THE COMPLAINT OF CHRISTMAS* AND THE TEARS OF TWELFETYDE.

By JOHN TAILOR.



LONDON:

Printed for JAMES BOLER, dwelling at the sign of the Marigold in Paul's
Churchyard. 1631.

To the most mighty, much unworthy honored, and to the Right Rich-worshipped
disworshipped, and to the al-tomuch powerful and respected; the miserable
Moneymongers and Mammonists, whose hateful habitations are within the bounds
of Europe or the Pales of Christendom; Christmas sends Greeting.
TAke it as you please you Almighty makers of Beggars, you prouokers of Thieves
and encreasers of Vagabo^ds; I, I my self, old Christmas (without fear or
flattery, proclaims your base entertainment, are you all turned Foxfur'd,
Goldfinches Wolves, Cormorants, Caterpillars, and Curmudgeans? Has the devil
and the world so besotted and bewitched you, that you will wilfully spend your
days miserably, to end your lives detestedly? will you live poor to dye rich?
will you empty your consciences, to fill your bags? and will you pinch your
bellies to starve yoursoules? He that should have told me for five hundred
years ago, that Christmas and Hospitality should have bin thus unregarded and
slighted, I should have held him for a lying Prophet, and a false
Prognosticator. Oh mad and brutish age, wherein the avarice of one is the
prejudice of thousands; when the Coach eats up the Cart, the Back robs the
Belly, when the Perfumes, crewels, cullisses and the Castingbottle, makes a
warm Chamber and a cold Kitchen; Know you thick skinned Hide-bound Chuffes,
that you are hared of God and men, yea your own children or heirs (for whom
you rake and rauine) do inwardly curse and hate you, and know, that what most
vilely you get over the devils back, your inheritours will as wickedly spend
under his Dammes belly. What a shame it is (if you had the grace to see it)
that you should give your minds to live upon the unnatural lechery and
engendring of money, that all the meat you eat in your own houses is the
accursed spawnes of oppression, extortion, bribery, and insatiat covetousness:
and yet some of you keep no houses at all, but pinch your own and your
families guts at home, when at other men's boords you are tirants, where you
turn the old custom backward, and instead of keeping Christmas, you (like
droues) make Christmas keep you; but take it for a warning, let me not find
it so the next year; for if I do, I will send you such guests as shall never
forsake you; as the Dropsy, Gout, colic, the Stone, and the like kind
tokens of my just anger, which you shall receive as most worthy and deserved
New-yeeres-guifts.

Your friend or foe, as you hereafter use him, Chritmas.

To the most Right and truly honorable, to the Rightly approved and
deseruinglie beloved, right Worshipful, and to the Rest of the small number of
Liberal and Charitable Houskeepers of Christendom; old Christmas se^ds loving
Commendations.
YOU that are thick sown and thin come up, as if the world were barren of
virtue, or past breeding of Goodness: you that are as rare as Phenixes, as
scare as black Swans or white Negroes, and as much to be held in admiration as
Snow in July, Strawberries in December, the Sunshine at Midnight, or a blazing
Star at Noone: I assure you my brave worthy Benefactors, that I your ancient
and yearly Guest (Christmas,) am heartily sorry to see your quondam number so
much shrunk in the wetting; and although you are fallen into that lamentable
consumption that I with my friends favorers and followers can scarcely find
the tithe of my former entertainment: yet (to show my thankful memory to your
worthy predecessors,) with my gratefulness to you (too few) that are
suruiuers, and to encourage a fruitful Spring, enease or multiplication of
your successors. I send to you this my loving and friendly Epistle. You in your
discetions, hold the commendable and golden mean way betwixt the two extreme
Gulphs of Niggerality and prodegality, betwixt Hunger and Gluttony, betwixt
Hide all and Spend all, betwixt wilful Slavery and wastefull Bravery. I wish
most unfeignedly that the dew of Heaven may descend blessedly, that you may
fructify, multiply fruitfully, increase and ampliffe, like the tree which
Nabuchadnezar drempt of, whose top reached to Heaven, and whose branches
extended and stretched to the ends of the Earth: you have the Celestial
Graces; your Hope is constant, your Faith is fervent, your Charity is frequent:
your Hope is in assurance of that never faiing possession wherein the vnblasted
tree of your Faith is firmly fixed and rooted; and your Charity is the pious
fruit which springs from that faithful Tree. And he that with his Grace does
plant it, water it, and cause it to increase, will crown his own gifts on your
heads, that are his beloved instruments; not only here, with blessings
transitory and temporal, but hereafter with that unspeakable glory which was,
is, and shall be permanent and Eternal.

Yours in the best of friendship, Christmas.

To the Profuse Sardanapallitanians, most famous Infamous Heliogabalonians, the
complete company of Cockbrain'd whimsie-pated Gul-Gallants, the inte^perate
prodigals and abusiuely nicknam'd and called either Honorable, worshipful honest,
wise, or any style or title that has a relish of Commendations.
Brave Sparks have amongst you, though Christmas be old, yet you shall perceive
that he neither fears your Toledoes, Bilboes, or Steelettoes; I know that
each of you have more shadow than substance, more tongue than truth, and more
hair than wit, though many of you be bald or beardlesse. You that have Ror'd
away your Land, Whor'd away your money, and Scor'd away your credits; that with
often unnatural going to bed at Sunrising, and rising at supper time to
breakefast, by turning the course of time out of his natural circumuolution; as
the day into night, and the night into day, like Owls, Bats, and Glowormes,
are monsters against nature, that pay more for the maring of your clothes, then
for the making, giving twice as much for the cutting as for the sowing; whose
exercise is drinking and dicing, and whose grace is swearing; who entertain
old Christmas with Gluttony and Ebriety, with the ill gotten expenses of
thieuery, cheating, vnthristy borrowing, unmeasurable exhausting, unmerciful
oppressing, or any unlawful obtaining; Know, all the whole kennell or litter
of you, that I scorn you and your surfeiting welcome: let me persuade you to
be wiser hereafter, and not to keep me company in such prodigal manner, that
you must be forced to fare the worse all the year after: Let it not be
imputed to me, that I and my company did in twelve days, eat up that which
should have lasted 365. The old Proverb says Enough is a feast, and as you love
to feast, so have no more then enough, lest to much feasting perforce, do
breed and engender to much fasting spite of your teeth. Finally, Know, that I
do come every year in memory of a great blessing, and I would not have your
wastefull profuseness to turn that blessed time of Remembrance into an
accursed use of impious blasphemy, and worse then Heathenish, Paganish,
Bacchanalliall Beastiallitie. So wishing every of you to use your best
endeavors each one to mend one, I leave you till the next year, in small hope
to have my request granted.

No way your friend, till you mend your manners, Christmas.

THE COMPLAINT OF CHRISTMAS.
ABout that time of the year when Skiegilding, and Earth-polishing Don Phoebus
had (like a skillful Clothworker) stretched the nights upon the longest
Tenterhookes of time, and curtold the days to the coldest abreuiation, or a
brief coldness, (an emblem of frozen charity:) I, Christmas, according to my
old custom of 1600. years standing, visited the world; and like a quick Post,
riding upon the wings of full speed, in ten days space I haunted the most
Kingdoms and Climates of the Christian world. I was in the stewing-Stoues of
Russia, Muscouia, Pollonia, Sweauia, Hungaria, Austria, Bohemia, Germania, and
so many other num-cold teeth-gnashing Regions, that if I should name them all,
I should strike the Readers into such a shiuering, and endanger their wits and
bounties with a perpetual dead palfie or Apoplexy: In the most of these
places my cheer and entertainment was Pilchards, Anchouies, Pickled-Herring,
white and red dried Sprats, Neats tongues, Stock fish, hanged Beef, Mutton,
raw Bacon, Brand-wine, (alias Aqua vitae) Tantablins, durty Puddings, and
Flapdraggons sowsd and carowsd with Balderdash. Indeed most of their diet is so
well seasoned, that the men do naturally sweat salt, and the women do weep
brine: and I noted that they never watered either their saltest fish or flesh
in any other vessels than their bellies, which was an exceeding policy to vent
their Malt, and a stratagem to make Saltpeeter of their Vrin.

In Spain and Italy I was welcomed in many great Dons and Magnificoes houses,
with three Alphabets of sallads at one meal, but all the meat upon five of
their tables would scarce give a zealous Puritan his supper on good Friday. I
have seen a hungry Signeor or Clarissimo eat a trusse of Sampheir, with his
forke like a Prenge or Pitchsorke tossing it into the hay-loft of his chaps, as
if his mouth had been an Hostry: In a word, I perceived that what either the
Italian or Spaniard does want in glu^tony and drunkenness, he takes out his
share in pride and lechery with more extortion than threescore in the hundred.
So (amongst their multiplicity of sawces) I leave them like saucy companions.

Being at Rome I was mightily feasted, for they thought nothing too hot, too
heavy, or too dear for me: I met there with no sects of dull or cinicall
Diogenasses, there was no parsimonious banquets, or Phylosophicall kind of
feasting, I found not a man that was not half a Doctor, and was well skild in
Kitching Physic, and they knew that roots and fountain water would breed
Crudities, therefore if they eat any, it was Potatoes, Skerrets, or Eringoes,
baked with the lushious pulpe, p^^ or linings of the marrow-bones of he Goats,
or lusty Rams.

Vitellius or Helliogabalus could not have bid me better welcome than those
charitable minded men did: I mused at it; but at last I considered that his
holiness with all his Cardinals and Clergy, were like Millers, and had toll
out of all the kingdoms of Christendom, and that they had Mines of gold and
silver in Purgatory, (and it is thought that the Philosophers stone is there,)
which was more safely brought into the treasury, than the King of Spaines Ships
can come from the West Indies, (for Purgatory is a Country which the Sea-sowsd
pickled Hollander never yet discovered.) Indeed we did out-Epicure the Epicure,
and made Epicurisme seem sobriety, both in meat, music, perfumes, masks,
or any thing that might with delight fill the five senses, or cinque ports of
man.

For recreation I went to visit the lean Carthusian Friars, whom I no sooner
beheld, but me thought I saw so many Deaths heads, or Memento mories, a man
might have told their ribs like so many ragged laths, their looks were almost
as sharp as a hatchet; a good Anatomist might have discerned them only by the
eye without incision: For how could it be otherwise with them, that all their
whole life time feed upon flegmaticke fish; fish, fish, nothing but fish.
Sometimes perhaps they tasted Cauiare, Potathoes, or Anchouies, which they
renc'd down with the suds of Sack: Then they had Almond Butter, a few blew
Figs, and Reisins of the Sun to make up a starueling meal; but I observed
one thing in this Friar whom I fasted withal, he would eat no poor John, or
offer to catch a Ling by the Pole, but he loved a well grown Place exceeding
well* provided, it were well buttered: he never would go to bed without a Cods
head, for Maids he fed hungerly upon them, but as for Soles he trod them
under his fect. He gave me a dish of fish, dressed (as he said) with the same
oil that was made of the Olives that grew upon Mount Oliuet the last time my
great Lord and Master was there* which I believed to be as true as Saint John
Baptist had two heads, or Saint Dennis having his own head cut off, did take
it up in his hands and carry it more than a mile. I gave my Friar the hearing,
and the eating of some of his fish to boot, but I was very parsimonious and
frugall of belief, and indeed I could not spare or afford him any.

At last I grew so bold with him, with whom I dined that day, as to ask him
the reason why he and the rest of his order did never eat flesh; he answered
me, that it was in honor of S. Peter, because he was a fisherman: by the same
substantial reason, I replied you might (for the honor of S. Paul) dwell in
Tents, for he was a tent-maker. But there is a great mystery, or misery in it,
that men should hold opinion that a man cannot go toward heaven with as good a
conscience having the leg or wing of a Capon in his belly, as he might do with
the Cob of a red Herring. For Reverend Sir, quoth I, you are a carnal man
though you eat nothing but fish, for you must understand that there is a flesh
of fishes: besides, as there are beasts on the land, so Corin. 15.
there is a Seahorse, a Sea-calfe, a Sea-oxe, and the like; and further you
know, That whatsoever goes into the mouth does not defile the man: but he would
not hear on that side, but prayed me to feed and stop my mouth of such as the
blessed Virgin and the Saints had sent him, (indeed I heard him not talk of
God at all.) So my belly being more full of his talk than his cheer, I took
my leave thankfully of him, bidding him heartily farewell, which he could
hardly do^ having no better diet.

In France I found a great deal more meat and lose sauce, but the most part of
the Mounsiers were saucy enough of themselves. Indeed the entertainment I had
there, made me half amazed; for I thought the people themselves had been so
many sacrifices to me, the men (for the most part) the Gallants I mean, were
in the most bitterest of winter cut and slashed and carbonadoed into Rashers,
Collops, Steakes, and Spitchcocks; that it was no more but cast a handful of
salt upon a Gentleman, and he was ready for the broyling. Their Pride would
have out-fac'd the cold of Caucausus; nay, had they been under the frozen
Zone, they would have showed their linen through the sippers of their sleeves,
breasts and sholders, the heat of the fashion warmed them, although their teeth
chatterd in their heads.

The women were well-fac'd creatures, (but like our melancholy Gentlemen, who
are in danger of a man-catching Serieant) they seemed afraid to show their
faces, and therefore they hid their heads in black bags, like Lawyers
declarations; the difference is, that the Ladies bag is silk, and the
Lawyers Buckrum.

There every Peasant keeps his wife like a Hawke (for they all wear Hoods)
and a pair of old English Boots will hood a brace of them from generation to
generation: and I observed that the miserable Country people durst not eat
their o wne Beef or Mutton (except the tripes and offall) for there is a
penalty laid upon them if they bring not their best to the Markets, either of
Beast or Bird; the Gallant Mounsiers have a prerogative to have all the Geese,
Guls, and Woodcocks that the Country yields, the Buzzards, Widgeons, and
Cuckooes are for the Cities diet only, but the Partridge, Pheasant and
Peacocke are Courtiers.

I had almost forgotten some particularities which I obferued in Germany, for I
perceived they had been mad Gamesters at vi'd Ruff almost over all the
Empire: the most of them had wrangled and played foul play, for Hypocrisy,
and Cruelty cut, Ambition rubd, and Oppression won the game, whilst Royal
and real Virtues were merely cheated and abused: Clubs being trump wanne the
Set by fraud and force, the Spades and Diamonds assisting them, so that the
Hearts only suffered, whilst Kingdoms, Principalities, and many fair
Lordships lay at stake for it.

Descending into the Low Countries, or Netherlands, the Dutch States feasted
me in state; and coming to Amsterdam, where there are almost as many heresies
as Nations, I was indifferently bid welcome by most of the Sectaries, but I was
most villainously used (rather abused) by a prick-ear'd Puritan, whose beard
was warped like green Wainscot, or a capital S. (I think it stood as many
ways as a Sea-mans Compass.) He was a Cobbler on Translater by his trade; and
coming to him I found his shop open, and he a mending of a bad or wicked soale
of a zealous sisters who had often trod awry, and his brotherly function was to
patch or piece her upright; but in sincerity I perceived the Cobbler was crafty,
and wrought altogether to his own ends. I mused at his little respect of me,
because he was at work, and telling him that I was come to dine with him, and
keep Holy Day: he asked me my name, and I told him my name was Christmas. At
the very name of Mass, he leaped from me like a Squirrell, as nimbly as if he
had had neither gut in his belly, or stone in his breech. And having recovered
himself, he stopped both his ears, for fear my name the second time should
strike him: he told me that the Mass was profane, and so were all the days
in the year that ended with the word Mass, as Candle- mass, Lam- mass,
Michael- mass,, Martle-masse, and that some Papist had been my Godfather;
therefore he would have nothing to do with me. It is abomination (said he)
and the mimicke solemnizing of this hellborne superstition was borrowed (or
stolen) from the Heathens; therefore there was one said well when he called
the Synagogue, or finfull Assembly, or fry of Friars at the Mass, the
kingdom of Apes, for there is such mopping and mowing, such crossing and
creeping, such ducking and nodding, that any reasonable man would think they
were mad; besides, the Priest has more postures than six Fencers, as if he
were at quarter-staffe with his Breaden god, that I am persuaded the God of
heaven hold them in derision, and their Service to be rather masquing or
mummery than Divine; therefore, I say, the Mass is profane, and so art thou,
therefore with me thou gett'st no entertainment.

Thus was poor Christmas welcomed like Jack Drum and thrust out of doors;
yet I suspected his hypocriticality spoke at us inuectiuely against the Mass,
that he might (with the more cunning and less suspect) defend what was ill in
himself and be held the more devout, (much like as one Whore or Thief should
revile and scandal another) for howsoever he prated, I thought him a Rascal,
that would employ himself about his trade on such a day as was celebrated in
the memory of the birth of our glorious Redeemer, God and Man, Jesus Christ,
which was the happiest day that mortality ever beheld: for in our Creation God
showed his power, but in our Redemption his unspeakable love and mercy:
therefore this day should be kept holy in remembrance of him that is the Holy
of Holiest.

That day we have escaped any danger, we celebrate with all joy and mirth, and
shall this day be put to profane uses whereon our inestimable ransom was
given us, that on this day put on mortality to make us immortal, that on this
blessed day did put off his unspeakable glory, and put on our insupportable
misery, thereby to make us eternally glorious; that on this day came to conquer
and confound the power of our conquerors, Sin, Death, and Hell, and to free
us from perpetual malediction.

Saint Austin (that blessed Lamb, and Angelical Doctor of the Church) did with
great thankfulness celebrate his birthday, saying, Let us so celebrate the day
of our births, that we may give thanks to God who: would have us to be borne
that we might be consecrated to himself.

Also Pharaoh and Herod did not omit the celebration of the days of their
natiuities. At the birth of a young Prince the Bells do clamor the joy of the
people, the great Ordnance do thunder out their reioycings, the Bonefires do
manifest men's fervent affections: Why not then on this happiest day, whereon
our chiefest happiness came, this great day when the Angel of the great
Counsel came to make our eternal peace between God and man; oh let us then
for his sake be merry in God, and charitable to our neighbors, let us feast
with thankfulness, and relieve with alacrity those impouerish'd members, of
whom our gloriour Redeemer is the head.

But you Master Confusion the Puritan, who are a Weathercocke, Shittlecocke, a
right Laodician, neither hot or cold, fit to be cast out of all good society of
Christendom, or to be perpetually Amster-damnified into Holland; your
sincerity being void of verity; your Faith unfruitful of good works, your Hope
Innovation, your Charity Inuifible, or like a Noune Adjective, not to be seen,
felt, heard, or understood.

I arrived in England the 25. of December, about one of the clock in the
morning, where I was no sooner landed, but (as old as I was) I cut a caper for
joy, assuring my self that I was now in my ancient Harbor or heaven of
happiness, in the Eden of the Earth, the Paradise of Terrestrial Peace,
Plenty and Pleasure, the most fruitful Garden of the rotundious Globe, the
comfortable Canaan, that flowest with Milk and Honey. And as thou (O England)
have ever given old Christmas (with his twelve Holy Day Seruingmen) good
entertainment, with such cheer, hospitality, and welcome, as the Christian
world never has done the like. So (I observing the ancient Proverb) where I
was wont to fare well am come again.

I having been four hours wrapped in this ecstasy of joy of my safe landing,
at last I heard Master Chantecleere (the nights living Clock, or Cock, and
the days dyall) with the care-piercing clang of his Horne-trumpet, crow out a
Proclamation of the approach of Aurora; which I was glad to hear, for poor
Christmas was as cold as a Snowball. Day being risen out of his oriental bed
(the black Curtains of the night being drawn) I looked up and down the
Country to see into which house I should go first, for I saw many fair houses
which I had often been well entertained at; but I could perceive no doors
open no lights through the windows, or smoke from the Chimnies, which made me
doubtful where I was. My poor twelve old fellows were half frozen with
fear and amazement, till (by mere fortune) I spied a swarm of Beggars, who
made toward us, bidding us very welcome, saying, they had mist us long,
acknowledging themselves beholding to us all, but chiefly to me.

Not much to me (quoth I) but I remember there is a Lords of the Mannours house
at the end of this Village, I will go thither, and do you come after me, and
anon I will give you your bellies full of good cheer. So the Beggars and I
parted, and I with my men went to the Lords house, where finding the gate shut,
I peeped in at the Keyhole, saw an old poor halfe-staru'd Seruingman lean
against the wall, bewailing the miseries of the time present, and grieuing at
the alterations of the time past, despairing of the amendment of the time to
come. I was half afraid of him dreading that instead of better meat he would
fall aboard of me and my troop; at last, seeing me retreat back, he beckened
to me, and watering every word with a tear, he spoke to me as follows:

Oh Christmas, old reverend Christmas! whither art An old Seruingmans complaint
to Christmas.
thou going? What haste art thou now making to this house, where hospitality
had once her habitation; where the poor man was relieved, the stranger
succored, the traveler refreshed, and all men bid welcome? Why art thou
making such haste now? Now it is decayed, ruined, sunk. This house that from
the Conquest has been famour for Hospitality, is now buried in her own
ruins. Look round about thee, where are now those high woods that did shelter
this house from the winds violence? Now they are low enough, the woodmans axe
has humbled their proud heads. Look into the Parks: Dear may be dear now,
for there are very sew there: My young Master not long fince closed them in a
Paste Pale, in a Tavern, where they were hunted by a company of fawning
flattering hounds. Look into the Meddowes, do thou see an Ox there? No, no;
they are all driven to the City. Is there a Calfe or Sheep in the Pastures?
no, they are all knocked on the head, and houe their throats cut, having
Parchment made of their skins to make him bonds after he had sold their
flesh. Look into the Garden, is there a Beehiue there? no, all the honey-birds
are fled, and the Wax spent in sealing Bonds for Commodities. Look about the
Yard, there is not a Ducke, Chicken, Hen or Capon to be seen? not a Goose to
be had? they are all plucked, and have pens made of their quils to set his hand
to his undoing. Look into the Barn, there is not so many Ears to be found
there as there are on a common Bailies head; or so much Corn in the Garners as
will breakfast a Chicken. O Christmas, Christmas, my old eyes are almost
bloodshot with weeping at the follies of my young Master, who iustead of making
his Chymneyes smoke in the Country, makes his nose smoke in a Tobaceo-shop
in the City. His Predecessors was wont to inuit his Tenants to dinner, but
now he has more need to be invited himself; which his Quondam Tenants are
not able todoe, for their new Landlord has used them like Traitors, and set
them on the Rack. Instead of keeping a good house in the Country, some blind
house in the City keeps him: Instead of keeping a kennell of hounds, he is
afraid to be fed on by hounds; he dares not look a Serieant in the face, for
fear he should bite him by the shoulder. Instead of keeping a fair Stable of
horse, he keeps a foul Table of -- Ravenous beasts that at one riotous
supper will devour more than the Paris-Garden dogs. Instead of keeping a
proper Seruing-men, he has much ado to keep himself; and whereas he should
walk in his own gardens in the Country, he walks the Temple garden in the
City: and last of all he thinks Milfordlane as safe a harbor for him as
Milford Haven. Oh Christmas, is it not pity that such an ancient house as this
where Hospitality, the Romans household God dwel^^* should thus decay? An old
Vserer in the deep whi^^epit of his ill conscience, has devoured my young
Masters house and lands. Thus have I vnballanced my self of that burden of
grief I was laden with, if you will not believe me draw nigh the house; the
door is open for this old penny-father (whom I am forced to serve) need fears
no thieves, for they rather fear him: for if they see any thing in this house
now worth carrying away, they have better eyes than ever I had.

The complaint of this poor Seruingman was but an ill breakfast for me and my
company that cold morning; yet I and my Comrades went along with him through
Note.
the yard, which looked much of his complexion, very lean; and I no sooner was
in the house but I fell into a swound: so that had it not been for those that
were about me I had departed; for they gave me hot waters, and rubbed my
temples, and at last, with much ado, brought me to my self; so that then I
purposed, what sight soever should poison my eyes, I would make a full survey
of all the chief parts of the house.

The wide room that I first set my foot in, was rather Christmas survey
thorowout the house.
like the hole of some loathsome Iaile, than the Hall of an House: The Hall.
Indeed it rather was a hell where a damnable extorting Devil dwelt with a few
spirits about him. I may properly call them spirits, for they had little flesh
about them. There was not so much fire in the Chimney as would broyle a
Pilcher, for his Harth was as cold as my heart.

The Blacke-Iacke whom every Seruingman in the The Jack.
house was wont to wring by the ear, for being too saucy with them, (for he
often would fling them into the fire, and make them quarrel without without
cause) was cast aside in a blind corner. This spright of the Buttery, (that
would run foaming at the mouth up and down the house as being weary of
traveling) was lamentably abused; this leather-suited Seruingman (whom the
Butler had often pitched over the Bar) I saw lie in a dark corner on his
belly, with his mouth wide open like a Canon, as it were gaping for that full
Charge he was wont to have in his old Master's time. Thus lay he sleeping in a
hole that had made many sleep. The Tables.


The Tables (that were wont to be spread with clean Linen, Diaper and Damask
for the rich, and homespunne for the poor,) were now covered with dust, and a
company of starved Mice and Rats, that for want of crummes were scarce able to
crawle out of their nests, supplied the places of many guests, that were wont
to fill them, in the time of bounteous housekeepers.

I have known the time when I have seen a Gentleman Sewer (that Captainelike
led a company of Seruingmen bare, or bare Seruingmen) armed with full dishes of
meat, and the Clerk of the Kitching, the Clerk of that stomackfull Band
bringing up the Rear, that in a quarter of an hours warning, would perform a
brave piece of service, and spite of hunger and famine place the right
worshipful sur-loyne at the upper end of the Table, attended by two sawcers of
Vinegar and Pepper, that waited on him like his Pages. I had almost forgot the
Mince-pies were quite forgot, also plum-broth
stiffe-neck'd colerick Collar of Brawn, that boldly charged on the Front with
his sprig of Rosemary on his head, instead of a white feather, like a
Bride-bush: but if these stout Captains, Brawne and burly Beef could not take
down the stomachs of those that did assault them with their slighted blades,
instantly upon the Rear would come whole troops of hot soldiers, ss Capons,
Hens, Lamb, Mutton and Veale to their rescue, and after them whole compani^s
of wilde-fowle would come flying to their succor; many tenderhearted Chicken
have I seen torn in pieces in these terrible conflicts, many plumpe Partriges
and Quails that could not quail their stomachs.

Often have I seen the dogs (that could do more than many Knights of the
Post) fall together by the ears for bones, the well filled guests have slung
under the Tables to them. I have seen the wide throated Usher of the Hall,
that took no small pride to cry Gentlemen and Yeomen to the Dresser, fill the
Alms. basket with meat and bread well sopp'd with the fat of wholesome powder
Beef. I have seen these windows stuck full of Holly and luy; but now the
laborious Spider, that most skillful Spinner and Weauer, that in his nets
intraps the silly Fly, as artificially as the Spider-like Tradesman does the
young Gentleman, has his Loomb-worke hanging in every window, not fearing the
house wives Broom.

Last of all, this Hall have I seen strewed with rushes, a sign of the soft
and kind entertainment the guests should have: I have seen a Lord of Misrule,
that with his honest mirth has made old Christmas laugh: I have seen Armor,
Swords, and Pikes adorn this Hall, which seemed to defend and aid Hospitality,
but now there is no such Star appears, no such sight seen, and I fear, I
am grown so old and dim, that I shell never see it again.

From the Hall, I made a step into the Buttery, but Buttery.
the thirsty Butler could not make me drink; he could not entertain me as a
man would do a dog, which is with a crust. But the Seruingman told me,
because his Master would not be thought prodigal, bought his Beer and Bread
at the next Alehouse. Instead of Plate, I saw a company of old Peuterpots,
which (though they had no leakes) very seldom did hold any Beer in them. The
Bynne grew musty for want of use, and the Chipping-knife rusty for want of
exercise. The Butler was not many crumbs the better for all the Bread that came
into the house in a week, for he had not so many chippins to his fees, as
would breakfast a Mouse; or so much waste Beer, as would dround a fly.

As for Cards and Dice that were wont to be as good to the Butler as a ten
pound Coppy-hold, the Master held profane: for he held the one were the
Devils Books, the other Witches bones; therefore unlawful to be read, or
followed. I was going down into the Celler, but I thought it in vain to
descend so lo, seeing so little drink stirring above.

Seeing I could not quench my thirst in the Buttery, I made bold to see if I
could break my fast in the Kitchen, Kitchen.
which had not so many Seacoles or Wood mit as would roast three ribs of a
rack of Mutton: then saw I the Master Cook (that now was not able to lick
his own fingers) turn the lean spit; so that now he was both Cook and
Scullion. The Dripping pannes and Kettles ^^apt many a scouring, which indeed
was good husbandry in their owner, for too much use would make the Kettles
look thin, and too much scouring the Spits to sharp. The Oven that had wont
to look as black in the mouth as a Tobacco pipe, and as hot as a Maquanella
that drinks nothing but Aquavitae, was now cool enough; he could not now
complain of any hart-burning, or of the unkindness of the Cook that
oftentimes did surfeit him with filling his belly to full, and cramming him up
to the mouth with Pasties, and baked meats. The Dresser-boord looked as lean
as a cooks shop in the time of the forty fasting days. The Collericke Cook
that in times past would out of his fury scald the breakfast beggars, as they
stood cutting slices of roast Beef off from the Spit, and boyld out of the
pot, now was as tame as a Water-man in a great frost, as a Player in a great
plague. He told me that he had not one quarter of Beef in the Kitchen, for a
quarter of a year together; so that now he could not be beholding to the
Butler for his Ladle of Beer, or the Butler to him for a trencher of meat: for
the one was almost chok'd for want of liquor, and the other starved for want of
meat. The Jack on the Mantletree.


There was one sight did much afflict me, and that was the Jack, which in
former times did rule the roast, and hindered many poor men's children from the
warm office of turne-broches. It never was a bountiful time since a Dog in
the wheel, and the Jack in the Mantletree began to turn the Spit; for they
began first to turn Hospitality out of doors. But the fault is in our English
Brewers, that Dutchmen have such devices in their sconces, for if they did not
tun up so many barrels of our Brittanian Barly-broth in their buckingtub-
bellies, their Geometrical pates could never find out such uncharitable
Engines.

Being weary of the Kitcken, I took Lazanello de Coquo by the fingers and bad
him be of good cheer (if he could get any meat to his dinner) and I went
into the Larder, that was wont to look as fat as a Tripe-wife; Larder.
but now, the copy of that lovely complexion was changed, for I have known
when the smell of it (as a man past by) would have given him his breakfast, but
now would not yield so much as would stay a man's stomach while dinner time: It
was fallen much away since I saw it last, by reason of his thin diet: so I
forsook the Larder, and went into the Dairie, Dairie.


As soon as I came in I saw the Boles whelmed upon each other backs, like so
many men that lay heapt up in one grave in a time of Pestilence: They lay on
the ground as if they mourned for their emptiness. The Cherme stood behind
the door, as if it were ashamed of it self; for whereas he was wont to have
his mouth buttered more then any Flemmings, now he was as lean as any
Spaniards. The Cheese-presse, that like a Cockney loved to feed on Curds and
congealed milk into Welchmens roastmeate, stood close against the wall, as if
it had been loath I should have seen it: and to be plain with you, there was
not so much Cheese to be seen as would bait a Moustrap, or so much Butter as
would make a toste for a Citizens son. There was not a timorous fearful
Custard to be seen, whose nature is to quake if your teeth do but water at
him.

Thus looking into every corner of the house beloestaires (as narrowly as if I
had been some enquiring Constable, and had warrant for the search) but finding
no such thing as I expected, up stairs went I and all my sorrowful
associates, and looking into a withdrawingChamber I saw the old Mammon himself
sitting over a The description of the Vserer.
few Cinders to warm his gowtie tooes, for no other part did need the comfort
of a fire, for from head to foot, he was furred like a Muscouite. Instead of a
Bible he had a Bond in his hand, which he was diligently perusing to see if it
were forfeit or no: his face very seldom did look upward, for his dull
melancholy eyes was most commonly fixed on the earth, as if he were looking out
for a Mine: He kept his keys continually tacked at his girdie, one hand
always on them, as if he feared they would run from him and unlock his Chest
for those that would do more good with his bags, than he himself ever had.
He was like the Poets Euclio that feared every man that did but look toward
his house, came to rob it: for he no sooner cast his Ospray eyes on me and my
company, but he cried, Thieves, Thieves, as loud as his hoarse throat could
creake it out, brauing his poor servants, telling them they had let in
fellows to rob him: so to stop this Hell Hounds mouth, I spoke to him as
follows.

Sir, fear not, there are none here that intend to hurt you: if you catch any
it must be your self that must do it to your self, and not we. My name is
Christmas, these gray hair'd men that are with me, are men of my near and
dear acquaintance, these poor men in their patched cloaks, poor people that
wish well to me: all true men, though poor men; and we come to you for a few
days, hoping of a free entertainment: if it is not your pleasure to welcome us
as your Guests, it is not our part to force it.

This old Penny-father looked as sour on me, as if I had brought him a
Priuy-Seale to borrow money of him, or a Subpaena out of the Exchequer for
extortion: and in brief told me, that I was an imposture, and only came to
entice the people to prodigality and expense: and as for the poor, he had
nothing to do with them, for he was poor himself.

Poor your self, said I, it is true; for how can you be Christmas to the
Curmudgion.
rich, that never think you have enough. In this you show your self most
unnatural, for Nature is content with a little, but you with never so much.
Therefore covetous rich men may well be called the sons of the Earth because
they hunt after nothing but earth. What need you be covetous? Has not God
given you himself, what need you have any more? If God cannot suffice you,
what can satisfy you? As for external riches they are more fugitive than
Chemists Quicksiluer, or the most notorious Vagabond.

He inherits nothing that loses Christ, he loses nothing that possesses
Christ. Will you possess him, let the poor possess some of your wealth? Will thou lose nothing, then put it to a spiritual interest, let the poor borrow
some of thee? Here on earth thou have but eight for a hundred, which is most
finfull use; but with the poor thou shall have a hundred for eight, which is a
most heavenly interest. He that does bestow his benevolence on the poor, does
not lose, but get; and by scattering his bread on the waters, does gather and
increase. By keeping them you do not possess them, or by dispersing them,
lose them. Gold and silver are good, not that they can make you good, but that
you may do good. How can money be better lent than to the poor, for my Lord
and Master will be bound to see it paid in again but he is a surety few
Vserers will take. What Note.
is gold, but yellow rubbish? What is silver, but white dross? and nothing
makes them precious but covetousness. Gold is a matter of labor, his peril
that does possess Anagram. Pecunia cui pena
it: It is an ill master, a worse servant. Be not a slave then to your estate,
but entertain me with some part of it, relieve those that follow me, cover
your boords and load them with well-fild dishes* so shall you crown your self
with all our blessings.

My Oratory would do no good, my Physic would not work; blessings he
regarded as much as a true Protestant will the Anathema of the holy Father the
Pope* for without any verbal answer he thrust me and my company out of
doors without saying Farewell.

Thus was poor Christmas used, which made me and my consorts look very blanke
upon the matter: so we wandered up and down from house to house but found
little comfort. Some would only smile on me, another ask me how I did, and
give me a cup of small Beer and a crust, and so farewell: a fourth, that laid
all on his back, would not look on me; so away went we still iogging on. At
last I cast up my dim eyes, and I saw a house where for four or five years
together I had not been bountifully, but profusely entertained, for the Master
of it did almost surfeit me every meal: A way went we thither, and coming to
the gate, the grumbling Seruingman (that opened his mouth wider than a trap
door) told me, there was no entertainment for me, but began to rail at me,
and said, that his Master was the worse for me by a thousand pound a year,
therefore bid me be gone, for he had warrant from his Master to lock me, out
of doors; telling me moreover, if I would speak with his master I must to
London, for he was soiourning there, not intending to return while the
Parliament was ended. Well, thought I, it were good if the Proclamation that
summons all Country-Gentlemen to return into the Country, would ^ake hold of
him and many others that lie lurking there because they would not be troubled
in the Country with their poor nieghbours.

As for thy Master, that spent more in three or four year, than he is able
to get together again in threescore, I did not entice to that expense. Can I
help his riot and excess? I desire to undo no man. I love to see men
bountiful, not prodigal: I never enticed him to luxury; I thought what would
become of his prodigality. He was prodigal because he would be accounted a
good housekeeper. A good housekeeper? Oh simplicity* that for keeping three
or four prodigal and fulsome feasts he should make himself a beggar for ever
after. I think indeed now that a good house is abler to keep him, than he a
good house. No, no, they are the means that bless, no man can live without
them, though few have them. What cause had your Master to feast all the richest
in the Country, and at one sumptuous and sinful supper, to consume more than
would relieve a Parish of poor folks a quarter? Is this charity? No, no. But I
think your Master does scarce know where he may read this. His fulsome,
gluttonous, and Bacchanalian Feasts, did presage of fasts. It grieved me first
to foresee it, now to know it. Is it charity to lard and grease the fat Country
Bores, I mean the rich chuffes that have enough in their Barnes to relieve
themselves and their poor neighbors? This kills, not cures charity. Gluttonous
Feasts cost much, do little good, much hurt. They mingle Earth, Heaven, Sea,
and Fire in their bellies at one sitting. What Foul soever flies in the Air,
what Beast soever treads on the Earth, what Fish soever swimmes in the Sea, and
what strange drinks, Wines, and strong Waters soever, (that are of fiery
natures) we barrall up in our bellies at one dinner or supper: So that the
confusion of these Elements cannot choose but beget diverse tempests in us,
which like earthquakes continually shake our bodies by the arising of hot and
fiery vapors from our stomachs. So that if Nature could find her tongue now,
as in the days of Ovid, she would complain once more to Jove of her wrongs:
for is it not against Nature to see fishes that should swim in the Seas,
first swim in wine vinegar, then in wine, being so scorcht, carbonadoed,
sows'd, and so martyred, that when it comes to the Table, a man cannot judge
whether it be fish or flesh? Then to have another dish brought to the board
covered over with an inundation of Vinegar, Oil, and Pepper? Is it not against
Nature to have pounds of Butter roasted, whose Cooking with white-bread,
Cinamond and Sugar will cost more than half a dozen Milch Kine will yield in a
week? Is it not against Nature to have Mutton larded with Ambergreece, and
breaded with Ciuet? To have Birds come to the Table lim'd to the dish with
viscous and clammy sawces, faster than they were before in the Fowlers
lime-twigs? And to have many of these invented and made dishes come to a Table,
do you think it would not make Nature complain? Yes, yes; for all this does
no good to Charity. And it is no wonder, as the Philosopher faith, why so
suddenly we dye, seeing we live by Death. Some will out-Epicure Geta the
Emperor, that had his Table furnished with dishes according to the Alphabet:
some again almost as gluttonous as Theocritus Chius, that having devoured at
one bit, a live fish, said that he had swallowed heaven: To whom one answered,
that he wanted one thing, which was to drink off the Sea at a draught; now if
he had but remembered to bid him eat the earth instead of bread, he had made a
pretty meal of it. Alas, alas, this luxuriousness kills as many as Physic.
Let Christmas be at a feast where is good store of good cheer, but not too
dainty or costly, but such as a man's own yard or pasture affords: where the
Tables are filled with guests, not rich, but poor: not so few as the Graces,
that are only three; or no more than the Muses, nine; for a feast ought to be
absolute for all comers.

I am of his mind, for if I have a moderate preparation of meat and drink,
honest mirth, good welcome, and a cup of good Wine or Beer; I care not for set
Suppers, high Music, complementall Cringies. No, no, if your master had but
began thus moderately, he need not now to have taken the City over his head to
hide himself from me. But he is not the first that has done so, (though that
be no excuse for him) I would he might be the last, for I and my followers
fare the worse for him and such profuse Prodigals.

So away went I and my train, having little comfort yet as you may perceive,
but as we were walking and talking of our bad fortune, we might perceive a
plain Country man come toward us: he had high-shooes A Farmer.
on that looked as black as a Bullice, white stockings made of the wool of
his own Sheep, gray Trunkehose, with all accoutriments belonging to this
Country plainness: As soon as he came somewhat nigh me, he began to salute
me and bid me welcome into the Country, telling me if it pleased me I should
be welcome to his house: So without many circumstances I took his proffer, and
with my (now) merry mates went toward his Farm, which was not far off. As
soon as we came into the yard (well stored with Poultrey) the Farmer himself
shook me by the hand, and bid all the rest welcome. The Dame of the house
dressed up in her home-spunne Gown, came to meet me; the Maid-seruants rejoiced
to see me, and the Plow-mens hearts leaped in their straw-colour'd letherd
Doublets for joy of my approach. Then with all Country solemnity I was had into
the Parlour and set down by a good fire. I was presented with a cup of brown
Ale, seasoned with Sinamon, Nutmegs, and Sugar. When dinner was ready, I was
set at the upper end of the Table, my own company set round about me, and the
rest eat with the servants. We had Brawne of their own feeding, Beef of their
own killing; we had brave plum broth in bole-dishes of a quart. The
White-loafe ran up and down the Table, like a Bowl in an Alley, every man
might have a fling at him: the March Beer marched up and down, and we were
all merry without the help of any Musicians. We had good cheer, and good
welcome which was worth all: for the Good Man of the house did not look with a
sower or stoicall brow, but was full of mirth and alacrity, so that it made the
house merry.

A, ha, quoth I, this is something like, our dinner is better than our
breakfast, this is as Christmas would have it, here is neither too delicate
cheer, which does cost much, or will cause surfeits, or too little or mean,
but such as will kill hunger. They are the best feasts where the poor are
relieved, the rich are able to help themselves.

Dinner being done, Grace being said, the Cloth taken away, the poor
refreshed, we went to the fire: before which, lay store of Apples piping hot,
expecting a bole of Ale to cool themselves in. Evening Prayer drew nigh, so we
all repaired to Church, where I heard my self much spoken of, but after
Service was done, few respected me: some indeed, invited me to their houses,
but I thought my entertainment would not be worth my labor, considering my
company: so went I home again with my honest Hobnaile-wearer, with whom I past
the time away in discourse while supper, which being ended, we went to Cards.
Some sung Carrols, merry songs, some again to waste the long nights, would
tell Winter-tales. At last came in a company of Maids with Wassell, Wassell,
jolly Wassell: I tasted of their Cakes, and supped of their Bole: and for my
sake, the White-loafe and Cheese were set before them, with Minee-Pies, and
other meat. These being gone, the jolly youths and plain dealing Plow-swaines,
being weary of Cards, fell to dancing; from dancing to show me some Gambols.
Some ventured the breaking of their shinnes to make me sport, some the
scalding of their lips to catch at Apples tied at the end of a stick, having
a lighted candle at the other; some shod the wild Mare; some at hotcockles,
and the like. These Country revels expiring with the night, early in the
morning we all took our leave of them, being loath to be too troublesome; and
rendering them unfeigned thanks for our good cheer (who still desired that we
would stay with them a little longer) we instantly traveled toward the City.

Being entered into it, we saw very few look with a smiling countenance on us,
but a few Prentices or Iourneymen that were tricked up in their Holliday
clothes; but we coniectured their Masters were not up, or else we could not
go so far unbidden. At last the Bells began to ring, every house-holder began
to bestirre himself, the Maid-seruants we saw run hurrying to the Cooks
shops with Pies, and the Iacks went as nimbly as any of the wives tongues: and
before we were aware, whole Parishes of people came to inuit us to dinner:
Some took me by the hands and would have me his guest, another took Saint
Stephen; a third, Saint John; a fourth, Childermasse; but New-yeares day was
welcome to them all, especially to the rich; but all this while the poor was
not looked on, they were not invited: It grieved me, as it did them (poor
souls) and I spoke as much as I could for them; but I was answered, the Parish
had taken order for the poor already, and that their houses were only for
their friends, and not Beggars; and for my part, if I would stay with them for
a week or so, I should be as welcome to them as any of their rich neighbors.

Alas, alas, said I, is Charity as well as Conscience banished out of your
freedom? How can you make me truly welcome, except the poor feed with me? It
does me more good to see a prisoner released, and the poor man relieved, than
taste of your daintiest meat. Yet I will confess I have scene many famous and
memorable deeds done by well-disposed Citizens; the Hospitals and other
charitable houses can witness it, and that some in these days follow the
footsteps of their predecessors; but the present compared to those past, are
no more in comparison than the least Star to the Sun, or a Gloworme to a
Star. Charity in those times was in her youth, in her prime, in her perfect
ripeness; now she is old, decrepit, and lame: for she is seldom seen
walking in the streets, she is now only an Vmbra, a Shadow, a Ghost: her
substance is vanished; nay, she is dead: And will you know when she died? I
will tell you, When Prodigality, Drunkenness, and Excess began When Charity
began to sicken.
to live, then she died; their generation was her destruction. When Prodigality
spent as much one day as would keep her a month; when Pride wore as many
clothes on her back as would cloth an Hospital of fatherless children;
when Drunkenness swallowed, in the whirlepoole of his belly, more drink at
one draught than would quench the thirsts of many poor children; when Gluttony
spent more at one meal than would content many hungry Lazars; when Farmers
began to make their sons Gentlemen, and young Gentlemen began to be devoured
by Usurers: then, then, Charity lay on her sicke-bed, nay, on her deathbed.
Will you When in her prime.
know when she was in her perfect health? I will tell you. When Gentlemen did
not know what a yard of Satin, Velvet, Cloth of Gold, or Tissue is worth; when
gold and silver lace were not seen in Cheap Side; when BeuerHats, blew, red,
yellow, and green Starch were not worn; when Lords went in good Cloth, and
their Seruingmen in good Frize, or Stuff; when the Gentry did not know what
did belong to Tobacco, Anchouies, Chauiare, and Pickled-Oysters; when such
walking-Spirits as Foot-boyes and Pages went invisible; when we went not
hurrying along the streets in their French Carts, as fast as if the Devil had
been the Coachman: then, then. Charity was well, was in health, and looked
cheerfully.

The Roman Catholics boast they have Charity living with them (which they
reverence as much as they do their Saints) by which, with the help of good
works they hope to merit. Alas, alas, they are deceived, their Charity will
do them little good, except they have the help of her elder sister, Faith.
Therefore I think it not amiss, if the Romanists would borrow some of our
Faith for some of their Charity and good deeds, for we wnnt one, as much as
they do the other.

But I begin to be weary with talking thus to no purpose: Therefore England,
beautiful, fruitful, and yet blessed Land, take heed lest thy Gluttony,
Pride, and Excess, Covetousness, Bribery, and Extortion, have that Adamantine
force to pull down Heavens Judgments on thee as they did on Sodom. Thou art
as sumptuous as that City was, be not thou so sinful. Before it was burnt it
was compared to a Garden, nay, to a Paradise for the neat and pleasant
situation, and the happy plentifulnesse of all things: But now it is a place
destitute of water and fruit; only, there are such growing, that only delight
the eye, but deride the touch and taste: for on those stinking and burnt
banks, grow Apples, that being touched fall in dust. Thou may be so, thou will be so, except some of thy fullness have vent toward the poor.

Thou art such a fortunate Island, that Histrographers write of, blessed with an
excellent temperature of Air, and singular Clemency of Heaven: where about
March, the Spring begins to cloth the earth in a Summer livery. Heaven is
bountiful and patient, be thou penitent and thankful.

But as I was going forward with my Admonition, they stopped my mouth by their
entreating me to be their guest for three or four days: so for such a small
quantity of time, I bestowed my self among them. But I was the most royallest,
noblest, and worthiliest entertained at Court, Innes of Court and Temples,
where I was resident while Candlemas, and then left this Land.

FINIS.
A Christmas CARROLL,
To the tune of Poor TOM.
Rejoice, rejoice, this day is come
Salvation unto Christendom:
All that will hear their blessed Redeemers voice,
Let them all with mirth rejoice, rejoice.
The Savior of the world is borne,
To ransom us that were forlorn:
He left the Heavens, and came to us on earth,
And from a blessed Virgins womb had birth.
Here a mighty mystery well was wrought,
whose depth no man can gather;
A Mayden-mother pure, a Son forth brought,
and no man was the father:
God above, with peace and love,
The sinful world possessed
With heavenly treasure, past all measure,
Who is ever blessed.
He this day to Grace a feast,
sent his Son to be a Guest:
Let us then, like thankful men
give entertainment to him:
And let us still with heart and will,
our best of service do him:
Himself for us he has given,
to draw us from earth to heaven.
Therefore for all his pain,
let us give him our selves again.
TO wipe away our sins great sums,
Gods Son and heir in person comes;
He left his glorious and Immortal throne,
and underneath his Fathers curse did groan:
Down from the heavens to the earth he came,
to honor us he took our shame;
He suffered death that we might live thereby,
and through his merits reign eternally.
Seeing he has with his precious blood
washed clear our foul offenses,
How can we render any thing
that may be recompenses,
Since we may not any way
give any thing worth taking;
Or all that can be done by man,
no satisfaction making:
Let us do as David says,
give him honor, laud and praise.
Let Christmas day put us in mind,
that Christ was borne this day:
Let Us entertain him here, that we
may entertain him aye.
That we all with one heart and desire,
amidst the Celestial Quire
All honor and praise may sing,
to Christ our heavenly King.
FINIS.
A CATALOGVE OF ALL Mr JOHN TAILORS several Books, Printed together in one
Volumne in Folio.
Tailors Urania.

The first part of the troubles and destructions of Jerusalem. The second part
and final destruction of Jerusalem by Titus and Vespasian. The life and death
of the most blessed amongst women, the Virgin Mary, the mother of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Superbiae flagellum, or the Whip of Pride. Against cursing and
swearing. The fearful Summer. The Travels of tweluepence. The Armado, or Navy
of Ships that sail as well by land as by sea. The Beggar, or the praise of
Beggars beggary and begging. Tailors Goose. Jack a Lent. Tailors pennilesse
Pilgrimage, or Journey (without money) from London to Edenborough in Scotland,
and back to London. The Acts and exploits of Wood the great Eater in Kent. Sir
Gregory Nonsense* A very merry Wherry voyage from London to York with a pair
of Oars. A new Difcouery, (by sea) with a Wherry, from London to Salisbury. A
Kicksie winsie, or a Lerry cum Twang. Tailors Motto. An Epicedium or mournful
death-song for Coriats supposed drowning. The eighth Wonder of the world, or
Coriats reviving. Laugh and be fat. Coriats News and Letter with the Authors
paraphasing verses. A Bawd very modest. A Whore very honest. A These very
true. A Hangman very necessary. The unnatural Father. Tailors Revenge against
Fenner. Fenners Defense. A Caft over the water to Fenner. The Water-mans suite
concerning Players. Wit and mirth. A Dog of War. The World runs on wheels.
The nipping or snipping of abuses. A brief of the Chronicle from Brute to this
present in Verse. A brief of the Chronicle from the Norman Conquest to this
present. A Farewell to the Tower bottles. The Marriage of the Princess
Elizabeth. A funeral Elegy for King James. A funeral Elegy for the Earl of
Nottingham. A funeral Elegy for the Earl of Holdernesse. A funeral Elegy
for the Bishop of Winchester. A funeral Elegy for the Duke of Richmond and
Lenox. A funeral Elegy for John Moray Esquire.
These Books in number sixty three are here,
Bound in one Volume, scattred here and there:
They stand not thus in order in the book,
But any man may find them that will look.
FINIS.

