THose that will change this new coined English shilling,
And giue's two Testorns, or three Groates, most willing:
Shall find (though 'twas not Coined in the Mint)
That there is no counterfaited metal in it.
I Coined it, and the Coining I Will maintain
It is vnclip'd and weight unto a grain;
To Mint and stamp, my brains and Pen agreed,
I Coined, and fear no hanging for the deed.
The meaning of the Picture.
HEre, Twelue-pence slowely rides upon a Snaile,
To meet the Oar, the Shouell and the Flaile:
But to the Furre-gowne all in post he flings
Through the Air, over Earth and Sea, with Faulcons wings,
Which Emblem truly to the world implies,
That Money to the Mizers Coffers flies.
Whilst unto those that pains and labor take,
It does a creeping, sleeping dull pace make.
But let it creepo, fly slow, or swiftly come:
Amidst this scrambling Age, I will have some:
For if it come not to the Oar, nor Pen,
I Will never studdy, write, or Row again.
JOHN TAILOR.
A SHILLING OR, The Travails of Twelue-pence.



TO ALL THOSE THAT HAVE BEEN, ARE, WILL, OR WOULD BE, Masters of a SHILLING or
TWELVE-PENCE.
SIR John Mandeuill, an English Knight, a famous Trauailer, and discouerer of
foreign Manners, Regions, and Rarieties; Christopher Collumbus, Magellane,
Hernando Cortez, Don Diego de Almagro, Drake, Hawkins, Frosbushir, Baskeruile,
Cauendish, and many more worthy Trauailers of our own and other Nations, whose
honorable, dangerous, and laudable atchieuements, have made their meritorious
names to be Recorded, to the admiration of the time past, present, and to
future posterity: yet if it be well considered, it will plainly appear, that
all their laborious endeavors had an end with their lives. But the Trauailer
that I treat of, the Thricetrebble tryumphant Troynouantine Twelue-pence, is
like a perpetual motion in continual travel, to whose Journey there can be
no end, until the world come to a final dissolution and period. For the
progress of Coriat was but a walk in regard of my Shillings perambulations:
and if all the Ink and Paper-murdering fictions should be true of Amadis de
Gaul, Huon, Sir Egre, Beuis, Guy, the Mirror of Knighthood, the seven
champions, Chinon, Sir Dagonet, Triamore, Launcelet, Don Spatterlash of Toledo,
Monsieur Mallegrindo, Knight of the frozen I Will: If it were possible that all
their lies should be true, of the great Travels of these imaginary and never
seen Worthies, yet must they all come short of the praise that is due to my
traveling Twelue-pence. I could have busied my brains about many other
Subjects, as quick Epigrams, biting Satyrs, sharp Iambicks, soothing Elegies,
pleasant Pastorals, Odes, Madrigalls, or Roundelayes; alluring Sonnets,
flattering Epithalamiums, or lying Epitaphs, Panegericks, or name-seruing
Acrosticks, and Annagrams, lofty Tragedy, lowely Comedy, ridling Morrall, or
stately Heroicks: either of all these I could have poorly handled, but that my
Muse stumbled by chance upon this Twelue-peny subject, wherein I would have the
Reader to consider, that in some places I speak only of a Shilling or
Twelue-pence, and in some places generally of Money. I have set down the
manner of my Shillings shifting of Masters, more often then the Serieants do;
for they use the old Sheriffs like Almanacks out of date, and yearly serve the
new: but Twelue-pence has sometimes 12. 16. or 20. Masters in a day. In a word
(Reader) I do not beg your favor, crave your acceptance, entreat your
kindness, implore your love, or request your friendship; for it is not any of
these in particular that I seek or care for: but generally at all I aim, and
for all I hope, and being in that hope, I leave you to Read and Judge of my
ensuing Labors, and my Twelue-pences Travels.

Yours, as you please to be mine, JOHN TAILOR.

THE TRAVELS OF Twelue-pence.
Imagine Reader (to his grief and glory, No man da^^ confess h^^ whole life^
actions, as twelue-pen^^ does.

Twelue-pence himself declares his wandering story:
Relating how he first was borne and bred,
And how about the world he Travailed.
IF any one (as I dare boldly dare) Where the best metta^^ do grow, Earth is
n^^ barren, wh^^ is an Emb^^ that they t^^ hoord or h^^ money, barren of fruits
of go^^ness.

His Birth, his Breeding, and his Life declare:
Let him appear, and I dare lay my neck
He will be hanged, or else deserve a check.
From vast America's rude barbarous bounds,
From rocky barren soil, and sterrill grounds,
Where men did not their great Creator know,
And where the Devil's the God to whom they bow,
There from my Heathen Dam, or mother Earth
With pains and travail, I at first had birth.
A hundred strong men-midwiues, dug their way
Into her bowels, to find where I lay
With Engines, Spades, Crows, Mattocks, and such matters,
They ripp'd and tore her harmless womb to tatters,
And but they did within the midway catch me,
They would have dig'd to Hell it self to fetch me.
At last they found me, mixed with dirt and dross,
Corruption vnrefin'd, eclipst my Gloss,
And from the Earth I in the fire was tried,
And into Ingots purged and purifide.
From Purchase.
Paphlagonia, some my birth do count,
Near Sandracurgium, a most famous Mount,
And that poor Slaves which were condemned to dye,
Were forced to dig for me laboriously,
Whereas the dampish Mines infecting air
Killed the poor wretches, and so eased their care.
Some say that Polidore Virgil. Me^^es might ^e the first ^^uenter of ^oyne in
E^^pt, yet not ^f a Twelue-pence, but I ^^inke money ^as in ^^ains time, I am
sure ^^at Abra^am bought ^ field for bu^^all with ^oney.
Menes, an Egiptian King,
Me to the shape of Coin, at first did bring:
But when they saw that people, greedily
For me did run into all villainy,
The Priests did curse the King, that first invented
Me, that so many ways their minds tormented.
For till they knew me, they affirmed true,
No Envy, Pride, or Avarice they knew.
Thus with great labor, and the death of men
I first was borne, and afterward again
He that to Money did convert me first,
Was by the Priests and People, bann'd and cursed.
With blood and curses I at first began,
And ever since have been a curse to man.
Yet for me some excuses may be shown
The name of Twelue-pence, was as then not known,
Diversity of Coins over all the world
Were scattered universally, and hurld,
In Courts, in Cities, and in warlike Camps
E're I was made, they all used other stamps.
There were some Sicles, some Meruiades, A small piece of Sp^^nish Coyne^^ six
of them to an Engli^^ penny.

An As, a Dram, a Sesterties,
Quadrins, Sextanes, Minaes, (it appears)
Didrachmaes, and Sportullas, and Denieres.
My name at first did from the Romans come,
(As Cooper says) they called me Sollidum,
Or from a Soldier it was named thus,
(As 'twere his daily wages) Sollidus.
For though the Times are subject to mutation,
Yet from Soldatus I have nomination:
Thus Twelue-pence has an ancient Warrior bin,
Although men know not when I did begin.
And by experience all the world can tell,
Soldatus does love Sollidus so well,
That always every Soldier is unwilling,
Long to be kept asunder from a Shilling,
If he do want me, a month, two, Soldiers ^^^^ng t^eir (...) will to (...)
or three,
He Will grumble, and go near to Mutiny,
He has no mind to draw his sword and fight,
But (discontented) bids the wars goodnight,
When let but Sollidus come to his hand,
He Will fight as long as he can go or stand,
Regarding nor remembering child or wife,
He Will hazard and endanger limb and life:
And thus by way of argument it is pend,
A Shilling is a Soldiers loved friend.
A Shilling's much more ancient then a pound,
And in pronouncing gives a better sound:
As for example; which is most mouth-filling
Of fifty pounds, or of a thousand shilling,
A thousand pounds, may make the accent rore,
But twenty thousand shillings sounds more.
Thus of two sillables, I am compacted,
When into one the pounds are all extracted.
The Germane Dollors are my Iuniors far,
So are the Copesticks of the Brabander.
The Spanish Royal, piece of four and eight,
On me for my antiquity may wait:
The Floren, Guelder, and French Cardecus
To me are vpstarts, if Records be true,
The Grosh, A brass piece of Bohemians coyn^ twelve of them to a penny.
Potchandle, Stiuer, Doyte, and Sowse
Compared with me, are all scarce worth a Lowse:
Nor can the Atcheson or the Baubee
For my antiquity compare with me.
The half Crown is on horseback mounted hie,
Yet never trauail'd half so far as I;
The Scottish Mark's a dangerous piece of Coin,
It Is just a hanging price, if one purloyne,
There Is no such hazard in the stealing me,
I am three halfe-pence lower in degree.
And as in pence I for a Jury stand,
I have eleven Coins under my command:
And (to grace all the rest) my proper self,
Like a Graund Iury-man make up the Twelfe. The Anatomy of tweluepence or a
shilling.

But for men shall not think I brag or prate,
Those whom I do command I Will nominate.
Nine pence (three quarters) with his Harp befriends me,
And six pence with half service still attends me,
The four pence halfe-penny next comes fidling on,
The Groat my third part does depend upon:
The threepence is a quarter wayter still,
The two pence in six parts attends my will,
Three halfe-pence stoopes to my commanding sway,
And eight of them at once does me obey:
The single pence are all my little Cozens,
And do attend my service by the dozens.
Three farthings by sixteenes attend in plenty,
And halfe-pence to the sum of four and twenty,
And last (for Pages) on my State does wait,
Of dapper farthing Tokens forty eight.
But ere I did attain my shape and form,
I'abid the brunt of many a furious storm;
For this the world I would have well to wot,
Mine honor was with pains and danger got.
I past the raging Seas and flaming fire,
And gained a Face and Cross for all my hire:
It would almost dissolve a heart of flint,
To be so used as I was in the Mint:
The pains of Purgatory cannot be
But fictions to those things that fell on me.
For what I did endure, had man but felt,
It had (like Kitchinstuffe) have made him melt.
Then my Tormentors, all at once agrees
From my great heat, to let me cool or freeze,
And dead and cold, me then again they martir'd,
Me all in pieces they be cut and quartir'd,
Weighing the mangled mammocks Five Shillings weigh^^ an ounce.
, they pronounce
That five of me in weight should be an ounce.
Then to the Anuile was I brought in have,
Whereas with Hammers they did me bumbast,
And there they never left belab'ring me,
Until they brought me to the shape you see.
Thus I mine honor, and my form did win,
Through many dreadful dangers I was in.
And though there scarce does memory remain,
What I was e're the sixth King Edwards reign,
Yet long before his time I was in value,
As read in good true written Stories shall you.
My stamp (when Rome did keep the world in awe)
Was four swift Steedes that did a Chariot draw,
Which figured, that I too and fro should run
An endless Journey that would nere be done.
I am made endless, round, which does portend,
Till the world end, my Journey never shall end.
And men may plainly in my roundnesse see,
An Emblem of the worlds rotundity.
Round is the Globe, round is the Hemisphere,
Round runs the Moon and Sun, each month and year;
Round ran the Empire from the Assirian Kings,
Round unto Persia, Greece, and Rome it flings,
Round to great Britain, it is come I know,
Whence (hemmed round with the Sea) it cannot go.
But the maine cause that makes it stay and stand,
Is where it is guarded by The Almighty's hand.
Round from the North to East, to South and West,
All Arts have still ran round it is manifest.
The Jews, the Egiptians, Calates, Persians,
Devised Arts, and were Astrologians,
And true experience does approve it thus,
Their knowledge is run round from them to us.
The age of man goes round, a child at first,
And like a child returns unto his dust.
His body and his limbs, his eyes, his head,
All in round forms are made and fashioned,
The roots, the fruits, the flowers, and the Trees,
All in a round conformity agrees,
Our drinking healths run round, with nimble quicknes
Until at last to many healths brings sickness:
When store of money to men's hands do come,
They say they have received a good round sum;
And when a man does take a Knave up soundly,
It Is said he told him of his faults most roundly.
The Hangman hangs a Traitor, or a Thief,
And is about his business round, and brief,
Round are the dishes where we put our meat,
Our Cups, wherein we drink, are round complete:
Round is our Butter, round our Cheeses are,
Round are the clothes which on our backs we wear,
Beasts, fowls and fish, that every where abound,
Are (for the most part) every where made round.
Round are all wedding Rings, implying still,
Men's cares run round, like horses in a Mill.
Thus having plainly showed, why, and wherefore
I am made round, now to my task once more.
About my circle, I a Poesy have,
The Title, God unto the King first gave. In Engli^^ I have put ^^ placed) G^^
my helpe^^

The circle that encompasseth my face,
Declares my Sovereigns Title, by Gods grace,
Upon my other side is, Annagra^^ of the Lat^^ Motto of Posui pla^^^into
Englis^ words, W^^dom adm^^ me Power
POSVI DEVM,
Whereto is added ADIVTOREM MEVM.
The which last Poesy Annagrammatiz'd,
Wisdom, admit me power, true comprised,
Wisdom at first upon me did bestow
Such power that for a Shilling I should go,
When Wisdom gave me power, I was then
A servant, not a Master unto men.
Now, Power The Annagram turned ^^ckward, ^isedome ^^^es behind ^^^ey.
makes me Wisdom force perforce
Improper, like the Cart before the Horse.
For in this Age, so many friends I find,
My power's before, and Wisdom comes behind.
He that for me and for my kin can rake
Is wise, (although a Coxcomb) for my sake,
He that wants me, shall be esteemed an Ass,
Although he be as wise as e're man was.
For there is such league, one in Triplicity
Sworn firm betwixt the Devil, the world, and I,
That those who to the one true servants be,
Are captive bondslaues unto all the three,
Great sway upon the earth to us is given,
For well we know we never shall come in heaven,
And all that in us take delight and mirth,
Their only heaven is here upon the earth.
And covetous they are not, in this case,
Because they covet for no better place;
So much for that: now to my shape again,
You see my face is beardlesse, smooth and plain,
Because my Sovereign King Edw. a^s crowned (...) nine years (...) a^^ and
^^ed before (...) was 6.
was a child, it is known
When as he did put on the English Crown.
But had my stamp been bearded, as with hair,
Long before this is had been worn out bare;
For why with me the unthrifts every day,
With my face downwards do at shoue-boord Edw. sh^^lings for t^^ most part are
used a^ shooue-bor^^
play,
That had I had a beard, you my suppose
They Had worn it off, as they have done my nose.
Yet does my bare face sometimes, now and than
Make a young beardlesse Boy, outface a man,
For any Boy and I, do both agree,
To outface any man that does want me.
A cross Upon t^^ Cross of a Twelue-pence.
I bear upon my other side,
(A glorious figure of true Christian pride)
And with that cross I any man can cross
From wrong to injury, from harm to loss,
And in me is such working powerfulness,
That those that have me, and both cross and Here I mean ge^^ally of m^ney,
and simply of twelve p^^
bless.
The English, and French Arms, the Lions and flowers
Shows France a subject once to Englands powers,
And when my Master did respire his breath,
His sisters Mary, and Elizabeth
Ordained new Twelue-pences with me to join,
But altered not my badge upon my Coin,
Except a little which King Philip did,
Which Queen Elizabeth did soon forbid.
But since the coming of my Sovereign James,
The Badge upon my K. Ed^^ Q. Mar^ Qu. E^^ and K (...) all their ^^^lings of
weight (...) and before my (...)-pence ^
back more worth proclaims.
And to mix state with truth, truth with delight.
Upon the arms I carry, thus I write.
Upon the Kings Arms.
THree Lions Passant (borne by former Kings)
Subdues the (...)
Harp, quarters the (...)
flowers of (...)
France
Fourth Lion Rampant, equal honor brings,
Though having power to war does peace advance,
United in great James this Royal style,
King of great Britain, France, and Irelands I Will.
Thus Readers, having printed for your reading,
My birth, my rising, my estate, and breeding:
My Badge, my face, my Cross, my Annagram.
How mighty in my great command I am,
Now will I tell some travels I have had,
And humors of my Masters, good and bad,
Some (as I can remember) I Will recite)
Should I name all, 'twere almost infinite.
ONE asked the Cinnick wise Athenian, ^iogenes

The cause why silver looked so pale and wan:
He, in reply was quick, and answered strait,
Because so many for it lay in wait,
And did men think in what diversity
Of fashions men for me in wait do lie,
They would agree together in a tale, Twelue^^^ is at ^^^^.

That I had reason to look wan and pale.
I have of Treason, bin made Instrument
To betray Kingdoms, and to circumuent,
To undermine, and to subvert the states
Of Empires, and of mighty Potentates.
I have caused murder, cruel Homicide,
Foul Fratricide, unnatural Paricide.
For which a curse does unto me remain
A Runnagate, and Vagabond like Caine.
And though that God, in thundering Majesty
For bad man to have any Gods but he,
Yet many thousands that command forget,
Not minding God, their minds on me On mon^^
they set.
To purchase me, men have forsworn and sworn,
And from the Book of life their names have torn.
For me the Sabbath is profaned with works
Of Christians labors, worse then Jews or Turks,
For me those Parents that have nursed and bred
Their Children, by them are dishonored,
For to have me (to endless joy or woe)
Some children care not where their Fathers go.
I with the deu'ls sole help (my sole partaker)
Have bin an universal Cuckold-maker:
For where nor wit, or beauty could come in
In any shape I could admittance win.
I make the Husband sometimes keep the door,
The whilst for me) his wife does play the whore.
And many times (to move all hell to laughter)
I made a Mother Bawd unto her daughter.
I forced a Virgin, cast off continence
And Chastity, and put on Impudence.
I made a reverend Judge to take a Bribe,
I made a Scribe a forged Name subscribe,
I caused a Miser sell his soul to hell,
Because I here on Earth with him should dwell,
And eighteen years he kept me day and night
Locked in a Chest, not seeing any light.
And though my lot was thus a Slave to be,
Yet was he a far worser Slave to me;
For he had vowed himself to death to pine,
Rather then spend one penny pot of wine,
Although he late had swallowed down his throat,
Stinking fresh Herrings threescore for a Groat.
And he did bide this slavish misery,
On purpose to debar my liberty.
At last this poor rich, base penurious Knave,
Was borne (the way of all flesh) to his Grave:
And his brave heir, upon his back had got
A mourning merry suit, long looked I wot,
He the next day let fly the ill got treasure,
And I began to see some worldly pleasure;
From my old Masters Chest, I was assumed
To my young Masters Pockets, sweet perfumed,
'Ta bawdy house, of the last new translation
He bare me with him, for his recreation,
There for a maydenhead he played a game,
Where eightscore more before had done the same,
There did my Master Knave, discharge the score,
And went, and left me with my Mistress Whore.
I stayed not in her service long, for she
Was not two days before she set me free,
For having got a Frenchified heat,
She was prescribed a Diet, and a sweat,
She gave me to the Surgeon, for some Lotion
For Unguents, and a gentle working Potion
For Plasters, and for Ointments in a Box,
And so I left my Mistress, with a Pox.
The Surgeon me to the Physician sent,
From him I to the Apothecaery went,
But there I thought that Hell I had been in,
And all the Fiends had in his Boxes bin.
For it appeared to me that all his drugs
Had got the names of the infernal Bugs:
Zarzaparilla, Colloquintida,
Auxungia Porci, Cassia Fistula,
Egiptiacum, Album Camphiratum,
Black Oxicrotium, and white Sublimatum.
But soon my Master freed me from my fear,
He to the Tavern went, and left me there.
And whilst I in the Vintners house remained,
Some knowledge of my Masters state I gained,
Let no man say that drunk, my self I show,
For what I speak I understand and know.
I Will show some discommodities that wait
(For the most part) on every Vintners state.
First, if a row of houses stand together,
All of one bigness formed, no odds in either,
If one of them be to a Vintner let,
Amongst the rest at double rent it is set,
Next, if French Wine be twenty pounds the Tonne,
But a poor penny in a quart is won:
Besides, he sometimes in the Caske does find,
Of Lees six Gallons, for a Lagge behind.
And more, when in the Celler it is laid,
The Carmen, and Wine-Porters must be paid.
And by misfortune if the Caske be weak,
Three or four Gallons in the ground may leake,
Or taking vent, it may grow dead and flat,
And then the Vintner little gets by that.
And if he be a fellow of free heart,
He now and then must give a pint or quart.
His Candles (night and day) are burning still
Within his Seller, lest his Wines should spill:
And if two Kennell-rakers chance to come
To come in the evening, they must have a room,
And over one bare pint will sit and prate,
And burn a Candle out (perhaps) thereat,
Whilst all the Drawers must stay up and wait
Upon these fellows be it never so late.
The whilst a Candle in the Kitchen wastes,
Another to his end in the Seller hasts,
One with the Guests, another at the Bar,
Thus for one pint, four Candles burning are.
By day light, this I have seen some to do,
Call for a pint, a Pipe, and Candle to,
By that time he has done, it is quickly counted,
To what large sum the Vintners gains amounted.
Besides all this, his charge is ever great,
For servants wages, clothes, and fire, and meat;
For linen, washing, Trenchers, loss of Plate,
For Glasses broken (by the course of Fate)
Besides, he has some scores, which if you look
(...) or the (...) of this (...) true on (...) own ^^^wledge.
They make his posts look white, and black his book:
And if a debtor seau'n long years do stay,
But six pence for a quart of wine he will pay,
When if a Merchant do a Vintner trust,
For the forbearance dear he answer must.
And when some Guests have liquor in their brains,
How they will swagger in their roaring strains,
Out goes their swords, and by the ears they fall,
And now and then one's nailed unto the wall.
The man and's wife abused, his servants beaten,
No moneys paid for what is drunk or eaten,
(...) if a ^^^wer be (...) so good ^^^an, yet ^^ry paltry (...) will (...)
fill (...) Wine.
His house in question brought, a man is killed,
His and his wives heart both with sorrow filled,
And whereas other Trades their labors end
At night, till midnight He does still attend,
At every Grooms command officiously
He waits, and takes hard words most courteously.
He that amongst these harms can purchase profit,
Much good may't do him, he is worthy of it,
My Master Vintners Trade, I thought to touch,
Because I cannot think his gains is much,
I love them all, my lines here manifests,
And so God send them honest sober guests.
From thence unto the Wine-Marchant I went,
He presently me to the Market sent:
For Butter, and for Eggs I was exchanged,
And to the Country with my Dame I ranged.
Her Husband gave me to a laboring Ditcher,
He to the Alehouse went, and banged the Pitcher.
To stay long there, I was exceeding loath,
They used so much deceit with nick and froath.
My Master Host, unto the Brewer gave me,
The Malt-man came on Monday, and would have me,
He to the Alehouse brought me back in have,
From thence I quickly to the Baker past,
My service there was very short and brief,
He placed me with a Miller and a Thief,
That was a merry Master for the nonce,
He got his living cogging, with two stones,
I next dwelt with a Butcher, that had tricks
To live and thrive by Mutton and by pricks.
Thus have I often been tossed too and fro,
From bad to worse, from misery to woe,
From miserable Slaves, to Prodigalls,
To arrant Thieves, and to good Hospitalls,
To good and bad, to true men and to Taylers,
To Fiddlers, Pipers, Fishmongers and Sailors,
(...) all (...) Masters (...) Twelve-(...), not in (...) as they (...) degree,
(...) calling, (...) as he ^^^^iled (...), good (...) bad, poor (...) rich,
^^^^out any (...).
To Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, Tinkers, Pedlers,
To Fruiterers, for Pipins, Plumbs, and Medlers,
To Silk-men, Sadlers, Turners, Tylers, Glasiers,
To Tripewiues, Mealme, Gardners, Grasiers, Brasiers,
To Plummers, Bricklay'rs, Smithes, and Carpenters,
To Dyers, Goldsmithes, and to Playsterers,
To Noblemen, to Watermen, to Ioyners,
To honest men, to Knaves, to clipping Coyners.
To Knights, to Beggars, Scriu'ners, Colliers, Lawyers,
To Stationers, to Printers, Silk-men, Sawyers,
To fools, to wisemen, Dunces, and to Doctors,
To Harlots, Varlots, Serieants, Bayliffes, Proctors,
To Papists, Protestants, and Puritans,
To Traitors, Subjects, Matchiuillians,
To Catchpoles, Beadles, Iaylors, Ironmongers,
To Cooks (whose labors do assuage men's hungers,
To Cuckolds, Bawdes, to greasy Pimps and Panders,
To Cowards, valiant men, and stout Commanders.
To Fishers, Fowlers, Shepherds, Queristers,
To Feather-makers, Girdlers, Barristers,
To Players, Bearewards, Fencers, to good fellows,
To those that make no breath, yet can make bellows.
To Pewt'rers, Shoomakers, and Buttonmakers,
To Marshals men, and dirty kennell-rakers.
To Leather-sellers, Armourers, and Curriers,
To Iuglers, Iesters, Masons, Barbars, Spurriers,
To Woodmongers, to Tapsters, and to Salters,
To Ropemakers, for Cables, Ropes and Halters,
To Paynters, Poynters, Hackney-men and Skinners,
To Hearb-wiues, Fish-wiues, and such scolding sinners,
To Cutlers, Parrators, to Posts, to Judges,
To Druggists, Felmongers, and to toyling Drudges,
To Hatters, Powlterers, Coniurers, and Farmers,
To Priests, Clerks, Sextanes, Sorcerers, and Charmers,
To Bowyers, Chaundlers, and Astronomers,
To Gulls, to Gallants, and Embroyderers,
To Basket-makers, Milke-maydes, Iewellers, Hear are a strange gal^^mawfrey of
Twelue-pences Maste^^ honest men and Kna^^^ like hearb^^ and weede^ in a
Hotch^potch.

To Comfit-makers, and Soliciters,
To Yeomen, Hostlers, and to under Shrieues,
To Millainers, to Chamberlaines, and Thieues,
To Cappers, Faulkners, Plow-men, Haberdashers,
To Coopers, Weauers, Scullions, Cobblers, Thrashers,
To Hunts-men, Gunners, Grauers, Rhethoritians,
To Coachmen Tuckers, Potters, and Musicians,
To Reapers, Spinners, Caruers, and Suruayors,
To Orators, to Cariers, and Puruayors,
To Clothiars, to Logitians, Mowers, Shermen,
To Clockmakers, Collectors, Miners, Carmen,
Tobacco-sellers, Netmakers, men, Boys,
To Sharkes, Stales, Nims, Lifts, Foysts, Cheats, Stands, Decoyes,
T'a Cutpurse, and a Pocket picking Hound,
To as mad Rogues as ever trod on ground.
To married men, to Batchellers, to Lads;
To sober Fellows, and to drunken Swads,
To Maids, to Wives, to Widows, and to Whores,
To liberal minds, and hungry hide-bound Bores,
To Midwiues, Chimney-sweepers, Beadles, Nurses,
To Scampsters, Laundresses, and Gossips purses,
To Drummers, Draymen, Pirates, Drawers, Glouers,
To Trumpets, Whitsters, Ratcatchers, and Drouers,
To Hang-men, Sidemen; to Churchwardens, Cryers,
To Fluits, Horse-coursers, Sellers, and to Buyers,
To Prisoners, to Night-farmers, and to Broome-men,
To all estates of Forraigners and Freemen:
I could name more, if so my Muse did please,
Of Mowse Traps, and tormentors to kill Fleas:
For Ballads, Table-bookes, and Conny-skins,
For ends of Gold and Silver, Points and Pins:
For Knights, and Madames made of Ginger-bread,
And many a stale and musty maydenhead.
These Masters have I served, and thousands more
Of all degrees and Trades, on seas and shore.
And amongst all the places that I had,
Whereas I found one good, I got ten bad:
If I did serve a poor man but one day,
I five year (for it) with the rich would stay,
I have bin Twelue-pence seauenty od long year,
And to the world, I Will make it plain appear,
That where I had one Master loved the poor,
I had ten Drunkards, that did love a Whore,
For each hours service good men had of me,
To my great grief I served bad people three.
I wear the Kings badge, yet fly from the King,
And to a Misers Chest I profit bring.
The words I have are Latin, which implies
That I should wait upon the learned and wise,
But for one Scholar, that can understand,
I have served twenty Artlesse fools command.
My service to the Poets have bin evil,
I ran more swift from them, then from the Devil,
I know not well the cause, but they and I
Together long could never keep company.
I have a true excuse that will defend me,
They Poets and money are i^ emulation.
love me not, which makes them quickly spend me.
But there is no great love lost twixt them and me,
We keep asunder, and so best agree.
They that do love me best beyond (...)
Sea dwell,
For there I am like to a soul in hell,
From whence there is no returning, and so I
In the Low Countries or in Germany,
If they do get me once upon their shore,
It Is ten to one I never see England more,
I have served Cut-purses, and highway Fellows,
And I have brought ten thousand to the Gallows,
Were he the arrantst Thief that ever 'twang'd,
For my love he would venture to be hanged.
Some Scriueners, and some Post Knights (it appears)
For loving me too much, have lost their ears,
There Is many a reverend Bawd rode in a Cart,
For bearing unto me a loving heart.
There Is many a sweet-fac'd Punk has bin perplexed,
Whipped, and behind her (...)
back, much grieved and vexed,
Some of my Masters would take pains to have me,
And like to Barbars, wash, clip, (...)
poll, and shave me,
In this I only differ from a Whore,
We both have wicked followers great store:
The Whore they may kiss, clip and coll, and strip,
Me they may safely kiss, but never clip.
And now and then, like immitating Apes,
With Brass, Tin, Iron, they would counterfeit my shapes.
They loved me more then honesty requires,
But commonly the Hangman pays their hires.
Thus though I be but of a small account,
I have had power to make my Masters mount,
And some again (by their own bad endeavor)
I have had power to sink them down for ever.
To some I am (in coming) show as Lead,
But quick as Quick silver, again, soon fled.
Suppose that any mischief that could be,
Had lately bin by the only means of me,
As casting good men into great distress,
T'vndoe the Widow, and the Fatherless,
A long delaide sure, longer to prolong,
Or hanged a guiltless man, that did no wrong:
Corrupted a chaste Maid, enticed a Wife
To folly, and to loath her Husbands life:
If I had bin the means to work all this,
Or ten times more such actions of amiss,
Yet do I look as white as Innocence,
And never blush, at the most vile offense.
Nay more, there is none will (for my faults) refrain me,
But every one will straitway entertain me.
If treason (through my means) be thought or wrought,
I never am unto my trial brought:
For I have had the trial touch before,
And am so known, I shall be tried no more.
For though I be in ill, chief foremost Actor,
No man suspects me for a malefactor,
And if there be one man that wlll reveal me,
There are at least ten thousand will conceal me.
Indeed I was a Pagan (...) first and a^ongst Pa^ans and ^^eathen.
borne at first,
And since in Christendom I have been nursed,
So they might have me to increase their pelf,
Many are turned, worse Pagans then my self.
For I no God or diety did know,
To whom I should my love and service show:
But they forsake their God, whom they know well,
And make a God of me, an Infidel.
So, though I be but of a Heathen state,
I am no base Apostate, Reprobate.
Look on the herbs, the flowers, the fruits, the Trees,
Fowls of the air, the painful laboring Bees,
And ask their Owners why they breed and spring,
His answer is, they must him money bring.
Note but the toyling Plowman, he is sowing
He Is hedging, ditching, raking, reaping, mowing,
Goes to bed late, and rises before day,
And all to have my company, he will say,
For me with dagled Gowns, and duty ham'd,
The Hall at Westminster, in the Term is crammed,
Such writing, running, sweating, interceading,
Removing Causes, Pleading, Counter-pleading,
Ask the cause why, the answer true will be, All men ^^bour for ^^ney, bu^^
with al^^ devotion

Their wrangling and their strife is all for me.
Look in the Town, how folks throng to and fro,
So thick, one cannot for another go,
And how the Shops with Wares are furnished out:
How every one stares, pryes, and gapes about.
Demand the reason, all will answer make,
They watch, and wait, cause they would money take.
I know not why my reputation's such,
But still my credit has been wondrous much,
I am more willing taken, now and then
Then a sealed Bond, of any Ready ^^ney is as (...) as any m^^^^ Bond.
Aldermen,
For by long proof, the Proverb true does say,
That ready money ever will away.
I am no worse then I have been of old,
When thrice my worth, for me was bought and sold,
For I could once have paid a quarters rent.
For a small Garden, and a Tenement,
And that (for me) of Barley, Wheat or Rye,
Three times as much as now a man might buy:
The cause why now I not so much attain,
Is (that I am not lighter half a grain)
But that through greediness, and hateful pride,
I still am ill imployde, and worse applide:
For though the world be in a tottering state
^^^^^^ng is ^^nstant ^^^^^nce.
Yet am I constant always at one rate,
Let house, land, clothes, food, high or lower rise,
I am in value, always at one sise,
Raise the price up, or let it fall down low,
A shilling is but Twelve pence, all men know.
I am the same I was, it is only men
Have lost the consciences they harbored then.
I might (as they might use me) be a blessing,
And they make me the cause of their transgressing,
Some to obtain me into mischief run,
And some to spend me have destruction won:
^^^ I speak ^^ally of ^^^ey.
There Is many a Master, where I used to dwell,
That took delight (with me) to purchase hell.
And all the vicious ways they ran aside,
They made the devil and I, their only guide:
(Perhaps) their Fathers went to hell to have me,
And their mad heirs, run the same way to leave me,
The whilst a haire-braind'd needy crew beset me,
And gallop to the deu'll amayne, to get me.
Thus vilely, how to get, and keep, and spend me,
Three quarters of the world do still attend me.
I have made Marriages in many a place,
Where has bin neither beauty, wit, or grace,
All Is one for that, I am of that high price,
I can make vice seem virtue, virtue vice.
I am of that great power, and high command,
In joining house to house, and land to land:
That where one has a dwelling to abide,
One hundred knows not where their heads to hide:
And as one may three hundred Tenants have,
Five hundred knows not where to have a grave.
For though from Earth man has original,
And to the Earth, from whence he came does fall,
Though he be Earth, and can claim naught but earth,
(As the frail portion due unto his birth)
Yet many thousands that the earth does breed,
Have no place (certain) where to lodge or feed:
In which respect men's pleasures are behind
The Birds, and Beasts, for they contentment find
With the provision that dame Nature gives,
Free (without money) every Creature lives,
Their food, attire, their Caves, dens, holes, and nests
They have, and hold, as their own interests.
And man, that has a reasonable soul,
Whose reason countermaunds each beast and foul,
Within whose face, a Majesty is seated,
Beyond all Creatures that were e're created;
Yet let him but want money, and it is plain,
He Is the only brief and abstract or disdain,
Despised, scorned, dejected, and contemned,
And round about with miseries behem'd.
Search all the worlds Records from age to age,
And view Times variable Pilgrimage:
Note that though Fortune (in her tottering guise)
Has played at Football with great Monarchies,
Yet shall you find how ever States have varied,
How ever things were carried or miscarried,
That money still bare the commanding sway,
To whom both right and wrong, and all obey.
Should all the Witches in the whole world sit
In Counsel, and employ their damned wit,
And have the aids of all the fiends in hell,
With many a mumbling Necromantick spell,
And all this toil and pains of theirs should be,
To bring Pecunia into infamy,
To cast my Lady Argent in disgrace,
And make some other thing supply her place:
The fruits of all their labors they should find,
Would be like throwing feathers against the wind:
For in man's heart it is rooted with such love,
That nothing else but Death can it remove.
And many humane reasons does approve it,
That above all things earthly he should love it.
Do thou want honor, money strait will buy it,
Although ten thousand needy Slaves envy it.
Would have an office thy estate to rear,
Money will help thee to it man, never fear:
Do want wit how to guide and govern it?
If thou have money thou can want no wit.
Art thou a damned Matchiuillian,
Thy money makes thee held an honest man.
Have thou a scuruie face, take this of me,
If thou have money it is not seen in thee.
Would have a whore, a Coach, smoke, drink or dry?
Money will bring thee all at any price.
Would have all pleasures in variety,
Money will thy insatiate wants supply:
Then seeing money can do what it will,
Have not men reason to regard it still?
Some things there are that Money cannot win,
But they are things men take small pleasure in;
As Heaven, and a good Conscience, Virtue, Grace,
He that loves Money, cannot these embrace.
For he whose heart to Money, is inclined,
Of things Celestial has but little mind.
If Money were a Woman, I do fee
Her Case most pity pitiful would be,
Because I think she would no lovers have,
Except a Gowty miserable Knave:
One that all night would by her lie and Groan,
Gripped with the Collicke, or tormenting Stone,
With stinking, Coughing, Grunting, spitting, spauling,
And nothing but Contagious Catterwalling.
Besides he would be so Iealious day and night,
He would not suffer her go out of's sight:
That sure I think her Case far worse would be
Then is the Turkish Galley slavery.
For none but such as those whom Age has got,
Are in the Love of Money extreme hot.
And when as Hearing, Sent, and Taste, and Sight,
Are gone, yet Feeling Money's their Delight.
The whilst a Young Man, full of strength and pride,
Would make her Go by water, Run and Ride,
Force her in all things to supply his need,
For Recreation, or to Cloth and Feed,
Compel her to Maintain him fine and Brave, (...)

And in a word make her his Drudge or Slave,
And all his Love to her would be so so,
For he would but kiss her, and so let her go.
Thus if It were a Woman as I say,
Her Case were Lamentable every way:
For Old men within Doors would ever worr'y her,
and Youngmen round about the world would hurry her,
That were she matchd with either young or old,
Her miseries would still be manifold.
But this Commanding bright Imperious Dame,
Used well or ill, She Is evermore the same:
Lock her, order her loose, she Cares not which,
She still has power the whole world to bewitch.
I call to mind, I heard my Twelue-pence say,
That he has often at Christmas bin at play:
At Court, at th'Innes of Court, and every where
Throughout the Kingdom, being far and near.
At Passage, and And tw^^ games more
Mumchance, at In and in,
Where Swearing has bin Counted for no Sin,
Where Fullamshigh and False 'Di^
Loanmen Bore great sway,
With the quick help of a Band Cater Trey.
My shilling said such swaggering there would be
Amongst the wrangling Knaves for me (quoth he)
Such shoueing, sholdring, thrusting, thronging, setting,
Such striving, crowding, iustling and such betting,
Such storming, fretting, fuming, chafing, sweating,
Resuse, renounce me, damn me, swearing, cheating,
So many heavy curses, plagues and poxes,
Where all are losers, but the Butlers boxes:
That sure in hell the Devils are in fear,
To curse and to blaspheme as they do there.
Whilst without touch of conscience, or of sense,
They abuse the Almighties great Omnipotence,
And all this wicked stir that they do make,
Is me from one another how to rake.
That though I were a Pagan borne, I see
They make themselves much worse, to pocket me.
(...) shilling ^^^o Puritan (...) all this.
These Gamesters make this time, a time of mirth,
In memory of their blessed Saviors birth:
Whose dear remembrance, they do annually
Observe with extreme odious gluttony,
^peake not ^^ainst ho^^^t mirth, ^^ndly Ga^^ng, nor good cheer but against
the unlawful use of these Recre^^tions, and abuse of Go^^
With gurmondizing beastly belly filling,
With swinish drinking, and with drunken swilling,
With Ribald Songs, Iigges, Tales, and gaudy clothes,
With bitter cursings, and most fearful Oaths,
That sure my shilling says, the Heathen will
Not entertain the devil half so ill;
But worship Saethan in more kind behavior,
Then some professed Christians do their Savior.
In Saturnes reign when money was unfound,
Then was that age with peace and plenty crowned,
Then mine was thine, Thine mine, and all our lives,
All things in common were, except our wives.
But now the case is altered (as they say)
Quite topsie-turuy the contrary way:
For now men's wealth is privately kept close,
The whilst their wives are commonly let lose.
For he whom love of money does besot
For's own soul, or's wives body, much cares not.
It bewitched Aohan at the siege of Ai, Joshua 7.

For which the Israelites did lose the day:
It made Gehezie false in his affairs, 2. Kings 5.

And gained the Leprosy for him, and's heirs,
It with The Apostle Judas bore such sway,
That it made him the Lord of life betray;
And Anaenias and his wretched wife, Acts 5.

By sudden death it made them lose their life;
And Divine stories, and profane, recite
Examples of such matters infinite,
It Is said in Salomons Dominions,
Kings. 10. 7.
That Silver was as plenty as the Stones:
But sure the Sin of Couetise was not
Amongst them either borne, or scarce begot.
For all that Silver, and a great deal more,
Raked and Ripped from the Europian shore,
From AEsia, and Sun-parched Africa,
And from the womb of vaust America,
Purcas.
From which last place the Potent King of Spain,
Eleven Millious in one year did gain,
And from Pottozzy Mines he Daily had
Three hundred thirty thousand Ryals made.
To speak what mighty sums King David won,
And left them unto Solomon his Son,
Chron. 22. A Tallent of Gold is in ^alue 600. ^rownes.
Of Gold one hundred thousand Talents fine,
Silver one Thousand thousand, from the Mine,
Besides from Ophir he had at the least,
Three thousand Golden talents of the best.
^oseph in the ^^^. Book of ^is Antiqui^ies.
Josephus does of David's Tomb thus write,
How th'hidden Treasure there was infinite,
The Basins, Candlestickes, and Censors all,
Lamps, Organs, Instruments most Musical,
Ports, Altar, Tables, Hindges the Gates to hold,
They were all made of pure Refined Gold.
Besides 600. Shields and Targets more,
The King causde all with Gold be plated over.
Besides the Richnes of his Royal Throne,
The like whereof elsewhere And (...) the Captan^^ 5000. Talents, and 10000.
pe^^ces of Gold and 1000^ talents of Si^^uer, besid^^ Brass and Iron.
was never none.
When the Great Macedonian did subdue
Darius, Quint^^ Curtius.
and his haples Persian Crew,
It Is said his Treasure did so much abound,
Twenty nine thousand Tallents there was found.
And more he faith (if we may Credit this)
How that in Susa and 2 Cities in Persia.
Persepolis
They found, of Silver to Increase their store,
One hundred seauenty thousand Talents more.
When Cirus Conquered Cressus, About 60. Millions of Crowns.
Cressus lost
Three hundred Millions of good Gold almost,
It Is writ that Midas A King of Phrigia.
Treasure so amounted
Innumerable, not to be Accounted,
Sardanapalus an Assirian A most Licentious Prince.
King
Near eight score Millions to the Fire did bring.
Where Fifteen days did burn his house, and pelf,
His whores, and ('among the rest) his wretched self.
And Plutarch faith, Mark Of Crown^^ which was ^ pay.
Anthony spent clear
Of Gold, full Six score Millions in one year.
What should I speak of Cleopatraes Treasures,
Or wealth, or Triumphs of the Roman Caesar's.
Or what they were whose riches have bin such,
Or who they are that now possess too much,
But here is the question, seeing times of old
Did yield such store of silver and of gold,
And seeing daily more and more is found,
Dug in abundance from the solid ground,
I muse which way the devil all is gone,
That I, and thousand thousands can have none.
I know my self as able to abuse it,
As any man that knows well how to use it,
But sure I never should my Master make it,
But as my servant take it, and forsake it.
I have described in particular
What Twelue-pence is, how it has trauell'd far:
How to all ages, Sexes, Trades, and Arts,
It comes and goes, it tarries and departs:
(...)
I could tell further how it does command,
In pressing men to serve by sea or land,
How Bakers thirteen penny loaves do give
All for a shilling, and thrive well and live.
How it a pottle of good Clarret buys,
How it is a quart of rich Canaries prise,
How for a thousand things it is daily ranging,
And is so round a sum, it needs no changing,
How up and down the world he still does firrit,
And takes no more rest then an ayery spirit.
Then at the last my Muse to mind does call,
The mighty power of money in general,
And how all ages still have had good store,
Musing the cause my self can have no more.
And Money having writ all this for thee, (...) Mone^^

Show not thy self ungrateful unto me:
But as I know thou can, so preethee grant
That when I want thou will supply my want,
Reward thy Poet, that does set thee forth,
I Will love thee still, according to thy worth.
FINIS.

