A SERMON PREACHED IN SAINT MARY'S Church in OXFORD.

Upon the Anniversary of the GUNPOWDER-TREASON.

By JEREMY TAILOR, Fellow of Allsoules College in OXFORD.

Nolite tangere Christos meos.

OXFORD,

Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University. M. DC. XXXVIII.

TO THE MOST REVER END FATHER IN GOD WILLIAM by Divine providence LORD
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY His Grace, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan.
CHANCELLOR of the University of OXFORD, and one of his MAJESTY'S most
Honorable Privy Council.
My most Honorable good LORD. May it please your GRACE,
IT was obedience to my Superior that engaged me upon this last Anniversary
commemoration of the great Goodness of God Almighty to our King and Country in
the discovery of the most damnable Powder Treason. It was a blessing which no
tongue could express, much less mine, which had scarce learned to speak, at
least, was most unfit to speak in the Schools, of the Prophets. Delicata
autem est illa obedientia que (...) quaerit. It had been no good argument of
my obedience to have disputed the inconvenience of my person, and the
unaptnesse of my parts for such an employment I knew God, out of the mouth of
Infants, could acquire his praise, and if my heart were actually as Votive as
my tongue should have been, it might be one of Gods (...) to perfect his own
praise out of the weakness and imperfection of the Organ. So as I was able, I
endeavored to perform it, having my obedience ever ready for my excuse to
men, and my willingness to perform my duty, for the assoylment of my self
before God; part of which I hope was accepted, and I have no reason to think,
that the other was not pardoned.

When I first thought of the Barbarism of this Treason, I wondered not so much
at the thing it self as by what means it was possible for the Devil to gain
so strong a party in men's resolutions, as to move them to undertake a business
so abhorring from Christianity, so evidently full of extreme danger to their
lives, and so certainly to incur the highest wrath of God Almighty. My
thoughts were thus rude at first; but after a strict inquisition I fond it was
apprehended as a business (perhaps full of danger to their bodies, but)
advantageous to their souls, consonant to the obligation of all Christians,
and meritorious of an exceeding weight of Glory, for now it was come to pass
which our dear Master foretold, men should kill us, and think they did God
good service in it. I could not think this to be a part of any man's religion,
nor do I yet believe it. For it is so apparently destructive of our dear
Master his Royal laws of Charity and Obedience, that I must not be so
uncharitable as to think they speak their own mind truly, when they
profess their belief of the lawfullnesse and necessity in some cases of
rebelling against their lawful Prince, and using all means to throw him from
his kingdom, though it be by taking of his life. But it is but just that they
who break the bonds of duty to their Prince, should likewise forfeit the laws
of charity to themselves, and if they say not true, yet to be more
uncharitable to their own persons, then I durst be, though I had their own
warrant. Briefly (Most R. Father) I found amongst them of the Roman party such
prevailing opinions, as could not consist with loyalty to their Prince, in case
he were not the Popes subjects, and these so generally believed, and somewhere
obtruded under peril of their souls, that I could not but point at these
dangerous rocks, at which I doubt not, but the loyalty of many has suffered
shipwreck, and of thousands more might, if a higher Star had not guided them
better, then their own Pilots.

I could not therefore but think it very likely that this Treason might spring
from the same Fountain, and I had concluded so in my first meditations, but
that I was willing to consider, whether or no it might not be that these men
were rather exasperated then persuaded, and whether it were not that the
severity of our laws against them might rather provoke their intemperate zeal,
then religion thus move their settled conscience. It was a material
consideration, because they ever did and still do fill the world with outcries
against our laws for making a rape upon their consciences, have printed
Catalogues of their English Martyrs, drawn Schemes of most strange tortures
imposed on their Priests, such as were unimaginable, by Nero, or Dioclesian, or
any of the worst and cruellest enemies of Christianity, endeavoring thus to
make us partly guilty of our own ruin, and so washing their hands in token of
their own innocence, even then when they were dipping them in the blood
Royal, and would have emptyed the best veins in the whole Kingdom to fill
their Lavatory. But I found all these to be but Calumnies, strong accusations
upon weak presumptions, and that the cause did rest where I had begun, I
mean, upon the pretense of the Catholic cause, and that the imagined
iniquity of the Laws of England could not be made a veil to cover the
deformity of their intentions, for our Laws were just, Honorable, and
Religious.

Concerning these and some other appendices to the business of the day, I
expressed some part of my thoughts, which because happily they were but a just
truth, and this truth not unseasonable for these last times, in which (as S.
Paul prophesied) men would be fierce, Traitors, heady, and high minded,
creeping into houses, leading filly women captive, it pleased some who had
power to command me, to wish me to a publicatio^ of these my short and sudden
meditations, that (if it were possible) even this way I might express my duty
to God and the King.

Being thus far encouraged, I resolved to go something further, even to the
boldness of a dedication to your Grace, that since I had no merit of my own to
move me to the confidence of a public view, yet I might dare to venture under
the protection of your Graces favor. But since my boldness does as much need
a defense, as my Sermon a Patronage, I humbly crave leave to say, that though
it be boldness, even to presumption, yet my address to your Grace is not
altogether unreasonable.

For since all know that your Grace thinks not your life your own, but when it
spends it self in the service of your King, opposing your great endeavors
against the zelots of both sides who labor the disturbance of the Church and
State, I could not think it (...) to present to your Grace this short discovery
of the Kings enemies, (...), and proper to your Grace who is so true, so
zealous a lover of your Prince and Country. It was likewise appointed to be the
public voice of thanksgiving for your Vniverfity (though she never spoke
weaker then by so mean an instrument) and therefore is accountable to your
Grace to whom under God and the King we owe the Blessing and Prosperity of all
our Studies. Nor yet can I choose but hope, that my Great Obligations to your
Grace's Favor may plead my pardon, (since it is better that my Gratitude
should be bold, then my diffidence ungrateful) but that this is so far from
expressing the least part of them, that it lays a greater bond upon me, either
for a debt of delinquency in presenting it, or of thankfulness, if your Grace
may please to pardon it.

I humbly crave your Grace's Benediction, pardon, and acceptance of the
humblest duty and observance of

Your GRACES: most observant and obliged CHAPLAIN IER. TAILOR.

A SERMON PREACHED UPON THE Anniversary of the GUNPOWDER-TREASON.
LUKE 9. Cap. verse. 54. But when James and John saw this, they said, Lord, will thou that we command fire to come from Heaven and consume them even as Elias
did?
I Shall not need to strain much to bring my Text and the day together, Here is
fire in the text, consuming fire, like that whose Antevorta we do this day
commemorate. This fire called for by the Disciples of Christ: so was ours too;
by Christ's Disciples at least, and some of them entitled to our Great Master by
the compellation of his holy name of JESUS.

I would say the parallel holds thus far, but that the persons of my Text,
however Boanerges, sons of thunder and of a reproveable spirit, yet are no
way considerable in the proportion of malice with the persons of the day. For
if I consider the cause that moved James and John to so inconsiderate a wrath,
it bears a fair excuse: The men of Samaria Verse 53.
turned their Lord and Master out of doors, denying to give a nights lodging
to the Lord of Heaven and Earth. It would have disturbed an excellent patience
to see him, whom but just before they beheld transfigured, and in a glorious
Epiphany upon the Mount, to be so neglected by a company of hated Samaritans,
as to be forced to keep his vigils where nothing but the welkin should have
been his roof, not any thing to shelter his precious head from the descending
dew of heaven. -- Quis talia fando Temperet? It had been the greater wonder if
they had not been angry. But now if we should level our progress by the same
line and guess that in the present affair there was an equal cause, because
a greater fire was intended, we shall too much betray the ingenuity of
apparent truth, and the blessing of this Anniversary. They had not half such a
case for an excuse to a far greater malice; it will prove they had none at
all, and therefore their malice was so much the more malicious because
causeless and totally inexcusable.

However, I shall endeavor to join their consideration in as (...) a parallel
as I can; which if it be not exact (as certainly it cannot, where we have
already discovered so much difference in degrees of malice,) yet by laying them
together we may better take their estimate, though it be only by seeing their
disproportion.

The words as they lay in their own order, point out, 1. The persons that ask't
the question. 2. The cause that moved them. 3. The person to whom they
propounded it; 4. The Question it self. 5. And the precedent they urged to
move a grant, drawn from a very fallible Topic, a singular Example, in a
special and different case. The persons here were Christ's Disciples; and so
they are in our case, designed to us by that glorious Surname of Christianity:
they will be called Catholics, but if our discovery perhaps rise higher, and
that the Sea Apostolic prove sometimes guilty of so reproveable a spirit,
then we are very near to a parallel of the persons, for they were Disciples of
Christ, and Apostles. 2. The cause was the denying of toleration of abode upon
the grudge of an old schism, Religion was made the instrument. That which
should have taught the Apostles to be charitable, and the Samaritans
hospitable, was made a pretense to justify the unhospitablenesse of the one and
the uncharitableness of the other. Thus far we are right, for the malice of
this present Treason, stood upon the same base. 3. Although neither Side much
doubted of the lawfulness of their proceedings; yet S. James and S. John were
so discreet as not to think themselves infallible, therefore they asked their
Lord: so did the persons of the day, ask the question too, but not of Christ,
for he was not in all their thoughts; but yet they asked of Christ's Delegates,
who therefore should have given their answer eodem tripode, from the same
spirit. They were the Fathers Confessors who were asked. 4. The question is of
both sides concerning a consumptive sacrifice, the destruction of a Town
there, of a whole Kingdom here, but differing in the circumstance of place
whence they would fetch their fire. The Apostles would have had it from Heaven,
but these men's conversation was not there. (...), things from beneath, from an
artificial hell, but breathed from the natural and proper, were in all their
thoughts. 5. The example, which is the last particular, I fear I must leave
quite out, and when you have considered all, perhaps you will look for no
example.

First of the persons; they were Disciples of Christ and Apostles. [ But when
James and John saw this,] When first I considered they were Apostles, I
wondered they should be so intemperatly angry; but when I perceived they were
so angry, I wondered not that they sinned. Not the privilege of an Apostolical
spirit, not the nature of Angels, not the condition of immortality can guard
from the danger of sin, but if we be overrul'd by passion, we almost subject
our selves to its necessity. It was not therefore without reason altogether,
that the Stoics affirmed wisemen to be void of passions, for sure I am, the
inordination of any passion is the first step to folly. And although of them,
as of waters of a muddy residence we may make good use, and quench our thirst,
if we do not trouble them, yet upon any ungentle disturbance we drink down
mud in stead of a clear stream, and the issues of sin and sorrow, certain
consequents of temerarious or inordinate anger. And therefore when the Apostle
had given us leave to be angry, as knowing the condition of human nature, he
quickly enters a Caveat that we sin not; he knew sin was very likely to be
handmaid where Anger did domineer, and this was the reason why S. James and S.
John are the men here pointed at, for the Scripture notes them for Boanerges,
sons of thunder, men of an angry temper, and quid mirum est filios tonitrui
fulgurasse voluisse? said S. Ambrose. But there was more in it then thus. Their
spirits of themselves hot enough, yet met with their education under the Law,
(whose first tradition was in fire and thunder, whose precepts were just but
not so merciful;) and this inflamed their distemper to the height of a
revenge. It is the Doctrine of S. Epist. ad Algis.
Hierome and (...) Lucam.
Titus Bostrensis; The Law had been their Schoolmasters, and taught them the
rules of justice both Punitive and Vindictive: But Christ was the first that
taught it to be a sin to retaliate evil with evil, it was a Doctrine they
could not read in the killing letter of the Law. There they might meet with
precedents of revenge and anger of a high severity, an eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth, and let him be cut off from his people: But forgiving
injuries, praying for our persecutors, loving our enemies, and relieving them,
were Doctrines of such high and absolute integrity, as were to be reserved for
the best and most perfect Lawgiver, the bringer of the best promises, to which
the most perfect actions have the best proportion; and this was to be when
Shiloh came. Now then the spirit of Elias is out of date, -- Iam ferrea primum
Desinit, ac toto surgit Gens Aurea Mundo. And therefore our blessed Master
reproves them of ignorance, not of the Law, but of his spirit, which had they
but known or could but have guessed at the end of his coming, they had not
been such Abecedarij in the School of Mercy.

And now we shall not need to look far for persons, Disciples professing at
least in Christ's school, yet as great strangers to the merciful spirit of our
Savior, as if they had been sons of the Law, or foster-brothers to Romulus
and sucked a wolse, and they are Romanists too; this days solemnity presents
them to us, (...), and yet were that washed off, underneath they write
Christian and Jesuit.

One would have expected that such men, set forth to the worlds acceptance with
so mercifulla cognomentum, should have put a hand to support the ruinous
fabric of the worlds charity, and not have pulled the frame of heaven and
earth about our ears. But yet -- Necredite Teucri! Give me leave first to make
an Inquisition after this Antichristian pravity, and try who is of our side,
and who loves the King, by pointing at those whose Sermons do blast Loyalty,
breathing forth Treason, flaughters and cruelty, the greatest imaginable
contrariety to the spirit and Doctrine of our Dear Master. So we shall quickly
find out more then a pareil for S. James and S. John the Boanerges of my Text.

It is an act of faith, by faith to conquer the enemies (...) de Clave David
Lib. 2. 6. 15.
of God and Holy Church, says Sanders our Countryman. Hitherto nothing but
well; If James and John had offered to do no more then what they could have
done with the sword of the spirit and the shield of Faith, they might have
been inculpable, and so had he if he had said no more; but the blood boyles
higher, the manner spoils all. For it is not well done unless a warlike
Captain be appointed by Christ's Vicar to bear a Croisade in a field of blood.
And if the other Apostles did not proceed such an angry way as James and John,
it was only discretion that detained Ibid. cap. 14.
them, not religion. For so they might, and it were no way unlawful for them
to bear arms to propagate Religion, had they not wanted an opportunity; if
you believe the same author: for fighting is proper for S. Peter and his
Successors, therefore because Christ gave him Commission to feed his Lambs. A
strange reason!

I had thought Christ would have his Lambs fed with the sincere milk of his
word, not like to Canibals, solitisque (...) Lac potare Getis, and
poculatingere venis, To mingle blood intheir sacrifices (as Herod to the
Galilaeans) and quaffe it off for an auspicium to the propagation of the
Christian faith. Me thinks here is already too much clashing of armor and
effusion of blood for a Christian cause; but this were not altogether so
unchristian like, if the sheep, though with blood, yet were not to be fed with
the blood of their shepherd (...), I mean their Princes. But I find many
such Nutritij in the Nurseries of Rome, driving their Lambs from their folds
unless they will be taught to wory the Lion. Tyrannice gubernans just (...)
dominium non potest spoliari fine publico iudicio: Lata (...) sententia (...)
potest fieri executor. Potest autem a populo etian qui iuravit ei obedientian,
(...) monitus non vult corrigi. Verb. Tyrannus.


Emanuel Sa, in his Aphorisms, affirms it lawful to kill a King, indeed not
every King, but such a one as rules with Tyranny, and not then, unless the
Pope has sentene'd him to death, but then he may; though he be his lawful
Prince. Not the necessitude which the Law of nations has put between Prince
and people, not the obligation of the oath of Allegiance, not the Sanctions of
God Almighty himself, must reverse the sentence against the King when once
past, but any one of his subjects, of his own sworn subjects, may kill him.

This perfidious treasonable position of Sa, is not a single Testimony. For 1.
it slipped not from his pen Praesertim cum in hoc opus per annos fere quadraginta
diligentissime (...).
by inadvertency; it was not made public, until after forty years
deliberation, as himself testifies in his Preface. 2. After such an avisamente
it is now the ordinary received manual for the Fathers Confessors of the
Jesuits Order.

This Doctrine, although -- Titulo res digna sepulchri -- yet is nothing if
compared with Mariana. For 1. he affirms the same Doctrine in substance. 2.
Then De Rege and R. instituit. lib. 1. c. 6.
he descends to the very manner of it, ordering how it may be done with the
best convenience: He thinks poison to be the best way, but yet that for the
more secrecy, it be cast upon the chayres, saddles, and garments of his Prince.
It was the old laudable custom of the Moors of Spain. 3. He adds examples
of Qui est l'artifice don't ie trouue que le Roys Mores ont souuent use. Cap. 7.
the business, telling us that this was the device, to wit, by poisoned boots,
that old Henry of Castile was cured of his sickness. 4. Lastly, this may be
done, not only if the Pope judge the King a Tyrant (which was the utmost
Emanuel Sa affirmed) but it is sufficient proof of his being a Tyrant if
learned men, though but few, and those seditious too do but murmr it, or
begin to call him so. I Postquam a paucis seditiofis, sed doctis caeperit
Tyrannus appellari.
hope this Doctrine was long since disclaimed by the whole Society, and
condemned ad umbras Acherunticas. Perhaps so, but yet these men who use to
object to us an infinity of divisions among our selves, who boast so much of
their own Union and consonancy in judgment, with whom nothing is more ordinary
then to maintain some opinions quite throughout their Order (as if they were
informed by some common Intellectus agens) should not be divided in a matter of
so great moment, so much concerning the Monarchy of the Sea Apostolic, to
which they are vowed leigemen. But I have greater reason to believe them United
in this Doctrine, then is the greatness of this probability. For 1. There was
an Apology printed in Italy, permissu superiorum, in the year 1610. that
says, They were all enemies of that holy Name of Jesus that condemned Mariana
for any such Doctrine. I understand not why, but sure I am that the Jesuits do
or did think his Doctrine innocent: for in their Apology put forth in the name
of the whole Society against the accusations of Anticoton, they deny that the
Assasine of Henry 4. I mean Ravaillac, was moved to kill the King by reading
Quodamodo optandum esse ut ille Alastor Marianam legisset.
of Mariana, and are not ashamed to wish that he had read him. Perhaps they
mean it might have wrought the same effect upon him which the sight of a
drunkard did upon the youth of Lacedaemon, else I am sure it is not very likely
he should have been dissuaded from his purpose by reading in Mariana that it
was lawful to do what he intended. 3. I add Gap. 6.
they not only thought it innocent, and without positive Cum cagnito a (...)
quos erat sciscitatus, (...) jure interimi posse.
hurt, but good and commendable; so that it is apparent that it was not the
opinion of Mariana alone, but that the Moors of Spain had more disciples then
Mariana. 1. He says it himself, for commending the young Monk that killed
Henry 3. he says, he did it having been informed by several Divines that a
Tyrant might lawfully be killed. 2. The thing it self speaks it, for his book
was highly commended by Chauue sauris polit.
Gretser and Amphith. honoris lib. 1. cap. 12.
Bonarscius both for style and matter, higher yet by Petrus de Onna,
provincial of Toledo who was so highly pleased with it, he was sorry he
wanted Iterum and tertio facturus siper otium and tempus licuisset.
leisure to read it the second and third time over, and with this censure
prefixed was licensed to the Press. Further yet, for Steven Hoyeda Visitor of
the Jesuits for the same Province approved Vt approbatos prius a viris Doctis
and gravihus ex eodem (...) Ordine.
it not only from his own judgment, but as being before approved by grave and
learned men of the Jesuits Order, and so with a special commission from
Claudius Aquaviva their general, with these approbations and other solemn
Privileges it was Printed at By Petrus Rhodriques. 1599.
Toledo and By Balth. Lippius 1605
Montz; and lastly inserted into the Catalogues of the Books of their Order by
Petrus Ribadineira.

What negligence is sufficient that such a Doctrine as this should pass so
great supravisors, if in their hearts they disavow it? The children of this
world are not such fools in their generations. The Fathers of the Society
cannot but know how apt these things of themselves are to public mischief,
how invidious to the Christian world, how scandalous to their Order; and yet
they rather excuse then condemn Mariana: speaking of him at the hardest but
very gently, as if his only fault had been his speaking a truth intempore non
opportuno, something out of season, or as if they were forced to yield to the
current of the times, and durst not profess openly of what in their hearts
they were persuaded. I speak of some of them, for others you see are of the
same opinion. But I would feign learn why they are so sedulous and careful to
procure the decrees of the Rector and Deputies of Paris, Rescripts of the
Bishop, Revocation of Arrest of the Parliament which had been against them, and
all to acquit the Fathers of the Society from these scandalous opinions; as if
these laborious devices could make what they have said and done, to be unspoken
and undone, or could change their opinions from what indeed they are, whereas
they never went ex animo to refute these Theorems, never spoke against them in
the real and serious dialect of an adversary, never condemned them as
heretical, but what they have done they have been shamed to, or forced upon,
as Pere Coton by the King of France, and Servin to a confutation of Mariana,
(from which he desired to be excused, and after the Kings death, writ his
declaratory letter to no purpose;) the Apologists of Paris by the outcryes of
Christendom against them; and when it is done, done so coldly in their
reprehensions with a greater readiness to excuse all, then condemn any, I say
these things to a considering man do increase the suspicion if at least that
may be called suspicion for which we have had so plain testimonies of their own.

I add this more, to put the business past all question, that when some
things of this nature were objected to them by Arnald the French Kings
Advocate, they were so far from denying them or excusing them, that they
maintained them in spite of opposition, putting forth a Book entitled Veritas
defensa contra actionem Antonii Arnaldi. What the things were for which they
stood up patrons, hear themselves speaking, Tum enim id non solum potest Page
7. 1. edit.
Papa, (...) etiam debet (...) ostendere superiorem illis [Principibus.] (...)
stomacham tibi commovet, facit ut (...), sed oportet (...), and de (...)
fatiaris tibi nec rationem esse, nec (...). Hard words these! The Advocate is
affirmed to be void both of reason and honesty for denying the Popes dominion
over Kings. The reason follows, The Pope could not keep them to their duties,
unless he kept them in (...) with threatening them the loss of their
Kingdoms. But this is but the least part of it. Page 67. 1. edit.
They add, If the subjects had been but disposed as they should have been,
there was no time but it might have been profitable to have exercised the sword
upon the persons of Kings. Let them construe their meaning, those are their
words. But see farther.

The damned act of (...) Clement the Monk upon the life of Henry the third of
France, of Iean Chastel and Ravaillac upon Henry the fourth, are notorious in
the Christian world, and yet the first of these was commended by Voyez. le
process de Parliam. de Paris contre le perc Guignard prestre Jesuit.
F. Guignard in a discourse of purpose, and by Mariana as I before cited him.
The second had two Apologies made for him, the one by Vid. cap. 3.
Constantinus Veruna, the Lugduni de iusta abdicatione Henr. 3. 1610.
other without a name indeed, but with the mark and cognizance of the Jesuits
order, and the last was publicly commended in a Sermon by a Monk of Colein,
as it is reported by the excellent Thuanus.

Not much less then this is that of Baronius, just I am sure of the same
spirit with James and John, for he calls for a ruin upon the Venetians for
opposing of his Holiness. Arise Peter, not to feed these wandering sheep, but
to destroy them, throw away thy Pastoral staff and take thy sword. I confess
here is some more ingenuity, to oppose Murdering to Feeding then to make them
all one, as Sanders does, but yet De clave David cap. 14.
the same fiery spirit inflames them both, as if all Vide page 7.
Rome were on fire, and would put the world in a combustion.

Farther yet. Guignard a Jesuit of Clerimont College in Paris was executed by
command of the Arrest. de Parliam. 7. de Tanv. 1595.
Parliament for some conclusions he had writ which were of a high nature
treasonable, and yet as if, either there were an infallibility in every person
of the Society, or as if the Parliament had done in justice in condemning
Guignard, or lastly as if they approved his Doctrine, he was Apologiz'd for by
Expostul. Apologet. pro Societ. Jesus.
Jews Richeome, and Amphith. honor. lib. 1.
Bonarscius. I know they will not say that every Jesuit is infallible, they are
not come to that yet, it is plain then they are of the same mind with Guignard,
or else (which I think they dare not say) the Parliament was unjust in the
condemnation of him, but if they do, they thus proclaim their approbation of
these Doctrines he was hanged for; for that he had such, was under his own
hand, by his own confession, and of it self evident; as is to be seen in the
Arrest of the Parliament against him.

Lastly, more pertinent to the day is the fact of Garnet, who because a Jesuit
could have done nothing for which he should not have found an Apologist, for
even for this his last act of high treason he was Apologiz'd for, by Apol. adv.
R. Angliae.
Bellarmine, Stigm. Miseric.
Gretser, and Apol. pro Garnetto.
Eudamon Johannes.

Thus far we have found out persons fit enough to match any malice; Boanerges
all, and more then a pareil for James and John: but I shall anon discover the
disease to be more Epidemicall, and the pest of a more Catholic infection, and
yet if we sum up our accounts, we shall already find the doctrine to be too
Catholic. For we have already met with Emanuel Sa a Portugal, Mariana and
Ribadineira Spaniards, Bonarscius a bas Almain, Gretser a German, Eudaemon
Johannes a false Greek, Guignard, Richeome and the Apologists for Chastell,
Frenchmen, Bellarmine and Baronius, Italians, Garnet and Sanders, English.

The Doctrine you see they would fain make Catholic, now if it prove to be but
Apostolic too, then we have found out an exact parallel for James and John,
great Disciples and Apostles, and whether or no the Sea Apostolic may not
sometime be of a fiery and consuming spirit, we have so strange examples, even
in our own home, that we need seek no farther for resolution of the Quare. In
the Bull of excommunication put forth by Pius quintus against Q. Elizabeth of
blessed memory, there is more then a naked encouragement, as much as comes to a
Volumus and Iubemus ut adversus Elizabetham Angliae Reginam subditi arma
capessant. Bone Jesus! in que nos reservasti tempora? Here is a command to turn
rebels, a necessity of being Traitors. Quid co infelicius, cui iam esse malum
necesse est?

The business is put something farther home by Catena and Gabutius, who writ
the life of Pius quintus, were resident at Rome, one of them an advocate in the
Roman Court; their Books both printed at 1588.
Rome, con licenza, and con privilegio. And now hear 1605.
their testimonies of the whole business between the Queen and his Holiness.

Pius quintus published a Bull against Q. Elizabeth, declared her a Heretic,
and deprived her of her Pio publico una bolla and sentezza co^tra Elisabetta,
dichiarandola heretica, and priva del regno,... in tal forma concedendo che
ciascuno andar contra le potesse etc.
Kingdom, absolved her subjects from their oath of Allegiance, excommunicated
her, and gave power to any one to rebel against her etc. This was but the
first step, he therefore thus proceeds, He procures a gentleman of Florence to
move her subjects to a rebellion against her for her destruction. Farther yet,
he thought this would be such a real benefit to Christendom to have her
destroyed, that the Pope was ready to aid in person, to spend the whole revenew
of Girolamo catena p. 114. Il quale.... muovesse gli usimi al sollevamento per
distruttione d' Elizabetta.
the Sea Apostolic, all the Chalices and crosses of the Church, and even his
very cloths to promote so pious a business as was the destruction of Q.
Elizabeth.

The witnesses of truth usually agree in one. The same story is told by De vita
and Giftis Pii 5. lib. 3. cap. 9.
Antonius Gabutius, and some more circumstances added. First he names the end
Page 113.
of the Popes design, it was to take her life away, in L'andare in persona,
inpegnae tutte le sostanze della sede Apostolica, and calici, e. i. proprii
vestimenti. Page 117.
case she would not turn, Roman Catholic. To atchieve this, because no Legate
could come into England, nor any public messenger from the Sea Apostolic he
employed a Florentine Merchant to (...) her subjects to a rebellion for her
perdition. Nothing but Sollevamento, Qui incolaru^ animos ad Elizabethae
perditionem. rebellione fact a commoveret.
Rebellion, Perdition and destruction to the Queen could be thought upon by his
Holiness.

More yet; for when the Duke of Alva had feiz'd upon the English Merchants
goods which were at Antwerp, the Pope took the occasion, instigated the King of
Spain to aid the pious attempts of those who conspired against the Queen: they
are the words of Gabatius. This rebellion was intended to be; under
Efflagitabat ab Rege ut Anglorum in Elizabetham pie conspirantium studia
soveret.
the conduct of the Duke of Norfolk, Viro Catholico, a Roman Catholic,
Gabutius notes it, for fear some Heretik might be suspected of the design, and
so the Catholics loofe the glory of the action. However Pius quintus intended
to use the utmost and most extreme remedies to cure her heresy, and all means
to increase and strengthen the rebellion. I durst not have thought so much of
his Halinesse, if his own had not said it; but if this be not worse then the
fiery spirit which our blessed Savior reproved in James and John, I know not
what is.

I have nothing to do to specify the spirit of Paulus quintus in the Venetian
cause; this only, Baronius propounded the example of Gregory the seventh
Hildebrand.
to him, of which how far short he came, the world is witness. Our own
business calls to mind the Bulls of Pope Clemont the eight, in which the
Catholics in England were commanded to see that however the right of
succession did entitle any man to the Crown of England, yet if he were not a
Catholic, they should have none of him, but with all their power they should
hinder his coming in. This Bull Bellarmine does extremely magnify, and indeed
Apol. adv. R. Angl.
it was for his purpose, for it was (if not author) yet the main encouragor of
Catesby to the Powder Treason. For when Garnet would willingly have known the
Popes mind in the business, Catesby eased him of the trouble of sending to
Rome, since the Popes Proced agt. Traitors.
mind was clear. I doubt not (said Catesby) at all of the Popes mind, but that
he, who commanded our endeavors to hinder his coming in, is willing enough we
should throw him out. It was but a reasonable collection.

I shall not need to instance in the effects which this Bull produced; the
Treason of Watson and Cleark; two English Seminaries are sufficiently known, it
was as a Praeludium or warning piece to the great Fougade, the discharge of the
Powder Treason; Briefly, the case was so, that after the Publication of the
Bull of Pius quintus, these Catholics in England durst not be good Subjects
till F. Parsons and Campian got a dispensation that they might for a while do
it, and rebus sic stantibus with a safe conscience profess a general
obedience in causes Temporal: and after the Bull of Clement a great many of
them were not good subjects, and if the rest had not taken to themselves the
Privilege which the Pope Innoc. Decretal de rescript cap. si quando.
sometimes gave to the Archbishop of Ravenna, either to do as the Pope bid
them, or to pretend a reason why they would not: we may say as Creswell in
defense Philop page 212, n. 306.
of Cardinal Allen; certainly we might have had more bloody tragedies in
England, if the moderation of some more discreetly temperd had not been
interposed. However it is no thank to his Holiness, his spirit blew high
enough.

But I will open this secret no farther, if I may have but leave to instance
once more. If I mistake Scp. 11, 1589
not, it was Sixtus Quintus who sometimes pronounced a speech in full
Consistory, in which he compares the assasinat of Jacques Clement upon Henry
the third, to the exploits of Eleazar and Judith, where after having aggravated
the faults of the murdered King, concluded him to have diedimpenitent, denied
him the solemnities of Mass, Dirge and Requiem, for his soul, at last he ends
with a prayer, that God would finish what in this (bloody) manner had been
begun. I will not aggravate the foulness of the thing by any circumstances
(though I cannot but wonder that his Holiness should say a prayer of so much
abomination.) it is of it self too bad.

If his Holiness be wronged in the business I have By Nichol. Nivelle, and
(...) Tbierry.
no hand in it; the speech was printed at Paris three months after the murder
of the King, and avouched for authentic by the approbation of three Doctors,
Boucher, Decreil, and Ancelein; let them answer it, I wash my hands of the
accusation, and only consider the danger of such Doctrines, if set forth with
so great authority and practiced by so uncontrollable (...)

If the Disciples of Christ, if Apostles, if the Sea Apostolic, if the
fathers Confessors prove (...) and (...), I Will no more wonder if the people
call for fire to consume us, but rather wonder if they do not. And indeed
although it be no rare or unusual thing for a Papist to be de facto loyal and
duteous to his Prince, yet it is a wonder that he is so since such Doctrines
have been taught by so great Masters, and at the best he depends but upon the
Popes pleasure for his Loyalty, which upon what security it rests, you may
easily guess from the antecedents.

Thus much for consideration of the persons who asked the Question; they were
Christ's Disciples, they were James and John.

But when James and John [ saw this] Our next inquiry shall be of the cause of
this their angry Question. This we must learn from the foregoing story.
Christ was going to the feast at Jerusalem, and passing through a Village of
Samaria asked lodging Ver. (...)
for a night; but they perceiving that he was a Jew would by no means
entertain him, as being of a different Religion. For although God appointed
that all of the seed of Jacob should go up to (...) to worship, (...), yet the
(...) in hunclocum.
Tribes of the separation first under (...) worshipped in Groves and High
places, and after the captivity being a mixed people, half Jew, half Gentile,
procured a Temple to be built them by (...) Iosephi antiq. (...). 11, c. 6.
their President, near the City (...) upon the mountain Gerezim, stiling
themselves pertinentes (...) de linguis. lib. 12 Deuteronomy. 27.
(...) Montem benedictum, by allusion to the words of God by Mofes, they shall
stand upon the Mount Gerezim to bless the people, and these upon Mount Ebal to
curse. And in case arguments should fail to make this schism plausible, they
will make it good by turning their Adversaries out of doors. They shall not
come near their blessed Mount of Gerezim, but fastening an Anathema on them let
them go to Ebal, and curse there. And now I wonder not that these Disciples
were very angry at them who had lost the true Religion, and neglected the
offices of humanity to them that kept it. They might go near now to make it a
cause of Religion; (...) (as Nazianzene speaks) might seem to Apologize Orat.
12.
for them, and so it might if it had not led them to indiscreet and
uncharitable zeal. But men care not how far they go if they do but once
think they can make God a party of their Quarrel. For when Religion which
ought to be the antidote of our malice, proves its greatest incentive, our
uncharitableness must needs run faster to a mischief, by how much that
which stopped it is course before, drives it on with the greater violence. And
therefore as it is ordinary for charity to be called coldness in Religion, so
it is as ordinary for a pretense of Religion to make cold charity.

The present case of the Disciples and the same spirit which, for the same
(...) cause, is takenup by the persons of the day, proves all this true; with
whom fire and faggot is esteemed the best argument to convince the
understanding, and the Inquisitors of heretical pravity, the best Doctors and
subtlest Decret. Carolquinti, pro Flandris.
Disputants, determining all with a Vir is ignem, fossa^ mulieribus. For thus
we had like to have suffered, it was mistaken Religion that moved these
Traitors to so damnable a Conspiracy, not for any defense of their own cause,
but for extirpation of ours. For Orat 2. (...).
else what grievances, did they groan under? In quos little populum exaestuantem
solicit a vimus? quibus vitae periculum attulimus? It was Nazianzen's question
to the Apostate. Give me leave to consider it as appliable to our present case,
and try if I can make a just discovery of the cause that moved these Traitors
to so accursed a Confpiracy.

1 Then there was no cause at all given them by us; none put to death for being
a Roman Catholic Vid. L. Burleighs book called Execution for Treason not
religion. King James his declaration to all (...) Kings and Princes, and the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his speech in Star Chamber in Burtons case.
nor any of them punished for his Religion.

This has been the constant attestation of our Princes and State since the
first Laws made against Recusants and the thing it self will bear them record.

From primo of Elizabeth to undecimo, the Papists made no scruple of coming to
our Churches, Recusancy was not then so much as a Chrysome, not an Embrio. But
when Pius quintus sent forth his Breves of Excommunication and Deposition of
the Queen, then first they forbore to pray with us, or to have any religious
communion. This although every where known, yet being a matter of fact and so
as likely to be denied by others as affirmed by us without good evidence, see
it therefore affirmed expressly by an Act of Parliament in Decimo tertio of
Elizabeth, which specifies this as one inconvenience and ill consequence of the
Bull. [Whereby (...) grown great (...) and bolonesse in many, not only to (...)
and absent themselves from (...) service, now most (...) set forth and used
within this Realm, but also have thought themselves discharged of all (...)
and c.] Not only Recusancy, but likewise disobedience; therefore both Recusancy
and disobedience.

Two years therefore after this Bull, this Statute was made if it was possible
to nullify the effects of it, to hinder its execution, and if it might be, by
this means to keep them, as they had been before, in Communion with the Church
of England, and obedience to her Majesty. This was the first Statute that
concerned them in special, but yet their Religion was not meddled with; For
this Statute against execution of the Popes Bulls was no more the^ what had
been established by Act of Parliament, in the 16th year of Richard the second,
by which it was made (...) to purchase Bulls from Rome, and the delinquents in
this kind with all their [(...), fautors, (...), and maintainers to be
referred to the Kings Council for farther punishment.] There was indeed this
severity expressed in the Act of 130 of the Queen, that the putting them in
Execution should be Capital; and yet this severity was no more then what was
inflicted upon the Bishop of Ely in Edward the thirds time, for publishing of a
Bull against the Earl of Chester without the Kings leave, and on the Bishop of
Carlisle, in the time of Henry the fourth, for the like offense. Thus far our
Laws are innocent.

But when this Statute did not take the good effect for which it was intended,
neither keeping them in their ancient Communion nor obedience, but for all
this, Main, Campian, and many others, came as the Popes Emissaries for
execution of the Bull, the State proceeded to a farther severity, making Laws
against Recusancy, against Seditious and Traiterous Books, and against the
residence of Romish Priests in England, making the first fineable with a
pecuniary mulct, the two later, Capital, as being made of a Treasonable
nature. Of these in order.

1 The mulct which was imposed for Recusancy, was not soul money, or paid for
Religion; and that for these reasons. 1. Because it is plain Religion did not
make them absent themselves from our Churches, unless they had changed their
Religion since the Bull came over. For if Religion could consist with their
Communion with us before the Bull (as it is plain it did) then why not after the
Bull, unless it be part of their Religion to obey the Pope, rather then to
obey God commanding us to obey our Prince? 2. Their Recusancy was an apparent
mischiefeto our Kingdom, and it was the prevention or diversion of this that
was the only or special end of these Laws.

The mischief is apparent these two ways. 1. Because by their Recusancy they
gave attestation that they held the Bull to be valid; for else why should they
after the Bull deny their Communion, which before they did not? Either they
must think the Queen for a just cause, and by a just power excommunicate, or
why did they separate from her Communion? Now if the Queen by virtue of the
Bull was excommunicate, why should they stop here? She was by the same deposed,
they absolved from all Allegiance to her, and commanded to take arms against
her. I confess it is no good argument of it self, to say, The Pope might
excommunicate the Queen, therefore depose her from her Kingdom; But this
concludes with them sufficiently, with whom excommunication not only drives
from Spiritualls, but deprives of Temporalls, and is not to mend our lives but
to take them away; I speak how it is in the case of Princes, (and I shall anon
prove it) for they being public persons from whose Deposition more may be
gotten, are like to suffer more, ut ex tunc ipse ((...)) vasallos ab ejus
fidelitate denuntiet absolutos, and terr am exponat Catholic is occupandam, as
they are taught by Pope Innocent the third, in the eight Later an Council:
such is their Excommunication for matter of Heresy, as was this pretended in
the Queens case, so that in respect of them the danger was apparent.

2 It is plain that Recusancy and disobedience came actually hand in hand; I
say not that one was the issue of the other, but that they were coetaneous, for
the same persons that moved them to Recusancy by virtue of the Bull, moved them
to the execution of it per omnia. Now see whither this would tend! They by
Recusancy were better able to judge of their forces in England, and what party
they were able to make for execution of the Bull, whilst by that as by a
discriminative cognizance they were pointed at, as Abettors of the Catholic
cause.

Thus far they suffered not for their Religion or conscience, unless it were
against their conscience to be good subjects, and then it was not Religion, at
least not Christian, that was inconsistent with their Loyalty, and so hitherto
inrespect of us, their machination was altogether causeless.

2. For the second (of which sometimes they accuse our laws) I mean the writing
and publishing of Seditious and Traiterous Books, I shall not need to say any
Apud (...) de senten. excommunicat.
thing in defense of its being made Capital, for they were ever so, and of a
high nature Treasonable, and the Item omnes illos excommunicationis innodamus
sententia qui pacem and tranquillitatem Domini Regis and Regni, iniuriose
perturbare (...), and qui iura Demini Regis (...) detincre contendunt.
Publishers of them by the Canons of the Church were ipsofacto excommunicate.
This I noted, because the same (...) involves more, by virtue of the same
Canon: I mean, not only the seditious Libellers but impugners of the Kings
Regalties, as also the Bringers, Publishers, and Executioners of the Bull; as
is to be seen in the constitution of Archbishop Stephen, in a Coar cell held
at Oxford. But secondly, whether they were or were not, it matters nothing;
this I suppose was no part of their Religion, therefore this might be made
Treason, and yet their Religion and peace of conscience undistarbed. 3. But the
next is the main outcry of all, the very Conclamatum est of the Catholic
cause, if suffered; it was made Treason to be a Priest, or at least if any of
their Priests should be found in England he should be adjudged a Traitor, and
these Laws were not yet repealed, but then in execution.

When certain Sycophants told Philip of Macedon, that some of his discontented
Subjects called him Tyrant, his answer was, Rudes sunt Macedones, and scapham
vocant scapham. I wish these men who object this, had the same ingenuity, and
would acknowledge that the rudenesle of a Macedonian teltroth is no apparent
calumny. And truly, as the case then stood, it was no worse. For consider that
the statute against Priests was not made till sixteen years after the Bull of
Pius quintus, and after much evidence both by the confession of some Priests
themselves, and diverse Lay-persons, that at least, many of them came into
England with this errand, that they might instigate the Queens liege people to
the Execution of it. This is very plain in the case of Main the lesuit, and
M. Tregion who were executed 1577.
at Launston for the same business.

The state could not certainly know what would be the issue, but yet could not
but think it likely to produce more and worse consequences for the future.
Tacitus lib. 3. Annal.
Leges aute^ justa in factaconstituuntur quiafutura in incerto sunt. The Queen
then providing for her safety banished these Priests out of her dominions. This
was all, and this done with so much lenity and moderation as if of purpose to
render good for their evil; such was her innocence, and yet to provide for her
safety, such was her prudence. She gave them forty days time of preparation
for their journey, imposed no penalty for their longer stay incase that any of
them were less healthful, or that the winds were cross, or that the wether
served not: provided that during their stay, they gave security for their due
obedience to her laws, and that they should attempt nothing against her person
or government, for this was all she aimed at; but if they obeyed not the
Proscriptio^, having no just cause to the contrary, such as were expressed in
the Act, then it should be adjudged their errand was not right, and therefore
(not their Religion, but) their disobedience Treasonable.

This was the highest (...) of the severity of this state against them, now
first I shall briefly show that this proscription which was the highest
penalty, was for just cause as the case then stood, and deserved on their part.
2. It was but reasonable, in case they obeyed not the proscription, their stay
should be made Treason. 1. Because the Priests did generally preach the Popes
power either directly over temporalls, or else in order to spiritualls, of
which the Pope being judge it would come to the same issue, and this was
dangerous to the peace of the Kingdom, and entrenched too much upon the
Regalty. In particular, the case of bringing from the Sea of Rome, and
publishing of Bulls, was by the Lords of the Parliament in the sixteenth year
of Richard the second, judged to be [ clearly in (...) of the Kings Crown and
of his Regalty, as it is well known and has been of a long time known,] and
therefore they protested [ together and every one (...) by himself, that they
would be with the same Crown and Regalty inthese cases specially, and in all
other cases which shall be attempted against the same Crown and Regalty in all
points with all their power,] I hope then if the State in the time of Queen
Elizabeth having far greater reason then ever, shall judge that these Bulls,
the publishing of them, the Preaching of their validity, and reconciling by
virtue of them her Subjects to the Sea of Rome, be derogatory to her Crown and
Regalty, I see no reason She should be frighted from her just defense with the
bugbear of pretended Religion, for if it was not against Religion then, why is
it now? I confess there is a reason for it, to wit, because now the Popes
power is an Article of Faith (as I shall show anon) but then it was not with
them, any more then now it is with us: but whether this will convince any man
of reason I leave it to himself to consider.

But one thing is observeable in that Act of Parliament of Richard the second,
I mean this clause [ as it is well (...), and (...) been of a long time
known.] The Popes encroachments upon the State of England had been an old
sore, and by its eld almost habituate; but yet it grieved them nevertheless,
nor was the less a fever for being hecticall: but so it is that I am confident
upon very good grounds, it may be made as apparent as the noon Sun, for these
600 years and upwards, that the Bishops of Rome have exercised so extreme and
continual Tyranny and exactions in this Kingdom, that our condition was under
him worse then the State of the Athenians under their thirty Tyrants, or then
our neighbors are now under their Belgic Tributes. So many greivances of the
people, expilations of the Church, abuses to the State, intrenchments upon the
Royalties of the Crown were continued, that it was a great blessing of Almighty
God, our Kingdom was delivered from them upon so easy terms, which Grosthead
Bishop of Lincoln thought would never be done, but in Ore gladii cruentandi:
and now to have all these mischiefs return with more strength upon us by the
attempts of these Priests, had been the highest point of indiscretion and
sleepiness. I said [ with more strength] because what anciently at the highest
was thought but a privilege of the Church began now to be an Article of Faith,
and therefore if admitted would have bound stronger and without all possibility
of redress.

And now if after all this any man should doubt of the justice of these Laws
against the Priests obtruding upon the State the Popes power, I only refer
him to the Parliament of Paris, where let him hold his Plea against those great
Sages of the Law, for their just censures upon Florentinus Iacobus, Thomas 1561.
Blanzius, and John Tanquerell, who were all condemned to a solemn honorary
penance and satisfaction to the State, and not without extreme difficulty
escaped death, for the same cause. But this is hot all. I add.

Secondly, the Pope had his Agent in England to stir up the Subjects to
rebel against the Queen, as I proved before by the testimonies of Catena and
(...). It is not then imaginable that he should so poorly intend his own
designs, to employ one on purpose, and he but a Merchant, and that the Priests
who were the men, if any, most likely to do the business, should be
un-imployed. I speak not of the argument from matter of fact, (for it is
apparent that they were employed, as I showed but now,) but it is plain also
that they must have been employed, if we had had no other argument but a
presumption of the Popes ordinary discretion.

Things then remaining in this condition what security could the Queen or State
have without the absence of those men who must be the instruments of their
mischief? Thirdly, there was great reason those men might be banished who
might from their own principles plead immunity from all Laws, and
subordination to the Prince. But that so these Priests might, I only bring two
witnesses, leading men of their own Side. Thus Bellarmine: The Pope has
exempted all Clerks from subjection to Princes. Lib. 1. cap. 28. (...) Clericis.
The same is taught by Emanuel Sa in his Aphorisms, (...) Clericus. I must not
dissemble that this Aphorism however it passed the Press at first, yet in the
Edition of Paris it was left out. The cause is known to every man: For that it
was merely to serve their ends is apparent; for their French freedom was
there taken from them, they durst not parler tout so near the Parliament; but
the Aphorism is to this day retained in the Editions of (...) and Colein.

If this be their Doctrine, as it is plain it is taught by these leading
Authors, I mean Sa and Bellarmine, I know no reason but it may be very just and
most convenient to deny those men the Country from whose Laws they plead
exemption.

Secondly, it was but reasonable, in case they obeyed not the proscriptio^,
their disobedience should be made Capital. For if they did not obey, then
either they sinned against their conscience in disobeying their lawful Prince,
and so are (...), and inexcusable from the Laws penalty, which may be extended
at the pleasure of the Lawgiver, where there is no positive injustice in the
disproportion; or if they did not sin against their conscience, then of
necessity must they think her to be no lawful Prince or not their lawful
Prince, nor they her Subjects, and so ipso (...) are guilty of high Treason,
and their execution De simplic. (...).
was for Treason not Religion, and so the Principal is evicted which I shall
beg leave to express in S. Cyprians language, Non erat illa fidei Corona, sed
poena (...); nec (...) virtut is exitus gloriosus, sed desperation is (...).

For if Valentius banish Eusebius from (...), and Eusebius obey not the edict,
if Valentius puts (...). l. 4. c. 14.
him to death, it is not for his being a Christian that he suffers death, but
for staying at (...) against the command of Valentius. Such was the case of the
Priests, whom for just cause (as I have proved) and too apparent proof of
seditious practices the Queen banished. Now if the Queen was their lawful
Sovereign, then were they bound to obey her Decree of exile, though it had
been unjust as was the case of Eusebius; or if they did not obey, not to think
the Laws unjust for punishing their disobedience. I say again, their
Disobedience, not their Religion: for that it was not their Religion that was
struck at by the justice of these Laws, but the security of the Queen and
State only aimed at, (besides what I have already said,) is apparent to the
evidence of sense. For when Heart, and Bosgrave, Jesuits both, came into England
against the Law, they were apprehended and imprisoned: (for the Laws without
just Execution were of no force for the Queens safety;) but when these men had
acknowledged the Queens legitimate power, and put in their security for their
due obedience, they obtained their pardon and their liberty. The same
proceedings were in the case of Horton and Rishton, all which I hope were not
(...) from their Order or Religion, but so they must have been or not have
escaped death, in case that their Religion had been made Capital. Lastly, this
Statute extended only to such Priests who were made Priests since Primo of
Elizabeth, and were born in England. It was not Treason for a French Priest to
be in England, but yet so it must have been if Religion had been the thing they
aimed at. But it is so foul a Calumny, I am ashamed to stand longer to efute
it. The proceedings of the Church and State of England were just, honorable
and religious, full of mercy and discretion, and unless it were that as C.
Fimbria complained of Q. Scaevola, we did not open our breasts wide enough to
receive the danger, there is no cause imaginable, I mean on our parts, to move
them to so damned a conspiracy, or indeed to any just complaint.

Secondly, if these were not the causes (as they would feign abuse the world
into a persuasion that they were,) what was? I shall tell you, if you will give
me leave (...), to derive it from its very head, and then I will leave it to
you to judge whether or no my Augury fails me.

First, I guess that the Traitors were encouraged and primarily moved to this
Treason from the prevailing opinion which is most generally received on that
side of the lawfulness of deposing Princes that are Heretical. I say
generally received, and I shall make my words good, or else the blame shall lay
on themselves for deceiving me when they declare their own minds. I instance
first in the Fathers of the Society. Necullaeis injuria fiet si (...). Lib. 5.
de Romans (...). cap 7. Exipsa vi juris and ante (...) sententiam fupremi
Pastoris ac Iudicis (...) sum prolatam. Lugduni impres. 1593. p. 106. n. 157.
Amphith honor. p. 117. Sedheus Arnalde a (...) institutione (...) posse
intercidere causam quae regem cogat abire regno? Non (...)?
Bellarmine teaches that Kings have no wrong done them if they be deprived of
their Kingdoms when they prove Heretics. Creswell in his Philopater goes
farther, saying, that if his Heresy be manifest he is deposed without any
explicit judicial sentence of the Pope, the Law it self has passed the
sentence of deposition. And therefore

Bonarscius is very angry at Arnald the French Kings Advocate for affirming
that Religion could be no just cause to depose a lawful Prince, If he had
been brought up in their Schools he might have learnt another lesson; papa
Potest mutare regna Bellar. de Pont. R. c. 6. lib. 5.
and uni auferre atque alteri confer tanquam summus Princeps spiritualis, si
id necessarium sit ad animarum salutem, says Bellarmine. He gives his reason
too, quia alioqui possent mali Principes impune fovere Haereticos, which is a
thing not to be suffered by his Holiness. Cap. 71.


This Doctrine is not the private opinion of these Doctors, but est certa,
definita, atque, indubitata virorum clarissimorum sententia, says F. Creswell,
I suppose Vbi supra p. 107.
he means in his own Order; and yet I must take heed what I say, for
Eudaemon Johannes is very angry with Sr Edward Cook for saying it is the
Doctrine of the Jesuits. Do they then deny it? No surely, Apol. pro Garnet. c.
3.
but Non est Iesuitarum propria, it is not theirs alone, sed ut Garnettus
respondit, totius Ecclesiae, and quidem ab antiquissimis temporibus consensione
recepta Doctrina nostra est, and there he reckons up seven and twenty famous
Authors of the same opinion. Creswell in his Philopater says as much, if not
more: Hinc etiam infert Vniversa Theologorum and Iuris consultorum
Ecclesiasticorum Schola and est certum Number. 157.
and de fide, quemconque Principem Christianum si a religione Catbolica
manifest deflexerit, and alios avocare voluerit, excidere statim omni
potestate ac dignitate ex ipsa vi juris tum Humani tum Divini. You see how
easily they swallow this great camel. Add to this that Bellarmine himself
prooves that the Popes temporal power, or of disposing of Princes Kingdoms is
a Catholic Doctrine, for he reckons Contra (...) in (...). fere.
up of this opinion, one and twenty Italians, fourteen French, (...) Germans,
seven English and Scotch, nineteen Spaniards, and these not e faece plebis, but
e (...), all very famous and very leading Authors.

You see it is good Divinity amongst them, and I have made it good that it is a
general opinion received by all their Side if you will believe themselves and
now let us see if it will pass for good Law as well as good Divinity.

It is not for nothing that the Church of France protests against some of their
received Canons; if they did not I know not what would become of their Princes.
Their Lillies may be to day, and to morrow be cast into the oven, if the Pope
either call their Prince (...), as he did Henry the fourth, or Tyrant as Henry
the third, or unprofitable for the Church or Kingdom, as he did King
Childeric, whom Pope (...), de (...) did depose for the same cause, and
inserted his act into the body of the Can. (...). (...). 15. 9. 6.
Law as a precedent for the future, quod etiam ex (...) frequenti agit sancta
Ecclesia, it is impaled in a (...) in the body of the Canon, least deposition
of Princes should be taken for news. The law is clear for matter of fact; the
lawfulness follows.

[ (...) est auferri (...) habent,] and this Cl. 1. in Summa. 23. 9. 7.
not only from a private man, but even from Princes, [ nam qui in majore
dignitate, est plus punitur] or take it if you please in more proper terms. [
Dominus Gl. cap. (...). de haereticis. l. 5.
Papa Principem (...) propter haeresim,] and so another may be chosen like the
(...) and (...) in Poland, just as if the King were dead, (...) per haeresim
(...) civiliter (...), says Simancha, and that by virtue of a Cap. 45. de
(...).
constitution of (...) the ninth, by which every man is freed from all duty,
homage, allegiance or subordination whatsoever due to a Heretic, whether due
by a natural, civil, or political right; [ aliquo pacto, aut quacunque
firmitate vallatum.] Et sic nota (says the gloss) quod Papa potest absolvere
Laicum de iuramento fidelitatis.

I end those things with the attestation of Bellarmine, (...) Barclaiumc. ap. 3.
Est res certa and (...) at a (...) maximum justice de causis temporalibus
indicare, atque ipsos Temporales Principes aliquando deponere. And again that
we may be sure to know of what nature this doctrine is, he repeats it; Sic
igitur de potestate in Temporalibus quod ea sit in Papa non Opinio, sed
Certitudo apud Catholices est. And now let any man say if this be not a
Catholic Doctrine, and a likely antecedent to have Treason to be its
consequent.

But I fix not here, only this, it is plain that this proposition is no
friend to Loyalty; but that which follows is absolutely inconsistent with it,
in case our Prince be of a different perswafion in matters of Religion. For,

2 It is not only lawful to depose Princes that are heretical, but it is
necessary, and the Catholics are bound to do it sub mortali. I know not
whether it be so generally, I am sure it is as confidently taught as the
former, and by as great Doctors.

(...) erraret si admitteret aliquem Lib. 5. de Romans (...) c. 7.
Regem, qui vellet impune fovere quamlibet Sectam, and (...). So Bellarmine.
And again, Non licet Christianis tolerare Regem haereticum, si conetur
pertrahere subditos ad suam haeresim. But F. Ibid.
Creswell puts the business home to purpose, Certe non tantum licet, sed summa
etiam iuris Divini necessitate, Philopat p. 110 n. 162.
ac praecepto, imo conscientiae vinculo arctissimo, and extremo animarum suarum
periculo ac discrimine Christianis omnibus hoc ipsum incumbit, si praestare rem
possint. Under peril of their souls they must not suffer an heretical Prince
to reign over them. (...). 106. n. 157.
Possunt and debent (...) arcere ex hominum Christianorum dominatu, ne alios
inficiat etc.

3 He that says Subjects may and are bound to depose their Princes, and to
drive them from all rule over Christians, if they be able, means something
more: For what if the Prince resist still he is bound to depose him if he be
able. How if the Prince make a (...) The Catholic subject must do his duty
nevertheless, and war too, if he be able. He that (...) he may wage a war
with his Prince, I doubt not but thinks he may kill him; and if the fortune of
the war lights so upon him, the subject cannot be blamed, for doing of his
duty.

It is plain that killing a Prince is a certain consequent of deposing him,
unless the Prince be bound in conscience to think himself a Heretic, when
the Pope declares him so, and be likewise bound not to resist, and besides all
this will perform these his obligations, and as certainly think himself
heretical, and as really give over his Kingdom quietly, as he is bound. For
in case any of these should fail, there can be but very sleder assurance of
his life. I would be loath to obtrude upon men the odious consequences of their
opinions, or to make any thing worse which is capable of a fairer construction;
but I crave pardon in this particular, the life of Princes is sacred, and is
not to be violated so much as in thought, or by the most remote consequence of
a public doctrine: But here indeed it is so immediate and natural a
consequent of the former that it must not be dissembled. But what shall we
think if even this blasphemy be taught in terminis? See this too.

In the year 1407. when the Duke of Orleans had been slain by John of
Burgundy, and the fact notorious beyond a possibility of conccalement, he
thought it his best way to employ his Chaplain to justify the act, pretending
that Orleans was a Tyrant. This stood him in small stead; for by the
procurement of Gerson, it was decreed in the Council of Constance, that
Tyranny was no sufficient cause for a man to kill a Prince. But yet I find
that even this decree will not stand Princes in much stead. First, because the
decree runs [ ut nemo privata Authoritate etc.] but if the Pope commands it,
then it is Iudicium publicum, and so they are never the more secure for all
this. Secondly, because (...) tells us, that this Decree is nothing. (...) id
decretum (Concilij (...)) Romano Pontifici Martino De Reg and R. instit. lib.
1. c. 6.
quinto probatum non invenio, non Eugenio (...) Successoribus, quorum (...)
Ecclesiasticorum sanctitas stat. Thirdly, because though the Council had
forbidden killing of Tyrannical Princes even by public authority, though this
Decree had been confirmed by the Pope, which yet it was not, yet Princes are
never the more secure if they be convict of Heresy, and therefore let them but
add Heresy to their Tyranny, and this Council Non obstante they may be killed
by any man; for so it is determined in an Apology made for Chastel, Licitum
Franc. Verum. Constable. p. 2. c. 2.
esse privatis and singulis Reges and Principes Hareseos and Tyrannidis
condemnatos occidere, non obstante Decreto Concilij Constantiensis; And the
Author of the Book de iusta abdicatione Henrici. 3. affirms it not only
lawful but meritorious.

How much less then this is that of Bellarmine? De Pont. R. lib. 5. c6.
Si obsint fini Spirituali, Spiritualis potestas potest and debet coercere
Temporalem, omni ratione ac via. If omniratione, then this of killing him in
case of necessity or greater convenience, must not be excluded. But to confess
the business openly and freely; It is known that either the Consent of the
people, or the Sentence of the Pope, or Consent of learned men is with them
held to be a publicum (...), and sufficient to sentence a Prince and convict
him of Heresy or Tyranny. That opinion which makes the people Judge is very
rare amongst them but almost generally exploded, that opinion which Vide P. D.
M. Image of both Churches.
makes the learned to be their Judge is I think proper to Mariana or to a few
more with him, but that the sentence of the Pope is a sufficient conviction of
him, and a complete (...) act, is the most Catholic opinion on that Side, as
I shall show anon. Now whether the Pope, or learned men, or the people be to
pass this sentence upon the Prince, it is plain that it is an Universal
Doctrine amongst them that after this sentence (whosesoever it be) it is then
without Question lawful to kill him, and the most that ever they say is, that
it is indeed not lawful to kill a King, not lawful for a private man, of his
own head, without the public sentence of his Judge, but when this Judge (whom
they affirm to be the Pope) has passed his sentence, then they doubt not of
its being lawful. That I say true I appeal to Tom. 3. disp. 5. q. S. punct. 3.
Gregory de Valentia, In sum. (...). 5. c. 6. A polog ad
Tolet, R Angl. c. 13
Bellarmine, Defens fidei lib. 6 c. 4.
Suarez, in 13 cap. ad Romans disp. 5.
Salmeron, Quest p. in c. 3. (...).
Serarius, De just. and inre. (...) m. 4. (...). 3. d. 6.
Molina, Aphoris. verb. Tyran. nus. 1. Instit. Moral 2. p. lib.
(...) Sa, 1. c. 5. q 10.
(...), In Hercul. Furent.
Martinus (...), de Iustit. and jure. c 9 dub 4
Lessius, Chauue sauris polit
Gretser, in resp ad Aphoris. Calvinistaru^
(...), Contr. Calvinist. Aphcrism. c. 3. ad Aphor. 1.
(...) Heissius, In expostul. ad Henrici. (...). pro Societate
(...), in Apolog. pro Henrico Garnetto.
(...) Johannes, Ad annum Mundi. 2669. n. 7.
Salianus, Tract. 29. p. 2. de quinto praecepro Decal. n. 12.
Filliucius, tom. 3. disp. 4. q 8. dub. 3
Adam Tanner, and their great 32, u. opusc. 20. and lib. 1. de (...). (...) c.
6.
Thomas Aquinas.

All these and many more that I have seen teach the lawfulness of killing
Kings after public sentence, and then to beautify the matter profess that
they deny the lawfulness of Regicidium, by a private authority. For if the
Pope sentence him then he is no longer a King, and so the killing of him is not
Regicidium, and if any man does kill him after such sentence, then he kills him
not privata Authoritate, or (...) judicio publico, which is all they affirm to
be unlawful.

And thus they hope to stop the clamor of the world against them, yet to have
their opinions stand entire, the way to their own ends fair, but the Prince no
jot the more secure of his life. I do them no wrong, I appeal to the Authors
themselves, thereI will be tried. For that either the People, or that a Company
of learned men, or to be sure the Pope may license a man to kill the King, they
speak it with one voice, and tongue. And now after all this we may better
guess what manner of counsel or In lib. sub (...) Torti. edit. Colon. Agrip.
1610. page 21.
threatening (for I know not which to call it) that was which Bellarmine gave
sometimes to K. James of B. M. Si securus regnare velit Rex, si vitae suae and
suorum consulere cupiat, sinat Catholicos frui religione sua! If this be good
counsel, then in case the Catholics were hindered from the free profession of
their Religion, at the best it was full of danger if not certain ruin. But I
will no more rake this Augaean Stable, in my first Part I showed it was too
Catholic a Doctrine, and too much practiced by the great Cisalpine Prelate. I
add no more, least truth it self should blush, fearing to become incredible.

Now if we put all these things together, and then we should prove to be (...)
in their account, we are in a fair case both Prince and people, if we can but
gusse rightly at this we shall need I think to look no further why fire was
called for to consume both our King and Country, nor why we may fear it
another time.

The Author of the Epistle of comfort to the Catholics in prison printed by
authority in the year of the Powder Treason, is very earnest to persuade his
Catholics not to come to our Churches or communicate with us in any part of
our divine service, affrighting them with the strange terriculamenta of half
Christians, Hypocrites, Denyers of Christ, in case they joined with us in our
Liturgy. Strange affrightments these yet not much more then what is (...)
true if they esteem us Heretics. For if they think us so, we are so to
them, and they communicating with us do as much sin, as if we were so
indeed.

But if we be not Heretics what need all this stir permissu Superiorum. the
Counsel of Recusancy was unreasonable, dangerous, schismatic, and as the
case then stood, very imprudent. In charity to their discretion we cannot but
think them uncharitable in their opinion of us.

But there is no need we should dispute ourselves into a conjecture, themselves
speak out and plain enough. Hear Ballarmine under the visor of Tortus, Apol
ad R. Angl.
affirming that the Kings Edict commanded the Catholics, to go to Heretics
Churches, speaking of ours But more plain is that of Champ the Sorbonist Cap.
11. page 149 Doway. 1616.
in his Treatise of Vocation of Bishops. Therefore as Arrianisme is a condemned
Heresy, and the Professors thereof be Heretics, sa likewiseis Protestantisme
a condemned Heresy, and those that Profess it be also Heretics.

By this time we see too plainly that the state of Protestant Princes is full
of danger where these men have to do. They may be deposed and expelled from
the Government of their Kingdoms, they must be deposed by the Catholics
under peril of their souls, it may be done any way that is most convenient,
they may be rebelled against, fought with, slain. For all this, it were some
ease, if here we might fix a (...). For perhaps these Princes might put in a
(...) for themselves, and go near to prove themselves to be no Heretics.
All'sone, for though they do, yet unless they can persuade his Holiness not
to judge them so, or declare them Heretics, all is to no purprse, for to him
they must stand or fall. Namiudicare an Rex pertrahat ad haresim (...) pertinet
ad Pontificem. So Bellarmine They need not stay till his Heresy be of it self
manifest, he is then to be used like a Heretic when by the rope of Rome he
shall be judged Heretical.

But what matter is it if the Pope be judge, for if they may be deposed, as
good he as any else. What greivance then, can this be to the state of Princes
more then the former? Yes, very much. 1. Because the Pope by his order to
spiritualls may take away Kingdoms upon more pretenses then actual heresy. It
is a large title, and may do any thing. Bellarmine Vbi supra.
expresses it handsomely, and it is the doctrine of their great Aquinas. The
Pope (says he) by De regim. Princip.
his Spiritual power may dispose of the Temporalties of all the Christians in
the World, when it is requisite to the end of the Spiritual power. The words
are plain that he may do it for his own ends (for his is the Spiritual power)
that is, for the advancement of the Sea (...), and thus (to be sure) he did
actually wish Frederick Barbarossa, John of Navarre, the Earl of Toulouse, and
our own King John. 2. The Pope pretends to a power that to avoid the probable
danger of the increase of heresy he may take away a Territory from the right
owner, as is reported by the Cardinal D'Ossat, and this is soon pretended, for
who is there that cannot make probabilities, especially when a Kingdom is at
stake? 3. We find examples that the Pope has excommunicate Princes, and
declared them heretics when all the heresy has been a not laying their
crowns at the feet of S. Peter. The case of Lewis the fourth is every where
known, whom John the twenty third Excommunicated. Platina tells the reason. He
called himself In Clement. (...).
Emperor without the Popes leave, and aided the (...) deputies to recover
Millaine. Doubtless a most damnable and fundamental heresy. 4. How if it
proves in the Popes account to be a heresy to defend the immediate right of
Princes to their Kingtholiques, dependant only on God, not on the Sea (...) If
this be no heresy, nor like heresy to say it, I would feign learn the meaning
of Baronius concerning the book of Johannes de Roa, who sometimes had been a
Jesuit, but then changed his order, and Baron. tom, 6. Annal. An Dom 447. n 8
became (...), saying, it was sentenced to the fire before it had escaped the
press. And good reason, Nihil enim tale a Patribus societatis didicit. Good
men, they never taught him any such doctrine as is contained in that pestilent
book, de iuribus principalibus defendendis and moderandis just. Now if this be
heresy or like it, to preach such a Doctrine, then likely it will be judged
heresy in Princes to do so, that is, to hold their crowns without
acknowledgment of subordination to S. Peter's chair. And if it be not heresy to
do so, it is in their account as bad, for so the Jesuits in their Veritas
defensa against the Action of Arnald the Advocate affirm in terminis, that the
actions of some Kings of France against the Pope in defense of their Regalties,
were but examples of rebellion, and spots to disgrace the purity of the French
Lillies. 5. Put case the Pope should chance to mistake in his sentence against
a Prince, for the cause of heresy, yet for all this mistake, he can secure any
man to take away the Princes life or Kingdom. His Lawyers will be his security
for this point. For although in this case, the deposition of the Prince should
be, and be acknowledged to be against Gods law, the Prince being neither Tyrant
nor heretic, yet his Holiness commanding it, takes away the unlawfulness of
it, by his dispensation. So D. Marta, and for this doctrine he De Iurisd cas.
64, (...), 14.
quotes Hostiensis, Felinus, Cratus, the Abbat, the Arch bishop of Florence,
Ancharanus, Johannes Andreas, Laurentius de Pinu, and some others. Indeed his
Divines deny this, sed contrarium (...) observatur, Number. 17.
as it is very well observed by the same Doctor, for he brings the practice and
example of Pope Martin the fifth, Julius the second, Celestine the third,
Alexander the third, and Sixtus quintus, all which dispensed in cases
acknowledged to be expressly against Gods law. 6. Lastly. How if the Pope
should lay a claim to all the Kingdoms of the world, as belonging to S.
Peter's patrimony by right of spiritual pre-eminence? I know no great security
we have to the contrary. For first, It is known he has claimed the Kingdom of
England, as feudatary to the a Rex (...) est subditus Romano Pontisici (...)
directi dominii quol in Regnum Angliae and Hibernie Romana (...) Ecclesia.
Bellarm. Apol. alv. R. Angl. c. 3.
See Apostolic. Which when I considered I wondered not at that new and insolent
title which Mosconius gives his Holiness of Desensor fidei. He might have
added the title of Rex Catholicus, and Christianisstmus. For D. Marta in his
treatise of Jurisdiction, which he dedicated to Paulus quintus, has that for
an argument why he dedicated his Book to him, because, for sooth the Pope is
the only Monarch of the World. But of greater authority is that of Thomas
Aquinas affirming, b De May. milit. Eccles. c. 1. page 25.
the Pope to be the vertical top of all power Ecclesiastical c Tibi a quo
emanat omuis (...), unicus in orb Pontisex, Imperator and Rex, omnium
Principum superior, (...) and personarum supremus and Dominus. Epist. Dedicat.
d 2 Sent, did. 44. and lib. 3 de Regim. Princ.
and Civil. So that now it may be true which the Bishop of Patara told the
Emperor, in behalf of Pope Sylverius. Multos esse Reges, sed nullum Lib. erat.
in Breviar. de (...) Nestorian cap. 21.
talem, qualis ille, qui est Papa super Ecclesiam Mundi totius.

For these reasons I think it is true enough that the constituting the Pope the
judge of Princes in the matter of deposition, is of more danger then the thing
it self. The sum is this. However schism or heresy may be pretended, yet it
is but during the Popes pleasure that Kings or subjects shall remain firm in
their mutual necessitude. For if our Prince be but excommunicate or declared
heretic, then to be a good subject will be accounted no better then irreligion
and Anti-Catholicisme. If the conclusion be too hard and intolerable then so
are the Premises, and yet they pass for good Catholic doctrine among
themselves.

But if truly and ex animo they are otherwise affected, they should do well to
unsay what has been said, and declare themselves by public authority against
such doctrines. And say whether or no their determinations shall be de fide? If
they be, then all those famous Catholic Doctors, Thomas Aquinas, Bellarmine,
Creswell, Mariana, Emanuel Sa, etc. are heretics, and their Canons teach
heresy, and Many of their Popes to be condemned as heretical, for practicing
and teaching deposition of Princes by an authority usurped against, and in
prejudice of the Christian faith. But if their answers be not de fide, then
they had as good say nothing, for the danger is not at all decreased, because
if there be Doctors on both sides by their own Charity maintained by Cath. cap.
7.
assertion they may without sin follow either, but yet more safely if they
follow the most received and the most authorized, and whether this rule will
lead them, I will be judged by any man that has considered the premises.
Briefly either this thing must remain in the same state it is, and our Princes
still exposed to so extreme hazards, or else let his Holiness seat himself in
his chair, condemn these doctrines, vow against their future practice, limit
his ordo ad spiritualia, contain himself within the limits of causes directly
and merely Ecclesiastical, disclaim all power, so much as indirect over
Princes temporalls, and all this with an intent to oblige all Christendom.
Which when I see done, I shall be most ready to believe that nothing in Popery,
does either directly or by a necessary consequence destroy Loyalty to our
lawful Prince, but not till then, having so much evidence to the contrary.

Thus much was occasioned by consideration of the cause of the Disciples Quaere
which was when they saw this, that their L. and M. for his difference in
Religion was turned forth of doors, which when they saw,

They said Lord] It was well they asked at all, and would not too hastily act
what they too sudde^ly had intended, but it was better that they asked Christ,
it had been the best warrant they could have had, could they have obtained but
a Magister dixit. But this was not likely, it was too strange a Question to
ask of such a Mr. A Magistre (...) crudelitatis? Nothing could have come more
cross to his disposition. His spirit never was addicted to blood, unless it
were to shed his own. He was a Prince of peace and set forth to us by all the
Symboles of peace and gentleness, as of a sheep, a lamb, a hen, a gentle
twining vine, the healing (...). and is it likely that such a one should give
his placet to the utter ruin of a company of poor Villagers for denying him a
nights lodging moved thereto by the foregoing scandal of a Schism? He knew
better what it cost to redeem aman, and to save his life from destruction then
to be so hasty for his ruin. And if the Fathers Confessors who were to
answer the Question of the day had but reflected upon this Gospel, they might
have informed their penitents better then to have engaged them upon such
Antichristian, and Treasonable practices, as to destroy an assembly of
Christians, as to depose or kill a King.

It is the proper cognizance of Mahumetanisme, by fire and sword to maintain
their cause, and to propagate their Religion, by ruin of Princes and
conquering their Kingdoms. But it is the excellency of Christianity, that by
humility and obedience it made Princes tributary to our Dear Master, and
homagers to his Kingdom. When Valentinian sent Calligonus his Chamberlain to
S. Ambrose to threaten him from his faith, his answer was, Deus permittit tibi
ut impleas quod minaris. Ego patiar, quod est Episcopi, (...) facies quod est
spadonis. He did not stir up the numerous people of his Diocese to rebel
against the Emperor, or depose him, employed no agent in his Court to
undermine his security, nor assasine to take his life. He and the rest of those
good Fathers, would not have lost their possibility of being Martyrs, for the
world, unless it were by persuading the Emperors to the Christian faith. We
pray for all our Governors, that they might have long life, a secure
government, a safe house, strong armies, good subjects, quiet world. So (...).
Apologet.


I had thought that the Doctrine and example of our B. Savior, the practice
Apostolical and primitive, had been ties enough to keep us in our obedience
to God and the King, and in Christian charity to all, but I find that all
these precepts come to nothing, for the Apostles and primitive Christians did
not actually depose Kings, nor alter states, nor call for fire to consume their
enemies: not because it was simply unlawful so to do, or any way adverse to
the precepts of Christ, but because they wanted Power. So Bellarmine: The
Church gave De Pontif. R. l. 5. c. 7.
leave that the faithful should obey Julian, because then they wanted forces.
And F. Creswell is very confident of the business, They might without all
Question have Philopater P. 107. n. 158.
appointed to themselves other Kings and Princes, if the Christians had been
strong enough to bring their intendments to pass. But because they could not,
therefore it was not lawful for them to go about it, nor is it for us in the
same case, especially if the Prince has quiet possession, and a strong guard
about him, then by no means is it lawful for a single man by Disp. 5. inc.
13. ad Roman.
then by no means is it lawful for a single man by his own authority to
assault his Prince that rules Tyrannically. So Salmeron. But who sees not that
this way murder may be lawful. For true it is God commanded us, saying, Thou
shall not kill, that is, if thou art not able to lift up thy hand, or strike a
stroke; thou shall not blaspheme, that is, if thou be speechless, thou
must be obedient to thy Prince, that is, if thou can not tell how to help
it. Good Doctrine this! And indeed it might possibly be something if God had
commanded our subordination to Princes only for wrath, for then si vires (...),
if we can defend our selves we are secure, we need not fear his wrath, but
when he adds, also for conscience sake, I cannot sufficiently wonder that any
man should obtrude so (...), so illiterate, and so impious an interpretation
upon the Christian world, under the Title of Catholic Doctrine.

Christ when he was betrayed and seized upon by his Murderers could have
commanded twelve Legions of Angels for his Guard, Non defuerunt vires; and in
all humane likelihood such a Satellitium as that would have moved them to a
belief in him, or else I am sure, might have destroyed the unbelievers. Shall
I say more against this rude (...) Then thus. It is false that the Primitive
Christians had not power to defend themselves against their Persecutors, Hear
S. Cyprian; Nemo nostrum quando apprehenditur reluctatur, nec se adversus
iniustitiam, and violentiam vestram quamvis nimius and copiosus noster sit
Populus, ulciscitur. They could have resisted and that to blood, but they had
not so learned Christ. Prayers and tears were the arms of Christians, and
then they had a defense beyond all this, when they were hard put to it, Mori
potuerunt, a submission of their bodies to Martyrdom was their last refuge.

Thus S. Agnes, Lucia, Agatha, Christina, Domitilla saved both their faith and
chastity, non armis, sedignibus and carnificis manu, the tormentors last
cruelty defended them from all succeeding danger.

I will not yet conclude, that, that which these men obtrude for Catholic
Doctrine is flat and direct heresy, I will instance but once more and then I
shall. In the fourth Council of Toledo which was assembled when the usurping
and Tyrannizing Goths did domineere in Europe, the most whereof were Tyrants,
Usurpers, or Arrians; the Council decreed that if any man did violate the life
or person of his King, aut potestate Regni exuerit, kill him or depose him,
Anathema sit etc. He should be accursed in the sight of God and his Holy
Angels, and together withal the companions of his iniquity, he should be
separated from the Catholic Church. And now I hope I may say that these men
who either practice or advise such practices as killing or deposing Kings,
areas formally condemned for heresy, and anathematized, as ever was Manichee or
Cataphrygian. I know not, but perhaps this might be thought of when the (...)
were inscribed heretics upon the public pillar before the Louure in Paris,
upon their banishment: however, let them answer it as they may, it concerns
them as much as their being Catholics comes to, Et considerent, quia quae
praedicant tantopere verba, aut ipsorum summorum Pontificum sunt suas fimbrias
extendentium, (...) illorum qui eis adulantur, as said Aeneas Sylvius, but at
De gestis consil. Basil. lib. 1.
no hand can it be Christian Doctrine.

I instanced in these things to show the (...) between the spirit of our B.
Savior who answered the Question of the text, and the Fathers Confessors of
whom was asked the Question of the day.

But give me leave to consider them not only as mis-informing their penitents,
but as concealing their intended purpose, for even this way, the persons a Cap
(...). excom. and. c. delicto ibid. in (...) 13. q. 3. q. 3.
to whom the Question was propounded made themselves guilty of the intended
machination. For by all Law Ecclesiastical and Civil he that conceales an
intended Murder or Treason makes himself b l. 1. Occisorum ad (...). c. (...)
and l 1.. 1. ad l. Cornel. de falsis l. quisquis ad l lub. May.
as much a party for concealing, as is the Principal for contriving.

Ob. But these Fathers Confessors could not be accused by virtue of these
general Laws, as being exempt by virtue of special case, for they received
notice of these things only in confession, the seal of which is so sacred and
inviolable, that he is sacrilegious who in any case does break it open, though
it be to avoid the greatest evil that can happen, so Bellarmine, to save the
lives of all the Kings in Christendom, Apol. adv. R. Angl.
so Binet; though to save a whole common Casaub. ad Front. Duc. In 3. part. D.
Thom. disp. 33. Sect. 1. (...). 2.
wealth from damage temporal or spiritual, of body or soul, so Suarez.

A considerable matter! On the one side we are threatened by sacrilege, on the
other by danger of Princes and commonwealths, for the case may happen, that
either the Prince and whole State may be suffered to perish bodily and ghostly,
or else the Priest must certainly damn himself by the sacrilegious breach of
the holy Seal of confession. Give me leave briefly to consider it, and, both
for the acquittance of our state in its proceedings against these Traitors, and
for the regulating of the case it self, to say these two things.

1 This present Treason was not revealed to these Fathers Confessors in formal
confession. 2. If it had, it did not bind to secresy in the present case. Of
the first, only a word.

1 It was only propounded to them in way of Question or consultation (like this
in the text) as appeared Vide Casaub. ep. ad Frent. D. p. 133.
by their own confessions, and the attestation of then Sr Henry Mountague
Recorder of London to Garnet himself. It could not therefore be a formal D.
Soto. in 4. l. Sent. d. 18. q. 4 art. 5. concl. 5.
confession, and therefore not bind to the seal. It is the common opinion of
their own Doctors: Non enim inducitur obligatio sigilli in confessione quam
quis facit Navar. 6. 8. n. 18.
sine ullo animo accipiendi absolutionem, sed solum Suarez. disp. 33 Sect 2.
consilij pettendi causa.

2 It was propounded to these Fathers Confessors Coninck (...) conf. (...) 1.
n. 7.
as a thing not subjicible to their penitential judicature, because it was a
fact not repented of, but then in agitation, and resolved upon for the future.
How then could this be a confession, whose institution must certainly be in
order to absolution, and how could this be in any such order, when it was a
business of which they could not expect to be absolved unless they hoped to
sin with a pardon about their necks; and on condition God would be merciful
to them in its remission, would come and profess that they were resolved to
anger him? In reason this could be no act of repentance, neither could it, by
confession of their own side. It is the doctrine of Hostiensis: and Cap
Sacerdos. 3. q. n. 116.
Navarre, and In lucubrat: ad Barrolum. in L. ut Vim. n. 22 ff. de iuftitia and
iure
Cardinal Alban confess it to be most commonly received.

3 It was not only not repented of, but by them reputed to be a good action,
and so could not be a matter of confession. I appeal to any of their own
Manuals and penitentiary books. It is culpable say they. I am sure it is
ridiculous in any man to confess and shrive himself of a good action, and
that this was such in their opinion, it is plain, by that impious answer of
Garnet, affirming it a business See proceed. against late Traitors.
greatly meritorious, if any good might thence accrue to the Catholic cause.

4 By this their pretended confession they endeavored to acquire new
accomplices, as is evident in the proceedings against the Traitors. They were
therefore bound to reveal it, for it neither was nor could be a proper and
formal confession. That this is the common opinion of their own Schools, see
it affirmed by Aegidius (...). Vbi supra.


The first particular then is plain. Here neither was the form of confession,
nor yet could this thing be a matter of confession, therefore supposing the
seal of confession to be sacredly inviolable in all cases, yet they were
highly blameable for their concealment in the present.

2 But the truth of the second particular is more to be inquired of. That is,
that though these things had been only revealed in confession, and this
confession had been formal and direct, yet they were bound in the present case
to reveal it, because the seal of confession is not so inviolable, as that in
no case it is to be broken up, and if in any, especially it may be opened in
the case of treason.

I never knew any thing cried up with so general avoyce upon so little ground,
as is the Over hallowed seal of confession.

True it is that an ordinary secret committed to a friend in civil commerce is
not to be revealed upon every cause, nor upon many, (but upon some it may as
they all confess.) If thus, then much rather is this to be observed in the
revelation of the secrets of our consciences, not only from the ordinary tie to
secrecy, but likewise least sins should grow more frequent, if so great a
remedy of them be made so odious, as to expose us to a public infancy or
danger of the law. The Council therefore that first introduced this obligation
was very prudent and reasonable, pleads a thousand years prescription, and
relies upon good conveniences. This is all that ever could be proved of it (as
may appear anon) but these are too weak a base, to build so great a structure
on it, as to make it sacrilege, or any sin at all, to reveal confessions in
some cases.

1 For first, if because it is delivered as a secret, and such a secret, it is
the more closely and religiously to be kept; it is true, but concludes no more,
but that it must be a greater cause that must authorize a publication of this,
then of the secrets of ordinary commerce between friend and friend.

2 If the licensing of publicatio^ of confession be a way to make confession
odious, and therefore that it may not be published, I say if this concludes,
then on the contrary it concludes far more strongly, that therefore in some
cases it may be published, because nothing can make a thing more odious and
intolerable, then if it be made a cover for grand impieties, so as to engage a
true subject, quietly and Knowingly to see his Prince murdered.

3 If it be discouragement to the practice of confession that some sins
revealed in it must be published though with peril to the delinquents same and
life, then it will be a far greater discouragement to the sin, when that it
shall by an universal judgment be so detested, that its concealment may not
be permitted, though it be with the hazard of discouraging the Holy duty of
confession: and when the being guilty of such a sin, shall reduce men into
such streights, that either they shall want the benefit of absolution, or
submit themselves to a public satisfaction, and so even in this particular the
benefit is far greater then the imaginary inconvenience.

The conveniences of the (...) force no more then that it is convenient to be
observed, not simply and absolutely in all cases necessary. And perhaps Suarez
the great patron of it perceived it, however he lays the burden, super communi
consensu Ecclesiae, In 3. part. D Thom disp. 33. sect. (...), n, 2
(...) perpetua traditione. If then I can show, that there is no such Catholic
consent of the present Church, nor any universal tradition of the ancient
Church for the inviolable Seal, but plainly the contrary, then our Church in
her permission of the Priests to reveal some confessions is as inculpable as
those of the present Church, who (besides her self) teach and practice it, and
as the Primitive Church whose, example in this (as in other things) she
strictly follows.

Of the first. The Church of England, which observes the seal of confession as
sacredly as reason or religion it self can possibly permit, yet forbids not
disclosure in case of Murder or Treason, but in these particulars leaves us
entire in our obedience to Can. 113. A. D. 1604.
the common laws of England, and these command it.

That the Church of England gives leave in some cases to reveal confessions,
is argument enough to prove that the Seal is not founded upon the consent of
the present Catholic Church. For it is no more a begging of the Question (nor
apparently so much) to say, the Church of England is a part of the Catholic
Church, and therefore her consent is required to make a thing universal, then
to say, the Church of Rome is the whole Catholic Church, therefore her consent
is sufficient to make a thing Catholic. But I shall not need to proceed this
way. For,

1 It is apparent that of their own side Altisidiorensis largely and
professedly proves the lawfulness of publication in some cases as is to be
seen. Lib. 4. Summae tract. 6. cap. 3. q. 7. and Garnet himself, the man who
if any had most need to stand in defense of the Seal that the pretense of it
might have defended him, yet confessed of his own accord, Leges quae celare
Actio in prodit. lat. p 99
haec prohibent apprime esse justas and salutares. He adds his reason, and
that is more then his authority, for (says he) it is not fitting that the life
and safety of a Prince should depend upon the private niceties of any man's
conscience. If two, nay if one dissent, it is enough to destroy a consent. But
see farther.

There are many cases, generally confessed amongst themselves, in which the
seal of formal and (as they love to speak) Sacramental confession may be
broken open. I instance but in two or three.

First, confession may be revealed to clear a doubtful case of marriage. It is
the opinion of many great Practic. crim. Ecclesiast. cap. 109.
Canonists, as you may see them quoted by Suarez de Paz. and (...), and the
case of the Venetian Resol. de Matrimon.
who married a Virgin that was both his sister and daughter: and that at Rome
under Pope Paul the third almost to like purpose, were long disputed on both
sides, whether they were to be revealed or not, so that at most, it is but a
doubtful matter in such cases, whether the tie of secrecy does oblige. Now if
for the proof of marriage the seal may be broken up, that man and wife might
live contentedly and as they ought, strange it should be unlawful to reveal
confessions in case of Treason, for the safety of a Prince or State!

2 In case of herely the seal binds not, by their own general confession. It
is a rule amongst them, Haeresis est crimen quod non confessio celat. Now I
would fain learn why Treason is not as revealeable as Heresy? Is heresy
dangerous to souls? Then surely, so is Treason, unless it be none, or a very
small crime. May heresy infect others? So may Treason, as it did in the
present. It may then as well be revealed as heresy. Now that it may something
rather, I have these reasons. 1. Because it is not so certain that such an
opinion is heresy as that such a (...) is Treason. 2. Because although both
Treason and real heresy be damnable and dangerous to souls, yet heresy killes
no Kings as treason does. I confess that heresy may, and does teach it, but
then it degenerates into Treason. Now if some heresy may be Treason, then that
Treason is heresy, and so a case of Treason may occur, in which from their
own confession, treason is revealeable.

3 By the most general voice of their own side any man may license his
confessor to reveal his confession. It is the doctrine of Scotus, Durandus,
Almain, Navarre, Medina, and generally of all the Thomists. I infer, if a
private man may license his Consessor to reveal his consession, then the seal
of confession is not founded upon any divine commandment, for if it were, the
penitent could not give the Priest license to break it. But if the penitent may
give his Confessor leave, because the tie of secrecy is a bond in which the
Priest stands bound to the penitent, and he giving him leave, remits of his own
right, then much rather may a whole State authorize this publication, for what
ever personal right a private L. quod Mayor ff. ad Municipalem.
man has, that the whole State has much rather, for he is included in it as a
part of the whole, and in such cases as concern the whole commonwealth (as
this of treason does most especially) the rule of the Law holds without
exception, Refertur ad (...) ff. de regul (...). ad. refertur. L. 7. ult. ff.
de pact.
quod public fit per maiorem partem, the delinquent gives leave to the
publication of confession, therefore because the whole state does, whereof he
is one member. I add, that in the case of Treason this is much rather true,
for here the delinquent loses all his right whatsoever, praediall, personal,
and of privilege, and therefore the Commonwealth can the better license the
publication, and the breach of the bond of secrecy, in which the Confessor
stood tied to the penitent by virtue of implicit stipulation.

4 Lastly, even in special in the very case of Treason confessed, many of
their own do actually practice a publication, when either they are loyal of
themselves, or dare not be otherwise.

I instance first in the Church of France. For this See Bodinus, who reports of
a Norman Gentleman whom his Confessor discovered for having confessed De
republ. lib. 2. cap. 5.
a Treasonable purpose he sometimes had, of killing Francis the first, of which
he was penitent, did his penance, craved absolutio^ obtain'dit but yet was
sentenced to the axe by express commission from the Histoire de (...).
King to the Parliament of Paris. The like confession was made by the Lord of
Haulteville when he was in danger of death, which when he had escaped, he
incurred it with the disadvantage of public infamy upon the Scaffold. I
instance not in the case of Barriere, it is every where known as it is
reported partly by Thuanus, but more fully by the Author of Histoire de la
paix. Nor yet is France singular in the practice of publication of confessed
Treason. For at Rome there have been examples of the like, I mean Dominic.
(...). memb. 3. q 4 concl. 2 derat. regendi secret.
of those who confessed their purpose of killing the Pope, who were revealed by
their Confessors, and accordingly punished.

Thus then the first pretense proves a nullity, and either our Laws are just in
commanding publication of confession in case of Treason, or themselves very
culpable in teaching and practicing it in the same, and in cases of less
moment. The 2d is like the first for it is extremly vain to pretend that the
seal of confession is founded upon Catholic tradition. Judge by the sequel.

The first word I hear of concealing confessions Lib 7. hist. c. 16.
is in Sozomen, relating how the (...) Church about (...)
the time of Decius the Emperor, set over the penite^ts a public penitentiary
Priest, who was bound to be Virbonae conversationis, (...), secretum, a good
man and a keeper of secrets, for indeed he was bound to conceal some crimes,
in particular those which an Adulteress had confessed, I mean concerning her
Adultery, as appears in the Canons of S. Basil. But yet this Priest who was so
tied to a religious Epist. ad Amphil.
secrecy did publish many of them in the Congregation before the people, that
they might reprove the delinquent and discountenance the sin. The same story
is reported by Cassiodore, and Niccphorus from the same Author.

The lawfulness and practice of publication in some cases is as clear in
Origin. If (says he) the Physician (...). 2. in 37. Psalm.
of thy soul perceives thy sins to be such as to need so harsh a remedy as
to have them published before the assemblies of the people, that others may be
admonished, and thou the better cured, he need be very deliberate, and skillful
in the application of it. Hitherto no such thing as an Universal tradition for
the pretended inviolable sacramental seal, for Origin plainly, and by them
confessedly speaks of such sins as first were privately confessed to the
Priest; how else should he deliberate of their publication? but yet he did so,
and for all the seal of confession, sometimes opened many of them, to no sewer
witnesses then a whole assembly. Thus it was in the Greek Church both Law and
Custom. But now if we look into the Latin Church we shall find that it was
taken up from example of the Greeks and some while practiced, that some
particular sins should be published in the Church before the Congregation,
Cap. 10. and 21.
as it is confessed in the Council of Mentz, and inserted by Burchard into his
Decree. l. 19 c. 37.


But when the Lay piety began to cool, and the zeal of some Clergy men wax
too hot, they would needs heighten this custom of publication of some sins
to a Law of the publishing of all sins. This being judged to be inconvenient,
expressed the first decree for the seal of confession in the Latin Church. Now
see how it is uttered, and it will sufficiently inform us both of the practice
and the opinion which Antiquity had of the obligation to the seal.

Illam contra Apostolicam regulam praesumptionem, etc. that is, it was against
the Apostolical ordinance Decret (...) Leonis. P. M. Epist. 80. ad (...).
Campan.
that a Law should enjoin that the Priest should reveal all those sins which
had been told him in confession. It might be done so it were not required and
exacted, and yet might be so required, so it were not a publication of all. Non
enim omnium (...) sunt peccata; says S. Leo, some sins are inconvenient to
be published, it is not fit the world should know all, therefore, some they
might, or else he had said nothing. The reason which he gives makes the
business somewhat clearer, for he derives it not from any simple necessity of
the thing or a Divine Right, but least men out of inordinate love to
themselves, should rather refuse to be washed then buy their purity with so
much shame. The whole Epistle has many things in it excellently to the same
purpose.

I say no more, the Doctrine and practice of antiquity is sufficiently evident,
and that there is nothing less then an Universal tradition for the seal of
confession to be observed in all cases, even of sins of the highest malignity.

Thus these Fathers Confessors are made totally inexcusable by concealing a
Treason which was not revealed to them in a formal confession, and had been
likewise culpable though it had, there being as I have shown, no such
sacredness of the Seal as to be inviolable in all cases whatsoever.

I have now done with the several considerations of the persons to whom the
Question was propounded, they were the Fathers Confessors in the day, but it
was Christ the Lord in my text. The Question it self follows.

Shall we command fire to come from heaven and consume them?

The Question was concerning the fate of a whole Town of Samaria, in our case
it was more; of the Fate of a whole Kingdom. It had been well if such a
Question had been silenced by a direct negative or (as the Judges of the
Areopage used to do) put off ad diem longissimum, that they might have
expected the answer three ages after.

De morte hominis nulla est (...) longa, No demurre had been too long in a case
of so much and so royal blood, the blood of a King, of a Kings Children, of a
Kings Kingdom. (...)King and Kingdom should have and been made a solemn
sacrifice to appease their solemn deliberate malice. I said deliberate, for
they were loath to be malicious without good advice, and therefore they asked
their question, worthy of an Oracle, even no less then Delphick, where an
evil spirit was the Numen, and a Witch the Prophet. For the Question was such
of which a Christian could not doubt though he had been fearfully scrupulous
in his resolutions. For whoever questioned the unlawfulness of murder, of
murdering innocents, of murdering them who were confessed righteous? for such
was their proposal, being rather willing that Catholics should perish with
those whom they thought, heretics, then that their should be no blood spilt.
But to the question: it was fire they called for. The most merciless of all
the Elements. No possibility of relenting when once kindled and had its object.
It was the fittest instrument for merciless men, men of no bowels whose malice
like their instrument did agere ad extremum suarnm virium, work to the highest
of its possibility. Secondly, It was fire indeed they called for, but not like
that in my text, not fire from heaven, They might have called as long and as
loud as those Priests did, who contested with Elisha, no fire would have come
from heaven to have consumed what they had intended for a sacrifice. Gods (...)
post not so fast as ours do. Deus non est sicnt homo. Man (...) often when God
blesses, men condemn whom God acquits, and therefore they were loath to trust
God with their cause, they therefore take it into their own hands. And
certainly if to their Anathemas they add some fagots of their own and
gunpowder, it is odds but then we may be consumed indeed, and so did they,
their fire was not from heaven.

Lastly, it was a fire so strange, that it had no example. The Apostles indeed
pleaded a mistaken precedent for the reasonableness of their demand, they
desired leave to do but even as Elias did. [The Greeks only retain this
clause, it is not in the Bibles of the church of Rome] and really these
Romano-barbari could never pretend to any precedent for an act so barbarous as
theirs. Adrimelech indeed killed a King, but he spared the people, Haman would
have killed the people, but spared the King, but that both King and people,
Princes and Judges, branch, and rush and root should dye at once (as if
Caligula's were actuated and all England upon one head) was never known till
now, that all the malice in the world met in this as in a center. The Sicilian
(...), the mattins of S. Bartholomew, known for the pitiless and damned
massacres, were but (...)the dream of the shadow of smoke if compared with
this great fire. In tam occupato saeculo fabulas Vulgaris nequitia non invenit.
This was a busy age; Herostratus must have invented a more sublimed malice then
the burning of one Temple, or not have been so much as spoke of since the
discovery of the Powder Treason. But I must make more have I shall not else
clime the sublimity of this impiety. Nero was sometimes the populare odium was
popularly hated, and deserved it too, for he slew his Master, and his wife and
all his family once or twice over, opened his mothers womb, fired the City,
laughed at it, slandred the Christians for it, but yet all these were but
principia malorum, the very first rudiments of evil. Add then to these,
Herod's Masterpiece at Ramah as it was deciphred by the tears and sad threnes
of the Matrons in an Universal mourning for the loss of their pretty infants,
yet this of Herod will prove but an infant wickedness, and thar of Nero, the
evil but of one city. I would willingly have found out an example, but I see
I cannot, should I put into the scale the extract of all the old Tyrants famous
in Antique stories, Bristonij stabulum Regis, Busiridis aras,
Antiphatae mensas and Taurica regna Thoantis,
Should I take for true story the highest cruelty as it was fancied by the most
hieroglyphicall Egyptian, this alone would weigh them down, as if the Alps
were put in scale against the dust of a balance. For had this accursed Treason
Prosper'd, we should have had the whole Kingdom mourn for the inestimable
loss of its chiefest glory, its life, its present joy, and all its very hopes
for the future. For such was their destind malice, that they would not only
have inflicted so cruel a blow, but have made it incurable, by cutting off our
supplies of joy, the whole succession of the line Royal. Not only the Vine it
self but all the Gemmulae, and the tender Olive branches should either have
been bent to their intentions, and made to grow crooked, or else been broken.

And now after such a sublimity of malice, I will not instance in the
sacrilegious ruin of the neighboring Temples which needs must have perished
in the flame, nor in the disturbing the ashes of our incomb'd Kings devouring
their dead ruins like Sepulchrall dogs, these are but minutes, in respect of
the ruin prepared for the living Temples.

Stragem sed istam non tulit
Christus cadentum Principum Prudent, (...).

Impune, ne for san sui
Patris periret fabrica.
Ergo quae poterit lingua retexere
Lauds Christ tuas, qui domitum struis
Infidum populum cum Duce persido?
Let us then return to God the cup of thanksgiving, he having powered forth so
largely to us of the cup of salvation. We cannot want where withal to fill it,
here is matter enough for an eternal thankfulness, for the expressiou of
which a short life is too little, but let us here begin our Hallelujahs hoping
to finish them hereafter, where the many quires of Angels will fill the consort.

Praise the Lord ye house of Levi, ye that fear the Psalm. 135. v. 20. 21.
Lord, Praise the Lord. Praise the Lord out of Sion, which dwells at
Jerusalem.

FINIS.

