THE PRAISE AND VERTVE OF A Iayle, and Iaylers.

WITH THE MOST EXCELLENT (...)sterie, and necessary use of all sorts of HANGING.

ALSO (...)ch at Tyburne for a Period, (...)uthors free leave to let them
(...), who are offended at the (...)ke without cause.

By JOHN TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for R. B. 1623.

TO THE SENSEABLE, Reader, yo(...) note that thy(...)tleman did (...)me from
FARNE (...)barrel of (...) and Corm(...) eggs, by th(...)ing of wh(...) have
attain(...) the understand (...) of many (...) which our (...) an(...)do
speak (...) about LON(...)
Reasonable, Affable, Amiable, Acceptable, minded Honorable, in Wit,
Judgment, and Understanding Able, Robert Rugge Gentleman, Rear Adelantado of
the HOLY ISLAND, the FAIRNE, and the STAPLES, on the Coast of NORTHVMBRIA.
NO Hanging, Tap'strie, Quilt, or Couerlet,
This dedication of my wit could get:
No Mattresse, Blanket, Sheet, or Fetherbed,
Could have these labors of my working head:
But (cold by Nature) from my Nurses dugge,
My inclination still has loved a Rugge:
Which makes my thankful Muse thus bold to be,
To consecrate this worthless work to thee;
Thou that within those happy Isles do bide,
Which Neptunes waves do from our land divide,
Wherein the Holy Island stands a Fort
That can defend, and injuries retort,
That does command a goodly Haven nigh,
Wherein a hundred Ships may safely lie:
Thou in the (...) Fairn Island (...) 7. mile the Holy into the sea, Holy Island
seven miles Barwicke. (...) Fairne all of Sea-fowle in such a(...)nce, as
yo(...) step but Eggs or (...): They miss lay on Saint (...)es day, and might
after (...)as there is (...) to be seen. (...)taple Islands (...) to the (...),
and stand (...)mile from it (...)he sea, where (...)wle upon the (...) are so
thick (...) upon the (...)nd upon the (...) and with such (...)sitie build
(...)ests, as the (...) man cannot (...)hat egg in (...) place again (...)
once taken (...) abide in the (...) place Upon (...) flight the sea (...)
covered for (...) a mile, and (...)eauens above (...) obscured for present.
Farne and Staples bearst such sway,
That all the dwellers there do thee obey;
Where Foul are all thy fair inhabitants,
Where thou (Commander of the Cormorants,)
Grand Governor of Guls, of Geese and Ganders,
Over whom thou art none of the least Commanders,
Whereas sometimes thou can not stir thy legs,
But thou must tread on tributarie Eggs,
For they like honest, true, plain dealing folks,
Pay thee the Custom of their Whites and Yolks,
Which to thy friends often times transported be,
As late thou sentst a barrel full to me:
And in requital to so good a friend,
This Prisone, and this Hanging here I send.
Because within the There is but one house there, all the dwellers else being
Sea-sowle, who will her know offenses nor punishments.
Fairne and Staples too,
The dwellers do as they do please to do;
Their pride and lust, their stealing and their treason,
Is all imputed to their want of reason;
I therefore have made bold to send thee this,
To show them what a Iayle and Hanging is.
Thou have from Hermes sucked the Quintessence
Of quick Invention, and of Eloquence,
And thou so well do love good witty Books,
That makes thee like Apollo in thy looks:
For Nature has thy Visage so much graced,
That there is the Ensign of true friendship placed.
A Chaulkie face, that is like a Pewter spoone,
Or Buttermilke, or Green cheese, or the Moon,
Are either such as kill themselves with care,
Or hide-bound miserable wretches are.
Give me the man whose color and prospect,
Like Titan when it does on Gold reflect,
And if his purse be equal to his will,
He Will then be frolic, free, and Iouiall still:
And such a one (my worthy friend) art thou,
To whom I dedicate this Pamphlet now;
And I implore the Heavens to prove so kind,
To keep thy state according to thy mind.
Yours, with my best wishes, JOHN TAILOR.

THE VERTVE of a IAYLE, and necessity of Hanging.
MY free borne Muse of Bondage rudely treats,
And strange vagaries in my Braine-pan beats:
Whilst I unmask, vnuisor, or vnueile,
The virtues of a Iaylor, and a Iayle;
And then of Hanging, and the Hangmans Art
My lines do end, and at the Gallows part.
First I do find, in Histories enrold,
Iayles for antiquity, are very old:
For Joseph was in Prison, (false accused,
That he his Masters Wife would have abused.)
And all the world does understand, a Prison
Is not an vpstart Fable, newly risen.
And Jeremy, was under bolts and locks,
By Pashur once imprisoned in the Ier. 22.2.
stocks:
And after that he twice was put in Chap. 32. Chap. 37.
Thrall,
For true foretelling Israel, Judah's fall.
The Sacred Histories do well declare,
That Prisons for their time most ancient are.
Yet though my lines do speak of Iayles, I see
That mine invention and my Muse is free:
And I do find the name of Prisone, frames
Significant Alluding Anagrams.
As thus.
1. PRISONE. Anagramma. NIP SORE.
12. Anagrammes of Iayles, Iaylors and Seriean^s.
THere men are Nip'd with mischiefs manifold,
With loss of freedom, hunger, thirst, and cold*
With Mourning shirts, and sheets, and lice some store;
And thus a Prison truly does Nip sore.
2. PRISONE. Anagramma. IN ROPES.
Again the very word portends small hopes,
For he that is in a Prisone is In Ropes.
3. PRISONE. Anagramma. IN PROSE.
TO all good verses Prisons are great foes,
And many Poets they keep fast In Prose.
4. PRISONE. Anagramma. NO PRISE.
INdeed it is no profit, or No Prise,
But woeful purchase of calamities.
The name of Iayles (by letters transposition)
Does very well discover their condition.
5. IAYLES. Anagramma. I SLAYE.
ANd well it does befit it every way,
The Nature of all Iayles is still to slay:
There are men slain most strange tormenting ways,
In name, fame, state, and life, with long delays.
6. BONDAGE. Anagramma. BANDOGE.
ANd Bondage like a Band^gge still does gnaw,
Fangd with the tushes of the biting law.
7. IAYLER. Anagramma. I RAIL.
THis does befit the Iayler wondrous trim,
He at the prisoners railes, and they at him.
8. ARESTING. Anagramma. A STINGER.
A Resting very well with this agrees,
It is A Stinger worse than Wasps or Bees.
OR, 9. ARESTING. Anagramma. IN GRATES.
THis very word includes poor prisoners fates,
Aresting briefly claps em up In Grates.
10. SERIEANT. Anagramma. IN ARESTE.
TO turn this word unto the very best,
A Serieant In Areste does breed unrest.
OR, 11. SERIEANT. Anagramma. IN TEARS.
IN cares and Tears he leaves men to lament,
When Credit, Coin, and goods, and all is spent.
12. WARDS. Anagramma. DRAWS.
A Prisoners purse is like a Nurse, for why
His Ward or lodging draws or sucks it dry:
A Iu^y here of Anagramms you see,
Of Serieants and of ^ailes empanneld be,
And now my pen intends to walk a station,
And talk of Prisons in some other fashion.
That Iailes should be, there is Law, sense and reason,
To punish Bawdry, Cheating, Theft and Treason,
Though some against them have inuectiue bin,
And called a Iaile a magazin of sin,
An University of Villainy,
An Academy of foul blasphemy,
A sink of drunkenness, a den of Thieves,
A Treasury for Serieants and for Shreeues,
A Mint for Baylifes, Marshalls men and Iailors,
Who live by losses of captived bewailers:
A Nurse of Roguery, and an earthly hell,
Where Devils or Iaylers in men's shapes do dwell:
But I am quite contrary to all this,
I think a Iaile a School of virtue is,
A house of study and of contemplation,
A place of discipline and reformation,
There men may try their patience, and shall know,
If they have any friends alive or no:
There they shall prove if they have fortitude,
By which all crosses stoutly are subdude,
A Prison leads the Creditor unto
His cozning debtor, that would him undo,
It Is Physic that preserues a common wealth,
Foul Treasons snaffle and the curb of stealth,
The whip of hellish pride, the scourge of lust,
The good man's help in plaguing the unjust.
Were Thieves and Villains not in prison put,
A world of Throats (past number) would be cut:
For when diseases are grown desperate, then
They must have desperate Remedies, and when
Men mend not for Reproof, or Admonition,
A Iaile then is the Surgion or Physician.
The roaring Knave, that like a Horse or Mule,
His parents, master, or no friends could rule,
But that he daily would be drunk and swear,
And like a demy-deuill domineere,
Though to good course he never meant to bend him,
A prison at the last will mend or end him. Excellent reformation^

The deeds of darkness that do hate the light,
Fraies, brawls and bloodshed which start out by night:
The watch like cunning Fowlers lie in wait,
And catch these Woodcocks in their Sprindges strait,
These Birds are in the Iaile mewed up from riot,
Where they may learn more manners and be quiet.
A Iail's a glass wherein old men may see,
The blemish of their youths deformity;
And young men quickly may perceive from thence,
The way to wisdom and experience.
And though the lights of prisons are but dim,
A prisoners candle yet may show to him
At midnight, without light of Sun or Moon,
More than he ever could perceive at noone;
It shows the fleeting state of earthly pelf,
It makes him wisely learn to know himself,
The world unto his view it represents,
To be a Map or mass of discontents,
It shows his fained friends like Butter-flies,
That dogged his summer of prosperities:
And in a word it truly does set forth
The world, and all that is in it nothing worth.
These things unto a wisemans judgment brings,
A have to earth, and love to heavenly things.
T'a wise man nothing in a Iaile does bide,
But it to some good use may be applide:
He hears a Ruffin swear, and so does hear
That he does stand in fear, and hate to swear,
He spies another drunk, and so does spy
That such unmanly beastliness heel fly.
He notes the curtall Cans half filled with froth,
Tobacco piping hot, and from them both
His judgment does discern, with wisdoms eye,
The world is vapor, froth, and vanity.
His homely Bed and Vermines sundry forms,
Does make him mind his grave, and crawling worms;
The Spiders Cobweb, Lawne, or Tapestry,
There are too few that make this good use of imprisonment.
Shows odds 'twixt Idleness and Industry.
The Churlish Keepers, rattling chains and fetters,
The Hole or Dungeon for condemned debtors,
Blaspheming wretches of all grace bereauen,
Does make him think on hell and wish for heaven.
And thus though wise men's corpse in prison be,
Their minds are still at liberty and free.
Besides Experience daily teaches this,
The Soul a Prisoner in the Body is:
Our Reason should the Keeper be to guide,
The Heart does lodge within the Masters side*
The Brains the Knights Ward may be termed fit,
There lies the Understanding and the Wit:
The Dungeons where the Prisoners starve and die,
Is in the Breast where sad despair does lie:
Our Sins the Manacles, and Bolts and Ginos,
Which fetter us in bondage all our lives:
Sad melancholy sorrow, grief and care,
Continual waiters in those Prisons are,
Our partial self-love all our crimes excusing,
Our Consciences true evidence accusing,
Our sighs and tears the Messengers we send
To God, that all our sorrows may have end,
And then through faith and hope we do believe,
To gain a pardon better than repreeue,
Then lastly death does free the soul from thrall,
And makes a Iaile delivery unto all.
Thus is our flesh the walls, our bones the grates,
Our eyes the windows, and our mouths the gates,
The Nose the Chimny, Or stomac^
Kitchen is the breast,
Our tongue the taster of the worst and best,
Our hands the Caruers, teeth the Cooks to mince,
The diet of a Peasant or a Prince;
Our hunger is best sauce, as I do think,
Our bellies sellers where we lay our drink:
And in these corpse of ours deciphered thus,
Our souls are prisoners unto all of us.
As grace guides us, so we by grace guide them,
The way unto the new Jerusalem.
Stern rugged winter, with frosts, storms and gusts,
Close prisoners yearly in the earth it thrusts, The earth Prison.

Herbs, roots, flowers, fruits, and worms til sun and rain
With Summers heat does bail them forth again.
But of all men alive, A strait (...) is a Tailor Prison.
I find a Tailor
Is an approved artificial Iailor:
Some do commit themselves unto his charge,
And may but will by no means go at large.
I have seen many in the Tailors Iailes,
Have labored till they sweat with tooth and nails,
(The whilst a man might ride five miles at least)
To get their clothes together on the breast,
And being then in prison buttoned up,
So close that scarcely they could bite or sup,
Yet I have heard their pride how loud it lide,
Protesting that their clothes were made too wide:
These men love bondage more then liberty,
And it is a gallant kind of foolery,
When thus amongst themselves they have a Law,
To deck and dawbe the back, and pinch the Maw.
Me thinks their souls should be in mighty trouble,
Poor Animals, they are imprisoned double;
In Corpse and Clothes, and which is true and plain,
They seem to take great pleasure in their pain.
Shooma(...)rs Prison.
A Shoomaker's a kind of Iailor too,
And very strange exploits he dares to do:
For many times he has the power and might,
To clap into his Stocks a Lord or Knight,
The Madam and the Maid he cares not whether,
He lays them all fast by the heels in lether.
^^uth and ^^nesty pri^^ners.
Plain Honesty and Truth, both Prisoners are,
Although they seldom come unto the bar,
Yet are they kept so closely day and night,
That in an age they scarcely come in sight.
And but for many of our Countries pillars,
True Tailers, Weauers, and clean fingered Millers,
Good Serieants and kind Brokers did relieve them,
^^^hard case.
I know not who would any comfort give them.
No doubt but many a Less that feign would wed,
Is her own Iailor to her maiden head, A maid^^ head of times (...) Prisoner

With much unwillingness she keeps it close,
And with her heart she will gladly let it lose.
But look to it wenches, if you give it scope,
It Is gone past all recovery, past all hope,
Much like old Time which ceaselesse does run on,
But never does return once being gone.
The Gowt's a saucy Prisoner, The G(...) Prisone State.
and will have
His keepers to maintain him fine and brave;
His Iailors shall no needy beggars be,
But men of honor and of high degree,
And over them he bears such great command,
That many times they can nor go nor stand;
And if he would break Iaile and fly, it is thought,
He by his keepers never should be sought.
And money is close Prisoner I think sure, Money close P^^^^ner.

Where no man can its liberty procure:
The Devils Stewards and his Bailifes vow,
That moneys freedom they will not allow,
Unless unto a Miser or a Whore,
But by all means fast hold it from the poor.
I wish Coin were as painful as the Gout, Amen*

To those that hoard it; and I make no doubt
But miserable Iailers would agree
To open their Prisons, and let money flee.
And were it not a lamentable thing,
That some great Emperor or some mighty King
Should be imprisoned by a vassal slave,
And lodged alive (as 'twere within his Grave.)
Such is the case of Silver and of Gold,
The chiefest of all metals fast in hold,
And darkness lies held in the Misers stocks,
(...) and (...) kept in (...)age by (...).
In steel and iron bars, and ^o^ts and locks.
Though gold and silver royal metals be,
Yet are they slaves to iron as we see.
But leaving Gold and Gowt, ^e turn my pen,
To what I have digrest from Iayles and men:
Let man examine well himself, and he
(...) men (...) their (...)ene(...).
Shall find himself his greatest enemy;
And that his loss of liberty and pelf,
He can accuse none for it, but himself;
How passions, actions, and affections cluster,
And how to ruinate his state they muster,
His frailty arms his members and his senses,
To undertake most dangerous pretenses.
The back often tempts him unto borrowed bravery,
And all his body suffers for it in slavery;
His Belly tempts him to superfluous fare,
For which his corpse lies in a Iaylors snare;
His Eyes from beauty to his heart draws lust,
For which he is often into prison thrust,
His Ears give credit to a knave or thief,
And's body suffers for his ears belief.
His Tongue much like a Hackney goes all paces,
In City, Country, Court and Camp, all places,
It gallops and false gallops, trots and ambles,
One pace or other still it runs and rambles;
Of Kings and Princes states it often prattles,
Of Church and Commonwealth it idly rattles,
Of passing of it is word and suretiships,
For which at last the Iayle the Carcass nips.
Man's Hands have very often against him warred,
And made him of his liberty debarred:
A stab, a blow, a d^shing of a pen,
Has clapped him closely in the Iaylors den.
The Feet which on the ground men daily tread,
The way to their captivity do lead.
Now for the inward faculties, I find
Some lie in Prison for their haughty mind,
Some for their folly, some because too wise,
Are mewed up in the Iaylors custodies;
Some for much gaming or for recreation,
Do make a Iayle their homely habitation;
And thus it plainly may be proved well,
Man's greatest foes within himself do dwell.
And now two contraries I will compare,
To show how like and how unlike they are:
A Iayle, our birth, our death, and setting free,
These four do all agree and disagree;
For all degrees, our birth and life we know
Is natural, We are al^ borne in form, an^ come into world of fashion, we die
(...) leave the world in^^^nite way
one way, for high and low:
But death has many thousand ways and snares,
To take our lives away all unawares.
And therefore of our lives it is no doubt,
That there is but one way in and many out,
But to a Iayle there is many ways to win,
Ten thousand tricks and sleights to clap men in:
And there is but one way out as I do know,
Which is by satisfying what we owe.
O west thou the law thy life, dispatch and pay,
And from the Prison thou art freed away:
Do thou owe money, quickly pay thy score,
And farewell, go thy ways man, there is the door.
As men in all that is ill, are Satan's Apes,
So sundry sins bring death in sundry shapes;
Life from the God of life, which is but one,
To all degrees one way gives life alone.
And so our several frailties, several ways
Our wretched Carcasses in prison lays,
But there is but one way out that e're I saw,
Which is by satisfying of the law.
The faults we do in springtime of our youth,
In Summer of our manhood gather growth:
Then Haruests middle age does make them ripe,
Which winters old age does in prison gripe;
And thus the very seasons of the year,
Fit emblemes of our thraldom do appear.
(...) To(...)
In London and within a mile, I ween,
There are of Iayles or Prisons full eighteen,
And sixty Whipping-posts, and Stocks and Cages,
Where sin with shame and sorrow has due wages.
(...)des Pole(...), Parti(...), Hal(...), Iaue(...), Battle(...),
Cross(...)ves, half (...)es, Pistols (...)d Pettro(...)s.
For though the Tower be a Castle Royal,
Yet there is a Prison in it for men disloyal:
Though for defense a Camp may there be fitted,
Yet for offense, men thither are committed.
It is a house of fame, and there is in it
A Palace for a Prince, a Royal Mint,
Great Ordnance, Powder, Shot, Match, Bills and Bows,
Shafts, swords, pikes, lances, shouels, mattocks, crows,
Bright armor, muskets, ready still I say,
To arm one hundred thousand in a day.
And last it is a Prison unto those
That do their Sovereign or his laws oppose.
The Gatehouse for a prison was ordained, The (...) house.

When in this land the third king Edward reigned:
Good lodging rooms, and diet it affoords,
But I had rather lie at home on boords.
Since Richards reign the first, The Fleet.
the Fleet has been
A Prison, as upon records is seen,
For lodgings and for bowling, there is large space,
But yet I have no stomach to the place.
Old Newgate I perceive a theeuish den, New(...)

But yet there is lodging for good honest men.
When second Henry here the Scepter swaid,
Then the foundation of that gate was laid.
But sixty six years ere our Saviors birth,
By Lud was Ludgate founded from the earth, Lud(...)

No Iayle for thieves, though some perhaps as bad,
That break in policy, may there be had.
The Counter in the Powltry is so old, Pe(...) Count(...)

That it in History is not enrold.
And Woodstreet Counters age we may derive, Woe(...) street.

Since Anno fifteen hundred fifty five.
For me the one's too old, and one's too new,
And as they bake a Gods name let them brew.
Bridewell unto my memory comes next; Bri(...)

Where idleness and lechery is vexed:
This is a royal house, of state and port,
Which the eighth king Henry built, and there kept Court.
King Edward somewhat ere his timelesse fall,
Gave it a way to be an Hospital,
Which use the city puts it well unto,
And many pious deeds they there do do:
But yet for Vagabonds and Runnagates,
For Whores, and idle knaves, and such like mates,
It Is littell better than a Iayle to those,
Where they chop chalk, for meat and drink and blows.
In this house those that against their wills do dwell,
Love well a Bride (perhaps) but not Bridewell.
White (...), Kings (...), Man(...)a, (...)ter, and (...)
Five Iayles or Prisons are in Southwarke placed,
The Counter (once S. Margrets Church defaced)
The Marshalsea, the Kings Bench and White Lion,
Where some like Tantalus, or like Ixion,
The pinching pain of hunger daily feel,
Turned up and down with fickle Fortunes wheel:
And some do willingly make there abode,
Because they cannot live so well abroad.
Then there is the Clinke, where handsome lodgings be,
The hole ^ Kathe^^^^.
And much good may it do them all, for me.
Cross but the Thames unto S. Katherins then,
There is another hole or den for men.
East (...)chfield (...).
Another in East-Smithfield little better,
Will serve to hold a thief or paltry debtor.
New (...).
Then near three Craves a Iayle for Heretics,
For Brownists, Familists, and Schismatics.
The (...) Went(...).
Lord Wentworths Iayle within White Chapel stands,
And Finsbury, God bless me from their hands.
These eighteen Iayles so near the City bounded,
Are founded and maintained by men confounded:
As one man's meat may be another bane,
The keepers full, springs from the prisners wane*
This has been still the use, and ever will,
That one man's welfare, comes from others ill.
But (as I said) man's self is cause of all
The miseries that to him can befall.
Note but our corpse, how every member lies,
Their several offices, and faculties:
And our own judgment will inform us than,
The likeness 'twixt a prison and a man:
For as man has his limbs and linaments,
His sinews, muscles, nerves, and ligaments:
His Panicles, his Arteries, his Veins,
His joints, his membranes, and his beating brains:
So has a Iayle, Were (...) for the(...) Iayle (...) have (...)
Writs, Warrants, and Attachements,
Arestings, Actions, Hues, Cries, and Appeachments:
With Garnish, Sharing fees, and Habeas Corpus,
(Which feeds some Iaylors fatter than a Porpus)
And last for everlasting Executions,
Until the prisoners bodies dissolutions;
And if a man be hurt in leg or arm,
Or head, or heel, it is said the man has harm:
If inward grief do pinch in any part,
The anguish is a terror to the heart,
And should a Iayle want these things named before,
It quickly would be miserable poor:
Like men dismembered or of sense bereft,
With scarcely any life or being left.
For in man's corpse (like prisners) always lies
His virtues, and his foul iniquities.
And which of these his fancy likes best,
Shall still be kept in bondage, or releast.
As Wisdom, Bounty, and Humanity.
(Despised in these days of vanity)
Some keep so close, not suffering them to walk,
So much as in bare thoughts, or deeds, or talk;
Whilst Folly, and close fisted Niggardize,
With Barbarism, have ease and liberties.
Faith, Hope, and Charity, are pent up close,
And doubt, despair, and cruelty let loose.
Lust revels it, rich clad in Robes of Pride:
Friendship, and Love, are liberty denide.
Whereby the liberal Arts in number seven,
Are of their liberal liberties bereauen,
The whilst the seven delightful deadly sins
The game and glory, of the whole world winnes.
The Cardnall virtues, at unworthy prices,
Are made but vassals to all Carnal vices.
The Muses are mewed up, with woes and wants,
Whilst fortune follows knaves, and Ignorants;
And thus within man's little Commonweal,
He like a partial Iaylor often does deal:
Permits his goodness never to appear,
And lets his badnesse ramble any where.
So Rorers, rascals, Banquerouts politic,
With money, or with friends will find a trick
Their Iaylor to corrupt, and at their will
They walk abroad, and take their pleasure still:
Whilst naked virtue, beggarly, despised,
Beleaguered round, with miseries surprised,
Of hope of any liberty defeated,
For passing of his word is merely cheated:
And dungeond up, may tell the walls his mones,
And make relation to the senseless stones,
Where sighs and groans, and tears may be his feast,
Whilst man to man, is worse than beast to beast.
Till death he there must make his sad abode,
Whilst craft and cousenage walk at will abroad.
Thus these comparisons do well agree,
Man to a Iayle may fitly likened be:
The thought whereof may make him wish with speed
To have his prisoned soul releast and freed.
Thus Iayles and meditations of a Iayle,
May serve a Christian for his great avail.
But now my Muse, thus long in bondage pent,
Begins to think of her infranchizement:
And having of a Prison spoke her part,
She mounts unto the Hangman and his Art.
THE NECESSITY of Hanging.
OF Hangings there is diversity of fashions,
Almost as many as are sundry Nations.
For in the world al things so hanged are,
That any thing vnhang'd is strange and rare.
Earth hangs in the concauity of Water,
And Water hangs within the Ayerie matter,
The Air hangs in the Fiery continent:
Thus Element does hang in Element,
(Without foundation) all the Massy Globe
Hangs, which the skies encompasse like a Robe.
For as an Simile.
egg, the yolke within the white,
The white within the skinne's enuellop'd quite,
The skin within the shell does outmost lie:
Even so these Elements hang midst the sky.
First all the world where mortals live, we see
Within the Orb of Luna Hanged be;
Above her Mercury his course does steer,
And next above him is bright Venus Sphere.
And in the fourth, and middle firmament,
Sol keeps his hot and fiery Regiment.
Next above that runs Mars, that star of war,
Beyond him Jupiter, that Iouiall star,
Then last is sullen Saturnes ample bounds,
Who once in thirty years the world surrounds;
This earthly Globe (for which men fight and braule)
Compared to Heaven, is like an Attom small,
Or as a Needles point compared to it, All the world is in comparison for
greatness to the Heavens as a handwo^^^ or a Nit may be compared to the world.
We live in ^ Hanging world.

So it to Heaven may be compared fit,
And it does Hang, and has its residence
In The center of the skies circumference.
Thus to prove Hanging natural, I prove,
We in a Hanging world do live and move.
Man is a little world, wherein we see,
The great worlds abstract or epitomie,
And if we note each linament and lim,
There are not many parts vnhang'd of him,
His hair which to his head and beard belongs,
Hangs, if not turned up with the Barbers tongs,
His arms, his hands, his legs and feet we know*
Do all hang pendant downwards as they grow,
There Is nothing of him that does hanging skip,
Except his ears, his nether teeth and lip,
And when he is crossed or sullen any way,
He mumps, and lowres, and Hangs the Lip, they say:
That I a wise man's sayings must approve,
Man is a tree, whose root does grow above
Within his brains, whose sprigs and branches round,
From head to foot grow downward to the ground.
Thus world to world, and man to man does call,
And tells him Hanging is most natural:
The word Dependant does inform our reason,
That Hanging will be never out of season.
All that depends does hang, which does express,
Rich men are poor men's Gallowses. All Dependants are Hangers on.
That Great men are like Iybbets for the less.
It is an old phrase, many years past gone,
That such a Lord has many hangers on;
Thereby describing, that all men's Attendants
As it were hangers on, were called Dependants:
And sure of all men, they are best indeed,
Who have most hangers on to cloth and seed;
For he that has the means, and not the grace,
To help the needy, is a Miser base.
He Is no good Steward, but a hateful Thief,
That keeps from good Dependants their relief:
And of all the Thieves, he hanging does deserve,
Who That's a Rogue.
has the power to feed, and lets men sterue.
To end this point, this consequence I Will grant,
He that has wealth, no Hangers on can want;
For since the time that mankind first began,
It is a destiny ordained to man,
The mean upon the mighty should depend,
And all upon the Mightiest should attend.
Thus through all ages, Countries and dominions,
We each on other hang like Ropes of Onions.
Some wealthy slaves, whose consciences condem,
Will hang themselves, lest others hang on them;
And some spend all on Hangers on so fast,
That they are forced to steal, and hang at last.
If they from these Extremes themselves could wean,
There is betwixt them both a Golden mean,
Which would direct their superfluities,
They would not hang themselves for niggardize,
Nor wastfully or prodigally spend,
Till want bring them to hanging in the end,
And they and many others, by their purse,
Might escape that hanging which is called a curse.
There Is many a That's an Ass.
Gallant, made of fool and feather,
Of Gold and Velvet, Silk and Spanish leather,
Whose ragged Hangers on have moved my mind,
To see pride go before, and shame behind,
With scarce a button, or an Elboe whole,
A breech, or any shoe that is worth a sole:
Those are like Golden Iybbets, and their Trains
Are like poor tatterd Thieves hanged up in chains.
He that does suffer Whores, or Thieves, or Knaves,
Base flattering Villains, or such kind of slaves,
To hang upon him, and knows what they are,
That man unto a Gallowse I compare.
That Vintner I account no friend of mine,
Who for good money, draws me scuruie wine,
And by the rule of Conscience (not of Law)
That he is fitter made to hang, than draw.
The Lawyer that at length does spin men's causes,
With false delays, and dilatorie clauses,
Who makes a trade to broach and draw contention,
For him a hanging were a good prevention.
But holla, Muse come back, you bear my Rhyme
To hanging in good earnest ere the time.
There are a many sorts of hangings yet
Behind, which I by no means must forget:
A Swing or ^tretch for exercise and wealth.
One hanging is a necessary thing,
Which is a pretty Gamboll, called a Swing,
And men of good repute I often have seen
To hang, and stretch, and totter, for the spleen,
This hanging is a military course,
Not by the Law, but strength of arms, and force:
Thus every morning for a little spurt,
A man may hang himself, and do no hurt.
This hanging often (like Tyburne) has a trick,
Saues charge of physic, or of being sick.
Besides the word Hang is so much in use,
That few or none will take it as an abuse;
It does a great man's kindness much approve,
When he shall bid a man Be hanged in love;
And with some men it is common courtesy,
To say, Farewell, be hanged, that is twice God ^wy.
The pictures of the dearest friends we have,
Although their corpse are rotten in the grave,
We hang them for a reverend memory,
To us and unto our posterity.
Some hang their wives in picture, which have cause
To hang their persons, were not for the laws:
Some hang their heirs in picture, who would feign
Wish their good fathers hanged, their lands to ga^ne.
I often have seen good garments for men's wearing,
Have very thriftily been hanged to airing,
And I have seen those garments (like good fellows)
Hang kindly with their master at the Gallowse,
And then into the Hangmans Wardrobe drop,
Have been again hanged in a Broakers shop,
Which after by a Curpurse bought might be,
And make another journey to the Tree,
Twixt which, and twixt the Broaker, it might go
Or ride, some twelve or thirteen times, or more.
Thus th'hangmans harvest, and the Brokers grow,
They reap the crop, which sin and shame does sow,
There are rich Hangings made of Tapestrie,
Of Arras, and of brave embroderie,
Those are for Princes, and for men of worth,
T'adorne their Rooms, and set their greatness forth.
But as dead bones in painted Tombs do bide,
These If all traitors, Hypocrites, flatterers, extortioners, oppressors,
Br^betakers, Cheaters, Panders, Bawds, etc. were hanged up in the woods on
several Trees, there is no Arras, or Tapestry can grace and adorn, in Princes
Court as those Hangings could become a Commonwealth.
Hangings, filthy rotten walls do hide.
A Hearts horn to a post fast nailed on,
Serves well for men to Hang their hats upon:
But if they knew their heads would serve the turn,
They would not shift their hats from horn to horn.
Men's swords in Hangers Hang, fast by their side,
Their Stirrops Hang, when as they use to ride:
Our Conies and our Dear, are Hanged in toiles,
Our meat hangs over the fire when as it boiles;
Our light Hangs in the Lantern, all men sees
Our frui^ we eat was hanged upon the trees,
Signs hang on posts show where as tradesmen dwells,
In steeples all men know are Hanged the Bells,
The scales or balance hangs where things are weighed,
Goods Hanged in Cranes, that is in or out conue^'d;
Yards, sails, shears, tacks, lists, caskets, bolins, braces,
Are fitly hanged in their convenient places.
The compass that directs where winds do blow,
Is Hanged upon the Needles point we know:
In stately buildings, Timber, Lead and Stone,
Are Hanged and hoist, or Buildings would be none.
(...) is an (...)my of (...)angings.
Our Maps wherein the world described be,
Are all Hanged up against the walls we see:
Our Cazements Hang as they do open and shut,
Our Curtains Hang, which 'bout our beds we put,
Our Hogs are Hanged, else Bacon we might look,
Doors Hang on Hinges, or I am mistook,
And many a trusty Padlocke Hangs no doubt,
To let in honest men and keep Knaves out.
Sea Cabins Hang, where poor men sleep and rest,
Our Clokes Hang on our backs it is manifest;
The Vial, Citterne, the Bandore and Lute,
Are cased or vncas'd, all Hanged up and mute,
Our Linen (being washed) must Hang to dry,
Or else Lice will Hang on and multiply:
Thus Hanging's beneficial to all States,
Whilst Gods dread curse Hangs over the reprobates.
And as for those that take my Lines amiss,
And will be pleased to be displeased with this,
For groats a piece, nay less, for three pence either,
I Will give them all leave to to be Hanged together;
Since Hanging then is proved so natural,
So beneficial, so general,
So apt, so necessary, and so fit,
Our reason tells us we should honor it.
It is a good man's life, and it is their death,
That rob and rifle men of goods and breath:
This kind of Hanging all offenses ends,
From which God ever bless me and my friends.
I from the Hangman this conclusion draw,
He is the fatal period of the Law:
If thieves or traitors into mischief run,
If he have done with them, then they have done.
It Is often seen that many hapless men
Have been condemned and Judged, reprieu'd again
And pardoned, have committed new transgressions,
And in again often many a Size and Sessions:
When many warnings mend them not therefore
The Hangman warnes them, they offend no more.
He Is the Catastrophe and Epilogue
Of many of the desperate Catalogue;
And he is one that cannot wanted be,
But still God keep him far enough from me.
THE DESCRIPTION of Tyburne.
I Have heard sundry men often times dispute
Of trees that in one year will twice bear fruit.
But if a man note Tyburne, 'twill appear,
That that is a tree that bears twelve times a year.
I Muse it should so fruitful be, for why
I understand the root of it is dry,
It bears no leaf, no blossom, or no bud,
The rain that makes it fructify is blond.
I further note the fruit which it produces,
Does seldom serve for profitable uses:
Except the skillful Surgions industry,
Do make Defection or Anatomy.
It blossoms, buds, and bears, all three together,
And in one hour, does live, and die, and wither.
Like Sodom Apples, they are in conceit,
For touched they turn to dust and ashes straight.
Besides I find this Tree has never bin
Like other fruit trees, walled or hedged in,
But in the high way standing many a year,
It never yet was robbed, as I could hear.
The reason is apparent to our eyes,
That what it bears are dead commodities:
And yet sometimes (such grace to it is given)
The dying fruit is well prepared for heaven,
And many times a man may gather thence
Remorse, devotion, and true penitence.
And from that Tree, I think more souls ascend
To that Celestial joy, which never shall end:
I say more souls from thence to heaven do come,
Than from all Except Paul's ^^urchyard and not Gregory's, (...) many in(...)
and then (...) there; whom I do (...) believe have ^ules. Also I except the
(...) at Salisbury, with all Cathedral Churchyards, and others, where any body
dwells, if it be but a Summer, or a Sexton.
Churchyards throughout christendom
The reason is, the bodies all are dead,
And all the souls to joy or woe are fled.
Perhaps a week, a day, or two, or three,
Before they in the Churchyards buried be.
But at this Tree, in twinkling of an eye,
The soul and body part immediately,
There death the fatal parting blow does strike,
And in Churchyards is seldom seen the like.
Besides, they are assisted with the alms
Of peoples charitable Prayers, and Psalms,
Which are the wings that lift the hou'ring spirit,
By faith, through grace, true glory to inherit.
Concerning this dead fruit, I noted it,
In stead of paste it is put into a pit,
And laid up carefully in any place,
Yet worme-eaten it grows in little space.
My understanding can by no means frame
To give this Tyburne fruit a fitter name,
Than Medlers, for I find that great and small
(To my capacity) are Medlers all.
Some say they are Choked pears, and some again
Do call them Hearty Choakes, but it is most plain,
It is a kind of Medler it does bear,
Or else I think it never would come there.
Moreover where it grows I find it true,
It often turns the Herb of Grace to Rue.
Amongst all Pot-herbes growing on the ground,
Time is the least respected, I have found,
And most abused, and therefore one shall see
No branch or bud of it grow near this Tree:
For it is occasion of man's greatest crime,
To turn the Use, into Abuse, of Time.
When Passions are let loose without a bridle,
Then precious Time is turned to Love and Idle:
And that is the chiefest reason I can show,
Why fruit so often does on Tyburne grow.
There are inferior Gallowses which bear
(According to the season) twice a year:
And there is a kind of watrish Tree at Wapping,
Whereas Sea-theeues or Pirates are caught napping:
But Tyburne does deserve before them all
The title and addition capital,
Of Arch or great Grand Gallowse of our Land,
Whilst all the rest like ragged Laqueyes stand;
It has (like Luna) 'full, and change, and quarters,
It (like a Merchant) monthly trucks and barters;
But all the other Gallowses are fit,
Like Chapmen, or poor Pedlers unto it.
Thus Iayles and Iaylors being here explained,
How both are good, and for good use ordained,
All sorts of Hanging which I could surmise,
I likewise have described before your eyes;
And further having showed what Tyburne is,
With many more inferior Gallowsis,
My pen from paper with this Prayer does part,
God bless all people from their sins desert.
FINIS.

