SIR Gregory Nonsense His News from no place.

Written on purpose, with much study to no end, plentifully stored with want of
wit, learning, Judgment, Rhyme and Reason, and may seem very fitly for the
understanding of Nobody.

Toyte, Puncton, Ghemorah, Molushque, Kaycapepson.

This is the work of the Authors, without borrowing or stealing from others.

By John Tailor.

Printed in London, and are to be sold between Charing-Crosse, and Algate.

To the (Sir Reverence) Rich Worshipped, Master Trim Tram Senceles, great Image
of Authority and Hedgborough of the famous City of Goteham, and to the rest of
that admired and unmatchable Senate, with their Corruptions and Families.
MOst Honorificicabilitudinitatibus, I having studied the seven Lubberly
Sciences (being nine by computation) out of which I gathered three conjunctions
four mile Asse-vnder, which with much labor, and great ease, to little or no
purpose, I have Noddicated to your gray grave and grauelled Prate ection. I
doubt not but I might have had a Patron nearer hand, as the Deane of
Dunstable, or the Beadle of Layton Buzzard, but that I know the p^^rase, Method
and Style, is not for every man's understanding, no my most renowned
Pythagor-Asses, for you this Hogshead of invention was brewed and broched, for
I am ignorantly persuaded that your wisdom, can pick as much matter out of
this Book in one day as both the Universities can in twelve months, and
thirteen Moons, with six times four years to boot. I know your bounties
too exding, for as old mother Baly said, the wit of man was much when she saw a
dog muzzled. I have History for this our of an Illiterate well printed Poem in
Prose, entitled, the wise men of Gotha^, of much antiquity.
Every man is not borne to make a Monument for the Cuckoo; to send a Trifoote
home alone, to drive sheep before they have them, or to Trundle Cheeses down a
hill. So saluting you with more prespect then the Mayor of Loo, did the Queens
Ape, I take leave to leave you, and rest yours to bid you welcome, if you came
within a mile of my house to stay all night.

Yours Rolihayton.
To Nobody.
VVpon a Christmas Even, some what night Easter, anon after Whitsontide, walking
in a Coach from London to Lambeth by water, I ouertooke a man that met me in
the morning before sun set, the wind being in Capricorn, the Sign
Southwest, with silence I demanded many questions of him, and he with much
pensiveness did answer me merrily to the full, with such ample and empty
replications, that both our understandings being equally satisfied, we
contentiously agreed to finish and prosecute the narration of the unknown
Knight Sir Gregory Nonsense, so sitting down upon our shoulders, resting
uneasily on a bank of Sicamores under a Tree of odoriferous and contagious
Camomile, after three sighs, smilingly uttered in the Hebrew Character, two
groans from the Chaldean Dialact, five sobs from the Arabian Sinquapace, six
dumps from Germane Idiome, nine Moodes of Melancholy from the Italian tongue,
with one hub hub from the Hiberbian outcry. And last he laughed in the Cambrian
tongue, and began to declare in the Vtopian speech, what I have here with
most diligent negligence translated into the English Language, in which if the
Printer has placed any line, letter or syllable, whereby this large volume may
be made guilty to be understood by any man, I would have the Reader not to
impute the fault to the Author, for it was far from his purpose to write to
any purpose, so ending at the beginning, I say as it is applawsfully writ ten
and commended to posterity in the Midsommer nights dream. If we offend, it is
with our good will, we came with no intent, but to offend, and show our simple
skill.

Rolihayton.
The names of such Authors Alphabetically recited as are simply mintioned in
this Work.
A Madis de Gaul. Archy Arms. Beuis of Hampton. Boe to a Goose. Charing Cross.
Coakley. Dunsmore Cow. Dauy Wager. Euanwich Muffe. Friar and the Boy. Fubs his
Travels. Garagantua. Gammon of Westphallia. Grigs Granam. Hundred merry tales.
Huon of Burdeux. Jack Drum. Knight of the Sun. Knave of Diamonds. Lanum.
Long Meg. Mad Mawdlin. No body. Otoole. Proofs of OOOO. Quinborough Osters.
Ready money. Shooters Hill. Singer. Sir Thomas Parsons. Tarleton. Tom Derry. Tom
Thumb. Vnguentum Album. Will Summers. Wit whither will thou. Woodcocke of our
side. Xampelloes Quiblines. Yard of Ale. Zany on tumbling.
Faults escaped in the Printing, which a wise Reader may mend when he sees them.
IN the 25. page. 44. line, for a Friars mouth read a Pudding.

If the 170. page 53. line, for a fool read a Babble.

In the 90. page, 27. line, for friend read rare.

In the 30. page 6. line 78. for a Whore read a Bridewell.

In the 100. pace, line 40. for a Bawd read a Cart.

In the 12. page 11. line, for noone read dinner.

In the 16. first, and all the Pages following for Tobacco read a Witch.

In the 40. page, and 80. line, for a Calves head read Bacon.

In the 37. page, and 1. line, for vice read plenty.

In the 000. page, and 3. line for money read scarce.

In the last Page, for conscience, read none.

In every page for sense read nonsense.

Sir Gregory Nonsense his news from no place.
IT was in June the eight and thirtieth day,
That I embarked was on highgate Hill,
After discourteous friendly taking leave:
Of my young Father Madge and Mother John,
The Wind did ebb, the tide flou'd North South-east,
We hoist our Sails of Colloquintida,
And after 13. days and 17. nights,
(With certain Hiroglyphicke hours to boot)
We with tempestuous calmes, and friendly storms,
Split our maine topmast, close below the keele.
But I with a dull quick congruity,
Took 19. ounces of the Western wind,
And with the pith of the pole Artichocke,
Saild by the flaming Coast of Trapezond,
There in a Fort of melting Adamant,
Armed in a Crimson Robe, as black as Iet,
I saw Alcides with a Spiders thread,
Lead Serberus to the Proponticke Sea,
Then cutting further through the marble Maine,
Amongst flying Bulls* and 4. legged Turkicocks,
A dumb fair spoken, welfac'd aged youth,
Sent to me from the stout Stimphalides,
With tonguelesse silence thus began his speech.
Illustrious flapiack, to thy hungry doom,
Low as the ground I eleuate my cause,
As I upon a Gnat was riding late,
In quest to parley with the Pleiades,
I saw the Duke of Hounsditch gaping close,
In a green Arbor made of yellow starch,
Betwixt two Brokers howling Madrigales,
A Banquet was served in of Lampraies bones,
Well pickel'd in the Tarbox of old time,
When Demogorgon saild to Islington;
Which I perceiving with nine chads of steel,
Straight flew unto the coast of Pimlico.
'Tinforme great Prester John, and the Mogull,
What exlent Oysters were at Billingsgate.
The Mogull (all enraged with these news,
Sent a black snaile post to Tartaria.
To tell the Irishmen in Saxony,
The dismal downfall of old Charing Cross.
With that nine butter Firkins in a flame,
Did coldly rise to Arbitrate the cause:
Guessing by the Sinderesis of wapping,
Saint Thomas Watrings is most ominous,
For though an Andiron, and a pair of Tongs,
May both have breeding from one teeming womb,
Yet by the Calculation of Pickt-hatch,
Milk must not be so dear as Muskadell.
First shall Melpomene in Cobweb Lawne.
Adorn great Memphis in a Mussell boat,
And all the Muses clad in Robes of Air,
Shall dance Leuoltoes with a Whirligig,
Fair Pluto shall descend from Brazen dis,
And Polipheamus keep a Seamsters shop,
The I Will of Wight shall like a diue dapper,
Devour the Egyptian proud Piramides,
Whilst Cassia Fistula shall gurmundize,
Upon the flesh and blood of Croydon cole dust,
Then on the Banks of Shoreditch shall be seen,
What it is to serve the great Vtopian Queen.
This fearful period with great joyful care,
Was heard with acclamations, and in fine,
The whilst a lad of aged Nestors years,
Stood sitting in a Throne of massy yeast,
(Not speaking any word gave this reply.
Most conscript Vmpire in this various Orb.
I saw the Ceaders of old Lebanon,
Read a sad Lecture unto Clapham heath,
At which time a strange vision did appear,
His head was Buckrum, and his eyes were sedge,
His arms were blew botiles, his teeth were straw,
His legs were nine well squard Tobacco Pipes,
Clothed in a garment all of Dolphins eggs,
Then with a voice erected to the ground,
Lifting aloft his hands unto his feet,
He thus began, cease friendly cutting throtes,
Clamor the promulgation of your tongues,
And yield to Demagorgons policy.
Stop the refulgent method of your moodes,
For should you live old Paphlagonias years,
And with Sardanapalus match in virtue.
Yet Atropos will with a Marigold,
Run through the Mountains of the Caspian Sea,
When you shall see above you, and beneath
That nothing kills a man so soon as death.
This period finished, ere it was begun,
Aquarius joined with Pisces, in firm league,
With Reasons and vindictiue Arguments,
That pulueriz'd the King of Diamonds,
And with a diogoricall relap's,
Squeaz'd through the Sinders of a Butterflye,
Great Oboron was mounted on a Waspe,
To signify this news at Dunstable.
The Weathercock at Pancrage in a fume,
With Patience much distracted hearing this,
Replied thus briefly without fear or wit,
What madness does thy Pericranion seize,
Beyond the Dragons tail A^tophilax.
Think thou a Wolf thrust through a sheep skin gl^^e,
Can make me take this Goblin for a Lamb:
Or that a Crodadile in Barley broth,
Is not a dish to feast don Beelzebub,
Give me a Medler in a field of blue,
Wrapped up stigmatically in a dream,
And I will send him to the gates of Dis,
To cause him fetch a sword of massy Chalk,
With which he wan the fatal Theban field*
From Romes great mitred Matropolitan.
Much was the quoile this brauing answer made,
When presently a German Coniurer,
Did open a learned Book of Palmistry,
Crammed full of mental reseruations:
The which beginning with a loud low voice,
With affable and kind discourtesie,
He spoke what no man heard or understood,
Words tending unto this or no respect,
Spawne of a Tortoyse hold thy silent noise,
For when the great Leuiathan of Trumps,
Shall make a breach in Sinons Tennis Court.
Then shall the pigmey mighty Hercules,
Skip like a Wilderness in Woodstreet Counter.
Then Taurus shall in league with Hanniball,
Draw Bacchus dry, whilst Boreus in a heat,
In(...)opened, in a Gown of Isicles:
With much discretion and great want of wit,
Leave all as wisely as it was at first,
^^^^fed much how those things could be done*
When strait a water Tankerd answered me,
That it was made with a Parenthesis,
With thirteen yards of Kersie and a (...)*
Made of fine flax which grew on Goodwin sands,
Whereby we all perceived the Hernshawes breed,
Being trusted with a charitable doom,
Was near Bunhill, when staite I might descry,
the Quintesence of Grubstreete, well disti^
Through Cripplegate in a contagioas Map.
Bright Phaeton all angry at the sight,
Snatched a large Wool-packe from a Pismires mouth.
And in a Tailors Thimble boiled a Cabbage.
Then all the standers by, most Reueterend, Rude,
Judged that the case was most obscure and clear,
And that three salt Enuigmates well applied,
With fourscore Pipers, and Arions Harp,
Might catch Garagantua through an augor-hole,
And it was no doubt but mulley Mahamet,
Would make a quaffing bole of Gorgons skull,
Whilst gormundizing Tantalus would weep,
That Polipheme should kiss Auroraes lips,
Triformed Cinthis in a sinkefoile shape,
Met with the Dogstarre on Saint David's day,
But sad Grimalkin mumbling up the Alps,
Made fifteen fustian fumes of Pasticrust.
This was no sooner known at Amsterdam,
But with an Ethiopian Argosey,
Manned with Flap-dragons, drinking up sifreeze,
They past the purple gulf of Basingstoke.
This being finished, scarce to any end,
A full od number of just sixteen dogs,
Drencht in a sulpher flame of scalding Ice,
^ung the Besonian W(...) pooles of Argeire,
Mixed with pragmaticall potato Pies,
With that I turned mine ears to see these things,
and on a Crystal wall of Scarlet dye,
with mine eyes began to hear and note,
What these succeding Verses might portend,
Which furiously an Annabaptist squeak'd,
^he audieace deaflly listening all the while.
A most learned-Lye, and Illiterate Oration, in lame galloping Rhyme, fustianly
pronounced by Nimshag, a Gimnosophicall Phoolosopher, in the presence of
Achittophell Smel-smocke, Annani-Asse Aretine, Iscariot Nabal, Fransiscus
Ra-viliaco, Garnetto Iebusito, Guido Salpetro Fauexit Powderio, and many other
grave Senators of Limbo. Translated out of the vulgar Language, of Terra
Incognita, and is as material as any part of the Book, the meaning whereof a
blind man may see without Spectacles as well at midn^ght, as at noone day.
THe Story of Ricardo, and of Bindo,
Appeared like Nylus, peeping through a Windo:
Which put the wandering Jew in much amazement,
In seeing such a voice without the Cazement.
When lo a Bull (long nourished in Cocitus,
With sulphur horns, sent by the Emperor Titus,
Asked a stigmatike Paraclesian question,
If Alexander ever loved Ephestion.
I seeing each to other were much adverse,
In mirth and sport set down their minds in sad verse,
Which as my brains with care have coined and minted
With plenteous want of judgment here it is printed,
But if Grimalkine take my line in dudgion,
The case is plain, I pray good Readers judge ye on,
That Esop that old fabulisticke Phrigian,
From the Nocturnall flood, or lake called Stigian,
Came to the Court at Creete, clad like a Legate,
The Porter kindly to him opened the-Gate,
He past through Plutoes Hall in Hell most horrid,
Where gnashing cold mixed with combustious torid,
Where all things that are good, and goodness wanted,
Where plants of man's perdition still are planted,
Where Ghosts and Goblins all in sulphur suited,
And all the fiends like Cuckolds were cornuted.
At last he audience got in Plutoes presence,
And of his whole Embassage this was the-sence.
To thee Tartarian Monarch now my Rime-is,
And therefore mark my Prologue, or Imprimis,
Thou that in Limbo art as 'twere Rex Regnant,
Bear with my wit, which is not sharp or pregnant,
I come from Houndsditch, Long-lane, and from Bridewel,
Where all that have lived ill, have all not did well,
Where as the Vices show like Virtues Cardinal,
Where Is money store, and conscience very hard in all,
Through thy protection they are monstrous Thriuers,
Not like the Dutchmen in base Doytes and Stiuers,
For there you may see many a greedy grout-head,
Without or wit, or sense, almost without-head,
Held and esteemed a man whose zeal is fervent,
And makes a show as he were not your servant.
To tell this news I came from many a mile hence,
For we do know there is ods 'twixt talk and silence,
With that the smug-fac'd Pluto shook his vestment,
Deep ruminating what the weighty Jest meant,
Calling to mind old Dodonaeus Hearball,
With Taciturnity and Actions verbal,
Quoth he, I care for neither Friend or Kinsman,
Nor do I value honesty two pinnes man:
But it is a Maxim Mortals cannot hinder,
The doughty deeds of Wakesields huffe cap Pinder,
Are not so pleasant as the fair Aurora,
When Nimrod rudely played on his Bandora.
For it is not fit that any Turk or Persian,
Should in a Cloke-bag hide a fever Tertian,
Because the Dog-starre in his cold Meridian,
Might arm himself in fury most quotidian.
With that most quick a Pettifoggers tongue went,
(Well oild with Aureum, Argent, or such Unguent,)
Is It fit (quoth he) here should be such incroachment,
By such whose fathers nere knew what a Coach meant,
Or shall their Scutchions fairly be endorsed,
Who riding backward iadishly were horsed,
For though in India it be rare and frequent,
Where to the wall most commonly the weak went,
Yet neither can the Sultan or the Sophy,
Show any Presidents for such a Trophy.
By Rules of Logic, he is a kind a Catiue,
And makes no reckning of his Country native,
That does with feeble strength, love with derision,
And without bloodshed makes a deep incision.
Why should a man lay either life or lime ny,
To be endangered by a falling Chimney.
For though the prosecution may be quaintly,
Yet may the execution end but faintly,
Lets call to mind the famous acts of Hector,
When aged Ganimede carousing Nectar,
Did leave the Greeks much matter to repine on.
Until the Wooden Horse of trusty Sinon,
Foald a whole litter of mad Colts in Harness,
As furious as the host of Hollophernes.
But to the purpose here is the long and and short ont,
All that is said, has not been much important,
Nor can it be that what is spoke is meant all,
Of any thing that happens accidental,
We will examine wisely what the Foe sent,
And whether he be innocent or nocent.
In weighty matters lets not be too serious,
There Is many an Eunuch has bin thought venrious,
And it is a thing which often has bin heard on,
That he that labors does deserve his Guerdon,
Let us the first precadent time examine,
You Will find that hunger is the cause of famine,
The Birds in Summer that have sweetly chirped,
Ere winter has been done have been extirped.
He may wear Robes, that nere knew what a Rag meant,
And he that feasts may fast without a fragment,
The end proves all, I care not for the Interim,
Time now that summers him, will one day winter him.
To outward view, and Senses all exterier,
Amongst all fools I never saw a verier,
Then he that does his liberty prohibit,
To fall in danger of a fatal Iibbit.
Nor for this purpose here to talk come I,
How silver may be mocked with Alcamie,
I often have heard that many a Hawke has muted,
Whereby the Faulkners Clothes has been poluted.
This may be avoided if the Knight Sir Reverence,
Be wary with a negligent perseverance:
For men of Iudement never think it decent,
To love a stinking Pole-cat well for the sent.
But if a man should seriously consider,
Where Charity is fled, or who has hid her,
He in the end would give this worthy sentence,
The earth has been accursed since she went hence.
The Times are biting, and the days Caniculer,
And mischief girds about the Globes orbiculer,
How from the Country all the plain Rusticity,
Lives by deceit, exiling plain simplicity.
A face like Rubies mixed with Allablaster,
Wastes much in Physic, and her water-caster,
That whosoever perceiues which way the stink went,
May sent and sensure she is a great delinquent.
Why should a Bawd be fur'd with Budge and Miniuer,
As if she were a Lady, or Queen Guiniuer?
When as perhaps there is many a modest Matron,
Has scarcely meat, or money, clothes or patron,
And wherefore should a man be grown so stupid,
To be a slave to Venus or to Cupid,
He Is but a fool that hoping for a vain prize,
Being captived can have no bail or maine prize.
For he that has no shift let him determine,
He shall be bitten with Fleas, Lice, or Vermin.
This being all his speeches Pia Matter,
He called a Sculler, and would go by water:
When strait the Stigian Ferriman a rare one,
Old amiable, currish courteous Caron,
Rowed with a whirlwind through the Acheron ticke
And thence unto the Azure Sea proponticke.
There Neptune in a burning blue Pauillion,
In state did entertain this slow Postilion,
There Proteus in a Robe of twisted Camphire,
With a grave beard of monumentall Samphire,
Quoth he, shall we whose Ancestors were warre-like,
Whose rich Perfumes were only Leekes and Garlike,
Whose noble deeds nocturnall and diurnall,
Great Towns and Towers did topsie turuy turn all.
Shall all their valor be in us extinguished,
Great Jove forbid there should be such a thing wished,
Though Cleoprtra was Octauia's rival,
It is a thing that we may well conniue all,
Amongst the Ancients it is vndisputable,
That women and the winds were ever muteable,
And it is aprou'd where people are littigious,
There every Epicure is not religious,
Old Oceamus knowing what they meant all,
Brought Zephirus unto the Oriental,
And he by Argument would prove that love is,
A thing that makes a wise man often a Nouice:
For it is approved a Greyhound or a Beagle,
Were not ordained or made, to hunt the Eagle,
Nor can the nimblest Cat that came from Gottam*
Search the profundity of Neptunes bottom.
Let roaring Cannons with the Welkin parley,
It Is known good liquer may be made with Barley*
And by experience many are assured,
Some grounds are fruitful if they be manured.
For in the rudimens of health or sanity,
An arrant Whore is but a price of vanity:
Some men with fury will procrastinate,
And some with leaden speed make have in at*
But in conclusion many things impurely,
Dye in the Birth, and never end maturely,
The man that seeks straying minds to weane all*
From venial vices, or offenses penal:
Had he the forces of the Turkish Navy,
He would lie down at last and cry pecauy.
Of one thing I have oftentimes took notice,
The fool that is old, and rich, much apt to dote is,
And by the light of Polux and of Castor,
A Woolfe in Shepherds weeds is no good Pastor,
Those that do live a Commicke life by Magic,
Their Scenes in their Catastraphes are tragic.
And that ore the World would be chief Primate,
May give occasion for wise men to rhyme at,
Before men fell to wrangling disagreement,
A Lawyer understood not what a fee meant:
It was a time when Guilt did fear no censure,
But love, and peace, and charity was then sure.
Now fathers (for their bread dig and delue it,
The whilst the Satin Sons are lined with Velvet.
Thus do I make a hotch potch mess of Nonsense,
In dark Enigmaes, and strange sense upon sense:
It is not foolish all, nor is it wise all,
Nor is it true in all, nor is it lies all.
I have not showed my wits accute or fluent,
Nor told which way of late the wandering Jew went,
For mine own part I never cared greatly,
(So I farewell) where those that dress the meat lie.
A miserable Knave may be close fisted,
And prodigal expense may be resisted,
I neither care what Tom, or Jack, or Dick sed,
I am resolved, and my mind is fixed,
The case is not as he, or I, or you sed,
Truth must be found, and witnesses produced,
My care is, that no captious Reader bear hence,
My understanding, wit, or reason here hence.
On purpose to no purpose I did write all,
And so at Noone, I bid you here good night all.
THen with a tuchbox of transalpine tar,
Turning thrice round, and stirring not a jot,
He threw five tun of red hot purple Snow,
Into a Pigmeis mouth, nine inches square,
Which strait with mellancholly moved,
Old Bombus Burgomaster of Pickthatch,
That plunging through the Sea of Turneball street*
He safely did ariue at Smith field Bars.
Then did the Turnetripes on the Coast of France.
Catch fifteen hundred thousand Grasshoppers,
With fourteen Spanish Needles bumbasted,
Poach'd with the Eggs of fourscore Flanders Mares,
Mounted upon the foot of Caucasus,
They whorld the footeball of conspiring fate,
And brake the shinnes of smugfac'd Mulciber,
With that grim Pluto all in Scarlet blue,
Gave fair Proserpina a kiss of brass,
At which all Hell danced Trenchmore in a string,
Whilst Acheron, and Termagaunt did sing,
The Mold-warpe all this while in white broth bathed,
Did Carroll Didoes happiness in love,
Upon a Gridiron made of Whiting-mops,
Unto the tune of John come kiss me now,
At which Auernus Music began to rore,
Iuthron'd upon a seat of three leau'd grass,
Whilst all the Hibernian Kernes in multitudes,
Did feast with Shamerags stewed in Vsquebagh.
At which a banquet made of Monopolies,
Took great disaste, because the Pillory
Was hunger-staru'd for want of Villains ears,
Whom to relieve, there was a Mittimus,
Sent from Tartaria in an Oyster Boat,
At which the King of China was amazed,
And with nine grains of Rewbarbe stellified,
As low as to the altitude of shame,
He thrust four Onions in a Candle-case,
And spoild the meaning of the worlds misdoubt,
Thus with a Dialogue of crimson starch,
I was inflamed with a num-cold fire,
Upon the tenterhookes of Chalemaine,
The Dogstar howled, the Cat a Mountain smiled,
And Sisiphus drank Muskadell and Eggs,
In the horned hoof of huge Bucephalus,
Time turned about, and showed me yesterday,
Clad in a Gown of mourning had I wist,
The motion was almost too late they said,
Whilst sad despair made all the World stark mad,
They all arose, and I put up my pen,
It makes no matter, where, why, how, or when.
Some sense at last to the learned.
YOu that in Greek and Latin learned are,
And of the ancient Hebrew have a share:
You that most rarely oftentimes have sung,
In the French, Spanish or Italian tongue,
Here I in English have imploid my pen,
To be read by the learned Englishmen,
Wherein the meanest Scholar plain may see,
I understand their tongues, as they do me.
FINIS.
Printed at London by N. O* 1622.


