

News and strange News from St. Christophers of a tempestuous Spirit, which
is called by the Indians a Hurry-Cano or whirlewind.

Which happens in many of those Islands of America or the West Indies, as it did
in August last, about the 5. day. 1638.

Blowing down houses, tearing up trees by the roots, and it did puff men up
from the earth, as they had been Feathers, killing diverse men.

Whereunto is added the true and last relation of the dreadful accident which
happened at Withicombe in Devonshire the 21. of October last past.

Imprinted at London by P. O. for Francis Coules dwelling in the Old Bailey.
1638.

New and Strange News from St. Christophers, of a tempestuous Spirit, which is
called by the Indians a Hurry Cano, which happens in many of those Islands of
America, or the West Indies, as it did in August last the 5. 1638.
GOD, who is every way infinite and incomprehensible, is pleased sometimes in
his just Judgments, to punish or restrain by Terrors and Affrightings, most
obstinate and rebellious sinners: for those that will not lovingly be allured
to obey him for his Goodness and unspeakable Mercies, will be fearfully
enforced to abide the rigor of his most upright and severe Justice, by which
means He makes his ways to be known upon Earth, and his saving health
amongst all Nations. And it is to be noted, that where God is least known and
honored, there the Devil has most power and domination. But he that drew
light out of darkness, has often (and can when he will) draw good out of
evil? for through slavery and bondage many people and Nations that were
Heathens, and barbarous, have been happily brought to Civility and Christian
Liberty. The Great Alexanders conquests, those whom he overcame, learned to
build Towns, Cities, and defencible places, to apparel their naked bodies, in
their thraldom they found Religion: and whereas in their Freedoms they did
use to kill their aged Parents inhumanely, to eat them with savadge, ravenous,
most greedy Gormandizing, by Servitude they learned more reverend Duty; they
were taught the Rites and Laws of Matrimony: And whereas in their licentious
freedom, they bedded with their Mothers, Sisters, Daughters, and Neeces, not
sparing any Kindred, Aliance, Propinquity, or any degree of blood or
consanguinity, they by Servitude learned better life and manners; and also by
being conquered and overcome, they were taught the use of Arms, the practice
of Arts, and the laudable Experience of Tillage and Husbandry. And such as
these rude people were in ancient times; even such were the first Inhabitants
of this our Island of great Britain, until such time as more civiller Nations
did conquer, tame, and teach us.

Yet in the latest Days of the World all are not civilliz'd; there are yet
many Heathens, Indians, and barbarous Nations unconverted: as for the known
Examples in America, and in diverse Islands adjacent, where this Hurri Cano is
frequent; of which with the manner of the Description of it as follows.

From whence the name of it is derived, I know not; but the Indians do call it
Hurri Cano, or Hurri Caenae, or Cani: some say that it comes to the same place
once in five years, but that is uncertain, for it has no certain or set
times of either years or days for the coming of it. It is held by the
Natives to be a Spirit, it comes with such an extraordinary violence, with
Thunder, Lightning, and impetuous gusts of wind, (as it has done many times)
for it touches not all places there, but sometimes it comes but once, or never
in a man's age to one place, and more often to another, according as it is
swayed or hurried with its own robustuous motion, or as the influences and
force of the Planets do drive it: and the Indians are so skillful, that they
do know two or three or four days before hand of the coming of it, and then
they do make provision to prevent the harm which it may do unto them, by
such means as shall be related in the latter end of this Treatise: the Indians
do know when it will come, by the marks or signs here mentioned. They do
observe that just so many days as it will be before the Hurri Cano does come,
so many Circles will be as it were fringed and gleaming about the Moon: as if
it be but one day before it come, then there will be but one Circle; if two
Circles, then it will be two days; and so perhaps three or four Circles, as it
did lately at Saint Christophers, where it came in that fearful and
unresistable fury, on the fifth day of August last, 1638. Where, although that
the Dutch and English had warning of the coming of it, by the knowledge that
the Indians had by observation of the Moon and the Circles, and that all
possible means was used for the safeguard of men ships, and goods, yet when it
came, the force of it was so great, and continued so vehemently the space of
four days and nights without intermission, that maugre all the industry that
could be, it sunk five Ships, whereof two were English, and three were Dutch;
and of Englishmen, Dutchmen, and Indians, it did drown and kill to the number
of Seventy and five persons, besides the harm it did to many Houses and goods.

Where the Here or Hurri Cano comes, the Wind does blow so strong and
forcible, that it will puff men from the ground into the Air five or six
foot high, as if they were no more but rags, clouts, or feathers; and so
violent it is, that it leaves not a lease upon any Bough or Tree: and likewise
it overthrows many Trees, rending them up by the roots, so that the
Inhabitants (when they are warned of the coming of the Hurri Cano by the
Circles about the Moon) they do lop off the limbs and great heads off from
the Trees, because the violent and outrageous Tempest of the tempestuous Winds
shall have the less force and power to overturne them; and especially those
Trees which they do intend to preserve and keep for bearing of fruit, they
do commonly cut off, and graffe them again by our English advice.

The people all of them forsake their Houses, as not daring to remain in them
for fear that they should be blown down about their ears; at which dangerous
times they do creep for safety into holes Caves, pits, Dens and hollow places
of the earth, which are either natural of themselves, or dug and framed by
Art or laborious industry of man, which places are good harbors and defenses
against the Hurry-Cano. They do likewise tie or make fast Hamackoes or hanging
Cabin unto two Trees that are lopy'd, and then the people do get into those
Cabins, and so they do lie down in them, being hanged above the ground six or
seven foot, either with strong Ropes or iron chains; and so they swing two
and again like a Bell when it is rung, when this tempest is; their Hamackoes
are made either of course linning cloth, or of strong stuff made of twisted
threads spun out of the rindes of trees; some who have not these Cabins, do for
fear bind themselves with cords, singlely or severally to diverse trees, and so
they do remain bound until the fury of the Hurry-Cano is past. And this is
the true relation of the nature and quality of it, and also partly of the
harms which it did in the month of August last past. The Indians do foreknow
it by certain circles which appear about the Moon, and those Indians that are
servants under our English, did give some notice, or else far more hurt had
insued; and is when the Moon has diverse circles like mists and fogs about it,
and of a flaming color, and by some other signs, the people do sometimes
save themselves and their goods, in making caves or cellers in the ground, or
else they loose all.

But for a late remarkable proof of Gods mercy and power, in drawing good out
of Evil; I desire the Reader to note that in the year 1609. eight ships were
bound from London unto Virginia, Sir Thomas Gates, and Sir George Summers
Knights, were General and Admiral of the Fleet, and Captain Newport was
Vice Admiral. The Admiral Ship, wherein Sir George Summers was, was by a
Hurry-Cano dispersed and sundred from the rest of the Fleet, and with the
greatness of the storm driven between two rocks at the Island of Bermudas,
where his ship stuck fast, and was there lost and split. But he landed all
his men safe, with some of his chiefest goods, where he found good relief of
Swine, Fish, and Foul. But Sir Thomas Gates and the other Ships did give Sir
George with his men to be utterly lost and cast away, but he made such shift,
that with Timber that he found, and felled in the Island, he caused two Ships
to be built, with the which he sailed from the Bermudaes to Virginia, (after
he had been ten Months supposed dead) where he was most joyfully welcomed:
and thus out of this great danger (which in man's imagination was evil) God was
graciously pleased to make it the happy finding and discovery of that good and
fruitful Island, the Plantation whereof is now so profitable and beneficial
to the English Adventures; and the Bermudaes, with some other Islands, are at
this time called the Summer Islands, in memory of Sir George Summers, who was
the first discoverer of them: and thus much shall suffice for the true Report
and Description of the Hurri Cano.

Innumerable of other the like of such things as these, I have formerly
related, and many of them are Recorded in our own Histories, to have happened
in our own Country, which who so do desire to read more, may see them amply
and truly recorded in the works of the learned Cambden, painful Speed,
Stowe, and Howes, Histories and Chronicles, wherein they may be certainly
informed, that former Times have afforded as strange and fearful Signs and
warnings, as this prodigious Tempest and lamentable Accident at Worthycombe,
near Dartmoores in Devonshiere, as you may read in these ensuing Verses the
whole truth, as follows.

A true Relation in Verse, of the strange accident which happened at Wit by comb
in Devon-shiere.
THE Almighty was, is, shall be still the same,
Who with his word did all of nothing frame;
Whose glory lightens all, whose Voice is Thunder.
Whose mercy's ore his works, each work a wonder
Whose Powerful Arme's not shortened, but his Will,
(Unlimited) is as his pleasure still.
The sacred Text unto our Faith presents,
How God plagued sinners with the Elements
Of Water, Earth, Air, and consuming Fire,
All Creatures are his Soldiers, in his Ire;
With means, with small means, with no means at al
He ayds his flock; and gives his foes the fall:
With Water he did first the World confound,
Eight Persons only saved, the rest were drowned;
When Sodoms crying sins, to Heaven assumed,
By fire from Heaven they were consumed: Inburn'd.
Samaria's Captains with their fifties, slain
By fire, when they Elias would have taken;
When Corah did rebel (with heart unhallowed)
The Earth gaped, him with his companions swallowed.
By putred Air (for Ishaies offense)
Died seventy thousand of the Pestilence;
He Is Lord of Hosts, and when man runs amiss.
The meanest thing Gods mighty Soldier is;
Plagues, Botches, Blaines, all mortal Malladies;
Grasshoppers, Darkness, Murrain, Frogs, Lice, Flies,
With Gedeons Pitchers, and with Shamgars Goade,
His Enemies he under foot has troad;
With Foxes, and the Iaw-bone of an Affe,
He mighty Miracles has brought to pass,
Thus with Contemptible despised things,
He tameth Tyrans; and He Conquers Kings:
Thus Heaven, Earth, Hell, Seas, and th'ut most Coasts
Declare him still to be the Lord of Hoasts:
His Power, by Iudeth (a weak woman's hand)
Slew Holophornes, foiled the Assyrian Band,
By Iacls hammered Nail, and David's Sling,
God does his foes to fell confusion bring:
He Is still the same he was, and changes never,
But yesterday, to day, the same for ever.
And now (good Reader) with attentive mind,
Read these ensuing lines, and thou shall find
Strange Prodiges, full of amazing fear
IN the Church of Withy-combe, in Devonshiere.
It Is worthy thy best considerations weight,
One Thousand Sixteen hundred, thirty eight,
These signs and sights of terror chanced upon
A Sunday last, Octobers twenty one;
A short space after Service did begin,
(And our best prai'rs are mixed with too much sin)
An extreme Darkness did begin to fill
The Church, which more and more increased still,
In such Cymerian manner it did spread,
That none assembled there could see to read:
The people (all astonished) strait way hears
Most dreadful Thundering, rattling in their ears,
With horride sounds, in such a fearful sort,
As Cannons or great Ordnance in Report,
Attended with such direful Lightning flashes,
As if the world should straight be turned to ashes.
The darkness still increased, that mist and smother
Was waxed so thick, one could not see each other:
The smell like Brimstone, and the fire and smoke
The Affrighted Congregation seemed to choke;
With darkness, smoke, stench,, lightning and thunder;
Their souls and bodies almost seemed to sunder.
Most lamentable were the cases then,
The cries of children, women, and of men;
Dispersed in their seats in diverse places,
Some all astonished grovelling on their faces:
Some on their Knees, did humbly God intrete,
To grant them Mercy from his Mercy Seat
Some, one upon another tumbling lay,
Expecting that should be their latest day;
Some burnt, and some with scaldings overspread,
And every one gave up themselves for dead.
The Pastor of the Parish (Master Lyde)
With Christian courage Reading did abide
And heard and saw, all that was seen and heard
And was not hurt or bruised; nor singed or feared,
But praying for himself and for the rest,
The duty of a good Divine expressed.
He after saw a lamentable sight,
His poor Wife in a sad perplexed plight
In many parts, lightning her body burned,
Her Ruff and garments were into ashes turned:
To think upon the torments that she felt,
Will make a heart of stone, relent or melt:
One Mistress Disford with her then was fate
Within her Powe, and tasted of like fate;
She was much scalded, but yet not so bad
As was the harm that Mistress Lyde than had.
But God that saves those that he will save,
Unto her Maid and child, such favor gave,
That though the Mistress was hurt very sore,
The Maid and child were safe at the Pew door;
Which shows our lives and healths are no way fixed
'Twixt death and life, often but aboard betwixt.
Two women were burnt, scalded, torn, and rent
The flesh quite from the bones; incontinent
Or in a moment, that with pains oppressed:
The one of them that very night deceast:
The other may perhaps again be cured,
Hope is her comfort, nothing is assured;
For like to flowers, we bud, we spread, and fade,
To day a Man, tomorrow but a shade.
One Master Hill, (a Gentleman of fame
And worth) was stricken with the Sulphur flame
As in the Chauncell, he was in his seat,
The great tempestuous violence was so great,
It beat his head; against the stony wall
That he surrendr'd up his life withal:
And yet his Corpse was found unscorch'd and clear
For no hurt on his body did appear.
A worthy Knight (Sir Richard Reynolds named)
(Who for good Housekeeping is loved and famed
His Warriner that time, his Scull was cleft
Three several ways, his brains beat out and lef^
Whole on the ground; against a Pillar there
Was forcibly beat of his Scalpe and Hair,
And there it cleaves fast for a memory,
And there that man (untimely) then did dye.
There were some others that were scorched, and frid^
In Lightning flashes, which since then have died;
Some were but frighted, and scarce harmed or touch^^
Some were a little Scalded and besmutch'd,
Some had their clothes burnt, and their bodies no^
Some had their bodies burnt, their clothes no jot
Was touched at all; thus God in judgment then
Remembered Mercy amongst sinful men.
There were some Seats or Pewes there over-thrown
And violently turned up-side-downe;
And yet scarce any Person, great or small
Was either burnt, or bruised; or hurt at all:
There was one man in this amazed route,
That near the Chauncell door was going out,
His Dog was with a Whirlwind whisked round,
And presently fell dead upon the ground.
The man perceived his dog dead suddenly,
Steot back in fear and haste, unhurt thereby.
The Church in many a place was rent and torn,
And sundry pieces from their places borne:
And likewise (with the lightning and the thunder)
A beam of Timber was burst quite in sunder:
Betwixt the Minister and the Clarke it flew,
And hurt them not, but only brake a Pew.
Also a mighty Stone the storm did tear,
That fixed was the Churches bottom near.
The Steeple was most strange defaced and shattered,
And pieces falling down the Church much batterd.
A Pinnacle was, by the Tempests forced power,
Beat through the Church, that fell from off the tower
And from the tower the stones so thick were thrown
As if a handred men had hurld them down.
Yet `tis not known that any hurt was done
To any one, by fall of wood or stone,
Only from Manaton there came a Maid,
That by a Stone was killed, as some men said.
And where the Church was broke, it is manifest
There 'twas hurt most, there people were hurt least.
The Pulpit to a Pillar there is placed,
Which Pillar is by Lightning much defaced:
'Twas newly whited, but with violence blasting.
It has a black and Sulphury overcasting.
One in the Chancell happened to espy
Near to the Churches neather-end to fly,
Some things like dust or lyme, which did arise,
And suddenly it flew into his eyes,
Where he for twelve hours space was blinded quite,
And (by Gods mercy) then regained his sight.
The Thunder and the Lightning being past,
The people all into amazement cast,
As if stupidious fear did them benumb,
Unable scarce to speak, as 'twere struck dumb.
Then Master Rowse, a Vintner there,
Said, Neighbors, in the Name of God let us cheers
Our drooping spirits, you see the Church much broken,
Which does much danger unto us beroken:
And therefore I do hope, without offense,
In Gods Name we may venture to go e-hence
These, or the like, spoke Rowse, but Master Lyde
With courage (as beseem'd his place) replied,
Beloved, of our prayers amend let us make,
And all of us to God our selves betake:
Where can we better our souls recommend
To Him, whose glory never shall have end?
Let us beg mercy from the Throne of Grace,
We cannot better dye than in this place.
These good words from this good man did proceed
But yet the Congregation all agreed,
(Because the Church was torn, and fearing more
Would fall down from the Roof unto the floor)
All to avoid the danger imminent,
And so with speed each party homeward went.
Without, or near the Churchyard was a Green
Or Bowling-place, or Alloy, which was seen
Turned up in pits and heaps, so that it showed
^n form and shape, like Land that is newly plowed.
About that time, of Hail a mighty shower
Did fall, and most impetuously down power:
The Haile-stones, big as Turkies Eggs to sight,
Some, five, or six, and some seven Ounces weight.
At Brix^^n, near to Plimmouth, this befell,
What harm it did, Report will after tell.
It Is said, that in the County Sommerset,
At Norton, how the Church was hurt much, yet
Because thereof no certainty we have,
To future time I will Relation leave.
FINIS.

