AN ENGLISH-MANS LOVE TO BOHEMIA:

WITH A friendly Farewell to all the noble Soldiers that go from great
Britain to that honorable Expedition.

AS ALSO, The names of the most part of the Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquisses,
Earls, Bishops, and other friendly Confederates, that are combined with the
Bohemian part.

BY JOHN TAILOR.



Printed at Dort. M DC XX.

We bear the outward form of Martialists,
But worth and manhood in the mind consists.
And noble Soldiers that our shapes do see,
We are but shadows, you the substance be.



TO THE HONORABLE WELL APPROVED AND accomplished Soldier, Sir Andrew Gray,
Knight; Colonel of the forces of Great Britain, in this noble Bohemian
Preparation.
SIR ANDREW GRAIE. Anagramma. I GUARD IN WARS.
Honorable Knight:
THere are two especial Causes that have moved me most boldly to thrust these
rude lines into the world: the first is my hearty affection to the generality
of the cause you undertake, (which I believe God and his best servants do
affect:) and the other is my love and service which I owe to your worthy self
in particular, for many undeserved friendships which I have received from you,
and many of your noble friends for your sake. Ingratitude is a Devil, so far
worse then all the devils, that if it should crave harbor of me, in the
likeness of an Angel of light,yet I would never be persuaded to entertain
it. My thankful acknowledgement of your goodness toward me is my prayers
and best wishes, which shall ever be a poor requital toward you, not
forgetting my thanks in the behalf of all the worthy Ladies and others of that
Angelical sex that are married and resident in London, whose chaste honors you
(as became a true Knight) defended, when an audacious Frenchman most
slanderously did (without exception) swear there was not one honest woman
dwelling within the bounds of this populous City, but that they had all
generally abused the bed of marriage: then did your noble self enforce the
pestiferous pesant to swallow his odious calumny, and in humility to confess
there were fifty thousand or a greater number that never had wronged their
husbands in that unlawful act. I have made bold to speak of this matter here,
because the abuse was so general, and your quarrel so honorable, which I
think unfit to be buried in silence or forgetfulness: howsoever, I crave you
pardon and worthy acceptance, whilst I most obsequiously remain

Ever to be commanded by you, John Tailor.

A FRIENDLY FAREWELL to all the noble Soldiers that go out of Great Britain
unto BOHEMIA.
Wars, noble Wars,
and manly brave designs;
Where glorious valor
in bright armor shines:
Where God with guards of Angels
does defend,
And best of Christian Princes do befriend,
Where mighty Kings in glittering burnisht arms
Lead bloody brusing battles, and alarmes,
Where honor, truth, love, royal reputation,
Make Realms and Nations join in combination,
Bohemia, Denmark and Hungaria,
The upper and the lower Bauaria,
The two great Counties of the Pallatine,
The King of Sweden friendly does combine,
The Marquess and Elector Brandenburge,
The Dukes of Brunswicke, and of Lunenburge,
Of Holsten, Deuxpont, and of Wittemberge,
Of the low-Saxons, and of Mackelberge,
Brave Hessens Lantsgraue, Anholts worthy Prince of Ascania.
Prince,
The inhance Towns, whom force cannot convince:
Prince Maurice, and the States of Netherlands,
And the ancient Knights of The Empire lend their hands.
These and a number more then I have named,
Whose worths and valors through the world are famed,
With many a Marquess, Bishop, Lord and Knight
Bishops of Halberstadt, Magenberg, Hilsheine, Osenburgh
To Oppose foul wrong, and to defend fair right:
Whose warlike troops assembled bravely are
To aid a gracious Prince in a just war.
For God, for Natures, and for Nations laws
The Marquess of Anspash, Cullinbagh, Durlagh. The Count Palatine of Lowtrecke
and Luxenburgh. The States of Venice and Sauoy.
This martial army undertakes this cause;
And true borne Britains, worthy countrymen,
Resume your ancient honors once again.
I know your valiant minds are sharp and keen
To serve your Sovereigns daughter, Bohems Queen.
I know you need no spur to set you on,
But you think days are years till you are gone;
And being gone, you will wealth and honor win,
Whilst riot here at home adds sin to sin.
You (God assisting) may do mighty things,
Make Kings of captives, and of captives Kings,
Riches and love those that survive shall gain,
And fame, and Heaven the portion of the slain.
The wounds and scarres more beautiful will make
Those that do wear them for true honors sake.
Since God then in his love did preordaine
That you should be his Champions, to maintain
His quarrel, and his cause; a fig for foes,
God being with you, how can man oppose?
Some may object, Your enemies are store:
If so, your fame and victori's the more;
Men do win honor when they cope with men,
The Eagle will not triumph over a wren:
The Lion with the Mouse will not contend,
Nor men against boys and women wars will bend,
But clouds of dust and smoke, and blood and sweat
Are the maine means that will true honor get.
Thus to fames altitude must men aspire
By noble actions, won through sword and fire,
By trumpets clangor, drums, guns, flute or fife:
For as there is an end to every life,
And man well knows that one day he must end it,
Let him keep't well, defend, and bravely spend it.
O grief to see how many stout men lie
Half rotten in their beds before they dye;
Some by foul surfets, some by odious whoring,
In misery lie stinking and deploring,
And e're a lingering death their sad life ends,
They are most tedious loathsome to their friends;
Wasting in physic, which adds woe to grief
That which should yield their families relief:
At last when wished death their cares do cure,
Their names like to their bodies lie obscure.
Whereas the soldier with a Christian breast,
Wars for his Sovereigns peace, and Countries rest:
He to his Makers will, his will inclines,
And never against heaven impatiently repines,
He to his Savior says, that thou art mine,
And being thou redeem'st me, I am thine,
That if I live or die, or die or live,
Blessed be thy name whether thou take or give.
This resolution peirces heavens high roof,
And arms a soldier more then Cannon proof.
Suppose his life ends by some noble wounds,
His soul to heaven, from whence it came rebounds:
Suppose blown up with powder up he flies,
Fire his impurity repurifies,
Suppose a shot pierce through his breast or head
He nobly lived and nobly he is dead,
He lies not bedred stinking, nor does rave
Blaspheming against him, that him should save,
Nor he in Physic does consume and spend
That which himself and others should defend,
He does not languish, drawing loathsome breath,
But dies before his friends do wish his death,
And though his earthly part to earth does pass,
His fame out wears a monument of brass.
Most worthy countrymen, coragious hearts,
Now is the time, now act brave manly parts,
Remember you are sons unto such sires
Whose sacred memories the world admires,
Make your names fearful to your foes again
Like Talbot to the French, or Drake to Spain:
Think on brave valiant Essex, and Mountioy,
And Sidney, that did Englands foes destroy,
With noble Norris, Williams, and the Veares,
The Grayes, the Willoughbies all peerlesse Peers,
And when you think what glory they have won, 34 Battles fought in France by
Englishmen since the Conquest. Henry the sixth.

Some worthy actions by you will be done.
Remember Poicteirs, Cressy, Agincourt,
With Bullen, Turwin, Turnyes warlike sport,
And more (our honors higher to advance)
Our King of England was crowned King of France,
In Paris, thus all France we did prouoake
T'obay and serve under the English yoke.
In Ireland 18 bloody fields we fought,
And that fierce Nation to subjection brought,
Besides Tyrones rebellion, which soul strife
Cost England many a pound, lost many a life,
And before we were Scotlands, or it ours,
How often have we with opposed powers
In most vnneighbourly, unfriendly manners,
With hostile arms, displaying bloody banners:
With various victories on either side,
Now up, now down, our fortunes have bin tried,
What one fight winnes, the other losing yields,
In more then sixscore bloody foughten fields.
But since that we and they, and they and we
More near then brethren, now conjoined be.
Those scattering powers we each against other lead,
Being one knit body, to one royal head.
Then let this Island, East, West, South and North
Jointly in these brave wars emblaze our worth.
And as there was a strife, that once befell
Twixt men of Judah, and of Israel:
Contending which should love King David best,
And who in him had greatest interest:
Long may contention only then be thus
Twixt us and Scotland, and twixt them and us,
Still friendly striving which of us can be
Most true and loyal to his Majesty.
This is a strife will please the God of peace,
And this contending will our loves increase.
You hardy Scots remember Royal Bruce,
And what stout Wallace valor did produce:
The glorious name of Stewarts, Hamiltons,
The Ereskins, Morayes, and the Levingstons,
The noble Ramseies, and the illustrious Hayes,
The valiant Dowglasses, the Grimes and Grayes,
Great Sir James Douglas, The praise of sir James Douglas, in the reign of K.
Robert Bruce 1330.
a most valiant Knight
Lead seauenty battles with victorious fight,
Not by Lieutenants, or by deputation,
But he in person wanne his reputation.
The Turks and Sarazens he overcame,
Where ending life he purchased endless fame, In 13. maine battles he overcame
Gods enemies, and at last was slain.

And his true noble worth is well derived
To worthies of that name that since suruiu'd.
Then since both nations did and do abound
With men approved, and through all Lands renowned,
Through Europe, and through Asia, further far,
Then is our blessed Redeemer Sepulcher.
Through all the coasts of tawny Africa,
And through the bounds of rich America.
And as the world our worths acknowledge must,
Let not our valor sleeping lie and rust:
But to immortalize our Britains name,
Let it from imbers burst into a flame.
We have that Land and shape our elders had,
Their courages were good, can ours be bad?
Their deeds did manifest their worthy minds,
Then how can we degenerate from kinds?
In former times we were so given to war
(Witness the broils twixt York and Lancaster)
Having no place to foreign foes to go,
Amongst our selves, we made our selves a foe
Full threescore years with fierce unkind alarmes,
Were practiced fierce uncivil civil arms,
Whilst fourscore Peers of the blood royal died,
With hundred thousands commoners beside.
Thus Englishmen to wars did bear good will,
They would be doing although doing ill.
And Scotlands history avouches clear,
Of many civil wars, and tormoyles there,
Rebellion, discord, rapine and foul spoil
Has peirc't the bowels of their native soil,
Themselves against themselves, Peers against Peers,
And kin with kin together by the ears,
The friend against friend, each other has withstood,
Unfriendly friends weltering in their blood.
Thus we with them, and they with us contending,
And we our selves, and they themselves thus rending,
Does show that all of us have ever bin
Addicted unto martial discipline:
Spain can report, and Portingale can tell,
Denmark and Norway both can witness well,
Sweden and Poland truly can declare
Our service there, and almost every where.
And The low countries, Holland, Zeland etc.
Belgia but for the English and the Scots,
Perpetual slavery had been their lots
Under the great commanding power of Spain,
By th'Prince of Parma's and the Archdukes train.
Far for my witnesses I need not look,
It Is writ in many a hundred living book.
And Newports famous battle bravely tells
The English and the Scots in fight excels:
Yea all, or most towns in those seauenteene Lands
Have felt the force, or friendship of their hands.
Ostend whose siege all sieges did surpass
That will be, is, or I think ever was,
In three years, three months, Scots and Englishmen
Did more then Troy accomplished in ten.
Ostend endured (which never will be forgot)
Above seven hundred thousand Cannon shot:
And, as if hell against it did conspire,
They did abide death, dearth, and sword and fire.
There danger was with resolution mixed,
And honor with true valor firmly fixed.
Were death more horrid then a Gorgons head,
In his worst shapes they met him, free from dread.
There many a Britain did, and yet they live
In fame, which fame to us does courage give.
At last when to an end the siege was come,
The gainers of it, cast their losing sum,
And the uneven reckoning thus did run:
The winners had most loss, the losers won;
For in this siege upon the Archdukes side
Seven Masters of the Camp all wounded did.
And fifteen Colonels in that war deceast:
And Serieant Mayors twenty nine, at least.
Captains five hundred sixty five were slain.
Lieutenants (whilst this Leaguer did remain)
One thousand, and one hundred and sixteen
Dyed, and are now as they had never been.
Ensigns three hundred twenty two, all even:
And nineteen hundred Serieants and eleven.
Corp'rals and Lantzprizadoes death did mix
In number seauenteene hundred sixty six.
Of Soldiers, Mariners, women, children, all,
More then seven times ten thousand there did fall.
Thus Ostend was at dear rates won and lost,
Besides these lives, with many millions cost.
And when 'twas won, 'twas won but on conditions,
On honorable terms, and compositions:
The winners wanne a ruined heap of stones,
A demi-Golgotha of dead men's bones.
Thus the brave Britains that the same did leave,
Left nothing in it worthy to receive.
And thus from time to time, from age to age,
To these late days of our last pilgrimage,
We have bin men with martial minds inspired,
And for our meeds, beloved, approved, admired.
Men prize not Manhood at so low a rate
To make it idle and effeminate:
And worthy Countrymen I hope and trust
You Will do as much as your forefathers durst,
A fair advantage now is offered here
Whereby your wonted worths may well appear,
And he that in this quarrel will not strike,
Let him expect never to have the like.
He that spares both his person and his purse,
Must (if ever he use it) use it worse.
And you that for that purpose go from hence
To serve that mighty Princess, and that Prince,
Ten thousand, thousand prayers shall every day
Implore The Almighty to direct your way.
Go on, go on, brave soldiers, never cease
Till noble war, produce a noble peace.
A brief Description of Bohemia.
THe Kingdom of Bohemia is well peopled with many brave horsemen and footmen:
rich, fruitful, and plentifully stored (by the Almighties bounty,) with all
the treasuries of Nature fit for the use and commodity of man: it has in it of
Castles and walled towns, to the number of 780 and 32000 villages; by a grant
from the Emperor Charles the fourth, it was freed for ever of the payments of
all contributions to the Empire whatsoever, Morauia, Silesia, and Lusatia are
as large as Bohemia, well replenished with stout horsemen and footmen.

FINIS.

