CAROLUS STUART.


Koningk van Engelandt. Schotlandt, En Irlandt, Gebooren Ao. 1600.

Binnen Londen onthalst, Ao. 1649. in it 24 Iaer zyner Regeeringe.

Ant^ van Dyck pinxit. Ioost Hartgers excud. S. Savery f^^tt

A MEMORIAL OF ALL THE English Monarchs being in number 151, from BRVTE to King
CHARLES. In Heroical Uerse by IO. TAILOR.

LONDON Printed by JOHN BEALE, for James Bowler, 1630



TO THE RIGHT Honorable, LIONEL Lord Viscount Cranefield, Earl of Middlesex,
etc.
MY humble Muse, in lofty manner sings
The 7 Kingdoms were, 1. Kent. 2 South Saxons, Sussex and Surry. 3
East Angles, Norfolk, and Cambridge-shire. 4 West Saxon, Barkshire,
Devonshire, Somersetshire, and Cornewell. 5 Mertia, Glostershire,
Herefordshire, Worcester, Shropsh^re, Scaffor^shire, Cheshire, Warwike,
Leycester, Noreb, Oxford, ^ingham, Bedford, and half Hartfordshire. 6
East-Saxon, Essex, Middlesex, and half Hartfordshire. 7 Northumberland divided
to two Kingdoms, (...) and Bernicia, all brought to one Monarchy by Egler^:
(...) West Saxons, and called England, 196^ yee^s after (...).

A Catalogue of Englands mighty Kings:
At first I do begin with Trojan BRVTE,
And following Chronicles I do dispute,
Proceeding briefly with their Reigns and Names,
Till these blessed days of our best Monarch JAMES,
It Is but an Argument that's written here,
That in such time such and such Princes were:
But he that means their Actions more to know,
May read Boethius, Hollinshed, or Stow,
Or our true laboring Modern Master How,
Which Authors, Learned Judgment do allow:
Or if you will see how former times do run,
Read the laborious pains of Middleton.
We have had Kings since Brute, of royal Blood,
One hundred forty six, some bad, some good,
Four Queens in all, this time did only Reign,
Whose Memories in Histories remain.
So in two thousand and seven hundred years,
We had thrice 50 Princes it appears.
This Kingdom here was five times won and lost,
And Kings (as God decreed) often changed and tossed.
Sometimes one swaid the Scepter, sometime twain,
And sometime seven at once did rule and reign,
Till six (by bloody wars) lost life and throne,
And valiant Egbert joined them all in one.
But since (through Heavens high providence) I see,
It Is grown more great, and greater like to be:
Long may He live, by whom in one it is guided,
And may they sink that wished again divided.
Then (Noble Lord) with good acceptance take
This Poem, for the Royal Subjects sake,
And though it be not complete as it should,
Bear with it, and accept of what I could,
The matter's worthy, though the manner poor,
Which makes me here your Patronage implore,
And may you be external and internal,
Blessed and advanced to happiness eternal.
Your Honors in all observance to be commanded,

John Tailor.

Years before Christ.
Medulla Historioe Anglicanoe

BRVTE, THE FIRST KING OF BRITAIN, began his Reign,
1. BRVTE.
Anno mundi, 2858. Before Christ, 1108.




AENEAS from subverted Troy exilde,
In Tuscan wedded King Lati^s child:
By whom the Realm of Italy he gained,
And after he had 3 years fully reigned,
He died, and left Ascanius in his stead:
To whom Sil^s Post^s did succeed.
From which Posthumus Royal loins did spring,
Brute being of the age of 15 years, as he shot at a wild beast, the arrow
glanced unfortunately and slew his Father Siluius Aeneas, for the which he was
exilde, and came into this Land, then called Albion.

I follow the common opinion: for many Writers do neither write or allow of
Brutes being here, accounting it a dishonor for our Nation, to have original
from a Par^ide, and one that derived his descent from the Goddess (alias
strumper) Venus. Howsoever, Histories are obscured and clouded with
ambiguities, some burnt, lost, defaced by antiquity; and some abused by the
malice, ignorance, or partiality of Writers, so that truth is hard to be
found. Amongst all which variations of Times and Writers, I must conclude there
was a BRVTE.


Great Brutus, Britains first commanding King:
The people then were (here) all void of pride,
Borne Naked, Naked lived, and Naked died.
Three Sons Brute left, Locrinus was his Heir
To England, Cambria (Wales) was Cambers share,
To Albanact (the youngest) 'twas his lot,
To sway the Scepter of the valiant Scot.
Thus amongst his Sons this I Will he did divide,
And after twenty four years Reign he died.
Locrine 20. years, 1084.


LOcrinus, Eldest of old Brutus Sons,
By Valor vanquished the inuading Hunnes:
He chased them, and their power did quite confound,
And their King Humber was in The River of Humber took the name from the
drow^d King of the Huns, now Hungarians.
Humber drowned:
This Locrine had a Queen, fair Guendoline was daughter unto Corineus, Duke
Cornwall. Estrild was a beauteous Lady of King ^umbers, whom Locrinus took
prisoner.
Guendolin,
Yet folly led him to the Paphaean sin,
^esotted sense, and blood with lust inflamed,
He loved a beauty, Beauteous Estrild named,
^y whom he had a Daughter, Sabrin hight,
(...) whom the King had whole and sole delight:
^or which the Queen made war upon her Lord:
and in the Fight she put him to the Sword;
and after a reuengefull bloody slaughter,
Queen Guendoline took Estrild and her daughter,
and drowned them both (to quench her ielous flame)
and so from Sabrine, Seauerne got the name.
Q. Guendoline, 1064.


About this time Saul was King of Israel.

When 15. years this Queen had wisely reigned,
She died, and then her Son the kingdom gained.
Queen Guendoline was allowed the government in her Son Madans minority,
whose p^dent reign is app^fully recorded in histories.

Madan, 1009.


When forty years this King had ruled this I Will,
(As Stories say) he died a death most vile:
The wide-mouthed Wolf, and keene-tusk'd brutish Bore
Did eat his Kingly flesh, and drink his gore.
Madan was a vicious and wicked Prince, the Sonn^ of Locrine and Guendoline.
He was a great Tyrant. H^ built the To^ne of Doncaster. He had two ^nes,
Mempricius and Mannus.

Mempricius reigned 20. years, 991.


MEmpricius base, his brother (...) slew,
And got the Crown, by murder, (...) as d^e:
Maids, wives and widows, hoby (...) deflowered:
He lived a Beast, and died, by a Beast, d^uour'd.
He killed his elder brother tre^ sly as ^ee was parlying with him. He was
eaten of Wolves as he was hunting. He was so beastly, that he was ta^din
histories to be a Sodomite with Beasts in his time.

Ebranke, 989. King David reign over Israe^


AT Edinburgh the Castle he did found,
Alcluid and York, he built new from the ground
He builded Bambrough, and reigned sixty years,
Beloved, as it in Chronicles appears.
Ebranke had 21. wives, by whom he had 20. Sons and 30. Daughters; he
invaded Gallia, now France He was the Son of Mempricius. In his Reign reign
King Solomon. Alcluid is Dumbreton in Scotland.

Brute the second, 929.


IF any noble act Brute Greeneshield did,
He Is wronged, because from Histories they are hid:
Twelve years he ruled, that is all I of him read,
And how at York, he Iyeth buried.
This Brute was the Son of Ebranke and some histories write doubtfully, that
he conquered France, and that after he received a great foil in field by
Brinchild, or Brinchillus, Prince of Henoway, or Henault.

Leil. 917.


LEil Carleile b^t, and raign^d years twenty five,
And as Fame still keeps dead men's acts alive:
So Leil (though dead) (...) ever live by Fame,
He lies at Carleile, which himself did frame.
Leil was the Son of Brute Greeneshield. It is also written that he bu^ the
(...) of Chester. Lud, or Rudhudibras was the Son of Leil, a religious Prince
in ^s superstitious way of Paganism, for in these 3. Towns ^ich he built, he
erected 3. Temples, and placed 3. (...) or Pagan Bishops in them.

Rudhudibrasse, 892.


THis King built Canterbury, Winchester,
And Shaftsbury, he from the ground did rear:
And after twenty nine years reign was past,
At Winchester sore sick, he breathed his last.
Bladud reigned 20. 863.


BAathe was by Bladud to perfection brought,
By Necromanricke Arts, to fly he sought:
As from a Tower he thought to scale the Sky,
He brake his neck, because he soared too hig^
This Bladud had been a st^ in Ather ^id: whence he brought any learned men:
he bui^ elue ford, a College I think, the first in England: play the foul
or the fool, he brake his neck on the Temple of Apollo in Troynouant.

Leire, 844.


LEire (as the Story says) three daughters had,
The youngest good, the other two too bad:
Yet the old King loved the^ that wronged him most,
She that loved him, he banished from his Coast.
False Gonorel and Ragan, he between
Them gave the Kingdom, making ^ach a Queen.
But young Cordeilla wedded was by chance,
To Aganippus, King of fertile France:
The eldest Daughters did reject their Sire,
For succor to the young'st he did retire,
By whose just aid the Crown again he gained;
And dyed when he full forty years had reigned.
Leire built Leicester and was a good Prince. At Leycester he built a Temple to
Ianues Bifrons, or Ianues with two faces.

Qu. Cordeilla, 805.


MAd Morgan, and vnmanner'd Cunedague,
Their Au^t Cordeilla with fierce war did plague:
They vanquished her, and her in Prison threw:
And having reigned five years, her self she slew.
She reigned with her Husband Aganippus till he dyed, and then in her widowhood
her cruel kinsmen oppressed her. She stabbed her self in prison, being
tyrannously used, in despair of her liberty.

Morgan Cunedagu^, 800.


THen Morgan did against Cunedague contend,
And at Glamorgan, Morgan had his end.
Then Cunedagus sole King did abide,
Full three and thirty years, and then he dyed.
Morgan was the Son of Gonorel, Leires eldest Daughter, and Cunedagus his
kinsman, was the Son of Ragan.

The Prophet Esaias prophesied about this time.

Riuallo, before Christ, 766.


THree days it rained blood, when Riuallo reigned,
And great mortality the Land sustained;
He forty six years ruled in Kingly State,
And then surrendered to all humane Fate.
This Land in this Kings reign was almost unpeopled with dearth, death and
desolation. In his time Rome was builded, 356. years after Brute: Innumerable
multitudes of Horse-flyes or Hornets sprung out of the blood that raind, which
flies stung many people to death. Riuallo was buried at York.

Gurgustus, 7^.


Scicillius, 684.


A Common Drunkard was this wicked King,
Which vice did many other vices bring,
Years thirty eight, the Diadem he wore,
Scicillius next raignd nine and forty more.
Gurgustus and Scicillius were brethren. I find little mention of any good
they did, though they reigned long: They were both the Sons of Riuallo.

Iago, 636.
(...), 612.




OF these two Kings, small mention I do find,
They left bare Names (for me hori^) behind;
One twenty five years: (...) other fifty four,
Had in this Land Commanding Regal power.
Iugo was a kinsman to Gurgustus, and by his vicious life, he got a sleepy
disease called the Lethargy, whereof he dyed. These two Kings were both buried
at York.

Gorbodug, 559.


GOrbodug next did in the Throne succced,
Was sixty three years King, and ^ast decreed,
'Twixt his two Sons this Kingdom to divide,
At York he is buried, where in peace he died.
Some write that he reigned but 42. years, and that he was buried at
Troynouant.

Ferex, and Porex, 496.


POrex, in Fight his brother Ferex killed,
For which their mother, Porex heartblud (...)
These murders merciless, did quite deface,
These Princes, last of Royal Brutus Race.
Ferex and Porex were the sons of Gorbodug. Their mother and her maids
chopped Porex in pieces, in revenge of her son Ferex: they reigned five
years: after whose death the Land was a long time divided into five Kingdoms.

Mulmutius Donwallo. 441.


THe Land unguided, Kinglesse did remain,
Till great Mulmutius did the Wreathe obtain:
He builded Temples, made Laws, Ploughs, highwaies,
And 40. years he lived in fame and praise.
Mulmutius slew Pinnar, Slater, and Rudack, three Kings of several parts of
this I Will, and at last brought the Kingdom to his sole obedience. He was the
Son of ^lotten, Duke of Cornwall: He was the first of all the Kings of this
Land that wore a crown of Gold.

Bellinus and Brennus reigned 26. years. 401.


THese brethren did divide the Realm in twain,
But Kings can brook no partnership in reign;
They fell at odds, and Brennus fled, subdude
With slaughter of his warlike multitude.
To France he escaped, and was received in State,
In London, Belline builded Bellins-gate
Brave Brennus conquered Italy and Rome,
Bellinus lies here in an honored Tomb.
Brennus slew himself with the sword, at the fiedge of Delphos in Greece.
Bochas. They were the sons of Mulmutius Donwallo. Belinus brought Denmark to
be tributary to Britain: they were a pair of worthy brothers.

Gurguintus, 373.


GVrguintus, was Belinus firstborn son,
Victorously ^e Denmark overrun:
He the unpeopled Ireland did supply,
Reigned nineteen years a King, and then did dye.
This King gave leave to a company of straggling distressed Spaniards to
possess themselules in Ireland, he lies buried at Carelion.

Guinthelinus, 456.


HE married Mercia a renowned Dame,
From whom the just, wise, Mercian Statutes came:
He six and twenty years the Scepter swaide,
And then with honor in his Tomb was laid.
He was the son of Arguintus, he builded Warwick and lies buried at London.

Cecilius, 330.


Kimarus, 223.


Seven years Cecilius kept the Regal Chair,
Three years Kimarus ruled as his sole Heir;
The Sire with love did well and justly reign,
His son Kimarus was a hunting slain.
About this time, a savage people called the Picts, begged habitation of the
King of Scots, and lived in the Marshes between England and Scotland. Kimarus
was a vicious Prince, and killed by wild Beasts as he was hunting: he was the
son of Cecilius. Cecilius was buried at Carelion.

Elanius, 321.


ELanius (as most Histories agree)
Was King of Britain years just three times three:
What Acts he did, or what Laws he decreed,
They are vnwrit, and therefore are unread.
Elanius was the son of Kimarus.

Morindus reigned 8 years. 311.


THis King Morindus, valiant more then wise,
A ran'ning Monster from the Sea did rise:
Which many people to destruction brought,
Who killed this brave King as he bravely fought.
He killed the Monster, after the Monster had devoured him, for he was in the
belly of it living, and found dead with his dagger in his hand.

Gorbomanus. 303.


THis King eleven years wore the Britain crown.
He founded Cambridge, and built Grantham Town;
His subjects peace, past Kingdoms he preferred,
Loved and bewailed, at London was interred.
He built the Towns of Cambridge and Grantham.

Archigalo, and Elidurus. 392.


THese brothers were not Kings both at one time,
But for extortion (an unkingly crime,
The Eldest having gaind his Subjects hate)
Deposed, and Elidurus got the State.
But he (not greedy after worldly reign)
To Archigalo gave it up again.
Ruled ten years more: thus twenty years in all,
His State Maiesticke, did twice rise and fall.
Archigalo put away from him and rejected the true and (...) Nobility and
Gentry: and in their rooms was ^pplyde with the counsels of flatterers and
parasites, which was his downfall.

Elidurus, 272. Vigenius, Peredurus, 270.


THen Archigale being dead and gone,
Good Elidure two years kept Britains Throne.
Vigenius, Peredurus two years more,
Thrust Elidure from all the sway he bore,
But they both died the third time he was crowned, Elidurus, 261.
And reigned four years more, beloved, renowned.
Once subject, twice a slave, and thrice a King;
Thus Fortunes favors up and down did fling.
In these often changes of Princes estates, this Land was miserably vexed.

Here because Hystories make little or no mention of any the doings of the
Kings, from the reign of Elidurus to King Lud, I think it fit, only to
insert their names, and the times of their reigns, with their years before
Christ.

258. Gorbonian reigned ten years.


248. Morgan fourteen years.


234. Emerianus seven years.


This King was deposed from all Regal government for h^ tyranny.

227. Iuall twenty years.


This King was a just and prudent Prince.

207. Rimo sixteen years.


His reign was blessed with abundance of Peace and Plenty.

191. Geruncius twenty years.


171. Catillus ten years.


Catillus caused all the oppressors of the poor to be hanged up: but since his
time they are doubly increased.

161. Coylus twenty years.


A peaceable King, and a quiet reign.

141. Porrex five years.


A good Prince.

136. Chirimus one year.


Chirimus through excessive drinking gat his death.

135. Fulgon two years.


133. Eldred one year.


132. Androgius one year.


131. Varianus o^ ^re.


Varianus given ^to lust, purchsed himself a short reigne^ and it may be
perceived, that all these Prince: either by treason, or their ow^ bad lives,
were soon brought to their ends, for 25 of them did not reign^ above 62 years.

129. Fliud five years.


120. Dedamius five years.


118. Gurginius three years.


115. Mercianus two years.


113. Bladunus two years.


110. Cupenus three years.


108. Quinus two years.


106. S^ius two years.


94. Bledgabredus ten years.


A great lover of Music, and a good Patron to Musician^.

92. Archemalus two years.


90. Eldolus two years.


88. Rodianus two years.


86. Redargius three years.


84. Samullius two years.


81. Penisellus three years.


78. Pirrhus two years.


76. Caporus two years.


74. Dinellus four years.


A Noble and virtuous Prince.

70. Hellius one year.


The I Will of Ely took the nomination from this Prince. There he built a
Palace, and there he dying was buried.

Lud reigned 11. years, 66.


A Long time after Troynouant was framed,
It was by Lud, Kair-Lud, or Lud-stone named,
He made (...) strong with Battlemen^s and Towers,
Defensive against foes inuasiue powers.
Of free Stone for Freemen Ludgate he founded,
Where freemen (wanting freedom) are confounded.
He died and left two Sons, too young for reign,
Wherefore his brother did the Crown obtain.
Some Writers do affirm, that this King b^ilded ^ondon from Ludgate to
London-stone, and that the stone in memory thereof was called Luds stone.

Cassibelan, 17. years. 58.


LVd deed, the Nobles crowned Cassibelan,
In whose reign her^ the Roman conquest ^an,
Great Julius Caesar sailed out of France,
And in this Land his Eagle did advance.
But Britains bold scorned base at first to stoop,
Twice Caesar f^ed, before their warlike troop.
The ^iuill wars, this Kingdom over (...),
Betwixt Cassibelan, and Luds two Sons,
Whilst they (unnatural) sought each others fall,
The Romans took advantage, conquered all:
Where Caesar, by his high Imperial doom,
Made Britain Tributary unto Rome.
Nennius a valiant Duke of this Kingdom, received his de^ths ^und of Caesar:
Yet after that he took Caesar's Sword from him, and with the same kil^d
La^ianus a Roman Tribune, and lastly, man the fi^ld and (...). Caesar built
the Castles of Dou^, Canterbury, and the Tower of London.

Theomantius, 37.


THen Theomantius ((...) (...) all blood)
The (...) Son (...) o^ his Father (...):
Reigned three and twenty years, a King in (...)
Whose Picture stands on Luds (...) gate.
Cimbelinus.


IN this Kings reign, (the glorious King of Kings
In person came, and man's salvation brings)
When through the world all bloody wars did cease,
(For our souls peace) then came the Prince of peace.
Our Savior Jesus Christ was borne in his reign, in the 42. year of Augustus
Caesar, then being Emperor of Rome: Cimbelinus was the Son of Iheomantius,

Years after Christ.
Guiderius, (...) (...), 21.


THis King and Sub^cts, bravely, nobly join,
To hold from Rome the tributary Coin:
But Claudius Caesar with an Army came,
The B^t bold rebellious hearts to tame;
One Hamon there (a Roman) di^ (...),
Himself like to a Britain to (...),
Guiderius bravely cha^de his fo^s amain,
Was by disg^ifed Hamon falfely slain.
When Guiderius was King of Britain, our Redeemer suffered under Claudius
Tiberius Caesar, being the Roman Emperor. Guiderius was a valiant Prince.

Aruiragus, 44.


STout Aruiragus being in the fight,
The Kings death added fury to his might:
Perceived the Britain Host, almost dismaide,
In's brothers Armor he himself arrayed,
The Soldiers thought the King again suruiu'd.
With co^rage new through every vein derived,
Brave Aruiragus, like a Tempest goes,
And pell mell topsieturuy throws his foes.
Grear Caesar with his Roman army fled,
The King took Hamon, and cut off his head,
And more, with sharp revenge his wrath to appease,
Hewed him piece-meale, and cast him in the Seas,
The place long time, this name did then allow,
Of Hamons haven, or Southampton now.
The Emperor would quite the tribute free,
If Britains King his Son in law would be.
Then Aruarigue did fair Genisse marry,
And Claudius Caesar here a while did tarry,
He builded Gloucester, whilst he here remained:
The King dyed having twenty eight years reigned.
Marius, 73.


IN this Kings reign the lawless proling Pict,
(A Nation strange) did the North part afflict:
But Marius, in a battle slew their King,
And all their power did to subjection bring.
The Picts from Scythia, into Scotland came,
Rude, barbarous, ungrateful, hard to tame:
For by the Scotsh Kings favor having got
Possession, they often warred upon the Scot.
And more and more that Kingdom they annoyed,
Till Kennith Scotlands King, them all destroyed:
Years fifty three reigned Marius just and wise,
Dyed: and at Carleile his Corpse royal lies.
Much about this time, Joseph of Arimathea, after he had buried Christ (being
hated for it of the mis-beleeuing Jews) came into this Land, and first planted
Christianity here, built a Chapel at Glastenburgh: Some writers say, that he
repaired Chester, and was buried there.

Coylus, 124.


IN Rome this King was fostred all his youth,
He loved Peace, Justice, Fortitude and Truth:
He builded Colchester, and did survive,
Till he had reigned a Kings years, fifty five.
Coylus was the Son of Marius, he was buried at York.

Lucius, 179.


THe first of Kings that was a Christian named,
Was Lucius (with the spirit of God inflamed)
The Bread of life he did receive with joy,
The Pagan Idols he did all destroy,
The Flamines and Archflamines he down cast,
And Bishops and Archbishops here he placed,
He loved and feared the eternal Three in one,
And dyed when he had 12 years kept the Throne.
This was the first Christian King of Britain, he caused twenty eight
Idolatrous Temples of the ^agan gods to be made Cathedral Churches, for the
service of the (...) God; Elutherius was then Bishop of Rome, King Lucius was
buried at Gloucester: he dyed leaving no (...), so that this Land was in a
burly-burly 15. years, through want of a King.

Seuerus, 194.


THis was a Roman Emperor, and was slain
At York the eighteenth year of his proud reigne^
He was an Alien and a stranger here,
And therefore bought his usurpation dear:
Seuerus was 60. years old when he took the crown, and caused a wall of
Turfe to be made betwixt England and Scotland to keep this Land from the
incursions of the Scots and Picts: the wall reached from Tyne to the Scottish
Seas, 112. miles.

Bassianus, 212.


SEuerus here did wed a British Dame,
By whom this King (their Son) the Crown did claim.
But after six veeres time, he left this Land,
And had the Roman Empire at's command.
Bassianus was brought from Rome by his Father Seuerus.

Carausius, 290.


When Carausi^ reigned, Dioclesian was ^mperor.

Alectus, 292.


THis King (of mean birth) did the Crown attain
After seven years, was by Alectus slain:
Three years Alectus did in state recide,
Our Protomartyr then Saint Alban did.
Dioclesian and Maximilian ruled the Roman Empire, when Saint Albane suffered;
Alectus was sent from Rome against Carausius: this Alectus was a cruel Tyrant,
and was also slame by Asclepiodatus.

Asclepiodatus, 299.


ASclepiodatus, (in a mortal Fight)
Suodude the Roman General Gallus might,
Killed him, and cast him headlong in a Brook,
Whence Gallus or Wallbrooke, for name it took,
And as Alectus did Carausius kill,
So did this King Alectus life blood spill,
And after two years reign in mortal strife,
Asclepiodatus slain lost Crown and life.
Gallus Brook or Wallbrooke took the name from Gallus a Roman Captain,
slain by Asclepiodatus, and thrown into that Brook. Asclepiodatus was after
slain by Coil Duke of Colchester. Some write that Asclepiodatus reigned 30.
years.

Coil reigned 14. years. 301.


COlchesters Duke Coil in the Throne invested,
Was by Constantius Caesar much molested:
Till Coil gaue's Daughter to him for his Bride,
And paid Romes tribute, that was long denide.
The Lady was of beauty most divine,
Fair Hellen, Mother to great Constantine.
The King at Colchester, dead, laid in's Tomb,
His Son Constantius did supply his room.
This Hellen reedified Jerusalem, and adorned it with ^oodly Churches. She also
walle^ London and Colchester.

Constantius, 305.


Spain, Italy, France, Britains Emperor,
Four years he reigned here, with Maiesticke power,
True Honor was the aim at which he shot.
Just, Valiant, these reports his Actions got.
This Constantius was Grandfather to Constantine the Great: he came from Rome
to this I Will, and was buried at York.

Constantine, 306,


GReat Emp'ror Constantine, surnamed the Great:
In all respects a worthy Prince complete,
The glorious Gospel, he adored, and feared,
Constantinople famously he reared,
Maxentius, Romes great Tyrant, (most abhorred)
He made him fly from his (...) sword.
Beloved, be wail'd, high honored and admired,
In grace with God and men, his days expired.
This worthy Prince Constantine was borne in this Land, the Son of
Constantius and Hellen. After Constantius decease, our Land was molested by
Octauius Maximus and others for many years. These times are so diversely written
of in Histories, that a man knows not which to believe most.

84. Constantinus, 337.


85. Constans, 340.


THese two were Brothers of the Royal line,
And Sons unto the Emperor Constantine:
Ambition and debate for Kingly Reign,
Was the unnatural cause they both were slain.
Kings and Lovers can brook no partners: for these two brothers were each
others destruction.

86. Octauius, 345.


87. Traherus, 349.


OCtauius Duke of Windsor to oak the Crown,
Traherus came from Rome and put him down:
The Land was ^ull with hurly-burlies filled,
Traherus by Octtauius last was killed.
Theodosius was Emperor of the East ^d Macri^ of the West: Some write that
Octauius (...) 54. years Noncredo.

88. Constantius the third. 353.


The Roman Empire he did closely sway,
And as a King this Land did him obey:
The Apostate Julian was the Emperor next,
By whom the Christians all were slain, or vexed.
Constantius was a victorious Prince, and triumphed in Rome: yet a cruel
oppressor, and an Arian heretic.

89 Maximinianus. 375.


NExt Julian, reigned Valentinian,
And after him, succeeded Gratian
Maximi^nus was of life deprived,
'Cause he with Gratian for the Empire strived.
How like Bauius these tyr^ts confi^med one another; these were all Emperors
of Rome, and Kings of Britain,

90. Gratian. 376.


THen Gratian claimed this Kingdom as his right^
But having gained it, he was slain in fight:
Fierce wars the Roman Empire did divide,
And Caesar's and their Viceroyes fought and did.
Honorius Romes Tribunal did obtain,
Next after him did Theodosius reign,
Then did the Scot join with the barbarous Pict,
This headless, Kinglesse Kingdom to afflict.
The Roman Scepter we had long obayd,
Four hundred eightythree years Tribute paid;
And now this land shook off their wronged command
When Civil discord had near spoiled this Land.
In one battle the whole nation of the Piets were quite ^xtinguished about
this time the Romans g^uernement ^nded here. Gratian was a Britain Emperor
but four (...).

91 Vortiger. 447.


THis King through murder did the Throne ascend,
And had a troublous Reign, and murdrous end:
Constanes (Constantines) lawful Heir and Son,
By Vortigers false means to death was done.
For which (to keep the Crown unjustly gained)
The Saxons for his aid he entertained.
Then Hengist, with his Brother Horsus crew,
In Britains best blood did their blades embrew.
King Vortiger with doting love inthral'd,
Matched Hengists daughter, beauteous Rowan called:
But Saxons troops, on troops came in so fast,
That Britains did deprive the King at last.
He murdered his lawful Prince, and usurping the Throne, was enforced to have
aid of the Saxons, who at the last almost ouer-ran this Kingdom, but the
Britains deposed Vortiger, and crowned his Son Vortimer.

92. Vortimer. 454.


THen On the Plain of Salisbury at Stonehing (where the Stones are to be seen
at this day.)
Vortimer, the Son of Vortiger,
Upon the Saxons made successful war:
Till he by Rowan was by craft o'r-^ane,
From whose false hands, he died by poisonous (...)
Deposed Vortiger (his Son once slain)
His ill gained, ill kept Crown he gained again:
Hengistus with his Saxon fresh supplies,
The Plains of Salisbury did all surprise.
The King took counsel of his Britain Lords,
And all in general to a Peace accords.
The Saxons and the Britains did agree,
That at this meeting all unarmed should be:
But traitrous Hengist did a watchword speak,
Which did the Law of Arms, and Honor break,
The Saxons unsuspected drew forth Knives,
Four hundred, threescore Lords, all lost their lives,
All Britain Nobles, then the Saxons there,
Surprised the King, constraining him through fear
To give Kent, Sussex, Suffolk, Norfolk, and
That Hengist, King should in those Lands command,
But after nineteen years were quite expired,
The King and Queen burnt to death. Vortiger married his own daughter (...)
his third wife.
Revenging Fire, the King in's Castle fired.
And thus the Saxons, and Great Hengists Heirs,
Won Shire to Shire, till Britain all was theirs.
93. Aurelius Ambrose. 466.


IN honor of the Nobles basely slain,
This King set up the Ston^s on Saru^ (...)
The Gospel with great zeal he dignified,
Reigned thirty two years, and by poison died.
This King was a Rom^ne, and brother to Vter Pendragon that succeeded him.

94. Vter Pendragon reigned 18 years. 498.


THis King (by Merlins means a skillful man)
Igrene, the Duke of Cornewals Duchess wan:
On her he got, (though illegittimate)
The Christian Worthy, Arthur, stilde the Great.
Vter Pendragon poisoned by the Saxons, after he had reigned 18. years.

95. Arthur. 516.


OF the nine Worthies was this Worthy one,
Denmark, and Norway, did ^y his Throne:
In twelve set Battles he the Saxons beat,
Great, and to make his Victories more great,
The Faithless Sarazons he overcame,
And made them honor high Iehonah's Name.
The Noble order of the Table round,
At Winchester, his first invention found.
Whilst he beyond Sea fought to win Renown,
His Nephew Mordred did usurp his Crown,
But he returned, and Mordred did confound,
And in the fight great Arthur got a wound,
That proved lo mortal, that immortally
It made him live, although it made him dye.
Full sixteen years the Diadem he wore,
And every day gaind Honor more and more.
Arthur the great was buried at Glastenbury.
96 Constantine, the fourth. 542.


97 Aurelius Conanus. 545.


COnstantine was by King (...) killed:
Aurelius ((...)) (...) (...) years held,
Seven Kingdoms here at once the Saxons held,
And slaughter launc'd, when proud ambition sweld.
This Constantine was kinsman to King Arthur, and was slain by Conanus.
Constantine was a wicked Prince, and slain in battle by his kinsman Conanus,
when he had reigned near 3. years. Of the time of this Aurelius Conanus his
reign, there is much variation in Histories.

Here began the Heptarchy, or 7 Kingdoms in this Land, namely, Kent,
South Saxons, West Saxons, East Saxons, Northumberland, Mercia, and
East Angles: which division continued more then 600. years, before it was all
united into one Monarchy the names of the Kings, and times of their reigns,
and limits of their Kingdoms, are hereunder expressed.

1 KEnt was only a kingdom which had 17 Kings, namely, 1 Hengist, 2 Eske, 3
Octa, 4 Ymerick, 5 Ethelbert, who was the first Christian King of Kent, he was
an aid and helper of Sebert, King of the East Saxons, in the famous and
memorable buildings of St. Paul's Church in London, and Saint Peter's at
Westminster. 6 Eabald, 7 Ercombert, 8 Egbert, 9 Lother, 10 Edrick, 11 Withred,
12 Edbert, 13 Edelbert, 14 Alick, 15 Ethilbert, 16 Cuthred, 17 Baldred. These
Kings reigned in Kent 372. years, from the year of Grace 455. till the year
827.

2 The kingdom of the South Saxons contained the Counties of Sussex and
Surrie, it continued from the year 488. until the year 601. being 113
years: they had three Kings, namely, 1 Ella, 2 Cissa, 3 Ethelwolfe a Christian
King, 4 Berthrum, 5 Authum.

3 The West Saxons kingdom, whose beginning was in the year 519. and ended,
Anno. 166. lasted 561 years, having 17 Kings, namely, 1 Cherdick, 2 Kenrick, 3
Chequilin, 4 Cealick, 5 Chelwold, 6 Kingils, a Christian, 7 Kenwald, 8 Eskwin,
9 Kentwin, 10 Ceadwald, 11 Inas, 12 (...), 13 Cuthred, 14 Sigebert, 15
Kenwolfe, 16 Brightrik, 17 Egbert,: These Kings had under their governments,
the Counties of Cornwall, Devonshire, Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire and
Barkshire.

4 The East Saxons reigned 281 years, beginning, Anno. 527, and ending in the
year 827. Their bounds were Essex and Middle-Sex, and their Kings were in
number 14, namely, 1 Erchenwin, 2 Sledda, 3 Sebert a Christian King, that
assisted Ethelbert, King of Kent, in the building of the Churches of Saint Paul
and Saint Peter aforesaid. 4 Seward, 5 Sigebert, 6 Sigibext, 7 Switheline, 8
Sighere, 9 Sebba, 10 Sigherd, 11 Seofrid, 12 Offa, 13 Selred, 14 Suthred.

5 Northumberland was sometimes divided into two kingdoms. It contained the
Cou^ties of Yorkshire, Durham, Lancashire, Westmerland, Cumberland and
Northumberland: this Kingdom began in the year of our Lord, 547. and
expired in 926. continuing 379. years under 23 Kings, whose names were, 1
Ella, 2 Adda, 3 Theodwald, 4 Frethulse, 5 Theodrick, 6 Ethelrick, 7 Ethelfrid,
8 Edwin, 9 Oswald, 10 Oswy, 11 Egfrid, 12 Alkfrid, 13 Ofred, 14 Kenred, 15
Oswicke, 16 Ceolnuph, 17 Egbert, 18 Oswolfe, 19 Edilwald, 20 Alured, 21
Ethelred, 22 Alswald, 23 Osr^d. Amongst these, Edwin was their first Christian
King.

6 The East Angles under 15 several Kings, continued 353 years, beginning in
Anno, 575. and (...) III 914. their Territories were Su^ Nor^olk,
Cambridgeshire and the I Will (...), Ely, their Kings names were, 1 Vffa, 2 Ti^us,
(...) Red^ald their first Christian King, 4 (...), 5 Sigebert, 6 Egrik, 7 Anna,
8 Ethelbert, 9 Ethwald, 10 Aldwol^e, 11 Aswald, 12 Beorn, 13 Ethelred, 14
Ethelbert, 15 Edmund.

7 The seventh Kingdom were the Mercians, who had 20 Kings and 17 shires under
their command: their Kings were, 1 Creda, 2 Wibba, 3 Cheorle, 4 Penda, 5 Peada
their first Christian King, 6 Wolfere, 7 Ethelred, 8 Kenred, 9 Chelred, 10
Ethebald, 11 Offa, 12 Egfrid, 13 Kenwolfe, 14 Kenelme, 15 Chelwolse, 16
Bernulfe, 17 Ludecan, 18 Whitlafe, 19 Bertwolfe, 20 Burdred. Their bounds and
dominions were 17 Counties, as of Northampton, Leister, Darby, Lincoln,
Huntington, Rutland, Notingham, Chesshire, Oxfordshire, Staffordshire,
Worcestershire, Glostershire, Shropshire, Warwickeshire, Bedfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, and Hartfordshire.

98 Vortiporus. 578.


99 Malgo. 581.


THis Vortipore from good Kings did decline,
Kept his wives Daughter as his Conc^ine:
And Malgo put his Wife to bloody slaughter,
To live in ^ncest with his brothers Daughter.
About this time Augustine the Monk, Mellitus, Iustus and John, all learned
men, came from Rome, and preached the Gospel to the English men. Vortipore
reigned 4. years. Malgo, his reign was short and wicked.

100. Careticus. 586.


GVrmundus hither out of Ireland came,
And with the Saxons joined with sword and flame:
The King to Wales did fly, his life to save,
Whereas he changed his Kingdom for a Grave.
He reigned 3. years: and now the Saxons had all England, the Britains and
their Kings being expulsed and chased to the West sides of the Rivers Seauerne,
and Dee.

Cadwane. 613.


THis Cadwane did the Saxon force withstand,
Of Ethelfridus of Northumberland:
And made him to entreat and sue for peace:
Reigned two and twenty years, then did decease.
102. Cadwallin. 635.


CAdwallin slew King Edwin, Egfrids Son,
He Penda Mercias King did overrun:
He never fought but Conquest home did bring,
And eight and forty years did reign a King.
Cadwallin was buried at London in Saint Martins Church near Ludgate.

103. Cadwallader. 685.


THis King renowned was both near and far,
The last of Britains Kings, Cadwallader,
The name of Britain was quite alterd then,
The Kings of England, subjects, Englishmen.
Then in this Land, of Kings there reigned so many,
That Subjects knew not to obey all, or any:
Their names and times of reign I mean to tell,
Should I write more, my Book too big would swell.
Here the inhabitants lost the name of Britains, the land being called
Anglia, or England, and the people Englishmen.

687. Cadwallader left his Crown, went to Rome, and dyed there.

These Kings following were of the West Saxons.
726 Ethelard was King of the West Saxons.


740. Cuthred succeeded him.


757. Sigebert next him, was slain by a Swineheard.


758. Kenulphus was slain by a kinsman of Sigebert.


786. Brithricus. In his time it rained blood.


IN the 800. ^re of Christ, the Danes landed at Portland, but Brithricus beat
them back, and afterward was poisoned by his wife Ethelburga.

Eghricus, King of West Saxons.


839. Adelnulphus overcame (...) Danes, that came to invade the kingdom with
350. ships.


857. Athelbald.


860. Athelbrict.


866. Etheldrid.


872. Aelfred.


900. Edward surnamed Senior.


Here end the Kings of the West Saxons, now follow the Kings of Britain.

104. Athelstane reigned 15. years. 905.


THis King did tame the Welsh, the Danes sub du'd,
He conquered Scotland and the Marches rude:
The Danish Giant Colebrand in Hyde-meade,
By Guy the Earl of Warwick was struck dead.
King Athelstane was crowned at Kingstone, he brought this Land again to one
sole Monarchy, he was buried at Malmsbury.

105. Edmund. 940.


106. Eldred. 946.


EDmond, reigned next his brother Athelstane,
And after five years was untimely slain:
Nine years was Eldred Englands King inst^d,
The Insulting Danes, he from this Realm exilde.
Edmund was buried at Glastenbury. Eldred was brother to Edmund, he was crowned
at Kingstone, he expelled the Danes, and was buried at Winchester.

107 Edwin. 955.


108 Edgar. 959.


THen Edwin (as his right) obtained the Crown,
For Rape, and brutish Just he was put down,
His brother Edgar a man just and w^se,
By Edwin^ fall, unto the Throne did rise.
The Church and Commonweal (long time deformed)
He by his Justice and good Laws reformed.
Reigned sixteen years, and then by death assailed,
As he had lived beloved, he died bewailed.
Edwin was Eldreds kinsman crowned at Kingstone: he defloured his own
kinswoman and slew her husband, for which odious acts he was deposed of all
Kingly dignity, and his brother Edgar was in his stead crowned at Bathe. Edgar
had 3600 ships to withstand the invasion of his enemies, he founded and
repaired 47. relligious houses, he was buried at Glastenbury.

109 Edward. 975.


110 Etheldred. 978.


EDward was slain by his accursed Stepmother,
Aided by Etheldred his cruel brother.
This Etheldred caused all the Danes be slain:
And dyed the thirty eight year of his reign.
He was crowned at Kingstone: he reigned 3 years, and was buried at Shaftsbury.

Etheldred was buried in S. Paul's Church in London.

111 Edmond Ironside. 1016.


THe Danes came to revenge with sword and fire,
Both Kings to Combat single did desire:
On equal terms, their valors both were tried,
In love the Realm betwixt them they divide.
Edricus a traitor murdered King Edmond Ironside, for the which Canutus the
Dane caused him to be tormented to death grievously as he deserved.

112 Canutus. 1018.


THis mighty Danish King four Kingdoms hel^
Danes, Norway, England, Scotland he compeld,
Taxes and toles he raised in England here,
And dyed when he had governed twenty year.
In Canutus his reign the Danes possessed all England: he lies buried at
Winchester.

113 Harold. 10^8.


114 Hardicanutus. 1041.


HArold from England did exile his Mother,
And killed Allured his King and his Brother:
Hardicanutus then the Crown obtained,
Who quaffing died, when he 3. years had raig^'d.
Harold was a Tyrant: he was called Hartfoote for his swift running: he
murdered Prince Allured he reigned three years, and was buried at Westminster.

He caused the body of Harold to be dug out of the grave, and ^ast into the
Thames, in revenge of his brother Allureds death: he was buried at Winchester.

115. Saint Edward. 1043.


1^6. Harold the second. 1066.


SAint Edward from the Danes this Ki^gdom freed,
And for he had no Heir, he here decreed,
That William Duke of Normandy ^hou'd be
Next King, but Harold seeming to agree,
As Soon as Edward was laid in his Toombe,
This hasty Harold mounted in his room,
But William came from Normandy amain,
By whom King Harold was vnking'd and slain.
The end of the first part.
The second part.
William Conqueror. An. Dom. 1066.


When Britains, Romans, Saxons, Danes had done,
The Normans (fifthly) Englands glory won,
^w Lords brought in new Laws incontinent,
and all were Conquered but the County Kent.
King William (after he had all surpised)
^lted, domineered, and tyrannized,
(...) Englishmen (like slaves) their doors must lock,
(...) pain of death, each night at eight of clock.
(...) English from all Office were disgrac^d,
(...) in their places the proud French were placed.
(...) beating down the right, with wrong on wrong,
^aining men should speak the English tongue.
(...) so to bring o^r memory to naught,
(...) Grammar and the Laws in French were taught,
(...) (...) Sons, with Danes a mighty band,
(...) in ^umber to invade the Land,
Then York was burnt, the wealth away was borne
And Danes on Composition home did turn.
A dearth in England was so great, that here
Cats, Dogs, and man's flesh, was our woeful cheer.
The Mercians and Northumbers they rebel'd,
Strong wars the Scots within our Country held:
The I Will of Ely did the King surprise,
He caused the Rebels lose hands, feet, and eyes.
The Normans did rebel and were subdued,
Danes came and fled, with all their multitude.
The Kings son (Robert) by the French Kings aid,
Did diverse parts of Normandy invade.
The Scots spoild England, with all might and maine,
And Durhams Bishop in a broyle was slain,
Here every Acre of men's Lands were measured.
And by a heavy tax the King was treasured:
Slain by a Dear the Kings son lost his life,
And Glassenbury Monks were killed in strife.
The English Nobles almost were decayed,
And every place of rule the Normans swai'd.
And all men's goods and lands, and coin were rated
Through England, and unto the King related.
The French men's pride did England ouerwhelme,
And grievous tributes did oppress the Realm.
Churches and Chapels were thrown down with speed,
To make New Forest as the King decreed:
Who having ruled in trouble, toil and care,
And tryannously pol'd this Kingdom bare,
Near twenty one years, death was then his bane:
He lies in Normandy, enterr'd at Cane.
William Conqueror was crowned on Christmasday, 1067. the year then beginning
on that day. In the (...) Forest in Hampshire called New Forest, where this
King had defased many Churches (wherein the name of God was called upon) and
placed wild Beasts for his disport: in the same Forest two of his own sons
were slain, Prince Robert killed by a Dear, and William Rufus by a Knight
shooting at a Dear.

William Rufus. An. Dom. 1087.


WIlliam the cruel Conquerours second Son,
With ease, got what his Fathers pains had won,
Oppressed England he oppressed and pressed,
And great Exactions wrongfully did wrest.
For Symony, and base corrupting gold,
The King most Churches and Church-liuings sold,
And more, (his Subjects vilely to abuse)
Against them he in arms did arm the Jews,
And swore if they the victory did gain,
That he their faithless faith would entertain.
Upon his eldest brother he rai'sd wars,
His youngest brother troubled him with iarres.
At London, such a furious wind did blow,
Which did six hundred houses overthrow.
The City Gloucester was by Welshmen sacked.
Northumberland was by King William wracked:
William de Oue, and William de Aluery,
In cruel torments dyed at Salisbury.
Duke Robert laid all Normandy to gage
Unto the King, wars with the Turks to wage.
Westminster Hall was built, the Danes came in,
And the Orchades, and the I Will of Man did win.
But as the King was hunting in Hampshire,
Sir Walter Tirr^ll shooting at a Dear,
The Arrow glauncing'gainst a Tree by chance,
The Unhappy King killed, by the hapless Glaunce.
A Colliers Cart to Winchester did bring
The Corpse, where vnbemoand they laid the King.
Rufus. In the 8. year of his reign, the Christian Army went to Jerusalem
under the conduct of Godfry Duke of Bulleine, in which wars served Robert
Duke of Normandy the Kings eldest brother, who pawned his Dukedom for 16666
pounds weight of silver. In the 11. year the Lands of the late Earl Godwine
sunk in the sea, and are to this day called Godwine sands. This King died the
2. of August 1100. he reigned 12. years, 11. months, and was buried at
Winchester.

Henry the first. An. Dom. 1100.


THis Henry (for his wisdom Beuclarke named)
Th'vnlawfull Laws and measures he reclaimed.
The Norman Duke, eld'st Brother to the King,
To claim the Crown a mighty Host did bring.
Saint Bartholomewes was founded and Saint Gyles,
And Henry stopped Duke Roberts mouth with wiles.
Then peace was made; but after, wars did rise,
The King tooke's brother, and put out his eyes.
Here Windsor Church and Castle were erected,
And Wales (rebeld) most sharply was corrected.
All the King's Sons and eight score persons more,
Were drowned by tempest near the Norman shore.
Thus all his Joy in Childrens loss bereft,
Save only Maud, the Widow Empress left,
Whom Geffrey Anioy's Earl to wife did get,
From whom did spring the name Plant^genet.
The King proclaimed his Daughter, or her seed,
After his death should in the Realm succeed,
And after thirty five years time was past,
King Henry by a surfeit breathed his last.
Much trouble in his days this Kingdom wearied,
He dyed, and dead, at Redding he lies buried.
Thus God that lifts the low, casts down the high,
Caused all the Conquerors sons untimely dye.
Henry the 1. He held the Crown wrongfully from his elder brother Robert Duke
of Normandy, and ouercomming him in battle, most unnaturally put out his eyes:
he reigned 35. y^res, his brains, eyes and bowels were buried at Roane in
France, and the rest of his body at Redding: his Phisician that opened his
head, was killed suddenly with the stench of his brains.

King Stephen. An. Dom. 1135.


STephen Earl of B^loign, (The Earl of Bloys his son)
From the Empress Maud this famous Kingdom won.
Domestike, foreign, dangerous discords,
'Twixt factions f^ctions, of the King and's Lords,
Wars 'twixt the King and the Empress for the crown,
Both tasted Fortunes favors, and her frown,
Now up, now down, like balls at Tennis tossed,
Till Stephen gained the goal, and th'Empresse lost.
And after eighteen years were come and gone,
The King not having any lawful Son,
He dyed, and changed his Kingdom and his strength,
For a small Sepulcher of six foot length.
King Stephen. He was noble, valiant, liberal, and politic, and almost in
continual trouble. In the 1. year of his reign a fire burnt all the street,
from London-stone East, to Paul's, and West, to Algate, and within 2. years
after, the ci^ties of York, Rochester, and Bathe, were burnt. He reigned 18.
years, 10. months, and was buried at Feuersham.

Henry the second. An Dom. 1154.


THis King unto the Empress Maud was Heir,
And lawfully obtained the Regal Chair,
He was courageous, and yet most unchaste,
Which Vice, his other Virtues all defaced.
He loved fair Rosamond, the worlds fair Rose,
For which his wife and children turned his foes.
He made his son Copartner in his Crown,
Who raised strong wars to put his Father down.
Fair Rosamond at Woodstock by the Queen
Was poisoned, in reuengefull-iealous spleen.
In toil, and trouble, with his Sons and Peers,
The King reigned almost five and thirty years.
He near his death did curse his day of birth,
He cursed his Sons, and sadly left the earth,
He at Founteuerard in his Tomb was laid.
And his Son Richard next the Scepter swaid.
Henry the 2. In the 12. year of this King an earthquake in Norfolk, Suffolk,
and Elye, that made bells ring with shaking the steeples, and overthrew men that
stood on their feet. Nicholas Breakespeare, an Englishman was Pope of Rome,
and was named Adrian the fourth, he gave the Lord-shippe of Ireland to King
Henry.

Richard Cordelion. An. Dom. 1189.


THis brave victorious Lyon-hearted Prince,
The foes of Christ, in Jury did convince:
Whilst at Jerusalem he wan Renown,
His Brother John at home usurped his Crown.
And as he home returned, (his own to gain)
By Austria's Duke the King was Prisoner taken.
His ransom was an hundred thousand pound,
Which paid, in England he again was crowned.
Yet after nine full years, and 9. months reign,
He with a Shot was killed in Aquitane,
His burial at (...) was ^hought meet,
At his dead Fathers, second Henry's feet.
Richard the 1. he conquered the kingdom of Cypress, and he took from the
Infidels the Cities of Acon, and Ioppa, and delivered them to Christians. In
his 2. year, the bones of the renowned King Arthur were found at Glastenbury.
King Richards bowels were buried at Chalne Castle in Aquitane, his heart at
Roane, and his body at Founteuerard.

King John. An. Dom. 1199.


John Earl of Morton took the regal Seat,
His state, his toil, his pomp, his cares, all great:
The French, the Welsh, the Scotsh, all proved his foes,
The Pope King John did from his Crown depose.
His Lords rebel'd, from France the Dolphin came,
And wasted England much with sword and flame.
And after seventeen years were full expired.
King John being poisoned, to his grave retired.
King John. In the 8. year many men, Women, and cattle were slain with
thunder, and many houses burnt, and the corn was beaten down with hail as
big as goose eggs.

Some say, the King was po^son'd by a monk, and others write that he died of a
surfeit at Newark, but his life was full of troubles, and after his death he
was by base villains robbed and left naked without any thing to cover the
corpse, he was buried at Worcester.

Henry the third. An. Dom. 1216.


WArs, bloody wars, the French in England made,
Strong holds, Towns, Towers and Castles they invade.
But afterward it was K. Henry's chance,
By force perforce to force them back to France.
Great discord 'twixt the King and Barons were,
And factions did the Realm in pieces tear.
A world of mischiefs did this Land abide,
And fifty six years reigned the King, and died.
Henry the 3. This King was born at Winchester, crowned at Gloucester, and
buried at Westminster. In the 17. of his reign on the 8. of April 1233. there
were 5 Sons in the firmament, and the natural Sun was as red as blood.

Edward Long-shanks. An. Dom. 1272.


THis was a hardy, wise, Victorious King,
The Welshmen he did to subjection bring:
He Scotland wan, and brought from thence (by fate)
Their Crown, their Scepter, Chair, and Cloth of state,
That Kingdom with oppression sore he brusde,
Much tyranny and bloodshed there he used.
When thirty five years he the Crown had kept,
At Westminster, he with his Father slept.
Edward the 1. In the 13. year his son Edward was borne at Carnaruan, who
was the first son of any King of England that was Prince of Wales.

An. 17. Wheat at 3. pence the Bushel.

Edward of Carnaruan. An. Dom. 1307.


THe hard mis haps that did this King attend,
The wretched life, and lamentable end,
Which he endured the like has never bin seen,
Deposed, and poisoned by his cruel Queen.
Which when the poison had no force to kill,
Another way she wrought her wicked will.
Into his Fundament a red hot Spit
Was thrust, which made his Royal heart to split.
In his 8. year such a dearth, that dogs and horses were good food, many ate
their own children, and old prisoners tore such as were newly committed in
pieces, and devoured them half living. The King reigned 19. years 6. months.

Edward the third. An. Dom. 1316.


IN Peace and war, ^his King was right, and good,
He did reu^nge his murdered Fathers blood:
He, and the black Prince, his most valiant Son,
The field at Cress^ and at Poytiers won,
At first and l^st in his victorious reign,
Of French and Scots, were six score thousand slain.
And more, (his glory further to advance)
He took the Kings of Scotland and of France.
The noble order of the Garter, he
At Windsor, instituted caused to be.
When fifty years this Land had him obaid,
At Westminster he in his tomb was laid.
In his 12. year he quartered the Arms of England and France, as they are at
this day. Henry Pichard Vi^tner, in his Maioralty feasted at once, Edward King
of England, David King of Scotland, John King of France, the King of Cypres,
the Prince of Wales, the Dolphin of France, with many other great Personages of
Honor and Worship.

Richard the second. An. Dom. 1377.


Young King, rash counsel, laws and right neglected,
The good put down, the bad in State ^rected:
The Court with knaves and flat'rers here did swarm,
The Kingdom, (like a Farm) was let to Farm.
The Commons rose in Armies, Rou^es, and throngs,
And by foul treason, would (...) foul wrongs.
In this Kings reign, began the Civil war,
(Unnaturally) 'twixt York and Lancaster.
Oppression on oppression, breeds Confusion,
Bad Prologue, bad Proceeding, bad Conclusion:
King Richard, twenty two years reigned, misse-led,
Deposed and at Pomfret knocked ith'head.
This King was Grandchild to Edward the 3. and son to the black Prince, he
was borne at Burdeux in France, and was but 11. years old when he was crowned,
so that all his miserable calamity may be imputed to his not having or not
regarding good counsel.

Henry the fourth. An. Dom. 1399.


THe Crown wrong got from the wrong' doing king,
More grief then joy did to King Henry bring:
France, England, Scotland, Wales, arose in Arms,
And menaced Henry, with most fierce Alarmes:
Hot Percy, Douglas, Mortimer, Glend^wre,
At Shrewsbury, the King or^threw their power,
He fourteen years did reign, and then did dye,
At Cant^rbury buried, he does lie.
Henry the 4. He began his reign the 29. of September, 1399. and the 14. of
February following, King Richard the 2. being in prison at Pomfret-Castle, was
murdered. The reign of King Henry was a continual war and trouble.

Henry the fifth. An. Dom. 1412.


THis was a King Renowned n^ere and far,
A Mars of men, a Thunderbolt of war:
At Agencourt the French were overthrown,
And Henry heir proclaimed unto that Crown.
^ine years reign this valiant Prince wan more,
I hena^ the Kings did after or before.
Entombed at Westminster his Carkas lies,
His soul did (like his Acts) ascend the skies.
Henry the 5. In his 3. year he past the sea with 1000. (...) of Ships and
Vessels into France. His tomb or statue was covered with silver, but this iron
age has devoured

Henry the sixth. An. Dom. 1422.


THis Infant Prince scarce being nine months old,
The Realms of France and England he did hold
But he incapable through want of years,
Was ouer-gouern'd by mis-gouern'd Peers.
Now York and Lancaster, with bloody wars,
Both wound this kingdom, with deep deadly scars.
Wh^st this good King by York opposed, deposed,
Exposed to dangers, is captived, (...)'d,
His (...) ^xilde, his son and many friends,
F^d, murdered, slaughtred; lastly, ^ate contends
To crown him once again, who then at last
Was murdered, thirty nine years being past.
King Henry the fixed, being 10. years old, was crowned King of France in Paris,
but with the strife betwixt the Nobility, and the Commons in England, the most
part of France was lost again, which was never recovered since.

Edward the fourth. An. Dom. 1460.


EDward, the 4 the house of Yorks great heir,
By bloody wars attained the Regal Chair^,
The poor King Henry into Scotland fled,
And four years there was royally clothed and fed,
Still good success^ with him was in the wane,
He by King Edwards power at last was taken.
But yet before the tenth year of his reign,
Hence Edward fled, and Henry crowned again.
By Warwicks means six months he held the same,
Till Edward back in arms to England came,
And fighting stoutly, made this kingdom yield,
And slew great Warwicks Earl at Barnet field.
Thus Civil wars on wars, and broils on broils,
And England against England spils and spoils,
Now York, then Lancaster, then York again
Quels Lancaster; thus joy, grief, pleasure, pain,
Does like inconstant waters ebb and flow:
Ones rising is the others overthrow.
King Edward, twenty two years ruled this Land,
And lies at Windsor, where his Tomb does stand.
Edward the 4. In the first year on Palme-sunday, 1460. there was a battle
fought betwixt King Edward and King Henry, near Todcaster, wherein were slain
of Englishmen on both sides 53000, 700, and 11. persons: The bloody victory
fell to King Edward. In the 10. year of his reign, he was forced to forsake
this Land, whereby King Henry was restored again to the Crown. But shortly
after, Edward returned, and Henry was ^urthered.

Edward the fifth. An. Dom. 1483.


HIgh birth, blood, state, and innocent in years,
Eclipsed, and murdered by insulting Peers:
This King was never crowned, short was his reign:
For to be short, he in short space was slain.
Edward the 5. Within 3. months after the death of his father, he and his
brother Richard Duke of York, were deprived both of their lives, and he of the
Crown, by their tyrannous Uncle Richard, Duke of Gloucester.

Richard the third. An. Dom. 1483.


BY reason, mischief, murder and debate.
Usurping Richard won the royal state:
Vnnatnrally the children of his brothe.
The King, and Duke of York he caused to smother.
For Sir James Tirrell, Dighton and Black Will,
Did in the Tower these harmless Princes kill,
Buckinghams Duke did raise King Richard high,
And for reward he lost his head thereby.
A fellow to this King I scarce can find.
His shape deformed, and crooked like his mind.
Most cruel, tyrannous, inconstant, stout,
Courageous, hardy, to abide all dangers out,
Yet when his sins were mellow, ripe and full,
The Almighty's Justice then his plum^s did pull:
By bloody means he did the kingdom gain,
And lost it so, at Bosworth being slain.
This Richard was never a good subject; but wh^ he had got the Crown, he
striued by all means to be a good King, for in his short reign of two years,
two mo^s, he made very profitable Laws, which are yet in force: by which it
may be perceived how willing he was to (...) his misspent time.

Henry the seventh. An. Dom. 1485.


When Civil wars, full fourscore years and more,
Had made this kingdom welter in her Gore:
When eighty of the royal blood were killed,
That York and Lancasters cross faction held,
Then God in mercy, looking on this Land,
Brought in this Prince, with a triumphant band,
The only Heir of the Lancastrian line,
Who grac^ously consented to combine,
To ease poor England of a world of anon,
And make the red Rose and the white but one,
By Marriage with Elizabeth the fair,
Fourth Edwards daughter, and Yorks only heir.
But Margret Burgunds Lancaster stormed and frowned,
That th'heire of Lancaster in state was crowned.
A counterfeit, one Lambert she suborned,
(Beign with Princely ornaments adorned)
To claim the State in name of Cla^ce son,
Who in the Tower before to death was done.
Wars' against the French King Henry did maintain,
And Edward brave Lord Wooduil^ there was slain.
Northumberlands great Earl (for the Kings right)
Was slain by Northern rebels in sharp fight.
The King besiedged Boloigne, but a Peace
The French king sought, and so the siedge did cease.
Still Burgunds Duchess, (with inueterate hate)
Did seek to ruin Henry's Royal state:
She caused one Perkin Warbecke, to put on
The name of Richard, Edwards murdered son,
Which Richard, was the youngest of the twain
Of Edwards sons that in the Tower was slain.
The King at last these traitors did confound,
And Perkin for a counterfeit was found.
Sir William Stanley, (once the Kings best friend)
At Tower hill, on a Scaffold had his end.
On Black Heath Cornish rebels were o'rthrowne,
A Shoemaker did claine King Henry's Crown.
The Earl of Warwick lost his hapless head,
And Lady Katherine did Prince Arthur wed.
But ere six months were fully gone and past,
In Ludlow Castle, Arthur breathed his last.
King Henry built his Chapel from the ground,
At Westminster, whose like can scarce be found.
Fair Margret eldest daughter to our King,
King James the fourth of (...) home did bring,
Where those two Princes, with great pomp and cheer,
In State at Edenborough married were.
But as all Mortal things are tra^ory,
So to an end came H^nrie ^arthly glory.
Twenty three years, and 8. months here he swaid,
And then at Westminster, i^s Tomb was laid.
He all his Life had variable share,
Of Peace, War, Joy Grief, Royalty and Care.
In his 1. year in 7. weeks space, there dyed in London 2. Masors, and 6.
Aldermen, besides many hundred others of a strange sweating sickness, 1485.

Anno Reg. 12. at Saint Needs in Bedfordshire, there fell bail-stones 18.
inches about.

King James the 4. of Scotland, married Margret, eldest daughter to Henry the
7. from whom our gracious Sovereign is lineally descended.

Henry the eight. An. Dom. 1509.


FRom both the Lines, and both the loins did spring
Of York and Lancaster, this mighty King:
Katherine that was his brothers wife of late,
He took to wife, and crowned her Queen in state.
Empson and Dudley lost their heads at Tower,
For racking the poor Commons by their power.
Wars, dreadful wars, arose 'twixt us and France,
Lord Edward Howard, drowned by mis-chance
At Breast, he was high Admiral in fight,
Cast ouerboord, died like a valiant Knight.
In England Suffolks Duke did lose his head,
The King to Tur^in d^d an army lead,
Turney he won with his victorious blade,
King James of Scotland, England did invade:
But Surries Earl, the Sco^sh King overcame,
Who lost life there, but won immortal fame.
Now Cardinal Wol^ey, in the Kings high Grace,
Was raised to honors, from great place to place,
Lordship on Lordship laid upon his back,
Until the burden was the bearers wrack.
The Duke of Buckingham, his head did lose,
And Luther stoutly did the Pope oppose,
Blind ignorance that long had looked awry,
Began to see Truth with a clearer eye,
And then the King (inspired with fervent Zeal)
Reformed both the Church and Common weal,
Jehovah with his power Omnipotent,
Did make this King his gracious instrument,
TO unmask his Truth from Antichristian fables,
And purge this woeful Land from Babel^ bables.
This King at Boloigne was victorious;
In peace and war, Magnifique, Glorious;
In his rage bounty he did often express,
His Liberality to be excess,
In Revels, Iusts, and Turnies he spent more,
Then five of his Forefathers did before,
His Avarice was all for Noble fame,
Amongst the Worthies to inrole his Name,
A valiant Champion for the Faiths defense,
Was the great Title of this mighty Prince.
Six wives he had, 3. Kates, 2. Annes, one Jane,
Two were diuorc'd, two at the block were slain:
One son and two fair daughters he did leave,
Who each from other did the Crown receive:
The first was Edward; Mary next, whose death
Left State, and Realm, to Queen Elizabeth.
He thirty eight years kept this Royal Room,
At Windsor he is entered without a Tomb.
Leeth, Edenbourgh, and diverse other parts of Scotland were spoiled by Sir John
Dudley, Lord Viscount Lisle, Lord high Admiral of England, with a Navy of 200.
tall Ships.

Anno 1544. King Henry went to Boloigne, he entered France the 13. of July, and
into Boloigne the 25. of September, in which year were taken 300. French Ships
for prizes.

Edward the sixth. An. Dom. 1546.


HAd this Kings reign bin long, as it was good,
Religion in a peaceable state had stood,
What might have his age bin, when his blessed youth,
So valiantly advanced Gods sacred truth?
At nine years age, the Crown on him he took,
And ere sixteen, he Crown and life forsook.
Too good for earth, the Almighty took his spirit,
And Westminster his Carkas does inherit.
In his 5. year a strange Earthquake did much harm in diverse places of
Surry, and a sweating sickness generally over England, that dispatched those
that were in good health, in 12. hours, or 24. at the most. In one week there
dyed of it in London 806. the most of them being men of best strength.

Queen Mary. An. Dam. D^


AFter a while this Queen had worn the Crown,
Idolatry was raised, and Truth put down,
The Mass, the Images, the Beads and Altars,
By tyranny, by fire, and sword and Halters,
The ungodly bloody Antichristian sway,
Men were force, perforce forced to obey.
Now burning Bonner, Londons Bishop, he
Was from the Marshal-sea again set free:
John Dudley, great Duke of Northumberland,
And Sir John Gates dyed by the Headsmans hand.
With them Sir Thomas Palmer likewise died.
Hoping for heaven, through Jesus Crucified.
In Latin Service must be sung and said,
Because men should not know for what they prayed.
The Emp'rors son, great Philip King of Spain,
A marriage with Queen Mary did obtain:
Against which match, Sir Thomas Wyat rose,
With powers of Kent the Spaniards to oppose.
But Wyat was or'throwne, his army fled,
And on the Tower hill after lost his head.
Lord Gray the Duke of Suffolk also died,
An Axe his Corpse did from his head divide,
A little after, the Lord Thomas Gray,
The Dukes own brother went that headless way.
A Millers son asl^m'd King Edwards name,
And fa sely in that n^me the Crown did claim,
But he was taken and justly whipped and tortured,
And claiming it once more, was hanged and quarterd.
King Pl^lip won Saint. Quintins with great cost.
But after to our shame was Callice lost,
Calli^e was lost, which threescore years and ten,
Had been a Garrison for English men.
Thus by Gods mercy Englands Queen did dye,
And England gained much ease and rest thereby.
Five years and 4. months was her bloody reign,
And all her glory does one grave contain.
Though of her self this Queen was well inclined,
Bad-minded counsel al^red much her mind.
She married Philip King of Spain, on Saint James his day, 1554. at Winchester.

Callice was won by Edward the 3. in the 21. of his reign, 1347. and it was
lost the 1. of January 1557. after the Englishmen had possessed it 210. years.

August 7. 1558 a tempest near Nottingham, beat damn 2 Towns and Churches,
and cast the Bells to the further side of the Churchyard, threw whole sheets
of Lead 400. foot into the fields, where they were crumpled together like burnt
parchment: the stream and mud of the K^er of Trent was blown a-land a quarter
of a mile: a child blown out of a man's hand 100. foot and killed, there fell
hayle 15. Inches about.

Queen Elizabeth. An. Dom. 1558.


A Debora, a Judith, a Susannae,
A Virgin, a Virago, a Diana:
Courageous, Zealous, Learned, Wise and Chaste,
With heavenly, earthly gifts, adorned and graced,
Victorious, glorious, bountious, gracious, good,
And one, whose virtues dignified her blood,
That Muses, Graces, Arms, and liberal Arts,
Amongst all Queens, proclaimed her Queen of hearts,
She did repurifie this Land once more,
From the infection of the Romish whore.
Now Abbeys, Abbots, Fri'rs, Monks, Nuns and Stews,
Masses, and Mass Priests, that men's souls abuse,
Were all cast down, Lamps, Tapers, Relikes, Beads,
And Superstitions that man's soul misse-leads,
All Popish pardons, Bulls. Confessions,
With Crossings, Christening bells, Saints Intercessions,
The Altars, Idols, Images down cast,
All Pilgrimage, and Superstitious Fast,
The acknowledging the Pope for supreme head,
The holy water, and the god of bread,
The mumbling Mattins, and the pickpurse Mass,
These bables this good Queen did turn to grass.
She caused Gods service to be said and sung,
In our own understanding English tongue.
In Scotland and in France, fierce wars she held,
The Irish she subdued when they rebeld,
The Netherlands her name do still admire,
And Spain her like again does not desire.
When forty four years reign was past and gone,
She changed her earthly for a heavenly Throne,
At Greenwich she was borne, at Richmond died,
At Westminster she buried, does abide;
And as the fame of this Imperial Maid,
Is through the world, (by the four winds) displaid,
So shall her memory for ever grace
Her famous birth, her death, and burial place.
At Teuxbury Anno 1574. the 24. of February, being a hard frost, the River of
Seuerne was covered with Flies and Beetles, so that it was thought, within the
length of a pair of Buts, to be 100. quarters of them the ^ils were stopped
with them, but from whence they came, is unknown.

1582. A piece of Land of three Acres in Dorsetshire, in the Parish of
Armitage, was suddenly removed 600. foot from the place where formerly it
stood.

King James. An. Dom. 1601.


When as Elizaes woeful death was act^d:
When this lamenting land was half (...):
When tears e^ch loyal heart with grief had drowned,
Then came this King and made our jove's abound,
Ordained for us by heavenly power divine,
Then from the North this glorious star did shine,
The Royal Image of the Prince of Peace,
The blessed Concorder that made wars to cease;
By Name a S T E V V A R D, and by Nature one,
Appointed from Iehonahs sacred Throne,
And by the almighty's hand supported ever,
That Treason or the Devil should hurt him never:
And as his Zeal unto his God was great,
Gods blessings on him were each way complete,
Rich in his Subjects love (a Kings best treasure)
Rich in content, (a Riches above measure)
Rich in his Princely Issue, and in them,
Rich in his hopeful Branches of his stem;
Rich in Munition and a Navy Royal,
And richer then all Kings in servants Loyal.
When Hell and Ro^ together did conspire,
^o blow him and his Kingdom up with fire,
Then did the King of Kings preserve our King,
And all the Traitors to confusion bring.
And whosoever reckons up from first to last,
The many hel-hatch'd dangers he has past
Through all his days, he will believe (no doubt)
That he with heavenly powers was walled about.
All Christian Princes held his friendship dear,
Was feared for love, and not beloved for fear:
And Pagan Monarchs were in L^ague combined
With him, as far as is the Eastern Ind^.
And like a flame a midst a River fixed,
So was his Justice with his m^rcy mixed:
He strived to imitate his Ma^er still,
And clemency preserved where Law (...):
He has cured England and (...) (...) wounds,
And made them both great ((...)) Britains bounds
All bloody deadly fewds (...) (...) (...)
And cankered hate he turned to Christian (...),
The mouth of war he muzzled mu^e (...) (...),
He stilled the roaring Cannon and the (...)
Secure in peace, his people sup and dine, (...)
With their own fig trees shaded and (...)
Whilst in an uproar most of Christendom,
One Nation does another (...).
Unto the King of Kings let us praises sing.
For giving us this ^appy peaceful King.
None know so well how they should peace prefer,
As those that know the miseries of war:
It Is true (though (...)) and must not be forgot,
The wars are sweet to such as know them not.
Peace (happy peace) does spread tranq^illity,
Through all the bounds of Britains Monarchy;
And may we all our actions still address,
For peace with God, and war against wickedness.
Unto which peace of God this King's (...),
To reign in glory that shall never be ended.
His mortal part at Westminster entered,
His soul and Fame immortally preferred.
God did wonderfully preserve him (upon two several Tuesdaies) from 2 most
dangerous treas^, the one at the Town of Saint Iohnston in Scotland, on
Tuesday the 5. of August, 1600. where the Earl of Gowry attempted to kill his
Majesty. The ^her was in England, in that fearful treason and deliverance from
the Powder Plot, on Tuesday the 5. of November. 1606.

King CHARLES.


TWo Williams, Henry's 8. 1. Steven, 1. John,
Six Edwards, Richards 3. and 1. Queen Mary:
Elizabeth, and James, all dead and gone,
Our gracious Charles does now the Scepter carry;
And may they live and dye of God accursed,
Who wish the pre^dice of Charles the first.
Just 25. Kings and Queens of England since the Norman Conquest.

FINIS.
THIS AVTHOR HAS newly caused all his works (being above 60.) to be printed
into one Volume, the Names of all which Works are set down in this following
Catalogue.
Tailors Urania. The life and death of the Virgin Mary. The whip of Pride.
Against cursing and swearing. The fearful Summer. Christian Admonitions. The
travel of tweluepence. The Armado. The Beggar. Tailors Goose. Jack a Lent.
Tailors peninlesse Pilgrimage, The Sculler. The Dolphins danger. The Cormorant.
A sea fight by Captain Wedall. The praise of Hempseed. Tailors Pastoral.
Prince Charles his welcome from Spain. An English man's love to Bohemia. Three
weeks and three days travels Tailors farewell ^o Bohemia. Sir Gregory
Nonsense. A very merry Whir^y voyage. The great O Tnole. A voyage to the West.
The scourge of baseness. Tailors Motto. Odcombs complaint. Coriats
resurrection. Laugh and be fat. Coriats news. A Bawd. A Whore. A Thief. A
Hangman. The unnatural Father. Tailors revenge. Fenners defense. A cast over
the water. The praise of clean Linen. The Water-mans suit. Wit and mirth. A
Dog of War. The world runs on Wheels. The nipping or snipping of abuses. A
Chronicle from Brute. A Brief from the conquest. A Farewell to the Tower
bottles. The marriage of the Princess Elizabeth. An Elegy for King James. An
Elegy for the Earl of Nottingham. An Elegy for the Earl of Holdernesse. An
Elegy for the Bishop of Winchester. An Elegy for the Duke of Richmond. An Elegy
for John Moray Esquire. The sum of the Bible in verse. The sum of the Book
of Martyrs in verse. The Churches deliverances. Archies making peace with
France. The Acts and exployts of Wood the great Eater, in Kent.
FINIS.

