NEWS FROM JERUSALEM:

Containing, 1. The beauty of the City of the great King. 2. The Vanity of
the Isles of the sonns of men. 3. The coming of the Kings Son.


Tom pulchra es Amica mea, non est macula in te. Cant. 4. Written by AVGVSTIN
TAILOR, Preacher at Hawarden.

LONDON, Printed by Augustine Matthewes, dwelling in the Parsonage house in
Bride Lane, near Fleet Street. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable ANNE, the Lady CARRE, only Daughter to the thrice
Noble Lord, WILLIAM Earl of DARBY, etc.
IF it may please you to Survey,
These Lines with the eyes of Grace,
You Will not repent, for surely they
Do Aim at Glories Place.
They are your Own; I did intend
When I was great with young
Of these Conceptions, some great Friend
Should Patronage my Song.
And may with Honor, Sacred things
Can nere be lodged too well;
Gods holy Truth in breasts of Kings
Beseems best to dwell.
Most Virtuous Noble Lady, I
Have (from your Bounty) wing,
And whilst my Muse has power to fly,
Some holy Offering
She will prefer, The Body may
Wi h all her parts agree
To rule the mind; but I dare say,
The Soul can never be
Contained in such base limits. No!
It aims at better things,
And cannot rest until it know,
That Camp where is none but Kings.
Great and Good Lady, hold your Hand,
And to requite your pains,
You shall more true Joy understand,
Then all the world contains.
Peruse this well, and if it does
Your inward Thoughts advance,
Give God the Praise and Honor both,
And me your Countenance.
Ever disposed to be at your Honorable dispose, Augustine Tailor.

THE GREAT KINGS CITY.
1 A Arise my soul from death and Hell,
Soar with the wings of Love,
To see where Saints and Angels dwell
with God in bliss above.
2 Remember thou a stranger art,
and wandering Pilgrim here,
And shall be until thou depart
to Saints thy fellows there.
3 An exile poor on earth oppressed
amongst professed Foes,
The World, the Flesh, the Devils protest
to multiply thy woes:
4 Immortal Soul why is it thou stays
to build thy House on Sand,
The Bridegroom comes, the music plays,
the Marriage is at hand.
5 A wedding garment thou must have,
I mean a virtuous life:
For other garments are not grave
for such a Princ s wife.
6 Therefore renounce all earthly pelf,
a heavenly Race to run,
Forsake the world, and frame thy self,
To live as Saints have done.
7 Ascend above the Azure sky,
and things that mortal be,
Beyond the starry Heavens hie,
if thou true joys would see.
8 A City there prepared is,
for stately Order rare,
A Princely place adorned with bliss,
And sumptuous buildings fair,
9 Jerusalem that place is called,
most glorious to behold,
The which with precious stones is walled,
whose streets are pau'd with gold.
10 Amid the streets the well of Life,
with golden Streams does flow,
Upon whose Banks the Tree of Life
in seemly sort does grow.
11 With pleasant fruits of every kind,
fit for immortal taste,
Upon whose root there shall thou sind,
the heavenly Manna placed.
12 There David sits with Harp in hand,
as Master of the Quire,
Most happy those that understand,
and may his Music hear.
13 There Noah with all the Just does reign,
There do the Prophets land,
Patriarchs old do there remain
with scepters in their hands.
14 There all our good progenitors,
do wish and wayt for thee,
And thousands of thine Ancestors,
which thou did never see.
15 There millions of bright Angels be,
and Saints in glory brave,
And every one is glad to see
the joys their fellows have.
16 There Marryrs and Apostles live,
there sacred Virgins stay,
There they do wayt, and duly give
attendance night and day.
17 There blessed Mary sweetly sings,
with sweet melodious voice,
The Saints, and all Caelestiall things,
for Joy with her rejoice.
18 Sad Magdalen has left her moan,
her sighs, and sobbs do cease,
Now all her tears and griefs are gone,
and she is in endless peace.
19 Ten thousand tongues cannot expound,
nor Angels skill indite,
The passing pleasures there abound,
the Joys that there delight.
20 There is combined the complete sum,
that loved to live well:
There all the Kings in order come,
that honou'd Israel.
21 There shall thou see the Cherubins,
in glorious State excel,
The Angels and the Seraphins,
where souls of Saints do dwell.
22 O happy time to meet our Friends,
and loving Kinsfolk there,
To line in bliss that never ends,
with them we loved so dear.
23 No bliss nor pleasure there does want,
that man may wish to have:
No Joys, nor true delights are scant,
thou can devise to crave.
24 If Wealth or Honor thou desire,
or Happy days to see,
There nothing wants thou can require,
for thou a Prince shall be.
25 Thy Garments shall be all of bliss,
thou shall a Scepter bear,
And Dyadem more precious is,
then earthly Princes wear.
26 If thou desire dainty Cheer,
and rich and costly Meat;
The Bread and Drink of Life is there,
and food that Angels eat.
27 In aged years, if thou request
to live with faithful friends,
With Saints and Angels thou shall rest,
in bliss that never ends.
28 If Learning, Wisdom, Wit, or Health,
may satisfy thy mind,
A boundless, endless Commonwealth,
is there for thee assigned.
29 Or if thou list in reverend wise,
the will of God to do,
There is the Church, the Sacrifice,
the Priest, and Altar too.
30 There God himself does hear our plaints,
and pities Christians case,
Our ancient friends (now holy Saints)
beholds him face to face.
31 There triumph over sin is won,
the Devil, and Death defaced,
The Kingdom of the Just begun,
and there in glory placed:
32 There Tyrants nothing have to do,
nor Rack, nor Rope is known:
Tormentors all, and Satan too,
are fully overthrown.
33 To live upon this Earth a King,
ten thousand years, I say:
To thee such pleasure cannot bring,
as there to live a day.
34 No rude nor railing Heretic,
that strange Religion make:
No temporizing Schismatique,
that Christ and Church forsake,
35 Shall enter there, or find a place,
wherein to take repose:
Those that have lived the life of grace,
the life of glory knows
36 Nothing unclean nothing impure,
can be admitted there.
God loves what is like himself be sure,
things spotless, bright, and clear.
37 For Envy there is no place to rest,
foul Blasphemy's debarred,
Slander presumes to be a Ghest,
but Heaven was prepared
38 For no such stuff; Ambition may
suppose t'ascend on hye:
But that is an error, there is no stay
for such Society.
39 Joy, Piety, Bounty, Patience, Faith,
are sure to soar above:
For Sion (as the Ancients says)
was built for Peace and Love.
40 This place is free from Need and Night,
for Day and plenty lasts:
Christ's is the Sun of endless light,
not subject t'ouer-casts.
41 The bodies there of every one,
exceeds the Crystal clear,
And shines far brighter then the Sun,
when it does fairest appear:
42 No Moon, nor Stars, nor Candles there
can profit any whit:
They show much like as clouds do hear,
that yield no benefit.
43 The Citizens thereof are Saints,
the Gouernour's the Lamb;
No Treasure, neither pleasure wants,
that God can give to man.
44 And if Jehovah use his skill,
to make a place complete,
To praise the work of his best will,
none can but those that see it.
45 Who cannot comprehend, admire,
and we shall see in time,
The state of those that do aspire
to that celestial Clyme.
46 Remove your thoughts to better things,
the nature of the mind,
Aspires, and seeks a camp of Kings,
and cannot be confined.
47 A King a time may be contained
under the poorest roof:
But long no Monarch so remained,
I need to bring no proof.
48 Even so the soul awhile may night
within weak walls of clay,
But wayts the time to take her flight,
to find a better day.
49 Then since there is no certain good
allotted here below:
Get wings against another Flood,
and teach thy self to know,
50 The Towers of Bethell, Babells down,
and like to rise no more,
Except to fall; seek thou the Town,
from which old Simon bore
51 His Masters Cross; for thou must pass
the Valley to the Mount,
Then change thy self from what thou was,
and make a full account,
52 To leave the earthly City, and
prepare thy self to sing,
Such Songs as fits the Holy Land,
to praise so great a King.
53 O let no graceless Sirens Song,
thy graces ouer-cast:
If thou want strength to come along,
bind thy self to the Mast
54 Of Heavens holy Ship, the Church;
yet there thou may be tossed:
But for her safest Harbor search,
and thou can not be lost.
55 The Owner of the Ship may wink,
and Passengers may weep,
When they as Peter thought, do think
the Master is asleep,
56 And Winds and Seas do threaten death,
but then like Peter call;
And Winds, and Seas, and Hell beneath,
confess to obey him all.
57 Who may it be that these obey?
Iehouahs only Son,
Sailing for Heaven: Happy they
that in this passage run
58 Each one will venture to find Land,
that yields small Gemmes of price,
And for a trifle take in hand
a tedious enterprise.
59 As 'twas, it is, Canaans Gold,
is gracelessely refused,
For Straw in Egypt: but why should
the best be thus abused?
60 Why buy men profane Books apace,
and leave the sacred Story?
For want of grace; and want of grace
will breed the want of glory.
61 Therefore you that desire those things,
prepared with God above,
Contemn the world, and take the wings
of Faith of Hope, and Love.
62 The Heavens are open, the Way is light,
true Joys abounds amain:
The Lamb and Bride in glory bright,
eternally shall reign.
63 In Persons three, in Essence one,
God grant we all adore;
Not only evermore alone,
but ever, more and more. Amen.
FINIS.
THE MISERY OF THE WORLD.

Or The Vanity of the Isles of the sons of men.

Hoc momentum vnde pendet aeternitas.

By AVGVSTIN TAILOR, Preacher at Hawarden.

LONDON, Printed by Augustine Matthewes, dwelling in the Parsonage house. in
Bride Lane, near Fleet Street. 1623.

To the Right Worshipful WILLIAM RAVENSCROFT, Esquire, etc. a Principal of
the Honorable Society of Lincolnes Inn.
WOrthy Sir, it has been a proper custom in all ages amongst all (but
especially the best) sorts of people, to requite every benefit (at the least
with gratitude,) for it is found in the rules of humane equity, non datur
beneficium, nisi propter ossicium, and if it be so, that no benefit is
bestowed, but in regard of some office to be performed for it, then your
bounties weekly bestowed in so large measure in our Church of Hawarden,
toward the relief of them most needful in that Jurisdiction) deserves a
public testimonial of many thankful voices, and not to be a requital to
you, but to be an excitall to others to do the like. In a word, your dative
act unto your native place shall find rewards at God, and should find
imitation, but shall find commendation with men: being an act both good,
great, and lasting. And since your bounties (truly construed) are Gods
blessings, J take it to belong to me to erect some column in your memorial,
in the behalf of those that in so great measure taste your gracious gifts, for
since I am appointed to offer their sacrifice to God, I am likewise allotted to
conduct their thankefulnes to you; not to flatter you, for I know you are not
vain glorious, because it is known you are charitable: and charity and
vainglory were never yet chamberfellowes; and therefore that (as you do) you
may still seek for those treasures above, I present you with the vanity of
these trifles below; the baseness of the latter, inuites you to pursue the
excellency of the former: and as you have begun with Grace, so without
question you shall finish with glory, which is the earnest desire of

Your worships in the service of God, AVGVSTIN TAILOR.

THE MISERY OF THF WORLD.
IF any one long after life, and desires to see good days, let him refrain
his tongue from evil, remove his feet out of the paths of Impiety, hold his
hands from all acts of Severity, wash his heart from all thoughts of
impuritie, and then willingly cast aside the coat of Iniquity; and having put
it off, put it on no more; let every one strive to obtain a reformation, and
then to continue perfect: It is most apparent every one desires to see many
days, but, it is very doubtful that few desires to see good days; and it is
true (for ipse dixit) all those that do not desire to see good days, are
certain to be partakers of many evil nights; for the decree is out that none
can disanull; those that do not love the light, are deomed to be shut up in
darkness: for the unfortunate unfurnished (unfortunate to be unfurnished)
wicked man, heard this sentence denounced against him, when in speachlesse
silence his ears were forced to entertain the judgment of damnation, that in
the days of peace would not receive the glad-tidings of Salvation, Matthew. 22.
Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into utter
daskenesse, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, sorced howling, and
continual torments, the horrible clamours of the damned souls; there is
nothing to be seen but darkness, nothing to be heard but horror, nothing
to be understood but confusion, nothing to be known but dolours, nothing to
be felt but torments, and last of all, which is worst of all, there is no end
of these, they are eternal.

And these remains for those that will not put off the works of darkness,
and put on the armor of light, that will not cease to do evil, and learn to
do well, that will not cast away the rags of wickedness polluted with their
own miseries, and seek the white robes of righteousness prepared by our
Saviors mercies. There is none (no not the meanest) shut from the benefit of
salvation; God has bestowed upon us the word Incarnate, wherein God was made
man, Ioh. 1. The Word was made flesh, and dwell amongst us, and we saw the
glory of it as the glory of the only begotten son of God, full of grace and
truth: so that no greater dignity could be bestowed upon us, then to be
personally and bodily joined unto the nature of God in the only begotten Son
of God: In few words, man could have been set no nearer the Godhead, unless he
had been altogether changed into it. We are the children of a gracious Father,
which has provided for every towardly child an everlasting inheritance;
therefore since the book is unsealed, let us be careful to search that
sacred Evidence, wherein we may find directions to land us in that fair
Country, which every blessed soul does seek; and now that it may be known
you are bound for Jerusalem, you must forsake those ways that leads to
Babylon, you must content your selves first to endure the cross; and the
promise is, you shall after enjoy the crown: and to move you to remove your
affections to the world to come, and to refuse the infections of the world
present; If you contemn the voice of meaner men, hear a King speak, and He
is Rex magnus, a great King; Regnans super omnia Regna terrae, Reigning over
all the Kingdoms of the world, he advises us, Matthew. 6.33. Seek first the
Kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof, and all things necessary
shall be given unto you.

Now you that are contracted to the world, and the vanities of it, spare a
little time to examine what benefits it can afford, that may move you to put
your confidence in it, or settle your love upon it, and for your own speedy
satisfaction that you may be resolved in as little time as may be convenient.
You that aim to win the world, consider but these two things: first, the
quantity of the purchase; secondly, the quality of the price: and first for
the first.

The quality of the purchase is great, there is honor praise, clothing,
worldly wisdom, riches, and carnal pleasures, and more, and yet the best of
these are to those that trust in them worse then nothing, because, had they
been nothing, they had not been tru^^ed in, therefore they are something
nothing worth; for the time will come (I am afraid) that as Christ once said of
Judas particularly, in Matthew. 26. It had been good for that man if he had not
been borne; so a number will say of themselves plurally, It had been good for
us if we had never been; for better to have no being, then to want a being well.

But let us be further satisfied. Shall we account our selves happy to enjoy
earthly honor? not as it is earthly; for first, it is gotten with much labor,
kept with great costs, and lost with great grief. I remember the great men in
Jury rather chose to deliver Christ to death, then to rob Caesar, or
themselves, of their dignity and honor, Ioh. 11. If we let him alone, he
does so many miracles, he will take away both our place and nation, our honor
and authority. O! I fear policy preuailes against piety, there are too many
(two is many, but there is too too many) that prefers temporal honor before
eternal happiness. It is said, and it is a true report, that Homo vanitati
similis factus est, Man is made like unto vanity, for he loses his breath
with pursuing shadows, or it had not been said, In vanitate sua appenditur
peccator, The sinner is weighed in his own vanity.

Where is now the dignities of all our antique Worthies? Caesar's, was murdered
in the Senate; Alexanders, died of poison; Salomons, is in a dead sleep on an
adulterous bed; Absaloms was hanged in the cords of disobedience, Nimrods
tumbled with Babylon, Nebuchadnezzars is turned to grass, Siseraes is nailed
to the ground, Holofernes honor is beheaded by a silly woman, Senacheribs is
slain in the Temple, Herod's is consumed with vermin, this earthly honor is
so attended with death and infamy, that he that desires it shall in the end
be found guilty of his own endless overthrow. Honor flies from those that
follows it, and follows those that flies it. Who desired it more then the
Monarchs? and who had less? who esteemed it less then the Apostles? and who
had more? those that lived in honor died with disgrace to live in endless
torments; and those that lived in disgrace, died with honor to live in
endless glory. Then we must not be thus satisfied, but seek some better
benefice, Matthew. 21.9.
for it will profit us nothing to win worldly honor.

2 Shall we account our selves happy to enjoy the praise of men? Luke 23.21.
no; who desires the fruits of stinking breath that is rotten before it be
fully ripe? The heathen says; Non refert quam multi laudent te, etc. It
forces not how many praise thee, but how good, for to be praised of the
wicked is to be dispraised, it is Paul's resolution, 1. Cor. 4. I pass very
little to be judged of men. There are a number like the Babylonians spoken of
in the third of Daniel, a little sweet music made them to fall down and
honor Nebuchadnezzars new God, and a little flattering and praise of men will
make a number to dishonor Iaacobs true God. The bright Angels in heaven seeks
not their own but their makers worship, Reu. 22. The glorious Elders takes off
their Crowns and casts them at the feet of the Lamb, and sing not their own,
but their Princes praise: yet man being but a poor worm, would be extolled,
and makes Sycophants and flatterers the best welcome. I can hear none cry
with good King David, Psa. 141. Away with this oil and ointment of sinners, it
shall not come upon my head. A man may have the praise of a multitude, and yet
be near his fall. Note the profit that came to the great Prophet by men's
praise, Matthew. 22. at Jesus coming to Iernsalem, the gates were opened,
bonefires kindled, branches cut, garments spread, trumpets sounded, and the
sacrifice of every one was, Hosanna to the son of David, Matthew. 21.9.
blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord. This praise was great, but
it both begun and ended together, they forgot Hosanna in a few hours, and the
very same lips cried crucifige eum, Luke 23.21.
crucify him, crucify him. Who couets the praise of the people that commends
Barabbas the murderer, and condemns Jesus the Savior? Let us maintain the
Apostles motion; Nolite esse pueri sensibus, be not you children in
understanding: run not after bables, but seek the true treasures; we are set
at liberty to gather gold in Canaan, shall not we then disdain to toil for
straw in Egypt; let us stretch our best endeavors to find some better
benefice, for it will avail us nothing to win worldy praise.

3 Is any true felicity to be found in rich apparel? No, I have read the
King of Cypress having put on princely and sumptuous attire, and being set on
his Royal throne, demanded of Solon if he ever saw a more glorious object.
Solon told him, he had seen cocks, pheasants, and peacockes, and that he
thought those birds were more beautiful, for because their colors were both
fair and natural. It is most true, that we are most wretched of all
creatures, and miseros facit populos peccatum, sin is the thing that makes
men miserable, and we pluck from every thing something to be couerings to our
miseries; one lends us skin, another wool, another furre, another feathers,
another pearl, another gold, another silk, another precious stones and
jewels, yea, every creature, and every element affords some things to furnish
us, and yet we are as proud of this as if it were ours by nature, when indeed
ours is the least part, for if every creature should come and challenge his
own, all our costly couerings would dissolve to nakedness. Therefore that of
David cannot be told too often, Psalm. 39. Doubilesse man walks in a shadow,
and disquieteth himself in vain. Howsoever we draw curtains and couerings
about us, to make us appear more seemly then we are; yet our illness will be
manifest. Clouds that are ouercharged with water must needs drop. God is
omniuident, and the power of policy cannot prevail so much as to conceal any
thing from the Prince of piety: It is not Art, but grace, must help the
defects of nature, we main taine our clothing against the Rule of God. Our
noblest fathers wore coats of skins, Genesis 3. The Saints recorded in the
book of God, Hebr. 11. were but clothed in camels hair and goats skins.
Christ said in Luke 7. they that wear delicate and soft apparel, are in Kings
houses (understand this, lest you take it for a preferme^t) not fighting in the
great Kings camp, but flattering in petty Princes Courts: to check us for
our careless wantonness, (in this kind) there is an example in Luke 16. The
rich Glutton wa^ clothed in fine linen, and curious silks very sumptuously,
and fared very deliciously, died very damnably, and shall live in torments
eternally. Now you that would avoid his portion, damnation, you must detest his
proportion, ambition; for the command is, in vestitu ne glorieris vnquam, see
thou now never take glory in thine habit.

To prevent the destruction which was threatened to Nineveh we find in Jonah 3.
the king commanded to keep a solemn feast and to frame themselves for
mourning, as the outward sign of inward repentance, and he himself forsook
his Throne, put on sackecloth, and sat in ashes. but was it wisely done to put
on so poor attire, to stand in before the greatest king, being to beg his
own and Nineuehs pardon? Yes surely he did wondrous well, he considered,
that although he was a king, since his power was perished, and that he could no
longer continue, except he could beg his liberty at God, (because ambition
and sauciness becomes not beggars) he laid aside his rich clothing, and
poorly went and purchased his own and Niniuehs pardon. O remember Lazarus was
found in rags when he was taken and preferred into Abraham's bosom. And we
find, Lu. 2. CHRIST was but poorly lapt in clouts when he came to conquer
sin, death, and hell, and yet left the earth with glory and victory. Be
advised then, it is not garish apparel that will prefer you; observe the
holy direction, Eccles. 9. at all times let thy garments be white. Clothe your
selves with innocence, and contemn this ambitious furniture; all the gain
comes by it is this, It makes Christians that should die like lambs, to die
like dogs, their skins prove better then their bodies O keep your selves
free from this pride and vaineglory, that you may (without blushing) disdain
such comparisons, and show your selves guiltless, and then seek some other
preferment, for it will profit us nothing to practice proud attire.

4 Next, for worldly wisdom it is little worth, there comes no lasting
advancement by it, because 4. Cor. 3. The wisdom of the world is folly with
God. The wise men of the world Christ did seldom or never choose to do him any
service, for, non multi sapientes secundum carnem. When the Messiah was
promised to come to be the king of the Jews, they expected a great earthly
Prince, a Royal Caesar, and refused Christ, because he came in poverty, so
he was unto them a stumbling block, and the Gentiles sauouring of naught but
earthly wisdom, thought it was a thing unlike, and mere folly for the Son
of God, to leave his Throne in heaven (being so glorious) to descend to earth
to taste of man's miseries, so he was to them foolishness, 1. Cor. 1. This is
worldly wisdom, and who can be happy in it? this shall one day be the
worldly-wise man's confession, Nos insensati vitam i'lorum aes imabamus
insaniam, Wis. 5. We foolish men esteemed the lives of Saints to be but
madness: this shall be many of our wise men's confession, when their confession
comes too late to have a pardon; the wisdom of the world is no more
profitable, and therefore none can be happy in it. In times past the Apostles
preached Christ crucified (with the manner of his offering, and the merit of
his suffering) and the Philosophers and wise men of the world accounted them
fools for their pains.

Indeed the time present does not much alter from the time past, when the
ministers of God took, or takes pains for the fools, they shall be accounted
fools for their pains, for that ^itle is the best that the wisdom of the
world allows them, but the Saints of God have all his messengers in great
regard, for the good turns done by the master, and it becomes well the just
to be thankful: therefore be better advised and seek better treasure, since
there is no true profit in worldly wisdom.

5 For riches, I say to you as Aristippus said to his man that carried his
treasure after him. That which is too weighty cast out. and that which thou
can well, carry. So cast away such triflles as are needless, and keep such
treasures as you may with ease and without danger undergo, as necessary. These
riches are but thorns, they are but miseries and afflictions. And we see,
quomodo suffocant, how they do choke us, by swallowing them too greedy. Paul
esteemed all riches but as dung. Phil. 3. They are indeed but vanity it self.
We find that Solomon was the most absolute pattern of worldly prosperity. 1.
Kings 4. Gold and silver was as plentiful with him as stones, So much, that
the abundance of both, made both little esteemed; his jewels and plate were not
to be valued, his precious apparel and armor was infinite, his Throne of
Majesty was borne up with twelve Lions of gold, far exceeding all other
kingly seats in the world: all the vessels of his house were of pure gold, for
silver was not esteemed in the days of Solomon: He had all the Kings from the
river of the Philistians to Egypt to serve him. He had forty thousand horses
in his stables to ride. He had 12. thousand Chariots and horses, with furniture
to them for his use. He had two hundred spears, and three hundred shieldes of
beaten gold borne before him, and it is said that he spent in bread every day
in his house one thousand nine hundred thirty and seven quarters of meal and
flower, he spent in flesh thirty fat oxen, an hundred sheep, besides Hearts,
Buckes, and fat Foul; He had seven hundred Queens, and three hundred
Concubines; were not these things verified in the sacred History, I should
blush to report them; because they almost seem impossible: and therefore
incredible, yet not these, but more things the holy Scripture testifies of
Salomons worldly riches and prosperity: but now since he inioyed all these
things in his days, let us know how he was satisfied in the evening, and
whether he went content and pleased to his bed or no? no that he did not: for
having fully and largely tasted all the best content that those riches could
afford; he delivers these words from his unsatisfied mind, with a disliking
voice. Fccles. 1 Vanitas vanitatum, and omnia vanitas, Vanity of vanities, and
all is vanity; those that now will not, hereafter shall repent when this
remediless complaint, (shall come too late.) Diuitiarum Iactantia quid nobis
contulit. What has the bravery of our riches profited us? none at all. They
can do the possessors of them no good, when they have most need of help,
Prou. 11. They cannot profit a man in the day of wrath.

I have read that Byas Priennaeus a Sage of Greece, beholding his Country
overthrown by his enemies, forsook it, and fled with his neighbors, and they
carried away so much of their riches, as by all means they could, and seeing
him go so singly and bear nothing but himself, demanded of him why he left
his treasure behind him; he answered, my treasure is in my breast, I take it,
yours is but upon you backs: you mistake it; it is in the power of the enemy
to make you poor; and no change, no mishap, no enemy can take my treasure, for
whilst I have a being I am rich, and when I am not, I am not poor: his
resolution deserves eternal memory; it is looked for in a Christian, but it is
strange to hear a Heathen esteem all things vanity: Man is like unto a
rouling wheel that runs about from day to day, and yet it is but in the same
place at the years end, where it was in the beginning. So man toils and
labors all his time upon earth to gather wealth and riches, and yet is as
poor upon that day he dies, as he was upon that day he was borne. Therefore I
say to you as Saint Paul did to Timothy, 1. Tim. 6. We brought nothing into the
world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. Therefore, if we have food
and raiment let us therewith be content: content sits rejoicing and singing in
a supposed chair of state (and indeed 'its rather a truth then a supposition;
for it is a chair of contented estate,) and smiles to see the covetous
worldling take such pains to make other men pleasure; and although the
contented man be but tenant to a poor Cottage, coucred but with straw or clods
of earth, sheltered from the violence of the winds, with the curled tops of the
shadie trees: such a one as he may stand in the middle and touch the roof with
his head, and both walls with both his hands. Yet he hears not of the mutation
in the Court, he fears not their disimulation in the City; but lives richly
content in a poor home: you see the Cottage is as much worth as the Court, but
for the show. Weak walls of clay, gives as much assurance of safety, as
walls of stone lined with Wainscot or cloth of Arras; all the odds is in the
show. The poor man sleeps as soundly upon his bed of straw, as the rich man
upon his bed of down; and the difference is but in the show: and the mean man
is kept as warm in country russet and homely gray, as the mightiest man in
his cloth of gold, and curious silks; yet all the odds is in the show: the
poor man's woollen cap, keeps his head as dry, as the rich man's beauer; they
only but differ in the show: a brown crust, and fountain water, preserues the
poor man in health, as well as the rich man is kept with his daintest cates,
and purest wine; still the difference is in the show: a wooden dish is as
wholesome to drink in, as a cup of gold; but for the show: the rich man
exceeds the poor for the quantity, the color and the show; but the poor man
exceeds the rich for the quality, the condition, and the substance: the rich
man's part is greater, but the poor man's part is better: and I know not how it
happens, they were both set to run one course, and the rich has all the honor
and glory of it from the poor in the middle of it; but sure I am, they were
both alike in the beginning, and shall be alike in the end. Aut in vtero, aut
in vrna, Senec. Epist. 91. Either in the womb, or in the tomb. Interuallis
distinguimur, exitu equamur, It is the interim of this short life, that we are
somewhat in some things unlike: some are Lords of more, and of less; some are
Princes, and some are beggars, and some win the world, and some lose it; and
some have much, and are not pleased, and some have little, and are well
content: but Ex. 16. He that gathers much has nothing over, and he that
gathers little, has not the less.

Qui dilligit auram non iustificabitur, He that loves gold, shall never be
justified, and the words of Christ are, Matthew. 19. Verily I say unto you, a
rich man can hardly enter into the kingdom of God: because some take so much
care and toil to lay up treasure together upon earth, which thieves, and
moths, and canker consume, and are both negligent, and unwilling, to lay up
treasure in heaven; such setting their minds only upon earth, with earthly
riches shall perish: and providing no treasure heavenly, in heaven shall never
come. James 5. Go to now you rich men, weep and howl for the misery that
shall come upon you: your riches are corrupt, your garmentsare moth-eaten, your
gold and silver are cankred, and the rust of them shall be a witness against
you, and shall eat your flesh up, as it were fire: you have heaped up wrath for
the last days. A man accounts his riches his best friend to accompany,
relieve, and comfort a man in adversity: and riches can never do it. They are
like flatterers, which when a man is in most need, will do him least good; for
they shall not profit him in the day of indignation: nevertheless, the rich
man is confident in the contrary. I conceive so much in his carriage, for he
has erected fair and sumptuous building, decked his habitation with richest
furniture, furnished his lodgings with beds of down, filled his possessions with
store of cattle, stuffed his barnes with purest corn; provided for his diet
the daintiest meat chosen, for his back the richest clothing, prepared for his
ears the sweetest music, flatters himself with with a supposed content,
withdrawes himself into the room of his plenty, scats himself in the chair
of ingratitude, and shuts upon him the door of covetousness, numbers the
angels in his chests; and forgets the Articles of his Creed, throws himself
upon his bed of vanity, and there falls into a golden dream, and wakening,
vtters this resolute speech, Luke 12. Soul, thou have much goods laid up for
many years, live at ease, eat, sleep, and take thy pleasure. But this would
not last, his disolute resolution had a resolute disolution. Fool this night
they will take away thy soul, and whose shall all these things be which thou
have provided. Thus it happens to those that trust in their riches. The Prophet
demands, Baruch 3. Where are they now which hoarded up silver and gold, wherein
they trusted, and made no end of scraping together. He answers himself:
Exterminati sunt and ad Inferos descenderunt, They are now rooted out and gone
down into hell. Therefore, woe be unto the rich, for they have received their
consolation, Luke 6. Like unto unthrifty heirs, sold all, and spent all; to
whom, and for whom, nothing remains but misery. Then since the wealth of the
world is worthless, and yields no perfect happiness, but for a time flatters
fools, and leaves them unsatisfied. It shall be our care to find out some
better benefit, for it will profit us nothing to win worldly riches.

6 Shall we account our selves happy to practice carnal pleasure? no, no;
yet God has allowed a certain measure of carnal recreations for the godly;
for the maintenance of their healths: these I do not intend to prove, but to
reprove that excess and abundance, in which worldly men use them: banqueting,
speaking, laughing, playing, etc. These are the chief parts of carnal
pleasures. There is danger in banquetings: Alexander the Great feasting in
Babylon, after he had conquered the whole world, sitting there to rejoice, and
cast lots, upon the kingdoms, the end of his banquet, was the end of his life;
amongst all his dainties, he died of poison. Holofernes, after his banquet,
being full of wine, fell into a heavy sleep, and paid his head for his
pleasures, Judith 13. and so he found a heavy reckoning. Yet this excess in
banqueting takes not away the blessing of feasting: nevertheless, make the
banquet without excess, and see it used in a moderate kind, and it is a good,
but the discontinuance of it, makes it imperfect: hunger so suddenly ensues the
best feeding, so that our best title I can give this carnal pleasure, is a
troublesome custom that yields more profit then delight.

There is danger in speaking, since, Matthew. 12. For every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give an account thereof at the day of judgment; There
is danger in laughing, for Eccles. 2. I have said of laughter, thou art mad,
and of joy, what is this that thou do. There is danger in playing and
wantonness, and so Sampson lost his strength, Judges 16. So did David stain
his honor, 2. Sam. 11. There is danger in sleeping, Two shall be lying in one
bed, the one shall be taken, the other refused, Luke 17. Danger lies lurking
under the fairest roof, the most sumptuous buildings are but shadows, for the
time shall come, that one stone shall not be left upon another, Mark 13.
Therefore, he that has ears to hear may hear, he that has eyes to see,
may see, he that has sense to leare, may learn, the world is worthless, the
purchase needless, the plenties of it helpless, the lovers of it hapless,
the pleasures in it fruitless, and the torments after it endless. Nothing to
be found in the world but troubles, miseries, night, need, and plenty of
discontent; and no better treasure then is herein discovered unto you, is to be
found in the quantity of the purchase.

Now the quality of the price is the soul, and what shall it profit a man to
win the whole world, and to loose his own soul? The soul is an immorsall
substance, and the proper seat of the image of God, and 't is the noblest part
of man: as the poor cottage of clay may lodge the mightiest Prince, so our
poor clods of soil were but made to lodge the soul, the body being the
baser, is made a chamber for the soul, which is the better; and upon the soul
God has bestowed eternity, it had a beginning, but has no ending; which shall
either upon the forsaking of his earthly mansion, find perpetual joy, or
lasting torments; and who to win the world, which is but a winters day, fears
not to send the soul to endless punishment into everlasting night? If there
be any faith, there is some fear, but I fear, a^grotat fides ^am proxima
morti. Faith is so sick that it is ready to die; and if it be so, we have lost
our Anchour and are but in a broken Bark upon the great seas of misery, all
things to nothing suddenly to perish.

But to come to an end (and I beseech God my now ending may be a numbers good
beginning.) Since the quality of the price, the immortal soul far exceedes
the quantity of the purchase, the worthles world, my advise is to forsake
these Netherlands, and lift your eyes unto the heavens, for from thence must
come your help. Colos^. If you be then risen with Christ, seek those things
that are above. And as the spies did that fled from Jericho, so save your
selves and escape by hills. It is the devils council, mitte deorsum, throw thy
self down, set thy affections upon earthly things, delight in the world: but
do not regard it, aim at better ends, nay aim at that which has no end,
and as you see God has ordained the end, so he has done the means, then use
the world as the means to obtain heaven, unto the haven, the heaven of
gladness and glory he that is Lord of all, bring us all for his mercies and
merits sake: to him be all praise and glory now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE COMING OF THE KINGS SON.

Behold, I come shortly, and my reward is with me. Revel. 22. Quisquis ad vitam
editur, ad mortem destinatur. Composed By AVGVSTIN TAILOR, Preacher at Hawarden.

LONDON, Printed by Augustine Matthewes, dwelling in the Parsonage house in
Bride Lane, near Fleet Street. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable ARTHVR Lord Chichester, Baron of Belfast, etc.
IT cannot be but as you have
Worn death upon your sword
And purchac'd honor, you should save
One Swan upon your ford
To sing you measures, you before
Have marched like David King
And since like him you conquest wore
Now set you down and sing:
Or hearken me, my Lord I Am free
To sing, and my song's true;
Ornated with Divinity,
And does belong to you,
Your noble nature, valor, and
Most Lordly bounty, should
Be writ by an Euangels hand,
In lines of perfect gold.
Mine are divine (although unmeet)
Accept them, I have power
To build another Lantern yet
Upon your stateli'st tower.
Thrice noble Lord make use of this,
'Twill tell you of a son
That shall shine in the days of blis,
When nights of woes are done.
At your Honors service, in any Christian office. Augustine Tailor.

THE COMING OF THE KINGS SON.
1 O Israel that thou would hear
And understand those things
That God commands, for love or fear
Of the great King of Kings
Reform thy self, the days does run
And posteth fast away
The time departs, and th'euening sun
Is finishing the day.
2 The beams of mercy will grow dim,
Offenses grow so great,
The times are now so sick with sin
Moses dare scarce entreat
Thy pardon any more of God,
Thy promise was to mend,
And he in mercy stays the rod,
And does thy time attend.
3 The days of peace are almost past,
And nights of death ensue
Vengeance black cloud will drop at last
The news are bad, yet true;
The goulden bells at Aarons coat
Have almost lost their sound,
David's sweet Harp, and Cymbals note,
The thundering trump has dround.
4 Behold the Son of God does come
Not Lamb, but Lyon-like
With life to all the righteous some
And with black death to strike
The cursed brood of profane Cham,
A dismal time comes on
When God will grant the wicked man
No place to rest upon.
5 The bondlesse sea with fire shall burn.
The Hills shall leap and dance
But not for joy; all flesh shall mourn
And who presumes to advance
His eyes to heaven there shall view,
The stars go out and fall,
The Skies shall change their Azur blew
To Crimsonred, and all
6 The furniture of air and earth
Shall perish and decay,
Mourning shall come in steed of mirth,
And night instead of day:
The now bright sun shall then appear
A cloud filled full of rain,
The moon that sometime looked so clear
Before the starrie train
7 Shall look like blood, and loose her pace,
Sad witnesses of ire,
Shall multiply in fearful case,
And storms and showers, of fire
Thicker then hayle did ere descend
Shall fall as (as Prophets cry)
Since for man's sin, God did intend,
And said, all flesh shall die.
8 After these storms and fearful signs,
The Kings son in a cloud
Shall sit as Judge: to whom inclines
The ears of all the crowd
There shall be all that borrowed breath,
As well the great as small,
From the worlds birth day to it death
And latest funeral.
9 The Princes, Kings, and Monarchs great
That once the world did sway,
Shall naked stand before the seat
Of the high Judge, that day.
The nice and tender wanton crew
That now do scorn the ground,
And do disdain the sun should view,
Their faces shall be found
10 Bare face and foot, without a coach
No man, no maid, no knees
To Adore their greatness, but reproach
For their proud qualities.
There Lazarus and Caesar meet,
And the spectators can
Not censure (by their equal greet)
Which is the greater man.
11 The supreme Judge above shall sit
In glory strength and might,
The godly shall rejoice at it,
The righteous shall have right;
No bribes, nor friends, nor flatters may
Prevail, to hide offense,
For why? God only made that day
To honor innocence.
12 God is so gracious, the condemned
Can have no cause to grudge,
Which does all days in mercy spend
And keeps but one to judge.
But great and fearful will it be
The thoughts of every heart,
Shall be reueil'd apparently,
And after each desert.
13 Rewards shall run; it is Gods decree
All wickedness shall fail
And fall, and perish utterly,
And purity prevail:
Against this judgment who prouides,
Or who with Job demands
What shall I do? life runs and slides
Like unto dyall sands.
14 Falls to be lift again; might I
Friendly persuasion use
And see it followed, none should spy
Sad passion in my muse.
Hate envy, murder, blasphemy,
Detraction, and all vice,
Contract your selves to purity
Or to his Paradise.
15 This judge admits you not; beware
That run not out of mind,
That he intends for to declare
He showd himself so kind
To publish it in days of peace
Where by we know's intent
Intends, if sin spring and increase,
Even so shall punishment.
16 You blessed, come; you cursed go;
So has the judge decreed,
And that his blessings you may know,
Furnish your selves with speed,
For the right hand, and let our foes
Sinister passage try
That leads to torments, death and woes,
God grant both you and I
17 May tread the path that leads to peace,
And when our days of grace
Are finished let never cease
Our days of Glory. Place
Us all above, with all our friends;
And from all woes beneath,
Assign us bless that never ends
Both free from dumb and death.
FINIS.

