THE HONORABL^ AND MEMORABL^ Foundations, Erections, Raisings, a^ Ruins, of
diverse Cities, Towns, Castles, and other Pieces of Antiquity, within ten
Shires and Counties of this Kingdom;

Namely, Kent, Sussex, Hampshire, Sur^ Barkshire, Essex, Middlesex,
Hartfordshire Buckinghamshire, and Oxfordshire: With the Description of many
fam^ Accidents that have happened, in diver^ places in the said Counties.Also,
a Relation of the Wine Tavern^ either by their signs, or names of the persons
that allow, or keep them, in, and throughout the said several Shires.

By JOHN TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed for HENRY GOSSON. 1636

TO ALL THE GOOD-Fellowes in general, and particular, that do keep, inhabit,
allow, or maintain the Wine Tavernes, or Inn Tavernes in the ten Shires and
Counties before named
MINE HOSTS,
I Hope I am not much mistaken in calling you Gentlemen, or kind Friends; if
you be either, it is as much as I look for, or can deserve; you only are the
men that do truly merit the name and title of Mine Hosts, for alas, our City
Tavernes have no other entertainment, but Welcome Gentlemen, a Crust, and What
Wine will you drink? But you, Brave minded, and most Ioviall Sardanapalitans,
have power and prerogative (Cum Privilegio) to receive, lodge, feast, and fe^
both man and beast; you have the happiness to Boil, Roast, Broile and Bake
Fish, Flesh, and Fool, whilst we in London have scarce the command of a Gull,
a Widgeon, or a Wood^ock; and for your further, and more high Reputation, the
most part of your Customers come riding to your houses, where almost all our
guests are footmen; with you it is common for the Master to drink pintes or
quarts ^ut of Pots, whilst his horse is eating of Bottles. Besides, our City
Tavernes are not troublesome to their Clients with many various Items, and
Reckonings; but briefly, so much for Sack, Clarret, or White; whilst you have
the predominance to assault a man with (...) Bill, and call him to a strait and
strict ^ccount, not only for himself, but for the ^oings of his horse; the
Jury is divided or ^ven into five parts, in the manner of Lin^y Woolsey;
namely, the Hosts, the Drawer, ^e Chamberlain, the Tapster, and the Hostler.
Who having viewed the Bill of Indictment, They) being themselves, Accusers,
Evidence, Plaintiff, Jury, and Judges; the final Sentence is pronounced at
their own Bar of justice, where the Delinquents conscience knowing all to be
justly laid to his charge, with patience and Fortitude, suffers the
irrevokeable doom to pass upon him, paies the Reckoning, puts the Bill out of
all Force and Virtue, paying his Fees, he is discharged with a Heartily
Welcome. Of all, or the most part of such Accounts, Actions, Debts, or Demands,
our City Tavernes have a long time pleaded not Guilty. They cannot ^ee taxed
with the deadly Sin of Gluttony, nor are they troubled with the harsh music of
Trencher-Scraping, so that if I were to be transformed, or metamorphos'd into a
Hogg, I would be loath to dwell in one of our Tavernes, because I should have
such plenty of Wash, and such scarcity of Grains.

But Gentlemen, though I am bold (a little) to play the ( --) with you, yet I
assure you, I love you well; but for some more special love and favor that I
bear to my self. I have written this my second Book of Tavernes, I have not
written Epigrams here, as I did upon the former, because in City and Country
the signs and the Wines are all alike.

Yet (to give all the respectfull content that I can to my Honorable,
Worshipful, and o^rs of my good Friends, that are to pay me money, upon the
receiving, or this my ^shing this small Book.) I have recorded in stead of
Epigrams, some Monu^ents of Ant^quity, which my hope is, will ^ee more
profitable and delightful; And Gentlemen (I mean you that are engaged unto
me) in your just payment to me, you may wo^ke a piece of a wonder, (which is,
^o make a Rich Poet;) but alas! that style is as much too high for me, as I am
too low for (...), (That Is a Bull) so much the better; for almost all men are
turned Grasiers, and speak ^ls familiarly, and those are the Mounsier
Vomusses, who have sold their Wise Akers before they have sowed their Wild
Oats; And these will censure harshly, any thing ^hey understand hardly, whose
knowledge is as much in the validity and measure of a Verse, as the Ass had
that judged the Cuckoo's song to be sweeter than the Nightingales.

I have laid the Foundation of this Project my self, it is a Vineyard of mine
own Planting, the Grapes of mine own Pressing, the Wine of mine own Vintage
(or Vantage) the Tavernes of mine own finding, and the Vintoners my own
friends, in lieu of which, I am not mine own man, but theirs, or yours, or his,
or hers, that wis^eth me well, as far as my Intentions and Actions are Just,
Lawful, o^ Laudable,

(...) TAILOR.

These Tavernes (some of them) were mistaken in the first Book, and some of
them have been set up since the said Book was Printed; therefore, to give
satisfaction, I have here inserted them.
Angel near St. Clements Church. Angel near Creechurch, or Aldgate. Bull
within Bishopsgate Bull without Bishopsgate. Bull or Buffles Head at
Charing-Crosse. Bush in Buttolph lane. Castle without Cripplegate. 3. Cranes
near the Customhouse. Crown near Dowgate, that was the Dolphin. The
Raine-Deere without Temple Bar. Dog, or Talbot in Long Lane. Dog near
Bishopsgate. ^ountaine in Bloomesbury. Heart in Basing lane. Golden-fleece
without Temple Bar. Green Dragon at Breadstreet hill, was the Castle. Globe in
Bedlam. Heart in Little Moorefields. Harrow in Southwarke. Hoope in Purpoole
lane near Graysin-lane. Horse near the Bridge in Southwarke. Kings head in
Southwarke. The golden Lion in Fleetstreet. Maydenhead in Pudding lane.
Mayden-he^d in Bush-Lane. Mermayd in White Cross street. Princes Arms in
Fleetstreet late the Fountain Princes Arms in St. John street. Princes Arms
in Finch Lane, was the 3 Flower de Lices. Queens Head near the Wardrope.
Queens Arms at Westminster. Queens Arms in St. Martins. Rose in Turnbull
street. Sun in Thames street near Dice Key. Salutation in Bermondsey street.
Ship in Butolph lane. Ship at Smithfield Pens.
A CATALOGVE OF Tavernes in ten Shires about LONDON.
Kent
FOr Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, ^ers, Mariners; Virtuous and ^auteous
Ladies, and Women of meanest degrees, comely, pretty, proper, handsome,
cleanely, neat, and hon^ ^red with all sorts of Artificers, and (...) with
^full and profitable Husbandmen; famous for ^o most ancient Cities, (whereof
^ne is the (...) Metropolitan seat of England) It has many fair M^ket Towns,
^mpregnable Castl^s, s^e and (...) Havens and Harbors for S^ipping, abo^nce of
rich Villages and Ham^s: So that by the Almighties blessings, and the pe^es
(...), this (old Kingdom) County is for Fruit, F^, Flesh Fish, Cloth, Corn,
Wood and Cattle, or (...) or any thing that is for the use of Man to maintain
life and pleasure, Kent is, an^ has bin renowned universally.

Deptford, or Deepefourd, so called by reason o^ the deepenesse of the Fourd or
River there, where Ships of great Burden may safely Ride at Ankor, there is a
fair and useful Do^ke for the building or mending of the Kings Ships, it has
also a goodly storehouse for provision for the said ships. Deptford is
sometimes called East-Greenewich. This Town has these Tavern Licenses or
Inhabiters.

The Kings Head, The Mermayd, The Sun and the Ship: the parties that keep or
maintain them are William Tyle, Richard Aileworth, Ieffrey Nixon, William
Dring.

Eltham, where the King has a fair Summer House, at the first it was founded
by Anthony Beck Bishop of Durham, who gave it to Elinor, wife to king Edward
the first, but since often Re-edified by succeeding Princes. It has a Tavern
under the name of one Nathanael Mercer.

Greenewich, for situation and prospect a Paradise of pleasure, the Palace
there was first built by Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, in the Reign of King
Henry the 6. Since when it has been Re-edified, and made more large and
sumptuous by King Henry the 7. Which Palace also was begun be enlarged by the
late virtuous Queen Anne, ^t now finished by our gracious Queen Mary. his
Town is most famous for the Birth of that ^dmired Wonder of her Sex, Queen
Elizabeth, ^ho was borne there, in the year of Grace 1533. ^ptember the 7.

Greenewich has these Wine Tavernes: ^he Bear, The Crown. The Kings Arms
The ^rinces Arms. The Rose. And (which I should ^ave named first) the Ship.
kept by Henry Noris. Also there is a Tavern with a Bush only, kept ^y Gregory
Martin, and the Kings Arms at Dept^ord bridge in Greenewich Parish.

Darentfourd, so called because it is situate on the River Darent, it is
vulgarly named Dartfourd, there was once a Nunnery built by King Edward the
third, which after was made a House for King Henry the 8. Where he did
sometimes keep his Court. Dartford has these Tavernes: At the Bull, George
Hanger. At the Cock, William Summers. At the White Heart, Elizabeth Glover.

Gravesend (as the Learned Antiquary Master Camden writes) is so called,
because it is the end of the Greve Reeve, or Port Greves government, or bounds.
It is a Town famous for receipt of ^ll Nations, having at any time more fair
Lodgings, and provision for Entertainment, then many Towns has that are
thrice as great; It ha^ oftentimes lodged Kings, Princes, and Forreig^
Ambassadors; it is divided into two Parishe^ namely, Gravesend and Milton. It
has the Wine Tavernes. William Vernon at the Ange^ Richard Tucker at the Ship.
Thomas Tongue at t^ Anchor. William Diston at the Bull. The Christ^pher. Thomas
Skilhorne at the Horn

Seavenoake so called, because seven great Oake^ growing there abouts, it is a
good Market Town and a great thorow-fare, and has these Tavernes The Crown,
the Cat, and the Bull; they are Tavernes in the tuition (or by the Licenses) of
Margery Pocock. Debora Pocock. and William Petley

Tunbridge, (or the Town of Bridges) so called, by reason, it has five stone
Bridges, for passage over the River; which River is divided there into so many
several Branches; it is lately famous for a healthful, approved, sweet,
medicinable water, that cures, or eases many diseases: The Tavernes there, are
at the dispose of two women namely, Martha Bartlet, and Elizabeth Frye.

Maydstone, a fair, spacious, sweet, pleasant, rich, and populous Market
Town, has these Taverns, or Tavern keepers, John Tailor, Thomas Davis, and
Agnes Shorey.

Rochester, is a fine N^ate City, long sinc^ founded by a Bishop named Hamo:
it was destroyed by Atheldred, King of the Mercians Anno 676. it has been
oftentimes spoiled by the Danes; the Castle there has been a strong piec^ of
defense, it was built by a Bishop named Gun^dulph; it was raced, and spoiled in
the Baron wars, in King Henry the third's Reign. The Cathedral Church there
was built by Aeth^lber King of Kent: The goodly s^one Bridge ther^ was built by
Sir Robert Knowles, Knight, with such Spoils as he had valliantly gotten from
the French in the Reign of King Richard the second Rochester has these
Tavernes, Thomas Lovell a^ the Kings head, Dorothy Allen, or Thomas Mot, a^ the
Bull, John Stone. or Ambrose Groom at the White-hart, and John Dom^w, or John
Philpot a^ the Crown.

Queenburrough was built by King Edward the third, in the honor of Queen
Phillip his Wife there is a Tavern which serves for Minster as wel^ as for
Queenburrough, it is a^ the dispose or keeping of James Jacob. This Town is
famous for my Arrival there (from London thither) with a Boa^ o^ Brown Paper,
Anno 1619.

Feversham, a good Town, it was sometimes the residence of Athelstane, King of
Kent; where he enacted Laws: it is also famous for a sump^uous Aboey, ^uilt
there by King Stephen, and there (...), Queen Mawd his wife, and his Son
^ince Eustace were s^pulchred. It has three Ta^ernes: at the Ship, Walter
Moses, the other two ^elongs to S^muell Thurstone, and James Hudson.

At the Town of Ashfourd, there may be three ^avernes, for Thomas Mascall may
or does keep ^wo, the other does belong to Peter Colebrand.

At Chepsted one, Anthony Fuller.

At Lenham one, Robert Tray.

At Egerton one, Elizabeth Faireway.

At Erith one, Giles Sidgwick.

At Kenthatch one, Edmund Plomley.

At Gowthurst one, Thomas Cowchman.

At Ash one, John Tompson.

At Br^mley two, Toby Priest, John Halfepenny, ^he Bell, the Heart.

At Chattham, Francis Giles.

At Folkstone one, Elizabeth March.

At Ferningham one, John Rad^liffe.

At El^m two, Jane Country, Robert Fox.

At Crayford one, Ralph Meykins, at the Angel.

At Lamberhurst, Mary Astone.

At Greenehive one, Miles Croxton, the sign, Callice Sands.

At Leed^s, one Edward Lloyde.

Canterbury, or the Kentish Burough or Citi^ is ancient and renowned, it has
Metropolitan dignity, chief over England: Augustine the Monke^ about the 67
year of Christ, came into Britaine^ and at Canterbury kept his residence,
where by hi^ Doctrine, and good example of life, he confirmed and established
many in the Christian Fait^ causing it to spread and flou^ish by his paineful
Ministry, so that after a holy and lawdable lif^ ended, he dyed, and was
buried in that Honorabl^ City. It has these Tavernes, Elizabeth Lockley or
William Terry at the Rose; Edward Den, at the White-hart, James Penn, or George
B. at the Red. Lion, Elizabeth Bridge, at the Sarazers head, Miles Bull, or
Warham Iemut, at the B^ll, William Mann Esquire has also a Tavern License,
Robert or Susan Turner, Alias Baker, at the Ch^quer; Peter Winn, or Christopher
Baldwin, at the Sun, 8.

At Milton and Newington one, William Dickins.

At Staplehurst one, William Poynet.

At Wye one, Simon Allen.

At Strowd one, Edward Monox.

At Lewsham one, Elizabeth Tarpley.

At Sandway one, John White.

At Mard^n one, Anthony Young.

At Yalding one, Richard Pix.

At Offham one, Thomas Tresse.

At New Romney, three, Susan Wood, Sara Wood, Smith Tookey.

At Hawkhurst one, Agnes Viney.

At Bersted one, Thomas Holford.

Deal, where stands a strong defencible Castle, ^uilt by King Henry the eight,
the place is famous ^or repulsing Julius Caesar three times thence before he
could arrive there: it has these three Tavernes kept by Susan Woodland, Mary
Coun^rey, and Judith Hudson.

At Crambrooke two, Joan Kirkham, and John Leigh.

At Charing one, Anthony Page. At Appledore and Biddenden -- William Poynit,

Sandwich, so called, by reason of too much Sand, which, not only makes
sh^ales and flats in the Sea, but also chokes up the Haven there; it is a fair
rich Town, and one of the ^inque Ports; it has had the trial of sundry
alterations; It has been often distressed by the Danes; it was sacked, spoiled
and burnt by Lewis, the Daulphin of France in the reign of King John. King
Edward the first placed there a Staple for Wool. King Edward the third did
honor it with much Princely favor, since when, it was again burnt by the
French in King Henry the sixth his reign, since which time it has been so
repaired, that it flourishes beautifully and bountifully: there do inhabit
man^ Dutch people, who do enrich themselves, and a^ profitable to the ^owne,
by making diverse sor^ of Stuffes there. Sandwich has these Tavernes John
Seymer, Axne Peyton, Hugh Rodes, Jane Woo^ Roger Pain, and Alice Barrel.

At Saint Lawrence one, Katherine Hudson.

At Stonecrutch one, under William Campio. Esquire.

At Ospring one, Peter Greenstr^t.

At Redred, Mary Oxo^bridge.

At Penchurst one, Thomas Sexton.

At Woolwich, John Sims at the Heart.

At Saint Mary Cray one, Edward Fleet.

At Woodsgate one, John Burdet.

At Benenden one, William Leedes.

At Blenchdy one, Elizabeth Clampard.

At Wingham one; Elizabeth Ashton.

At Sunbridge one, Anne Cacot.

Tenterden is (...) good Town for clothing, and so is Crambrooke (before
named) Tenterden has two Tavernes: Matthew Outred, and James Glover.

At Rootham and Norflect, Thomas Spencer, the Crown.

At Westram and Aeton Bridge, Anne Spencer.

At Mawlin, George Huntley, may keep two ^vernes.

At Margate, two, Averie Ienkinson, and Henry ^ulmer.

At Lid, Godfrey Martin, and Thomas Tookey.

At Sutton Valience, Anne Vsm^r.

At Seal, Mabell Sandall.

At Herne, Willi^m Towlson.

At Highgate, William VVarson.

At Bexley and Foot^bray Nathaniel Mercer.

At Hyde Henry Heart, William Not.

At Sittingborne, four, Margaret Husbands, ^nne Wood, Margaret Law, Thomas
Rochfourd.

To finish my Collections of this famous Coun^e; I, for my relish to my
Narration, and as an ^xcellent seal, or E^sterne limitation to the most
^xcellent bounds of Kent, I close up all with

Dover, a brave Town, and one of the Cinque ^orts, the m^st commodi^us place
for passage too and fro between the mighty Kingdoms of Eng^nd and France. It
has a good and safe Haven, which was at the first made by the command of ^ing
Henry the eight, at sixty three thousand ^ound charges, which is called, Dover
Peer: but (...) time, all the cost being almost lost, and by the vio^ence of
the raging sea, decayed and broken, Queen Elizabeth (of blessed memory) with
much of her ^wne cost, and Parliamentarie authority, enacted that a Toll upon
Tonnage should be paid for some years, for all manner of Goods transported
inward or outward.

There is also an impregnable Castle, which is the strongest Hold, and
Fortress in England, commanding both by Land and Sea; is is supposed to have
been built by Julius Caesar. Dover has these Tavernes, Tavern keepers, or
Allowers. John Low, Judith Haines, Edward Waller, John Hugesson, Anthony
Percivall, Trustram S^evens.

At Dover Peer be these, William Streeting, Elizabeth Alley, and William
Bradshaw, to whom I dedicate these few lines:

Kind friend, as thou did once the favor gain,
Great Britains Mighty Prince to entertain;
So entertain these Verses I have penned,
As my remembrance unto thee my friend:
Thou know (by old experience) that I love thee;
And if thou love me, I will one day prove thee.
The County of Kent had, in King Henry the eight's reign, at the suppression
of Monasteries, Abbeys, Nunneries, Priories, Frieries, Colleges, Hospitals, and
(as they termed them) Religious houses, the number of fifty three.

Kent is divided into sixty four hundreds, or divisions; namely, Black Heath
hundred, Lesnes, Rooksley, Axtave, Broomley, Whitstaple, Milton, ^oltingtroph,
Hoo, Tencham, Shammell, Fever^ham, Blengate, Bouton under Bleath, Kingslow,
^etham, Westgate, Ham, Downhamford, Tenterden, Preston, Felborow, Oxney I Will
hundred, Black^urne, Wye, Winham, Charte, Stowting Co^los, Longbridge,
Bi^cholt, Franchils Calhill, Heane, Blewborough, Street, Selbright fenden,
Folkstone, Worth, Eyhorne, Lovingborough, Roluinden, New-church, Maydstone,
Barnesield, Kinghamford, Brinkley and Horse, Saint Martins, Chattham and
Gillingham, Bredge, Langport, Twyford, Watheling stone, Larkfield, Loway and
Tunbridge, Alloftbridge, Littlefield, Marden, Wortham, Barkley, Godsheath,
Westram, Crambrooke and Somerden.

Kent has seventeene good Market Towns, three hundred ninety eight Parishes,
and one hundred thirty seven Wine Tavernes.

Sussex.
SUssex, or South-Saxony, so named when there was an Heptarchy, or government
of 7 King^ at once in England; because this County was the best part of the
Southsaxon Kingdom. It is a rich County, plenteous in Iron-Mines, and much goo^
Ordnance are cast there, with other necessary Iro^ works: also it is much
enriched by Glass-making^ It is situate near the British Ocean, whereby
(...) is plentifully stored with Fish: also it is Nob^ rich with Inhabitants,
and all other Commoditi^ for Life and Maintenance.

Arundell, A Town famous for a goodly Cast^ there, belonging to the Earls of
Arundell an^ Surrey. This town has two Tavernes, held b^ Mi^as H^g, and
Elizabeth Freeman.

At Chilkington, Charles Johnson.

At Witham, William Pigott.

At Forest Roe, Edw. Woodman, the Antelop.

At Battle, Matthew Cowchman does or man keep two Tavernes

At Marsfield, William Mowhurst.

Chichester was built by Cissa, the second Kin^ of the Southsaxons, An. 586 The
Bishops See f^ the Diocese of Sussex or Chichester, was kept an^ held at
Selsey till the time of King William the Conqueror. Chichester has these
Tavernes^ Thomas Powsley, Anne Billet, Mary Billet, Th^mas Billet, Thomas Ball,
Matthew Ball.

At Front, John Giles.

At Ditchelling, James Da^y.

At Newshoreham, Richard Gold.

At Tarring, William Fletcher.

At Hay field and Seaford, Richard Meade.

At Haughton, George Coals.

Petworth, a pretty Market-towne, where the ^arle of Northumberland has a
goodly house, and ^s an honorable and bounteous housekeeper. It ^ath these two
Tavernes, Anthony Goodman, and ^ohn Hall.

At Hartsield, Mary Shelton.

At Ticehurst, Ioane Kipping.

At Micheing, Samuel Towers.

At Cuck field, Thomas Tasker.

Horsham seems to take derivation from Hor^ the Saxon, the brother of Hengist,
the first King ^f Kent: It has the allowance of two Tavernes ^der one M.
Robert Deering.

At Staining 2. Richard Briant, and Tho. Oliver.

At Wadehurst, one Francis Wilfourd.

Winchelsea was overwhelmed with the Sea, ^n 1250. in the reign of King Henry
the third; ^ce when the town is built higher out of the ^anger or fury of the
Oceans violence: but the ^aven is decayed, to the towns great hinderance, ^d
for the commodity and profit of the town ^f R^e. Winchelsea has one
Taverner, John Pettit.

The town of Midhurst has four Taverners, John Kelsey, Anne Carus, Mary
Hudson, and Joan White.

Hastings is a good and profitable Fisher-town, a Nu^sery for Mariners and
Saylors: It had a Mint to coin Money in it, in the time of King Athelstan: and
it is named the first of the ^que Ports; it had these ports and towns belonging
to it, namely, Seaford, Pemsey, Hodney, Bulver^, Winchelsea and Rye: all which
were at any time at command of the King to set out 21 serviceable ships, for
the service of their Prince and Country (within forty days warning) and to
bear all the charge of the said ships for the space of fifteen days, and
the King was to be at all the charges after the fifteen days were expired.
Hastings has two Tavernes, John Phissenden, and Francis Wennell.

Lewis, a famous Market Town, which had a Mint in it, in King Athelstanes
Reign, for his Coin of Gold and Silver, or other Metals. It has 6.
Churches, and a goodly house belonging to the Earl of Dorset; A mighty
memorable Battle was fought there Anno 1264. betwixt King Henry the third and
Simon Montfort Earl of Leaster, where the Earl took the King, and the King
of the Romans prisoners. Lewis has these Taverns, or number of houses for the
sale of Wines. Agnes Thurgood, Thomas Oliver, Robert Carter, and William Peake
may keep two Tavernes if he will.

At Lingfield Beding, and Bramborow, Richard Meade.

At Billi^ghurst, John Agate.

At V^field. field, John Forde.

At Backesteed, Thomas Oliver.

At Cliffe, Richard Meade, and William Peake.

At Crawley and Worth, John Peake.

At Brighthelmeson, Alice Harding, and William Peake.

At Barreash, Mayfield, Pemsey, and Westham, Thomas Oliver.

At Dallington, Henfield, and Abfreston, Thomas Oliver.

At East-Greensteed, John Langridge, and Henry Baldwin: the signs at East
Greensted, are the Crown, and the Cat.

Rye, is a good Town, and was made strong by William of Ipres, (A valiant
Nobleman and Earl of Kent) It was walled in the undefensible and weakest
places by King Edward the 3. Terrible storms and tempests has done more for
them, then they could well have done for themselves. for the blustering raging
Winds has formerly caused the violence of the Sea to make them a good Haven:
but great pity it is, for it is much decayed. For Rye is a brave flourishing
Town, and serves London and many other places with Fish in abundance: It has
these Tavernes in name or number. Richard Pecote. John Halsey. Richard Thomas.

Sussex had at the suppression of Abbyes, Nunneries, Priories, Frieries,
Colleges and Hospitalls 32. This County is divided into 6. Devisions, or
Hundreds, called Rapes, namely. Chichester, Arundell, Bramber, Lewis, Pemsey
and Hastings. There are in Sussex 18 Market towns, 312 Parishes, and 61
Tavernes.

Middlesex.
MIddlesex does (almost) round beguirt the two famous Cities of London and
Westminster: And although I have in my former Book made mention of many of the
Tavernes near adjoining to the said Cities; yet to make this my second
narration in the better form and order, I have named some of the said Tavernes
again, because I would play the part of an honest true Tailor, and put in all
the stuff.

At Chelsey, Richard Eeds the sign of the Dog.

At Fulham, Joseph Holden, Richard Parkes: the signs are, the Kings Arms, and
the Nags head.

At Hammersmith, Alice Robinson, or Thomas Warner at the white Heart and Thomas
Holden at the Goat or Ant^lop.

At Chiswick, Valentine Smith at the Kings head.

At Acton, John Cooth^idge, and William Aldridg: their signs are the Cock, and
the Bell.

At Old Br^ntford, and New B^entford, are these signs, the Three Pigeons, the
Half Moon, the Lion, the Goat, the George the Swan.

The Ga^ter near Hammersmith in London way toward Brentford.

At Hownslow, Henry Needles, and Martha Warwick: the signs are, the Katherin
Wheel, and the Georg^.

At E^gworth, Henry Haley.

At Harrow hill, Peter Jones.

At Strangreene, Thomas Blithe.

At Northket, Katherin Awceter.

At Thistleworth, Anne Parks.

At Rayslip, Margaret Price.

At Kenzington, Annis Turbervill, at the Lion.

At Knightsbridge, Richard Kellway, Elizabeth Sharp, there are three Tavern
signs, G^ave Ma^rice, the Swan and the Rose.

Uxbridge is a fair long Market town, it has many Innes, and four of them
be (...), John Raynor, Edmund Morris, Sara Hitchcock and Michael Web: The
signs are, the Chequer, the George, the Crown, and the White horse.

The Toy Tavern at Hampton Court needs no sign.

At Twickenham, Anne Palmer.

At Paddington, Walter Whitlock.

At Kingsland, George Willis; the sign, the King, or Princes Arms.

At Newington, John Usher, at the Sun.

At Islington are these signs and Tavernes: the Angel, the Globe, the Lion,
the Miter, the Nags-head, the Swan, and the Sarazens head.

At Kentish Town, the Rose, Gregory Machin.

At Whetstone, the Lion, and the Princes Arms, Samuel Augier, Richard Tailor.

At White-chappell, Habacuck Kirby.

At South M^mms, Thomas Avis, the Bell.

At Hillingdon, Katherin Tailor.

At Pinner, Margery Bateman.

At Saint Giles, John Prince, William Pearpoynt.

At Kenton, William Bird.

At Tottenham Court, John Day.

At Tottenham-highcrosse, Matthew Beuning, at the Sun.

At Chiswell street, Samuel Tailor.

At Cow-crosse, Robert Iordane.

At Edmonton, Stephen Goodyere.

At Highgate, at the Mermayd, Mary Sell.

At Budfo^, Thomas Weldish.

At Hackney, William Gore, and William Cave: the signs are the Mermayd and the
Rose.

At Engfield, Elizabeth Kirby, and Mary Southwell.

At Hardington, Elizabeth Osbourne.

At Totnam street, Francis K^y.

At Hayes, Mary Hill.

At Feltham, Robert Butler

At Holloway street, Ez^hiel Cates^ the B^ll

At Black-wall, Zachary (...) ^igne of the Arms of the East India Company.

The Cross at Ratcliffe, the Diagon, the Kin^s head, the Mermayd, the Ship,
the Queens head, the Lion, the ship at Dickshore, and the Hoope, and the three
Kings.

In Ratcliffe highway, the Anchor, the Garter, the Rose.

At Bow, the Flower de Lice, the George, and the Kings head.

At Mile end, the Nags-head.

At Lime-house, John Iennings.

At Wapping, James Bull: the Bull, the Angel, the Cross, the Dragon, the
Gunne, the Ship, the Pope's Head, the Rose, and the Kings head.

At Popler, the Ship, the Lion.

The Bull at Stepney, and the Bull-head.

These that follow hereafter named, are already in my former book, because
they are so near to the Cities of London and Westminster, but because they are
in this County of Middlesex, I will name them once more.

Near the Bowling Alley at Westminster, Henry Normaville.

(...) Galley street, Daniel Hitche.

(...) Holborne, William Matthewes, Thomas Simcots.

In Saint John street, Margery Baines, and Mary Motsley.

In Saint Martins in the fields, Richard Ieyner, Anne Parks, and Gertred Swan.

In Silver street, John Thomas.

In Tuttle street, Ieffrey George.

In Savoy Parish, Robert Amery, and Thomas Blunt.

In the Tower Liberties, Thomas Foster.

Stanes is famous for a Meadow near it called, Rennimead or Running mead,
where in the twelfe or thirteenth year of the reign of King John, the most
part of the Lords, and great States of England met, and opposed the King in
Warlike manner, the Lords rebelliously to compel the King, and the King to
defend his person, and Royal Prerogative; and at last (after much council and
debating) they forced the King to yield to such conditions as were never
observed. Stanes is a good through fare, and has these ^avernes: Thomas
Wilkins, John Shorter, and Margaret Venman; the signs are, the Bush, the Bell
and the Lion.

This County had of Religious houses, a ^es, Nunneries, Priories, Frieries,
Colleges and Hospitalls, nine. London, within and without the Walls and
Liberties, thirty one.

It has these hundreds, or divisions; Edmonton, Gore, Finsbury and Wenulocks,
Barn, Osulston, Elthorne, Istleworth, Spelthorne.

It has seventy three Parishes, three Market Towns, and a hundred and one
Wine savernes.

Essex.
ESsex, or East Saxony, is a good, a great, and a rich County, stored
plentifully with Wood, Fish, Flesh, Butter, Cheese, Saffron, and as good Calves
as any other County, or Country whatsoever; in a word, it is stored with any
thing, or all things needful.

Colchester stands near the River Colne, it is (...) wasled Town, with
fifteen Churches, and one other, a most stately building, now ruined with an
old Castle, which Time has brought into a Consumption. This Town is famous
for Adtiquity, it was built by Coylus, a good King of Britain, it is said that
this Coylus was father to Queen Hellen, who was borne, or brought up in this
Town, she was the mother of Constantine the great Emperor, who ^lt
Constantinople. Colchester has these seven ^e Tavernes: Francis Kitteridg,
John Portkell, Lawrence Brown, Mary Spilesby, Mary Bloomfield, Elizabeth
Wyles, Elizabeth Wade.

At Barking, Joan Gowen, or George Lilly at the Bull.

At Braintree two, John Sparhawke, and Ralph Burton.

At M^nningtree, George Springet, and Robert Heywood.

At Abridge, Samuel Newbold.

At So^field, Anne Dae.

At Epping, John and Mary Archer at the Cock.

At Grayes, Thomas Farnell and Edward Knightly.

At Danbury, William Dickins.

At Harlow John Iosceline.

At Rochfourd, Judith Rix.

At Orsed near Graies, Anthony Web.

At Raynam, John Slany.

At Wethersfield, John Aldridge.

At Sampford Magna, Ireffrey Baker.

At Pritle well, Thomas Wait.

At Thacksted, Edward Constable.

At Stork, Charles Newman.

At Woodham-series, Oliver Higham.

At Springfield, Richard Smith.

At Thorpe, John Beriffe.

At Wivenhoe, John Parker.

At (...), Dame Martha Harris.

B^entwood, or Burntwood, is an ancient Town and had a Market and a Fair,
allowed by King Stephen, and continued ever since. It has these Tavernes: the
Crown, the Angel; but there are three in all, kept or allowed by Richard
Smith, Jane Tailor, and John Camper, the Angel.

At high ^asterne, Robert Plat.

At Dagnam, Joan Bird.

At Lexden, John Pottler.

At Leigh, James Hare.

At Southweald, Edward Woodford.

At Aveley, Lucy Ringsoll.

At Saint Ozith, Thomas Rand.

At Bardfield, John Rudland.

At South Ockenden, Elizabeth Wortley.

At Dedham John Wills.

At Horndon, Nicholas Richold.

At Upminster, Elizabeth Saward.

At Tarling, Dina Has^er.

At Blackmore, John P^chy.

At Little Waltham, Abel White.

At Eastcolne, Samuel Burton.

Ingarstone, a good Town for Market, and excellent neat entertainment for
Travelers, it has these Tavernes: Agnis White, John Bond.

At Bocking, Joan Kent, Francis Fit^h.

At Chippingange^, Will. Stane, Katherin Stane.

At Waltham Abbey, Tho: More, Mary Waterer.

At Walthamstow, Ralph Baker, Thomas Shaw.

Rumford is a sweet, savery, clean and gainful Market for Hoggs, and all
other sorts of swine, and of what else is needful for man's life. It has these
Tavernes, the Angel, the Bell, the White Heart, and the Cock.

At Rawleigh, Rob. Luckin, and Tho Parker.

At Dunmow, George Deane, and Agnes Gynn.

At East Tiburly, John French.

At Boreham, John Lane.

At Halstead 3. William Thurstone, John Coe, Thomas Harvie.

At Hithe near Colchester, Edward Leg, Francis Allen.

At Ilford, Francis Blanchard, the sign of the blew Boat.

Wittam, or Whittam is an ancient very fair through-faire. It was built by
King Edward the Elder, in the year 914; which was 154 years before the Norman
Conquest, 722 years since: It has two Tavernes, William Nevell (alias) Smith,
and John Alexander.

At Stratford Langthon two, Ralfe Keeling, and William Lovell.

At Low Laighton, or Laighton stone, Roger Falkstone, the sign of the Huntsman.

At Burnham, Robert Rowdon.

At Hatfield Peverell, Abigail Lane.

Hatfield Broadoake, so called, because a broad Oak, being a goodly fair tree
grew there, that spread a great compass. It has one Tavern kept by or for
one John Earl.

Chelmsford, a fair goodly Market-towne, has these 4 Taverns, Simon Wilmot,
George Solme, Nicholas Sutton, and Tho. Freeman; the signs are, the three
Tons, the Cock, the Black boy, and the Lion.

At Bricksley Roger Green.

At Kelvadon, John Theedham.

Harwich, has an excellent good Road for shipping. It is a good strong Town,
well strengthened by Natural situation, and Artificial Fortresses: it is not
only full of people, but honestly peopled for the most part of them. The River
Stoure there divides Essex from Suffolk. Harwich has three Tavernes, kept or
allowed by Alice Farley, Will. Heart, and Margaret Moore.

At Brookstreet at the Bull, Agmondesham Pickayes.

At Chigwell one, allowed by Tho: Pennington

At Plashie and St. Annes, Will. Chandler.

At Much Parindon, Roger Worthington.

Walden, or Saffron-walden, so called for the great quantity of Saffron that
grows thereabouts. It has had a fair Castle, which is now Ruinated. It is a
very good Market town, and it has a Corporation, with large Privileges: It
has three Tavernes allowed, o^ inhabited by Simon VVillmott, Katherine Bates
and Thomas VVatton.

At Much Wakering, Mawd Goldingham.

At newport, John Sell.

At Little-baddo, Abigail Lane.

At Much Waltham, Abell White.

Maldon was a City in the time of Calligula the Emperor, above forty years
after Christ, It was then called Camallodunum: It has been spoiled by the
Danes, and since repaired by the Normans: but by the industry of the people
there, it has been and is still a town of great worth and reputation: it
has a good Haven, and a Tavern for a safe harbor kept or allowed by Ursula
Edwards.

This County of Essex (in the Reign of King Henry 8.) had at the suppression
of Monasteries, Abbeys, Nunneries, Priories, Frieries, Colleges and Hospitals,
35. Essex is divided into 20 several Hundreds; namely, Vltford, Hinckford,
Rorchford, Chelmesford, Chaford, Winstree, Lexden, Dengie, Ougar, Tendering,
Thurstable, Barstable, Dunmow, Waltham, Freshwell, Harlow, Havering, Clavering,
Becontree, Wittham.

Essex has one and twenty Market towns, four hundred and fifteen Parishes,
and one hundred and seven Tavernes.

Hartfordshire.
HArtfordshire, is a County that surpasses all Countries and Counties for
making the best Malt; and for good clean Highways, conscionable short Miles,
meat, drink, lodging for travelers, kind men, women fair and honest, and with
any thing that is necessary, this County is plentifully stored withal.

Barkhamstead is a good Market Town, and it had once a Castle there of
strength, the Ruins of it are there yet to be seen; it has been the
habitation for Kings and Princes, for the most noble Prince Richard, Brother to
the King of England, dyed there: which Richard was King of the Romans, and
Earl of Cornwall. This Castle ruined, is also famous, for the residence there
of that most Illustrious Royal Spark, Edward the Black Prince: and lastly, it
is memorable for being the Birthplace of King Richard the third. Barkhamstead
has two Taverns allowed or kept by Stephen Besowth, and Francis Baker.

At Tring, William Blacknall.

At Stevenedge, John Nodes.

At Whethamstead, Thomas Stepping.

At Redburne, Prudence Miles.

At Sabridgeworth, John Burr.

At Walton, George Honor.

At Colney or Coney, William Tompson.

Barnet is a good Market town for Sheep and Beasts, it is a great through
fare, and famous for the Battle fought near it (on Easter day, the 14th of
April, 1471) betwixt King Edward the 4 and the Earls of Warwick and Oxford,
where Warwick was ^ine, and with great slaughter of men on both sides, King
Edward had a bloody victory. Barnet has these Tavernes: John Brisco at the
Antelop, Henry Owen at the red Lion, Thomas Brisco at the Rose; the Crown.

At B^ldock 2, James Haiday and John Thurgood.

At Stevenledg, John Nodes.

At Stansted Abbey, John Giver.

At the Bell at Richmonsworth, Sara Marsh.

At Bishops Hatfield, William Walker, and Elizabeth Barefoot.

Hartford is the Provincial town of this Shire; there is a Castle (as some
write) built by King Edward the first: this town has been much larger, and in
greater prosperity and account, for it had 4 Churches, namely, All Saints, and
Saint Andrews, which are now standing; the other 2 are decayed, or down, their
names were Saint Mary's, and Saint Michaels. Hartford has these 3 Tavernes:
Will. Scant at the Bell, Anne Vinmunt, Tho: Noble, Henry Chalkley, and Henry
Butler; these 4 persons last named, do inhabit and allow, the other a Tavernes
there being the signs of the Glove, and the Angel

At Hempstead 2, Will: Smith, and Dorcas Goodwin.

At Hitchin three, George Haiday, Thomas Harding, Priscilla Warner.

At Hoddesden, John Sides at the Black Lion, and Francis Williams at the
Chequer.

At Waltham Cross two, Katherin Holt at the Bell, and Rosamond Hawton.

At Royston three, Leonard Hamond, Anne Crofts, and Thomas Hagger.

At Watford 2, Edward How, and Henry G^ry.

At Markatstreet, John Crane.

At Wellwin, Iesper Wilshire.

At Barkway, John Rawley, and Thomas Smith.

Ware is a great thorow-fare, and has many fair Innes, with very large
Bedding, and one high and mighty Bed, called The Great Bed of Ware: a man may
seek all England over, and not find a married couple that can fill it. Ware
has 3 Tavernes: Will: Cross, or Will: Raste at the Crown, Shelton Amery,
Christopher Robinson, widow Hall at the George, also she keeps a Wine-seller
at the Christopher.

At Bishops-starford two, George Hawkins, and John Cheyny.

At Buntingford two, Edward Bullen, and Anne Hensham.

At Wormeley, Rich: Bishop at the Black Lion.

At Much-hadham, Edmund Rustat.

At Puckeridge two, Sir John Wats does allow one, and the other is inhabited or
allowed under one Will: Northage.

Saint Albanes is famous for Antiquity, and for the death of our English
Proto-martyr St. Alban, he was martyred there in the raig^e of Dioclesian the
Emperor, Ann. 268. After he had suffered many torments, lastly his head was
struck off, and immediately the executioner was struck blind. Off a king of the
Mercians built the goodly Abbey Church there, An. 795. and the said Church was
dedicated to Christ and St. Alban, from whom the town has denomination. The
Brazen Font in the Church was brought out of Scotland by Sir Richard Lea
Knight, An. 1543. in the 36 year of the reign of K Henry the 8. This town is
also famous for two memorable bloody Battles there betwixt K. Edward the 4. and
K. Henry the 6. where both the Kings had various fortunes: It has these Wine
tavernes; the Blow Bore, the Lion, the Kings Arms.

Kingslangley is also famous for being sometimes the residence of Kings, Edmund
of Langley, Son to K. Edward the third was borne there, and K. Richard the
second was first buried there: It has a tav^m kept or allowed by Rose Deacon.

At Abbots Langley, one Nicholas Breakespeare was borne, who was afterward
Pope of Rome by the name of Hadrian the 4th, he died suddenly chok'd with a Fly
in his Cup.

This County of Hartford, had, at the suppression of Popery, 22 Religious
houses, as Abbeys, etc. It has 8 divisions or hundreds; namely, Odsey, Caysho,
Branghing, Hartford, Hiching, Edwinstree Broadwater, and Dacorum. This County
has 18 Market towns; 120 Parishes, and 52 Tavernes.

Hampshire.
HAmpshire, or Hantshire, is a goodly rich County, abounding in Corn, Wood,
Pasture, and much enriched with innumerable Commodities from the Sea

Southampton is a fair, sweet and pleasant town, it has had trial of both
fortunes often, it was quite consumed by fire, in the reign of K. Edward the
3. Anno 1337. since when it is better re-edified and much increased, well
defenced with Walls, (...)rets, a Haven, and a strong Castle built by K. Richard
the second, it is rich in Merchants and Inhabitants, and by the grant of K.
Henry the 6. it is a County of it self. It has 8 Wine Tavernes, either
allowed or inhabited by Thomas Miles, Tho: Stoner, Tho. Smith, Augustine
Reignolds, Oliver Stoner, Elizabeth King, Eliz: Nevey, and Eliz: Elzey.

At Mew-church, Benjamin Newland.

At Alton 3. Io. Butler, Io. Goldsbery, Basil Kemp.

At Basing-stoake three, Anne Cross, or Robert White at the Bell, Avis Tate, or
Anthony Spittle at the Maydenhead, Thomasin Barrel, or Captain Marlow at the
George.

Kingwood is a very ancient town, it was in estimation and prosperity more
than 1100. years ago in the reign of Cerdicus, K. of West Saxons, Anno 508 it
is now a good Market town, and has 2 taver^ers allowed by Will: Tarvar and
John Wiseman.

At Petersfield two, Richard Goodwin, and Agnes Wood.

At Stokebridge one, Francis Leison.

At Hava^t, William Woolgar.

At Fareham, Anne Wilks.

At (...) (...), Anne Tinkeridg, Rachell Tinkeridg, Mary Williams.

At Buckland, Henry Fabyn.

Tichfield, where K. Henry the sixth was married to the valiant Virago, Qu.
Margaret, daughter to Reinard Earl of Anjou. and titularie king of Scicilia
and Jerusalem. There is a goodly house, the chief seat and residence of the
honorable Earl of Southhampton. Tichfield has one Tavern, Rich: Brown.

At Andover three, John Milier, John Hercy, and Mary So^h.

At Hook, Bridget Woolse, the sign of the B^ll.

At Romsey three, Alexander Elver, William Bloys, and Dorothy Loa^.

Christ-Church, by the Saxons, it had once a Castle in it of a good strength;
the town was much repaired by one Ralph Flammard Bp. of Durham, Anno 1094. in
the reign of K. Rufus, or William the 2. this Bishop was Deane of this Christ
Church, and there he erected a fair Monastery. This town has one Tavern, John
Powson.

At Warnford, Richard Woods, and Mabell Vin^.

At Limmington, George Castle.

At Castbrooke, Margaret Hayles.

At Newport, in the Isle of Wight, one John James, may, or does keep three
Tavernes.

At N^wtowne, (...) Tailor.

At Cowse three, Morgan Adams, Margaret Hayles, William Edwards.

At (...), Anne Garyre.

At Brading, John James. So there are nine Taverns in the I Will o^ W^ght. This
^and to the County of Hampshire, ^s 2^ mil^s in length and 12 miles in breadth
in the broadest place; it is a most plentiful strong defencible Country, Sea,
Art and Nature made so. It is peopled with valiant and warlike inhabitants,
Henry Bewchamp Earl of Warwick was crowned King of the I Will of Wight, in the
reign of King Henry the sixth.

At Forthingoridg one Tavern, Richard Boen.

At Hambledon one, Christopher Organ.

At Bishops Waltham one, John Hawksworth.

At Eastincon one, Jane Loving.

At Botley, Dorathy Doncastle.

Winchester is a very famous and ancient City, it was the Royal seat of the
West Saxon Kings; it had 6 houses in it for coining and minting money in the
reign of King Athelstane; and long since that ^ll the public Records and
Evidences of the whole ^ingdom of England were kept there. This City has been
twice fired by sudden misfortunes; and in king Stephens reign it was sacked
and spoiled by rude Soldiers that belonged to the King, and Mawd the Empress
factions; but after it was much enriched by the royal favor of King Edward
the 3, who caused a Mart or Staple of Wool and Cloth to be kept there, but
since (as times has altered) this worthy City has suffered many changes, yet
still with Fame and Reputation she bears up her head. Winchester has 4
tavernes Joan Prat, Anne Bud, Thomas Brexton, and Cornelius Brexton.

At Soake, near Winchester three, William Pope, John Noake, and Walter
Travers.

At Lippock, Robert Palmer.

At Sutton Sconey, Michaell Nicholas.

At Hartlerow, Anthony Maynard, or John VVild at the G^orge.

Portsmouth, so called, because it stands at the mouth of the Port or Haven; it
is a strong town and fortress, with a Garrison; and it thrives better by War
than by Peace: It has 4 tavernes, Richard James, Owen Iennings, Dorothy
Iennings, and William Haberley. Portsmouth Liberties, one Anthony Haberly
has, or may keep two tavernes.

At Gosport, near Portsmouth two, Anne Clarke, and William Towerson.

At Hartford bridge, Thomas Bickton, or William VVild at the Swan.

At Milbrooke, Margery Strood.

Odiam is a pretty Market town, where sometimes David King of the Scots was
kept prisoner, in King Eward the third's reign; since when, the Kings of
England have, and do, now, and then lodge there in a royal Mansion of their
own: there was a fortress there in the reign of King John, of such strength,
that thirteen Englishmen, did hold it fifteen days against Lewis the Daulphin
of France, who assaulted it with a mighty army, yet could not win it from the
said thirteen men Odiam has one tavern, kept by Bridget Dickenson, or one
Mistrisse Keys, at the George.

Hampshire had at the suppression of Popery, of Abbeys, Nunneries, Priories,
Fricries, Colleges, Hospitals 30. This Shire has 18 Market towns, Parishes
253. It is divided into 40 hundreds, or divisions, as Crundon, Acton, Selburne,
Odiam, Eastmean, Sutton, Bartenstacy, Finchdeane, Portsdown, Tichfield,
Mansbridge, Meanstock, Fawley, Hambledon, Budlegate, Redbridge, Kings,
Sombourne, Andover within, Andover without, Hornwell, Bosmere, Fareham,
Averstock and Gosport, Waltham, Eringer, (...), Kings Clear, Thoragate,
Overton, Basingstoake extra Holdshot, Christ-church, Newforre^, Ringwood,
Barmanspi^, Forthingbridge, Buntsborough, Mainsborough, Chutefey, and Michell
^ever. Number of Tavernes in this County seventy three.

Barkshire.
BArkeshire is a rich and plentiful County, and a great help to her neighbor
Provinces for Wood and Corn; which necessary commodities are the cause that no
other thing fitting for man's use is wanting in this County.

Windsor is a dainty, fair, and spacious town, with a royal Castle, of such
mag^cent structure, and so scited and seated, that for prospect it is
unparalleld, and deserves respect transcendent beyond all the princely fabrics
in Great Britain. That victorious Mars of men, King Edw. 3. was borne in
Winsor, and he founded the said Castle. He held prisoners King John of France,
and David K. o^ Scots: since which time the Castle was made more stately and
conspicuous by King Edw. 4. and a Noble Knight Sir Reignold Bray was at great
charge in the augmenting of it; since when the famous and worthy memorable
Queen Elizabeth, beautified it with the stone Gallery, or Walk toward the
Thames. The Right honorable Order of the Garter was first instituted by K. Edw
3. at Bordeaux in France, but since that time it has bin continued at Winsor
for that noble installation: and in the beautiful Chapel there, are all the
Arms and Hatchments of that noble Fellowship, placed in their degrees. Also in
this famous Castle was borne that good and pious King Henry the 6 who founded
Aeton College, and the worthy structure of Kings College in Cambridge. Winsor
has these Tavernes, the Crosskeyes, the George, the Garter, and the White Heart.

Wantage is a place of great antiquity, long before the Norman Conquest there
was a house for the king, for Aelfred the 23 king of the West Saxons was borne
there, who reigned, Anno 872: there is or may be two Tavernes kept by Edward
Gallant at the sign of the Elephant.

At Buscot one, Adam Kirby.

At Twyford one, Henry Millward.

At Enborne one, Anne Plantin.

At Wareseile one, Thomas Garson.

Abendun, Abbington, or Abinton, the name was first derived from a famous Abbey
built there by Cissa, one of the Saxon Kings, which Abbey was thrown down by
the Danes, and after raised again by king Edgar Anno 995. since which time it
grew to that state and greatness, that scarce any Monastry in England could
top it either for wealth or pomp; but there remains little or nothing of it
now but Ruins and Rubbish, as Relics of the greatness which once it had,
from it the Town was called Abby-town, now changed into the name Abington; it
is a fair and sweet situation, famous for a rare Cross in the Market place,
and for plenty of Malt made and sold there: It has but one Tavern kept by
one John Prince, who at his pleasure may keep three Tavernes there if he will.

At Theale one, John Bowyer.

At Winfield one, John Hawkins.

At Binfield, Richard Williams.

At Thackham, Robert Humphrey.

At Farington two, Simon Turner, and Margaret Handy.

At Okingham two, Will: Hunt, and Rich: Thorp.

At Lamburne one, kept by one Daintree at the two neck'd Swan.

At Hungerford one, Thomas Smith.

Wallingford was a good town in the reign of K. Edward the Confessor. An.
1042. It has been a walled town, as appears by the ruins of it, with a
strong Castle near the river of Thames, which is now almost defaced into
fragments. King Stephen with all his force could not win it from the besieged
Empress Mawd; In the reign of K. Edw. 3. An 1334 this town was of such
greatness that it had 12 Churches, which now are demolished and diminished to
1, or scarce two; (such are the changes of transitory things) it is a good
Market town, and stands commodiously, having two Tavernes under William
Donnington and John Smith.

Newbery is a rich town for the trade of clothing, it sprang out of the
C^nsumption of an old town, which is near it, called Spene, or Spinhamlands;
there are three Tavernes, under John Greenoway, Thomas Howes, and Anthony Linch.

Spinhamland has two tavernes under Richard Cox, and James Garroway.

Maydenhead is so called, as some say, of a Maid's head that was cut off at
Colleyne in Germany, which from thence was brought thither, and worshipped; the
people supposing it to be the Head of one of the 1100 Virgins (or Maids) that
suff^ed wi^h Saint Ursula, how certain it is I know not, but this I know, that
there are good Inns, lodging and entertainment, half of it being in the Parish
of Bray, having these taverns: the Bear, the Greybound the Lion, the White
heart, the Sarazens head: It may be one too many.

Reading is the prime and principal town in this County of Barkshire, for
fair buildings, large streets for clothing and other blessings: King Henry
the first, with his wife, and his daughter Mawd the Empress, were buried
there. Reading has these Tavernes, kept or allowed by John Domelaw, Elizabeth
Foster, John Bagley, Richard Alexander, John Skot, and George Duel at the
George.

This Shire had at suppression of Monasteries, of Abbeys, Nunneries, Priories,
Frieries, Colleges and Hospitals, 14. It is divided into 20 devisions, or
hundreds; namely, Hormer, Farington, Ganfield, Shrievenham, Kentbury, Oak,
Braye, Wanting, Riplemore, Compton, Morton, Cookeham, Barnelth, I am borne,
Wargrove, Reading, Sunning, Theale, Charleton, and Fairecrosse.

Barkshire has also 11 good Market towns, 140 Parishes, and 40 Tavernes.

Surrey.
SUrrey, or Southrey, because it lies South from the River of Thames, it is a
rich County, and if the inhabitants do not want thank fullness to God, there is
nothing wanting (either pleasant or profitable) for the life and maintenance
of men.

Farnham is a fine Town in the Rode betwixt London and Winchester, it has a
fair Castle in it, which was built by Henry Earl of Bloys, Brother to King
Stephen; it stands lofty on a Hill, seeming to overlooke the Town, as it
overtops it; it was thrown down by King Henry the third, in the Barons wars;
but the Bishops of Winchester (who are the owners of it) has from time to time
raised and repaired it to that goodly structure. The town has 3 tavernes
inhabited or allowed under John Folder, Anne Hoore, and Anne Martin.

At Haselmere one, Robert Palmer.

At Cobham, John Perior.

At Godstone two, the Bell and the Greyhound.

At Peckham one, the Greyhound.

At Linyuill, Thomas Chapman.

At Lederhead, or Leatherhead two, John Rogers, Thomas Clark.

At By^eet one, John Baily.

At Mowlsey, Anthony Powell.

Chertsey is a pretty little Market town near the Thames, where there is a
decayed left handed Bridge over the River, I wish it mended, the people are for
the most part very kind and honest. It has or may have 2 taverns, Ellin Day,
and John Stare.

At Croydon 2, the George and the Greyhound.

Guilford is a good Market town where Kings have kept their Court as appears
by an old decayed house there to this day. Also, there are the ruins of an
ancient Castle to be seen near the Brook: This town has very fair innes,
and good entertainment, at the Tavernes, the Angel, the Crown, the White heart
and the Lion.

At Wimble^on, the two Lions and Wheat-sheafe.

At Godalming (corruptly called Godlyman) are two, under Henry Westbrooke and
George Bridger.

At Bagshot are two, the Bush, Scipio le Squire, or Mr. Anthill, and Robert
Battin at the Lion.

At Barnes, Richard Hill at the Bear.

Rygate is anciently famous for affronti^g and repulsing the Danes near there
in Holensedale, near which is a ruinated Castle, called Holme Castle; the
Tavernes may be two, but William Pistor has the command, the Heart.

At Little Monlesey, Parnell Nitingale, White heart.

At Riple, Anne Stanton at the Dog.

At Stretham, William Lads at the Antelop.

At Barm^ street one, Julian Haberley.

At Ca^halton one, Mary Rutleage at the White Lion.

At Lambeth and Lambeth Marsh, the Faulcon, the Kings head, the White Lion, the
Three Squirrel^, the Three Tuns, the Vine.

At Egham, the Kings head, and Katherin wheel, by Elizabeth Clarke, and
Margaret Guy.

At Micham one, William Holland.

At Tooting one, Elinor Serient.

At Mortlake two, Miles Bourne at the Princes Arms, and Phebe Tucker at the
Maidenhead.

At Waddon one, Christian Weller.

At Camberwell, John Stratfield, and Jane Webb.

At Bleechingles, Anne Fince.

At Waybridge, Kate Williams.

Kinston, a very commodious and good well governed Town, an excellent Market
(especially for corn.) In old time it had a fair Castle belonging to the
Earls of Gloucester. Three Saxon Kings were crowned there on a Scaffold in the
Market place, namely, Edwin, Athelstane, and Etheldred, in memory of which
there are the figures of those Kings in the Church. Before those Kings were
crowned there, the town was called Mereford, and ever since those Coronations,
it has bin called Kingston, or the Kings Town. Parliaments have bin held
there diverse times: It has many good Innes, and these Tavernes, the Castle,
the Crane, the Kings head, the Saracens head, and the Hand in hand.

At Meistham, Reignold Durkin.

At Battersea, Henry Norton, Anne Boswell, the Mermayd. At Darking, Toby Ridge,
Edward Goodman, and John Comber.

At Ewell two, Katherin Umbrevile, and Francis Kendall: but one may serve that
town, and does (as I think) which is the sign of the Popinjay.

At Newington, the Bull, and the Kings Arms.

At Putney 2. the white Lion, and the red Lion.

At Wandsworth, Mary Gibson, Since Brown, and William Sherlocke.

At Cobham, the Lion, the George.

The Golden Lion near old Paris Garden.

At Rederhith three, the Mermayd, the Sun, and the Rose.

Richmond, was called Sheene before K. Henry the 7. built the stately Palace
there. I here was a goodly House near the said foundation in old time, for K.
Edw. 3. died there: so likewise did Queen Anne the wife of K. Richard 2. King
Henry 5. built much there, which being burnt by casual misfortune, K. Henry 7.
built upon the old groundworke. In that Palace that now is, dyed the said
Royal founder of it, King Henry, and after that there died his grandchild
Queen Elizabeth, both unmatchable Princes for internal and external
endowments. There are two Tavernes, the Lion, and the Princes Arms.

This County of Surrey had at the suppression of Monasteries, Abbeys,
Nunneries, Priories, Frieries, Colleges and Hospitalls, 14. It has 8 Market
towns, and it is divided into thirteen Hundreds or Divisions, namely,
Chertsey, Woking, Farnham Emley Bridge, Darking, Croydon, Kingston, Blackheath,
and Wooton, Capthome, and Effingham Godalming, Tanridge, Reygate, Brixton and
Wallington. It has 140 Parishes, and of Tavernes 71.

Buckinghamshire.
BVckinghamshire is a rich and fat soil, and by the bounty of heaven
plentifully replenishe^ with the fruits of the earth.

Marlow, was so named because it stands in Chaulkie or Marle ground: it is a
good Market town and has one Tavern under John Farmour.

At Winslow, Nicholas Brinsall.

At Chaffant, Robert Ducke.

At Burnham, John Phipp.

At Oney, Lewis Ablestone.

Brill is so ancient, that King Edward the confessor had a house in it, and
sometimes kept hi^ Court there. It has bin formerly a Market town^ it is a
place most fertile and fruitful, and has brave, beautiful, and pleasant
prospect. It has on^ Tavern, the Kings Arms, kept by Christophe^ Gregory.

At Brickhill two, John Hutchinson, and Jane Holmes.

At Cheneis, John Barefoot.

At Hanslap, Richard Perry.

At Newport Pagnell two, John Prest^, and Elizabeth White.

At Slowgh two, the Crown, and the White Heart, John Checkley.

At Fenny streetford, John Kims.

At Ever, William Atkins.

Alesbery (as some say) so called for brewing of most mighty Capitol Ale, as
brown as a Berry; it is a good Market town, and has these tavernes, and
fignes, Joseph Sexton, Ieffrey Standley and Anne Goldsworth, the George, the
Kings head, and the Bush.

At Amersham, John Cr^ss, Edward Bailey, and Tobias Saunders.

At Challey, Robert Pain.

At Marsh Gibbon, Mary Robins.

At Beconsfield, Richard Bentley, Sara Hayles, the Bell.

East Wickham, or high Wickham is a fair town, and a Mayor town, with these
tavernes, the Lion, the Nagshead, and the Katherin Wheel; but Mr. George
Wells may (if he pleas^) keep one more.

At West-wickham, Mary Wells.

At Farnham Royal, William Baldwin.

At Chessham, Daniell VV^st, and Eliz: Wolf.

At Aeton two, Francis Dickinson, and Peter VViggor; the signs there, are the
Christopher, and the Su^.

At Missenden two, William Harris, and Thomas Gardner.

At Whit-church, William Theed.

At ^vinghoe, Edward Anthony.

At Wendover two, Richard Rowell, and Ralpb Hill, the Lion.

Stonystretford is so named for the place where it stands, and much of the
Country near it is very stony; there is a Tavern there, the sign of the
Cock, Lloyde.

At Amelford two, the Sarazens head, the Bush.

Colebrooke is a great through-fare, and has these taverns, the George, the
Estrich, the Katherin wheel Thomas Meal, Thomas Charley, John Child.

At Prince Resborow, William Hastlegrove.

Buckingham is the Provincial Town of this Shire, and has these Tavernes,
the Cock and the Bush: Alexander Stotusbury, and Elizabeth Pollard.

This County had at suppression of Monasteries, Abbeys, Nunneries, Priories,
Frieries, Colleges and Hospitals 22. It has 8 divisions, or hundreds,
Assenden, Stock, Newport, Burnham, Buckingham, Disborough, Collstow, Alesbery.
It has 11 Market Towns, 185 Parishes, and 47 Tavernes.

Oxfordshire.
OXfordshire is scarce second to any County in England for plenty of Corn and
Pasturage, Wood and Fruits of all sorts, that this kingdom yields. It is also
excellently watered with fine sweet Rivers, as Ouse, or Isis, which some do
c^ll the Thames; and the little River Cherwell also glides into it, so that
this Shire is furnished in plenty with fresh River fi^h of sundry kinds.

Banbury is a goodly fair Market town, and (as the learned Cambden) it is
famous for Cakes, Cheese and Zeal: it has three saverns kept by Martin
Wright, Elizabeth Collins, and Matthew Alsop.

At Stoken Church, Augustine Belson, the sign the White Heart.

At Nettlebed two, John White and Ioh. Crowch. the signs are the Bull, and
the Lion.

At Watlington, Elizabeth Colebrooke.

At Bampton, Simon Turner.

Burfourd is a good Market town, but beware of a Burfourd Bayt, for it may
breed the Staggers: there are 3 Tavernes inhabited or allowed under Edmund
Hening, Agnes Dalby, and Simon Hator.

At Chippingnorton two, Christopher Deane, and Henry Cornish.

At VVitney, Tho. Brook at the Kings Arms.

Dorchester was a fair and goodly City 1000 years ago, for in anno 642.
Oswald King of Northumberland, was a Godfather to one Cingilse, a king of the
West Saxons, which king was converted from Paganism to Christianity, and was
then and there baptized in this town of Dorchester. The Cuines whereof that are
near it, do show in part how far the ancient greatness extended, it is now
but a little Town; the River of Tame does fall into Isis hard by this Town:
it has one tavern, inhabited or allowed by Elizabeth Bernard.

At Stratton Awdley there is one Tavern, under the license of John Burlace
Esquire.

At Enstone, Richard Canning, and Mary Ayldworth.

Them is a good Market town, and is so named from the River of Tame or Them
that waters it; it has two Tavernes, Thomas Ballow, and Richard Kendall, the
signs are the Red Lion, and the Swan.

At Benson one, Edward Snelling.

VVoodstocke house, or the Kings Palace there was built by King Henry the 1.
and the Park there was also by him enclosed. This house was after made a
Palace of private pleasure by King Henry the second, where he enjoyed his
fading contentment with the fair Rosamond Clifford: The town is a pretty
Market town, and chiefly famous for the breeding of the worthy Ieffrey
Chancer, the most ancient Arch-Poet of England. VVoodstocke has sometimes but
one Tavern, and sometimes two, according to the pleasure of Mr. Tho: Rayer.

At Tatsworth two, John Poyner, and Elizabeth Tanner.

At Paddington two, Katherin Bennet, and Mary ^ker.

At Is^p two, Edward Stoakley, William Bradley, Kings head, Princes Arms.

At Wheatley two, John Smith, and Athaliah Robinson.

Hendley or Henley is an excellent Market town, with these Tavernes, the White
heart and the Elephant. Also, there is a Tavern with a Bush only, at the
Bowling Green without the Town in Ox ford way. Robert Heyborne, Richard
Pinder, and John Stevens.

Oxford.
AS the glorious Beams of the resplendant Sun cannot be made more coruscant by
the light of a silly Taper, and as a drop of rain augments not the boundless
Ocean, so would any thing that should be spoken, or written by me in the
praise of this famous University and City be most needless or impertinent. The
vigor of Hercules could not be increased with the strength of a Pismire; it is
high presumption to show Apollo the grounds of Poetry, or to teach the Muses
(whose habitation is there) and there is the inexhausible Magazin of all Arts,
Learning, and good littrature; therefore, with that little parcel of Latin
which is translated out of Greek, and spoken by Apelles the famous Painter, Ne
Suitor Vltra Crepidam, I will take leave of the University, and speak of the
Tavernes, which are five, Francis Harris, William Turner, Thomas Hallom,
William Grice and Humphrey Budwit; the signs are the Mermayd, the Swan, the
other three are only Bushes.

This Shire had at the suppression of the Romish Religion, of Monasteries,
Abbeys, Nunneries, etc. 26. This County is divided into 14 hundreds or
devisions; namely, Langtree, Bloxham, Tame, Banburie, Wootton, Binfield,
Ewelme, Pitton, Chadlington, Bampton, Bullington, Plowghley, Dorchester, and
Lewknor. Also Oxfordshire has 11 Market Towns, 208 Parishes, and 40 Wine
Tavernes.

The total of all the Tavernes in all the ten Shires and Counties aforesaid,
are 686, or thereabouts.

FINIS.

