THE SCVLLER, Rowing from TIBER to THAMES with his Boat laden with a
hotch-potch, or Gallimawfry of Sonnets, Satyrs, and Epigrams.

With an addition of Pastoral Equiuocques or the complaint of a Shepherd.

By JOHN TAILOR.

Sum primus homo, Vis ire mecum Remis? Est mihi proxima ^ imbe.

Read, and then judge.

Printed at London by E. A. and are to be sold at the Pide-bull near St.
Austins gate. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and worthy favorer of learning, my singular good
Master, Sir WILLIAM WAAD Knight, Liefetenant of his Mties Tower of London,
your poor servant John Tailor, consecrates this his first Inventions: wishing
You, and Yours, all happiness temporal and eternal.
S Such is the course of this inconstant life,
I In which we mortal creatures draw our breath:
R Reason is ruld by Rage, and Peace by Strife,
W Wit is a slave to Will, and Life to Death.
I I in these fickle, fleeting, fading times,
L Live and enjoy the bounty of your favors,
L Let me I pray', and my unworthy rimes,
I Entreat your kind protection of my labors.
A As in a storm the Sheep to shelters run,
M My Muse unto your Patronage does fly,
W Whereas she hopes all Enuies storms to shun,
A And live despite of scandals callumnie.
A All my endeauours then shall me persuade,
D Dreadles that I through greater streams will wade.
Your humble servant most obesequious JOHN TAILOR.

To the right worshipful and my ever respected, Mr. JOHN MORAY Esquire.
OF all the wonders this vile world includes,
I muse how (...) such high favors gain!
How adulation cunningly deludes
Both high and low, from Scepter to the Swayne:
But yet if thou by flattry could obtain
More then the most that is possessed by men,
Thou can not tune thy tongue to falsehoods strain,
Yet with the best can use both tongue and pen.
Thy sacred learning can both scan and ken
The hidden things of Nature, and of Art,
It Is thou have raisd me from obliuions den,
And made my Muse from obscure sleep to start.
Unto thy wisdoms censure I commit,
This first borne issue of my worthles wit.
I T.

To my dear respected friend Mr. Benjamin Johnson.
THou can not dye, for though the stroke of death
Depriues the world of thy worst earthly part:
Yet when thy corpse has banished thy breath,
Thy living Muse shall still declare thy Art.
The fatal Sisters and the blessed Graces,
Were all thy friends at thy nativity:
And in thy mind the Muses took their places,
Adoring thee with rare capacity.
And all the Worthies of this worthy land,
Admires thy wondrous all admired worth,
Then how should I that cannot understand
Thy worth, thy worthy worthiness set forth.
Yet bear the boldness of the honest Sculler,
Whose worthless praise can fill thy praise no fuller.
I. T.

To my loving friend JOHN TAILOR.
COuld my vnpractisd Pen advance thy name,
Thou should be seated on the wings of Fame.
For from thy toylesome Oar I wonder I,
How thy invention flows so iocundly!
Not having dreamd on fair Pernassus Hill,
With fruitful numbers to enrich thy Quill.
Nor having washed in that Pegassion Fount,
Which lends the wits such nimblenes to mount,
With tickling rapture, on poetique strains,
On Thames the Muses floate that fills thy brains.
Thy happy wit producde thy happy rimes,
Which shall commend thee unto after times.
And worthily enrole thy name among those,
Whose Temples are begirt with Laurel bows.
For, (sooth to say) a work I saw not yet,
Less helped with learning and more graced with wit.
Then spite of Envy, and Detractions scorn,
Though Art thou wantst, thou art a Poet borne:
And as a friend for names sake, I Will say thus,
Nec scombros metuentia, Carmina nec Thus.
Henry Tailor.

To the one and only water-Poet and my friend John Tailor.
FResh water Soldiers sail in shallow streams,
And mile-end Captains venture not their lives:
A brain distempred brings forth idle dreams,
And gilded Sheathes have sildome golden Knives.
And painted faces none but fools bewitch:
Thy Muse is plain; but witty, fair, and rich.
When thou did first to Agganippe floate,
Without thy knowledge (as I surely think)
The Nayades did swim about thy boat
And brought thee bravely, to the Muses brinke.
(...) Grace, and Nature filling up thy Fountain,
Thy muse came flowing from Pernassus Mountain.
So long may flow as is to thee most fit,
The boundles Ocean, of a Poets wit.
I P.

In laudem Authoris.
Wit, Reason Grace, Religion, Nature, Zeal.
Wrought all together in thy working brain.
And to thy work did set this certain (...),
Pure is the cullor that will take no stain.
What need I praise, the work it self does praise:
In words, in worth, in form, and matter to,
A world of wits are working many ways,
But few have done, that thou do truly do:
Was never Tailor shapt so fit a Coat,
Unto the corpse of any earthly creature,
As thou (...) made for that foul Romish Goat,
In true description of his deuillish nature.
Besides, such matter of judicious wit,
With queint (...) so fitting every fancy,
As well may prove, who scorns and spights atit,
Shall either show their folly or their franzie.
Then let the Popes Bulls roar, bell, book and candle,
In all the Devils circuit sound thy curse:
Whilst thou with truth do every try all handle,
God bless thy work and thou art nere the worse.
And while Hells friends their (...) foe do prove thee
The Saints on earth, and God in heaven will love thee.
Thy loving friend Nicholas Bretton.

When Tybers silver waves their Channel leave,
And lovely Thames, her wonted course for sake,
Then foul oblivion shall thy name bereave,
Drenching thy glory in her hell-bred lake,
But till that time this scourge of Popery:
Shall Crown thy fame with immortallity.
Thy friend assured Maximilian Waad.

To my loving friend John Tailor.
FErris gave cause of vulgar wonderment,
When unto Bristow in a Boat he went:
Another with his Sculler ventered more,
That Rowed to Flushing from our English (...).
Another did devise a wooden Whale,
Which unto Callice, did from Dover sail,
Another, with his Oars and slender Wherry,
From London unto Antwerpe over did ferry.
Another, maugre fickle fortunes teeth,
Rowed hence to Scotland, and ariu'd at Leeth.
But thou have made all these but triuiall things,
That from the Tower thy watery Sculler brings
To Hellicon: most sacred in account,
And so arrived at Pernassus Mount:
And back returndladen with Poets wit,
With all the muses hands to witness it:
Who on their Sculler does this praise bestow,
Not such another on the Thames does row.
Thy loving friend SAMVEL ROWLANDS.

To my friend both by water and land JOHN TAILOR.
Often have thou traueld for me at thy Oar,
But never in this kind did toil before.
To turn a Poet in this peevish time,
Is held as rare as I should write in rhyme,
For one of thy profession, yet thy Art,
Surpasses mine: this serves to paint that part,
I mean thy Poetry which in thee lurkes,
And not thy sweating skill in water works.
I cannot but commend thy Book, and say
Thou merritst more then common Scullers pay:
Then whistle off thy Muse, and give her scope.
That she may soundly cease upon the Pope:
For well I see that he and many more,
Are dar'de by her (which scarce was done before)
Proceed (good John) and when thou have done this work,
Fear not to venture trussing of the Turk.
I like thy vain, I love thee for those gifts
Of Nature in thee, far above the shifts
That others seek plodding for what they pen,
Wit works in thee, Learning in other men,
Thou native language we have done thee wrong,
To say thou art not complete, wanting the tongue
Called Latin, for here is one shall end the strife,
That never learned Latin word in's life.
Then to conclude, I truly must confess,
Many have more been taught, hut learned less.
Thy assured friend R. B.

To my loving friend JOHN TAILOR.
SOme say kind Jack thou art a Poet borne,
And none by Art; which thou may justly scorn:
For if without thy name they had but seen
Thy lines, thy lines had artificial been.
Opinion carries with it such a curse,
Although thy name makes not thy verse the worse.
If then this work, variety affords
Of Tropes, of Figures, Epethets and words,
With no harsh accent, and with judgment too,
I pray what more can Art or Nature do?
So that in thee thy Genius does impart,
To Artificial Nature, Natural Art.
Thy old assured friend IO. MORAY.

Prologue to the READER.
GOod gentle Reader, if I do transgress,
I know you know, that I did never profess,
Until this time in Print to be a Poet:
And now to exercise my wits I show it.
View but the intralls of this little Book,
And thou will say that I some pains have took:
Pains mixed with pleasure, pleasure joined with pain,
Produced this issue of my laboring brain.
But now me thinks I hear some envious throat,
Say I should deal no further then my Boat:
And ply my Fare, and leave my Epigram,
Minding, ne suitor vltra (...).
To such I answer, Fortune gives her gifts,
Some down she throws, and some to honor lifts:
Among whom from me, she has with held her store
And gives me leave to sweat it at my Oar,
And though with labor I my living purse,
Yet do I think my lines no jot the worse:
For gold is gold, though buried under moss,
And dross in golden vessels is but dross.
John Tailor.

TO TOM CORIET.
What matters for the place I first came from,
I am no Duncecomb, Coxecombe, Odcombe Tom
Nor am I like a Wooll-packe, cramd with Greek,
Venus in Venice minded to go seek:
And at my back return to write a volume,
In memory of my wits Gargantua Colume.
(...) (...) wits would (...) so adore me,
Nor like so many (...) run before me:
But honest Tom, I envy not thy state,
There Is nothing in thee worthy of my hate:
Yet I confess thou have an exeellent wit:
But that an idle brain does harbor it.
Fool thou it at the Court, I on the Thames,
So farewell Odcomb Tom, God bless King James.
The Author in his own defense.
THere is a crew of ever carping spirits,
Who merit nothing good, yet hate good merits:
(...) wrings his Jaws awry, and then cries mew,
And that I stole my lines (...) plainly show.
Thou addle headed Ass, thy brains are muddy,
Thy witles wit, incapable of studdy,
Deemst each invention barren like to thine,
And what thou can not mend thou will repine.
Lo thus to wavering Censures torturing Rack,
With truth and confidence my Muse does pack.
Let Zoylus and let Momus do their worst,
Let Envy and Detraction swell and burst:
In spite of spite, and (...) disdain,
In (...) of any carping Critticks brain,
Like to a Poast I Will run through thick and thin,
To scourge iniquity and spurreg all sin.
You worthy favorites of wisdoms lore,
Only your fouors does my Muse implore:
If your good stomachs these harsh lines digest,
I careless bid a rush for all the rest.
My lines first parents (be they good or ill)
Was my unlearned brain, and barren quill.
To the whole kennell of AntiChrists hounds, Priests, friars, monks, and
Jesuits, mastiffs, mongrells, Islands, Spanniells, bloodhounds, bobtailetike,
or foysting-hound: the Sculler sends greeting.
Epigram 1.
CVrse, exorcize, with beads, with book, and bell
Poluted shauelings: rage and do your worst:
Use coniurations till your bellies burst,
With many a Nigromanticke mumbling spell,
I fear you not, nor all your friends that fell
With Lucifer: ye damned dogs that durst
Devise that thundering treason most accursed,
Whose like before was never hatchd in hell:
Half men, half devils, who never dreamd of good,
To you from fair and sweetly sliding Thames,
A popomasticke Sculler war proclaims,
As to the suckers of imperial blood.
An Anti-Iesuit Sculler with his pen,
Defies your Babell Beast, and all his den.
I. T.

Epigram 2.
Room, now approaches thy (...),
Thy Antichristian Kingdom down must tumble,
Like Nimrods proud cloud-pearcing Babylon,
Thy hell-hatchd pride, despite thy heart must humble.
In scorn of dambd equivocation,
My lines like thunder through thy Regions rumble.
Down in the dust must lie thy painted glory,
For now Irowe and write thy tragic story.
Epigram 3.
When God had all things out of nothing framed,
And man had named all things that are named:
God showed to man the way he should behave him,
What ill would dam him, or what good would save him.
All Creatures that the world did then contain,
Were all made subjects to man's Lordly reign.
Fair Paradise was princely ADAMS walk,
Where God himself did often with him talk:
At which the Angels, envious and proud,
Strived to ascend above the highest (...):
And with the mighty God to make compare,
And of his glory to have greatest share:
Because they saw Gods love to man so great,
They striud to throw their maker from his seat.
But he, whose power is All-sufficient,
Did headlong hurl them from Heavens battlement:
And for with envious pride they so did swell,
They lost Heavens glory for the pains of Hell.
In all this time man living at his ease,
His wife nor he not knowing to displease
Their glorious maker, till the son of night
Full fraught with rage, and poison bursting spite,
Finding alone, our ancient Grandam EVE,
With false persuasions makes her to believe,
If she would eat the fruit she was forbidden,
She should Gods secrets know, were from her hidden.
Supposing all was true, the Serpent told,
They both to ADAM straightway did unfold,
This treacherous horrid vile soule-killing treason,
And he ambitious, past the bounds of reason,
(To his posterities sole detriment)
Does to the Woman and the Fiend consent.
Yet Adam never had the Devil obayd,
Had he not had the woman for his aid.
Lo thus the sex that God made, man to cherish,
Was by the Devil intic'te to cause him perish.
Satan supposing he had won the field,
(In making man to his obedience yield)
Poor Adam now in corpse and mind dejected,
From head to foot with shameful sin infected:
Is now a slave to sin, the Devil, and death,
Dreading the danger of the almighty's wrath.
From Eden banished, from Gods presence thrust,
And all the earth being for his crime accursed:
Oppressed with grief and self consuming care,
(...) at the brim of bottomeles despair.
Yet God in mercy thinking of his frailty,
Though sinful man to him had broken fealty;
Did promise he would send his only Son,
To satisfy for faults by man misdone.
At last he came, in his appointed time,
And on his faultles shoulders took our crime:
And like a malefactor death he fusferd,
And once for all, himself himself has offered.
And yet the Devil will not be satisfide,
(Although the Son of God for sinners did)
But daily hellish damned enterprises,
His ministers and he against man devises,
Under the shelter of Religions cloak,
Seditiously he does the world provoke,
Against God in traytrous manner to rebel,
To amplify his everlasting hell,
Attempting mankind still by fraud or forcc,
His soul from his redeemer to divorce:
And yet not man alone must feel his sting,
But he dares venture on our heavenly King,
Whose power, though Satan knows is everlasting,
Yet after forty days and nights long fasting,
Thinking him weak, attempts now to invade him,
And with illusions seeking to persuade him:
Carries our Savior up unto a hill,
And told him if he would obey his will,
In adoration to fall down before him,
He of this worlds great glory would so store him,
That he should Lord and Master be of all,
If he in reverence would before him fall.
Christ knowing him to be the root of evil,
With God-like power commands, avoid thou devil:
It Is writ, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God,
But serve and fear the fury of his rod.
Satan perceiving all his labor lost,
Runs through the world more swifter then a post:
Proclaims large kingdoms, and a tryple Crown,
To him that in his reverence would fall down.
Ambitious thirst of sickle fading fame,
Did quickly minds of worldly men inflame:
Making them dream on pleasures transitory,
And to esteem earths pomp above heavens glory.
This made the Pope, with poysnous pride infusde,
T accept those honors Christ before refusde:
Now has he won great fame, on this condition,
That fore the devil he fall in base submission:
So having won this great magnificence,
To countermaund the earths circumference:
The Idiot World he proudly ouer-swayes,
Under the name of heavens immortal Kayes,
Ore all the Globe he reigns as Lord and King,
And to Hells Goate-folde aye does millions bring
Of souls, seduced with buzard blinded zeal,
From men besotted he does honor steal.
And yet with his effrontit shamles face,
Seems to command the Devil that gave him place.
A heinous fault in my dull understanding,
The servant over his Lord should be commanding:
But yet I think it is but for policy,
More to (...) the infernal monarchy:
He seems to hate the Devil, he most does serve,
Else would the world from Romes obedience swerue,
And leave the Pope and papists in the lurch,
And then might Satan whistle for a Church.
The I Will of Britain has perceived their tricks,
And in rebellion against the Pope she kicks:
For whom they have invented hell-hatcht plots,
Quite to extirp the English and the Scots.
I wot not which of Rome or hell roard louder,
But they had like to have peperd us with powder.
Yea all estates from Scepter to the Clown
Should topsie turuy all be tumbled down.
Without respect of person, sex, or age,
All had their doom, to abide the Roman rage.
But he that by his sacred self had sworn,
To guard his Church, did laugh them all to scorn:
For when those vassels of eternal night,
Thought all secure, then God brought all to light,
Casting their painted glory in the dust,
That any power besides his power does trust:
Leaving their Corpse a prey for Crows and Kites,
That bravely so for Signior Satan fights.
But in this matter I Will no longer travel,
Least want of water make my Ship to gravel:
Knowing there is many wits of far more worth,
That to the life has limd this treason forth:
But I Will conclude as I hegan before,
Because that Christ would not the Devil adore,
Christ lost this glorious worldly pompous reign,
Which happy loss the haples Pope did gain.
Epigram 4.
HOw weakly is that weak Religion grounded,
That thinks the Church on Peter's corpse is sounded?
The spouse of Christ is built on faiths firm rock,
Which not the fury of hells direful shock,
Though all the fiends in troops do her assail, Math. 16.

Yet against Gods power their force cannot prevail. If the corpse of Peter (...)
the Churches fou dation, as the Papists (...), the^ how (...) the spouse of our
Savior have done if the Apostle Peter had never ben borne

Peter's confessing Christ Gods true begotten,
Is sure the Churches ground, but Peter's rotten.
Or else if Peter never had had life,
Through want of him Christ never had had wife.
For it is an Article of faith profound,
To know St. Peter for the Churches ground.
And who denies it shall have fire and rope,
Believe me Reader or go ask the Pope.
But yet I muse in what place of this earth,
Gods Church did stand before Saint Peter's birth?
Epigram 5.
WHen as our Savior to the Temple went,
To tell the message that his father sent:
And finding there a rude unruly tout,
That bought and sold: he angry, beat them out,
And overthrew their tressels and their tables,
And made them pack away with all their bables:
And further said (what all true hearts believes)
This house was made for prayer, no den for thieves.
Those merchants thus whipped from their market place,
Practisd revenge against Christ for this disgrace.
And more, to strength their power, joined with the Pop.
Who by his lawles laws has given them scope,
That in the Church they still should buy and sell
Both God and devil, Heaven, Purgatory, Hell.
Now heeres the ods, Christ out the Pediars thrust,
And stayed himself there, preaching what was just.
And for revenge the hawty Roman Priest,
Has taken the Pedlars in, and thrust out Christ.
Epigram 6. It Is more the I can believe that the Devil has power to elect a^
Officer for God.

IT is a question far beyond my Logic,
How those that have the Popedom won by Magic,
Can be Liefetenants unto Christ our Savior,
Being known for hell hounds of most dambd behavior Being of the Devils
placing or displacing, the Pope must needs be the Devils deputy and not (...)

Then since the devil has the Pope created,
His Vicar must he be that there him seated:
T would make a wiser head then mine to muse,
That God should like the man the Devil does choose.
Epigram 7.
A Proverb old, where had the Devil the Friar?
Where had the Devil the Friar but where he was?
The Devil with the Friar, sits in the quire,
The Friar with the Devil says and sings Mass:
The Devil and the Friar are nere asunder,
The Friar to hate the Devil is more then wonder.
Epigram 8.
COnferring with a Romish Pharisie,
Who void of grace (...) this heresy, I my self did talk with such a fellow,
and if occasion serve I can produce him.

That he the law of God had never broken,
Nor never ill had done, nor ill had spoken.
I gave his Antichristian faith the lie,
And told him that for him Christ did not dye.
For he did suffer only for their sin,
Who were ensnared in the devils Iynne.
And as for him that never had transgrest,
Twere good to hang him now he is at the best.
Epigram 9.
IT is an Art beyond the work of Nature, It Is a (...) piece of work for the pot
to make the (...) ter.

The Pope should be Creator, and a creature:
Betwixt the Pope and God there is one thing od,
For though God all things made, the Pope makes God.
Epigram 10
REligion's scattered into diverse sects, If the devil be true to his (...),
these two principle axioms will to the end of the world, help the Papists at
a dead life.

One likes one way for many sound respects,
Others like that way, others like another,
And what likes the one, is loathed by the the other.
Yet each man deemes his own opinions right,
And each against other bears inated spite.
Amongst the rest the Roman Catholic,
Who scorns that his Religion sail should strike
To any, since from it two virtues springs,
That they may eat their God, and kill their Kings:
By which maine maxims they do strongly hope,
To the worlds Period to uphold the Pope.
Epigram 11. It Is reason a Shepherd should rule Rome because a Shepherd did
build it: and How Romulus by great reason the Pope should be of a woluish nature
cause a wolf was nurse to his first (...) for Romulus.

IT is no wonder though Romes regal sway,
Is by a Shepherd ruld with Lordly fame;
For ancient records truly does display;
How Romulus the Shepherd built the same:
And how his brother Remus and himself,
In Tybers ruthles waves, ydrencht and duckt,
When infant misery was all their pelf,
A ravening wolf, most mother-like they sucked:
From whom does spring as from a flowing gulf,
Romes Priest, and Prince, a Shepherd, and a Wolf.
Epigram 12.
TVmulteous thoughts within my breast does struggle, Though all the scriptures
do assure that the corporal presence of Christ is in heaven, from whence he
will not come (...), till (...) comes to the general judgment: yet a (...)
Priest will daily take upon him to command him down, (...) iuggle him into the
(...), ^ a cake or a piece of bread.

To think how finely popish Priests can iuggle:
And make the world believe, a wafer Cake
Is that Creator that did all things make:
Or that the sinne-polluted bald-crownd Priest,
With coniurations, can create his Christ,
When our belief does plainly testify,
He sits at Gods right hand in majesty,
From whence in humane form he will not come,
Till quick and dead shall all abide his dome,
What fools are they then thinks the priest and Baker,
With impious hands makes their immortal maker.
Epigram 13. Alexander the (...). (...) (...) (...) (...) were (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...). But if his holiness had (...) in (...) (...) he could
not have (...) in such a matter.

NOt all the sophistry of Aristotle,
Cannot persuade me but the Pope did err,
When he and's son mistook the poysned bottle,
(...) error sure what ever they infer.
O't had been good then, both for him and's heir,
He had been halterd fast in Peter's Chair.
Epigram 14.
THe warlike Emperors before Christ come, Heaven, Earth, Sea and land, being
all (...) before these latter times by the Emperors and the godly Bishop, There
remains only hell for the Pope to make a lawful claim unto.

Subdude the world, both sea and land to Rome.
Then afterward the Heavens, their Bishops won,
By preaching truly Gods immortal son.
Heaven, Earth, and Sea, being taken in the prime,
What rests now for the Popes this latter time?
Since of the heavens and earth they loose their part,
They will have hell despite the devils heart.
Epigram 15.
Christ's Church in no ways is the Church of Rome,
For Paul says, in the latter times should come That Church that is so oposite
to the doctrine of Christ cannot be Christ's wife but the devils whore.

Apostats that the (...) should quite for sake,
That lies and fables should Religion make:
Affirming meats and matrimony evil,
Which Paul does call the doctrine of the devil.
Then since the Pope and all his shaueling rout,
What Christ commands they wilfully thrust out,
I with my betters must conclude this doom,
The Devils dear drab must be the Church of Rome.
Epigram 16.
O Yes, if any man would know a place, God made (...), the (...), and the Sea,
and all things (...) in them: the Pope made Purgatory without Gods Ieaue or
know ledge therefore it is no reason that God should (...) any thing to do there
(...) the Popes leave.

Where God himself has neither power nor might,
Where as the almighty never showed his face:
Where words, (...) swords can neither talk nor fight,
O such a placeles place is Purgatory,
Created by the Pope without Gods leave,
To (...) his Antichristian glory,
And all the world with cunning to deceive,
Where as the Pope hangs, draws, condemns, and judges,
Commits, acquits, sets free, or casts in thrall,
Whether he thousands sends, on heaps like drudges,
For in this no place, he is all in all:
And like a mighty three crowned priestly Prince,
With threats and bans he so the world bewitches:
In sending thither and recalling thence,
He gains himself the Devil and all for riches.
Epigram 17.
THe Pope has charge of heavens immortal keys, His holiness (...) over all
the devils in this life, but it is but borrowed ware, (...) they pay him all his
old score when he dies, and comes to (...) host.

And triple-headed Cerberus obeyes,
His triple Crown, and who so ere he please,
He (...) to hell for pain, or heaven for ease.
He can command the Angels and the Fiends,
What pleases them for him or for his friends,
Like as a dog does fear a flitch of bacon,
So his great name, Heaven, Earth, and Hell has shaken.
Epigram 18.
Who dares affirm the Popes of Rome are Proud,
Amongst the Heretics himself must shroud:
Or who dares say they are given to Avarice,
In selling heaven and hell for sums of price?
Or who dares speak such words of treachery,
To say the Pope is given to Letchery?
Or who is he, dares be so impious, Seven goodly virtues, natu rally (...) in
his (...) (...).

To say his holiness is Envious?
Or (...), for fear of everlasting scath,
Dares once accuse his holiness of Wrath?
Or who is he that dares once veresy,
The Pope does use excessive Gluttony?
Or who dares say that like a droane or moath,
Like an unpreaching Priest he lives by Sloth?
He that against him this dares justify,
Is a plain Protestant, and such am I.
Epigram 19.
MAy it be called intolerable pride,
For man to sit in the Almighties seat?
Or on men's shoulders pompously to ride, His holiness never learned this of
Christ, nor yet of (...).

To terrify the World with thundering threate?
To wear a three-pilde Crown upon his head?
To have both Kings and Princes at his beck?
Whose Horse by mighty Potentates is (...),
Who proudly footes upon the Emperors neck?
If tricks like these for pride may be alloud,
Then I conclude the Pope must needs be proud.
Epigram 20.
IF it be covetous for gripple gain,
To sell (...) Heavens, the Earth, yea God himself, If you will know the (...)
of (...), any ordinary priest can tell you as well as (...) (...) can tell a
penny is the price of a pot of ale.

To dispossess Kings from their lawful reign,
To cram his coffers with unlawful pelf.
To pardon sins for money, more then pity:
Nay more, to pardon sins that are to come:
To maintain whores, and Stews in Town and City:
Who yearly pays the Pope a countles sum,
Who takes great interest, puts great sums to use,
It Is covetousness I think without excuse.
Epigram 21.
IS it not (...) sensual appetite, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).

The (...) to make a Strumpet of his Child?
Or is not Letchery an Epithet,
For him that has his fathers bed defilde?
For him that has deflourd Virginity?
That has defilde the Damsel and the Dam
(...) respect of Consanginity?
That like a Wolf has spoyld both Ewe and Lamb?
This may be tearmd incestuous Luxury,
And yet his Holiness not wronged thereby.
Epigram 22.
HE like a God that gouernes in the world, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).

That (...) each man's honor but his own:
He that sedition through the earth has hurld,
Whose Envy has great Kingdoms over thrown.
He that vngraues his foe that's once intombd,
For Envy that he wronged him whilst he lived,
And after death is (...) doombd,
To be of liueles senceles (...) deprived.
If this be true none will deny I hope,
That Envy is ingrafted in the Pope.
Epigram 23.
HE whose fierce Wrath with bloody rage does swell,
That takes delight in slaughtring Gods elect: (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).

He that is sworn the Champion of Hell,
That Wrath and Murder only does effect:
He whose combustious all deuowring ire,
Depopulates and lays whole Empires waste,
Whose Wrath like a consuming quenchles fire,
Has blessed peace from Christendom displac'te,
If I should need one, (...) in wrath and murder,
His Holiness commands me seek no further.
Epigram 24.
WHo dares for Gluttony the Pope accuse, It is a (...) (...) (...) (...), to
(...) flesh and (...) all (...) of fish, and other delicates, which they cause
to swim in their (...) with the strongest wine, which makes (...) Holiness and
all is crew, to look as lean as so many Brawnes, styed up against Christ mas.

Or against voluptuous diet make's complaints?
His Holiness so many Fasts does use,
As (...), and fasting days, and Eeues of Saints.
Yet where Pride, (...), and Avarice are found,
Heart gnawing Envy, and fell murdering Wrath,
There ravenous Gluttony must needs abound,
Else other vices will be out of breath.
For Papists fasts are generally more dear,
Then feasts of (...) with all their cheer.
Epigram 25.
THose I mean the 7. deadly sins.
Liberal Sciences, in number seven,
Began with Pride, and ends with drowsy Sloth?
Yet Christ's command unto the Apostles given,
Was His (...) knows if (...) should feed (...) Sheep of Christ (...) such
(...) (...) he (...), they (...) soon find out his (...).
feed my Sheep that faith in them have growth.
Now I suppose the feeding of Christ's flock,
Is truly preaching of his facred word,
Which word's the Key that opes the heavenly Lock,
Which If the Pope should (...) (...) (...) to (...) drawn, it weld (...) his
(...), and his (...). both.
Sword and Word his Holiness does hoord,
Which drawn, cuts his throat and the Devils both,
For fear of which he lets it sleep in sloth.
The belief of a Romish Catholic. Epig. 26.
I Do believe the holy Pope of Rome, I would wish that this were not so,
(...) (...) (...) stand long in (...) (...) to (...) (...) for (...) (...)
Authors (...) (...) (...) and (...) (...) (...).

Is Lord of Scriptures, Fathers, Church and all:
Of Counsels, of the world, whose dreadful doom,
Can at his pleasure make all rise, or fall.
I do believe though God (...) the same,
That I should worship Images, and Saints:
I hope by mine own works I Heaven may claim,
In tongues unknown, I must make prayers and plaints.
I do believe Christ's body made of bread,
And may be eaten by Dogs, Cats, (...) Mice,
Yet is a sacrifice for quick and dead,
And may be bought and sold for rated price.
I further do believe the Pope our Lord, I think as you think, what think
(...) (...)

Can at his pleasure all my sins forgive.
I do believe at his commanding word,
Subjects must Kings of lives and lands deprive.
Like as the Church belieues so I believe:
By which I hope the heavens I shall atchieue.
Epigram 27.
LIke as the Vipers birth's his mothers bane,
So the Popes Full, has been the Emperors Wane:
The Empires Autumn was the popish Spring,
And Kings subjection made the Pope a King.
Then did his holiness become a God,
When Princes children like, began fear his rod.
Whilst earthly potentates their own did hold
The Popes then shepherd like did keep their fold.
And fore the sacred truth should be overcome,
They manfully would suffer martyrdom.
But farewell Martyrs now, and welcome Miters,
For paineful Preachers now, contentius fighters
With blood or gold assends the papal chair,
Under the title of St. Peter's heir.
I think if truth were brought unto a trial,
The Pope is heir to Peter in denial.
But want of penitence proclaims him base,
A Bastard, not of Peter's blessed race,
Unless when Christ did call The Apostle devil,
He Is bastard to the good, and heir to the evil.
Epigram 28.
ME thinks I hear a swarm of Romanists,
Revile and curse, with candle book, and bell:
Yea all the poleshorne crew of Antichrists,
Condemns me all without remorse to hell.
But I with resolution so do arm me,
Their blessings do no good, nor cursings harm me.
Epigram 29.
I That have rowed from Tyber unto Thames,
Not with a Sculler, but with Scull and Brains:
If none will pay my fare, the more their shames,
I am not first unpaid that has taken pains.
Yet I Will be bold if payment be delayed,
To say and swear your Sculler is not paid.
To his aproued good friend Mr. Robert Branthwayt.
Dear friend to thee I owe a countles debt,
Which though I ever pay, will nere be paid:
It Is not base coin, subject to cankers fret,
If so, in time my debt would be defrayd.
But this my debt, I would have all men know,
Is love: the more I pay, the more I owe.
I. T,

To his well esteemed friend Mr. Maximilian Waad.
Wit, Learning, Honesty, and all good parts,
Has so possessed thy body, and thy mind,
That courteously thou stealst away men's hearts,
Yet against thy theft there is never none repinde.
My heart, that is my greatest worldly pelf,
Shall ever be for thee as for my self.
I. T.

To my friend Mr. William Sherman.
THou that in idle adulating words,
Can never please the humors of these days,
That greatest works with smallest speech affords,
Whose wit the rules of wisdoms lore obayes.
In few words then, I wish that thou may be,
As well beloved of all men as of me.
FINIS.
I. T.

Epigram 1.
ALl you that steadfastly do fix your eyes,
Upon this idle issue of my brain,
Who void of any intricate disguise,
Discribes my meaning rusticall and plain.
My Muse like Sisiphus with toylsome trade,
Is ever working, yet has never done,
Though from the Romish Sea she well began wade,
Yet is her labor as twere new begun.
For having at the Papists had a fling,
Great Britains vice, or Virtues now I sing.
Epigram 2.
THen cause I will not hug my self in sin,
First with my self I mean for to begin.
Confessing that in me there is nothing good:
My veins are full of sin-poluted blood,
Which al my corpse infects with hel-borne crimes,
Which make my actions lawles like these times,
That had I power according to my will,
My faults would make compare with any ill.
But yet I muse at Poets now adays,
That each man's vice so sharply will dispraise:
Like as the Kite does ore the carrion houer,
So their own faults, with other men's they cover.
Cause you shall deem my judgment to be just,
Amongst the guilty, I cry guilty first.
Epigram 3.
GLacus that self conceyted critticke fool,
Upon my Epigrams does look a scaunt,
And bids me put my barren wit to school,
And I in anger bid the Ass auaunt.
For till some better thing by him is pend,
I bid him falt not that he cannot mend.
Epigram 4.
A Skillful Painter such rare pictures drew,
That every man his workmanship admird:
So near the life, in beauty, form, and hue,
As if dead Art, against Nature had conspirde.
Painter says one, thy wife's a pretty woman,
I muse such ill shapt Children thou have got,
Yet make such Pictures as their like makes no man,
I prithee tell the cause of this thy lot?
Quoth he, I paint by day when it is light,
And get my Children in the dark at night.
Epigram 5.
Unlearned Azo, a store of books has bought,
Because a learned Scoller heel be thought:
I counseld him that had of books such store,
To buy Pipes, Lutes, the Violl and Bandore,
And then his music and his learnings share,
Being both alike, with either might compare.
Epigram 6.
Fair Betrice tucks her coats up somewhat hie,
Her pretty Leg and Foot cause men should spy:
Says one you have a handsome Leg sweet Ducke,
I have two (quoth she) or else I had hard luck:
There Is two indeed, I think they are twins (quoth he)
They are, and are not, honest friend (quoth she)
Their birth was both at once I dare be sworn,
But yet between them both a man was borne.
Epigram 7.
THe way to make a Welch-man thirst for bliss,
And say his prayers daily on his knees:
Is to persuade him that most certain it is,
The Moon is made of nothing but green Cheese.
And heel desire of God no greater boon.
But place in heaven to feed upon the Moon.
Epigram 8.
A Gallant Less from out her window saw
A gentleman whose nose in length exceeded:
Her boundles will, not lymited by law,
Imagined he had what she greatly needed.
To speak with him she kindly does entreat,
Desiring him to clear her dark suppose:
Supposing every thing was made complete,
And corespondent equal to his nose.
But finding short where she exspected long,
She sighed, and said, O nose thou did me wrong.
Epigram 9.
YOung Sr. John Puck foyst, and his new made madam,
Forgetts they were the offspring of old Adam:
I Am sure it is not for wit, nor man-like fight,
His worthles worship late was dubd a knight.
Some are made great for wealth, and some for wit,
And some for valor do attain to it:
And some for neither valor, wit nor wealth,
But stolen opinion, purchase it by stealth.
Epigrom 10.
ONe told me flattry was exilde the state,
And pride and lust at Court were out of date,
How virtue did from thence all vice pursue,
It Is news (quoth I) too good for to be true.
Epigrum 12.
HE that does beat his brains, and tire his wit,
In hope thereby to please the multitude
As soon may ride a horse without a bitt,
Above the Moon, or suns high Altitude.
Then neither flattery, nor the hope of pelf,
Has made me write, but for to please my self.
Epigram 12.
ARustick swain was cleaving of a block,
And hum he Cries at every pondrous knock,
His wife says, husband wherefore hum you so?
Quoth he it makes the wedge in further go.
When day was don, and drowsy night was come,
Being both in bed at play, she bids him hum,
Good wife (quoth he) entreat me hum no more,
For when I hum I cleave, but now I bore.
Epigram 13,
When Caualero Hot-shott goes with Oars,
Zoun's Row ye Rogs, ye lazy knaves make have,
A noise of Fiddlers, and a brace of whores,
At Lambeth stays for me to break their fast.
He that's so hott for's wench ere he come nie her,
Being at her once I doubt heel be a fire.
Epigram 14.
IT was my chance once in my furious mood,
To call my neighbors wife an arrant who re,
But she most stiffly on her credit stood,
Swearing that sorry I should be therefo re,
Her husband understanding of the case,
Protested he would sue me for a slander,
When straight I proved it to his forked face,
He was a knave, a cuckold and a Pander.
Oho (quoth he) good neighbor say no mo,
I know my wife lets out her buggle bo.
Epigram 15.
THe Law hangs Thieves for their unlawful stealing,
The Law carts Bawds, for keeping of the door,
The Law does punish Rogues, for roguish dealing,
The Law whips both the Pander and the whore,
But yet I muse from whence this Law is grown,
Whores must not steal nor yet must use their own.
Epigram 16.
OLd Fabian by extortion and by stealth,
Has got a huge mass of ill gotten wealth,
For which he gives God daily thanks and praise,
When it was the Devil that did his fortunes raise.
Then since the getting of thy goods were evil,
Thou Have reason to be thankful to the devil,
Who very largely has increast thy muck,
And sent them Miser Midaes golden luck.
Then thank not God for he has helped thee least,
But thank the Devil that has thy pelf increast.
Epigram 17.
What matter is it, how men their days do spend,
So good report do on their deaths attend:
Though in thy former life thou nere did good,
But made Religion for thy faults a hood,
And all black sins were harbourd in thy breast,
And took thy Conscience for their native nest:
Yet at thy burial for a noble price,
Shall have a Sermon made, shall hide thy vice.
A threed-bare Parson shall thy praise out-powre,
And in the expiration of an hour,
Will make the world thy honesty applaud,
And to thy passed life become a Baud.
Our Christian brother here lies dead (quoth he)
Who was the pattern of true Charity:
No Drunkard, Whoremonger, nor no vile swearer,
No greedy Usurer, nor no Rent-rearer.
O dear beloved his example take,
And thus an end at this time do I make.
Thus Mr. Parson nobly spends his breath,
To make a Villain honest after death.
And for one noble, freely he affoords,
Much more then twenty shillings-worth of words.
Epigram 18.
LOrd who would take him for a pippin squire,
That Is so bedawb'd with lace and rich attire?
Can the dambd windefalls of base bawdery,
Maintain the slave in this imbrodery?
No marvel Virtue's at so low a price,
When men knows better how to thrive by Vice.
Epigram 19.
ALl Bradoes oaths are newfound eloquence,
As though they sprung from learned sapience:
He swears by swift-pac'd Titans fiery Car,
By Marses Lance, the fearful God of war,
By Cupids Bow, Mercuries charming Rod,
By Baccus Diety, that drunken God.
By grimfacde Pluto, and Auernus Caves,
By Eolus blasts, and Nptunes raging waves,
By his sweet Mistress bright translucent eyes,
All other Oaths his Humor does despise.
Epigram 20.
Signeor Serano, to and fro does range,
And at high noone he visits the Exchange:
With stately gate the peopled Burse he stalks,
Prying for some acquaintance in those walks.
Which if he spy, note but his strange salute,
Mark how heel spread to show his broaking suit,
When he perhaps that owde this cast apparel,
Not a fortnight since at Tyburne fought a quarrel.
Epigram 21.
OLd Grubsons Son a stripling of good age,
T will make one laugh to see him and his Page,
Like to a guarded Vrchin walks the streets,
Looking for reverence of each one he meets:
Eagles must honor Owls, and Lions Apes,
And wise men worship fools for far fetched shapes.
Epigram 22.
GReat Captain Sharke does wonderfully muse,
How he shall spend the day that next ensues:
There Is no Play to be played but he has seen,
At all the Theaters he often has been:
And seen the rise of Clownes, and fall of Kings,
Which to his humor no contentment brings.
And for he scorns to see a Play past twice:
Heel spend the time with his sweet Cockatrice.
Epigram 23.
A Complete Gallant that has gone as far,
That with his hands from Skies has plucked a Star:
And saw bright Phoebus when he did take Coach,
And Luna when her Throane she did approach:
And talked with Jupiter and Mercury,
With Vulcan and the Queen of Letchery,
And saw the net the stumpfoot Blackesmith made,
Wherein fell Mars and Venus was betrayed,
With thousand other sights he saw in Skies:
Who dares affirm it that this gallant lies?
I counsel all that either hate or love him,
Rather believe him then to go disprove him.
Epigram 24.
DRusus his portion gallantly has spent,
What though? he did it to a good intent.
Unto a wise man it seems never strange,
That men should put their money to exchange.
Nay then I see he was a subtle Fox,
What had he for it I pray? sweet Sir the Pox.
I do not like his bargain: why, wherefore?
His money still wan'd less, his pox wax more.
He need not now fear wasting of his stocks,
Spend what he can he nere shall want the pox.
Epigram 25.
NEat Master Scapethrift railes against all riet,
Commending much a temperate sparing diet:
What though he has been prodigal and wild,
Those idle fancies now he has exilde:
What though he has been frequent with excess
Of Dice, of Drabs, and drowsy Drunkenness,
Yet now he is changd sir, he is not the man,
The case is alterd now from what it was than:
The Prologue of his wealth did teach him spend,
And it is the Epilogue that makes him mend.
Epigram 26.
A Greedy Chuffe once being warnd in post,
To make appearance at the Court of Hell:
Where grisly Pluto hotly rules the roste:
And being summond by the passing Bell,
With heaps of Gold he would have bribed Death,
But he disayning bribes, deprived his breath,
Epigram 27.
DOctor Donzago one of wondrous learning,
And in Astronomy exceeding cunning:
Of things that's past and coming, he is discerning,
His mind on Prophesies is ever running,
Of Commets, Meteors, Apparitions,
Of Prodigies, and exhalations,
Of Planets, natures, and conditions,
And of the spheres great calculations,
Yet want of one skill, all his cunning smothers,
Who lies most with his wife himself or others?
Epigram 28.
Brave Bragadocio whom the world would threaten,
Was lately with a faggot stick sore beaten:
Wherefore in kindenes now my Muse must weep,
Because his resolution was a sleep.
Epigram 29.
WAlking along the streets the other day,
A ragged Soldier crossed me on the way;
And though my Purses lyning was but scant,
Yet somewhat I bestowd to ease his want.
For which he kindly thankt me with his heart,
And took his leave and friendiy we did part.
When straight mine eyes a Horse and Footcloth spide,
Upon whose back in pompous state did ride,
One, whom I thought was Deputy to Jove,
Yet not this Soldiers wants could pity move,
But with disdainefull looks and terms of scorn,
Commands him travel whether he was borne.
Twill almost make a puritan to swear,
To see an Asses Horse a Cloak to wear,
When Christians must go naked bare and thin.
Wanting apparel t'hide their mangled skin.
Vain world unto thy Chaos turn again,
(...) brutish beasts are more esteemd then men.
Epigram 30.
LIefetenant Puff from Cleaueland is returned,
Where entering of a Breach was sorely burnd:
And from Revenge heel never be persuaded,
Till the low Countries he has quite invaded.
When his hot wrath makes Netherlands to smoke,
He Is bound for Deep in France, with irefull stroke.
But have a care in these hot wars of France:
Least in a pocky heat you spoil your Lance.
Epigram 31.
A Loue-sicke Woer would a Sonnet write,
In praise of her that was his hearts delight:
Hoping thereby his wished love to win,
And to attain it, thus he did begin.
Star of the Earth, and Empress of my Soul,
My Love and Life, that does my thoughts control:
Sole Queen of my affections, and desire,
That like to Aetna sets my heart on fire.
Thy golden Locks, resembling brightest Amber,
Most fit to grace some mighty Monarkes Chamber:
Thine eyes ecclipsing Titan in his rising,
Thy Face surpassing Natures best devising.
Thy Lips Euaporates most sweet perfumes,
Thy Voice the Music of the Spheres assumes.
Perfection wounds more then Loves Shaft and Bow,
Thy red the Rose does shame, thy white the snow,
Thou Worlds wonder, Natures dearest Jewel,
Stain not thy Virtues, with thy being cruel.
O thou that art my Souls adored Saint!
Be penetrable to my woes complaint.
Thus the poor Bull-finch spends the day in moanes,
The night he wastes in deep heart-gnawing groans,
For a most silthy ugly odious Whore,
On whom he spends his substance and his store.
Devising millions of egregious lies,
To raise his Punckes foul feature to the skies.
Epigram 32.
Look how yon I etchers Legs are worn away
With haunting of the Whore-house every day:
He knows more greasy Panders, Bauds, and Drabs,
And eats more Lobsters, Artichockes, and Crabs,
Blew roasted Eggs, Potatoes, Muskadine,
Oysters, and pith that grows in the Oxes Chine:
With many Drugs, Compounds, and Simples store,
Which makes him have a stomach to a Whore.
But one day heel give ore, when it is too late,
When he stands begging through an iron grate.
Epigram 33.
LIght fingerd Francis begging in the Iayle,
Did chance to see a friend of his pass by,
Thinking his lamentations would pre uaile,
And that some coin would from his bounty fly.
Those ancient friends, one thrall, and the other free,
One hungry, lowsy, ragged, and forlorn:
The the other fat with prodigallity,
Makes him this answer mixed with pride and scorn,
What Franck (quoth he) art there for Ale and Cake?
Why how the Devil comes this luckles cross?
Faith Sir (quoth Franck) your Mastership mistakes,
For I am here for stealing of a Horse.
Troth I mistook indeed, and so did thou,
For at this time I have no money now.
Epigram 34.
MOunsieur Luxurio has been with a Puncke,
Whereby his Worships purse is shrowdly shrunk.
And now for penance of his former ryet,
With good Duke Humfry he must take his diet.
Thus with a crosseles purse and meatles maw,
(...) his case quite past the help of Law.
Epigram 35.
THere chanst to meet together in an Inn,
Four men that thought that lying was no sin,
The (...) an old man was in age well entered,
The next a traveler that far had venter'd,
The third a Poet in prose and verse attired,
The fourth a Painter for his art admired:
These four striued each other to excel,
Who should in lying bear away the Bell:
The old man said that when he was a boy,
To lift nine hundred weight was but a toy,
To iump in plain ground thirty foot at least:
Then was accounted but an idle jest.
The (...) replide that he had seen,
The King of Pigmies and the Fairy Queen:
And been where triple-headed Cerberus,
Did guard the sulphrus gate of Erebus.
The Poet he had been at Hellicon,
And rakte from embers of oblivion,
Old Saturnes downfall, and Jove's royal rising,
With thousaud fictions of his wits devising.
And for the Painter scorns to come behind,
He paints a flying Horse, a golden Hind.
A Sagitary, and a grim wild man,
A two-neckt Eagle, and a cole-blacke swan.
Now Reader tell me which of those four Liars,
Does best deserve the whetstone of their hyers.
Epigram 36.
THough Death do Usurers of life deprive,
Yet their extorcions ever shall survive.
Epigram 37.
MIraculos wonders in the British clime,
Monsters of Nature, sprung from putred slime.
Sampson that pulled the Gates of Gaza down,
Nor Libian Hercules whose furious frown,
Would mase strong Giants, tame the Lions rage,
Were not so strong as Gallants of this age:
Why you shall see an vpstart Corkebraind Jack,
Will bear five hundred Akers at his back,
And walk as stoutly as it were no load,
And bear it to each place of his abode,
Men of such strength I judge it necessary,
That none but such should Porters burdens carry.
Epigram 38.
FOr Gods love tell what gallant Gull is that,
With the great Feather, and the Beauer Hat?
O now I know, his name is Mounsieur Shift,
Great Cousin german to Sir Cutbert Theft,
All his revenues still he bears ab out him,
Whorehouse, nor Ordinaries never are without him.
False Dice, sharp Knife, and nimble nimming fingers,
Are his sworn Subjects, and his tribute bringers.
Thus does he swagger, sharke, steal, filtch, and quarrel,
Until the hangmans wardrop keeps his parreli.
Epigram 39.
A Famous house in poasting have is built,
A gallant Porch with Pillars all beguilt,
Brave lofty Chimnies, pity to defile them,
Pray make no fire, for the smoke will soil them.
Epigram 40.
A Worthy Knight there is of ancient fame,
And sweet Sir reverence men do call his name:
By whose industrious policy and wit,
There Is many things well taken, were else unfit,
If to a foul discourse thou have pretense,
Before thy foul words name Sir reverence.
Thy beastly tale most pleasantly will slip,
And gain the praise when thou deserust the Whip.
There Is nothing vile that can be done or spoake,
But must be couerd with Sir reverence Cloak.
His ancient pedigree who ever seeks,
Shall find he is sprung from among the gallant Greeks.
Was Ajax Squire, great Champion to God Mars:
Pray God Sir Reverence bless your Worships ()
Epigram 41.
HVnting is all this Gentleman's delight,
Yet out of Town his Worship never rides:
He hunts invisible and out of sight,
For in the City still his game abides.
He hunts no Lion, Tygre, nor the Bore,
Nor Bucke, nor Stagge, nor Heart, nor Hind, nor Hare,
But all his sport's in hunting of a whore,
And in the Chase no travel he will spare.
He has one Dog for hunting of the Cunny,
Worth a whole kennell of your flapmouthd Hounds,
He will not part with him for any money,
But yet the Curre will course beyond his bounds.
But I advise him to respect his lot,
Least too much heating make him pocky hot.
Epigram 42.
FAlling a sleep, and sleeping in a dream,
Down by the Dale that flows with Milk and Cream,
I saw a Rat upon an Essex Cheese
Dismounted by a Cambrian clad in Freese.
To bid his Worship eat I had no need,
For like a Serieant he began to feed.
Epigram 43.
A French and English man at dinner sat,
And neither understanding others prate,
The Frenchman says, mange proface Mounsieure,
The Englishman begins to storm and swear:
By all the Devils, and the Devils dams,
He was not mangie but ith wrists and (...).
Epigram 44.
A Dead dead bargain is a quick quick wife,
A quick wife lies ore long upon ones hands,
But for a dead wife that has lost her life
A man may sooner utter then his lands.
This Riddle greatly does amaze my head,
That dead things should be quick, and quick things dead.
Lo then I Will make an outcry wondrous strange,
If death do any wife of life deprive:
I Will give her husband coin to boot and change,
And for his dead wife one that is alive:
Besides, I Will pay the (...) and the feast,
And take my wife again when she is dtceast.
Epigram 45.
Omus sits mumming like an (...) Elfe,
Hates others good nor does no good himself.
Epigram 46.
REader, if any thing this Book did cost,
Thou needst not deem thy coin and labor lost:
Twill serve thee well Tobacco for to dry,
Or when thou talkst with mother Anthony.
Twill serve for Muckenders for want of (...),
So farewell Reader, I remain thy detter.
Satire
THou that have ever been a rouing These,
A diuing Cutpurse, or a periurd Slave,
And in all villainy have been the Chief,
And with a brazen brow can justice brave,
That stealst thy pedigree from ancient houses,
And (...) in broaking Satin every day:
That takst delight in stabbing and Carowses,
Not caring how thou letst thy loose life stray.
Thou that have been a Traitor to thy Prince,
A great Arch-villaine to thy native soil,
And would by treachery exile from thence,
The blessed peace has been procurd with toil.
Thou that have been a Machiuilian
For damned slights, conceits, and policy:
Thou that have been an Antichristian,
Or (...) with blinded heresy.
If any of these vile iniquities,
Have been the Axioms of thy passed life;
Then view the Roles of old antiquities,
And see goods got with falsehood, lost with strife.
There shall thou see how Justice evermore,
Has poyz'd the Balance, and vpheld the Sword,
How Gravity inspirde with Wisdoms lore,
Has Virtue honored, and foul Vice abhord.
How Treason has been seuerd lim from lim,
How Theft and Murder there have paid their hire:
How those that erst in worldly pomp did swim,
Have soyld their fortunes in disgraces mire.
How (...) has forfeited his ears,
How (...) mounted on the Pillory,
How graceles (...), that nothing fears,
Do end their days in loathed misery.
How Usury is plagued with the Gowt,
How Avarice complayneth of the Stone:
How guilty Consciences are still in dout,
How Envy gnawes on Honor to the bone.
How Letchery is laden with the pox,
How Prodigallity does end with woe:
How Panderisme is headed like an Ox,
Because the destinies apoynt it so.
How drunkenness is with the dropsy fraught,
And made his visage like a fiery Commet,
Who being full must leave the the other draught,
Till like a Swine he wallow in his vommet.
How dambd hypocrisy with feigned zeal,
And outward show of painted holiness:
(Does like a Canker eat the public weal)
All scornful pride, yet seems all lowlynes.
To thee that readst this, therefore be it known,
If any of those vices are immurde
Within thy heart, not to the World yet shown:
If by this reading thou may be allurde,
To turn thy tide of life another way,
And to amendment all thy thoughts incline:
And to thy rebel will no more obey,
But seek by virtuous actions to combine
Fame to thy friends, and terror to thy foe,
And say it was friendly counsel told thee so.
Satire.
THis childish Anticke, doting pie-bald world,
Through which the Devil, all black sins has hurld:
Has hene so long by wickedness pressed down,
From the freese Plow-swaine to The Imperial Crown:
We have so long in vice accustomd bin,
That nothing that is wicked looks like sin.
The glistring Courtier in his gaudy tire,
Scorns with his heels to know his russet Sire.
The pettifogging Lawyer crammes up Crowns,
From hobnayld Boores, and sheepeskin country Clownes
The gaping, greedy, gryping Usurer,
The son of Hell, and Satan's treasurer:
The base (...) (...) sold bribing Broaker,
The (...) of Mankind and his Countries choaker.
The helhownd whelpe, the shoulder-clapping Serient,
That cares not to undo the world for Argent.
The postknight that will swear away his soul,
Though for the same, the law his ears do powle.
The smoaky black-lungd puffed Tobacconist,
Whose joy dothin Tobacco sole consist.
The chollericke Gull that is tangled with a Drab,
And in her quarrel will his father stab.
The baudy dry boand letcherous Baboone,
Would feign repent, hut thinks it is too soon.
The ryming Iygmonger would be a Poet,
But that the Rascal has not wit to show it.
The wrinkled Bawd, and dambd Vermillian whore,
That buys and sells the pox to increase their store.
The greasy cauesdropping dore-keeping Pander,
That with a Puncke to any man will wander.
The conycatching shifter (...) most brief,
And when he is hanged heel cease to be a thief.
The (...) Drunkard, will carrowse and quaffe,
Till like a Hog he tumble in his draffe.
Besides, there is diverse other helborne sins:
As some great men are wrapped in Misers skins,
For fear of whose dislike (...) hold me still,
And not bumbast them with my Ganders quill.
Consider with thy self good Reader then,
That here thou (...) amongst those wicked men,
Who on this earthly stage together keep,
Like mag gots in a putrified sheep.
Whose damned dealings black confusion brings,
By the just judgment of the King of Kings.
Pastoral Equinocks, or a Shepherds complaint.
I That have traced the mountains up and down,
And pipte and chanted Songs and pleasant lays:
The whilst my flokes have friskt it on the down,
Now blinded love my sportiue pleasures lays.
I that on greeny grass could lay me do wne,
And sleep as soundly as on beds of down.
I then was free from loves all wounding blow,
My Ewes and Lambs then merrily could fold:
I card not then which way the wind did blow,
Nor had I cause with grief my arms to fold,
I feared not Winters frost, nor Summers son,
And then was I a happy mothers son.
I then could haunt the Market and the Fair,
And in a frolic humor leap and spring:
Till she whose beauty did surpass all fair,
Did with her frosty (...) nip my Spring.
Then I alas, alas unhappy I,
Was made a captive to her scornful eye.
When love's fell shaft within my breast did light,
Then did my Cock-horse pleasures all a light,
Loves fiery (...) ecclipsed all my light,
And she unkind, weyde all my woes to light.
O then my merry days away did hie,
When I so low did dote on one so hie.
Her beauty, which did make Loves Queen a Crow,
VVhofe white did shame the Lilly, red the Rose.
When Phoebus messenger the Cock did crow,
Each morn when from hia Antipods he rose.
Despite of gates, and bars, and bolts, and locks,
Heed kiss her face, and guild her golden locks.
Which makes my rest, like those that restles be,
Like one that is hard pursude, and cannot fly:
Or like the busy buzzing humming Be,
Or like the fruitles naught respected Fly.
That cuts the subtle air so swift and fast,
Till in the Spiders web he is tangled fast.
As blustering Boreas rends the losty Pyne,
So her unkindness rends and reaues my heart,
I weep, I wail, I sigh, I groan, I pine,
I in ward bleed as does the wounded Heart.
She that alone should only wish me well,
Has drowned my joys in sorrows ioyles well.
The (...) Tiger, and the savage Bear,
All Beasts and Birds of prey that haunt the wood,
In my laments do seem some part to bear,
But only She whose feature makes me wood,
As barbing Autumn robs the trees of leaves:
Her (...) scorn me void of comfort leaves.
No Castle, Fort, no Rampire, or strong Hold,
But Love will enter without Law or Leave:
For where affections force has taken hold,
There lawles love will such impression (...),
That Gods, nor men, nor fire, earth, water, wind,
(...) Loves straight laws can neither turn nor wind.
Then since (...) haples haps falls out so hard,
Since all the fates on me their anger power:
Since my laments and moanes cannot be heard,
And she on me shows her commanding power.
What then remains, but I dissolve in tears,
Since her disdaines my heart in pieces tears.
Dye then sad heart in sorrows prison pend,
Dye face that's (...) with a deadly dye:
(...) (...) that in her praise has Poems pend,
(...) (...), and Hand, haples and helples dye.
(...) Serieant Death, that rests and take no bale,
(...) only thou must ease my bitter bale.
This said, he sighd, and fell into a sownd,
That (...) the Hills, and Groves, and neigbouring Plains,
The Echoes of his groanings seemd to sound,
With repercussion of his dying plains.
And where in life he scorned counsel grave,
Now in his death he rests him in his grave.
Epitaph.
Here lies ingrau'd whose life fell death did sack,
Who to his grave was brought upon a Beer:
For whom let all men ever mourn in Sack
Or else remember him in Ale or (...).
He who in life Loves blinded God did lead,
Now in his death lies here as cold as Lead.
Sonnet: In trust lies treason.
THe fowlest friends assumes the fairest forms,
The fairest Fields does feed the fowlest Toad:
The Sea at calm'st most (...) is to storms,
In choysest fruit the canker makes abode.
So in the shape of all believing trust,
Lies toad inuenomd treason cooched close,
Till like a storm his trothles thoughts out burst,
Who canker-like had lain in trusts repose.
For as the fire within the flint confinde,
In deepest Ocean still vnquencht remains:
Even so the false though truest seeming mind,
Despite of truth the treason still retains.
Yet maugre treason trust deserves trust,
And trust suruiues when treason dies accursed.
Death with the four Elements.
TWo Infant-twinnes a Sister and a Brother,
When out of doors was gone their careful Sire,
And left his babes in keeping with their mother,
Who merrily sat singing by the fire.
Who having filled a (...) with water warm,
She bathd hen girl (O ruthles tale to tell)
The whilst she thought the other safe from harm,
(Unluckily) into the fire he (...):
Which she (...) lets her daughter drown,
And rashly ran to save her burning son.
Which finding dead, she hastily casts down,
And all aghast, does to the water run:
Where seeing the other was depriud of breath,
She against the earth falls down and dasnt her brains:
Her Husband comes and sees this work of death,
And desperate hangs himself to ease his pains.
Thus death with all the elements conspire,
To reaue man's life, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire.
Epilogue.
GOod Reader, if my harshe unlearned rimes,
(Where with my Muse has whipped these heedles times)
Has pleased thy pallat with their true endeavor:
She then will think her self most fortunate,
And shall here after be importunate.
Her self in better labors to persevere.
I speak not to those ignorant Jack=(...),
That with their Canker-biting envious jaws,
Will seem to stain my Muses innocence.
But in all humblenes I yield to those,
Who are detracting Ignorances foes:
And loves the labors of each good pretense.
Dislike and scorn may chance my Book to smother,
But kind acceptance brings forth such another.
YOu that the Sculler right does understand,
Mees very glad you are safely come to land.
But if that any inarling manlike Monster,
His honest meaning wrongfully misconster:
To such (...) all despite, he sends this word,
From Book and Boat heel hurl them over board.
I. T.

FINIS.

