

A FAMOVS Fight at Sea. WERE FOUR English Ships under the command of Captain
John Weddell, and four Dutch Ships fought three days in the Gulf of Persia
near Ormus, against 8. Portugal Gallions, and 3. Friggots.

AS ALSO The memorable fight and loss of the good Ship called the Lion, with
the barbarous cruelty of the Enemy truly declared.



LONDON, Printed by John Hauiland for Henry Gosson.

TO THE RIGHT Worthy, Generous, and well experienced Commander Captain JOHN
WEDDELL, late General of the East India Fleet.
WOrthy Sir, having written the true manner of your late famous, perilous, and
fortunate fight with the Portugalls in the Persian Gulf, and knowing that
Books without Patrons are like fatherless Children, I imagined that it was
better to send it to you for succor and protection, than to any other
whomsoever; for the most part which is herein by Relation, I am assured that
you do know to be true by action, and my pen has but only superficially
pratled of those things which you saw, did, and suffered. I therefore humbly
entreat you to accept this poor fish out of your own Ocean, this sheep of
your own fold, this cloth of your own weauing, and this deserved memory of
part of your worthy won reputation. Thus not doubting but your affability is
correspondent to your approved knowledge and known sufficiency, I commit both
my self and this Relation to your acceptance and good censure, my best wishes
still attending on you, that your fortunes be ever equal to the goodness of
your mind.

Ever at your command to be employed, JOHN TAILOR.

A famous fight at Sea in the Gulf of Persia.
THe Eternal providence having divided mankind into many Kingdoms, Climates,
People, and Nations, yet to the end there should be a unity or mutual society
amongst all men, he has permitted traffic and Commerce betwixt Nation and
Nation. Realm and Realm. Navigations and Shipping being as it were the
fleeting bridges, for the transportation and exportation of men and
Merchandise, from Country to Country, that though God has not enriched any
one Kingdom or Country with all things, (the one having what the other has
not:) yet to maintain humane society (but chiefly for his own glory in
dispersing his gifts) Commerce and traffic has been used at all times, and
in all ages; for the which noble employments our Kingdom of England has not
been inferior to any Nation for the ability and worthiness of Merchants, and
I think not equalled by any for goodness and sufficiency of skillful
Nauigators, and Mariners, and strength of shipping, and munition.

So that neither the parching heat of Libia and Ethiopia, or the benumming
frigidity of Groen-land, or the Hiperborean Icle Regions, neither the far
remoteness of China Eastwards, or the uttermost bounds of the new world
America Westwards, the dangers Storms, Gusts, Flawes, Tempests, Spowts, and
Tornadoes, or Monsoones, the hazard of Shoales, Rocks, Leakes, Enemies,
Pirates, barbirous and cruel Nations, unwholesome and intemperate Aires and
Climates, Sea or Land Monsters, or what perils may be named or thought upon,
has ever daunted or hindered our Merchants and Mariners to prosecute and
accomplish their continual, laudable, and profitable undertakings.

Amongst whom our noble, worshipful, and worthy East India Merchants, and
Adventurers, may in these later times be held as superlatiue to those of former
ages, their inestimable charge, their mighty force, their valuable returns,
and their aduenturous hazards rightly considered. All which being no part of my
purpose to treas of, I refer the Reader only to the description of two
famous Sea Fights, performed betwixt the English and the Portugals; which,
though the news of it could not be brought hither so soon as if it had been
done upon the Coast of Zealand or Flanders; yet, as soon as wind and weather
could bring it, I had it, and with what time I could well spare I have written
it, assuring my self of what I dare assure my Reader, which is, that all is
true. In which regard, I thought it unfit to let it lie buried in oblivion, or
the hateful and ungrateful grave of forgetfulness. In it is valor
described, and manifested in the lives and deaths of many of our English, and
extreme cruelty and inhumanity in the Enemy. But to the matter.

A brave Sea Fight in the Gulf of Persia.
4 English Ships.
1 The Royal James, Admiral. 2 The Jonas, Vice Admiral. 3 The Star,
Reare-Admirall. 4 The Eagle, fourth Ship. John Weddell chief Commander of the
English Fleet.
4 Dutch Ships.
1 The South-Holland Admiral. 2 The Bantam Vice Admiral. 3 The Maid of Dort,
Reare-Admirall. 4 The Wesope, fourth Ship. Albert Becker, chief Commander of
the Dutch Fleet.
THe 30. of January 1624. being Friday, the English and Dutch Ships being in
the Road of Gombroone, there arrived a small Frigot belonging to a place near
Chowle, (which is in war with the Portugals) she came in between the Maine
and Ormus, to whom the General of the English, Capt. John Weddell, sent Mr.
Andrew Euans, in a little Boat called a Gellywat, to know from whence he came,
and whether he could give us any intelligence of the Portugal Armado; his
answer was, that he came from a place some eight or ten leagues to the
Southwards of Chowle, laden with Pepper and other Merchandise, and withal he
said, that on the Saturday before, being the 24. of January, he was of the Cape
called Cape Gordell, half way betwixt the Coast of India, and Cape Jacques,
where to Seaward of him he saw eight great Gallions, and certain Frigots,
which Frigots gave him chase, but he kept himself so near the shore, that
they could not fetch him up; and this was the first information of the near
approach of the Enemy.

The 31. of January in the morning, the English and Dutch Fleet heard three
pieces of Ordnance go off from Kishme Castle, (a strong hold, and in war
with the Portugals) the Captain of the said Castle having before promised the
General (Captain Weddell) that if he descried any Cross Sails or Ships in
sight of the Castle, that then he would discharge those Pieces as a warning
unto him, which accordingly he did.

Whereupon a man was sent up to the topmast head in the English Admiral, to
look abroad, who being up, presently cried a sail, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. with
many Frigots in their company, then the General commanded the Gunner to shoot
off a Piece of Ordnance, to give warning to all the Fleet to put themselves in
readiness for the entertainment of the Enemy, putting also the bloody Colors
out, as likewise the Dutch Admiral did the like, with all speed getting their
men and boats from the shore, weighing their Anchors of all hands, and getting
under sail with all possible celerity, with courage and resolution they stood
toward the Enemy, (whose drift was to have taken the English and Dutch at
Anchor unprepared) but their expectations were frustrate.

Toward 8. of the clock at night it fell calm, so that our ships came to an
Anchor, when the Commander of the Dutch Fleet (named Albert Becker) sent his
Master of his ship, accompanied with some other Merchants, and Masters aboard
the Royal James, informing Captain Weddell that their Commander had sent them
to see how he did, and what he thought the ships and Frigots to be that they
had descried. The Commander Weddell answered, that they could be no other than
the Portugal Armado, which had been two years preparing to meet with the
English and Dutch, and that now they were come in search of them, from Goa,
unto this place, hoping first to conquer both our and their Nation, and
afterward to fall to work upon Ormus, Kishme, and Gombroone, to destroy our
settled trade, and to extirpe and root us out with all hostility and dishonor.
Then the Dutch demanded Captain Weddells Resolution, concerning so common and
open an Enemy, he told them that his resolution was, for the glory of God, the
honor of his Nation, the profit of worthy Imployers, and the safeguard of
lives, ships, and goods, he would fight it out as long as a man was living in
his ship to wear a Sword, and that he doubted not but the other three ships
under his Command were all of the same mind and courage; to whom the Dutchmen
answered, that they were of the like resolution, and would stick as close to
the English as their shirts to their backs, and so in friendly manner each
took leave of other for that night.

The first of February, being Sunday, the Dutch Admiral weighed Anchor an
hour before daylight, and the English presently after him, but the Dutch got
the start of us all, though we made all the sail we could; at last the English
came up to him with their whole Fleet, but he discharged the first shot at the
Portugal Admiral, who presently answered him with three for one. The friends
and foes being now within Musket shot of each other, it fell calm, whereby our
ships would not work but as the Tide did set them, that when the Portugalls
were Board and Board, they had a great advantage of us with their Frigots that
towed them clear one off another often, which help we wanted, thus we lay
some four or five hours pelting and beating one another with our Ordnance,
the whilst the Frigots plied us with small shot, as fast as they could, the
Royal James being forced to keep the Barge a head to pull the ships head to
and fro; but toward the afternoon there arose a fine gale, but the Enemy had
the wind of us, whereupon the Admiral and Vice Admiral of the Portugalls bore
up room upon us, making account to lay the Royal James aboard, the one on the
Starboord, the other on the Larboord side, which Captain Weddell perceiving,
scarce being able to shun it, he called to the Master, and told him the purpose
of the Enemy, to avoid which danger, he commanded the Master to bear a little
lasking to separate them further each from other, that he might have more
room to go between them, the Vice Admiral of the Enemy seeing the James
bear up so lasking, she likewise bore up with her, when suddenly Captain
Weddell perceived there was hope to weather him, caused his Mizzen and Mizzen
top-saile to be set, and so presently got the wind of him, edging close up with
the Admiral, being within Musket Shot of them both; the Portugal Admiral put
to stay, by which means the James gate the wind of him also, having much ado
to get out a weather of him, coming so close under his stern, that his Boats
were close at our ships side as she sheared by, when presently we gave him a
whole broadside, every shot taking him fore and after, tacking forth with, and
standing after him. Thus the first days fight lasted till five at night,
wherein the Royal James lost eight men, and some others which had some small
hurts: Also this day the Dutch lost their chief Commander, a brave valiant
fellow, who lived and died nobly in the bed of honor. This fight was terrible
and fierce for the time, for the Royal James alone spent near 700. great
shot, and all the other ships English and Dutch, did proportionably do the
like. The Sun being set, the Enemy fell off, and came to an Anchor at the
East end of Kishme, the English being North-northwest from them two leagues,
thus was concluded the first days fight.

Monday the 2. of February, being Candlemas day, the wind being very little
which blew off from Kishme, so that the Enemy had the advantage of it, but
never offered to make use of it, to make room toward us; the English and
Dutch being imployd busily to fit up their torn rigging and tackling, and
stopping such dangerous shot as they had received in the fight betwixt wind and
water.

Also the same day in the afternoon there was a meeting aboard the Royal
James, where both the English and Dutch concluded, that they would give the
Enemy fight the next morning, and that the Royal James should be the leading
ship, and the Admiral of the Dutch should second her, and that they should go
directly to the Enemies Admiral, not striking higher or lower till the James
came side by side with her. So the third of February being Tuesday, both the
Fleets weighed Anchors at break of day, having the weather gage of the Enemy,
the great James stood right with the Admiral of the Portugalls, which was
head-most but one; but coming near them, they weaued to Leeward with their
bright arming Swords, and we the like to them, they saluted us with a whole
broad side; but Captain Weddell commanded his men not to answer them, till
they were brought nearer within danger, which charge was obeyed; but being come
near the Admiral, and another of their ships, the great James bestowed upon
each of them a whole broad side, making them both to bear up, the one a port,
and the other a starboord, by which means one of their ships was cut off and
sundred from them, and was chased three or four hours by the Eagle, and
Weasope; the hope of the English and Dutch being that she should no more
return to her Fleets Company; the James following still the Admiral and
Vice Admiral, got upon the Admiralls side, having the Vice Admiral on his
Starboord bow; insomuch that this days fight grew very hot, for often the
James was in thickest of the Enemy, being at one time all round about us; but
our men so plied their Ordnance upon them, that they all refused to stand by
us, but fled all before us as chafe, dust, or smoke before the wind. In this
fight the James got between one of their Fleet, and singled her out, lying by
her sides with fore-saile, and fore-topsaile a back stays, so near as a man
might quoit a Biscuit Cake into her, when straight Master Johnson came up in the
stern of the James, so near as he could hardly keep clear, to whom Captain
Weddell called, willing him to clap the Portugal aboard on the Larboord
quarter, (whilst the James lay thundering upon him with her great Ordnance) he
promised to do it, but after he refused it, this Vessel had not so few as
500. shot through her Hull, Masts, Sails, and Yards, before she got clear.
This third day the fight was very violent, for the Royal James only spent
2000. and odd shot upon the enemy, four men being slain in her, and three
others their legs shot off. In her Masts, Yards, Rigging and Hull, she had
received above 400. great shot; both parties at Sunset being so faint and
weary, that they all left off, the Portugalls came to an Anchor under Ormus,
and the other near Gombroone Road, this fight last near eight hours.

Note, that the morning Captain Weddell had fitted a Portugal Vessel (which
had been formerly taken with some Cokernuts) and purposed to have fired her
thwart the Admiralls Hawse, she being appointed to come between the Dutch
Admiral, and the Jonas, but through disaster, or rather negligence in Darby
the Master, who came not up according to his appointed place, she was chased by
the Frigots (she having but ten men in her) being of no defense, they were
forced to set her on fire far from the Fleet, and so the men betook
themselves to a Barge, which was left them for their safety, by which means
the Generals project was disappointed.

All this third day at night this Vessel burnt, and two hours before
daylight, whether she was towed by some of the Enemies Boats, or no, is
unknown, but she came burning amongst the English and Dutch Fleets, and forced
them from their Anchors by slipping their Cables, which Anchors they took up
some three days after.

The 4. of February in the morning, both Fleets made toward the Enemies, who
were under sail, and made all the haste they could to get under the Island of
Lowracke, which lies some eight or nine miles from Ormus, unto which Island
their Frigots went ahead, conducting them in over a Bar, whom the English and
Dutch followed as far as with safety they durst, having neither the help of
Pilots to shun the dangers of the place, or Frigots to go a head as
conductors, as the Enemy had. Besides, there might have been Ordnance planted
a shore by the Enemy, which would have been greatly to their advantage, or
otherwise in the dark night they might have chained two or three Frigots
together, and turning them upon them, upon the Ebb thwart their hawse, might
much have endangered them, they knowing the Enemy to be implacable, malicious,
and politic; these reasons caused them to follow them no further at this
time, but to come to an Anchor a League from them, when Captain Weddell sent
for the chief of the Dutch, whose resolution was to go back again for
Gombroone, there to dispatch our Merchants affairs. So Anchors were weighed,
the James giving them a shot for a farewell, and they answered her with the
like, they all getting into Gombroone Road that night, where they speedily fell
to work to repair the ruins of wars, in sitting of Masts, Yards, Sails,
rigging and stopping breaches, all which in three days, was accomplished,
leaving the Portugal like a Thief in his Mill, or a Fox in his hole, not
minding to try as yet the hazard of another bout.

In this fight their Reare-Admiralls maine Mast was shot by the board, their
Vice-Admiralls maine topmast was likewise shot by the board, their Admiralls
Mizzen-mast, Flag, and flag staff shot by the board, and her Hull much rent
and torn. Their fourth ship had the head of her maine Mast shot by the board.
Another of their ships had al her top-masts shot by the board. In conclusion,
all their eight ships were so torn and tattered, that they had neither good
Masts, Sails, or Yards to help themselves with, nor tight sides to bear
sail upon. Thus it pleased the Almighty to give the victory of the day unto
those that rely upon his promise; to that great God be all glory for ever, and
let all true Christians say Amen.

The 13. of February being Friday, the English and Dutch Fleets set sail at
daylight from the Road of Gombroone, having also with them four Iunks, other
vessels of lading, under the conduct and charge of the Dutch, which as soon as
the Enemy perceived, they let slip their Cables and slipped from their harbor
at the Island of Lawracke, which is four or five Leagues from the Road of
Gombroone, the Enemy making all the sail he could to sea-boord of the English
and Dutch all the day till Sunset; when they were got within Saker-shot of
each other, and a good bearing gale, they all kept company together all night.

This 13. at night it blew so hard at West-south-west, that one of their great
Gallions bore ouer-boord the head of her maine Mast, close under the hownds,
not being able to hoyst up her maine sail, she was forced to steer along
with her fore-saile, fore-top-saile, her Sprit-saile, and Mizzen, the wind
being at West-South-West, they steered away South and by East.

The 14. in the morning the Dutch Fleet staying, and bearing up unto the Iunke,
the night past was a storm so far, that the English Fleet could scarce
descry them; so the James laid her fore-saile a backe-staies, staid for them,
the Portugal never offering to alter his course, but kept on still.

The same day about noone the Dutch being come up with the English, it was
agreed between them, that the Royal James should give the first onset upon
their Admiral, and the rest of the Fleet to second her; so about two of the
clock that afternoon the two Fleets came to weather of the Enemies Admiral,
receiving the first shot from their Vice Admiral, and presently a whole broad
side from their Admiral, both sides coming as near each other as they could
but well keep clean of each other, they fell to it of all hands pell mell,
the Ordnance going off as fast as small shot, the James for her part giving
them two broad sides, she then edgd up in the wind, laying her fore-saile and
fore-top-saile a back stays, as well to give leave to the Jonas, (who was
second to the James) as also to suffer the Portugal Admiral to shoot a head,
which she suddenly did, then the James filling her top-saile the second time,
bore upright with the Enemy Admiral, plying her whole broad side so fast upon
him, that he had scarce leisure to return any shot back, whilst the English
and Portugal Admiralls were so near each other, that they could hardly clear
themselves. In this time whilst our ships plied the Enemies Admiral, (not so
much looking after, or heeding the other ships) the Vice Admiral, with the
rest of their Fleet, were left a stern, their Admiral plied very hard upon
the James, giving and receiving many dangerous shots, the James being shot
between wind and water often, and had more spoil in her Sails and Rigging
than she had done any of the two days fight before, then the third time
coming side by side with each others Fleet, they let drive one at another like
Thunder in the air, the James coming up with the Admiral (the great ship of
Damon, who the first days fight lost her maine Mast) crept in betwixt the
James and the Portugal Admiral, lying as a Bulwark to weather of her, to
receive all that might be put upon her, and indeed all that was meant to have
been bestowed upon the Admiral, was still plied upon that great Hulke; as
likewise the James, and Dutch, did continue this third days fight til
daylight was shut in, the Portugalls edging up to get near the Arabian shore,
in so much that at eight at night both English and Dutch were fair by it,
chasing them in.

This night the English and Dutch steered away their course for Surat, the
Portugalls steering for Swar, a place where they have a Castle.

The Royal James with the rest, were forced to give even the Chase for these
reasons.
FIrst, for that the time of year was so far spent, that they should not
have time enough to deliver their goods at Surat, and so to go clear off the
coast before the Westerly Monsoone, which is a wind that blows at west six
months together, beginning in April, would be come, and so endanger the ships
in getting off again.

A second reason was, that the Royal James had but 31. Barrells, and some 500.
Cartregos filled with Powder, and some 600. shot all which was not above three
quarters of a days fight for her use, for in her former days work the third
of February she alone spent 1000. great shot upon the Enemy, so that now
through want of Powder she was not able to maintain such another fight
according to that rate. And this last days fight she lost but one man, having
spent upon the Enemy more than three hundred great shot. To the Lord of hosts
the only giver of victory, the mighty God of battles, be all honor, glory,
praise and dominion for ever, Amen.

A note of the men's names slain in these three several fights with the
Portugalls, out of the English Fleet.
Slain in the Royal James.
Richard Dauis quarter Masters. Nicholas Burton quarter Masters. Robert Skalfe,
Gunners Mate. Joseph Wright Carpenters. Thomas Bland Carpenters. John Bircham
Carpenters. Godfrey Howton Carpenters. Richard Dauis Junior Sailers. Richard
Walker Sailers. John Masters Sailers. William Wilcockes Sailers. William
Clarke dismembered in their legs, and died. William Surnam dismembered in their
legs, and died.
Slain in the Jonas.
Robert Nodding, Masters Mate. John Beedam, mid ship-man. William Adams. Robert
Sancie. Edward Wilkinson. Robert Lark. Richard Hergell. Francis Blow. Thomas
Page. Thomas Wilkinson. Thomas Williams.
Slain in Star.
James Wanderion. William Carter. Reignold Sanderson. Charles Robinson.
Slain in the Eagle.
John Sares.
The Dutch lost near the like number, amongst whom their chief Commander
Albert Beaker slain the first days fight.

A Relation by Peter Hillion a Frenchman, of the force of eight Portugal
Gallions, which fought with the English and Dutch Fleet, in the Gulf of
Persia; as also the spoil they received by them, with their number of men
slain, on the 1.3. and 14. of February 1624. himself being then in the
Admiral; which afterward riding with three more of her fleet at the Rivers
mouth of Surat, he escaped from her, and ran to the English, which were then
riding in the Bar of Surat.

THeir Admiral named S. Francisco Sanuer, wherein was General Non Alua
Basellia, had 48. pieces of Brass Ordnance of whose Cannon, Demy-Cannon,
Cannon Pethrow, whose Culuering, and Demy-Culuering, and 350. men, of which
were slain 38, whereof three were chief Captains under the aforesaid
General, named Lorenzo Luis, Ieronimo Botella, and Brossa Coze, who all three
were killed with one shot, the ships Foremast, Bospreer, and maine Mast were so
torn with shot, that they were unserviceable, her Mizzen-mast, Flag and
Flagstaffe shot by the board, with the head of her maine topmast, and her
Rigging much rent and torn.

Their Vice Admiral named likewise S. Francisco, wherein was Commander
Francisco Burge, had 32. pieces of Ordnance as the former, and 250. men, of
which were slain 31. the aforesaid Commander being one of the number, her
maine top mast shot by the board, her maine Mast, foremast, and Bospreet so
torn, that they were unserviceable.

Their Reare-Admirall named S. Sebastian, (their biggest ship) wherein was
Commander Don Antonio tela, who was lamed of an arm, had 40. pieces of Brass
Ordnance as the former, and 400. men, whereof 20. were slain, her maine Mast,
fore-top-mast, fore-yard, and Spritsaile-top-mast shot by the board, and her
foremast so unserviceable, that she could bear no more sail but her
Sprit-saile.

Their fourth ship named S. Saluador, wherein was Commander Don Francisco de
Tuar, had 24. pieces of Brass Ordnance, and 250. men, 41. whereof were slain,
the aforesaid Commander being one of the number, his masts were so rent and
torn, that they were all unserviceable.

Their fifth ship named S. Iago, wherein was Commander Simon de Kintalle, had
22. pieces of Brass Ordnance, and 200. men, whereof were slain 83. her Masts
were all standing, but she so leaked between wind and water, by shot received,
that they had much to do to free her, so that she was cast away upon the Coast
of India seven days after.

Their sixth ship named Trinidada, wherein was Commander Pedro Alua Botelia,
had 22. pieces of Brass Ordnance, and 250. men, 243. whereof were slain, his
Top-masts were all shot by the board, and her other so torn, that she could
bear no sail thereon, but was towed by the Great Hulke Reare-Admirall, from
Muscas to Goa.

Their seventh ship named S. Antonio, wherein was Commander Antonio Burallia,
had 22. pieces of Brass Ordnance, and 200. men, whereof 22. were slain, her
Masts were all standing, but she very leake by shot received betwixt wind and
water, and the seventh day after she was cast away upon the Coast of India.

Their eighth ship named Miserere-Cordium, wherein was Commander Emanuel
Rodreeges Chaua, had 22. pieces of Brass Ordnance, and 200. men, whereof three
were slain, her fore-top-mast, maine-yard, fore-yard, and maine-top-saile-yard
shot by the board, and her foremast so torn that it was unserviceable.

A Table containing the former numbers.
Ordnance. Men. Men slain The Admiral had 48 350 38 The Vice Admiral had 32
250 31 The Reare-Admirall had 40 400 20 The fourth Ship had 24 250 41 The fifth
Ship had 22 200 83 The sixth Ship had 22 250 243 The seventh Ship had 22 200 22
The eighth Ship had 22 200 3 The sum 232 2100 481

Thus it pleased God in mercy that the English and Dutch, not being half the
numbers of the Enemy, neither in men or Ordnance, that with only the loss of
58. or 60. men, they should kill 481. of the Portugals, and with all so to beat
them, (notwithstanding the help of 16. Frigots) being so torn that they were
cast away seven days after, and the rest all unserviceable, and not daring to
stand to the hazard of another conflict.

A brief description of the Disaster of the good ship called the Lion, one of
our English ships, trading to the East India, who was lost in fight with the
Portugalls, near Gombroone in the Gulf of Persia, on the eighth of November
1625.
THe seventh of October 1625. about 4. in the morning, the Palsgrane, Dolphin,
and Lion anchored about three Leagues to the Southwards of Surat Bar, and
when it grew light (men being in the top) espied certain Roaders, riding
against Surat River, which some supposed to be English or Hollanders, others
affirmed to be a Fleet of Frigots; but in fine, about an hour after they set
sail and steered after us, and in short space we made them to be four
Portugal Gallions, and fifteen Frigots, the wind being then of shore, they
could not come to us that tide, but anchored about a League from us, our
Captain perceiving their intents, put forth an Ensign for Counsel, and the
Master of each Ship presently repaired aboard.

At which consultation, as it was reported by our Master M. Richard Swanley,
Captain Blithe propounded that he thought it expedient to set sail, and stand
off to Sea again, and by that means to abate the force of the Frigots, and if
it fell out so that our Ships sailed better than the Portugalls, we should
stand direct for Ormus; the reasons he gave for it were these, viz. first, he
doubred that the Portugal had a great force of shipping in Swalley Road.

Secondly, he feared whether our Merchants had friendship with the Country
people, or not, by reason of the discord which was between them at the Dolphins
preparations for England, which was the last news he heard from thence.

Thirdly, he doubted that the Portugalls had made peace with the Gazerats, and
had planted Ordnance a shore on Swalley sands. He also doubted what was become
of Captain Weddells Fleet, for he assured himself, if there were any friends
at that time in Swalley Road, they would not suffer the Portugal to ride
there, for he supposed that the Portugal had been in fight with them the
year past, and had either put them to the worst, or else for want of munition
to effect another fight, they were forced to repair to Ormus Castle for
succor until supply came out of England.

All which being propounded, and the vnreadinesle and great charge of all three
ships well considered, it was concluded to set sail, the which we did, the
wind being Northerly, and the tide of stoud come, we stood for Sea, and the
Portugal Admiral and Vice Admiral sailing better than the rest, fetched us up
about four in the afternoon, at which time the Lion being foremost of our
Fleet, the enemy Admiral shot one piece of Ordnance at her, for the which she
answered three of four, but could hardly reach further than half way: the
Portugal finding his Ordnance better than ours, both Admiral and
Vice Admiral plied upon the Lion for the space of half an hour, in which
time she received diverse shot both in her Hull and Rigging.

Our Master Richard Swanley, seeing their advantage, caused to bruile
maine-saile, and edge within Musket Shot of them both, and there maintained
fight with them until Sunne-set, and received no hurt at all.

All which time, and an hour after, being calm, the other two ships of the
Enemy were at least a League a starne. The Palsgrane, and Dolphin all this time
being right a head, kept on their course, only plying their starne pieces. The
Portugals seeing them still stand away, came both aboard of us, the one in the
one quarter, and the other in the other, and entered at least 100. of their men,
heauing fire-pots, and diverse sorts of fireworks upon our decks, the Frigots
(as many as could lie about us) threw firepots in at the ports, and stuck
fire-pikes in her sides; all which (by the great mercy and assistance of God)
we still put out. Our Admiral and Vice Admiral, in this our misery were
quickly out of our sight, the cause whereof is best known to themselves.

This conflict remained from 8. at night till about 11. in which space our
Master Richard Swanley was slain, and 4. more of our men were also slain, 3.
of our Masters Mates, and 20. more were exceedingly burnt, the rest almost
wearied, and more discomforted, by reason our Fleet had left us, and in brief
we were in that case that the word was given to blow up the ship, had not God
in his wisdom staid it, by putting it in the mind of some of our men to let
fall an Anchor, which being done (the tide running very strong) brought our
ship to so strong a bitter, that the fast which the Portugals had upon us
brake, whose unexpected* sudden departure from us left 50 or 60 of their men
upon our Poope, who still maintained the fire in such sort, that we were forced
to blow them up, which blast tore all the Starne of our ship in pieces, from
the middle-Decke upwards.

The Portugals being all repulsed, and the fire put out, we used all diligence
for the clearing our ship, and getting up our maine-top-saile-yard, which then
lay upon our Deck, likewise bringing new sails to Yard, the former being all
burnt and torn, all which being as well done as haste would give leave, we
expected their coming again the next tide, but they hoping we would either
have burnt or sunk, only left five Frigots without shot of us, and themselves
with the other two ships that were formerly a starne stood after the Palsgraue
and Dolphin, and in short space fetched them up, and fought with them all that
night, they standing still off to Sea, were but off our sight the next morning.

The 8. day in the morning, (all the ships being out of our sight) it was
agreed upon by the Officers of our ship, that Henry Crosbey our Masters chief
Mate should succeed as our Commander, until such time as it pleased God we
should meet with our Commander.

This being done, we being not able to weigh our Anchor, by reason our men were
most of them hurt, cut Cable in the hawse, and set as much sail as we durst
bear, (our foremast having received three shot, in such wise, as it had but
four inches hold) and stood off to Sea, and being fair weather, praised be
God, in short time our foremast was made serviceable.

The Frigots aforesaid that were left by us, stood four of them after the
Fleet, and the other in for the shore, all that day we heard them in sight, but
saw them not, likewise the next night we could see the light of their Ordnance
at our topmast head; but they being to wind-ward of us, we could not get to
them, nor indeed were not in case if we could, for our ship was so open, and
all our chief men killed and hurt.

The ninth in the morning, we could neither see them, nor hear them, then it
was thought fitting by our Master, that according to the consultation held
aboard the Palsgraue the seventh day we should stand for Ormus, the which (by
the assistance of God) we did, having fair weather all the way; in which time
of our sailing, our Carpenters had got up all the stern of our ship again, as
well as his store would give him leave, our men also were all well recovered of
their hurts.

The fourth of November we arrived at Gombroone, where we had intelligence by
our Merchants there resident, that Rufrero was riding under Ormus Island, with
18. or 20. Frigots, the which when our Master understood, (the Merchants being
then aboard) it was concluded by consultation, that to prevent any ensuing
danger that might happen, and also for the clearing of our ship, whereby to
mount our lower Tier, all the Cloth, and Currall, and four Chests of money
should be sent a shore with as much speed as possible, the other our Master
refused to send out of the ship, alleging, that if it should please God they
were forced to leave the Port by any disaster, there was no stock to buy any
refreshing for our men which then did want it; the rest of our Carriages or
Goods lying low in Hold, could not then be come by, without much time which
then we wanted. It was also appointed that we should with all speed take in
water, and stand for Ormus, the which was assaied to do, and partly effected,
for upon the fifth day the Merchants and our Purser rode with all speed to the
Sultan, (who was then out of Town) to entreat for Boats to land the goods, and
to water our ships, the which he granted, and also gave us a Boat to make us a
Long-boate, by reason we had lost both our Skiffe and Longboat the last fight.

The sixth there came Boot-hailers aboard, and took all the goods aforesaid,
and carried them a shore, and also took in Caske to fill with water.

The seventh of November there came twelve Tun of water aboard, which was
presently taken in, and more Caske sent a shore, also in this short time our
Lower orlope was almost made Priddie, and our two Chase pieces were mounted,
and we were in good hope the next day to take in water enough to serve until
the Fleet came to stand over for Ormus; but God having otherwise appointed, it
fell out contrary.

The eighth day, about seven in the morning, Rufrero with his Frigots came
rowing toward the ship, and being then calm that the ship could not work, he
came in such sort, that she could have none but her Chase piece to bear upon
them, which lay so well to pass, that they sunk two of their Frigots before
they could board her, and two more after they were by her sides. But after they
were a board they plied their small shot in such wise, that they were not able
to open a Port in the ship, but were forced to shute away Ports, and all.

They also maintained such abundance of fire-workes round about her, that in a
moment all her Masts and Sails were on fire, her upper Deck was also on fire,
the which for all their heauing much water upon it, in less than half an
hour fell down upon their heads, and put them from their Ordnance, who seeing
death on each side, some leaped ouer-boord, and put themselves to the mercy of
their enemies, the rest gave fire to the Powder-roome, and blew up the ship.
Those men which leaped ouer-boord were all received into the Frigots, and
carried unto Ormus Island, and the next morning Rufrero gave order to cut off
all their heads but one, namely, Thomas Winterborne, whom he sent with a letter
to the Merchants at Gambroone, the rest being 26. persons were immediately
beheaded.

Those that were blown up in the ship drove a shore, and were buried at
Gombroone, being in number 42. there were also 9. men a shore about the
Companies affairs, and one that Rufrero sent with a letter makes 10. whom God
grant never worse fortune.

Thus was this good ship and men unfortunately and lamentably lost, yet as much
courage and manly resolution as possibly could be was performed by the Engligh,
nor can it be imagined how more industry or truer valor could have been
showed; on the other side the cruel and bloodthirsty Enemy gained nothing but
knockes, loss of lives and limbs, having his Frigots suncke and torn in
pieces, his maine purchase being dishonor and infamy, for after all our men
had fought so long, and so manfully, being besieged round with death, as the
Sea to swallow them, the fire to consume them, or the Portugals swords to cut
their throats, not being possible to escape one of these ways of eminent
danger, that then in that extremity 27. men leaping into the Sea, were all
alive taken up by the Enemy, whom had he then killed in heat of blood, when
war, rage, death and fury were up, it had been then but the effect and
fortune of war; but to give them harbor all night, and the next day in cold
blood to cause them to be beheaded, it was one of the ignoblest, inhumane, and
barbarous parts of murder that could be committed. But Rufrero being a
Portugal or Spaniard, could do no other (for the honor of his Country) but
show his bloody nature, especially to our Nation: a Barbarian, a Turk, or a
Jew should have found more kindness, for indeed they all are of one
disposition. And I am sure no Record or Chronicle can show, no History can
report, no tradition can declare; nor any memory relate, that ever any
Englishman, or almost any other Nation (except the Spaniard) did murder so
many disarmed naked men, having had them all a whole night in their custody.

A farewell and hearty well-wishing to the noble attempts of our English Sea
and Land forces, with their Allies and Confederates.
YOu Sons of Mars, that surrow Neptunes brow,
And over the dangerous Deep (undaunted) plow;
You who esteem your Countries honor more
Than life, or pelse, (which Peasants do adore,)
Your noble Ancestors, whose memories
Are borne by fame as far as Titans Rise,
And universally diuulg'd from thence
The Circle of the Worlds circumferenoe,
Let their example be a Spur to you,
That you their worthy virtues may pursue:
They were but men, and you are each so much,
They were victorious, may you each be such;
They had good courage, guided with good skill,
Which Skill and Courage, Fortune, Grace, and Will,
I do implore the Almighty to bestow
On you in general, All, both high and low.
Time does record, our Britains matchless force
By Sea and Land, with valiant foot or horse,
Has made France tremble, and proud Spain to quake,
And great Ierusulems foundations shake:
And as true valor did inspire their breasts,
So Victory and Conquest crowned their Crests.
O may your good intendments fall out right,
The God of Battles still your battles fight;
That as your Fathers were, so you may be
Rare Patterns unto your posterity:
That all our Foes with terror now may know
They have been beaten, and they must be so.
True Honor, Fame, and Victory attend you,
And high Jehovah in your cause defend you:
That Immortality your fames may Crown,
And GOD may have the Glory and Renown.
JOHN TAILOR.
FINIS.

