ODCOMBS Complaint: OR CORIATS funeral Epicedium: or Death-song, upon his late
reported drowning. WITH His Epitaph in the Barmuda, and Utopian tongues. And
translated into English by John Tailor.

Printed for merry recreation, and are to be told at the salutation in Vtopia.
1613.

The Author in his own defense.
IF any where my lines do fall out lame,
I made them so, in merriment and game:
For, be they wide, or side, or long, or short,
All Is one to me, I writ them but in sport;
Yet I would have the Reader thus much know^
That when I list my simple skill to show
In poesy, I could both read and spell:
I know my Dactils, and my Spondees well;
My true proportion, and my equal measure,
What accent must be short, and what at leasur^
How to transpose my words from place, to plac^
To give my poesy the greater grace.
Either in Pastoral or Comic strain,
In Tragedy, or any other vain,
^n nipping Satyrs, or in Epigrams,
^n Odes, in Elegies, or Anagrams,
^n eare-bewitching rare Hexameters,
Or in Iambicks, or Pentameters:
^ know these like a Sculler not a Scholar,
And therefore Poet, pray assuage your collar.
^f as these in writing you envy me,
Before you judge me do your worst and try me.
I. T.
To the Mirror of Time, the most refulgent, splendidious reflecting Court
Animal, Don Archibald Armstrong: Great M. Comptroller, Commander, and
Countermander of mirth, alacrity, sport, and ridiculous confabulations, in this
septentrionall, or Western Monarchy of Magna Britannia. Your poor and daily
Orator, JOHN TAILOR, wishes increase of your wisdom, in your own person, and
that your eminence and spirit, may be infused into the bosoms of most men's
heirs, that esteem more of Wealth, then of WISDOM.
RIght worthy worthless Patron, the days and times being such, wherein wit
goes a wool-gathering in a thredbare Iacket, and folly is well reputed amongst
those that seem wise, I, considering this, having but little wit, in a mad
humor bad farewell it, and never so much as asked the question, with whether
will thou? Being certainly persuaded that playing the fool will repair the
breaches which my unhappy wit has made in the Bulwark of my reputation (as it
has done to many others) wherefore good sir (with) reverence I hearing that so
great a member in your esteemed quality, as Mr. Thomas Coriat of Odcomb, was
drowned in his passage toward Constantinople; And knowing that many good and
worthy writers have graced his living travels: So I have made bold (under your
great Patronage) to write his tragical supposed Death-song, or Funeral
Elegy; not knowing any man of that worthy worth (besides your self) to whom I
might dedicate these sad Epicediums. Thus, not doubting of your acceptance and
protection, I commit my self and my labors to your wonderful wisdoms
censure, always having a poor Muse to travel in your service.

John Tailor.
To the Gentlemen Readers, that understand A. B. from a Battledore.
NO sooner newe^ of Coriats death was com,
But with the same, my Muse was strooken done:
For whiest he lived he was my Muses subject
Her only life, and sense sole pleasing object.
Odcombian, Grecian, Laune, Great Thom Ass
He being dead what life has she alas.
But yet I hope his death was false Report,
Or else it was rumord to beget some sport:
To try how his dear friends would take his death
And what rare Epicedium, they would make,
TO accompany his all-amented Hearse,
In hobling io^ling, rumbling tumbling verse
Some smooth some harshe, some shorter and some long:
As sweet Melodious as Madg Howle^^ song:
But, when I saw that no man took in hand
To make the world his worth to understand,
(...) up I (...)ussled from Obliuions den,
And of a Ganders quill I made a pen,
With which I wrote this following work of woe
(Not caring much if he be dead or no:)
For, whilst his body did contain a life,
The rare it wits were at continual strife,
Who should exceed each other in his glory,
But none but I have writ His Tragic story.
If he be dead then farewell he: if not,
At his return, his thanks shall be thy lot,
Mean time my muse does like an humble Pleader
Entreat acceptance of the gentle Reader.
Remaining yours ever, JOHN TAILOR.
A sad, joyful, lamentable, delightful merry-go-sorry Elegy or Funeral Poem
upon the supposed death of the famous Cosmographicall surueior, and
Historiographical Relator M Thomas Coriat of Odcomb.
O For a rope of Onions from Saint Omers,
And for the Muse of golden tongued Homers
That I might write and weep, and weep and write,
Odcombian Coriats timeles last goodnight
O were my wit inspird with Scoggins vain,
Or that Will Summers Ghost had seasd my brain,
Or Tarlton, Lanum, Sin^er, Kempe, and Pope,
Or she that danced and tumbled on the rope,
Or Tilting Archy, that so bravely ran,
Against Don Phoeb^s knight, that wordy man.
O all you crew, inside pv de colored garments.
Assist me to the height of your preferments:
And with your wits and spirits inspire my pate full.
That I in Coriats praise be not ungrateful,
If ever age lamented loss of folly
If ever man had cause of Melancholy.
Then now is the time to wail his ruthles wrack,
And weep in tears of Claret and of Sack.
ANd now, according to my weak invention,
His wondrous worthles worthiness i will mention
Yet to describe him as he is, or was,
The wit of Men or Monsters would surpass
His head was a large powdring tub of phrases,
Whence men would pick delights, as boys pick daises
O head, no head, but blockhouse of feirce wars,
Where wit and learning were at daily Iars
Who should possess the Mansion of his pate:
But at the last, to end this great debate:
Admired learning took his heads possession.
And turned his wit a wandering in progression.
But Minyon Muse, hold, whether will thou go,
Think thou his rare anotomy to show,
None borne a Christian, Turk, nor yet in Tartary
Can write each vein, each sinew, and each artery.
His eyes and ears like broakers by extortion
Ingrost strange foreign manners and proportion
But what his eyes and ears did see or hear,
His tongue or pen dischargd the reckoning clear,
That sure I think, he well could prove by law,
He uttered more then ere he heard or saw.
His tongue and hands have truly paid their score,
And freely spent what they receau^d and more,
But lord to see, how far ore=shot am I
To wade thus deep in his Anotomy.
What now he is I Will lightly ouerpasse,
I Will only write ^n part, but what he was:
That as Grim Death our pleasures thus has crossed,
It Is good, because he is gone, to know what is lost.
He wa^ the Imp, whilst he on earth suruiu'd,
From whom this west-worlds pastimes were derived,
He was in City, Country, field, and Court
The Well of dry braind Jests, and Pump of sport,
He was the treasure-house of wrinkled laughter,
Where melancholy moodes are put to slaughter:
And in a word he was a man among many,
That never yet was parraleld by any,
Who now like human spite of wind and weather,
Will wear on earthlesse shirt 5. months together?
Who now to do his native country grace,
Will for a Trophee execute his case?
Who now will take the height of every Gallows?
Or who will describe the sign of every Alehowse?
Whether his Host were bigg, or short, or tall
And whether he did knock ere he did call:
The color of ^i^ Host and Hostess hare?
What he bought cheap, and what he paid for dear:
For vea^e or mutton what he paid a joint,
Where he sat down, and where be loosd a point.
Each Tower, each Turret, and each lofty steeple,
Who now (like him) will tell the vulgar people?
Who now will set a work so many writers,
As he has done in spite of his back-biters
With Panegericks, Anagrams Acrosticks,
TO emblazon him the chief among fantasticks?
Alas not one not one alive does live,
That to the world can such contentment give,
Should Poets stretch their Muses on the rack,
And study till their percrianions crack.
Should ^oot-back^t orting Trauelours intend,
To match his travails, all were to no end.
Let Poets write their best, and Trotters run,
They nere shall write nor run as he has don.
But Neptune and great AEolus contending
Against one another all their forces bending,
Which of them soon'st should rob the happy earth
Of this rare man of men, this map of mirth.
And like two envious great ambitious Lords,
They fell at deep and dangerous discords;
The sea-god with his three tin'd angry Rod com,
And swore by Stix he would have Tom of Odcomb.
With that, stern Eole blew a boisterous blast,
And in his rage did gusts and tempests cast
In sh^^^ring voil^es at fierce Neptunes head:
Who like a valiant Champion scorning dread,
Gave blow for blow with his commanding Mace,
And spitting seems in spightfull AEols face,
That golden Titan hid his glistering ray,
As fearing to behold this horrid fray.
Cimerian darkness curtain'd all the world,
An Ebon Mantle ore the Globe was hurld,
The wallowing waves turn oild the restless ships,
Like School boys shattlecocks that leaps and skips,
The Topmast seems to play with Phoebus nose,
Strait down toward Erebus amain she goes:
Blow wind, quoth Neptune, til thy entrails break,
Against my force thy force shall be too weak:
Then like two fools at variance for a trifle,
They split the ship, they enter and they rifle.
Like cursed Law-wormes, envious and cruel,
Striving to seize the peerlesse matchless Jewel,
Whilst AEol sought above the skies to crown him;
Blew-bearded Neptune in his arms did drown him.
The Wind-god sees the prize and battle lost,
Blows, storms, and rages to be curbed and crossed,
And vowed to rowze great Neptune in his Court,
And in his teeth his injury retort:
Then he commands retreat to all his forces;
Who riding sundry ways on winged horses,
Big Boreas to the freezing North went puffing,
And slauering Auster, to the South went huffing,
Eurus went East, and Zephyrus went West,
And thus the wars of winds and seas did rest.
ANd now dame Thetis in thy vasty womb,
Is odd Odcombians Coriats timeless Toomb,
Where Nayads, Driads, and sweet sea-nimphs tend him,
And with their daily service do befriend him,
There al-shap'd Proteus and shril trumping Triton
And many more, which I can hardly write on,
As if it were the thing they glory at,
In servile troops they wait on Coriat,
That though like hell, the sea were far more dark as
Yet these would guard his vnreguarded carcass.
You Academick, Latin, Greek Magisters,
You of-springs of the three times treble Sisters,
Write, study, teach until your tongs have blisters.
For, now the Haddocks, and the shifting Sharks,
That feed on Coriat, will become great Clarks:
The wri-mouth'd Place and mumping Whiting-mops
Will in their mawes keep Greek and Latin shops,
The Pork-like Porpose; Thorn-back, and the Scate
Like studious Grecian Latinists will prate,
And men with eating them, by inspiration,
With these two tongues, shall fill each barbarous Nation.
Then, though the Sea has rudely him bereft us;
Yet, midst our woes, this only comforts left us,
That our posterities by eating fishes,
Shall pick his wisdom out of diverse dishes;
And then (no doubt) but thousands more will be
As learned, or perhaps all as wisemen as he:
But to conclude, affection makes me cry,
Sorrow prouokes me sleep, grief dries mine eye.
EPITAPH in the Barmooda tongue, which must be pronounced with the accent of
the grunting of a hog.
HOugh grantough wough Thomough
Coriatough, Odcough robunquogh,
Warawogh bogh Comitogh
segh wogh termanatogrogh,
Callimogh gogh whobogh Ragamogh
demagorgoh palemogh,
Lomerogh nogh Tottertogh illemortogh
eagh Allaquemquogh,
Teracominogh Iagogh Iamerogh
mogh Carnogh pelepsogh,
Animogh trogh deradrogh maramogh
hogh Flondrogh calepsogh.
Epitaph in the Vtopian tongue.
NOrtumblum callimu^quash omystoliton quashte burashte,
Scribuke woshtay solusbay perambulatushte;
Grekay sons Turkay Paphay zums Ieruslushte.
Neptus esht Ealors Interremoy diz Dolorushte,
Confahuloy Odcombay Prozeugmollito^ tymorumynoy;
Omulas or at ushte paralescus tolliton vmbroy.
The same in English, translated by Caleb Quishquash, an Vtopian borne and
principal Secretary to the great Adelantado of Barmoodoes.
HEre lies the wonder of the English Nation,
Inuolv'd in Neptunes british vasty maw:
For fruitless travel, and for strange relation,
He past and repast all that ere eve saw.
Odcomb produced him; many Nations fed him,
And worlds of Writers, through the world have spread him,
FINIS.
Certain Sonnets, in praise of Mr. Thomas the deceased; fashioned of diverse
stuffs, as mockado, fustian, stand-further off, and Motly, all which the Author
dedicates to the immortal memory of the famous Odcombian traveler.
COnglomerating Ajax, in a fogge
Constulted with Ixion for a tripe,
At which Gargantua took an Irish bogge,
And with the same ga^e Sisiphus a stripe.
That all the bumbast forests began to swell,
With Triple treble trouble and with joy,
That Lucifer kept holiday to hell,
Cause Cupid would no more be called a boy.
Delucitating Flora's painted hide,
Redeemes Arion from the hongry Wolf,
And with conglutinating haughty pride,
Threw Pander in the damb'd Venetian gulf,
The Mediterrane mountains laughed and smiled,
And Libra wandered in the woods so wild.
Bright Cassia Fistula was wondrous sad,
To hear Zarzaparillas great mis-hap,
And Coloquintida was raging mad
When Saxafrage was set in Rubarbs lap;
Dame Lickorish was in a monstrous fume,
Against the lushious Reasons of the sun,
And Trinidado smoke auoids the room,
Whilst Gum-armoniack swears she is undone;
Vnguentum album is so pale and wan
That Paracelsus plaster mournes in black,
The spanish Eleborus strongly can
Make Lignum vita's hide with neesing crack:
Lo, thus with unguents, plasters, oils, and drugge^
We conjure up the fierce infernal bugges.
The headstrong Torchlight of Cimerian waves,
With fiery frozen wonder leaps and vaults:
And on the Altantick Ocean cuts and shaues,
Whilst thunder thwacking Ossa limps and halts,
Robustious AEtna drownes the Artick Pole,
And forked Vulcan has forsook his forge,
Apollo'es piebald mare has cast her fool,
And Mulley Mahomet has filled his gorge.
Don Beelzebub sits sleaing of his breech,
And Marble Proteus dances, leaps and skips,
Belerophon has pend an excellent speech,
And big-boand Boreas kissed Anroraes lips:
The Welkin rumbles; Argos lies a sleep,
And Tantalus has slain a flock of sheep.
When flounder-flapping Termagant was slain,
The smug faced Cerberus did houle and yell.
And Polyphemus rid in Charles his waine,
Whilst Gorgons head rung great Alcides knell,
The rip-rap-riffe-raffe, thwick thwack stout Babo^
Gripes in his downy clutch the spungy Oak.
And Young Andromeda at night rings noone,
Whilst Asdrubal at tick tack lost his cloak,
Prometheus covering, the Vmbranoes head,
And Typhon tumbles through the solid Air:
Proud Pegasus on Cheese and Garlic fed,
And Proserpina went to Sturbidge fair.
Pope Hildebrand bad Pluto home to supper,
And Don Diegoes horse has broke his crupper.
Dick Swash drew out his three pild blunted blade
And flasht in twain the equinoctial line:
Tom Thumb did through the Arabian deserts wade,
Where Castor and his brother Pollux shine,
The thread bare flap-Iacks of the western Isles,
Exasperates the Marble Sithian Snow,
Damu Venus traueld fifty thousand miles
To see the bounds of Nilus ebb and flow.
The Gurmondizing Quagmires of the East,
Ingurgitates the Eremanthean Bull:
And rude rebounding Sagittarius Ceast
To pipe Leualtoes to Gonzagues Trull
The Adriatic Polcats sat carousing,
And hidebound Gogmagog his shirt was lowfin^
Sweet Semi-circled Cinthya played at maw,
The whilst Endimion ran the wild-goose chase.
Great Bacchus with his Crosbow killed a daw,
And sullen Saturn smiled with pleasant face.
The ninefold Bugbeares of the Caspian lake,
Sat whistling Ebon hornepipes to their Ducks,
Madgh^ulet straight for joy her Girdle brake.
And rugged Satyrs friskd like Stagges and Buck^
The vntamd tumbling fifteen footed Goat,
With promulgation of the Lesbian shores,
Confronted Hydra in a sculler Boat,
At which the mighty mountain Tauris rores
Mean time great Sultan Soliman was borne,
And Atlas blew his rustic tumbling horn.
IF there be any Gentlemen, or others that are desirous to be practitioners in
the Barmoodo and Vtopian tongues: the Professor (being the Author hereof)
dwells at the old Swanne near London Bridge, who will teach them (that are
willing) to learn, with agilitie and facility.

Errata.
REader, you must imagine these six confused Sonnets, of Rhyme without Reason,
are confusedly put together; but I would entreat you ^or your better
understanding, to divide them into ^4. lines a piece in your reading.

FINIS.

