Some few years since, I rode to my Lords Manor of Haleing in Surrey, where
I presented his Lordship with a Manuscript, or written Book of the names and
degrees of all the Knights of the Noble Order of the Garter, since the first
institution by King Edward the third, which was of mine own collections out of
Windsor Castle, and some authentic Histories: His Lordship received it
gratefully, and rewarded me honorably: in the which Book was an Anagram of
his Name and Earldom of Nottingham, which I hold very fitting to be
hereunder Printed, because it falls correspondent to the reverence of his age,
and the happiness which the words import.

Charles Howarde, Earl of Nottinghame.
Anagramma.
O Heaven calls, and has true Glory for me.
And happy was this happy Anagram,
Heaven calls Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham:
And he obeyed the call, and gaind true Glory,
For change of earthly titles transitory.
FOR THE SACRED MEMORIAL OF THE GREAT, NOBLE, and ancient Example of Virtue
and Honor,

The Illustrious and Well-beloved LORD, CHARLES HOWARD Earl of Nottingham,
Justice in Air of all his Majesty's Forests, Parks, and Chases on this side
Trent; Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

WHO DEPARTED THIS Life at his Manor of Haleing in Surrey on Thursday the 14
of December, 1624. and was buried at Rigate, amongst his Honorable Ancestors,
the 20 of December last. 1624.

Printed at London for H. G. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Right Worshipful, of both Sexes, who had either
alliance by Marriage, Consanguinity by Birth, or bore love to the Right Noble
and truly virtuous deceased.
I Humbly crave your Worthiness t'excuse
This boldness of my poor unlearned Muse,
That has presumed so high a pitch to fly,
In praise of Virtue and Nobility,
I know this task most fit for Learned men,
For Homer, Ovid, or for Virgils pen:
But for I with him have both served and sailed,
My grateful duty has so far prevailed,
Boldly to write true Honors late decease,
Whiles better Muses please to hold their peace.
And thus much to the world my Verse proclaims,
That neither Gain nor Flattery are my aims,
But Love and Duty to the Noble dead,
Has caused me cause these Lines be published.
And therefore I entreat your generous Hearts,
T'accept my duty, pardon my deserts,
Bear with my weakness, wink at my defects,
Good purposes do merit good effects,
Poor earthen Vessels may hold precious Wine,
And I presume that in this Book of mine
In many places you shall something find,
To please each Noble well affected mind.
And for excuse my Muse does humbly plead,
That you will forbear to judge before you read.
He that is ever a true well-wisher, and obsequious Servant to your Honors,
Worships, and Noble Personages; John Tailor.

For the sacred Memorial of the Great, Noble, and Ancient Example of Virtue
and Honor, the Illustrious and well-beloved Lord, Charles Howard, Earl of
Nottingham, Justice in Air of all his Majesty's Forests, Parks, and Chases on
this side Trent; Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter, and one of the
Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
WHat English Muse forbeares to shed a tear
For Englands Nestor, grauest oldest Peer?
Not only old in number of his days,
But old in virtue, and all good men's praise:
Whose actions all his pilgrimage did pass,
More full of honor then his title was.
And though his corpse be seuer'd from his spirit,
And that the world sufficient knows his merit:
Yet shall my poor unworthy artlesse Verse
In duteous service wait upon his Hearse.
My self his Honor on the Seas attended,
And with his bounty have I been befriended,
And to acquit me from unthankfulness,
My lines shall here my gratitude express.
No monumentall Marble reard on hie,
He needs t'emblaze him to posterity,
No flattering Epitaph he needs to have,
To be engrau'd upon a gaudy grave,
His life and actions are his Monument,
Which fills each Kingdom, Clime, and Continent.
And when their memories shall stink and dye,
Who in most stately sepulchers do lie,
Then Royal Histories shall still relate
To each degree, or age, or sex, or state,
The virtue, valor, bounty, and the fame
Of Englands all beloved Nottinghame:
And Noble hearts his memory shall retain
Until the World to Chaos turn again.
That year of wonderment called eighty eight,
When Fraud and Force did our destruction wait,
When Hell, and Rome, and Spain did all agree,
That we should vanquished and invaded be.
Our foes at Sea thirty one thousand men,
With near four hundred ships and Galleys then,
Then this White Lion roused with irefull teene,
Defending both his Country and his Queen.
Like second Mars to battle brave he went,
God making him his worthy Instrument,
His Chieftaine, Champion, and his General,
With sixscore ships, and Vessels great and small,
To conquer those that did for conquest come,
And soil the power of Hell, and Spain, and Rome.
Then valor was with resolution mixed,
And manhood with true honor firmly fixed.
When death and danger threatened every where,
Brave Charles (all fearlesse) did encourage fear.
When roaring cannons countercheckt heavens thunder
And slaughterd me^ their vessels keeles lay under,
The Sun eclyps'd with smoke, skies dark and dim,
And battering bullets seuerd lim from lim,
When as that sea might be the Red Sea called,
Then he with dreadlesse courage, vnappall'd,
Like a bright Beacon, or a blazing Star,
Approved himself a thunderbolt of war,
Whose valor and example valiantly
Pursued and won a glorious victory.
And then by him (through the Almighties hand)
Preserved from invasion was this Land.
So that who ever shall his Tomb pass by,
And shall enquire who there does buried lie,
If answer be but made, He Is in this Grave
Who did in Eighty eight this Kingdom save;
Then is the total told, and service best,
Wherewith this little Land was ever blessed.
At 1596
Cales likewise the Sea Fight we did win
By his direction and grave discipline.
The Spanish ships soon from his force retired,
Some torn, some sunk, some taken, and some fired,
And whensoere he gave the overthrow,
He nere insulted ore his conquered foe,
But like a Noble Lion, every way
He scorned to prey upon a yielding prey:
With pity, piety, and true remorce,
His clemency was mixed with manly force.
Unto his foes a noble care he had,
Nor would affliction to affliction add:
So that his enemies much cause did find
To love and honor his true noble mind.
Yet against offenders he was sharply bent,
Severe in threats, and mild in punishment,
His justice would condemn, and in a breath
His mercy saved whom justice doomed to death.
His adversaries he did often relieve,
And his revenge was only to forgive.
He knew that well got honor nere shall die,
But make men live unto eternity:
It as his greatest riches he esteemed,
And Infamy he basest begg'ry deemed.
He knew, though worthy spirits may be crossed,
Yet if they lose no honor nothing's lost.
And those that have afraid of envy bin,
True honor or good fame did never win.
If he an auaritious mind had bore,
Of wealth no subject then had had such store:
So many years Englands high Admiral,
Fees, offices, and prizes that did fall,
With gifts and favors from the Queen and State,
And other things, amounting to a rate:
That had he been a mizer, close of hand,
No subject had been richer in this Land,
In deeds of pity, and true charity,
Good housekeeping, and hospitality,
Bounty, and courteous affability,
He was the Brooch of true Nobility:
And for these virtues men shall scarcely find,
That he a fellow here has left behind.
He knew that Avarice and Honor be
Two contraries that never will agree:
And that the Spender shall have true renown,
When infamy the Mizers fame shall drown.
He every way most nobly was inclined,
And loved no wealth but riches of the mind:
His pleasure was, that those that did retain
To him, and serve, should by him thrive and gain:
And he thought it was enough for him to have,
When as his servants did both get and save.
So amongst Nobles I think few are such,
That keeps so little, gives away so much.
His latest Will did make it plain appear,
The love which to his servants he did bear.
To great and small amongst them, more or less,
His bounty did express his worthiness:
We know that God to man has life but lent,
And placed it in his bodies tenement,
And when for it again the Landlord calls,
The Tenant must depart, the Cottage falls.
God is most just, and he will have it known,
That he in taking life, takes but his own:
Life is a debt which must to God be rendered,
And Natures retribution must be tendered.
Some pay in youth, and some in age do pay,
But it is a charge that all men must defray,
For it is the lot of all mortality,
When they begin to live, begin to dye.
And as from sin to sin we wander in,
So death at last is wages for our sin.
He neither has respect to sex or years,
Or has compassion of our sighs nor tears,
He Will enter (spite of bars, or bolts, or locks)
And like a bold intruder never knockes.
To Kings and Caitiffes, rich, poor, great and small,
Death plays the tyrant, and destroys them all.
He calls all creatures to account most strict,
And no man's power his force can contradict.
We must perforce be pleased with what he leaves us,
And not repine at ought which he bereaues us.
He Is lawless, and it is folly to demand
Amends, or restitution at his hand.
He does deride the grief of those that mourn,
And all our frail afflictions laugh to scorn.
For he condemns, and never hears the cause,
He takes away despite the power of Laws.
Yet he our vassal ever does remain,
From our first birth unto our grave again:
And God does in his service him employ,
To be the bad man's terror, good man's joy.
Death is the narrow door to life eternal,
Or else the broad gate unto death infernal:
But our Redeemer in his spotless offering,
Did lead the way for us to heaven by suffering.
He was the death of death, when he did die
Then Death was swallowed up in victory,
And by his rising blessed souls shall rise,
And dwell in the celestial Paradise.
For these respects, you whose affinity,
Propinquity, or consanguinity,
Whose blood or whose alliance challenge can
A part in this deceased Nobleman,
The law of Nature and affection moves,
That grief and sorrow should express your loves,
He was your secondary maker, and
Your authors earthly being, and you stand
In duty for your lives and honors bound
To him, for by him have you been renowned.
Yet Death that is common unto every one,
Should be intolerable unto none:
And therefore let his noble spirit rest,
Amidst those joys which cannot be expressed,
Let those that live his goodness imitate,
And yield unto the course of mortal fate.
FINIS.

