The Old, Old, very Old Man or Thomas Par, the Son of John Parr of
Winnington in the Parish of Alberbury; In the County of Shropshire who was
Borne in 1483 in The Reign of King Edward the 4th and is now living in The
strand, being aged 152 years and odd Months 1635 He dyed November the 15th
And is now buried in Westminster: 1635.


The Old, Old, Very Old Man: OR The Age and long Life of Thomas Par, The
Son of John Parr of Winnington in the Parish of Alberbury; in the Country of
Salopp, (or Shropshire) who was Borne in the Reign of King Edward the 4th. and
is now living in the Strand, being aged 152. years and odd Months.

His Manner of Life and Conversation is so long a Pilgrimage; his Marriages,
and his bringing up to London about the end of September last. 1635.

Written by JOHN TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Gosson, 1635.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE. CHARLES, By the Grace of God, King of great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
OF Subjects (my dread Liege) it is manifest,
You have the old'st, the greatest, and the least;
That for an Old, a Great, and Little man,
No kingdom (sure) compare with Britain can;
One, for his extraordinary stature,
Guards well your gates, and by instinct of Nature
(As he is strong) is Loyal, True, and Just,
Fit, and most able, for his Charge and Trust.
The other's small and well composed feature
Deserves the Title of a Pretty Creature:
And does (or may) retain as good a mind
As Greater men, and be as well inclined:
He may be great in spir't, though small in sight,
Whilst all his best of service, is Delight.
The Old'st, your Subject is; but for my use,
I make him here, the Subject of my Muse:
And as his Aged Person gained the grace,
That where his Sovereign was, to be in place,
And kiss your Royal Hand; I humbly crave,
His Lives Description may Acceptance have.
And as your Majesty has often before
Looked on my Poems; Pray read this one more.
Your Majesty's most Humble Subject and Servant, JOHN TAILOR.

THE OCCASION OF this Old Man's being brought out of Shropshiere to London.
AS it is impossible for the Sun to be without light, or fire to have no heat;
so is it undeniable that true Honor is as inseparably addicted to Virtue, as
the Steel to the Lodestone; and without great violence neither the one or the
other can be sundred. Which manifestly appears, in the conveying out of the
Country, of this poor ancient Man (Monument I may say, and almost Miracle of
Nature.) For the Right Honorable, Thomas Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Earl
Marshall of England, etc. being lately in Shropshiere to visit some Lands and
Manners which his Lordship holds in that County, or, for some other occasions of
Importance, which caused his Lordship to be there. The Report of this Aged Man
was certified to his Honor; who hearing of so remarkable a Piece of Antiquity,
his Lordship was pleased to see him, and in his Innated Noble and Christian
Piety, he took him into his charitable tuition and protection; Commanding
that a Litter and two Horses (for the more easy carriage of a man so enfeebled
and worn with Age) to be provided for him; Also, that a Daughter-in-Law of his
(named Lucye) should likewise attend him, and have a Horse for her own riding
with him; And (to cheer up the Old Man, and make him merry) there was an
Antique-fac'd-fellow, called Jack, or John the Fool, with a high and mighty
no Beard, that had also a Horse for his carriage. These all were to be brought
out of the Country to London, by easy Iourneyes; the Charges being allowed by
his Lordship, and likewise one of his Honors own Servants, named Brian
Kelley, to ride on horseback with them, and to attend and defray all manner of
Reckonings and Expenses; all which was done accordingly, as follows.

Winnington is a Hamlet in the Parish of Alberbury, near a place called the
Welsh Poole, eight miles from Shrewsbury, from whence he was carried to Wim, a
Town of the Earls aforesaid; and the next day to Shefnall, (a Manor House
of his Lordships) where they likewise stayed one night; from Shefnall they came
to Woolverhampton, and the next day to Brimicham, from thence to Coventry; and
although Master Kelley had much to do to keep the people off that pressed upon
him in all places where he came, yet at Coventry he was most oppressed: for
they came in such multitudes to see the Old Man, that those that defended him,
were almost quite tired and spent, and the aged man in danger to have bin
stifeled; and in a word, the rabble were so unruly, that Bryan was in doubt he
should bring his Charge no further; (so greedy are the Vulgar to hearken to, or
gaze after novelties.) The trouble being over, the next day they past to
Daventry, to stony Stratford, to Redburn, and so to London, where he is well
entertained and accomodated with all things, having all the aforesaid
Attendants, at the sole Charge and Cost of his Lordship.

One Remarkable Passage of the Old man's Policy must not be omitted or
forgotten, which is thus.
His three Leases of 63. years being expired, he took his last Lease of his
Landlord (one Master John Porter) for his Life, with which Lease, he has
lived more then 50. years (as is further hereafter declared;) but this Old Man
would (for his wives sake) renew his Lease for years, which his Landlord would
not consent unto; wherefore old Parr, (having been long blind) sitting in his
chair by the fire, his wife looked out of the window, and perceived Master
Edward Porter, the Son of his Landlord, to come toward their house, which she
told her husband, saying, Husband, our young Landlord is coming hither: Is he
so, said old Parr; I prithee wife lay a Pin on the ground near my foot, or at
my right toe; which, she did; and when young Master Porter (yet forty years
old) was come into the house, after salutations between them, the Old Man said,
Wife, is not that a Pin which lies at my foot? Truly husband, quoth she, it is
a Pin indeed, so she took up the Pin, and Master Porter was half in a maze
that the Old Man had recovered his sight again; but it was quickly found to be
a witty conceit, thereby to have them to suppose him to be more lively than he
was, because he hoped to have his Lease renewed for his wives sake, as
aforesaid.

He has had two Children by his first wife, a Son and a Daughter, the Boys
name was John, and lived but ten weeks; the Girl was named Joan, and she
lived but three weeks. So that it appears he has outlived the most part of
the people that are living near there, three times over.

The very Old Man: OR, The Life of Thomas Parr.
AN Old man's twice a child (the proverb says)
And many old men nere saw half his days
Of whom I write; for he at first had life,
When York and Lancasters Domestique strife
In her own blood had factious England drenched,
Until sweet Peace those civil flames had quenched.
When as fourth Edwards Reign to end drew nigh,
John Parr (a man that lived by Husbandry)
Begot this Thomas Parr, and borne was He
The year of fourteen hundred, eighty three.
And as his Fathers Living and his Trade,
Was Plough, and Cart, Sith, Sickle, Bill, and Spade;
The Harrow, Mattock, Flayle, Rake, Fork, and Goad,
And Whip, and how to Load, and to Unload;
Old Tom has showed himself the Son of John,
And from his Fathers function has not gone.
A Digression.
YEt I have read of as mean Pedigrees,
That have attained to Noble dignities
Agathocles, a Potters Son, and yet
The Kingdom of Sicilia he did get.
Great Tamberlaine, a Scythian Shepherd was,
Yet (in his time) all Princes did surpass.
First Ptolomey(the King of AEgypts Land)
A poor man's Son of Alexanders Band.
Dioclesian, Emperor, was a Scriveners Son,
And Proba from a Gardener the Empire won.
Pertinax was a Bondmans Son, and wan
The Empire; So did Valentinian,
Who was the offspring of a Rope-maker,
And Maximinus of a Mule-driver.
And if I on the truth do rightly glance,
Hugh Capet was a Butcher, King of France.
By this I have digrest, I have expressed
Promotion comes not from the East or West.
To the Matter.
SO much for that, now to my Theme again:
This Thomas Parr has lived the expired Reign
Of ten great Kings and Queens, the eleventh now sways
The Scepter, (blessed by the ancient of all days.)
He has survived the Edwards, fourth and fifth;
And the third Richard, who made many a shift
To place the Crown on his Ambitious head;
The seventh and eighth brave Henry's both are dead,
Sixth Edward, Mary, Phillip, Elsabeth,
And blessed remembered James, all these by death
Have changed life, and almost' leven years since
The happy reign of Charles our gracious Prince,
Tom Parr has lived, as by Record appears
Nine Months, one hundred fifty, and two years.
Amongst the Learned, it is held in general
That every seventh yeare's Climactericall,
And dangerous to man's life, and that they be
Most perilous, at the Age of sixty three,
Which is, nine Climactericals; but this Man
Of whom I write, (since first his life began)
Has lived of Climactericals such plenty,
That he has almost outlived two and twenty.
For by Records, and true Certificate,
From Shropshiere late, Relations does relate,
That He lived 17 years with John his Father,
And 18 with a Master, which I gather
To be full thirty five; his Sires decease
Left him four years Possession of a Lease;
Which past, Lewis Porter Gentleman, did then
For twenty one years grant his Lease again:
That Lease expired, the Son of Lew's called John,
Let him the like Lease, and that time being gone,
Then Hugh, the Son of John (last named before)
For one and twenty years, sold one Lease more.
And lastly, he has held from John, Hugh's Son,
A Lease for's life these fifty years, outrun:
And till old Thomas Parr, to Earth again
Return, the last Lease must his own remain.
Thus having showed th'extension of his Age,
I Will show some Actions of his Pilgrimage.
His Marriage.
A Tedious time a Batchelour he tarried,
Full eighty years of age before he married:
His Continence, to question Ple nor call,
Man's frailtie's weak, and often does slip and fall.
No doubt but he in fourscore years might find
In Salop's County, females fair and kind:
But what have I to do with that; let pass,
At the age aforesaid he first married was
To Jane, John Tailors Daughter; and it is said;
That she (before he had her) was a Maid.
With her he lived years three times ten and two,
And then she died (as all good wives will do.)
She dead, he ten years did a Widdower stay;
Then once more ventred in the Wedlock way:
And in affection to his first wife Jane,
He took another of that name again;
(With whom he now does live) she was a widow
To one named Anthony (and surnamed Adda)
She was (as by report it does appear)
Of Gillsels Parish, in Mountgom'ry-Shiere,
The Daughter of John Lloyde (corruptly Flood)
Of ancient house, and gentle Cambrian Blood.
Digression.
But hold, I had forgot, in's first wives Time,
He frayly, foully, fell into a Crime,
Which richer, poorer, older men, and younger,
More base, more noble, weaker men, and stronger
Have fallen into.
The Cytherean, or the Paphaean game,
That thundering Jupiter did often inflame;
Most cruel cutthroat Mars laid by his Arms,
And was a slave to Loves Enchanting charms,
And many a Pagan god, and semi-god,
The common road of lustful love has trod:
For from the Emperor to the russet Clown,
All states, each sex, from Cottage to the Crown,
Have in all Ages' since the first Creation,
Bin folyd, and overthrown with Loves temptation:
So was old Thomas, for he chanced to spy
A Beauty, and Love entered at his eye,
Whose powerful motion drew on sweet consent,
Consent drew Action, Action drew Content,
But when the period of those joys were past,
Those sweet delights were sourely sauc'd at last.
The flesh retains, what in the Bone is bred,
And one Colts tooth was then in old Toms head,
It may be he was guld as some have bin,
And suffered punishment for others sin;
For pleasures like a Trap, a grin, or snare,
Or (like a painted harlot) seems most fair;
But when she goes away, and takes her leave,
No ugly Beast so foul a shape can have.
Fair Katherin Milton, was this Beauty bright,
(Fair like an Angel, but in weight too light)
Whose fervent feature did inflame so far
The Ardent fervor of old Thomas Parr,
That for Laws satisfaction, 'twas thought meet,
He should be purged, by standing in a Sheet,
Which aged (He) one hundred and five year,
In Alberbury's Parish Church did wear.
Should All that so offend, such Penance do,
Oh, what a price would Linen rise unto,
All would be turned to sheets, our shirts and smocks
Our Table linen, very Porters Frocks
Would hardly escape trans-forming, but all is one,
He suffered, and his Punishment is done.
Another Passage more of his Life.
But to proceed, more serious in Relation,
He is a Wonder, worthy Admiration,
He Is in these times filled with Iniquity)
No Antiquary, but Antiquity;
For his Longeuity's of such extent,
That he is a living mortal Monument.
And as high Towers, (that seem the sky to shoulder)
By eating Time, consume away, and molder,
Until at last in piece meal they do fall;
Till they are buried in their Ruins All:
So this Old Man, his limbs their strength have left,
His teeth all gone, (but one) his sight bereft,
His sinews shrunk, his blood most chill and cold,
Small solace, Imperfections manifold:
Yet still his spirits possess his mortal Trunk,
Nor are his senses in his ruins shrunk,
But that his Hearing's quick, his stomach good,
He Will feed well, sleep well, well digest his food.
He will speak heartily, laugh, and be merry;
Drink Ale, and now and then a cup of Sherry;
Loves Company, and Understanding talk,
And (on both sides held up) will sometimes walk.
And though old Age his face with wrinckles fill,
He has been handsome, and is comely still,
Well faced, and though his Beard not often corrected,
Yet near it grows, not like a Beard neglected
From head to heel, his body has all over,
A Quick-set, Thick-set natural hairy cover.
And thus (as my dull weak Invention can)
I have Annatomiz'd this poor Old Man.
Though Age be incident to most transgressing,
Yet Time well spent, makes Age to be a blessing.
And if our studies would but daign to look,
And seriously to ponder Natures Book,
We there may read, that Man, the noblest Creature,
By riot and excess does murder Nature.
This man nere fed on dear compounded dishes,
Of Metamorphos'd beasts, fruits, fowls, and fishes,
The earth, and air, the boundless Ocean
Were never raked nor sorrag'd for this Man;
Nor ever did Physician to (his coast)
Send purging Physic through his guts in post:
In all his lifetime he was never known,
That drinking others healths, he lost his own,
The Dutch, the French, the Greek, and Spanish Grape,
Upon his reason never made a Rape;
For Riot, is for Troy an Annagram;
And Riot wasted Troy, with sword and flame:
And surely that which will a Kingdom spill,
Has much more power one silly man to kill,
Whilst sensuality the Pallat pleases,
The body's filled with surfets, and diseases;
By Riot (more than War) men slaughtred be,
From which confusion this Old Man is free.
He once was caught in the Venerall Sin,
And (being punished) did experience win,
That careful fear his Conscience so did strike,
He never would again attempt the like.
Which to our understandings may express
Men's days are shortened through lasciviousness,
And that a competent contenting Diet
Makes men live long, and soundly sleep in quiet.
Mistake me not, I speak not to debar
Good fare of all sorts; for all Creatures are
Made for man's use, and may by Man be used,
Not by voratious Gluttony abused.
For he that dares to scandal or deprave
Good hous-keeping; Oh hang up such a Knave;
Rather commend (what is not to be found)
Then injure that which makes the world renownd.
Bounty has got a spice of Lethargy,
And liberal noble Hospitallity
Lies in consumption, almost pined to death,
And Charity benumbed, near out of Breath.
May Englands few good hous-keepers be blessed
With endless Glory, and eternal Rest;
And may their Goods, Lands, and their hapy Seed
With heavens best Blessings multiply and breed.
It Is madness to build heigh with stone and lime,
Great houses, that may seem the Clouds to clime,
With spacious Halls, large Galleries, brave rooms,
Fit to receive a King, Peers, Squires and Grooms;
Amongst which rooms, the devil has put a Witch in,
And made a small Tobacco-box the Kitchen,
For Covetousness the Mint of Mischief is,
And Christian Bounty the Highway to Bliss
To wear a Farm in shoo-strings, edged with gold,
And spangled Garters worth a Copy hold
A hose and dublet; which a Lordship cost,
A gaudy cloak (three Manours price almost)
A Beaver, Band, and Feather for the head,
(Prized at the Churches tithe, the poor man's bread)
For which the Wearers are feared, and abhorred
Like Ieroboams golden Calves adored
This double, treble a god man, I woe,
Knows and remembers when these things were
Good wholesome labor was his exercise,
Down with the Lamb, and with the Lark would rise,
In mire and toyling sweat he spent the day,
And (to his Teame) he whistled Time away;
The Cock his night Clock, and till day was done,
His Watch, and chief Sun-Diall, was the Sun.
He was of old Pithagoras opinion,
That green cheese was most wholesome (with an onion)
Course, Mesclin Bread, and for his daily swigg,
Milk, Butter-milk, and Water, Whay, and Whigg;
Sometimes Metheglin, and by fortune happy,
He sometimes sip'd a Cup of Ale most nappie,
Syder, or Perry, when her did repair
T'a Whitson Ale, Wake, Wedding, or a Fair,
Or when in Christmas time he was a Guest
At his good, Landlords house amongst the rest
Else he had little leisure Time to waste,
Or (at the Ale house) huffe-cap Ale to taste.
Nor did he ever hunt a Tavern Fox,
Never knew a Coach, Tobacco, or the Pox,
His Physic was good Butter, which the soil
Of Salop yields, more sweet than Candy oil,
And Garlic he esteemed above the rate
Of Venice-Triacle, or best Mithridate.
He entertained no Gowt, no Ache he felt;
The air was good, and temp'rat where he dwelt,
Whilst Mavisses, and sweet tongued Nightingales
Did chant him Roundelayes, and Madigals.
Thus living within bounds of Natures Laws,
Of his long lasting life may be some cause.
For though the almighty all man's days do measure,
And does dispose of life and death at pleasure,
Yet Nature being wronged, man's days and date
May be abridg'd, and God may tolerate.
But had the Father of this Thomas Parr,
His Grandfather, and his Great grandfather,
Had their lives threads so long a length been spun,
They (by succession) might from Sire to Son
Have been unwritten Chronicles, and by
Tradition show Times mutabillity.
Then Parr might say he heard his Father well,
Say that his Grand-fire heard his Father tell
The death of famous Edward the Confessor,
( Harrold) and William Conq'rour his successor;
How his Son Robert wan Jerusalem,
Ore-came the Sarazens, and Conquered them:
How Rufus reigned, and's Brother Henry next,
And how usurping Stev'n this Kingdom vexed:
How Mawd the Empress (the first Henry's daughter)
To gain her Right, filled England full of slaughter:
Of second Henry's Rosamond the fair,
Of Richard Cuer-de-lyon, his brave heir,
King John, and of the foul suspicion
Of Arthurs death, John's elder Brothers Son.
Of the third Henry's long reign (sixty years)
The Barons wars, the loss of wrangling Peers,
How Long-shanks did the Scots and French convince,
Tamed Wales, and made his haples son their Prince.
How second Edward was Carnarvon called,
Beaten by Scots, and by his Queen inthrall'd.
How the third Edward, fifty years did reign,
And to honored Garters Order did ordain.
Next how the second Richard lived and died,
And how fourth Henry's faction did divide
The Realm with civil (most uncivil) war
Twixt long contending York and Lancaster.
How fifth Henry swayd, and how his son
Sixth Henry, a sad Pilgrimage did run.
Then of fourth Edward, and fair Mistrisse Shore,
King Edwards Concubine Lord Hastings ( --)
Then how fifth Edward, murdered with a trick
Of the third Richard; and then how that Dick
Was by seventh Henry's slain at Bosworth field;
How he and's son the eighth Henry, here did wield
The Scepter; how sixth Edward swayd,
How Mary ruled, and how that royal Maid
Elizabeth did Govern (best of Dames)
And Phenix-like expired, and how just James
(Another Phoenix) from her Ashes claims
The right of Britains Scepter, as his own,
But (changing for a better) left the Crown
Where now it is, with King Charles, and may it be
With him, and his most blessed Posterity
Till time shall end; be they on Earth renowned,
And after with Eternity be crowned.
Thus had Parr had good breeding, (without reading)
He from his sire, and Grand sires sire proceeding,
By word of mouth might tell most famous things
Done in the Raigns of all those Queens and Kings.
But he in Husbandry has bin brought up,
And nere did taste the Helliconian cup,
He nere knew History, nor in mind did keep
Ought, but the price of Corn, Hay, Kine, or Sheep.
Day found him work, and Night allowd him rest.
Nor did Affairs of Stae his brain molest.
His highest Ambition was, A tree to lop,
Or at the furthest to a May-poles top,
His Recreation, and his Mirths discourse
Has been the Pyper, and the Hobbyhorse.
And in this simple sort, he has with pain,
From Childhood lived to be a Child again.
It Is strange, a man that is in years so grown
Should not be rich, but to the world it is known,
That he that is borne in any Land, or Nation,
Under a Twelve-pence Planet's Domination,
(By working of that Planets influence)
Shall never live to be worth thirteen pence.
Whereby (although his Learning cannot show it)
He Is rich enough to be (like me) a Poet.
But er'e I do conclude, I will relate
Of reverend Age's Honorable state;
Where shall a young man good Instructions have,
But from the Ancient, from Experience grave?
Roboam, (Son and Heir to Solomon)
Rejecting ancient Counsel, was undone
Almost; for ten of twelve Tribes fell
To Jeroboam King of Israel.
And all wise Princes, and great Potentates
Select and choose Old men, as Magistrates,
Whose Wisdom, and whose reverend Aspect,
Knows how and when to punish or protect.
The Patriarchs long lives before the Flood,
Were given them (as it is rightly understood)
To store and multiply by procreations,
That people should inhabit and breed Nations.
That the Ancients their Posterities might show
The secrets Deep, of Nature how to know
To scale the sky with learned Astronomy,
And found the Oceans deep profundity;
But chiefly how to serve, and to obey
God, who made them out of slime and clay;
Should men live now, as long as they did then,
The Earth could not sustain the Breed of Men.
Each man had many wives, which Bigamie,
Was such increase to their Posterity,
That one old man might see before he died,
That his own only offspring had supplied
And Peopled Kingdoms.
But now so brittle's the estate of man,
That (in Comparison) his life's a span.
Yet since the Flood it may be proved plain,
That many did a longer life retain,
Than him I write of; for Arpachshad lived
Four hundred thirty eight, Shelah survived
Four hundred thirty three years, Eber more,
For he lived twice two hundred sixty four.
Two hundred years Terah was alive,
And Abr'ham lived one hundred seventy five.
Before Job's Troubles, holy writ relates,
His sons and daughters were at marriage states,
And after his restoring, it is most clear,
That he survived one hundred forty year.
John Buttadeus (if report be true)
Is his name that is styled, The Wandering Jew,
It Is said, he saw our Savior dye; and how
He was a man then, and is living now;
Whereof Relations you (that will) may read;
But pardon me, it is no part of my Creed.
Upon a Germans Age, it is written thus,
That one Johannes de Temporibus
Was Armor-bearer to brave Charlemaigne,
And that unto the age he did attain
Of years three hundred sixty one, and then
Old John of Times returned to Earth again.
And Noble Nestor, at the siege of Troy,
Had lived three hundred years both Man and boy.
Sir Walter Rawleigh (a most learned Knight)
Does of an Irish Countess, Desmond write,
Of seven score years of Age, he with her spoke:
The Lord Saint Albanes does more mention make
That she was Married in Fourth Edwards reign,
Thrice shed her Teeth, which three times came again.
The High-land Scots and the Wilde-Irish are
Long lived with Labor, hard, and temperate fare.
Amongst the Barbarous Indians some live strong
And lusty, near two hundred winters long?
So as I said before my Verse now says
By wronging Nature, men cut off their days.
Therefore (as Times are) He I now write on,
The age of all in Britane has out gone;
All those that were alive when he had Birth,
Are turned again unto their mother earth,
If any of them live, and do replye,
I will be sorry, and confess I lie.
For had he bin a Merchant, then perhaps
Storms, Thunderclaps, or fear of Afterclaps,
Sands, Rocks, or Roving Pirates, Gusts and storms
Had made him (long ere this) the food of worms,
Had he a Mercer, or a Silk-man bin,
And trusted much in hope great game to win.
And late and early strived to get or save
His Gray head long ere now had been in the Grave.
Or had he been a Judge or Magistrate,
Or of Great Counsel in Affairs of state
Then days important business, and nights cares
Had long ere this, Interred his hoary hairs:
But as I writ before, no cares oppressed him,
Nor ever did Affairs of State molest him.
Some may object, that they will not believe
His Age to be so much, for none can give
Account thereof, Time being past so far,
And at his Birth there was no Register.
The Register was ninty seven years since
Given by the eight Henry (that Illustrious Prince)
The year fifteen hundred forty wanting twain
And in the thirtieth year of that Kings reign;
So old Parr now, was almost an old man,
Near sixty ere the Register began.
IN have writ as much as Reason can require,
How Times did pass, how is Leases did expire;
And Gentlemen o'th County did Relate
To Our g^acious King by Their Certificate
His age, and how time with gray hairs has crowned him
And so I leave him older than I found him.
FINIS.

