A Common Whore With all these Graces Graced: She Is very honest, beautiful
and chaste.

Written by JOHN TAILOR.

AT LONDON: Printed for Henry Gosson, and are to be fould in Pannier-Alley.
1622.

To no matter who.
Lord, Master, Goodman, Gaffer, or Knave, Lady, Mistress, Goodwife, Gammer,
or Whore, Readers.
I Would not have you to take me for a Bawd or a Pander, for that I send a
Whore amongst you; for though it be my pleasure to call her so, yet you in the
perusing of her, and conuersing with her; shall find her honester then some of
your Wives or Mothers: indeed she has no great Kindred to boast of, for my
poor brain like Jove was the father and mother that begat and bare her like a
new Pall as And my Pen the Midwife that first wrapped her inragged verses in
stead of cloutes, where the Printer has used her as he would be loath to be
used himself, for he has published and proclaimed all her faults to the view
of the world, and yet I know the poor Whores pain is not past, for now she is
to be examined a thousand ways, and tortured upon the Rack of censure, and
amongst all that shall view and handle her, the hot whoremaister will deal most
discourteously with her, for when he perceiues her honesty too hard for his
Knavery, he will in anger, with three tushes, four pishes, five mewes, six wry
mouths, and seven s^uruy faces, tear her and pull her worse then the
Rusticall Rabblement did use to use common whores on former Shroue. Tuesdayes.
But all is one, let him do his worst, she is confidently armed with Innocence:
and the threats or danger of the bad, cannot affright her but that she will
attempt to recreate the good. In a word, all that is amiss in her, I pray you
impute to my bad Tutorship, and her own frailety; all that I hope of her, is,
that she is a merry Whore, full of good words: A kind Whore to be had for
money or love any where; a true Whore and (...) constant, for she will never
forsake any man that will keep her: and (by reason she is an honest Whore)
she is a poor Whore, and has neither money nor Sprats; so take my Whore
amongst yon as she is.

Now after this, I Will be exceeding brief
To send another Pamphlet called a Thief;
The Hue and Cry is out, and I protest,
Thought he escape hanging, yet he shall be pressed.
JOHN TAILOR.

A WHORE.
MY Book, an honest Whore, I fitly call,
Because it treats of whores in general:
Then though this Pamphlet I do name a whore
Let no man shun her company therefore,
For if ten thousand with her lodge and lie,
No reputation they shall lose thereby.
No cost A cheaps Whore.
for diet she at all requires,
No charge for change of changeable Attires,
No Coaches, or Carroaches she does crave,
No base attendance of a Pand'ring Knave,
Persumes and Paintings, she abhorres and hates,
Nor does she borrow hair from others pates.
And this much more I Will boldly say for her,
Who so redeemes her from the Stationer
With whom she as a Slave is kept in hold,
And at his pleasure daily bought and sold)
I say, that man that does her ransom pay,
She will requite his kindness every way,
Her Inside with such Treasury is stored,
As may become the Pocket of a Lord,
All, from the Cottage, to the Castle high,
From Pallatines unto the Peasantry,
(If ther'le permit their wisdoms Rule their will)
May keep this Whore, and yet be honest still.
Yet is she A strange Whore, common and yet honest.
Common, unto all that crave her,
For six pence honest man or Knave may haucher,
To be both turned and tossed, she free affords,
And (like a prating Whore) she is full of words,
But all her talk is to no other end,
Then to teach Whoremaisters and Whores to mend.
She in plaind terms unto the world does tell,
Whores are the Hackneyes which men ride to hell,
And by Comparisons she truly makes
A Whore worse then a common Shore, or Iakes.
A Succubus, a damned sink of sin,
A Mire, where worse then Swine do wallow in,
And with a Whore (although thus plain she be)
She shows a Whoremonger as bad as she.
And though I barren am of Elloquence,
Nor ever understood my Accidence:
Yet though I have no learning to my share,
A Whore to broken Lattin I Will compare;
First, if her mind on Whoring she does fix,
She Is all compact of mirth, all Meretrix,
And with small teaching she will soon decline
Mulier into the Gender Masculine.
By her Attire, of which sex she should be,
She seems the doubtful Gender unto me,
To either side her habit seems to lean,
And may be taken for the Epicene.
Unto the Newter I compare her can,
For she is for thee, or me, or any man.
In her Declousions she so far will go,
As to the common of two, three, or more.
And come to horum harum Whorum, then
She proves a great proficient amongst men.
Then after she has learned these Lessons right,
She forward goes unto hoc leave light,
She paints out pulcher, aided by her glass,
She Is neither bonus, or yet bonitas.
Homo for all men, is a common name,
And she for all men is a common shame.
Not lapis singularly, her can please,
She loves the plural number lapides.
To Conster plainly she is seldom curlous,
The two hard words of durus, and of durius,
Though she is not past the Whip, she is past the Rods,
And knows to join her qui'es, her quea's, and quods,
The Active from the Passive she will derive,
Her Mood co^mmaunds like the Imparatiue;
She knows no Concords, yet to all men thus,
She feign would be Iucundas omnibut;
Clam is the Cloak, that couers her offense,
Her goodness all is in the Future tense,
She Is facile fieri, (quickly won)
Or Const'ring truly, Easy to be done.
Parui ducitur probitas, sets forth
Her honesty is rekon'd little worth.
And he shall find, that takes her for his choice;
An Interiection, or Imperfect voice,
Among the rules of Gender, she by heart,
Can without missing daily say her part.
The first among them all she likes best,
Propria quae Maribus, and there she will rest.
Thus may a Whore be made (by this Construction)
Unto the Grammar Rules an Introduction,
But yet if Learning might be gotten so,
Few to the Universities would go.
And all degrees, tagge ragge, and old and young,
Would be well grounded in the Latin tongue:
Whilst many learned men would be forced to seek
Their livings from the Hebrew and the Greek.
For mine own part I dare to swear and vow
I never used Accidence so much as now,
Nor all these Latin words here enterlac'd,
I do not know if they with sense are placed,
I in the Book did find them, and conclude
At randon to a Whore I them allude.
But leaving Latin, every Trading Wench
Has much more understanding of the French.
If she has learned great P, O Perse O,
She Will quickly know De morbo Gallico.
If in these Rudiments she well does enter,
With any man she never fears to venture:
She Is Impudently armed, and shameless to,
And never dreads what man to her can do,
Her nether part to stake she will often lay
To keep her upper part in fashion, gay,
She blushes not to have her Trade well known,
Which is, she lives by using of her own.
Her shop, her ware, her fame, her shame, her game,
It Is all her own, which none from her can claim.
And if she be half mad, and Curse and swear,
And fight, and bite, and scratch, and domineere:
Yet still she proves her patience to be such,
'Midst all these passions she will bear too much.
She is not Covetous for any thing,
For what she has, men do unto her bring,
(Her Temperance is a virtue of much honor)
And all her Commings in, are put upon her.
She Is general, she is free, she is liberal
Of hand and purse, she is open unto all,
She is no miserable hidebound wretch,
To please her friend at any time she will stretch,
At once she can speak true, and lie, or either,
And is at home, abroad, and altogether.
She Is nimbler then a Tumbler, as I think
Lays down, and takes up, whilst a man can wink.
And though she seem vnmeasur'd in her pleasure,
It Is otherwise, a Yard's her only measure.
But as most Whores are vicious in their fames,
So many of them have most Virtuous names,
Though bad they be, they will not bate an Ace
To be called Prudence, Temperance, Faith, or Grace,
Or Mercy, Charity, or many more,
Good names (too good to give to any Whore)
Much from the Popes of Rome they do not swerue,
For they have Names which they do ill deserve,
Only betwixt them here is the difference on it,
A Whore receives her Name first at the Font.
The Roman Bishop takes a larger scope,
For he does Change his name, when he is a Pope.
As, if he were a Persecuting Saul,
If he please he will be called a Preaching Paul.
Is his name Swinesnowt, he can change the Case,
And swap away that Name for Boniface.
If he be most ungodly, and envious,
Yet if he please, he will be called Pious.
Be he by Nature to all mischief bent,
He may and will be called Innocent,
And be he never so doggedly inclinde,
He Will be named Vrbane, if it be his mind.
If he be much more fearful then a Sheep,
The Name of Lee he may have and keep.
And though he be unmerciful yet still,
He may be called Clement if he will.
Thus Popes may have good names, though bad they bet
And so may Whores though different in degree.
The Annagram of WHORE'S her mortal foe,
Divided into two words, it is HER WOE.
And seriously (to lay all Jesting by)
A Whore is Her own Woe, and misery.
For though she have all pleasures at the full,
Much more then Thaies, that proud Corinthian Trull
Who suffered none but Kings and Potentates
To have their pleasures, at Excessive rates,
Yet all that Dear bought Lechery would be
The greater brand of lasting Infamy,
And though her Carrion Corpse, rich clad, high ^^d,
(Half rotten living, and all rotten Dead)
Who with her hellish Courage, stout and hot,
Abid the brunt of many a prickshaft shot,
Yet being dead, and does Consumed lie,
Her everlasting shame shall never dye:
Ixion (in his arms) he did suppose
That he the Goddess Juno did enclose:
But in the end his frantic error showed,
That all which he Embraced was but a Cloud.
So whosoever do their Lust embrace,
In stead of Love are clouded with disgrace.
The Godless Goddess Venus, honored far,
For Conquering of the Conquering God of War,
To hide their shame they no defense could get,
When limping Vulcan took them in a net,
And being past shame, with that foul offense,
She armed herself with shameless Impudence,
And with ungodly articles would prove,
That foul Concupiscence and Lust is Love.
For which each baudy Knave, and filthy Whore, Here I have for some 60. lines
followed the report of Corneius Agrippa, in his Vanity of scicaces.

Her deuillish Diety do still adore.
I have read Histories that does Repeat
Whores were of old in estimation Great,
Pandemus King of Corinth, he Erected
(That he from Perses power might be protected)
A Temple unto Venus, as some say,
Where Whares might for his safety safely pray.
And some in Ephesus, did Temples rear,
In whom the Paphean Queen adored were,
Where they that were the wickedst Whores of all,
Were the chief Priests in robes Pontifical.
And in the I Will of Paphes, 'twas the use
Maids got their Dowries, by their Corpse abuse,
But if that order were allowed here,
So many would not Portions want I fear.
The Art of Bawd'ry was in such respect
Amongst the Egiptians, that they did erect
An Altar to Priapus, and their guise
Was, that their Priests on it did Sacrifice.
Wise Aristotle, was in wit so poor,
He Sacrificed to Hermia, his whore.
Great Julius Caesar, was so free and Common,
And called a Husband unto every woman.
Procullus Emperor, (the Story says)
Deslowr'd one hundred Maids Sarmatian Maids.
in Fifteen days.
If all be true that Poets use to write,
Hercules lay with Fifty in one night.
When Heliogabilus, Romes Scepter swayed,
And all the world his lawless Laws obay'd:
He in his Court did cause a Stews be made,
Whereas Cum priuilegio, Whores did trade.
H'inuited Two and twenty of his friends,
And kindly to each one a Whore he lends.
To set Whores free, that then in bondage lay,
A mighty Mass of money he did pay, 30. pound weight a piece.

He (in one day) gave to each whore in Rome
A Duckat, (a large and ill bestowed sum.)
He made Orations unto Whores, and said
They were his Soldiers, his Defense and aid,
And in his speech he showed his wit s'acute,
Of sundry forms of Bawd'ry to dispute.
And after giving unto every Whore,
For listening to his tale three Ducats more,
With Pardon unto all, and Liberty
That would be Whores within his Monarchy.
And yearly pensions, he freely gave,
To keep a Regiment of Whores, most brave.
And often he had (when he in Progress went)
Of Whores, Bawdes, Pandeas, such a Rabblement
Six hundred Wagons, History reports,
Attended only on these brave Consorts.
This was a Royal Whoremaster indeed,
A special Or rather malefastor
Benefactor at their need,
But now since Heliogabilus deceast,
I think the world with Whores is so increast,
That if it had an Emperor as mad,
He might have twice so many as he had.
For by experience we see every day
That bad things do increase, good things decay.
And virtue (with much care) from virtue breeds,
Vice freely springs from vice like stinking weeds.
Sardanapalus King of Babylon,
Was to his whores such a Companion,
That he in their Attire did Sow and sing,
(An exercise unfitting for a King)
This fervent Lust, (which some call ardent Jove)
Did cause the Bastard Hercuier.
of the mighty Jove
To please his Iole, he took a Wheel
And (laying by his Club) did Spin and Reele.
Great love himself, could not this snare escape,
Lust led him on to many a shameless Rape.
Poor Hebe, Hele, Jupiter transformd himself to all these shapes to attain
his desrie.
Danue, and Europa,
Alemena, Io, Semele, and Leada,
Antiopa, Asterie, Ganimede,
These and a number more his fancy fed.
To compass which his shifts were manifold
T'a Bull, a Ram, a Swan, a shower of Gold,
To dreadful Thunder, and consuming Fire,
And all to quench his inward flames desire.
Apollo turned fair Daph^^ into The Bay tree or Laurel.
Bay,
Because she from his Lust did fly away.
He loved his Hiacinct, and his Coronis,
As fervently as Venus loved Adonis,
So much he from his Godhead did de^^ne,
That for a Wench he kept Adme^^s Kine.
And many other Gods have gone aftray,
If all be true which Ouids Book does say.
Thus to fulfill their Lusts, and win their Truls,
We see that these ungodly Gods were Guls.
The mighty Captain Achilles, who was flaine (befotted to his Death) for the
love of Polixena.
of the Mermidous
Being Captived to these base passions,
Met an untimely unexpected slaughter
For fair Polixena, King Priams Daughter.
Lucretia's Rape, was Tarquins overthrow,
(Shame often pays the debt that sin does owe)
VVhot Philomela lost, and Tereus won
It causde the lustful Father Tereus K. of Thrace, care of his own Son Itis
made into py-meat by his wife Frogne.
eat his Son.
In this vice Nero took such beastly joy,
He married was to Sporus, a young Boy,
And P^riander, * A Tyrant Prince in Corinth.
was with Lust so led,
He with Mellissa lay, when she was Dead.
Pigmalion, Plutarte.
with an Image made of Stone,
Did Love and lodge; (I Will rather lie alone.)
Aristophanes, Appius murdered himself, because Virginias father had slain
her, to free her from his Lust.
joined in Love would be
To a she Ass, but what an Ass was he.
A Roman Appius did in Iayle abide
For Love of fair Virginia, where he did.
Our second Henry, K Henry the 2. King of England.
Aged, Childish, fond,
On the fair feature of fair Rosamond:
That it raised most unnatural hateful strife
Betwixt himself, his Children, At Woodstocke.
and his wife.
The end of which was, that the jealious Queen
Did poison Mrs. Shore.
Rosamond in furious spleen.
The fourth King Edward lower did descend.
He to a Goldsmiths wife She was I^cobs daughter, whose Rape was accursedly
revenged by her brethren, Simeon and Leu^, Genesi^.
his love did bend.
This sugared sin has bin so general,
That it has made the strongest Champions fall.
^^r Si^^em ravished 2. Sam. 12.
Dina, for which deed,
(...) number of the Sichemites did bleed,
^^d Sampson, in the prime of manly strength
(...) Dallila, was overcome at length
^^ng 2. Sam. 13.
David frayly fell, and felt the pain,
^^d with much sorrow, was restored again,
^^ough Saul his foe he no way would offend,
(...) this sin made him kill his loyal friend.
(...) much with Thamar, Incest did commit,
^^d Absolon deprived his Life for it.
^^d Sal^^^ allowed most Royal means,
(...) keep 3. hundred Queens, 7. hundred Queanes,
(...) whose means to Idolaty he fell
(...) most as low as to the Gates of Hell.
At last repeating, he makes declaration,
That all was vanity, and spirits vexation.
Abundance of Examples men may find,
Of Kings and Princes to this vice inclined,
Which is no way for meaner men to go,
Because their betters often have wandered so,
For they were plagued of God, and so shall we
Much more, if of their sin we partners be.
To show what Women have bin plunged in
The bottomless Abisse of this sweet sin:
There are example of them infinite,
Which I never mean to read, much less to write.
To please the Reader though I Will set down some,
As they unto my memory do come.
Flora a Whore in Rome, great wealth did win,
By her dear trading and her Commings in,
Which wealth she freely gave when she did dye
Unto the Roman people generally,
For which they all (to show their thanks unto h^^
Made her a Goddess, and did Reverence do her
And Lays of Corinth, asked Demosthenes
One hundred Crowns for one nights business,
For which a crew of Whores did set upon her,
A Whore she was, and Whores to death did stone
There was a famous Whore She was servant to Exanthus, and fellow to Esope the
Fabulist.
Rhodope named
Who for her gain, at such high price she gam'd,
That she (most liberal) did the Charges bear,
A stately high Piramides to Rear.
Great Julius Caesar, was much ouerseene
With Cleopatra the Aegiptian Queen:
And after she ensnared Mark Anthony,
For which they both by their own hands did dye.
Semiramis played the inhumane Trull,
Queen of Babylon, slain by her son, whom she would have had to have layne
with her.
And was enamored with a beastly Bull:
So did Pasipha, wife to Minos king of Creete.
Pasipha, but me thinks it is strange,
That Queens so far from womenhood should range.
Mirha ( Adonis mother) caused her father
The flower of her virginity to gather.
If wise Ulysses, had not well been armed,
Enchanting Circes, had his honor charmed,
When lustful Paris stole the lustful Punke
Fair Hellen, had the Ship that bore them sunk,
Then thirty Kings in peace at home had staide,
Nor Troy or Trojans in their ruins laid,
Fair Messalina, a most royal Whore,
(Wife unto Claudins the Emperor)
The sports of Venus in the Stews did play, Messalina and Faustins two
Empresses.

Sometimes full five and twenty times a day.
Marcus Aurelius did fair Faustine wed,
And she with Whoring did ad-horne his head.
And many Princes and great Potentates,
With Vulcans crest have armed their noble pates:
This to the poorest Cuckold seems a bliss,
That he with mighty Monarchs sharer is,
That though to be Cornuted be a grief,
Yet to have such brave partners, is relief.
These Whores and Whoremaisters, which I have named,
And thousands more (in Histories defamed)
With partial selfe-opinion did approve,
Their sensuality and lust was Love.
When as the ods is more then day from night,
Or fire from water, black from purest white.
The one with God, one with the Devil does dwell,
Love comes from heaven, and lust does spring from hell.
But the old Proverb, never will be forgot,
A Leachers love is (like Sir Reverence) hot.
And on the sudden cold as any stone,
For when the lust is past, the love is gone.
But love is such a blessing from on hie,
Whose zealous feruency can never dye,
It out-liues life, and the ascending flame
Mounis to the God of Love, from whence it came.
Lust made Genesis.
Seths sons, with fornication vain,
Join with the daughters of accursed Caine.
And the world suff'red, for their fornication
Depopulation, by the inundation.
And twenty and four thousand Israelites
Did for this sin amongst the Numbers.
Midianites.
For the not punishing this fact (almost)
The Tribe of Judge. 19.20. and 21. cha. 65000. were slain of the Israelines,
prodthere remained of the Beniamites only 600.
Beniami^ were slain and lost.
May this be called love, then call virtue vice,
And every bawdy house, a Paradise.
If lust were love, it would not like a Wolf,
Drown Lovers hearts in Desperations Gulf,
A Theban, For Antigena the daughter of Oedi us and Iecasla.
Hemon, himself madly killed,
On his to dear deeres Tomb his heart blood spild
For Pham (a poor Watermans sweet sake)
Fair Saphe from a rock, her The more fool she, though she were a Poecesse.
neck she brake.
Pheadra, for her Hippollitus, they say,
Did hang her self, and make a Holy Day.
And She was daughter to Lycurgus K. of Thrace.
Phillis for Son to Theseus.
Demophoon did as much,
I Will never love, if Loves effects be such.
To quench the Carthaginian D^co. for Eneac, burned her self.
Queens desire,
She burnt her self upon a pile of fire;
If either Piramus, or Thisby had
Not been stark fools, or else exceeding mad,
The doting, idle misconceiuing Elues,
So desperately, had never fore-done themselves.
Thus all the difference betwixt love and lust,
Is, one is just, the other is unjust,
Search but in Histories, and men may find
Examples beyond numb'ring, of this kind,
How of both Sexes, each estate, and sort
Of people; from the Cottage to the Court,
Have madly ran this course some hanged, some drowned,
Burnt, starved, and stabd themselves with many a wound,
Or pined away like Coxcombs, ever craving
To have the thing, that is never worth the having.
In Antwerp, many filthy Whores I saw,
That for their Trading were allowde by Law.
And I in Prague did see a street of Whores,
An English mile in length, who at their doors,
Did stand and ply (rich clad, and painted rare)
More hard then ever I plyde for a fare.
The Italian Stews (to make the Pope good cheer)
Paid twenty thousand Ducats in a Almost every year, a ducket is more then, 8.
shillings, which sum is 8000. l.
yeeee.
Besides, they give a Priest (t'amend his fee)
The profit of a Whore, or two or three,
Me thinks it must be bad Divinity,
That with the Stews has such affinity,
It Is a mad doctrine Leachery shall pay
A Church-mans stipend, that should preach and pray
And in those Stews, where women are so common
In entertaining all, refusing no man,
Whereas a father with a Whore may lie,
Which done, his son his place may hap supply,
And then an Uncle, or a brother may
Succeed each other in that damned play.
For no propinquity, or no degree
Of Kin, that haunt there, that can swear they are free
From this commixion, and which is worst,
A Whore may have a Bastard, borne and nursed,
And grown a woman, and to this Trade set her,
May be a Whore to him that did beget her.
Or to her brothers, or to all her Kin,
She may be prostituted in this sin.
And therefore to conclude this point, I muse
That Christian Commonwealths allow a Stues;
I think that Thieues as well allowed should be,
As Whores and Whore masters should thus be free.
They from the heathen do examples bring,
That Whoring, is a rare commodious thing,
There was an ancient use in Babylon,
When as a woman's stock was spent and gone,
Her living it was lawful then to get,
Her carcass out to Liuerie to let.
And Venus did allow the Cyprian Dames,
To get their livings by their bodies shames,
Lycurgus did a Law in Sparta make,
That all men might their Barren wives forsake:
And by the same Law it ordained was,
Wives might unable husbands turn to grals.
And the wise Solon the Athenian,
Allowed Whores to be free for any man.
And though these things the Pagan people did,
Yet Christian governments these things forbid,
But there is no Commonwealth maintains the same,
But where the Not in any place but where Romes supremacy is allowed.
Pope is Landlord of the game.
The Stews in England bore a beastly sway,
Till the eight Anno Regni 37.
Henry banished them away,
And since those common whores were quite put down,
A damned crew of private whores are grown,
So that the devil will be doing still,
Either with public or with private ill.
Thus much for whoring I must say again,
It has produced many valiant men:
Brave Bastards, have been famous Conquerours,
And some great Lords, and Kings, and Emperors.
As Hereules Jove's mighty Bastard son,
And So says Cornelius Agrippa, but I find it otherways in Quintus Curtius.
Alexander King of Macedon:
Clodouee King of France, from Bastardy,
And William Conqueror, from Normandy,
These and a number more I could recite,
Besides the unknown number's infinite.
And sure that wretched man that married is
Unto a wife disposed to this amiss,
Is mad to wrong himself at all thereby,
With heart grief and tormenting jealousy.
If he has cause for it, let him then forsake her,
And pray God mend her, or the devil take her:
If he has no cause to be jealous then,
He Is worthy to be made the scorn of men,
Thus cause or no cause, man himself should arm,
That jealousy should never do him harm.
The Nicholaitanes, to avoid the pain
Of jealousy, amongst them did ordain,
That all their married wives, of each degree,
To every one a common Whore should be.
And so amongst them one could hardly find,
A Cuckold that did bear a jealous mind.
When I but think what Sciences, and Arts,
What men and women, full of ex'lent parts,
Forget their functions, lay their virtues by,
And wait and live, and thrive by Leacherie.
A Poets Art, all other Arts excel,
If he has skill and grace to use it well:
Yet many times it is used most base and vile,
When it descends unto a bawdy style,
To turn good humane studies, and divine,
Into most beastly lines, like Aretine;
To seek to merit everliving Bays,
For sordid stuff (like Ouids lustful Lays.)
With false bewitching verses to entice
Frail creatures from fair virtue to foul vice,
Whose flattery makes a whore to seem a Saint,
That stinkes like carrion, with her pox and paint.
Comparing her (with false and odious lies)
To all that is in or underneath the skies.
Her eyes to Suns, that does the Sun Ecclips,
Her cheeks are Roses, (Rubies are her lips)
Her white and red Carnation mixed with snow,
Her teeth to oriental pearl, a Row,
Her voice like Music of the heavenly Spheres,
Her hair like thrice refined golden Wires,
Her breath more sweet then Arromatick drugs,
Like Mownts of Allablaster are her drugs,
Her Bracilets, Rings, her Scarf her Fan, her Chain,
Are subjects to inspire a Poets brain:
But above all her Smock most praise does win,
For it is the Curtain next unto her skin,
Her loose Gown, for her looser body fit,
Shall be adored with a flash of wit,
And from the Chin-clowt, to the lowly Slipper,
In Helliconian streams his praise shall dipher.
I leave unnamed what is affected best,
As it is most fit, for it maintains the rest,
Her thighs, her knees, her legs, her feet, and all,
From top to toe are supernatural.
Her Iuory hands, with sapphire veins inlayde,
Which cannot be by mortal Pen displayde.
Her smile makes cold December Summer like,
Her frown, hot June with shiuering Frost can strike,
And life and death does in her looks abide,
Or many Knaves and Fools that said so lyde.
Her Shapperoones, her Perriwigs and Tires,
Are Relics, which this flattery much admires,
Rebatoes, Mask, her Busk and Busk-point to,
Are things to which mad men must homage do.
Her Verdingale, her Garters, Shoes and Roses,
Her Girdle that her wastfull waste incloses.
Not one of these but's honored with a Sonnet,
If the said Poet be but set upon it.
Another seeks to win his Wenches will,
With oily Oratories smooting skill:
As thus.
MOst inestimable Magazin of Beauty, r^ Maister-piece of Nature, Perfections
wonder, and Loves Quintessence, in whom the po^^ and majesty of Juno, the
feature of Cithere the wisdom of Jove's Braine-bred Pallas.
Girl, ^^ chastity of Diana, and the constancy of Luc^cia, have their
domestical habitation, who w^ the Goddesses are deifide, with the Graces
graced, with the Virtues stellifide, with the Mus^ honored, and with the senses
admired: vouchsa^ dread Empress of my Affections, to pardon ^^ intrusiue
boldness of my untuned tongue (which was never tipped with the Courtly Gloss of
Adulation) who being the Ambassador of my heart does prostrate my self and my
best services to (...) disposed of at your great commands, and as the
Refulgent beams of Titan makes purity of obscurity, so one glance or glimpse
of the tranflucen^ of your eyes sun dazeling corruscancie, wi^^ exile all the
clowdy vapors of heart-tormenting moody mellancholly, that like an vsurpi^^
Tyrant has Captiuated your humble suppliant, thus fervently to Implore your
Clemency.

Here Is a sweet deal of scimble scamble stuff,
To please my Lady Wagtayle, (marry muffe)
Gep with the Grinkcomes, (but I speak too late)
This kind of flattery, makes a Whore take state, Crinkcomes is an Vtopian
word, which is in English a P. at Paris.

Grows pocky proud, and in such port does bear her,
That such poor scabs as I, must not come near her.
Thus may she live, (much honored for her Crimes)
And have the Pox some twelve or 13. times,
And she may be so bountiful again,
To sell those Pox to three or fourscore men.
And thus the Surgeons may get more by far
By Whores and Peace, then by the Sword and war.
And thus a Whore (if men consider of it)
^an increasing gainefull piece of profit.
^ut of all Whores, that I have named before,
There Is none so Cunning as the City Whore,
^hee has so many several sorts of Bawdes,
To cloak and cover her deceipts and frauds,
That sure the Devil cannot more devise
Then she, to blind her horned Husbands eyes.
The offers Purles to sell, and fine Bone-lace,
And whispers that her Friend's in such a place:
^ second offers Starch, and tells her how
^er sweetheart tarries for her at the Plowe,
A third sels Wafers, and a fourth has Pins,
And with these tricks these Bawdes admittance wins.
That had her Husband Argos eyes, yet he
By these deceivers should deceived be,
If all these fail, a Beggar woman may,
A sweet Love letter to her hands convey.
Or a neat Laundresse, or a Hearbwife can,
Carry a sleeuelesse message now and than,
Or if this fail, her teeth may Ache (forsooth)
And then the Barbar must come draw a Tooth.
Or else she may be sick (upon Condition)
That such a Doctor may be her Physician,
He feels her pulses, and applies his trade
With Potions which the Apothecary made,
All Is one for that, her health she quickly gains,
Her Husband pays the Doctor for his pains.
But of all Bawdes, Gold is the Bawd indeed,
It seldom speaks but it is sure to speed:
It can blind Watches, open bolts and locks,
Break walls of Stone, as hard as Marble rocks:
Make Iron bars give way, and Gates fly open,
Gives Lust the reins to run with boundless see
Kills Jealousy, appeases Riuals, and
Does what the owners will or can Command,
And last of all it stops the biting jaws
Of the just rigorous, and seuerest Laws.
I therefore say, he that has Golden pelf,
Has a good Bawd, if so he please himself,
Those that has Gold, can want no Bawds or Que^^
Except they use a mean, to guide their means.
To end this point, this consequence I Will grant,
Those that have Golden Bawds, no Whores can w^^
And though the mighty power of Gold be such, A seraping miserable father,
that cares not how he get Gold to leave it to a Whoremaster his Son, is his
Sons provident Bawd.

Yet Silver (many times) can do as much:
Thus every wealthy Whoremaster may bear
His Bawd in's purse, or pocket any where.
For mine own part, I live not in such want,
But that I eat and sleep, though Coin be scant:
And cause I want the Bawd I named before,
By Consequence I needs must want the Whore.
And wanting of them both, I hope to be
From Gowtes, Pox, and extortion ever free.
But as there is wondrous difference in men's meat,
So is the ods of Whores exceeding great:
Some Rampant, and some Couchant, and some Passant,
Some Guardant and some Dormant, and some Cressant,
Some Pendant, some (a Pox on it) but the best on it,
A private Whore, trades safely, there is the Jest on it.
Besides, as Whores are of a several cut,
So fitting Titles on them still are put:
^or if a Princes love to her decline,
^or manners sake she is called a Concubine:
^a great Lord, or Knight affect a Whore,
She must be termed his Honors Paramore,
The rich Gull Gallant call's her Dear and Love,
Ducke, Lamb, Squall, Sweethart, Cony, and his Dove:
^pretty Wench she is with the Countryman,
And a Kind Sister with the Puritan,
^e's a Priests Lemman, and a Tinkers Pad.
(...) Dell, or Doxy (though the names be bad)
And amongst Soldiers this sweet piece of Vice
(...) counted for a Captains Cockatrice.
But the mad Rascal, when he is five parts drunk,
Calls her his Drah, his Queen, his syll, or Punke:
And in his fury 'gins to Rail and Rore,
Then with full mouth, he truly calls her Whore,
And so I leave her, to her hot desires,
Amongst Pimps and Panders, and base Aplesquire
To mend or end, when Age or Pox will make her
Detested, and Whoremasters all forsake her.
A Comparison betwixt a Whore and a Book.
ME thinks I hear some Cauillers object
That it is a Name absurd and indirect,
To give a Book the Title of a Whore,
When sure I think no Name befits it more.
For like a Whore by day light, or by Candle,
It Is ever free for every Knave to handle:
And as a new Whore is beloved and sought,
So is a new Book in request and bought,
When Whores wax old and stale, they are out of (...)
Old Pamphlets are most subject to such fate.
As Whores have Panders, to emblaze their worth,
So these have Stationers to set them forth.
And as an old Whore may be painted new
With borrowed Beauty, fair unto the view,
Whereby she for a fine fresh whore may pass,
Yet is she but the Rotten whore she was.
So Stationers, their old cast Books can grace,
And by new Titles paint a fresh their face,
Whereby for Current they are past away,
As if they had come forth but yesterday.
A Book is Dedicated, now and than
To some great worthy, or unworthy man:
Yet for all that it is common unto me,
^^ thee, or he, or all estates that be,
And so a man may have a Whore (forsooth)
^pposing she is only for his tooth,
^^t if the truth he would search out and look,
^^e's common unto all men like a Book.
(...) Book with gaudy Coat, and silken stringes,
Whose inside's full of Obsceane beastly things,
^ like a Whore, Caparison'd and trap'd,
^ull of Infection, to all mischief apt.
^^one Whore may be common unto any,
^ one Book, may be Dedicate to many.
And sure I say, and hope I speak no slander,
(...) such a Book, the Poet is the Pander.
(...) prostitutes his Muse to every one,
which should be Constant unto one alone,
^his is a kind of Bawd'ry vile and base,
Is bounty, and is Poetryes disgrace.
^^d least they should be lost it is ordained,
^^t Books within a Library are Chained,
^hee that to himself will keep a Whore,
^^st Chain her, or she will trade with forty more.
(...) Books are leaf by leaf often turned and tossed,
(...) are the Garments of a whore (almost)
(...) both of them, with a wet finger may
(...) solded or unfolded, Night or Day.
Moreover it is not very hard to prove,
That Books and Whores may Riuals be in Love,
(To purchase men's displeasures I am loath)
But sure good Scholars still has loved them both.
Some Books have their Errataes at the last
That tells their Errors and offenses past.
So many great Whores did in state survive,
But when Death did their hateful lives deprive,
Their faults escaped and their Errataes then
Has been made manifest and known to men.
Some Books and Whores to wicked purpose bent
Do, for their faults receive one punishment.
As Books are often burnt, and quite forgotten,
So Whores are ouerstew'd, or roasted rotten.
Experience shows that Books much knowledge bri^^^
And by experience Whores know many Things.
And as true Justice, all men's loss repaires,
So whores do give to all men what is their's.
Terence she learnes, yet will she much Rebuke^
If we do play the part of true Eunuchus.
As Books profane, or else Heretical,
Or scurrillous, non sense Seismaticall,
Peruerts man's Judgment, and his soul pollutes,
Such are all whores, and such will be their Fruits
Some Slouens soil a Book in little space,
And slauer it, and so the Leaves deface:
And some again will take a cleanly course
To read it daily, yet it is never the worse.
So some men use a whore, when once they have
They Will touze and tear, and beastly all beslauer
When Forty neat whoremasters might have played
And used her, and she still be thought a Maid.
^e that does Read a Book he likes, would be
^^one, from any Interruption free,
And he that with a whore, would toy or iye,
^ think desires no other Company.
When Books are wet, their beauty's gone or soyl'd,
(...), wash a whore, and all her paintings spoiled.
^^d as an old whore (spite of Paint or clothing)
^^lls at the last, the object of men's loathing,
^^om'd and vnpittyed, and to finish all,
^^es in a Ditch, or in an Hospital.
^ Pamphlets, and some works of writers Grave
(...) used much worse then whores by many a Knave.
Who never regards the matter or the price,
(...) tear like Tyrants, to wrap Drugs or Spice,
(...) which is worse in Privy matters use them.
(...) worst of all, like Roarers they abuse them,
When as they Rend good Books to light and dry
(...) ^acco (Englands bainefull Diety).
(...) it is a thing I never thought on before, Now a^ days.

(...) Booke's examined stricter then a whore.
(...) ^re's not a Sheet, a Leaf, a Page, a Vearse,
^^orde, a syllable, or letter (scarce)
(...) that (Authority) with Judgments eye,
(...) diligently look, and search, and pry,
(...) gage the sense, and first will understand all,
^^st in a Phrase, or word, there lurk a scandal.
(...) my poor whore in this has not bin spared,
(...) skirts were curtayld, and her nails were She would have scratched else.
pared.
All Is one for that, though she such usage had,
She Is not left naked, though not richly clad,
I knew she must be questioned and I say,
I am right glad she escaped so well away.
And should all whores of high and low Degree,
(As Books are) to account thus called be,
The Whorish number would wax very small,
Or else men never could examine all.
This Book my Whore or else this whore my Boo^
(She bears both Names, so neither is mistook)
Respects not all her enemies a straw,
If she offended, she has had the Law,
She was examined, and she did Confess,
And has endured the torture of the Press:
Her faults are Printed unto all men's sight,
Impartially declared in black and white,
And last, in Paul's Churchyard, and in the street
She suffers Penance up and down in Sheets.
And if all Whores, to do the like were made,
A Linen Draper were the richest Trade.
If any Whore be honester then mine is,
I Will write no more but stop my mouth with
FINIS.

