THE PRAISE, ANTIQVITY, and commodity, of Beggary, Beggars, and Begging.

By JOHN TAILOR. Beggars Bush. A Maunbering Beggar. A gallant Beggar.


At London Printed by E. A. for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold by Edward
Wright near Christ's Church Gate. 1621.

TO THE BRIGHT EYE-DAZELING MIRROVR OF MIRTH, Adelantado of Alacrity, the Pump
of pastime, spout of sport, and Regent of ridiculous Confabulations, ARCHIBALD
ARMESTRONG, alias the Court ARCHY.
Envy and Hate are such daily followers, and deadly enemies, of the wife,
honest, and virtuous, that my hope is, that they will never do you wrong or
injury: And my belief is, that (as you have ever) you will always carry your
self so worthily in all your actions, that your best deserts shall neither
merit envy or hatred. I have here made bold to present to your illiterate
protection, a beggarly Pamphlet of my threed-bare invention: I do assure you
that I was more troubled in studying where to find a fit Patron, then I was in
writing the Book; I thought to have dedicated it to Beggars Bush near
Andeuer, or to his Hawthorne brother within a mile of Huntington: but I
considered at last, that the laps of your long Coat could shelter me as well
^r better then any beggarly Thorne-lush. I did once dedicate a Book to your
patronage, of the supposed drowning of M. Thomas Coriat, and I did also
dedicate tryce small Treatises to a Leash of Knights; and because you all four
make a well matched Murniuall of Patrons, A Gleek.
(for you all alike very illiberally put your hands in your pockets, and to
make your moneys even, gave me nothing:) It makes me the bolder at this time to
come upon you again, not doubting but your bounty will require my love and
pains with as much more. It may be that your high affairs (wherein you are
continually pestred with needless employments) rubs your mind quite from the
Ryas, that you do not see in what declining predicament your own sometimes
esteemed quality is: for the days has been that many men kept Fools, but
now (to save that charge) the most part of such Benefactors perform the
function themselves: So that if you take not a speedy order, fooling will be
as common as begging or whore-maisters, and the sight or presence either of
your worthy self, or any of your long-taild tribe (which was wont to be seen
and heard with admiration) will be no more regarded. To prevent which, I would
counsel you to make a Corporation of fooling, and that none shall intrude into
the society hereafter, but such as shall be Apprentizes to the quality, of
which those that are now living, to contribute toward the building or
purchasing of a Hall, your self (during your life) to be perpetual Master of
the Company. I hear that the valarous Sir Thomas, Knight of the Sun, has
had such a project in his head, end has presumed to petition for himself, to
have the sole approbation of all authorized Fools and Buffones. But for aught
I see, you need not fear that he will prevent you in this Monopoly, he being
so far from the sufficiency of a general super-intendant, that he is
esteemed unworthy to be a setter up of the trade: for mine own part, a Beadles
place is only my ambition, to whip those out of the Society that are malapert
fools, surcie fools, prodigal fools, courteous fools, proud fools,
counter fait fools, or any one that is more Knave than Fool. Apart of
Bridewell would serve silly for a Hall, and the Arms of the brotherhood shall
be an Asses head Dormant, in a field Gules, with a Babble and three Coxcombs
rampant, and two morice-bels pendant, with a Whip passant lashant for the
Crest, the Esoucheon mantled with powdered Vermin. This if you please to take
in hand, no doubt but the work will be meritorious and notorious, and as the
Roman Emperors Nero, Caligula, and Heliogabelus, are as famous for their
acts, lines, and deaths, as the good Augustus, Alexander, Seuerus, and Marcus
Aurelius: So shall you be remembered in succeeding ages beyond the memory of
Scoggin, or worthy Will Summers. I pray you be not angry that I do not salute
you with the flattering Epheihites, of honest, courteous, friendly, loving or
kind; for as yet you never gave me occasion to do you any such injury: I
protest Sir, I do love you with that affection as is correspondent to the
vaccuity of your Worthiness, and I am assured that at all times you will stand
my friend in word or deed, for as much as comes to an vnbaked Tabacco-Pipe. In
which assurance I kiss your hand as innocent as the newborn Babe, or Lamb in
the Cradle, and shall ever wish you a nimble tongue, to make other men's money
run into your Purse, and quick heels to out-runne the or Hue and cry, if
occasion require.

He that admires your vnparallelable parts, and wishes the reuersion of your
gains rather then your Office: John Tailor.

THE PRAISE, ANTIQVITY, AND COMMODITY of Beggerie, Beggars, and Begging.
A Beggar from an Ancient house begins, Antiquity of Beggars.

Old Adams soon, and heir unto his sins:
And as our father Adam did possess
The world, Universality.
there is not a Beggar that has less.
For whereof is the world compact and framed
But Elements, which to our fence are named,
The Earth, the Air, the Water, and the Fire,
With which all live, without which all-expire.
These, every Beggar has in plenteous store,
And every mighty Monarch has no more.
Nor can the greatest Potentate alive,
The meanest Beggar of these things deprive.
The Earth is common, Earth.
both for birth or Graves,
For Kings, and Beggars, Freemen, and for Slaves:
And a poor Beggar as much Air will draw, Air.

As he that could keep all the world in awe.
The Water, Water.
be it Rivers, Seas, or Spring,
It Is equal for a Beggar as a King.
And the Celestial Sunne's bright fire, Fire.
from Heaven
Amongst all estates most equally is given.
If these elements could be bought and sold, the poor beggars should have
small room for birth, life, or burial.
Given, not to be ingrost, or bought, not sold,
For gifts and bribes, or base corrupting gold.
These things nor poor or rich, can sell nor buy,
Free for all living creatures, till they dye.
An Emperor, a great command does beat;
But yet a Begger's more secure from fear.
A King may use disports (as fits the season)
But yet a Beggar is more safe from Treason.
A Prince (amidst his cares) may merry be,
But yet a Beggar is from flatt'rers free.
A Duke, is a degree magnificent,
But yet a Beggar may have more content.
A Marquess, is a title of great fame,
A Beggar may offend more, with less blame.
An Earl, an honorable house may keep,
But yet a beggar may more soundly sleep.
A Vizecoune may be honored and renound,
But yet a begger's on a surer ground.
A Barron, is a Style beloved and Noble,
But yet a beggar is more stee from troble.
A Knight, is good (if his deserts be such)
But yet a beggar may not owe so much.
A good Esquire is worthy of respect,
A begger's in less care, though more neglect.
A Gentleman, may good apparel wear,
A beggar, from the Mercers book is clear.
A Seruing-man that is young, in older years
Often proves an aged beggar, it appears.
Thus all degrees and states, what over they are,
With beggars happiness cannot compare
Heaven is the roof that Canopies his head,
The clouds his Curtains, and the earth his bed,
The Sun his fire, the Starre's his candle light,
The Moon his Lamp that guides him in the night.
When scorching Sol makes other mortals sweat,
Each tree does shade a beggar from his heat:
When nipping Winter makes the Cow to quake,
A beggar will a Barn for harbor take,
When Trees and Steeples are o're-turn'd with wind,
A beggar will a hedge for shelter find:
And though his inconveniences are store,
Yet still he has a salve for every sore,
He for new fashions, owes the Tailor nothing,
Nor to the Draper is in debt for clothing:
A beggar, does not beggar or deceive
Others, by breaking like a bankerupt Knave.
He Is free from shoulder-clapping Sergeants claws,
He Is out offeare of Enuies cankered jaws:
He lives in such a safe and happy state,
That he is neither hated, nor does hate.
None bears him malice, rancour, or despite,
And he dares kill, those that dare him back-bite.
Credit he neither has or gives to none,
All times and seasons, unto him are one:
He longs not for, or fears a quarter day,
For Rent he neither does receive or pay.
Let Nation against Nation wars denounce,
Let Cannons thunder, and let Muskets bounce:
Let armies, armies, force against force oppose,
He nothing fears, nor nothing has to lose.
Let Towns and Towers with batt'ry be o're-turn'd,
Let women be deflowered and houses burned:
Let men sight pell-mell, and loose life and lim,
If earth and skies-escafe, all is one to him.
O happy begg'ry, every liberal Art
Has left the thanklesse world, and takes thy part:
And learning, conscience, and simplicity,
Plain dealing, and true perfect honesty,
Sweet Poetry, and high Astronomy,
Musickes delightful heavenly harmony,
All these (with begg'ry) most assuredly
Have made a friendly league to live and dye.
For Fortune has decreed, and holds it fit,
Not to give one man conscience, wealth, and wit:
For they are portions which to twain belong,
And to give all to one were double wrong,
Wit, wisdom, wealth, and conscience, are not usually heredetary, or in one
man.
Therefore although the Goddess want her eyes,
Yet in her blinded bounty she is wise.
I will not say, but wealth and wisdom are
In one, ten, or in more, but it is most rare:
And such men are to be in peace or wars,
Admired like black Swans, or like blazing Stars.
Two sorts of people fills the whole world full,
The witty Beggar, and the wealthy Gull:
A Scholar, stored with Ares, with not one cross,
And Artlesse Naball stored with Indian dross.
I have seen learning tattered, bare and poor,
Whilst Barbarism has domineerd with store:
I have known knowledge, in but mean regard,
Whilst Ignorance has robbed it of reward:
And witless Coxcombs, I have heard dispute,
Whilst profound Indgements must be dumb and mute.
Apollo, with advice did wisely grant,
That Poets should be poor, and line in want:
And though plain Beggars they do not appear,
Yet their estates does show their kin is near.
The barrenness of Parnassus.
Parnassus Mount is fruitless, bare and sterill,
And all the Muses poor in their apparel:
Bare legged, and footed, with disheuel'd hair,
Nor Buskins, Shoes, or Head-tires for to wear.
So far they are from any show of thrist,
They scarce have e're a smock themselves to shift.
Homer, that was the Prince of Poetry,
Was a blind Beggar, and in poverty: The poverty or beggary of the Muses.

And matchless Ovid, (in poor wretched case)
Exiled from Rome to Pontus in disgrace.
And Maniun Maro, Virgill, he was borne in a ditch, and afterward being in
Rome in service with Augustus Caesar, to whom he many times gave learned
verses, and the Emperor always rewarded him with bread. A Lowse the ground of
the first Hexameters.
for some space in Rome,
Was to Augustus but a Stable Groom:
His verses show he had a learned head,
Yet all his profit was but bread and bread.
A Lowse has six feet, from whose creeping sprawl'd
The first Hexameters, the ever crawled:
And ever since, in memory of the same,
A Lowse amongst the Learned is no shame.
Then since the Parnassus.
mountains barren Muses bare,
And Prince of Poets had ae Beggars share:
Since their blind Sovereign was a Beggar poor,
How can the Subjects but be void of store?
What are their figures, numbers, types and tropes,
But Emblems of poor shadows, and vain hopes.
Their allegories, similies, allusions,
Threed-bare, do end in beggarly conclusions:
Nor can their Comedies and Tragedies,
Their Comitragy, Traggecomedies,
No pastoral preterplupastorall,
Their Moral studies, and Historical,
Their sharp I-ambick, high Heroic Saphique,
And all where with their painful studies traffic:
All these cannot allow a means complete
To keep them out of Debt with Clothes and meat.
And though a Poet have the accomplished parts
Of Learning, and the Axioms of all Arts:
What though he study all his brains to dust,
To make his Fame Immortal, and not rust,
Reuoluing day by day and night by night,
And waste himself in giving others light,
Yet this is all the Guerdon he shall have,
That begg'ry will attend him his Grave.
He (in his own Conceit) may have this bliss,
And sing, My mind to me a Kingdom is.
But it is a Kingdom wanting form or matter,
Or substance, like the Moonshine in the water.
For as a learned Chris. Marlo.
Poet wrote before,
Gross Gold runs headlong from them, to the Bore;
For which this vnauoyded Vow I Will make,
To love a Beggar for Poets sake.
I that never drank of Agganippes Well,
That in Parnissus Suburbs scarce do dwell,
That never tasted the Pegassiar Spring,
Or Tempe, nor e'reheard the Muses sing,
I (that in Vearse) can only Rhyme and matter
Quite from the purpose, Method, or the matter.
Yet some for friendship, Ignorance, or pity
Will say my lines may pass, indifferent, pretty:
And for this little, Itching, Vearsing vain,
With me the Beggar vows he will remain.
But if I could but once true Poetry win,
He would stick close to me, as is my Skin.
And sure if any man beneath the Sky,
Had to his Nurse a Witch, it must be I,
For I remember many years ago,
When I would Cry, as Children use to do:
My Nurse to still me, or to make me cease
From crying would say hush lamb, prey thee peace.
But I (like many youth or froward boys)
Would yaule, and baule, and make a wewling noise
Then she (in anger) in her arms would snatch me,
And bid the Beggar, or bulbegger catch me,
With take him Beggar, take him would she say,
Then did the Beggar such hard hold fast lay
Upon my back, that yet I never could
Nor ever shall in force him leave his hold
The reason therefore why I am not Rich
I think is, cause my Nurse was half a witch.
But since it is decreed that I must be
A beggar, welcome begg'ry unto me:
I Will patiently embrace my destir'd Fate
And live as well on some of higher Rate.
Yet shall my begg'ry no strange Suites devise
As Monopolies to catch Fleas or Flies:
Or the Sole making of all Bleachers pricks,
Or Corkes for bottles, or for every six
Smelt, Seacrab, Flounder, Playee or Whiting mop,
One, as a Duty unto me to drop
Nor to mark Cheeses, I Will not beg at all,
Nor for the Mouse trap Geometrical.
Nor will I impudently beg for I and,
Nor (with Ambition) beg to have Command:
Or meat, or clothes, or that which few men give,
I Will never beg for money whilst I live.
Yet money I esteem a precious thing,
Because it bears and picture of my King:
Unto my King I will a servant be,
And make his pictures servants unto men.
One only Begg'ry ever I Will embrace,
I Will beg for grace, of him that can give grace,
Who all things feeds and fills, and ouer-seeth
Who gives, and casts no man in the teeth.
So much for that, now on my Theme again,
What virtues Begg'ry still does entertain.
First amongst Beggars, there is not one in twenty,
But has the Art of memory most plenty:
When those that are possessed with riches store
(If e're they were in Beggars state and poor)
They quite forget it, and will ever hate
The memory of any Beggars state.
For fortune, favor, or benignity,
May raise a Beggar unto Dignity:
When like a bladder, puffed with pride and pelf,
He Will neither know his betters, nor himself,
But if a Beggar has bin wealthy ever,
He from his mind puts that remembrance never.
And thus if it be Rightly understood,
A beggars Memory is ever good.
Nor he by Gluttony, or swimish surfeit,
Does purchase Sickness with his bodies forfeit.
On bonds or bills, he borrowes not, or lends,
He neither by extortion gets or spends.
No Usury he neither takes or gines:
Oppress he cannot, yet oppressed he lives.
Nor when he dies, he leaves no wrangling heirs
To lose by Law that which was his or theirs
Men that are blind in judgment may see this
Which of the Rich, or Beggars has to often bliss:
On which most pleasure, Fortune seems to hurl,
The Lousy beggar, or the gowty Churl:
The Ragged beggar sitting in the Stocks,
Or the Embrodered Gallant with the Pocks.
A Beggar every way is Adams Son,
For in a Garden Adam first begun:
And so a Beggar even from his birth,
Does make his Garden the whole entire Earth.
The fields of Corn does yield him straw and bread
To Feed and Lodge, and Hat to hide his head:
And in the stead of Cutthroat slaughtering Shambles,
Each Hedge allows him Berryes from the brambles.
The Bullesse, hedge Peake, Hips and Hawes, and Sloes,
Attends his appetite where e're he goes:
As for his Sallets, better never was,
Then acute Sorrel, and sweet three leau'd Grass,
And as for Sauce he seldom is at Charges
For every Crabtree does afford them Vergis.
His banquet, sometimes is green Beans and Peason,
Nuts, Pears, Plumbes, Apples, as they are in season.
His music waytes on him in every bush,
The Mauis, Bulfinch, Blackbird and the Thrush:
The mounting Lark, sings in the lofty Sky,
And Robin Redbrest makes him melody.
The Nightingale chants most melodiously,
The chirping Sparrow, and the chattering Pie.
My neighbor Cuckoo, always in one tune,
Sings like a Townsman still in May and June.
These feathered Fiddlers, sing, and leap and play,
The beggar takes delight, and God does pay.
Moreover (to accomplish his Content)
There Is nothing wants to please his sight or sent.
The Earth embrodered with the various hew
Of Green, Red, Yellow, Purple, Watchet, Blew:
Carnation, Crimson, Damask, spotles White,
And every color that may please the sight.
The odoriserous Mint, the Eglantine,
The Woodbine, Primrose, and the Cowslip fine.
The Honisuckle, and the Daffadill,
The fragrant Time, delights the Beggar still.
He may pluck Violets in any place
And Rue, but very seldom herb of Grace:
Hearts-ease he has and Love and Idle both,
It in his bones has a continual growth.
His Drink he never does go far to look,
Each Spring's his Host, his Hostess is each Brook:
Where he may quaffe and to it again by fits,
And never stand in fear to hurt his wits,
For why that Ale, is Grandam Natures brewing,
And very seldom sets her Guests a spewing;
Unmixed, and vnsophisticated drink,
That never makes men stagger, reele and wink.
Besides a beggar has this pleasure more,
He never pays, or never goes on score:
But let him drink and quaffe both night and day,
There Is neither Chalk, nor Post, or ought to pay.
But after all this single-soal'd small Ale,
I think it best to tell a merry tale:
There was a Rich hard miserable Lord,
That kept a knauish Fool at bed and board,
(As Great men often affected have such Elues.
And loved a Fool, as they have loved themselves.)
But Nature to this Fool such virtue gave,
Two simples in one Compound, Fool and Knave.
This Noble Lord, Ignobly did oppress
His Tenants, raising Rents to such excess:
That they their states not able to maintain,
They turned stark beggars in a year or twain.
Yet though this Lord were too too miserable,
He in his House kept a well furnished Table:
Great store of Beggars daily at his Gate,
Which he did feed, and much Compassionate.
(For it is within the power of mighty men
To make five hundred Beggars, and feed Ten.
At last, upon a time the Lord and's Fool,
Walked after Dinner their hot bloods to cool,
And seeing three or four score Beggars stand
To seek Relief from his hard Clutched hand,
The Nobleman thus spoke his Fool unto,
Quoth he, what shall I with these Beggars do?
Since (quoth the Fool) you for my Judgment call,
I think it best we straight ways hang them all.
That were great pity, then the Lord replied
For them and me our Savior equal died:
The are Christians (although beggars) therefore yet
Hanging's uncharitable, and unfit.
Tush (said the Fool) they are but beggars thoe,
And thou can spare them, therefore let them go:
If thou will do, as thou have done before,
Thou can in one year make as many more.
And he that can pick nothing from this tale,
Then let him with the beggar drink small Ale.
Thus is a Beggar a strange kind of creature,
And begg'ry is an Art that lives by Nature:
For he neglects all Trades, all Occupations,
All functions, Mysteries, Arts, and Corporations.
He Is his own Law, and does even what he lift.
And is a persit right Gimnosophist.
A Phylosophicall Pithagoras,
That without care his life away does pass.
A Beggar never grows mad with too much study.
A Lawyer must for what he gets take pains,
And study night and day, and toil his brains,
With diligence to sift out Right from Wrong,
Writes, travels, pleades, with hands, and feet, and tongue.
And for to end Debate, does often debate
With Rhetoric, and Logic Intricate:
And after all his travel and his toil,
If that part which he pleads for get the foil,
The Clyent blames the Lawyer, and the Laws,
And never minds the badnes of his Cause.
It Is better with a Beggar that is Dumb,
Whose tongue-lesse mouth does only utter mum:
In study, and in care, no time he spends,
Dumb Rhetoric moves Charity.
And has his business at his finger ends.
And with dumb Rhetoric, and with Logic mute,
Lives and gains more, then many that Dispute.
If case a Beggar be old, weak or Ill,
The weak Beggar have a great advantage over the strong.
It makes his gains, and commings in more still;
When beggars that are strong, are paid with mocks,
Or threatened with the Cage, the Whip, or Stocks.
He Is better borne then any Prince or Peer,
In's Mothers womb three quarters of a year:
Beggars (for the most part well borne.
And when his birth has made her belly slack,
She four or five years bears him at her back,
He lives as if it were Grim Saturnes Reign,
Or as the Golden age were come again.
Moreover many virtues do attend
Virtues that Beggars have
On Beggars, and on them do they depend:
Humility's a Virtue, Humility.
and they are
In sign of Humblenes, continual bare:
And Patience is a virtue of great worth, Patience.

Which any beggar much expresses forth,
I saw a Beggar Rayl'd at, yet stood mute,
Before a Beadle, of but base Repute.
For Fortitude a beggar does excel, Fortitude.

There Is nothing can his valiant courage quell:
Nor heat or cold, thirst, hunger, Famines rage,
He dares out-dare Stocks, whipping-posts, or Cage.
He Is of the greatest Temperance under heaven, Temperance.

And (for the most part) seeds on what is given.
He waytes upon a Lady, of high price,
Whose birthplace was Celestial paradise.
One of the Graces, a most heavenly Dame,
And Charity's her all admired Name: It waytes on Charity a worthy bountiful
Mistres.

Her hand's never shut, her glory is in giving,
On her the Beggar waytes, and gets his living. Antiquity.

His State's more ancient then a Gentleman,
It from the Elder brother (Caine) began: Beggary descended from Caine, who was
the first man that ever was borne, and heir apparent to the whole world.

Of Runagates and vagabonds he was
The first that wandering over the earth did pass.
But what is a Vagabond and a Runagate?
True Annagramatiz'd I will relate:
RVNAGATE, Annagram, AGRANTE. VAGABONDE, Annagram, GAVE A BOND. And many well
borne Gallants, mad and fond,
Have with a Grant so often Gave a Bond.
And wrapped their states so in a Parchment skin,
They Vagabonds and Runagates have bin.
Honor
A begger's nob'ly borne, all men will yield,
His getting, and his birth b'ing in the field:
And all the world knows it is no idle fable,
To say and swear the field is honorable.
Courtesy.
A beggar is most courteous when he begges,
And has an excellent skill in making legs:
But if he could make Arms but half so well,
Security.
For Herauldry his cunning would excel.
A beggar in great safety does remain,
He Is out of danger to be robbed or slain:
In fear and peril he is never put,
And (for his wealth) no thief his throat will cut.
Bounty.
He Is far more bountiful then is Lord,
A world of hangers on at bed and board:
Which he does lodge, and daily cloth and feed,
Them and their Issue, that increase and breed;
Power.
For it is disparagement, and open wrong,
To say a begger's not a thousand strong:
Frugality.
Yet have I seen a beggar with his Many,
Come in at a Playhouse, all in for one penny.
And though of creatures Lice are almost least,
Yet is a Lowse a very valiant beast.
But did not strength unto her courage want,
She would kill Lion, Bear, or Elephant.
What is it that she can but she dares do,
She Will combat with a King, and stand to it to:
She Is not a starter like the dust-bred-Flea,
She Is a great trauailer by land and sea,
And dares take any Lady by the Rea.
She never from a battle yet did fly,
For with a Soldier she will line and dye.
And sure (I think) I said not much amiss,
To say a Lowse her self a soldier is.
An Host of Lice did to submission bring
Hard-harted Pharoh the Egyptian King.
But when these cruel creatures do want meat,
Man's flesh and blood like Canibals they eat.
They are unto the beggar Natures gifts,
Who very seldom puts them to their shifts. A Beggar is no shifting fellow.
True friendship

These are his Guard, which will not him forsake,
Till Death course does of his carcass make.
A beggar lives here in this vale of sorrow,
And travels here to day, and there tomorrow.
The next day being neither here, nor there:
But almost no where, and yet every where. Beggars are travelers.

He never labors, yet he does express
Himself an enemy to Idleness. He is seldom idle, though he never works.

In Court, Camp, City, Country, in the Ocean
A beggar is a right: perpetual motion,
His great devotion is in general,
He either prays for all, or preyes on all. Devotion.

And it is universally professed, Universality.

From South to North, from East unto the West.
On his own merits he will not rely, He is a lover of good works.

By others men's good works he will line and die.
That begg'ry is most natural all men know,
Our naked coming to the world does show: Peggery is natural, and general to
all the world.

Not worth a simple rotten ragge, or clout,
Our seely earkasses to wrap about.
That it will is, and has perpetual bin, Beggary is perpetual.

All go as naked out, as they came in,
We leave our clothes, which were our couers here,
For Beggars that come after us to wear.
The generality of beggerie.
Thus all the world in general beggars are,
And all alike comes in, and goes out bare.
It is most necessary for every one to live and dye a Beggar.
And who so lives here in the best degree,
Must (every day) a daily beggar be:
And when his life has run unto his date,
He dies a beggar, or a reprobate.
(Good Reader, pray misconster not this case,
I mean no profanation in this place)
Then since these virtues wait on beggary,
As mild Humility, and Charity,
With Patience, Fortitude, and Courtesy,
And Temperance, Honor, Health, Frugality,
Security, Universality,
Necessity, and Perpetuity,
And since heaven sends the Subject and the Prince
All Beggars hither, and no better hence,
Since begg'ry is our portion, and our lot,
Our Patrimony, birthright, and what not:
Let us pursue our function, let us do
That (which by nature) we were borne unto.
And whilst my Muse a little does repose,
I Will Character a Beggar out in prose.
Now it follows, that I show some part of their forms, carriage, manners, and
behavior, their several Garbs, tones, and salutations that they acost their
Clyents or Benefactours withal, for they can wisely, and discreetely suite
their Phrase and language, to be correspondent to their own shape, and
suitable to whomsoever they beg of, as for example suppose a Beggar he in
the shape or form of a maundering, or wandering Soldier, with one arm, leg
or eye, or some such maim; then imagine that there passes by him some Lord,
Knigt, or scarce a Gentleman, it makes no matter which, then his Honor or his
Worship shall be affronted in this manner:

Brave man of Honor, cast a favorable look upon the wounded estate of a
distressed Gentleman, that has borne Arms for his Country in the hottest
broils of the Netherla^ds, with the loss of his members; Cleueland has felt
my strength; I have bickered with the French, at Breast and Deep; I have past
the Straights, the dangerous Gulf: the Groyne can speak my service (Right
Honorable) with no less then two dangerous hurts hardly brought off from
Bummil Leaguer, which I would vnwillinly discover to your manliness, whose
belief shall be therein as much auailable as eye sight. Fortune has only
left me a tongue to bemone my losses, and one eye to be witness of your noble
bounty; I would be loath to weary your Lordship with the relations of my
travels, to whom the story of these wars are as familiar as to my self; your
worthy liberality is the spur to valor, and the sauegard of his country;
and in your honorable memory my tongue shall supplys the defects of my limbs,
and proclaim your merit through the 17 Provinces, whither your bounty shall
bear this witherd body, to interre it with the blood which I left there as a
pledge of my return.

This is the martial or decayed military kind of begging; which if he speed,
then he can fit himself with a prayer accordingly, for the prosperity of his
liberal benefactor, as thus:

Peace be to thy loins (Right honorable) and plenty at thy board, oppression
in the country, and extortion in the city, embroder thy carkas, and keep thy
Concubine constant, that Taylers may sue to thee for work, more then for
payment, and Sericants may stand and gaze at thy fair progress by the
Compters, whist thy coach mares shall whurrie thee free from Attachments.

Then (after a scrub or shrug) you must conceive that he meets with a Lawyer,
and fitting his phrase to his language, he assaults him thus, and ioynes issue.

Humbly shows to your good Worship, your poor suppliant having advanced his
bill in the late wars of Sweaden Copenhage, and Stock Holland; after
Replications in particular, and Reiovnders drawn, with bloody pens and
dreadful characters, your petitioner joined issue in that fearful day of
hearing, at the grand castle of Smolesco, where he came off with the loss of
his inheritance, having the evidence of his limbs violently rent from him, to
make open passage to the beneuolent charity of such of such pious persons as
is your good worship; for you are the true soldiers of the country, whose
wars concern the domestique peace of our nation, as such as my self does
the foreign. My breeding was Gentle, Sir, and my birth English, a younger
brother, driven to my shifts, to avoid the soul accidents of homebred
miseries; I measured foreign paces, and was deliuerd abroad of my breeding at
home, in which estate the hand of your bounty must support me, or else
calamity will crawle ever me, which has no Surgeon but the gallows, to which
I hope the Law will not deliver me, seeing it carries so fair a face as the
reverend aspect of your maisterships countenance.

By this time you must suppose that his bount being awaked he gives him
somewhat; when with a correspondent prayer he thus takes his benevale.

May the Terms be everlasting to thee, thou man of tongue, and may contentions
grow and multiply, may Actions beget Actions, and Cases engender Cases as
thick as hops, may every day of the year be a Shroue tuesday; let
Proclamations forbid fighting, to increase actions of battry, that thy Cassock
may be three pilde, and the welts of thy gown may not grow thread bare.

Perhaps he meets with some country Farmer, or some honest Russet homespun
plaine-dealing plowiogger, whom he assaults with a volley of lies and
brauadoes, in manner and form following.

You shall do well to take notice (countryman and friend) that I am a soldier
and a gentleman, who having bin made Fortunes tennis ball, was lately cast upon
these coasts of my country by the merciless cruelty of the raging tempestuous
seas, where I have bin in that distress that the whole Christian world durst
not so much as look on: mine Arms has bin feared by all the enemies that
ever beheld them advanced, and my command has bin dreadful through Europe,
Asia, Africa and America, from the Suns Eastern rising to his Western
declination. I was the first man that entered (despite the mouth of the cannon)
into the famous city of Portrega, a city five times greater then
Constantinople, where the great Turk then kept his Seraglio, Basha Caphy,
Basha Indae, and Mustapha Despot of Seruia being my prisoners, whose ransomes
yielded my sword three millions of Hungarian ducats; with which returning,
thinking to make thee and the rest of my nation rich, the ship which
transported me (being ouerladen) took such a leake that she sunk, not a
mortal eye being able to see one penny of that vncountable treasure, my self
(as you see preserved) a miserable spectacle of unfortunate chance, for getting
astride upon a demyculuering of brass, I was weather-beaten three leagues; on
shore, as you see, an ominous map of manquelling calamity, to the relief
whereof, my fellow and friend, (for so my now poverty makes me vouchsafe to
call thee) I must entreat thy manhood, by offering a parcel of thy substance;
make no delays, Sir, for I would be loath to exercise my valor on thee, and
make thee the first Christian that should feel the impregnable strength and
vigor of my victorious arm, which has done to death so many Turks, Pagans
and Infidels as cannot truly be numbered.

After all this superfluous fustian, the poor man unwillingly draws and gives
him some small mite, more for fear or lying, then either for love or charity.
His fury being abated, he takes his leave thus:

Fair be thy Harvest, and foul thy winter, that plenty may fill thy barnes,
and fear of scarcity raise thy price, may thy Landlord live unmarried, that
thy fine may not be raisde, to buy thy new Landladie a French petlicoate or a
new Block Beauer, nor thy rents raisde to keep her tire in fashion.

Invention many thousand ways could go,
To show their variations to and fro:
A Justice of peace is as the world to a beggar, a Beadle as the flesh, and a
Constable as the diveil.
For as upon the soul of man attends,
The world, the flesh, the devil, (three wicked friends)
So likewise has a beggar other three,
With whom his humor never could agree.
A Justice, to the world he does compare,
A Justice will wink or conniue at a beggars faults often, partly for pity, and
partly to a cold trouble
And for his flesh, a Beadle is a snare:
But he that he of all accounts most evil,
He thinks a Constable to be the devil.
And it is as easy for him as to drink,
To blind the world, and make a Justice wink:
The Beadle (for the flesh) 'is little pain,
A whipping will be love cured.
Which smart he can recover soon again.
But yet the Devils (the Constable) a spirit,
From hole to hole that hunts him like a ferrit,
Both day and night he haunts him as a ghost, A Constable in a Bugbeare to a
beggar.

And of all furies he torments him most.
All Is one for that, though some things fa'l out ill,
A beggar seldom rides up Holborne hill:
Nor is he taken with a theeuish trap,
And made dispute with Doctors Stories Sybutae
cap.
A common thief, for every groute he gains,
His life does venture, besides all his pains:
For every thing he eats, or drinks, or wears,
To lose his ears, or gain a rope he fears.
But for a beggar, be it he or she,
They are from all these choking dangers free.
And though (for sin) when mankind first began,
A curse was laid on all the race of man,
That of his labors he should live and eat,
And get his bread by travel and by sweat:
But if that any from this curse be free,
A beggar must he be, and none but he.
For every fool most certainly does know,
A beggar does not dig, delue, plow, or sow:
He neither harrowes, plants, lops, fels, nor rakes,
Nor any way he pains or labor takes.
Let swine be meazeld, let sheep die and rot,
Let moraine kill the cattle, he cares not:
He will not work and sweat, and yet he will feed,
And each man's labor must supply his need.
Thus without pains of care, his life he will spend,
And lives until he dies, and there is an end.
But I this reekning do of beggry make,
That it much better is to give then take:
Yet if my substance will not serve to give,
Lie (of my betters) take, with thanks, and live.
FINIS.

