A true and most exact Map of the siedge of Rochell, presented to the Kings
Majesty the first day of May, 1628. by Melchior Tavernor. grauer and printer
to his Matie., dwelling in the Isle of the palace, at the golden VVheate-eare.
map of the siege of Rochelle

SIRS,
it is no strange matter, if differing representations are often seen upon one
and the same subject, for besides the ordinary change in the face of things, it
is very difficult really to know how they are but with time. Hitherto you have
had such pourtraitures of this Town, and of the siedge thereof as might be
recovered, to content the desires of his Majesty's faithful servants. But at
this present having with much curiosity, had the care to gather together all
the plots and reports which have been made thereof, as well by his Majesty's
Inginers, as by many Lords and brave Captains, which (with his Majesty) have
been upon the places, and have seen and conducted the greater part of the
works there seen at this present; I have been persuaded that you would most
willingly accept a sight of this last assay of it, which I have graven so
exactly and truly, that I have been assured I might present it to his Majesty
which I have also done, who receiving it with great contentment, I hope that
you will infallibly do the like.

For the understanding then of this only exact and true new plot; It is to be
noted, that dividing the Circuit of the walls of the City according to the
four parts of the world: The part opposite to the south, is that which is from
the tower of the Far unto the gate of Saint Nicolas, which is filled by the
Sea during the flood; In which time, ships may enter within the said haven,
where they are locked up by a chain, which rises from the tower of Saint
Nicolas, and of la Chaisne: the entrance of the said haven, having no other
breadth then for a great vessel to enter in. It is also to be noted, that upon
the ebb, as well the haven as the places where these figures 35. are quoted
rest dry, being but owze upon which it is impossible to go.

The second part of the same walls toward the East and west, which extends
from S. Nicolas gate, until drawing near to the Congne gate, is taken up by a
salt marsh, where for the most part, the water remains always a flote, and
is therein maintained by means of a channel, marked 28. being newly made for
the commodity of the salt pitts which are in the said Marsh, as also to make
the water rise within the ditches by means of a Sluice, marked 30.

The third part of the walls, which are from the East South-east side, is from
the Bastion of the Euangille, unto the tower of Far upon all this length,
there is a little hill which reaches to the sea, which hill in some sort
commands the town, howsoever Its distance hinders that no offense can be
given, point blanke, nevertheless it may serve to take up the flanckes, and
hinder the defenses and retrenchments of those of the town; It is to be noted,
that between the same little hill and the town, there is a meddow which by
certain springs which are in those parts, is kept moist the greater part of
the year.

The fourth and last part, is that which looks toward the North, which
reaches from the Bastion of the Euangille unto this side of the Congne gate,
which is firm and gravely earth and much raised up* by means whereof, all
manner of access may be had to the place by way of intrenchment, although it
be against the opinion of many.

This is summarily that which I can tell you of this place, as also of the
works there made in Blocking thereof, which I have observed in the best I
possibly could, as well for the plot of the place as of the Country.

Here follows the Table to find the ^^^t remarkable places in this figure.
A Rochell. B The new Town. C The haven of Rochell. D Tower of the Chaisne. E
Tower of Saint Nicolas. F The Gabion or Bastion of Owze. G Saint Nicolas gate.
H Congne gate. I Newgate. K Gate of the 2. milles. L The tower of Far. M
Bastion of the Gospel. N Tadons fort. 1 Jews fort. 2 Saint Maurices Redouts.
3 The fort of the holy Ghost, 35. fathoms square. 4 Redoute of the red Pigeon
house. 5 Saint Mary's fort. 6 Saint Annes Redouts. 7 Saint Marguerites Redouts.
8 Fort de lae Fons, or the Queens fort, being 50. fathoms square. 9 Saint
Francis Redouts. 10 Beaulieus fort, here ends Monsieur Bassompierres
quarter, which begins from Jews fort. 11 Ronsez Fort, here begins
Monsieur de Chomberts quarter. 12 Port of the salt pitts. 13 Moulinettes Fort.
14 Saint Nicholas Fort, here begins Monsieur, d' Angoulesmes quarter. 15
Bonne graine's Fort. 16 Fort of Cornelle's house. 17 Redoutes. 18 Fort of
Orleans. 19 Battery which beats within the Haven. 20 Digues Fort, and
Monsieur Marilac's lodgins. 21 Coreilles point. 22 Head of the Baye. 23 The
New-port. 24 Redoute. 25 Battery between wind and water 26 The Kings ships
commanded by Monsieur de Guise. 27 The mount which has 8. fathoms breadth of
assize, being but three at the top. 28 Ships sunk. 29 Owzes. AA Estre the
Kings quarter. BB larne, the quarter of the Council and Secretaries of state.
CC Perigny, Monsieur de Chomberts quarter. DD La leu, Monsieur de Bassompierres
quarter.
At Paris, By MELCHIOR TAVERNOR Ingrauer, and Printer to the Kings Majesty for
the small Ingrauery, dwelling in the Isle of the Palace, at the golden
Wheate-eare. 1628.

And are to be sold by Thomas Walkely, at the Eagle and Child in Britains
Bursse. 1628.


