THE Carriers Cosmographie. or

A Brief Relation, of The Innes, Ordinaries, Hosteries, and other lodgings in,
and near London, where the Carriers, Wagons, Foote-posts and Higglers, do
usually come, from any parts, towns, shires and countries, of the Kingdoms of
England, Principality of Wales, as also from the Kingdoms of Scotland and
Ireland.

With nomination of what days of the week they do come to London, and on
what days they return, whereby all sorts of people may find direction how to
receive, or send, goods or letters, unto such places as their occasions may
require.

As also, Where the Ships, Hoighs, Barks, Tiltboats, Barges and wherries, do
usually attend to Carry Passengers, and Goods to the coast Towns of England,
Scotland, Ireland, or the Netherlands; and where the Barges and Boats are
ordinarily to be had that go up the River of Thames westward from London.

By John Tailor.

London Printed by A. G. 1637.

To all Whom it may concern, with my kind remembrance to the Posts, Carriers,
Waggoners and Higglers.
IF any man or woman whomsoever has either occasion or patience to Read this
following description, it is no doubt but they shall find full satisfaction for
as much as they laidout for the book, if not, it is against my will, and my
good intentions are lost and frustrate. I wrote it for three Causes, first for
a general and necessary good use for the whole Commonwealth, secondly to
express my grateful duty to all those who have honestly paid me my money which
they owed me for my Books of the collection of Tavernes, in London and
Westminster, and ten shires or Counties next round about London, and I do
also thank all such as do purpose to pay me hereafter: thirdly, (for the
third sort) that can pay me and will not; I write this as a document: I am well
pleased to leave them to the hangmans tuition (as being past any other man's
mending) for I would have them to know, that I am sensible of the too much
loss that I do suffer by their pride or cousenage, their number being so
many, and my charge so great, which I paid for paper and printing of those
books, that the base dealing of those sharks is Insupportable; But the tedious
T oil that I had in this Collection, and the harsh and unsavory answers that
I was feign to take patiently, from Hostlers, Carriers, and Porters, may move
any man that thinks himself mortal to pity me.

In some places I was suspected for a proiector, or one that had devised some
trick to bring the Carriers under some new taxation; and sometimes I was held
to have been a man taker, a Serieant or baylife to arrest or attach men's good
or beasts; indeed I was scarce taken for an honest man amongst the most of
them: all which suppositions I was enforced oftentimes to wash away, with two
or three Iugges of Beer, at most of the Innes I came to; In some Innes or
Hosteries, I could get no certain Intelligence, so that I did take
Instructions at the next Inn unto it, which I did oftentimes take upon trust
though I doubted it was indirect and imperfect,

Had the Carriers hostlers and others known my harmless and honest
intendments, I do think this following relation, had been more large and
useful, but if there be any thing left out in this first Impression, it shall
be with diligence inserted hereafter, when the Carriers and I shall be more
familiarly acquainted, and they, with the hostlers, shall be pleased in their
ingenerosity, to afford me more Ample directions. In the mean space, I hope I
shall give none of my Readers cause to curse the Carrier that brought me to
town.

Some may object that the Carriers do often change and shift from one Inn or
lodging to another, whereby this following direction may be hereafter untrue,
to them I answer, that I am not bound to bind them, or to stay them in any
place, but if they do remove, they may be enquired for at the place which they
have left or for saken, and it is an easy matter to find them by the learned
intelligence of some other Carrier, an hostler, or an understanding Porter.

Others may object and say that I have not named all the towns and places that
Carriers do go unto in England and Wales: To whom I yield, but yet I answer,
that if a Carrier of York has a letter or goods to deliver at any town in
his way thither, he serves the turn well enough, and there are carriers and
messengers from York to carry such goods and letters as are to be past any
ways north, broad and wide as far or further than Barwicke: so he that sends
to Lancaster, may from thence have what he sends conveyed to Kendall, or
Cockermouth, and what a man sends to Hereford may from thence be passed to
Saint David's in Wales, the Worster carriers can convey any thing as far as
Carmarthen, and those that go to Chester may send to Carnarvan: the carriers
or posts that go to Exeter may send daily to Plymouth, or to the Mount in
Cornwall, Maxfield, Chipnam, Hungerford, Newberry: and all those Towns
between London and Bristow, the Bristow carriers do carry letters unto them,
so likewise all the towns and places are served, which are betwixt London and
Lincoln, or Boston, Yarmouth, Oxford, Cambridge, Walsingham, Dover, Rye or any
places of the Kings Dominions with safe and true carriage of goods and letters;
as by this little books directions may be perceived. Besides, if a man at
Constantinople or some other remote part or Region shall chance to send a
letter to his parents, master, or friends that dwell at Nottingham, Derby,
Shrewsbury, Exeter, or any other town in England; then this book will give
instructions where the Carriers do lodge that may convey the said letter,
which could not easily be done without it: for there are not many that by heart
or memory can tell suddenly where and when every carrier is to be found, I have
(for the ease of the Reader and the speedier finding out of every towns name,
to which any one would send, or from whence they would receive, set them down
by way of Alphabet; and thus Reader if thou be pleased, I am satisfied, if
thou be contented, I am paid, if thou be angry, I care not for it.

A
THe Carriers of Saint Albanes do come every friday to the sign of the
Peacocke in Aldersgate street, on which days also comes a coach from Saint
Albanes to the bell in the same street, the like coach is also there for the
Carriage of passengers every tuesday.

The Carriers of Abington do lodge at the George in bredstreet, they do come
on wednesdaies and go away on thursdaies.

The Carriers of Aylsbury, in Buckingham shire, do lodge at the George near
Holborne bridge, and at the swan in the strand, and at the Angel behind Saint
Clements church, and at the bell in holborne, they are at one of these places
every other day.

The Carriers of Ashur do lodge at the castle in great woodstreet, they are to
be found there on thursdaies, fridaies and Saturdaies.

B
THe Carriers of Blanvile in Dorcetshire, do lodge at the chequerneere Charing
cross, they do come thither every second thursday, also there comes
carriers from Blandfourd, to the sign of the Rose near Holbourne bridge.

The Carriers of Brayntree, and Bocking in Essex do lodge at the sign of the
Tabbard in Gracious street, ( near the conduit) they do come on thursdaies
and go away on fridaies.

The Carriers of Bathe do lodge at the three cups in bread street they come on
fridaies and go on saturdaies.

The Carriers of Bristow do lodge at the three Cups in bredstreet, and
likewise from Bristow on Thursdaies a Carrier which lodges at the swan near
to holborne bridge,

The Carriers of Brewton in Dorcetshire do lodge at the Rose near holborne
bridge, they come on thursdaies and go away on frydaies.

The Carriers from diverse parts of Buckinghamshire and Bedfordshire, are almost
every day to be had at the sign of the Saracens head without Newgate.

The Carriers of Broomsbury, do lodge at the sign of the Maidenhead in
Cat-eatonstreet, near the guildhall in London, they come on thursdaies and go
away on fridaies.

The Carriers of Bingham, in Nottinghamshire, do lodge at the black bull in
smithfield, they come on fridaies.

The Carriers of Bramley in Staffordshire, do lodge at the castle near
smithfield bars, they come on thursdaies and go away on fridaies or
saturdaies.

The Carriers of Burfoord in Oxfordshire, do lodge at the bell in friday
street, they come on thursdaies and go away on fridaies.

The Carriers of Buckhingham do lodge at the kingshead in the old change, they
come wednesdaies and thursdaies.

The Carrriers of Buckingham, do lodge at the saracens head in carter lane,
they come and go fridaies and saturdaies.

The Carriers of Bewdley in Worcestershire, do lodge at the castle in
woodstreet, they come and go thursdaies, fridaies and saturdaies.

The Carriers of Buckingham, do lodge at the George near holborne bridge,
they come and go on wednesdaies, thursdaies and fridaies.

The Carries of Brackley in Northamptonshire, do lodge at the George near
holborne bridge, they come and go on wednesdaies thursdaies and fridaies.

The Carriers of Banbury in Oxfordshire do lodge at the George near holborne
bridge, they go and come wednesdaies, thursdaies and fridaies.

The Carriers of Bedford do lodge at the three horseshooes in in
aldersgatestreet, they come on thursdaies.

The Carriers of Bridge-north do lodge at the Maidenhead in cateaton street,
near the guild hall.

The Carriers of Bury (or saint Edmonds Bury) in Suffolk, do lodge at the
dolphin without bishopsgate, they come on thursdaies.

The Wagons of Bury or Berry in Suffolk, do come every thursday to the sign
of the four swans in bishopsgate street.

A foote-post does come from the said Berry every wedensday to the green
dragon in bishopsgate street, by whom letters may be conveyed to and fro.

The Carriers of Barstable in Devonshire, do lodge at the star in
breadstreet, they come on fridaies and return on saturdaies or mundaies.

The Carriers of Bampton do lodge at the Mer-maid in carterlane: and there
also lodge the Carriers of Buckland, they are there on thursdaies and fridaies.

The Carriers of Brill in Buckinghamshire, do lodge at the sign of Saint Paul's
head in carterlane, they come on tuesdaies and wedensdaies.

The Carriers of Bampton in Lancashire, do lodge at the bear at Bashingshaw,
they are there to be had on thursdaies and fridaies, also thither comes
Carriers from other parts in the said County of Lancashire.

The Carriers of Batcombe in Somersetshire, do lodge at the crown (or Iarrets
Hall) at the end of bassing lane near bread street, they come every friday.

The Carriers of Broughton, in Leicestershiere, do lodge at the sign of the
Axe in Aldermanbury; they are there every friday.

C
THe Carrier of Colchester do lodge at the crosse-keyes in Gracious street,
they come on the Thursdaies and go away on the Fridaies.

The Carrier of Chessam in Buckinghamshire, does come twice every week to the
sign of the white Heart in high Holborne at the end of Drury lane.

The Carrier of Cogshall in Suffolk does lodge at the spread Eagle in Gracious
street, he comes and goes on Thursdaies and Fridaies.

The Waggors from Chippinganger in Essex, do come every Wednesday to the
crown without Algate.

The Wagons from Chelmsford in Essex, come on Wednesdaies to the sign of the
blew Boar without Algate.

The Carriers of Cheltenham in Glocestershire, do lodge at the three caps in
Bredstreet, they do come on Fridaies and go away on Saturdaies.

The Carriers of Cambden in Glocestershire, and of Chippingnorton, do lodge at
the three Cups in Bredstreet, they come and go Thursdaies, Fridaies, and
Saturdaies.

The Carriers of Chester do lodge at the castle in Woodstreete, they are there
to be had on Thursd. Frid. and Saturdaies.

The Carriers of Chard in Dorsetshire, do lodge at the Queens Arms near
Holborne bridge, they are there to be had on Fridaies.

The Carriers of Chard do lodge at the George in Bredstreet.

The Carriers of Chester do lodge at Blossoms (or Bosoms Inn) in Saint
Laurence lane, near Cheapside, every Thursday.

The Carrier of Coleashby in Northamptonshire, do lodge at the sign of the
Ball in Smithfield; also there do lodge Carriers of diverse other parts of that
country at the Bell in Smithfield, they do come on the Thursdaies.

The Carriers of Crawley in Bedfordshire, do lodge at the Bear and ragged
staff in Smithfield, they come on the Thursdaies.

The Carriers of Coventry in Warwickeshire, do lodge at the Ram in Smithfield,
they come on Wednesdaies and Thursdaies.

There are other carriers from Coventry that do on Thursdaies and Fridaies
come to the Rose in Smithfield.

The Carrier of Creete in Leicestershire, do lodge at the Rose in Smithfield.

The Wagons or Coaches from Cambridge, do come every Thursday and Friday to
the black Bull in Bishopsgate street.

The Carriers of Coventry do lodge at the sign of the Axe in St Mary Axe in
Aldermanbury, they are there Thursdaies and Fridaies.

The Carriers of Cambridge, do lodge at the Bell in Coleman street, they come
every Thursday.

The foot-post of Canterbury does come every Wednesday and Saturday to the
sign of the two neck'd Swanne at Summers key, near Billingsgate,

The Carriers of Crookehorne in Devonshire, do lodge at the Queens Arms near
Holborne bridge, they come on Thursdaies.

D
THe Carriers of Dunmow in Essex, do lodge at the Saracens head in Gracious
street, they come and go on Thursdaies and Fridaies.

The Wagons from Dunmow, do come every Wednesday to the crown without Algate.

The Carriers of Ditmarsh in Barkeshire, do lodge at the George in Bredstreet.

The Carriers of Doncaster in Yorkshire, and many other parts in that country,
do lodge at the Bell, or Bell Savage without Ludgate, they do come on
Fridaies, and go away on Saturdaies or Mundaies.

The Carriers of Dorchester, do lodge at the Rose near Holborne bridge, they
come and go on Thursdaies and Fridaies.

The Carriers of Denbigh in Wales, do lodge at Bosoms Jane every Thursday:
also other carriers do come to the said Jane from other parts of that country.

The Carrier of Daintree, does lodge every Friday night at the cross keys in
St John's street.

The Carrier from Duncehanger, and other places near Stony Stratford, do
lodge at the three cups in St John's street.

The Carriers of Derby, and other parts of Derbyshire, do lodge at the Axe in
St Mary Axe, near Aldermanbury, they are to be heard of there on Fridaies.

The Carriers of Darby do lodge at the castle in woodstreet every week, on
thursdaies or fridaies.

E
THe Carrier of Epping in Essex do lodge at the Prince his Arms in
Leadenhallstreet, he comes on thursdaies.

The Carriers of Eveter do lodge at the star in breadstreet, they come on
fridaies and go away on saturdaies or mundaies.

The Carriers of Exeter do lodge at the rose near holbornebridge they come on
thursdaies.

The Carriers of Eveshim in Worcestershire do lodge at the cae^^^ in
woodstreet, they come thither on fridaies.

F
THe Carriers of Feckingham-forrest in Worcestershire do lodge at the crown
in high holbourne, and at the Queens head at Saint Giles in the fields, there
is also another Carrier from the same place.

The Carrier of Faringdon in Barkeshire do lodge at the Saint Paul's head in
Carter lane, they come on tuesdaies and go away on wedensdaies.

G
CArriers from Grindon Underwood, in Buckinghamshire do lodge at the Paul-head
in carter lane, they are to be found there on tuesdaies and wednesdaies.

The Carriers of Gloucester do come to the Saracens head without Newgate, on
fridaies.

The Carriers of Gloucester do lodge at the Saracens head in carter lane, they
come on fridaies.

Clothiers do come every week out of diverse parts of Gloce^^ershire to the
Saracens head in friday street.

The Waines or Wagons do come every week from sundry places in
Glocestershire, and are to be had at the swan near holborne Bridge.

There are Carriers of some places in Glocestershire that do lodge at the
mer-maide in Carterlane.

H
CArriers from Hadley in Suffolk, do lodge at the George in Lumbardstreet,
they come on thursdaies.

The Carriers of Huntingdon, do lodge at the White Hind without Cripplegate,
they come upon thursdaies and go away on fridaies.

The Carriers of Hereford, do lodge at the Kings Head in the old change, they
do come on fridaies and go on saturdaies.

The Carriers of Hallifax in Yorkshire do lodge at the Greyhound in
smithfield, they do come but once every month.

The Carriers of Hallifax are every Wednesday to be had at the Bear at
Bashingsh^w.

The Carriers of Hallifax do likewise lodge at the Axe in Aldermanbury.

The Carriers of Hallifax do likewise lodge at the white heart in Colemanstreet.

The Carrier of Hartfeild in Hartfordshire, do lodge at the bell in Saint
John's street they come on thursdaies.

The Carriers of Harding in Hartfordshire do lodge at the Cock in
Aldersgatesteete, they come on tuesdaies, wednesdaies and thursdaies.

The Carrier or wagon of Hadham, in Hartfourshire do lodge at the Bull in B
shopsgatestreet, they do come and go, on mundaies tuesdaies, fridaies and
saturdaies.

The Wagon, or Coach from Hartfourd Town does come every friday to the four
swannes without Bishopsgate.

The Wagon or Coach of Hatfeild, does come every friday to the Bell in
Aldersgate street.

I
THe Carriers of Ipswich in Suffolk, do lodge at the sign of the George in
Lumbardstreet, they do come on Thursdaies.

The Post of Ipswich, does lodge at the cross keys in Gracious street, he
comes on Thursdaies, and goes on Fridaies.

The Waines of Ingarstone in Essex, do come every Wednesday to the Kings Arms
in Leadenball street.

The Carriers of Jvell in Do sershire, do lodge at Jarrets hall, or the crown
in Basing lane, near Breasteeet.

K
THe Carriers of Keinton in Oxfordshire, do lodge at the Bell in Friday
street, they are there to be had on Thursdaies and Fridaies.

The Post of the Town of Kingston upon Hull (commonly called Hull) does lodge
at the sign of the Bull over against Leadenhall.

L
THe Carrier of Lincoln does lodge at the white Horse without Cripplegate, he
comes every second Friday.

The Carriers of Laighton Beud sart (corruptly colled Laighton Buzzard) in
Bedfordshire, do lodge at the Hearts Horns in Smithfield, they come on
Mundaies and Tuesdaies.

The Carriers of Leicester do lodge at the Saracens head without Newgate, they
do come on Thursdaies.

The Carriers of Leicester do also lodge at the castle near Smithfield bars,
they do come on Thursdaies.

There be Carriers that do pass to and through sundry parts of Leicestershire,
which do lodge at the Ram in Smithfield.

The like Carriers are weekly to be had at the Rose in Smithfild, that come
and go through other parts of Leicestershire.

The Carriers of Lewton in Hartfordshire do lodge at the Cock in Aldersgate
street, they are there Tuesdaies and Wednesdaies.

The Carriers of Leeds in Yorkshire, do lodge at the Bear in Bassinshaw, they
come every Wednesday.

The Carriers of Leedes, do also lodge at the Axe in Aldermanbury.

The Carrier of Leicester do lodge at the Axe in Aldermanbury.

The Carriers of Loughborough in Leicestershire, do lodge at the Axe in
Aldermanbury: also other Carriers do lodge there which do pass through
Leicestershire, and through diverse places of Lancashire.

M
THe Carriers of Mawlden in Essex, do lodge at the cross keys in Gracious
street, they come on Thursd. and go on Fridaies.

The Carriers of Monmouth, in Wales, and some other parts of Monmouthshire, do
lodge at the Paul head in Carter lane, they do come to London on Fridaies.

The Carriers of Marlborough, do lodge at the sign of the Swan near Holborne
bridge, they do come on Thursdaies.

There does come from great Marlow in Buckinghamshire, some Higglers, or demie
Carriers, they do lodge at the Swanne in the Strand, and they come every
Tuesday.

The Carriers of Manchester, do lodge at the Bear in Bassingshaw, they do
come on Thursdaies or Fridaies.

The Carriers of Manchester, do likewise lodge at the sign of the Axe in
Aldermanbury.

The Carriers of Manchester, do also lodge at the two neck'd Swan in Lad lane
(between great Woodstreet, and Milk-street end) they come every second
Thursday: also there do lodge Carriers that do pass through diverse other
parts of Lancashire.

The Carriers of Melford in Suffolk, do lodge at the spreadEagle in Gracious
street, they come and go on Thursdaies and Fridaies.

N
CArriers from New-elme in Barkeshire do lodge at the George in breadstreet
they come on wednesdaies and thursdaies.

The Carriers of Netherley in Staffordshire do lodge at the Bear and ragged
staff in smithfield, they do come on thursdaies.

The Carriers of Northampton, and from other parts of that county and country
there about, are almost every day in the week to be had, at the Ram in
smithfield.

There does come also Carriers to the Rose in smithfield, daily which do pass
to, or through many parts of Northamptonshire.

The Carriers of Nottingham, do lodge at the crosse-keyes in Saint John's
street, he comes every second saturday.

There is also a footpost does come every second thursday from Nottingham, he
lodges at the swan in Saint John's street.

The Carriers of Norwich do lodge at the Dolphin without Bishopsgate, they are
to be found there on mundaies and tuesdaies.

The Carriers of Newport Panel in Buckinghamshire, do lodge at the Peacocke
in Aldersgate street, they do come on mundaies and tuesdaies.

The Carriers of Nantwich in Chesshire, do lodge at the Axe in aldermanbury,
they are there wednesdaies, thursdaies and fridaies.

The Carriers of Nuneaton in Warwickshire, do lodge at the Axe in
Aldermanbury, they come on fridaies.

O
THe Carriers of Oxfoord do lodge at the Saracens head without Newgate (near
Saint sepulchers Church) they are there on Wednesdaies or almost any day.

The Carriers of Oney in Buckinghamshire, do lodge at the ^ocke in
Aldersgatestreet at long lane end, they do come on mundaies, tuesdaies and
wednesdaies.

P
THe Carriers of Preston in Lancashire do lodge at the Bell in friday street,
they are there on fridayes.

R
THe Carriers of Redding in Barkeshire do lodge at the George in Breadstreet,
they are there on thursdaies and fridaies.

The Carriers from Rutland, and Rutlandshire, and other parts of Yorkshire, do
lodge at the Ram in Smithfield, they come weekly, but their days of Coming is
not certain.

S
THe Carriers of Sudbury in Suffolk do lodge at the Saracens Head in Gracious
street, they do come and go on thursdaies and fridaies.

The Carriers of Sabridgworth in Hartfordshire do lodge at the Princes Arms in
Leadenhall street, they come on thursdaies.

The Waines from Stock in Essex, do come every Wednesday to the Kings Arms in
Leadenhall street.

The Carriers from Stroodwater in Glocestershire do lodge at the Bell in
friday street, they do come on Thursdaies and fridaies.

The Carriers of Sisham in Northhamptonshire do lodge at the Saracens head in
Carter-lane, they come on friday, and return on Saturday.

The Carriers from Sheffield, in Yorkshire does lodge at the Castle in
Woodstreet, they are there to be found on Thursdaies and Fridayes.

The Carriers from Salisbury do lodge at the Queens Arms near Holbourne
bridge, they come on thursdayes.

The Carriers of Shrewsbury, do lodge at the Mayden-head in Cateaton street,
near Guildhall, they come on thursdaies.

The Carriers of Shrewsbury do also lodge at Bosoms Inn, they do come on
thursdaies, and there do lodge Carriers that do travel diverse parts of the
County of Shropshire and places adjoining.

S
THe Carrier from Stony-stratfourd do lodge at the Rose and Crown in Saint
John's street, he comes every tuesday.

There does come from Saffron-Market, in Norfolk, a footpost who lodges at
the chequer in Holbourne.

The Carriers of Stampfoord, do lodge at the Bell in Aldersgatestreet, they
do come on wednesdaies and thursdaies.

The Wagon from Saffron Walden in Essex, does come to the Bull in
Bishopsgatestreet, it is to be had there, on Tuesdaies and Wednesdaies.

The Carriers of Shaftsbury, and from Sherbourne in Dorcetshire do lodge at
the Crown (or Iarrets Hall) in Baseing lane near Breadstreet, they come on
fridaies.

The Carriers from Stopfoord in Chesshire do lodge at the Axe in Aldermanbury,
also there are Carriers to other parts of Chesshire.

The Carriers of Staffoord, and other parts of that county, do lodge at the
swan with two necks, in Lad lane, they come on thursdaies.

T
CArriers from Teuxbury in Glocestershire do lodge at the three Cups in
Breadstreet, they come and go on fridaies and saturdaies.

The Carriers of Tiverton in Devonshire, do lodge at the star in
Breadstreet, they come on fridaies and return on saturdaies or mundaies.

The Carriers of Tame, in Oxfoordshire, do lodge at the Saracens head in
carterland, they come and go fridaies and saturdaies.

The Carriers of Torceter in Northamptonshire, do lodge at the Castle near
smithfield Bars, they come on thursdaies.

V
CArriers from Vies, (or the De-Vises) in Wiltshire, do lodge at the sign of
the swan near Holbourne Bridge, they come on thursdaies and go away on
fridaies.

W
THe Carrier from Wendover in Buckinghamshire does lodge at the black Swanne
in Holborne, and is there every tuesday and wednesday.

The Carrier of Wittham in Essex does lodge at the Crossekeyes in
Gracious-street every thursday and friday.

The Carriers of Walling field in Suffolck do lodge at the Spreadeagle in
Gracious-street, they come and go on thursdayes and fridayes.

The Carriers of Wallingford in Barkeshire do lodge at the George in
Breadstreet, their days are wednesdaies, thursdaies, and fridaies.

The Carriers of Winchcombe in Glocestershire do lodge at the three Cups in
Breadstreet, they come and go on fridaies and saturdaies.

The Clothiers of sundry parts of Wiltshire do weekly come and lodge at the
Saracens head in Friday-street.

The Carriers of Warwick doelodge at the Bell in Friday-street they are there
on thursdaies and fridaies.

The Carriers of Woodstock in Oxfordshire do lodge at the Mermaid in
Carterlaine on thursdaies and fridaies.

The Carriers of Wantage in Berkshire do lodge at the Mermaid in Carterlane,
their days are thursday and friday.

The Carriers of Worcester do lodge at the Castle in Woodstreet, their days
are fridaies and saturdaies.

The Carriers of Winsloe in Buckinghamshire do lodge at the Georg near
Holbornbridge, wednesdaies, thursdaies and fridaies.

The Wagon from VVatford in Middlesex does come to the the Swan near
Holbornebridge, on thursdaies.

The Carriers from Wells in Sommersetshire do lodge at the Rose near
Holbornebridge, they come on thursdaies, and on fridaies.

The Carriers from VVitney in Oxfordshire do lodge at the sign of the
Sarasinshead without Newgate, they come on Wednesdaies.

Their comes a Wagon from Winchester every Thursday to the Swan in the
Strand, and some Carriers comes thither from diverse parts of Buckinghamshire,
but the days of their coming are not certain.

The Carriers of Worcester do lodge at the Maydenhead in Cateatenstreet,
near Guild hall, they come on thursdaies.

The Carriers from many parts of Worcestershire and Warwickshire do lodge at
the Rose and Crown in high Holborne, but they keep no certain days.

The Carriers of Warwick do come to the Queens head near St. Giles in the
fields, on thursdaies.

The Carrier of Walsingham in Norfolk do lodge at the Chequer in Holborne,
he comes every second thursday.

The Carriers of VVendover in Buckinghamshire do lodge at the Bell in Holborne.

There does a Post come every second thursday from Walsingham to the Bell in
Holborne.

The Carrier of Ware in Hartfordshire does lodge at the Dolphin without
Bishopsgate, and is there on mundaies and tuesdaies.

There is a Footepost from Walsingham does come to the Crossekeyes in Holborne
every second thursday.

There are Carriers from diverse parts of Warwickeshire that do come weekly to
the Castle near Smithfield bars, but their days of coming are variable.

There is a Wagon from Ware at the Vine in Bishopsgatestreet every friday and
saturday.

The Carriers of Wakefield in Yorkshire do lodge at the Bear in B^shinshaw,
they do come on wednesdaies.

The Carriers of Wells in Somersetshire, do lodge at the Crown in Basing lane
near Breadstreet, they come and go on fridaies and saturdaies.

The Carriers of Wakefield and some other parts of Yorkshire do lodge at the
Axe in Aldermanbury, they are to be had there on thursdaies.

The Carriers of Wakefield and some other parts of Yorkshire does also lodge
at the VVhitehart in Colemanstreet, they come every second thursday.

Y
THe Carriers of York, (with some other parts near York, within that County)
do lodge at the sign of the Bell, or Bell salvage without Ludgate, they come
every fridaie, and go away on saturday or monday.

A Footepost from York does come every second thursday to the Rose and Crown
in Saint John's street.

For Scotland.
THose that will send any letter to Edenborough, that so they may be conveyed
to and fro to any parts of the Kingdom of Scotland, the Post does lodge at
the figne of the Kings Arms (or the Cradle) at the upper end of Cheapside,
from whence every monday, any that have occasion may send.

The Innes and lodgings of the Carriers which come into the Borough of
Southwarke out of the Countries of Kent, Sussex, and Surrey.
A Carrier from Reygate in Surrey does come every thursday (or oftener) to the
Falcon in Southwark.

The Carriers of Tunbridge, of Seaveneake, of Faut and Staplehurst in Kent, do
lodge at the Katherinewheele, they do come on thursdaies and go away on
fridaies: also on the same days do come thither the Carriers of Marden, and
Penbree, and from VVarbleton in Sussex.

On Thursdaies the Carriers of Hanckhurst and Blenchley in Kent, and from
Darking and Ledderhead in Surrey do come to the Greyhound in Southwarke.

The Carriers of Teuterden and Penshurst in Kent, and the Carriers from Battle
in Sussex do lodge at the sign of the spur in South warke, thy come on
thursdaies and go away on fridaies.

To the Queens head in Southwarke do come on wednesdaies and thursdaies, the
Carriers from Portsmouth in Hampshire, and from Chichester, Havant, Arundell,
Billinghurst, Rye, Lamberhurst, and VVadhurst, in Sussex, also from Godstone,
and Linvill in Surrey, they are there to be had wednesdaies, thursdaies and
fridaies.

The Carriers from Crambroke and Bevenden in Kent, and from Lewis, Petworth,
Vckfield, and Cuckfield in Sussex, do lodge at the Tabbard, or Talbot in
Southwarke, they are there on wednesdaies, thursdaies, and fridaies.

To the George in Southwarke come every thursday the Carriers from Gilford,
VVanuish, Goudhurst, and Chiddington in Surrey, also thither come out of Sussex
(on the same dales weekly) the Carriers of Battle, Sindrich, and Hastings,

The Carriers from these places undernamed out of Kent, Sussex and Surrey, are
every week to be had on thursdaies at the White heart in the Borough of
Southwarke; namely Dover, Sandwich, Canterbury, Biddenden, Mayfield, Eden (or
Eaten Bridge) Hebsome, VVimbleton, Godaliman, (corruptly called Godly man)
VVitherham, Shoreham, Enfield, Horsham, Hastemoore, and from many other places,
sarre and wide in the said Counties, Carriers are to be had almost daily at the
said Ione, but especially on thursdaies and fridaies.

The Carriers from Chiltington, VVestrum, Penborough, Slenge, Wrotham, and
other parts of Kent, Sussex, and Surrey, do lodge at the Kings head in
Southwarke, they do come on thursdayes, and they go on fridayes.

Every week there comes and goes from Tunbridge in Kent a Carrier that
lodges at the Green Dragon in foul Lane in Southwarke, near the
Meale-market.

Here follows certain directions for to find out Ships, Barks, Hoyghs, and
Passage Boats, that do come to London, from the most parts and places by sea,
within the Kings Dominions, either of England, Scotland or Ireland.
AHoigh does come from Colshester in Essex, to Smarts key, near Billingsgate,
by which goods may be carried from London to Colchester weekly.

He that will send to Ipswich in Suffolk, or Linn in Northfolke, let him go to
Dice key, and there his turn may be served.

The Ships from Kingston upon Hull (or Hull) in Yorkshire do come to Raphs
Key, and to Porters key.

At Galley key, passage for men, and Carriage for Goods may be had from London
to Barwicke.

At Chesters key, shipping may be had from Ireland, from Poole from Plymouth,
from Dartmouth and Weimouth.

At Sabbs Docke, a Hoigh or Bark is to be had from Sandwich or Dover in Kent.

A Hoigh from Rochester Margate in Kent, or Feversham and Maydston does come to
St Katherines Dock.

SHipping from Scotland are to be found at the Armitage or Hermitage below St
Katherines.

From Dunkirk at the custom house key.

From most parts of Holland or Zealand, Pinkes or shipping may be had at the
Brewhouses in St Katherines.

At Lion key, twice (almost in every 24 hours, or continually are Tydeboats,
or Wherries that pass to and fro betwixt London and the towns of Deptford,
Greenwich, Woolwich, Erith, and Greenhith in Kent, and also boats are to be had
that every Tide do carry goods and passengers betwixt London and Rainam,
Purfleet, and Grayes in Essex.

At Billinsgate, are every Tide to be had Barges, lighthorsmen Tiltboats and
Wherries, from London to the Towns of Gravesend and Milton in Kent, or to any
other place within the said bounds, and (as weather and occasions may serve
beyond, or further.

Passage Boats, and Wherries that do carry Passengers and goods from London,
and back again thither East or West above London Bridge.
TO Bull Wharfe (near Queenhithe) there does come and go great boats twice or
thrice every week, which boats do carry goods betwixt London and Kingston upon
Thames, also thither does often come a Boat from Colebrooke, which serves
those parts for such purposes.

Great Boats that do carry and Recarry Passengers and goods to and fro betwixt
London and the Towns of Maydenhead, Windsor, Stanes, Chertsey, with other
parts in the Counties of Surry, Barkeshire, Midlesex, and Buckingamshire, do
come every Monday, and thursday to Queenhith, and they do go away upon
tuesdayes and thusdaies.

The Redding Boat is to be had at Queenhith weekly.

All those that will send letters to the most parts of the habitable world, or
to any parts of our King of Great Britains Dominions, let them repair to the
General Postmaster Thomas Withering at his house in Sherburne Lane, near
Abchurch.

FINIS.

