The Dolphins danger: and Deliverance. Being a Ship of 220. Tun having in her
but 36. Men and 2. Boys, who were on the 12. of January 1616. set upon by 6.
Men of War of the Turks having at the least 1500. Men in them, who fought
with them 5. hours and a half, yet to the glory of God and the honor of our
English Nation, both Ship and goods safely brought up the River of Thames and
delivered. Truly set forth by the appointment of M. Edward Nichols, being
Master of the said Ship. With the names of all those that were slain on the
English part, the manner how, and how many were maimed, and what they are that
survive.

LONDON. Printed for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold in Panier Alley. 1617.

depiction of a ship

To the High and mighty Charles Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, York, and
Albanie, Earl of Chester, and Knight of the most noble order of the Garter.
RIGHT Gracious Prince, (I your humble Vassal) being imboldened by your
innated generous acceptance of all good endeavors, to present your Highness
with this poor piece of a shadow of the substantial perils that I have
escaped, which for my part had never been published, but that it was falsely
printed without my knowledge; which for the regard I have to the truth and mine
own Credit, I could do no less then contradict with a Refutation of
falsehood. I humbly implore your Highness to bestow your gracious reading of the
infallible verity of the truth, which if you vouchsafe, you shall therein see
Gods power manifested when man is at the weakest. So wishing your Highness all
earthly and heavenly felicity, I remain.

Your humble and obedient Servant. EDWARD NICNOLLS.

A Toothlesse Satire upon him that made, or rather mard the former Book.
RIch cloth of gold unto a Botcher brought,
It shall be mard, not made, quite shamed, not framed:
When worser stuff by a good Worke-man wrought,
Becomes the owner, makes the maker famed.
Rare Physic, as it is as abused, or used,
As is the Doctors ignorance, or skill:
Such operation from it is infused,
That it does help, or hurt, or cure, or kill.
Unto the stuff the fault we cannot put,
Nor to the Physic, we the crime apply:
The Bungling Tailor spoyld when he did cut,
And want of skill did cause the patient dye.
Then let a botching patcher botch and mend,
Let Mountebankes give Physic unto dogs:
Let Coopers on their hooples Tubs attend,
And Millers deal no further then their Cogges.
For, when a witles Rooke shall undertake,
Of such exployts as these to make a Book:
The ancient Prouethe true, he seem to make
God sends good meat, the Devil sends a Cook.
Why, such a work as this deserves to have
A Homers, or a Virgils skill to grace in
And not an ignorant intruding K -- --
Whose blindness did in every place misplace it.
Some lies some truths together crammed and thrust,
Quite out of Time, like mustard after meat:
That it is a wonder such a fellow durst
With wit so little, write of things so great.
Where thirty six men and two boys in fight,
Against fifteen hundred were six hours opposed:
Boorded with multitudes; with maine and might,
Round with the foes, and fiery flames enclosed
Where death was scorned and valor was beloved,
Where victory was that, at which they aimed;
Where noble Resolution was aproou'd
Where Fame adornes, the sound, dead, hurt and maimed,
What subject could a pen more Ample find
(If all were written in particular)
From Thames, unto the farthest shore of Inde,
Or from the Artick toth' Antartick star.
Why should a fellow, being there in place,
Remember not himself, or any other;
But bury all their glory in disgrace,
And each man's Acts in dark oblivion smother:
O! it is a hell of hells, and shame of shames,
Where men shall justly dare to fight and dye:
And writers will not regester their names.
When noming makes them live Immortally.
To show how valiant men do spend their blood,
It does each worthy heart with courage strike,
To Imitate the actions that are good,
And by example to attemp the like.
But when a man shall for a certain know,
That with his life, his memory must fall:
And no Records his worthiness shall show,
These means will make stark Cowards of us all.
Then these poor lines shall make these men survive,
Unto the utmost end of time or fate:
They lived and dyed, and dead, are still alive,
In Name, in Pame, in Earthly, Heavenly state.
And as for him that writ the Book before,
Let him write better, or else write no more.
John Tailor.

The Dolphins danger and Deliverance: Being a Ship of London of 220. Tun,
having in her but 36. men, and two Boys.
THe Almighty Creator, (who only works wonders) confounding strong things by
weak means, as David's Sling, Samgars Goad, Sampsons Iaw-bone, Gedeons
Pitchers, the great Captain Sisera and Holofernes killed by two seely weak
Women. All these and innumerable examples more there are both in divine and
humane Histories, which demonstrates that victory does not consist in the Arm
of flesh, but in the omnipotent Lord of Hosts, and God of Battles.

The Consideration of which makes us with thankfulness to commemorate this
our great Deliverance, from so imminent dangers, and sharp Assaults, as few,
or none has more cause to be thankful for the like, and not to attribute any
thing to my self being the Master of the Ship, or with ostentation to puff
up any of my Company, but giving the glory to whom glory belongs, I proceed.

About the end of this last year, our affairs being accomplished at Zant, our
Ship called the Dolphin of London, of the burden of 220. Tun, having in her
19. cast Pieces, and 5. Murderers 36. Men and two Boys, the Masters name
Edward Nichols, a man whose courage, industry, knowledge, and integrity, are
manifested by his actions in former times, but now more particularly in this
last and perilous adventure, we being laden weyed our Anchor, and set sail
from Zant the first of January 1616. with a fair gale of wind at North and by
East the 8. of January, we had sight of the Island of Sardaine, then the wind
being come Westerly, we on the ninth day stood for Callery, we came close by
two little watch Towers, who shot two shot near us to give warning to us, that
they would speak with us, which night would not permit, for if we could have
sent a shore to them, their intent was to have informed us of the Turks men of
war, which after we met withal to our cost and perrill and theirs to, for
these towns were not above two Leagues off from the place where we made our
fight. At night (being calm) we sailed toward Cape Pola, which small gale
brought us near to the Cape the 11. day About 2. of the Clock after noone.
Three Leagues Eastward of the aforesaid Cape, we descryed a Satty, which is a
small coasting Vessel, sent at that time for a scout or spy, belonging to the
Turks men of War: who kept ^ight of us in the evening near the I Will of
Serdine, which belongs to the King of Spain: The said Satty putting forth a
light aloft, to give a sign to the rest of his associates that he had espied
us, and the more to delude us, they let the light suddenly fall, that we might
immagine it to be the shooting of a Star.

The 12. of January in the morning about 4. of the clock we had better sight
of the Sattie, and we perceived that she stood in to get betwixt the shore and
us, which made us doubt she had more fellows not far off, as not long after
we found: the Mr. presently sent one to the top mast head who presently
discovered 5. Ships more making toward us before the wind being then at west
South west, which the Master with a prospectiue glass perceived to be the
Turks men of war. The first of them booming by himself before the wind with all
his sails abroad, without colors or Flag, yet at present boording he put his
flag out as we immagined: After him came 2. ships more of greater burden then
the first, and next one more which put his Flag in the main top as we perceived
afterward: then came the 5. and last much greater in bigness and force then any
of the rest, all strongly prepared to offend and defend in any Godles desperate
assault; our M. perceiving their readiness, made speedy preparation for the
encounter with our Ordinance and small shot, and other defensive munition,
first persuading his men with most Christian and manly Resolution by prayer
first to recommend their souls, their bodies, and their actions to their God
and Savior, which being done they went to dinner, after which the Mr. again
exhorted them in this manner. Contrymen and fellows, you see into what an
exigent it has pleased God to suffer us to fall into, let us remember that we
are but men, and must die of necessity, when, where and how, is only in Gods
knowledge and appointment, but if it be his pleasure, that this must be the
last of our days, his will be done, and let us for his glory, our souls
welfare, our Countries honor and the credit of our selves, fight it valiantly
to the last gasp: let us prefer a noble death before a slavish life, and if we
die let us die to gain a better life, for mine own part quoth. he, I will see
that if we escape this danger, that if any be hurt and maimd in the fight they
shall be carefully provided for their health and maintenance whilst they live
afterward, therefore be resolute stand to it, here is no shrinking, but force
perforce we must be men or slaves, die with me, or if you will not, I by Gods
grace will dye with you.

These cheerful words had been sufficient to put courage into faint hartles
Cowards: but much more it emboldened us that were feareles before, for we all
expected greedily to make proof of the success: at which the Master caused
his Trumpets twice to hail them, but they not regarding us, scornd to answer
us, then the M. went up the poop and waued his sword 3. or 4. times over his
head, brandishing it with such dreadles resolution, as if the day had been
ours already: then the Trumpets sounded a charge, which warlik noise inspird us
with new courage, and being within shot of them our Mr. commanded his Gunner
to make his level and to shoot, went close by his quarter that was nearest us,
shot on purpose to miss him, as a warning what kind welcome they were to have
at our hands at which the foremost ship came up to us apace, being almost
becalmed, or with very little wind, returning us worse then we sent for their
first shot killed us a man, so betwixt us for a good space was a most furious
encounter, they having advantage of us by reason of the wind, presently laid
us a board with one of their ships, this was near about eleauen of the
clock, then they sounded their Trumpets, and gave sueh a showt as if they had
won the victory already. But God, that never leaves those that put their
confidence in him, cheared our Master and Company with such manly fortitude,
that presently our Trumpets sounded and answered them with a charge. (Which
Trumpeter was presently slain, as shall be after related,) and the Boatswaine
winding his whistle, that pell-mell we fell to it, in such feirce manner that
their great ordinance had torn our ship that we used our Gunes clear of
the ports, for they had left us no port on the quarters but all open, but we
not failing to pay them as well on their bow, to their great dismaying, for we
had not left them one man alive from their maine-mast forward; besides we
dismounted their ordinance, and tore them so near the water that their chief
Commanders were forced with their Cuttleaxes to beat their own men, to force
them to make more have to vngrapple from us then they did to board us.

All this time the Master, Vigillently went to and frow encouraging his men,
sometimes in the Gunner room, sometimes at the healme, sometimes on the port
as ocasion served, and where his presence was most needful. This first fight
continued two hours, the ship was in burden, two hundred tons, or there
abouts, and had in her 25. pieces of ordinance, and about 250. men, the
Captain of her, we imagine was one Walsingham, which should be an English man
by that name, and Admiral of himself for so it signifide by his Flag in his
maine top, they boorded us on our Larboord quarter, armd with fauchions,
hatchets, and half pikes, they staid aboard us half an hour, tearing up our
naileboords, upon the poope and the Traphatch, but we having a murderer in
the round house kept the larbboord-side clear, whilst our men with the other
ordinance, and muskets, and a murderer in our Traphatch, played upon them and
their ship, yet for all this they paid our gallery with small shot that we were
much endangered, but at last we shot her through and through, and they us
likewise, that being fearful to be sunk she bore a head from us and lay by
the lee to mend her leakes, this fight was so near the shore, that the
inhabitants set up a glass and found it lasted two hours and a half, and
this was the first encounter in which was killed five men and a little boy, the
manner how they were slain shall be at the end of the book.

Now the Second encounter as we suppose was with Captain Kelleies Ship that
came likewise up with his flag in the maine top, and another Ship with his Flag
in the fore top, which Ships were at least three hundred tun apeece or
there abouts, and had in each of them twenty eight or thirty pieces of
Ordinance, and about two hundred and fifty men, so they laid us aboard on the
Starbord quarter, and the other on the Larbor, where entering our ship thick
and threefold, with their semiters, hatchets, half pikes and other weapons,
put us in great danger both of the loss of our Ship and our lives, for they
performed much manhood and many dangerous hazards, amongst which there was one
of their company, that desperately went up into our maine top to fetch down
our Flag, which being spied by the Steward of our Ship, presently shot him with
his Musket that he fell tumbling upon our deck, and presently Cast ouerbord
by their own men, as they did the rest, leaving the Flag hehind him, so these
two ships fought with us with great resolution, playing upon us with their
Ordinance and small shot, for the space of an hour and a half, of whom we
received some hurt, and likewise they of us, but when they could not prevail,
nor any way make us to yield, they bore up and passed from us to lay their
ships by the leeto stop their leaks, for we had grievously batterred them with
our great Ordinance, and this was the second attempt they made upon us.

Now for the third, there came one more of theirs ships of two hundred tun
that had 30. pieces of Ordinance, and at the least two hundred and 50. men all
well provided as might be, which was as we thought too great a number for us,
being so few in our ship, but God that was our friend gave us such strength
and success that they little prevailed against us, for at their first coming
up, notwithstanding all their multitude of men, we shot her quite thorough and
thorough, we entertaind her with two minion and three sacre, on our starboard
side, then she fell to our Larboard side, and then we welcomed her with a sacre
in our bow, two minion and, one demiculuerin, which made her forsake us and lie
by the lee, as the others did before: but the other ship remaining, greater
then the rest, in burden 500. tons with 650. men, laid us aboard on the
Starbord side, and in that quarter they entered our ship, with their Semiters,
Fauchions, half Pikes, and other weapons, running to and fro upon the deck
crying still in the Turkish tongue, and some English, yield your selves,
promising we should be well used, and one third part of our goods delivered
back, with such like fair promises; at which one of our company told, the
Master of the large offer of the Turks, persuading him to yield, but the
Master replied, away villain, I will never give them part or quarter, whilst
I have quarters to my body. Who being thus resolved, some of our men plied our
Ordinance against them, some played with the small shot, some with other
weapons, as swords and half Pikes and such like, in midst of which skirmish,
it so happened by ill chance that they seeing that we would not yield to
composition firde our ship in three places in the Masters Cabin, the gallery,
with wild fire balls cast into the hold and so left us, besides our gunnes and
theirs fired the Carpenters cabin, that we and the ship was fired, and in
great danger to be lost and cast away, had not the Lord in his mercy preserved
us, and sent us means happily to quench it, but now mark the accident, the
fire being perceived by our enemies to burn outragiously, and thinking that
our Ship would have therewith been suddenly burned to the water, they left
us to our fortunes, falling a stern from us, and so we put to the shore
under a Tower, for some succor, where we let an Anchor fall thinking to ride
there all that night, which we had no sooner done, but we saw the great ship
that parted from us, in our judgment bear upon us, and at that time the ship
that never boorded us shot a piece of ordinance, while we were preparing for
another encounter and so we were forced to wey our Anchor, and set sail to get
better succor, and the enemy being weary of our company hoyst out their boats
to mend their leakes, whereupon we put into the road between the two little
towers, where we sent our maimed gunner a shore to one of those towers, to
make shot at the enemy if need were, where we lay five days, mending the
bruises and leakes of our ship: the losses we received in the aforesaid fight,
were six Men and one Boy, which were killed outright, and there were hurt
eight men and one Boy more: but the Lord does know what damage we put them to,
and what number we slew in their ships.

There is one thing more worthy of reme^berance of our Surgeon whose name
was Robert Grove, who as he was dressing one of our men in the hold of our
Ship, a Ball of Wildfire fell into his Basin which he thinking to cast over
board it fell upon the deck, which had greatly endangered us but that he
resolutly fell upon it and rouling in it smothered it out with his body. The
Turks trumpeters were aboard and sounded their Trumpets, yet notwithstanding,
our men assaulted them so fiercely, that they forced them off, and the Boswaine
(seeing them fly) most vndantedly with a whistle blourd them to the skirmish,
if so they durst. The Captains of three of their Ships were Englishmen, as we
think, who took part with the Turks thus to rob and spoil upon the Ocean,
their names were Walsingham, Kelley, and Sampson.

Upon the 13. of January there came aboard certain Spaniards in the morning
betimes to witness what hurts we had received, who seeing our men dead, went a
shore with us, and showed us where we might bury them, but as we wore busy
in making their graves, and covering the bodies with earth, there came sailing
by a Flemish Ship of tweluescore tun, which the enemy in the dark thought
had been us, and so let her pass, which had in her five or six thousand
pounds, which had been chased with those men of war that had fought with us
before, all which money they brought in a long boat to this shore, and left in
the ship only three men, which were two Sailors and one Soldier, that
afterward within two days brought the said ship into the Road of Callery, not
any thing at all endangered, God be praised.

Upon the 15. of the same Month when we came from the burying of our men, and
had rested our selves in our Ship some two or 3. hours, as God would have
it, the wind began to blow a strong gale, and by little and little grew to be a
terrible tempest, through which from Sunday night till Friday in the evening.
we lay in such extremity of weather, as rain, wind, lightening and thunder,
that we thought we should never have got clear from the Road where we lay:
during which storm and tempest there dyed one of our men, that had been hurt
in the fight, whose body wecast ouerbord, into the Sea, without any other
burial, and so when the wind and sea a little calmed, we set up sail and
came forward: but within three days after we buried 3. men more in the sea,
and the same afternoon we arrived in the Road of Callery, and lay at anchor,
where again searching our Ship, we found it rent and torn in many several
places, so in Callery we mended our Ship, and hired certain men there to help
us to stop her leakes, and fish her Masts, and having all things fitting for
our Voyage homewards, upon the 30. day of January we committed our selves
again unto the Sea, so leaving Callery we came foreward with a Frenchman, who
was bound to a place Orestone, some thirty Leagues from Callery, where after
two days we left his company being the first day of February, and after that
putting forewards still toward England, we are now by Gods assistance safely
arrived at London, to the contentation of our Owners, and the comfort of our
selves that (by the Almighties protection) have escaped so many dangers. God be
praised.

FINIS.
WAlter Penrose, the first man killed, being shot in the belly. 2 Thomas
Sheapheard quarter master, his head shot off. 3 William Sw^te, Trumpetter, as
he sounded in the fight had one arm shot off, yet he sounded till another
great shot stroke off his other arm, with his Trumpet and all, then after he
was killed with a shot through the body. 4 William Rassell, quarter master, had
me arm first shot off, afterward he was shot through and killed. 5 John Sands,
the crown of his head shot off. 6 Benjamin Cornellius, a boy, shot in the
throat, killed. 7 David Fause, masters mate, shot in the groyne, killed.
These men were killed outright and buries a shore.

These 4 men dyed within 4 or 5 days, after were cast into the sea. 8 Io:
Blackatar, quarter Mr. his leg maym'd and burnt blind, yet he labored to quench
the ship being fired. 9 Thomas Worger, a youth, the Masters servant, his
sholder blade shot off and lived three days. 10 William James, Trumpetter,
burnd with wild fire, that he flamed like a fiery man all over, then John Roff
Purser cast water on him, to quench him, he lived 5 days in great pain: in
the fight an arrow came betwixt the Masters legs at the helm and ran into the
said James his leg which the Maisterpuld out. 11 John Prestin, a youth, killed
with a musket.


These following, were maymd and hurt, and are living. Robert May Masters
mate, shot in the thigh, Tho Wright, gunner, with shot and splintars hurt in
12. places. Thomas Dauiell, burnt with powder, and lost an eye. Roger Gi^er,
wounded in the head with splinters. Robert Downs, the Masters boy, shot in
the belly, lives.


These men are alive unhurt. Edward Nichols Master, shot with a small shot,
that tore his hose and stockings through, and gave his leg a scarre, and 4
times shot through the hose. Fra. Constable Boat swain, John Ro^he Purser.
William Lucas Carpenter. The. Hob Gunners mate, Will. Moore quarter Gunner. Will.
Coll^ Steward Rob. Groan Surgeon. John Adiney Couper. Christo. Austen
Cockson. Hum^. Lee, Boatsons mate. Will. Renfree quar: M. Will. Chalicom, Isake
Watlington, Trumperters. Thee: Anderson, Tho. Spurden Nicho. Wilkinson, Henry
Low, Cornelius Scot, Philip a welchman, Sailors the rest were passengers.



