FAIR AND foul weather: OR A SEA AND LAND Storm, between two Calmes.

WITH An Apology in defense of the painful life, and needful use of Sailers.

By John Tailor.



LONDON, Printed for W: B. and are to be sold by Edward Wright at
Christ-Church gate. 1615.

To the Judicious understanding gentleman, and my much approved and esteemed
good friend, Master ROBERT BRANTHVVAITE, Gentleman Tailor of the Kings
Majesty's Tower of London. John Tailor Dedicates this his Poetical
Weatherworke, with his best wishes, for your hearts contentment.
Kind Sir, my love to you's engaged so deep,
That were I Idle, I were much ungrateful:
Or should my thanks, forgetful, ever sleep
In me, 'twere base, unmannerly and hateful.
Then though I cannot pay you half my score,
Vouchsafe to take this trifle as a part,
As time enables me you shall have more,
And therefore now accept my willing heart.
I know, you well do understand and know
The weak defects of my defective Muse,
Yet do I hope you will this favor show
That love may her unwilling faults excuse.
And so to your protection I commend
This Pamphlet, as unto my dearest friend.
Yours in my best employments to be commended. JOHN TAILOR.
Briefly to you that will Read.
NOT unto every one can Read, I write;
But only unto those that can Read right.
And therefore if thou can not Read it well,
I pray thee lay it down, and learn to spell.
But if thou will be hewing, (like a drudge)
Hew on, and spare not, but forbear to Judge.
Thine if thou be mine, John Tailor.
To his friend and neighbor Master JOHN TAILOR.
FIerce Neptunes wrath, and Eol's angry spleen
Full many a time I have both felt and seen,
In leaking ship, and which has grieved me more,
In a long night a dark Moon, and lee shore:
But such a storm as thou describest h^ere,
Amazeth me with wonder and with fear
And were thou not both Water-man and Poet
Thou never could half so plainly show it,
I much rejoice thou safe on shore art come,
And bid thee very kindly welcome home.
Thomas Smith.
To his friend John Tailor.
I Cannot tell, how other men may praise
The pleasing Method, thy Minerua lays
In whatsoever it works on, but to me
It offers much desired variety,
To pass dull hours withal: with that, affords
Much useful matter, which with Phrase, and Words.
And all the aptest ornament of writ
Thy pen does furnish: This last birth of wit
Is witness, worth believing. Like the Glass
Great Arts-men use, in showing things that pass
In parts far from us. This presents a Flawe,
Or Storm at Sea: for what I red, I saw.
I so may speak. Me thought I had in sight,
A Clowd, as black as the dark Robe of Night:
Saw that dissolve, and fall in such a shower,
As (mixed with lightning, and that voice of power,
Makes Towers and Castles totter) made an hour
Full of confounding horror. Then again,
Mine eyes sad object, was the troubled Maine:
Sweld up, and curled, with that impetuous breath,
Makes Land-men quake, and Seamen often see death.
On this, me thought, I saw a vessel tossed,
Higher then ken, and in minute, lost
Between the Mountaine-billowes: At whose rise
I saw pale looks, and heard the heavy ayes.
Of those sad men that manned her: After all,
I saw this Storm into a Calmness fall,
As plain, and smooth as Crystal. In thy Book
All this is seen, as on thy lines we look.
If where such life is, there can want delight,
Though often I read, I Will never dare to write.
Tho: B.
FAIR AND FOUL WEATHER.
YOU triple-treble, thrice three Nymphs Divine,
Inspire this weak capacity of mine,
Oh let me quaffe of your Pegassian bowl,
That I may write of Weather Fair and Foul.
That to the life, my lines may here inform,
Description of a Calm, and then a Storm:
Give me that power that my unlearned Verse,
The Readers apprehension so may pierce,
That though the Weather be exceeding fair,
They may suppose a foul and troublous Air.
And when they come to read tempestuous lines
Then though the wind sleep, and Hiperion shines,
Yet let them think Heavens Axletree does crack,
And Atlas throws his burden from his back
I wish my Verse should such Impression strike,
That what men Read off, they should think the like.
For apprehension must be quick and yare,
Imagination must be here, and there,
For if a Tempest be but smoothly read,
It shows the Readers Judgment dull and dead.
Or else to seem to make the Welkin split,
In thundering out a Calm shows want of wit.
Against Heaven bread Poesy it is the worst offense,
To have it hacked, and read with senseless sense.
THen first I will describe Fair weather, cheerful,
To make Foul weather after seem more fearful.
Upon an Evening when Apolloes beams
Declinde unto the occidentall streams,
As of the day he took his kind adieu,
The Clouds, vermillion, purple, red, and blewe,
Put on the radient liueries of the Sun,
(As quickly lost, as they were lightly won.)
To th'under world in have he took his flight.
And left th'Horizon all in darkness dight:
Yet as he stoopt he glaunc'd his glorious eye,
And staind the Welkin with a Crimson dye,
Which did betoken, (as old sawes do say)
An Evening red, foretells a cheerful day.
Sweet Philomella, against a therne did sing,
Exclaiming against the lustful Thracian King,
Whilst Progne in the Chimneys top does keep
And for her selfe-borne self slain son does weep.
Madge-how let whooting cuts the empty skies,
The light she flees, and in the night she flies.
Bright Cinthia rises from her watery bed,
And shows her pale faced silver horned head:
Belighted and attended from her porch
With many an hundred thousand, thousand torch.
She light does run, and as she runs does light,
The universal Arch of pitchie night.
Hushed silence, (mortal foe to women kind,
In snoring sleep did living senses bind,
That (but for Rowting, and for drawing breath)
It seemed that all-deuouring grisly death)
Without respect of person, Sex, or Laws,
Had grasped the world in his insatiate paws.
At last the Cock proclaimed the days approach,
And Titan called for his Diurnall Coach.
He kissed Aurora, and she blushing red,
Ashamed, hid her shamefaced Maidenhead.
Pale Leina is obscured, her race is run,
Her light's extinguished by the flaming Sun.
The bucksome day, roab'd in a silken Calm,
With Zephers downy breath, as sweet as balm
Perfumed the vausty verge of the whole world,
When golden Sell his glistring beams had hurld.
And gilded tops of proud Clowd-kissing hills,
And all the world with radient brightness fills.
Fair Flora had embrodered ore the field,
Whose various colors, various sents did yield.
The gentle wind amongst the leaves did whiske,
The Goats did skip, the pretty Lambs did friske.
The brooks did warble, birds did sweetly sing,
With joy to entertain the gladsome Spring.
Like herds of Kids the Porposes began leap,
The Seals and Scollopendraes, on a heap
Do vault and caper in such active sort
That Neptune took delight to see the sport.
The Mountain Whale, in his wide yawning chaps,
Made shoales of smaller fishes fragment scraps,
To fill his endless, bowndlesse, greedy gut,
(For multitudes of littles hardly glut
Th'unbottom'd gorge of gaping thirst for more,
That pines in plenty, starues in midst of store)
Stern Nereus slept, raped in a pleasant dumpe,
Whilst Triton pip'd leuoltoes with his Trumpe.
Old Oceanus nimbly skipt and praunc'd,
And turne-coate Proteus with fair Thetis daunc'd.
The scaly Dolphins mounted on the waves,
And sportiue Sturgeons one another laues.
The Seahorse did curuet, and kick, and fling,
And without rider, mounts and runs the ring.
Yea all the watery squandrons took delight,
To see the Sea so still, the day so bright.
Was never gentler Calm on Neptunes face,
All Elements in friendly sort embrace,
As if in love they were combined together,
To give poor mortal creatures pleasant weather.
But what is it that continues permanent,
That bydes below the spacious firmament
Not any thing at all. Our sweet with sour
Is mixed and pain our pleasures do devour.
The pleasant fowntaines toads and aspicks breeds,
In fairest fields are most contagious weeds.
A minutes Joy, foreruns a month of trobles,
And under calmest Sea a tempest bubles.
We (in a merry, humor) Ankers wayd;
And in a trice our winged sails displaid.
And with a fresh and friendly welcome gale,
Into the Maine amain we mainely sail.
Our steadfast course, right North North East we keep,
We found and found the Sea ten fathom deep.
We had not saild above a league or twain,
But Eolus began to mount the Maine
Of Neptunes Monarchy, and with a troop
Of full mouthed winds, that made great oaks to stoop.
With Ceders, Pines, and tall wel-rooted Elmes,
And topsie turuie lofty towers ore'whelmes.
Resplendent Phoebus hid his glorious light,
And day inuellop'd in a Roabe of night
Attired the world in a black mourning town,
As all things had bin turned vpside down.
Jove's lightning flames, and dire amazing flashing,
At whom the Sea-God hills of water dashing.
Against the Heavens did seem in a age t'aspire,
T'extinguish Jove's Celestia 1 dreadful fire.
The spungy Clouds against one another crushed,
And bursting, violent floods of Rain out gasht.
Orion glar'd like a tempestuous Comet.
Whilst Skies, and Seas, did fire and water vomet.
The rattling Thunder through the Air did rumble,
As if Heavens frame into the Sea would tumble:
Whole gusts of Sea ascends and fronts the Rain,
And storms of rain in fury falls again,
As if the Clowd contending water strove,
Great Neptune from his Palace to remove.
Big blustering Eoll blew confounding breath,
And thunders dreadful larums, threatened death.
Down powers whole floods of Rain and driu'ling sleete,
As if Heaven, Eath, and Sea had meant to meet
In desperate opposition, to expire
The World, and unto Chaos back retire.
The rolling ruthlesse Billows rage and rore,
And battered fiercely against the rocky shore:
Who by the rugged Crags repulsed back.
With repercussiue anger threats our wrack.
Thus whilst the Wind and Seas contending gods,
In rough robustious fury were at ods,
Our beaten Bark, tossed like a forcelesse feather
Twixt winds and waves, now hither and now thither,
The topmast sometimes tilting at the Moon,
And being up so soon, does fall as soon,
With such precipitating low descent,
As if to Hels black Kingdom down she went.
The uncontrolled Hipperboroean blasts
Tears all to tatters, tacklings, sails and masts.
And boystrus gusts of Eurus breath did hizze,
And among our shrowds and Cordage wildly whizze.
Our Ship no Rudder, or no steerage feels,
But like a Drunkard to and fro she reeles,
Vnmanag'd, guidlesse, up and down she wallowed,
And of the foaming waves looks to be swallowed.
Midst darkness, lightning, thunder, fleet, and rain,
Remorceles winds and mercie-wanting Maine,
Amazement, horror, dread, from each man's face,
Had chased away life's blood, and in the place
Was black despair, with hair heau'd up upright,
With A shy visage, and with sad affright,
As if grim death with his all-murdring Dart,
Had aiming bin at each man's bloodles heart.
(...)s the Bote-swaine, lower, the top-saile low^^
Then up aloft runs scrambling three or fewer,
But yet for all their hurly burly have,
Ere they got up, down tumbles Sail and Mast.
Veare the maine sheate there, then the Master cride.
Let rise the foretacke on the larboord side.
Take in the foresaile, yare good fellows, yare,
Aluffe at healme there, ware no more beware.
Steer South-South-East there, I say ware no more,
We are in danger of the Leeward shore.
Clear your maine brace, let go the hollin there,
Port port the healme hard, Romer, come no near.
Then with a whiffe the wind amain does puff,
And then our Master cride aluffe, aluffe,
Clap hard the helm a Lee, yea, yea, done, done,
Down, down allow into the bold quick, run.
The maine bend snackes, the plankes and timbers break,
Pump bullies, Carpenters quick, at up the look.
Well pumpt my hearts of gold, who says ammends.
The careful Master thus his throat he reads,
Contending against the wind and weathers force,
Till he with gaping and with toil grows hoarce.
But since the Thund'rens high imperious bride,
Against AEneaes had her anger tried,
(Excepting this) a Storm so full of rage,
Was never seen or heard in any age.
But when our loss of lives we most expected,
Then powerful power of powers us all protected,
The winds grew gentle that had blown so stiff,
Stern Eurus hyed him Eastward with a whiffe.
And Rugged Boreas, Northward trudged a pace,
Hamidious Auster, to the South did trace.
Sweet breathing Zephirus cride Westward hoe,
Thus homeward all the furious winds did go.
And as they scud they swept th'an even Maine
From gusts, and flawes, and leaves it smooth and plain.
Like as the grass in field, some short, some long.
Some green, some dead, with witherd flowers among,
Unequally in height some high some low.
Until the Mower equal all does mow,
Where long and short cut down together lies,
And as it lives so it together dies.
Wherewith the sith (all sharp and barbing keen)
The lab'rer shaues all even, plain and cleene.
So are the billows, blew, and green, and white,
By the winds home retreat all shaven quite.
That Neptunes angry browe, looked mild and even,
For Storms and flawes before the winds were driven:
Or as a measure filled with Oats or Rye
Vnstrooke and heaped does lie confusedly,
Till at one stroke the Meater strikes it plain,
And makes the measure equal with the grain.
So at one blow, the blowing of each, wind,
Stooke Storms before them, and left Calmes behind.
That as bright Tytan in his Course did pass,
He made the Sea his amomours looking glass.
And as himself had of himself a sight,
His shadow seemed t'eclips his substance quite,
That he amazed ran, and ran amazed.
And gazed and winked, and winked again and gazed,
That as Narsissus dyed by his own error
So Titan was entangled in this mirror.
Until at last a curled woolsacke clowd
His glorious substance from his shade did shrowde
Great Neptune to his Court descended deep,
And laid his head in Thetis lap to sleep
We presently let no advantage slip,
But nimbly we rerig'd our vnrig'd ship,
Our Courses, Bonnets, Drablers, Malts, and all
With speed we merrily to mending fall.
And by Heavens favor, and our willing pain,
Into the wished hau'n we gain a chain.
Wheare at an Anchor we in safety ride,
Secured from storms and tempests, wind, and tide.
An Apology for Seamen, or the Description of a Mariners pains and
adventures.
UP sluggard Muse from Leathe's lazy Lake,
And in plain terms, a true Description make,
Of toils, of dangers, and excessive pains,
That Seamen suffer for the Land men's gains.
The one does live: Shore, in wealth and ease,
The other surrowes through th'vncertaine Seas.
The one in pleasure lives, and lies at home,
The other cuts the raging salt-Sea foam.
The one adventures only but his goods,
The other hazards all, both goods and bloods.
Among Pirates, tempests, rocks, fogs, gulfes, and shelues,
The Seamen ventures all, and that's themselves.
The Land-man (dangerlesse) doth-eate and sleep,
The Seaman slems and plowes the Ocean deep.
The one fares hard, and harder he does lie,
The other lies and faires, soft, sweet, and dry.
The one with dauntlesse vnrebated courage,
Through greatest perils valliently does forage,
And brings home Jewels, Silver Gold, and Pearls,
Tadorne both Court and City Dames, and Girls.
They set whole Kingdoms both at wars or peace,
They make wealth flow, and plenty to increase.
The Countries far remote, they do unite,
They make us sharers in the worlds delight:
And what they get with pain, they spend in pleasure.
They are no Mizers, boorders up of treasure.
The oldest man alive, did never see
A Sailer and a Niggards mind agree.
No, if their pains at Sea were ten times more,
It Is all forgotten when they come a shore.
And this much I dare publish with my pen,
They are the best of Serviceable men,
The walls of Kingdoms, Castles of defense,
Against Invasion of each foreign Prince.
A torch lights not it self, yet wastes and burns,
So they their lives spend, serving others turns.
The Merchant sits at home, and casts up sums,
And reckons gains and loss, what goes, what comes:
To what his whole adventures may amount,
He Ciphers, numbers, and he casts Account.
And every angy boystrous gust he hears
Disturbs his sleep, and fills his heart with fears.
His goods at Sea awakes and startles him,
For with them, his estate does sink or swim.
But yet for all this heart tormenting strife,
He Is in no danger of the loss of life
By cut throat Sea-theeues, or a world of woes,
Which many a Sailers life and state or'throwes.
The Mariner abides the desperate shocks
Of wind and weather, Pirates, sands and rocks
And what they get, they freely spend away,
A whole months wages, in a night, or day.
Their labors on the Sea, they leave a shore
And when all is spent then to it again for more:
And pity it is there should be such neglect
Of such, whose service merits such respect.
Whole spawnes of Land-sharks, and of gilded Guls,
Of painted Mammets, and ilfauourd truls,
Will hold their noses and cry sogh and sye,
When serviceable Mariners pass by:
And then (their stomachs somewhat more to ease)
What stinking tarlubbers (quoth they) are these.
Then Mistress Fumpe troubled with the stitch,
She Is poysned with the smell of tar and pitch.
Some Frankincense, or Juniper, oh quick,
Make haste I say, the Gentlewoman's sick.
And Mounsier Puffepast with the satin slop,
That sits in a Tobacco-sellers shop,
And makes a stink worse then a brace of Bears:
When with a whiffe his witless worship swears,
How Sailers are Rude fellows, and do smell,
Of pitch and tar worse then the smoke of hell.
But were the case now, as I erst have known,
That use of men should have their service shown,
One Mariner would then do much more good,
Then twenty of these Satin Milksop brood
Of all men then the Nauigator can,
For King and Countries cause, best play the man:
And howsoere they smell of tar and pitch,
Their painful toils do make great Kingdoms rich.
I we by soraine War should be annoyed,
Then chiefly Mariners must be employed,
They on the Sea must bide the fiercest brunt,
Grim death and danger they must first affront.
One fight at Sea, with Ships courageous mand,
Is more then three great battles on the Land.
There men must stand to 't, there is no way to fly,
There must they Conqu'rers live or Conquered die.
And if they dye not by some launching wound.
They are in hazard to be sunk and drowned.
The murdring bullets, and the brinish waves,
Are many a valliant Sea-mans death and graves.
And it is a lamentable case to think,
How these men's serviceable number shrink,
Decreasing and consuming every day,
Where one does breed, at least sour do decay,
Some the Sea swallows, but that which most grieves.
Some turn Sea Monsters, Pirates, roauing thieves:
Employing their best skill in Navigations,
Against their own Prince, and kin, and native Nation,
By which means many a Merchant is undone,
And Pirates nere the better for what is won.
For if (like Moss his Mare) they be caught napping.
They bid the world their last farewell at Wapping.
Which fatal Haven, has as many slain,
As could disturb and shake the power of Spain:
And want of means, but (chiefly want of grace)
Has made so many perish in that place.
But to conclude my Ryme, with heart and speech.
I do my God (for Jesus sake) beseech,
That he for Sailors will vouchsafe to please,
To grant them good employment on the Seas.
So honest salt-Sea-watermen adiewe,
I have bin, am, and will be still for you.
Whilst I live, JOHN TAILOR.
FINIS.

