

A BAWD. A virtuous Bawd, a modest Bawd: As She Deserves, reproove, or else
applaud.

Written by JOHN TAILOR.

Printed at London for Henry Gosson. 1635.

To the neither Noble or Ignoble, Lord or Lady, kind or cruel, learned or
ignorant, courteous or currish, Christian or Barbarian, Man or Woman, rich or
poor: but to all and every one in general and particular.
MOnsieur, and Madam Hydra, to your many Heads and variety of Censures I have
made bold to dedicate a poor, harmless, modest, honest, and innocent Bawd; I
know great persons of worth and Honor, are daily so visited with penurious
shreds of Schollership, fragments of Hexameters and Pentameters, scraps of
Poetry, the scum and dregs of wit, and the froth and lees of wisdom: One
salutes my Lords Lordship at Breakfast with a Funeral Elegy, lamentably
written, and is most miserably rewarded for his kindness. Another hunts out his
Worships ungentlemanly Knighthood, (having most intolerably be labored his
name with an Acroflicke or Anagram) which out of his vacuitie of worthiness
he rewards with not a penny. A third has belyed such a Lady or Gentlewomans
Beauty and qualities, in most abominable fashion, setting her forth for fair
and virtuous; for the which he is rewarded according to the subject he wrote
of, and his own demerits, with as much as comes to nothing. For these and some
other respects, I thought it not fit to desire the patronage of any one person
in patticular, it being a subject that is common to all, for all, or any. At
men are dispersed universally through the World, so a Bawd, being an
universal creature, whose function is publicly scattered, I thought it not
pertinent or accomodating, that she should be privately protected by any.
Therefore as she has been and is for all, so I dedicate her to all, knowing
that all are better able to reward the Poet, than one alone. And this is
further to advertise the Reader, that where I do speak of Spiritual Bawdes,
Bawdry, Adultery, or Fornication, that I have avoided prophanitie, obscenity,
scurrilitie, and all manner of incivility or indecencie; not meddling with
Religion at all, but with a pitiful derision, and merry reprehension,
explaining the abuses, foppish and sottish corruptions, that like so many
Cankers or Caterpillars have and do daily eat, consume and putrify both the
Purity and Piety of that Religion which boalts it self to be most Primitive
and Catholic. For the other part of this Book, or Bawd, she is altogether
civil or temporal, being not troubled so much as with one good Ecclesiastical
word, but merely Paradoxicall; setting forth the rare and singular virtues of
a Bawd; wherein if any of my Readers can pick any pleasure, it is on apparent
sign they have some wit, and if reap any profit, let them either thank me in
words, or else revvard me with silence.

Yours so far, and no further then you are mine, JOHN TAILOR.

A BAVVD.
MY Verse is honest, seemly, neat and clean,
Yet is my Theme polluted and obsceane:
I Will touch foul pitch, yet will not be defild,
My Muse shall wade through dirt, and not be soild.
The Sun on noisome dunghills shines as well,
As on fair flowers that do fragrant smell:
The Air by which we live, does every where
Breathe still alike upon the poor and Peer.
The Sea bears many an old despised Witness my paper Boat.
Boat,
Yet on the Sea the best Ships do but float,
And Earth allows to all her scattred brood,
Food, Clothes and Lodging to the bad and good.
Yet Sun, Air, Sea, nor Earth receive disgrace
By any bounty which they give the base.
Even so my Muse, (free from all foul intents)
Does take example from the Elements,
In laying better studies by a while,
And in clean fashion write a beastly style:
Yet will I not my sense or meaning mar;
With terms obscure, or phrases fetched from far
Nor will I any way equivocate,
With words sophistical, or intricate,
Vtopian-Fustianisme, poor heathen Greek,
To put my Readers wits to groape and seek.
Small eloquence men must expect from me,
My Schollership will name things as they be.
I think it good, plain English, without fraud,
To call a spide a spade, a Bawd a Bawd.
Two little Pamphlets I have wrote before,
Which I was bold to call a Thief, and Whore,
Yet was my Whore so chaste, that she had not,
From end to end, one foul offensive spot;
Nor did my Thief from any man purloyne,
Or lived by filching either goods or coin.
And now by chance it came into my mind,
That with the Bawd my Pen was much behind:
My Whore was honest, and my Thief was true,
And in this sort I Will give the Bawd her due.
Strange fruit from my poor barren labor springs,
I modestly must immodest things:
It Is somewhat hard, but yet it is no riddle,
All Bawdry does not breed below the middle.
So many several sorts of Bawds do grow,
That where there is not a Bawd, it is hard to know.
The first with spiritual Bawds, whose honor high
Springs from the whoredom of Idolatry,
Cast but your eyes upon the Man of Rome,
That styles himself the Head of Christendom,
Christ's universal Vicar, and Vicegerent,
In whom fools think the Truth is so inherent,
That he can souls to Heaven or Hell prefer,
And being full of Errors, cannot err:
And though his witchraft thousands has enticed,
He will be called Lieutenant unto Christ.
How has that false Conventicle of Trent,
Made laws, which God, or good men never meant,
Commanding worshipping of stones and stocks,
Of Relikes, dead men's bones, and senseless blocks,
From which adultrate painted Adoration,
Men (worse then stocks or blocks) must seek salvation?
The Souls of men are His that dearly bought the^,
And he the only way to Heaven has taught them.
And who so forces them to false adoring,
Is the maine Bawd unto this spiritual Whoring.
Besides, it is apparent, and most clear,
That he is the greatest Bawd the Earth does bear:
For he that tolerates the Stews erection,
Allows them Privileges and Protection,
Shares in the profit of their sordid sweat,
Reapes yearly Pensions and Revenues great,
Permits the Pole-Shorne fry of Friars and Monks,
For Annual stipends to enjoy their Puncks.
When Hen. Smith in his Treat. of Herodot. cap. 38 page 303.
Paul the third the Romish Miter wore,
He had contributary Trulls such store,
To five and forty thousand they amount,
As then Romes Register gave true account.
Besides, it was approved, the gain was clear
Cornelius Agrippa in his vanity of Sciences.
Full twenty thousand Ducats every year.
Moreover, once a Bishop (boasting said,
He had Ten Thousand Priests that paid
(Some more, some less (by way of Rent or fines;
Each Idem. a Lucrece was first married to her own brother the son of Pope
Aleaxander the sixth, she being daughter to the said pope, and daughter in law
to him by the marriage with his son. And being concubine to the said Pope, he
caused her after his son her husbands death, to be married to three princes
one after another: First to Duke John Sforza. Secondly, to Lewis son to
Alphonfus King of Arragon. Thirdly, to Alphonsus D.Est Duke of Ferara. b Her
name was Constancia, she was married to a Duke named Sforza, but the Pope her
father poisoned her, because he could not lawfully enjoy her. Also for the like
be poisoned his sister.
one of them for keeping Concubines.
And he that keeps none, pays as much as he
As for his use does keep one, two or three.
All Is one, the Priests must pay t'augme^t the treasure
Keep or not keep, Whore or not Whore at pleasure.
Now judge, good Reader, have I said amiss,
Was ever any Bawdry like to this?
Pope a Alexander of that name the sixth,
With his own child incestuously commixt.
And Paul the third (affecting the said Game)
With his own b daughter did commit the same:
And after with his sister took such course,
That he with her did do as bad or worse.
John the thirteenth, and other more, it is plain
Have with their sisters and their daughters lain,
And when their stomachs have been gone and past,
To Princes they have married them at last.
Here Is Bawds of State, of high and mighty place,
Our Turnbul street poor Bawds to these are base.
But these brave doings better to disclose,
A little while I Will turn my Verse to Prose.
The forenamed Lucrece being dead, had this Epitaph bestowed on her, written by
Pontanus: Here lies Lucrece by name, but Thais in life,
The Popes child, and spouse, and yet his ownsons wife.
Besides, I found a cursed catalogue of these veneriall Caterpillars, who were
suppressed with the Monasteries in England, in the time of King Henry the
eight, with number of trugs, which each of them kept in those days, as those;
Christopher James a Monk of the Order of Saint Bennet in Canterbury, had three
whores, all married women: William Abbot of Bristoll, four: Nicholas Wbyden
Priest kept four in Windsor Castle: in the same place George Whitthorne five,
Nicholas Spoter five, Robert Hunne five, Robert Daveson six, Richard the Prior
of Maidenbeadly five; In Shuldred Monastery in Chichester Diocese, George
Walden the Prior seven, John Standnep seven, Nicholas Duke five; In Bath
Monastery Richard Lincombe seven, three of them married: John Hill in the
Cathedral Church at Chichester but thirteen; John White Prior of Bermondsey
had no more but twenty: all this Rabble was found and known in England; let a
man imagine then how many were not known, and what a goodly brood of Barnes
were fathered upon those that never begat them: withal, if England were so
stored with them, it is not to be doubted but all the rest of the Christian
world did swarm with these lecherous Locusts.

Moreover, much knavery (Bawdery I should say) may be covered under the veil
of Auricular Confession; for the Priest having a young pretty maid or wife at
shrift, will know her disposition, groape out all her secret conveyances, and
craftily underfeele her policies, and for a penance for her faults past, she is
enjoined to commit a sin present. The unloading of her Conscience (many times)
proving the burden of her belly Forty weeks after. And in this manner the
most zealous Catholic, or the most jealous Italian, may be most devoutely
cornuted under the cloak of Confession and Absolution.

Besides a most pernicious Bawd is he,
That for poor A flattering hireling Preacher, is a Bawd to the vices of his
surly Patron, and an hypocritical conniver at the crying sins of his
Audience.
scraps, and a bare ten pounds fee,
Dares not his mighty Patron to offend,
Or any way his vices reprehend,
Nor preach against pride, oppression, usury,
Dice, drink, or drabbes, vain oaths or simony,
Nor Venial sin or Mortal, or nothing
That may his Worship in the Withers wring:
But every way must fit his Text and time,
To leave untoucht the Impropriators crime:
Thus those whose functions Heaven does signify,
(Who should like trumpets lift their voices high)
Are mute and muzled, for a hireling price,
And so are Bawds unto their Patrons vice;
For he is a Bawd who does his living win,
By hiding, or by flattring peoples sin.
The The Devil is the chief Bawd.
Prince of darkness, King of Acheron,
Great Emperor of Styx and Phlegeton,
Cocytus Monarch, high and mighty Dis,
Who of Great Limbo-lake Commander is,
Of Tartary, of Erebus, and all
Those Kindomes which men Barathrum do call,
He is the chiefest Bawd, and still he plods
To send us whoring after godless gods:
And by his sway, and powerful instigation,
Has made the world stark drunk with fornication.
For since the first Creation, never was
The least degree of Bawdry brought to pass,
But he began it, and contrived it still,
He laid the plot, and did the Act fulfill.
So that of all the Bawds that ever were,
The Devil himself the Bell away does bear:
Yet all his whoring base Idolatry,
Did seem Religious zealous sanctity.
As thus

He blinded and withdrew people so far from the service and knowledge of the
true God, that they prayed to Pomona for the increase of their fruit, to Ceres
for Corn and Grain, to Silvanus for wilde-fowle, to Bacchus for wine, to
Neptune for fish, to Mars for the success of Wares and Captains, to Phoebus
for Physic and Music, to Saturn for laborers and workmen in husbandry, to
Pallas for valor, to Minerva for wisdom, to Jupiter for men of state and
port, to Inno for Pomp and Jewels, to Vulcan for fire and lightening, to Venus
for beauty and lascivious pleasure, to Luna for calmnes and fair weather, to
Pluto for riches, to Mercury for learning and eloquence, to Flora for flowers,
to Proteus for disguises, to Pan for Pypers, to Eolus for winds and storms, to
Bellona for battles and conquests, to Lucina for women with child, to Faunus
for Goats and Venison, to Clotho for spinning out the thread of life, to
Lachesis for wynding or reeling it, and to Atropos for cutting it off: my he
led them into more ridiculous sorts of spiritual adultery, as to worship with
religious adoration, Cats, Dogs, Toades, Beetles, Serpents, Fools, Madmen,
Privies Onions, Garlic, and many other damnable inventions, not to be numbered.

Nevertheless, whosoever will but look into the lying Legend of Golden
Gullery; there they shall find that the poor seduced ignorant Romanists do
imitate all the idolatrious fornication of the Heathen Pagans, and Infidels;
and that they put their He and She Saints, to far more baser and
ignominious offices, then these unbelievers of former ages did dare to put upon
their (vain imaginary) gods, as they make Saint Crespine a Shoemaker, and
Saint Roch the Patron of Sowters and Cobblers, they put Saint Wendelin to keep
sheep, and they make Saint Pelage a Cowheard or Neatherd, Saint Antony has
the protection of their Swine, Saint Vitus or Vitellus, aelias, Saint Calfe, an
exellent patron or protector to cure those that are bitten of a Spider called
Terrantulla, or Phallanx. They acknowledge Saint Gertrude for an exellent
Rat-catcher, and Saint Hubert for a good Dogge-keeper (some say a cunning
Huntsman:) the Smiths must pray to Eloye, the Painters to Saint Luke, the
Bakers must invoke Saint Honor, the Mariners Saint Nicholas, Saint Yue is
for the Lawyers, and Saint Anne to find things that are stolen or lost, whilst
Saint Leonard is the only Saint to set prisoners at liberty, by opening the
doors in the night, and make their Shackles fall off without any noise or
knocking. Besides they make Job a Physician to cure the Pox, when as that foul
disease was not known in any part of the world many hundred years after Jobs
days; for in the year 1496. ( Charles the eight being then the French King)
the Pox was brought from Naples into France, having but a little before bin
very thriftily by the Spaniards purchased from the Americans or West Indians:
And therefore they do Job wrong to make a Mountebank of him, in ascribing
cures to him beyond his skill or knowledge: but all is one for that, he must be
content with his office, as Saint Valentine is with the falling sickness, Saint
Roch with scabs and scurfes, Saint Sebastian with the Plague, Saint Entrope the
Dropsy, Saint Genou the Gowt, Saint Petronella the Ague or any Fever, Saint
Apollonia the Toothach; A Glister of Holy water I think, would better drive
out the Devil.
Saint Roman, they say, dispossesseth Devils out of the possessed, and Saint
Maturine is the mad men's Saint to cure the Frenzy. It is to be doubted, that
Physicians and Chirurgians have small takings, where all these skillful Saints
are so employed, except now and then they get a Patient by chance, when the
good Saint is over-busied, or not at leisure.

Moreover, there is a great contention amongst them, to what Saint they shall
commit the keeping of their Geese: some will have Saint Andoch, some Saint
Gallicet, and some Saint Feriall: the business is very weighty, and requires
mature deliberation and ripe judgment: some there are that would deprive Saint
Wendoline (before named) of his keeping sheep, and bestow the place upon Saint
Woolfe, which is a very unsuitable name for a Shepherd.

By this which has been said, the Reader may perceive what a cunning Bawd the
Devil is, to adulterate the true service of the eternal God with these
whorish inventions. And so though I could amplify this point to a larger
extent, in describing spiritual Bawds and Bawdry, yet now I think fitting to
avoid tediousness, and to treat of this subject in other garbes and fashions.

It is reported by Henry Stephens in his Apology or defense of Herodotes, the
first Book, 21. Chapt. page 182. That a merry disposed Priest got a pretty
Less behind the high Altar upon a good Friday in the morning, where he thought
all the He and She Saints were contented to keep Counsel, but it was known
to the Legate of Auignion (by the intelligence of no Saint) which Legate after
he had wisely considered on what day and time, and in what place the cleanely
conveiance was acted, he out of his charity concluded a Priest to be mortal,
and that flesh was frail, for which respects (upon promise of amendment) he
was absolved and released.

Moreover great Emperors have been Bawdes.
Emperors and Kings have been Bawdes, as Suetonius Tranquillius writes of
Tiberius Caesar, that he had Cells, and Caves, and Vaults in his house, where
he had a nursery of Whores, and oftentimes would have the execrable sport
committed in his presence. The Emperor Domitian followed his admirable
example, and Heliogabolus went so far beyond them in the Art of Bawdry, that
he made Punies of them both. And of latter years a A King of Castile, or
Spain, Bawd to his own wife.
King of Castile, called Henry the unable, because he could uot have a child by
his wife to inherit after him: he kindly entreated one of his Lords to take the
pains to beget an Heir for him.

There was a rich Burger of Antwerp, a Mercer by his trade, who was a Bawd to
his own wife (though it was against his will or knowledge) but I blame him
not, for I doubt he has many more fellows as innocent and ignorant as
himself, but this was the case, his wife wearing Corke-shooes, was somewhat
light-heel'd, and like a foul player at Irish, sometimes she would bear a man
too many, and now and then make a wrong Entrance: The sum was that she loved
a Doctor of Physic well, and to attain his company she knew no better or
safer way, then to feign her self sick, that he under the color of
visitation might feel her pulses, and apply such cordial Remedies as might
either ease or cure her.

In brief, the Doctor being sent for, comes and finds the Mercer her husband
walking in his shop with a neighbor of his, where after a Leash of Conges, and
a brace of Baeza los manus, the Mercer told him that his Wife is a languishing
sick woman, and withal entreats him to take the pains to walk up the
stairs, and minister some comfort unto her. Master Doctor, who knew her
disease by the Symptoms, ascends up into the Chamber to his longing Patient,
staying an hour with her, applying such directions and refections, that her
health was upon the sudden almost half recoveered; so taking his leave of her
(with promise of often visitation) he comes down into the shop, where the
guiltless Bawd her husband was, who demanding of the Doctor how all did above,
truly quoth he, much better then when I came, but since I went up, your wife
has had two such strange violent fits upon her, that it would have grieved
your very heart to have seen but part of one of them.

I my self do know two men that lighted by chance into one of these houses of
Iniquity in Antwerpe, and I dare be sworn that they went to commit no carnal
act, nor did commit any; but they perceiving a pretty painted piece of Punks
flesh, did suspect in what house they were, the one of them taking her by the
hand, did ask her some questions (wherein I think was not one word of God;)
the other impatient that his fel'ow had ingrost all the familiarity and talk
with the wench, begins to stamp, knock and call, at which the man of the
house enters, demanding, What do ye lack? You base rascal, quoth the other,
have you no more Whores in your house, must I stand like a Jack an Apes here
empty handed? Good sir, (quoth mine Host) be patient, and I will presently
send mine own wife to wait upon you.

Nor is the skill and knowledge of a substantial or absolute Bawd easily
gotten or learned; no my Masters, there is more in the matter then so; Frist,
she is a young pretty Girl, and passes time away in the instructions,
rudiments, and documents of a Whore, till she has attained (with many hazards)
to the years of 30 or 35. in all which space she has not spent her time
idly, but has been a creature of much use, having for the common cause,
adventured the blemmish of her Reputation, the rigor of the Laws, as
whippings, Penance, Imprisonments, Fines, Fees to Justices Clerks, Beadles,
and such inferior Relics of Authority. Besides, her valorous combats and
conflicts with Diseases, (wherein she often approves her self one of the
profitablest members in a Commonwealth to Physicians and Chyrurgians:) having
(I say) passed all these degrees with much peril and jeopardie of her body, No
toleration.
then look higher and think but on the shipwreck of her soul, (an adventure
of a greater price then she is aware of;) then toward the declining of her
life, and that her beauty fades, What a deal of charge is she at with
sophisticated Art, White and Red, to emplayster decayed Nature? Her humility
being such, that when her own head is bald, she will wear the cast hair of
any he for she sinner, that made a voyage in a string from Tyburne, to either
Heaven or Hell. And lastly, when as Art can no longer hide the sorrowed or
wrinkled deformities of her over-worne Age; then (like a true wel-willer to the
old trade she has ever followed,) Whoring having left her very unkindly
before she was vvilling to leave it: she, (as her proper right for her long
service) takes upon her the office and authority of a Bawd, and as she was
brought up her self, so with motherly Care her Employment is to bring up
others, wherein her pains is not small, in hyring Country wenches, that come
up weekly with Carryers, and putting them in Fashion, selling one Maydenhead
three or four hundred times, and sometimes with great labor and difficulty
she is forced to persuade men's wives and daughters; all which considered, a
Bawd does not get her living with so great ease as the world supposes; nor is
her adventure, pains, charge and peril to be inconsiderately slighted.

And as blabbing, babbling, taletelling, and discovering the faults and
fraileties of others, is a most common and evil practice amongst too many: so
on the other side, the virtues of a Bawd are much illustrated and confirmed by
contrary effects: For she is the maine storehouse of secrecy, the Maggazin of
taciturnity, the closet of connivence, the inumbudget of silence, the
cloakebagge of council, and the Capcase, sardle, pack, A necessary male for a
man to trusse up his trinkets is.
male, (or female) of friendly toleration. She is full of intolerable charity,
for her whole trade and course of life is to hide and cover the faults of the
greatest offenders, in which regard she is one of the principal secretaries
to the great Goddess Venus, and one of her industrious vigilant most horrible
privy counsel, not being ignorant of the liberal Arts and Sciences, and
exceedingly qualified in the seven deadly sins. And (for her further behoof)
she has and insight and can fashion her self to the humors of all Nations,
degrees, conditions, mysteries and occupations.

First, for her knowledges in the Arts and Sciences, she has the grounds of A
Bawd a Gramarian.
Grammar, whereby she can speak and write Amorously, fainedly, merrily,
lamentably, craftily, purposely, Bawdily: these words all ending in Lie (do
make her true dealing questionable) yet her aim is to live profitably, though
her fate is to dye miserably. Her skill in An Astronomer.
Astronomy cannot be small, for she has been an often starre-gazer lying on
her back, practiced in elevations, retrogradations, Conjunctions, and
planetary revolutions; but indeed she is more addicted to accept the Moon for
her Mistress, then the Sun for her Master, which makes her expert in
nightworkes, ever changing from quarter to quarter, not long abiding in any
place: sometimes shining in Lady-like resplendant brightness with admiration,
and suddenly again eclipsed with the pitchy and tenebrous clouds of contempt
and deserved defamation. Sometimes at the Full at Pickt-hatch, and sometimes in
the Wane at Bridewell,

A Bawd is a A Logician.
Logician, which is perceived by her subtle and circumventing speeches,
doubtful and ambiguous Apothegmes, double significations, intricate, witty,
and cunning equivocations, (like a skillful Fencer that casts his eye upon a
man's foot, and hits him a knock on the pate) so she, by going the further
about, comes the nearer home, and by casting out the Lure, makes the
Tassel-gentle come to her fist.

For Rhetoric, she must have the Theoricke and Practicke, that though the
subject of her Discourse or writing be foul and deformed, yet must she (like
a Mounthink, Rarearcher, or Landloper.
Medicine-monger, Quack-salver, that covers his bitter pills in Sugar) with the
Embroidery of her Ecquence, flourish over her immodest pretenses, under the
enchanting and various colors of pleasure, profit, estimation, love,
reputation, and many more the like.

But of all the Arithmatick.
Arts, I think she be most unperfect in Arithmaticke; for though she has been
brought up to know Divisions and Multiplications, yet she has traded but by
Retaile, altogether in Fractions and broken Numbers, so that her accounts were
seldom or never to number her days, not caring for the Past or the Future,
her mind (like a Dial) always fixed upon the Present given much to over and
under-reckonings, for at forty years old she would be but twenty one, and at
threescore she will be no less then fourscore: so that the mark being out of
her mouth, we must take the Apocryphal account of her age from her own
Arithmaticke without any further warrant.

Cornelius Agrippa approves a Bawd for an excellent Geometry.
Geometrician for devising engines to climb into windows, as ladders of
Ropes, or such like, to scale the castle of comfort in the night, or the making
of Picklocks or false keys, wherein the Bawds care and providence is great, in
greazing and oyling locks, bolts and hinges, to avoid noise, she knows her
Angles, Triangles, quadrangles, squares, rounds, circles, semicircles and
centers, her altitudes, longitudes, latitudes and dimensions; yet for all this
skill of hers, she has much ado to live squarely, according to Geometrical
rules, or to live within any reasonable Compass.

As for Music.
Music, it is to be conjectured by her long practice in Prickesong, that
there is not any note above Ela, or below Gammoth, but she knows the Diapason:
(a Bawd is old dog at a Hornepipe. her chiefest Instrument is a Sackbut, her
female minikins do bring in her Means, and her Trebles, the Tenor of all is
that her self is the Base.) Besides, there are many pretty provocatory Dances,
as the Kissing dance, the Cushin dance, the Shaking of the sheets, and such
like, which are important isntrumental causes, whereby the skillful has both
clients and custom.

Poetry.
Poetry many times (though she understand it not) does her as good service;
for the most of our great Bawds are diligently waited on by scurrilous oily
sonneting, practical, Poetical, Panegyricall Panders, quaint trencher
Epigrammatists, hungry and needy Anagrammongers, their conceits being either
commending or provoking Bawdry: as one being requested by a Gentleman to invent
him a poesy for a Ring which he meant to give his Love, the conceit was: Have
you any Logges to cleave?

Painting.
Painting and graving are now and then profitable servants to Bawds, as the
naked Pictures of Venus, and Diana and her darlings; Aretine, and diverse other
in that kind can testify; but commonly all she- Bawds, are or have been
painters themselves or painters of themselves, by which bold practice they are
bold, adventrous, impudent, and audacious, fearing no colors.

As for Physic and Surgery.
Physic and Surgery, she has been so much practiced upon, that by long
continuance, she is a most excellent Empericke, so that a man need not doubt
but an ancient professed Bawd can play the Mountebanke.

Moreover, many old Bawds are skilled in Palmestry and Fortune-telling.
Palmestry or Chiromancy, by looking into the hand of a man or woman, or
Phisiognomy, and Metoposcopi, in viewing of the face or forehead, by which she
professes to tell the parties how many husbands or wives they shall have, how
long they shall live, when they are near a good or bad turn; but above all,
her skill is much credited to help young women breed and fructify, so that if
she be as barren as a Stockfish, yet the matronly medicines and instructions
of this wise cunning woman, will in a little time make her increase with a
vengeance, and multiply with a mischief.

Besides her skill in these forenamed Arts and sciences, she has an insight
and practice into all Mysteries and manual trades; she can imitate a
deceitful Mercer
Mercer in setting out her ware, fair to the eye, and false in the dye, with
an outside of glorious gloss, and an inside of rotten decayed dross, more for
pride or pleasure, then for providence or profit.

Like a bold Grocer.
Grocer, she cares not a Fig for any man, she knows flesh is frail, yet she
has many Reasons to live by, she runns her race long, and she is able to
Pepper as many as have any dealing with her; tooth Likorish, tongue Lickorish,
etc. She knows a bribe to a Catchpole is a sufficient as an Almond for a
Parrot, to free her from the heat of the Mace. Master Clove at the sign of
the Sugar-loafe, is a sweet youth, whose Candied Visitation will keep her
estate Current till age and diseases wear her quite out of date.

b A young rich heir newly come to his lands or portion, is a Bawds
Broadcloth, whom she measures out in parts, I will not tell you with what yard,
but I think no London measure, till in the end, only a poor Remnant
remains; her meaner Merchandise are Tradesmen, and poor Servingmen; these
serve for course Kersies, Bays, Cottons, and Pennistones, to line her inside
with Sack, Hot waters, and Aqua vitae.

Though she live after the flesh, all is Fish-mongers and Fishermen.
Fish that comes to the Net with her; she is a cunning Angler, and gets her
living by hook or by crook, she has bayts for all kind of Frye: A great
Lord is her Groneland Whale, a Country Gentleman is her Cods-head, a rich
Citizens son is her Sows'd Gurnet, or her Gudgeon, A Puritan is her
Whiting-mopp, her Lobster is a Scarlet Townsman, and a severe Justice of Peace
is her Crab; her meanest Customers are Sprats and Pilchards, whilst the Puncke
is her Salt Eele, and the Pander her Sharke and Sword-fish; And though she
deal most in Scorpio, yet she holds correspondencie with Pisces, for they are
both Signs that attend upon Venus: Friday is her day, and a day of doom to
more Fish then all the days in the week beside. And Fish by nature is
provocatory, as appears by the chaste lives of fasting fish-eating Friars and
Nuns, whose notorious ( qusia) meritorious continency is touched partly before.

She differs from the Goldsmith.
Goldsmith in the Touch, the Test, and the Weight, yet she puts the best side
of her ware outward; she casts and hammers her wenches into all fashions; she
has them burnished, polished, punsh'd and turned, and if any of them by a
fall, or too much heat be bruised, cracked, or broken, she can soder them
together again, and make them marketable.

There is scarce any Art, Mystery, Trade or Manual Occupation, but a Bawd has
a reference or allusion to it, or it to her. Therefore to run division
through them all, would be long labor to little purpose: In which respects
having spoken of a few, I Will skip over the rest to avoid tediousness; and to
free my self from the imputation of partiality, I will at last allude her to
a Water-man; for of all Degrees, Languages, Tongues, Nations, Ages, Sexes,
Functions, and Fraternities are welcome and well entertained to the one and the
other (provided that they bring money in their purses.) And as the Waterman
rows one way, and looks another, so a Bawds words and meaning do very seldom
go together.

Our five Senses are the Cinque Ports of Bawdry, each one in his office being
the Hearts Baud: The Hearing conveyes Tunes, Tales, Rymes, Riddles, Songs,
Sonnets, and Madrigals. The Sigh^ wanders, searches, seeks, finds and brings
hom^ (into the very bedchamber of the heart) amoro^^ actions: provocatory
gestures, effeminate glances, alluring looks, pictures of prostitution, and
veneriall vanities. The Taste plays the Bawd with both Art and Nature, and
searches through the Earth, Seas and Skies for variety of temptation poor and
innocent Lamstones, Potatoes, Eringoes Crabs, Scallops. Lobsters, Wilkes,
Cockles, Oysters, Anchoves and Caveare, Cock-sparrowes, Coxcombe-pyes, and all
manner of feathered foul from the Eagle to the Wren, do wait upon the Taste,
and the Taste attends the appetite. The Snul is the senting Bawd, that huffs
and snuffs up and down, and has the game always in the wind, that is a
right smell-smocke sense, who is wonderfully pleased to be led by the nose, can
hunt dry foot, and smell out venery nimbler then a pinchgut Usurer will nose
out a feast.

Touching or Feeling is a very merry Bawd and though a man or woman can neither
Hear, See, Taste or Smell, yet Feeling may remain: It is the last sense that
keeps us company, and were it not for feeling, all the rest of the senses were
but senceslesse.

And thus much more in excuse of a Bawd, though she live by one of the Seven
Deadly Sins which is Lechery; No man can deny Pride too be ^^other of the
said Septarchy, yet the Mercer, the Silkeman, the Embroyderer, the Drawer, the
Cutter, the Tailor and the Feather-maker, the new fashion-monger, the Devil
and all thrive by Pride, and might shut up shop, if Pride were not.

Gluttony and Drunkenness is another of the brood, yet were it not for
superfluous, voluptuous gurmandizing, and extraordinary swinish swilling and
drinking; the Wine-Merchant, the Vintner, the Malt-man, the Brewer, the
Tapster, Poulterer, the sellers of Eringoes and Potatoes, and the Cook would
have but very cold takings.

Covetousness is another whelpe of the same kind, yet were it not for ravenous
oppression, devouring Extortion, biting Usury, Bribery, Detoir, and Coozenage,
Dives would not, or could not fare deliciously and be clad in Purple, nor the
hackney Coach be in such common request.

Envy is a high point of State, and he is no perfect Politician that repines
not at the happiness of all men (but himself:) commonly it gives due
attendance in Princes Courts, and feeds upon the detraction of Noble actions;
It eats into honor as a Canker does into the best and choysest fruit, yet
does it live, thrive, wear good clothes, is esteemed a talent of high
wisdom and valor.

Wrath is a blood-hound of the aforesaid kennell, yet Armourers, Cutlers,
Fencers, Chyrgians, and Bone-setters would be idle, and vnimployment and
means, if Wraeth did not overcome Patience, and Madness dispossess
Discretion and Reason.

Sloth is the last of the list, (and well may it come last, because it is the
laziest) yet is it a Gentleman like quality, and a Lady-like disposition to be
idle and live upon the sweat of others; Manual trade or handicrafts are
counted base and mercenary, a good industry is contemptible; laudable endeavor
Mechanical, and to take pains and labor, is drudgery and mere slavery.

Thus by Pride a man may come to be one of the Masters of his Parish; by
Gluttony and Drunkenness, he may hap to mount to a place of reputation and
worship; by Covetousness he may get a damnable deal of wealth, and be
accounted a good man; by Envy, he may be esteemed conceited, politic, grave
and wise: by Wrath he may gain the titles of valiant and resolute; and by
Sloth and Idleness he may be perfectly known for a Ge^^man: All vices are in
high account and great respect, but only Bawds occupation: yet many men have
an itching desire in private, to that which he will condemn in public.
And is it not a wonder, that these six deadly sins, should be so
uncharitable to the seventh, as to rob it of all earthly reputation, where if a
man do consider them rightly, there is never a barrel better Herring; nor
does the Bawd live in a worse estate or condition, than the Proudest Gluttonous
Drunkard, or the most Covetous, Envious wretch: The Wrathful bloody villain,
or the idle slothful drone, are clogd with vices as vile and abominable as a
Bawd, yet for all this, the purblind partial world does hug, embrace,
cherish and reverence all these enormities, only a Bawd, a silly painful,
serviceable Bawd, is held odious and contemptible.

Commonly most of the she- Bawds have a peculiar privilege more than other
women: for generally they are not starveling creatures, but well larded and
embost with fat, so that a Bawd has her mouth three stories of Chinnes high,
and is a well-fed Emblem of plenty; and though she be but of small
estimation, yet is she always taken for a great woman amongst her neighbors.

The patience of a Bawd.
On former Shrove-Tuesdayes, when the unruly Rabble did falsely take upon them
the name of London Prentices, then two or three thousand of those boot-haling
pillaging Rascals, would march madly to the habitations of the most famous
Bawds, where they would robustiously venture, breaking open Doors, battring
down Walls, tearing down tyles, pulling down windows, rending Trunkes,
Chestes, Cupboords, Tables, and Bedsteads in pieces; ripping and embowelling
Bolsters and Featherbeds, ravishing her mayds or stale virgins, spoiling all
they stole not, and stealing what they liked, beating the grave Bawd, and all
her female vermin, most unmanly and unmannerly. In all which uncivil civil
hostility, the singular patience of the Bawd, is worthy admiration; not giving
any of these landsharkes an ill word, or showing any sign of anger or desire
of revenge, but entreating the most rough-hewd Rogues in the company, with the
styles of honest worthy Gentlemen with I pray you, I humbly desire you, I
heartily- beseech you, to assuage your fury, appease your wrath mollify your
anger, suppress your ire, mitigate your rage. These and like Phrases a modest
ancient Bawd would discreetly utter to her greatest enemies, rendering good
words for bad deeds, when they were doing or had done to her all the
mischiefs before named, nor ever after would she offer to take any legal
course, as to cause them to be brought before a Justice, whereby the Law might
in some sort give her satisfaction. In which sufferance the great patience of a
Bawd is remarkable.

We do esteem a Fountain, Well, or Spring to be the more clear from poison,
if a Toad, Newt, or a snake, be in either of them, for we imagine that those
venomous creatures do suck or extract all the contagion of that Christaline
Element into themselves. The necessity of a Bavvd.
In the like nature, a Bawd is the snuffers of the Commonwealth, and the most
wholesome or necessary Wheele-barrow or Tumbrell, for the close conveyance of
man's luxurious nastinesse, and sordid beastiality. Ravens, Kites, Crows, and
many other birds of prey, are tolerated to live unhurt, not for any good that
is in themselves, but because they do good offices in devouring and carrying
away our Garbage and noisome excrements, which they live by; and if they were
not our voluntary Scavengers, we should be much annoyed with contagious savours
of these corrupted offals. These are the right paternes of an industrious Bawd,
for she pickes her living out of the laystall on dunghill of our vices; if she
thrive and grow fat, it is with the Merdurinous draffe of our imperfections,
(for she is seldom beholding to an honest man for so much as a meals meat)
she robs not the virtuous of any part of their virtue, she lives only by the
vicious, and in this sort she is an executioner of sinners, and in the end
gives the most wicked cause to repent, leaving them such aching remembrance in
their joints, that their very bones rattle in their skins.

In other trades, when Apprentices come out of their years, they are allowed
to set up for themselves, and to have other Apprentices under them. He that
has been a Grammar Scholar, when he comes to ripeness of learning and
judgment, will think himself able and sufficient to be a Schoolmaster, and
to have Scholars under him: and why should not The equity of a Bawd.
Whores have a Mistress of their own dealing-trade, that they may have
Apprentices under their nurture and discipline, who may by their obedience in
their minority, be advanced to command others in the same mystery or
occupation? And therefore the law (in this point) favoring their vocation, why
should any Consorious Cato plead the Law for banishing of any Bawdes?

Why should any Ecclesiastical Laws in Foreign Countries, debar Bawds
and their disciples from the Sacrament; as if they were not i^^ Charity, when
as they are known to be so Catholikely charitable, that they extend their The
charity of a Bawd.
love to all without exception, and are ready enough to forgive all the world,
knowing themselves to be such great offenders, that they much need forgiveness?

Well fare The Philosophy of a Bawd.
the Commonwealth plotted to Plato, who would have no woman appropriate to any
man (it seems he was a great enemy against enclosures, who would have all
thus lie common) his reason was very Phylosophicall, the like whereof is not to
be found either in Don Quixot, or Sir Thomas Moors Vtopia, namely, that when
no child had any proper father, every man would love every child as his own,
and so the whole City should be happy in a Combination of an universal love
equally extended to all. If so wise a man as Plato, was not ashamed to make
himself the universal Bawd of a whole Commonwealth, why should any of our
unlearned neighbors that have read far fewer Books then he, be ashamed to
be accounted procuring Panders in one house, in the skirts of a City, for the
Platonicall Conjunction of their neighbors within a street or two adjoining.

The civility of a Bawd.
In Italy and most civil Countries, it is counted a most uncivil curiosity to
ask any man (though after long acquaintance) of what religion he is, or whence
he comes, or whither he goes, or whether he be a married man, or intend to
marry. Who then more civil or fairly mannered then the Bawdes: or they never
put any of their customers to the rack to confess, nor do they torture their
guests with the saucy inquiry of whence come you? How long will you tarry in
Town? Have you a wife at home Or are you a loose Bachelor? are you a
Gentleman? a Merchant, or Tradesman? are you a Catholic, or reformed? the Bawd
I say, is so civil, that she never will ask any of these questions; one
thing only she studieth and practices, which is diligently to demand* whether
a man have any money in his purse, which is no impertinent question: for the Law
does authorize a Landlor to demand his Rent upon the ground where it is due,
although sometimes he lets his tenant enjoy his house or land a quarter, of
half a year before he receive any rent: A waterman sweats and lands his fare
before he looks for money. The Host suffers his guest to eat his meat, before
anon, anon, with the white Apron comes in with thus much to pay, and ye are
welcome; no man at any game takes up his winnings before the Game be won; an
Usurer takes no forfeit before the day of payment be part; but the Bawd in her
demand is more wise and provident, then all these trades and functions, for
she like a Butcher takes present pay for her flesh, she will be sure to have
her wages before she afford you her pennyworth, you shall not drink at her
muddy Well before you pay for it. She knows that Hope and Desire of that
which is to come, is a better paymaster, then grudging remembrance of fruition
of that which is past. Herein she has good examples to follow of no mean
vocatious, the learned Physician and Chirurgian would be loath to exspect their
reward till the cure be performed; the honestest Lawyer would plead but coldly
if he might receive no Fees till his clients cause were judged. A Fencer will
fight but faintly if he should take no money before his prize were played and the
Players on their Public stage would act very poorly if their audience did not
pay at their first coming in.

The greedy haling and pulling of other men's goods, or insatiate appetite to
feed, ingurgitate, guzzle and swill, are apparent marks or tokens of
Intemperance; who then more Temperate then a Bawd? for The temperance of a Bawd.
she is so full of modesty that she lives only upon what people do give
her: Men do voluntarily bring her revenues to her, she kindly takes no more
then she can get, nor receives any thing but what is brought her, and as the
Tailor steals not at all, because men do freely (and unconstrained) deliver
their goods to him; even so, the Bawd cannot be taxed with depriving any man of
more then he idley parts withal.

Wise men have said, that virtue has no great praise where there is no
allurement or temptation to vice, and therefore have accounted it but small
mastery for a Judge to be incorrupt where there are no bribes stirring, for a
poor Clown to be humble that has neither money nor Clothes to be proud
of; for a Drunkard to be sober where is no drink but fair water; for a
notorious thief to refrain from filching, where there is not any thing to
steal; or for one to live chaste in a Monastery or Nunnery: But here is the
eminency of abstinence, and the true praise of virtue, for a man to fast at a
delicious feast; to be dear from bribes or gentle rewards, where oppressions,
extortions, strifes and contentions do continually grow and multiply: To be
sober and thirsty where wines and strong drinks are plenty in variety; to be
true and trusty amongst inestimable Jewels, vncountable Treasure, or untold
Gold. These are superarogating virtues, which though many boast of, yet few
attain to: now the Bawd lives in the storehouse of libidinous confraternity,
in the shop of Venery, in the Garden of lacivious pleasure, in the Ever-growing
and Flourishing field of vanity; amongst those that practice the excess of
Luxury, none so near within ken of wantonness and dalliance; she admits into
her house men flourishing in years, hot in their desires, and willing in
performance, yet (for ought I know) The chastity of a Bawd.
a Bawd was never accused for committing fornication in her own person, (which
is a rare mark of abstinence) for who can produce out of any record, that a
Bawd was ever carted for playing the Whore?

And this is her comfort when she is carted, that she rides when all her
followers go on foot, that every Dunghill pays her homage, and every Tavern
looking-glass powers bountiful reflection upon her, the streets and windows
are full of spectators of her pomp. Shouts, acclamations and ringing on well
tuned Banbury kettle-drums, and barbarous Basins, proclaim and sound forth her
triumphant progress, whilst she rides embrodered all over like a Lady of the
soil, conducted in state out of the Eastern suburbs, to set up her trade
fresh and new in the West.

As concerning Religion or matters of The conscience and religion of a Bawd.
Conscience, she is a creature that will never run mad with beating her
brains in any point of such high quality. For whereas it is a speech or
proverb, to say, that an extortioner, usurer, or corrupted Magistrate has a
Large Conscience, so on the other part, it is a saying, that such a man or
woman has no Conscience: now between these extremes of large and none, the
Bawd does observe the mediocrity or mean: for to say that she has a large
catholic or universal Conscience, to entertain all comers, or all that would
come to her, is false, for her conscience is bounded, caged, and imprisoned,
and limited in any man purse or pocket, of what estate, condition or Religion
soever. On the contrary, to say that she has no Conscience at all, it were to
do her an open injury, for she does extend her entertainment, to as many as
please to please her, and her charity does always stretch as far as any man's
money will reach: And to speak the truth, she has great reason on her side;
for if a man let his Horse to hire, or Ass to marker, he will look to be
paid for the travel or pains of his Beast; and shall a Bawd let her Soul to
the Devil for nothing? A Knight of the Poast will not hazard damnation (and
his ears to the Pillory to boot) but (if he be wise) he will be well paid
for his labor. Will any great man oppress and undo a whole Country, and
(with the loss of the Kingdom of Heaven) purchase an accursed portion of
Earth, but that he will have terrestrial Angels minister to him here, making
no account of the celestial hereafter? And shall the Conscience of a Bawd be
Pinfolded so straightly, that her Soul shall be of loss esteem than a Hackney
man makes of his Horse or Ass? or a swearing and forswearing Rogue does of his
ears? no, no my Masters, she is wiser than so, she thinks it is a long
journey to Hell, and therefore she does thristily provide to save charges, that
other men shall pay for her passage or Coach-hire: she will not travel so
far upon her own cost she is so well beloved, that every one of her
customers (will or must) give her something toward the reckoning, she has more
policy in her than to be damned for nothing; and she scorns to usurp a place
in Hell without just title or desert.

As for her Religion, it is of the same piece as her Conscience is, there went
but a pair of sheeres between; with the Papist she will be Ceremonious for
the Of men's money.
Cross, with the Puritan, she will be precise, casting her eyes up, when her
thoughts are down, and accept the Cross and Pyle.
Pyle; she has so brought up her scholars, that the name of God is too often
in their mouths, for they will swear either with or without occasion; and as
concerning matters of truth, she has brought them up so, that they will lie
with any man. Most of them are of the sect of the Family of Love, they differ
only in this, the Familists do hold opinion, that only when the husband
sleeps, that the wife may take as much liberty as a Cat, to play, etc. but the
Bawd does allow a larger toleration, and admits either man or woman to have
access, and use their exercise both sleeping and waking. She is indeed
addicted to any Religion, or all, or none, no further than her ease and profit
does incite her, for she knows that charity is a good huswife, and will begin
her own work at home first: In which respect a Bawd holds a high point of
Doctrine, to love her self better then she does all the world besides: and in
this she differs much from a Roman Catholic, that she builds not upon her
Works, or has any hope to be saved by her merits. And should persecution
come, she will be no Martyr, she will neither hang for one religion, or burn
for another, she knows that she came a raw creature into the world, and her
resolution is, that neither religion or conscience shall send her roasted out
of it.

And thus I would have the Reader to consider; that the pains that J have
taken in this description of a Bawd, is more then I would willingly do for the
honestest woman that dwells between Smithfield-barres and Clerkenwell, and I
know that there is not any of the trade so ungrateful, but that if my self or
any friend of mine have occasion to use them, they will do their best for me,
and go as near as they can to take our money. Neither have I discoursed of
any vpstart new fangled babble or toy, but of an ancient solid, real, and
lasting thing, for when all trades are trade-falne and broken, a Bawd may set
up with little worth, or a thing of naught, and many times her luck is so
fortunate, that she will A Bawd is an excellent Chimmist.
extract out of sin and wickedness, good money, good clothes, good meat,
and almost good any thing, but good conscience: but that is but a poor
beggarly virtue, which her contrary nature cannot agree withal, for she
knows by old experience that it has undone many, and that they are accounted
none of the wisest, that make any account or reckoning of it.

I am sorry that I have not dedicated this Book to some great Patron or
Patroness: but the world is so hard to please, that I think it an easier
matter to displease all, then every way fully to please one; for I did lately
write a small Pamphlet in the praise of clean Linen, which I did dedicate to
a neat, spruce, prime, principal and superexellent Landresse, and she in
stead of protecting my labors, or sheltring my good and painful study, does
not only express her liberality in giving me nothing, but also she depraves
and deprives me of that small tallent and portion of wit and Poetry which
nature has given or lent me; most untruely affirming and reporting, that that
Pamphlet was the invention of a grave and learned friend of mine, (whose
employments are so urgent and eminent, and whose capacity is so mature and
approved) that not one line, word, syllable, or letter is in that poor toy,
but it is so far unlike a wiseman, that they all, and every one, do most
truly and obediently call, John Tailor, Father.

But belike she has learned some frugall quallities, of some who are more
honored and worshipped, then honorable or worshipful, who take it for a point
of thrifty wisdom to discomend where they do not mean to reward. It is a kind
of policy, under which many better labors then mine have suffered persecution
and Martyrdom; and belike my unkind Patroness is ambitious to follow the
example of her betters. But I would have her to know, that if she had but
gratefully accepted my Book of Clean Linen, that then I would have cudgeld
and canvasde my Muse, I would have rowz'd my spirits, belabour'd my Invention,
beaten my brains, thump'd, bumbasted, strapadoed, lambski'nd, and
clapperclaw'd my Wits, to have mounted her praise one and thirty yards (
London measure) beyond the Moon. But ingratiude is the poison of industry, and
detraction is the destruction of good endeavors, for the which sins of hers,
I will allot her no other punishment but this, that she shall remain as she
was and is, the true wife to an honest Cobbler, A cleanly, trusty, chaste, loving
and well-beloved Landresse; whom (when the fates and destinies shall deprive
Chancery Lane of) then many polluted and slovenly Linen soylers shall lament
in soul bands, black cuffes, and mourning shirts.

The industry and vigilance of a Bawd.
As Sloth and idleness are vices discommended in all Laws and Commonwealths,
being enormites of that high nature and vile condition that they have ruined
whole Kingdoms, Cities, families, and many particular persons; so on the
contrary, diligence, industry and careful vigilance, are qualities that do
not only erect States and Commonwealths, but they do also conserve and
preserve whomsoever shall put them in use and practice: who then is more
vigilant or industrious then a diligent Bawd, she is none of the seven
Sleepers, nay she carefully watches whilst others sleep, she takes pains
for the pleasure of many, she is the true Emblem or Image of security, her
eyes like careful and trusty scouts or spies do foresee and prevent the
danger of Mr Busiman the Constable with his ragged, rusty regiment. Moreover,
she is not like a ship bound for Groneland, which must sail but in summer, or
a pot of ale with a roast, which is only in winter: no let the wind blow where
it will, her care is such, that it brings her prize and purchase all seasons,
her Or Punckes.
pinkes are fraughted, her Pinnaces are manned, her friggors are rig'd (from the
beakhead to the Poope) and if any of her vessels be boorded by Pirates, and shot
betwixt wind and water, they are so furnished with engines, that they will send
them packing with a pox, or else blow them quite up with a Devils name: there
is not a point in the compass but the skillful A Bawd a skillful Navigaton.
Bawd observes, if the wind be North or North-east, she expects profits out of
the Low Countries, from Germany, Denmark, Norway, and sometimes a prize from
Scotland; if at South or S. west, then her hopes are from France; but Spain
and Italy do seldom or never fail her; And let it blow high or low, the
Englishman is near on all occasions. She has not bin much accused for
receiving uncustomed goods, for to speak the truth, she will harbor no ventred
commodity in her warehouse; and if the Informer or Constable do light upon one
of her concealed dryfats, Punchions, fardils or (naughty) packs, and having
seized it by his office, and honestly laid it up safe in the storehouse of
Bridewel, yet the Bawd will so co^pound in the business, that for a small toy, and
a little sufferance, she will redeem the Commodity and have her ware again in her
own hands.

The plain dealing of a Bawd
A Bawd is no deceiver of her customers, for what she promises she will
perform, as for example, If she take a fee to help a man to a Whore she
will not cheat him and bring him an honest woman; a bargains a bargain, and
she will not sail you in a tittle: she plainly and openly shows her self
what she is, she does not dissemble or hide her function from her clyents,
under the veil of hypocrysie, and for her creatures that live under her, A
Bawd has common sense and reason to take her part or share in her profession.
she has taught them their Art whereby they may live another day, when she
is dead and rotten, and as they have their maintenance by her instruction, and
under her protection, so it is fit that in requital of her pains, she should
pick a revenue out of their commings in; she has good presidents out of
famous Authors for it: an old brave fellow took great pains in teaching of
his Cuthorse, and the beast was so thankful for it, that he got his masters
provender, and his own both, many years after. If a man teach an Ape to do
tricks, the honest Ape will maintain him for it; I have seen a Hare get her
master and dames living, with playing on a Tabor. The very Baboones are grave
examples in this kind, Tumblers boys, (and sometimes their wives) do teach us
this duty; and the ignorant Puppets do allow their maker and masters, meat,
drink, and cloth. For mine own part, If I teach my man to row, I will have
for my pains the greatest part of the profit. If I dig or plow and cast my
Seed into the ground, I will expect the benefit of the Crop: If I plant or
grass, I should think I had but hard measure, if I should not feed upon the
fruit of my labor: By this consequence it is reason that a Bawd should reap
where she has sown, and eat, and live upon such fruit as she has planted.

To close up all, the Sum of all is this,
I Will end my Book as Ovid ended his.
So long as on the Poles the spangled
firmament shall whirle,
So long as Procreation shall
beget a Boy or Girl,
So long as winter shall be cold,
or Summer shall be hot,
So long as poverty and spite
shall be true Virtues lot,
When Phoebus in the West shall rise
and in the East shall set,
When children on (their mothers)
their own fathers shall beget;
Then shall this Book, or Bawd lie dead,
and never till that day,
Shall Book or Bawd, or Bawd or Book,
be scarce, if men will pay.
Till Sun and Moon shall cease to shine,
and all the World lie wast;
So long his book, or else a Bawd,
I Am sure, so long shall last.
FINIS.
A Common Whore With all these graces graced, She Is very honest, beautiful
and chaste.

Written By JOHN TAILOR

Printed at London for Henry Gosson. 1635.


