ALL THE WORKS OF JOHN TAILOR THE WATER-POET Being 63 in Number COLLECTED INTO
ONE VOLUM By the Author With Sundry new Additions, Corrected, Reuised, and
newly IMPRINTED. 1630.

ALL THE WORKS OF JOHN TAILOR THE WATER-POET.

Being Sixty and three in Number.

Collected into one Volume by the AVTHOR: With sundry new Additions,
corrected, reuised, and newly Imprinted, 1630.

AT LONDON, Printed by J.B. for JAMES BOLER; at the sign of the Marigold in
Paul's Churchyard, 1630.

To the Right Honorable THE LORD MARQVESSE HAMILTON, Master of the Horse to
his MAJESTY, JAMES HAMILLTON: ANAGRAMMA, I AMM ALL HONESTY.
Of words, it is vain to use a Multitude,
Your very Name all Goodness does include.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Lord Steward of his Majesty's Honorable
HOVSEHOLD,

WILLIAM HERBERT EARL OF PENBROKE ANAGRAMMA. LIBERALY MEEK^, FOR REPVTE
HONORABLE.

What can be more then is explained here,
TO express a worthy well deserving Peer?
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LORD Chamberlain of his Majesty's most
Honorable HOVSEHOLD,

PHILIP HERBERT EARL OFF MONTGOMERY. ANAGRAMMA, FIRM FAITH BEGOT ALL MY
PROPER HONER.

Firm faith begot mi^e honor (says my name)
And my firm faith shalleuer keep the same.
To the Author, John Tailor.
WAst ever keowne to any time before,
That so much skill in Poesy could be,
Th'attendant to a Skull, or painful oar?
Thou live in water, but the fire in thee;
That mounting Element, that made thee choose,
To court Urania, the diuinest Muse.
Row on: to watermen did never blow
Agale so good, none so much goodness know.
THOMAS BREWER.

Johannes Tailerus(...):
Ira! an honest lusi:
Lusi et stigmata pessimis inussi,
Paucis, paru^; furunt, sed oh meorum
Ira ipsa arbitra, siste; tu librorum
Virus euome! honest an ipse lusi?
Respon.

Ars niuea hos lenit,(...).
VErbis verbera corripi merentes,
Non est ira; ^sed ampla mititudo.
Esse(...), decet Poetam,
Sed non(...),(...)renendum est.
Frendens rabula carnifex vocetur.
Qui aurem vellit, is artifex habetur,
Quo sque vrit leuis ira commerentes
Hos lenit niuea ar^, site monentis,
Ergo ludis honest, amor notabit
Naeuos leniter; hostis aggrauabit.
T. G.

Ad amicum merito dilectum, Iohannem Tailor alias, aquinatem, vulgo Poetam
aquaticum hendecasyllabae.
QVod numen Thamesis vagae per vndas
Plectro, ludit, eburno deorum?
Physis dicitur; eius hic sacerdos
Fundit millia mill ab ore cantus,
His mulcens lepidum artibus popellum.
Hunc quaerit Dea, and hunc docet sua, illi
Tam secreta libenter illa pandit;
Quam tam rara decenter ille pendit.
Hic vero rutilos Tagi lapillos
Et grandes Orientis, unions.
Si his mysteria tanta conferantur
Tricas, quisquiliasque censet omnes.
De te sabula tota mi Johannes
Verso nomine, scito, praedicatur.
Parnassus cerebrum tuum est bifurcus;
Cor, fons est Helicon, sedentque lingua
Et Musae, and Charites, venustiores.
Ipse es, tu tibi suggerens Apollo
Extra nil opus inuocare Dives
Naturae tibi sat favor; ministrans
Intus pectore delitet feraci.
Quod multis labor improbus dat aegre
Suffuratio et impudens librorum
Instinctus genij tui ingenique
Momento intimat: euge perge lymphas,
Plus vltra; Thamesis beat; Cygnos
Moeandri vada tortuosa curui
Non tot quot Thamesis canora nutrit,
Te vicisse iuuabit hos canendo,
Nos iuuabit, and omnia imprimendo.
Hoc si feceris; vnda dum manebit,
Atque aestus Thamesis manebis ipse;
Et campanus; vt est propheta Aquinas:
Anglicanus eris poeta Aquinas,
T. G.

To my worthy and well-deseruing friend, our wel-known hydropoet, JOHN TAILOR.
Some till their throats ache cry alowd and hollo
To aucupate great favors from Apollo.
One Bacchus and some other Venus vrges,
To bless their brain-brats. Those caerulean surges,
Gyrdling the earth, emball thy nerves, and season
Those animal parts, quick Organs of man's reason.
This Nimph-adored sountaine far excells,
Aganipe Aon; all that Bubulkes wells.
These daunst about thy Quinbro-bo^te to kiss thee,
And often since roar out because they miss thee.
These wyned with love sick Them the banks o'rswel water,
To visit their ingenious darlings Cell.
Blue Neptunes salt tempred with Thames sweet
Make thee both tart and pleasing. What theater
Of late; could Cinthius, half starved mists persuade
TO applaud; nay not to hiss at what they made?
Then call on Neptune still; let Delos sink
Or swim; for thee let Phoebus look, or wink
Whilst his poor Priests grow mad with ill success:
That still the more they write they please the less.
Thine Amphitritean Muse grows more arrident,
And Phoebus tripos, stoopes to Neptunes trident.
R. H.

To his friend the Author.
IN sport I hitherto have told thy same,
But now thy Muse does merit greater Name:
Soars high to Heaven, from earth and water flies,
And lea^ing baser matters, mounts the skies.
Where hidden knowledge, she does sweetly sing,
Careless of each inferior common thing.
Oh that my Soul could follow her in this,
To shun foul sin, and seek eternal bliss!
Her strength grows great, and may God ever send,
Me to amend my ^aults, as she does mend.
ROBERT BRANTHWAITE.

To my honest friend, John Tailor.
WHat shall I say, kind Friend, to let thee know
How worthily I do this work esteem?
Whereof I think I cannot too much deem,
From which I find a world of wit does flow.
The poor vnpollisht praise I can bestow
Vpon' this well deserving work of thine,
Which here I freely offer at thy Shrine,
Is like a Taper, when the Sun does show,
Or bellows help for Eol's breath to blow:
For thou as much have soard beyond the flraine,
Whereto our common Muses do attain:
As Cintyhaes light exceeds the worms that glow^
And were my Muse reple at with learned phrase,
The world should know thy work deserves praise.
Thine in the best of friendship, RICHARD LEIGH.

To the deserving author, John Tailor.
IT is disputed much among the wise,
If that there be a water in the skies:
If there be one: no Water-man before,
Was ever known to row in it with his Oar.
If none; such is thy high surmounting pen,
It soars above the strain of Watermen:
Whether there be or no, seek far and near,
Thou Art matchless sure in this eur hemispheere.
WILLIAM BRANTHWAITE Cant.

To my friend John Tailor.
ROw on (good Water-man) and look back still,
(Thus as thou do) upon the Muses Hill,
To guide thee in thy course: Thy Boate's a sphaere
Where thine Urania moves divinely. clear.
Well have thou pli'd and (with thy learned Oar)
Cut through a Riner, to a nobler shore,
Then ever any landed-at. Thy sail,
(Made all of clouds) swells with a prosperous gale.
Some say, there is a Ferriman of Hell,
The Ferriman of Heaven, I now know well,
And that is thy self, transporting souls, to Bliss.
URANIA sits at Helm and Pilot is;
For Thames, thou have the lactea via found,
Be thou with baies (as that with stars is) crowned.
THOMAS DEKKAR.

A Catalogue of all the several Books contained in this VOLVME.
Tailors Urania. The first part of the troubles and destructions of Jerusalem.
The second part and final destruction of Jerusalem by Titus and Vespasian The
life and death of the most blessed amongst women, The Virgin Mary, the mother
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Superbiae flagellum, or the Whip of Pride. Against
cursing and swearing. The fearful Summer. The Travels of tweluepence. The
Armado, or Navy of Ships that sail as well by land as by sea. The Beggar, or
the praise of beggars beggary and begging. Tailors Goose. Jack a Lent. Tailors
pennilesse Pilgrimage, or Journey (without money) from London to Edenborough in
Scotland, and back to London. The Acts and exployts of Wood the great Eater,
in Kent. Sir Gregory Nonsense. A very merry Wherry voyage from London, to York
with a pair of Oars. A new Discovery, (by sea) with a wherry, from London to
Salisbury. A Kicksie winsie, or a Lerry cum Twang. Tailors Motto. An Epicedium
or mournful death-song for Coriats supposed drowning. The eight Wonder of the
world, or Coriats reviving. Laugh and be fat. Coriats News and letter with the
Authors paraphrasing verses. A Bawd very modest. A Whore very honest. A Thief
very ^^ue. A Hangman very necessary. The unnatural Father. Tailors Revenge
against Fenner. Fenners Defense. A Cast over the water to Fenner. The
Water-mans suite concerning pl^^ers. Wit and mirth. A Dog of War. The World
runs on wheels. The Nipping or snipping of abuses. A brief of the Chronicle
from Brute to this present in Verse. A Brief of the Chronicle from the Norman
Conquest to this present. A Farewell to the Tower bottles. The Marriage of the
Princess Elizabeth. A funeral Elegy for King James. A funeral Elegy for the
Earl of Nottingham. A funeral Elegy for the Earl of Holdernesse. A funeral
Elegy for the Bishop of Winchester. A funeral Elegy for the Duke of Richmond
and Linox. A funeral Elegy for John Moray Esquire. The Sum of the Bible in
verse. The Sum of the Book of Martyrs in verse. Archie his making peace with
France. The Praise of Hempseed. Tailors Pastoral. Three weeks and three days
trauells from London into Germany. Tailors Travel to Bohemia. An English man's
love to Bohemia. The Dolphins danger and deliverance. The Cormorant. Abraue
Sea Fight by Captain John Weddell in the gulf of Persia. The Sculler.
Christian admonitions. The great. O Tool The Churches deliverances. Prince
G^ales his welcome from Spain. The praise of clean linnin.
These Books in number sixty three are here,
Bound in one Volume; scattred here and there,
They stand not thus in order in the book;
But any man may find them, that will look.
TO THE MOST HIGH, MOST MIGHTY, AND MOST ANCIENT PRODVCER, SEDVCER, AND ABVSER
OF MANKIND, THE WORLD.
MOst Potent and Powerful Imposture, take it not amiss that I a poor worm
of your own breeding, do (in way of retribution) give you here the increase
of my Tallent, which I have been almost 60 years a gathering. It was told me
that when I first came to visit you, that I cried and Waw'ld, and that when I
leave you, I shall sigh and groan: and ever since I knew you, I have loved you
so well for the good parts I have seen in you, that I could very willingly be
glad to change you for a better. I know not what Title to put upon you, you
have as many styles already as the great Turk; with the soldier, you are a
hard World; with the Divine, you are a wicked world; with the Lawyer you are a
contentious world, with the Courtier you are a slipperie world; with most men a
mad world; and with all men a bad world. The Devil (your brother) and your
sister the ( Flesh) has quite spoiled you of all your good qualities and
conditions; and (worse then that) they have made you blind, that you cannot or
will not see your own faults, and you have blinded all your inhabitants that
they can neither feel or perceive their miseries: for which cause, I have made
bold to dedicate this Volume to your greatness, wherein (as in a glass) you
may view your imperfections. Here shall you see all your four ages now combind
in one; first, This is the Golden age, for Gold can do any thing; it can both
clear and bleare the eyes of Justice: it can turn Religion into Policy,
Piety into perjury, and what not. Silver indeed looks white, and white is
the color of Age (Ergo the Silver age) which though it run in an inferior
strain to Gold, yet it works wonders, and without it there is no market kept
in Church or Commonwealth: for whosoever is King, Pecunia is Queen. The Brazen
age is apparent in every man's impudency; most men and women's foreheads or
our-sides (which are their actions) do manifest that they live in an age of
Brass. Lastly, the Iron age is palpably present, for many soldiers (who
mainetaine their lives with daily seeking their deaths) have stomachs like
Estriches, and (through want of means) they eat up their swords and pistols.
Amongst all these, I have long time noted your great bounty, you have been so
favorable to give some men as much ambition as served them (justly) for the
breaking of their necks. To some you have given Abundance, and you have made
that Abundance beget Avarice, and that Avarice to beget destruction: some you
have furnished with beauty, and that beauty has confounded chastity: on
some you have (suddenly) thrown honors and promotions, and those you have
laden with envy, slander and continual perplexities. In a word, your gifts
are so mischieuously mixed, as wit with beggerie, folly with wealth, and the
like, that I protest I am weary of you, which makes me thus bold to tell you
of your iadish tricks. You never favored me, and therefore I have no reason to
flatter you, nor will I flatter you or any man that shall or will do me
favor. I never will make my tongue like a plaisterers Trowell, to dawbe and
smooth over the vices or villainies of any, with Sicophantizing Parasiticall
flattery. World, all that I crave of thee living, is a grave when I am dead;
and although I flatter thee not; yet I love thee not, (nor have I any reason
for it) for to me thy fawnings have been frownings, thy benevolence
maleuolence, the courtesies, cares and crosses, and thy riches (innumerable)
restlesle perturbations: besides, when our blessed Savior was upon the earth,
thy estate was so vile and damnable, that though he prayed for his tormentors
and crucifiers, yet he only excluded the World (by name) out of his prayer
saying, I pray not for the world: and can there be any hopes that thou art any
better now then thou were then; nay, it is to be doubted that thou art rather
worse. So that if any man will say that he has occasion to love thee, he is
either a fool or a mad man: indeed our first father was too diffident toward
God, and too credulous toward Thee; our first mother was a liar, and our first
brother was a murderer, this is the sweet kindred we came of; yet thou
(Obewitching world) do puff us up with pomp, making us forget our
original, and esteem our selves Demie-gods, when we are far less then men;
there is a more resemblance of immortality in a suite in Law, then in the life
of a man; and we are so credulous, that when the whoremaster is called honest
man, the Knave will believe himself to be so. Truth is (and ever has been)
dangrous to be spoken. It cost John Baptist his head, and Clytus his life.

World, I have two requests to thee, which if thou grant me I will never
thank thee: the first is good clothes, (for those bear a monstrous sway)
because I have occasion to speak with great men, and without good clothes
(like a golden sheath to a leaden blade) there is no admittance. Secondly, that
thou will keep close from my Readers all preiudicate opinions, or let them be
persuaded that this following Book is not of my writing; for oppinion does
work much in such cases; There were Verses once much esteemed for their
goodness, because it was thought that a learned Italian Poet named Sanazarus
made them; but afterward, being found to be of a poor man's writing, they lost
their estimation. An Anthem was once sung before the Duchess of Vrbin, and
but slightly regarded; but after, being known that Iaquin de pris made it, it
was extolled. So for my poor inventions of my poorer self, were it namelesse,
I am persuaded that it would pass more blameless, howsoever ( world) to thee
I send it; I know thou have many humors and qualities, and I hope to find
some of the best of them, resolving to take my lot as it falls with patience,
fortitude, and as many virtues as I have, and more too; knowing my self for
two conditions to have no fellow; first, in being a Sculler; secondly a
VVater-Poet; of the last of which, there is and shall be no more I hope. And
knowing further, that the way to immortality, is ever to remember mortality,
and that death has more manners then an Ague; for death will be a man's guest
but once, which when he comes, I wish all men ready to bid him welcome; So
world, in plain terms I tell you there is no trust in you (yet I like a fool
put you in trust with my Book) the reason is, I am weary of you and it, and
take leave to leave you.

JOHN TAILOR.

Errata, or Faults to the Reader.
FAults, but not faults escaped, I would they were,
If they were faults escaped, they were not here:
But here they are, in many a page and line,
Men may perceive the Printers faults, or mine.
And since my faults are here in prison fast,
And on record (in print) are like to last,
Since the Correcters let them pass the Press,
And my occasions mixed with sicknesses,
And that four Printers dwelling far asunder,
Did print this book, pray make the faults no wonder.
I will confess my faults are ^cap'd indeed,
If they escape men's Censure when they read.
No Garden is so clear, but weeds are in it,
All is not Gold that is coined in the Mint;
The Rose has prickles, and the spots of sin,
Often takes the fairest features for their Inn.
Below the Moon no full perfection is,
And always some of us are all amiss.
Then in your reading mend each mis-plac'd letter,
And by your judgment make bad words ^ound better.
Where you may hurt, heal; where you can affect,
There help and cure, or else be not too strict.
Look through your fingers, wink, conniue at me,
And (as you meet with faults) see, and not see.
Thus must my faults escape, (or escape never,)
For which, good Readers, I am yours for ever.
JOHN TAILOR.

In laudem Authoris.
THou have no learning, yet with learned skill
Thou do write well, although thy means be ill.
And if I could, I would thy merits raise,
And crown thy temples with immortal Bays.
Thine in the best of friendship, ABRAHAM VIELL.

TAILORS URANIA.
To the Understander.
SEe here the Pride and Knowledge of a Sayler,
His Sprit-saile, Fore-saile, Main-saile, and his Mizz^^;
A poor frail man, God wot, I know none frailer:
I know for Sinners, Christ is dead, and rizen.
I know no greater ^inner then John Tailor,
Of all, his Death did Ransom out of Prizzen,
And therefore here is my Pride, if it be Pride,
To know Christ, and to know him Crucifide.
(1)
Eternal God, which in thine arms do Graspe
All past, all present, and all future things:
And in inevitable doom do claspe
The lives and deaths of all that dies and springs,
And at the doomefull day will once vnhaspe
Th'accusing book of Subjects and of Kings.
In whom though ending nor beginning be,
Let me ( O Lord) begin and end in thee.
(2)
All cogitations vain from me remove,
And cleanse my earthly and polluted heart:
Inspire me with thy blessings from above,
That (to thy honor) I with Artlesse Art
May sing thy Justice, Mercy, and thy Love;
Possess me with thy Grace in every part,
That no profane word issue from my pen,
But to the Glory of thy name; Amen.
(3)
I do beseech thee, gracious loving Father,
Reject me not in thy sharp judging Ire:
But in thy multitude of Mercies Rather
Recall me to thee, Recollect me Nigher,
My wandering Soul into thy bosom Gather,
And with thy Grace my graceless heart Inspire,
Dictate unto my mind what it may think,
Write with thy Spirit what I may write with ink.
(4)
Thou all things wast cu'n then when nothing was,
And then, thou all things did of nothing make:
Of nothing All thou still have brought to pass,
And all again, to nothing must betake.
When sea shall burn, and l^^d shall melt like brass,
When hills shall tremble, and the mountains quak^.
And when the World to Chaos turne^ again,
Then thou Almighty All, shall All remain.
(5)
And since this universal massy ball
This earth, this air, this water, and this fire,
Must to a ruin and a period fall,
And all again to nothing must retire:
Be thou to me my only All in All,
Whose love and mercy never shall expire.
In thee I place my treasure and my trust,
Where Fellon cannot steal, or canker rust.
(6)
All things (but only God) at first began,
The uncreated God did all Create:
In him Alone is equal will and can,
Who has no ending, or commencing date.
To whose Eternity all time's a span
Who was, is, shall be, ever in one state.
All else to nothing hourly does decline,
And only stands upon support Divine.
(7)
Our high Creator our first Parents formed,
And did inspire them with his heavenly spirit:
Our Soules-seducer ( Satan) them deformed,
And from Gods favor did them disinherit:
Our blessed Redeemer them again reformed,
And ransomed them by his unbounded merit.
Thus were they formed, deformed, reformed again
By God, by Satan, and our Saviors pain.
(8)
Man's Generation did from God proceed
A mortal Body, and a Soul Eternal:
Degeneration was the Devils deed,
With false delusions and with lies infernal:
Regeneration was our Saviors meede,
Whose death did satisfy the wrath supernall.
Thus was man found, and lost, and lost was found
By Grace; with Glory ever to be crowned.
(9)
Man was Produc'de, seduced, and reduc'de
By God, by Satan, and by God again:
From good to ill, from ill he was excusd'e
By merit of The Immortal Man of men.
The unpolluted blood from him was sluc'de,
To save us from damnations dreadful den.
Thus man was made, and marde, and better made,
By Him who did sin, death, and hell invade.
(10)
Let man consider then but what he is,
And contemplate on what erst he has bin:
How first he was created heir of bliss,
And how he fell to be the Child of sin;
How (of himself) he hourly does amiss,
And how his best works do no merit win,
Except acceptance make them be esteemed,
Through his obedience that our Souls redeemed.
(11)
Before thou wast, remember thou wast naught,
And out of naught (or nothing) thou wast fram'de:
And how thy Body being made and wrought
By God, was with a living Soul inflam'de:
And how The Eternal Nomenclator taught
Thee name all Creatures that were ever nam'de,
And made thee Stuard of the worlds whole treasure
And plac'de thee in a Paradise of pleasure.
(12)
Then wast thou Viceroy to the King of heaven,
And great Lieutenant to the Lord of hosts:
The rule of all things unto thee was given,
At thy command all creatures served like posts
To come or go, and at thy beck were driu'n
Both near and far, unto the farthest coasts.
God all things made, as servants unto thee
Because thou only should his servant be.
(13)
He gave life unto herbs, to plants, and trees,
For if they wanted life, how could they grow?
A beast has life and sense, moves, feels, and sees,
And in some sort does good and evil know:
But man's before all Creatures in degrees:
God life, and sense, and reason did bestow.
And left those blessings should be transitory,
He gave him life, sense, reason, grace, and glory.
(14)
Then let our meditations scope be most,
How at the first we were created good:
And how we (wilful) grace and goodness lost
And of the sons of God, were Satan's brood.
Then think the price, that our Redemption cost
The Eternal Son of Gods most precious blood.
Remember this whilst life and sense remain,
Else life, and sense, and reason are in vain.
(15)
Thou to requite thy God that all thee gave,
Ingratefully against him did rebel:
Whereby from Regal state, thou turnedst slave,
And heavenly lustice doomed thee down to hell.
As thy rebellion from thy God thee drove,
So' against thee all things to rebellion fell.
For when to heaven thy due obedience ceast,
Thy disobedience taught each brutish beast.
(16)
Now see thy miserable wretched state,
Thou and the earth is ^k^ with thee accursed:
All worldly things, which thee obaide of late,
In stiff commotion now against thee burst:
And thee for ever drove from Eden gate,
To live an exilde wretch, and which is worst,
Thy soul, (Gods darling) fell from her preferme^t,
To be the Devils thrall, in endless torment.
(17)
But Mercies sea has quenched Justice fire,
And Heavens high heir (in pity of man's ca^^)
In person came, and satisfide Gods ire,
And graceless man new Reposse^t in Grace.
The Son of God came down, to raise us higher,
To make us Glorious, he himself made ba^^.
To draw us up, down unto earth he came,
And honored us, by putting on our shame.
(18)
Who can conceive the Glory he was in
Above the heavens of heavens in threan'd in bliss?
Who can conceive the loss that he did win
To recti^ie and answer our amiss?
Who can conceive the Mountains of our sin,
That must be hid with such a sea as this?
No heart, no tongue, no pen of mortal wight
These things can once concei^e, or speak, or write.
(19)
Man may collect the abundance of his vice,
And the dear love his God to him did bear,
In thinking on th'inestimable price
Was paid his un^e-pollated ^ou^e to clear,
To give him an immortal Paradise,
And to redeem his foes, to pay so d^are.
For if our sins had not been more then much,
The ransom of them ^ure had not been such.
(20)
The blood of any mighty mortal King
Was insufficient this great debt to pay:
Archangels power, or Angels could not bring
A Ransom worth forbcarance but a day;
The only Son of God must do this thing,
El^e it must be undone, and we for aye.
God was the Creditor, and man the debtor,
Christ (God and man) did pay, none could pay better.
(21)
Then since thy sinful Some from Grace was lost,
And since by Grace it has found Grace again:
Since being lost, so great a price is lost,
T'enfranchise it from everlasting pain,
And since thy crimes are quit, thy debts are crossed,
Thy peace with God, the way to heaven made plain
Let not all this in vain for thee be done,
But thankful be to God, through Christ his Son.
(22)
Forget not thou a^t ashes, earth, and dust,
And that from whence thou came, then shall again:
And at the last Trumpe that appear thou must,
When Procseys and Essoynes are all in vain:
Where just and ^^iust, shall have judgment just,
For ever doomb'd to endless joy, or pain.
Where though that thou be damned, it is Gods glory,
Thy wife, thy son, thy ^ire, will not be sorry.
(23)
Me thinks it should make man this world to lot^e
When that which will a thousand clo^^^ and feed:
It should but only one man ^eede and clothe
In ^ares excess, and gorgewisnesse of weed:
Yet this brave canker, this consuming moth
(Who in his life never means to do good deed)
Must be ad or'd for those good pa^ts he wa^^^s,
By fearful Fools, and flattering Sicophan^^.
(24)
Has he the title of an earthly grace?
Or has he Honor, Lordship, Worship? or
Ha^h he in Court some great com^anding place?
Or has he wea^th to be regarded for?
If with these honors, virtue he embrace,
Then love him; else his p^ck ^oi^t pomp abho^e.
"Sunshine on dung-h^ls makes them ^^^^^^ the more,
"And Honor shows all that was had before.
(25)
Shall men give reu'rence to a painted trunk
That Is nothing but all outside, and within
Their senses are with black damnation drunk,
Whose heart ^s Satan's Tap-house, or his Inne^
Whose Reputation inwardly is ^unk^,
Though outwardly raisd up, and swollen with ^^^
I think it wor^e then to adore the Deui^^,
To worship his ba^e instrumenrs of ^uill.
(26)
No, look upon the Man, and not his Case,
See how he does his Maker imi^ate:
If Grace supernall, give internal Grace,
That makes his mind on virtue contemplate,
That holds this world, and all things in it as base,
Knows death makes happy, or unfortunate.
That does no wrong, for fouour, ^^^^^e, or ^^^^^,
And lays on each, that each det^ru's to bea^^.
(27)
Such men (no doubt) but few such living are,
For they are thickly so^'d, and thinly grow'd,
The purest Wheat is mixed with the Tare,
The humble minds, are servile to the proud.
Vice Reu^ls, and poor Virtue's poor and bare,
Hypocrisy into the Church will crowd.
So man must more then human ^^^^it poss^ss^,
T'escape the baits and inares of wickedness.
(28)
The Atheist of the Scriptures can dispute,
That one would deem him a Religious man:
The Temporizer to the Time will suit,
Although his Zeal be Machimillian.
Then there is a Faith that seldom yields good fruit,
And though impure, is called a '^^^^^tan.
A thousand Sei^^ in thousand Pr^^^^^, shapes
Are Times true Turne-c^ates, and Religions Apes.
(29)
The greatest plague, that ever came from Hell,
Is to be puffed and stuffed with self-conceit:
When men too Ill, esteem themselves too well,
When ouer-valued worth proves light in weight,
When Self-love and Ambition makes us swell
Above the limits of Discretions height.
When the poor lay displays his borrowed plumes;
And man (unfeeling sin) to sin presumes.
(30)
But if thy feathred pride, Icarian-high
Does soar too far above true Reasons bownd:
The Eternal Sun thy waren wings will fry,
Thy fatal Fall, thy Folly shall confound.
Who (like that Cretan) mounts ambitiously,
In Seas of sorrow shall (like him) be drowned.
By pride the Caldean Monarchy decreast,
A King (the best of men) was made a Beast.
(31)
The state of Man may be compared well
Unto a Kingdom governed well or ill:
For if his Rule and Policy excel,
His Reason (like a Queen) commands his will.
But if seditious Passions do rebel,
They Reasons Court with all disorder fill,
And ouer-run her careless Commonwealth,
With murder, fraud, oppression, whoredom, stealth.
(32)
The Sence^ are this Kingdoms Court of Guarde,
To keep their Queen secure from terrene treason:
Great is the trust and safety of this Ward,
Whilst they give true Intelligence to Reason:
But if this Guarde their duties not regard,
And mis-informe their Queen at any season;
Then right for wrong and wrong for right she will conster,
And in her Apprehension proves a Monster.
(33)
The Hearing, Sight, the Taste, the Smell and Touch,
If Vices do present themselves for objects:
And they (incredulous) not deem them such,
Informing Reason that they are good Subjects;
If Reasons judgment be not more then much,
She entertaines for Worthies these base Abiects:
Who spoil her Court, and break her Kingdoms frame,
And turn her State and Glory into shame.
(34)
The Appetite, the Fancy, and the Will,
(Spiritual Fa^nkies) are Reasons Peers:
Who (of themselves) do counsel all things ill,
Not knowing what is true, but what appears:
If she attend, what only they instill,
She takes in mere delusions through her ears:
And they at last will thrust her from her Throne,
And then (usurping Rebels) sit thereon.
(35)
These Vassals having got the Regal sway,
Enforce the Commons which are the Affections,
Their hateful hellish precepts to obey,
With promise of their favors and protections:
The Affections all agree, and all do pay
These Miscreants their tributes and subiections,
And now is Reason banished, and they threat,
She never shall gain again her awful seat.
(36)
Th'vsurping Heart, sometimes does reign as King,
Sometimes the Brain is Counselor of State:
The Eyes and Ears, Intelligence do bring,
The Tongue (as Herald) tidings does relate.
The Hands and Feet do execute each thing,
Which these intruding Tyrants love or hate.
And every Member plays a painful part,
To serve a swimming Brain, and swelling Heart.
(37)
The Fancy (like an Ape) skips to, and fro,
Begins a thousand things, and ends none:
Makes, marrs, forbids, and bids, no, yea, yea, no,
Do, and undo, hold fast, and let alone:
Run, stay, up, down, stand, fall, go, come, come, go;
Sad, glad, mad, witty, foolish, mirth and move.
Thus Fancy does in Apish toys delight
To serve the greedy maw of appetite.
(38)
And Appetite (as does a big-womb'd Dame)
Lusts, longs, desires, and must have this and that:
Herbs, roots, fruits, flowers, Fish, Foul, Beasts wild and tame
She must and will have, well she knows not what:
Whilst Fancy, and Imagination frame
Themselves more nimbly then a mouzing Cat,
Still searching what the Appetite desires,
Superfluous meats, drinks, bables, and attires.
(39)
The Memory's Lord Keeper of the Treasure,
And great Recorder of this world of dust:
The Understanding gives true Justice measure
To Good, to Bad, to Just, and to Unjust;
Invention and Remembrance wait the leisure
Of Memory; and Understanding must
Have Wisdom for her fellow, and her guide,
Else Prince, and Peers, and Commons stray aside.
(40)
Truth, and false Lying, on the Tongue attends;
The one instructs her plainly in the Tr^ath,
The other's proper, and improper, ends
Does reach to lie, and vouch it with an oath:
The Tongue loves one of these, yet both contends,
But she wants entertainment for them both.
At last she takes in Lying for her Page,
And bids Truth walk a beggars Pilgrimage.
(41)
When Wisdom must give Folly cap and knee,
When hare-braind will, over Wit does rule and reign,
When Lying, shall make Truth regardles be,
When Love is paid with hatred and disdain:
When Sense and Appetite do all agree
To serve a false rebellious heart and brain;
When they have Reasons Court, thus vnderminde,
It is a sign that Vnderstanding's blind.
(42)
Then is the place where Virtue does abode,
Made a foul Rendeuouz for filthy Vice:
The Temple of the holy Spirit of God
Esteems his blessed presence of no price.
Man spurns against his just revenging Rod
Worse then the Jews, that for his Coat cast Dice.
Men fallen into a reprobated Sense,
Dread not their Makers great Omnipotence.
(43)
Then what art thou, polluted earthly clod,
Thou, span, thou froth, thou bubble, and thou smoke:
Worse then the dust, that underfoot is trod,
Dare thou thy Makers fury to provoke?
Why will thou (wilful) thy perdition plod,
And with damnation thy salvation choke?
Christ bought thy Soul, and lent it thee to use it,
It Is one of thine; and therefore not abuse it.
(44)
Dare thou profane with thy ungodly breath
His name, that did (before the world) elect thee?
Dare thou dare him his Justice sword t'vnsheath?
Dare thou provoke his mercy to reject thee?
Dare thou run headloug to perpetual death,
Whereas eternal torments shall correct thee?
And dare thou (wretched worm) of earthly race,
Belch blasphemy against thy Makers Grace?
(45)
He thou offendest is the King of Kings,
Heaven Earth and Hell, do tremble at his frown:
Bright Angels and Archangells always sings
Before the seat of his immortal Crown:
His foes to fell confusion down he slings,
He gives his servants Honor and Renown.
His power's not circumscribed here, or there
But all in all, is all, and euery-where.
(46)
Can nothing move thy flinty heart to Ruthe,
That of thy self thou some remorse would take;
And not to spend thy beauty, strength, and youth,
To serve the Sovereign of the Stygian Lake?
Say not, to morrow, thou will seek the truth,
And when sin leaves thee, thou will sin forsake.
When thou no more (through weakness) can offend,
Then lame, old, rotten, thou will God attend.
(47)
When hoary hair, and blood all frozen chill,
When eyes wax dim, and limbs are weak and lame:
And that no more thy rash rebellious will
Cannot perform vile deeds of sin and shame:
When thou have lost thy strength to do more ill,
Then unto Heaven, thy mind thou' ginst to frame.
Thy youth in Satan's service being spent,
In age thou think on God, and do repent.
(48)
Supppose a man that is much engaged to thee,
Has a good Horse, which thou do much desire:
Thou offrest for him thrice his worth, to be
The Master of this Beast thou do require:
But this ingrate full wretch will not agree
To give, to sell him thee, or let thee hire,
But lets him (all his youth) be rid by those
Who are thy spightfull, and thy mortal foes:
(49)
And when he is lean, and old, and lame, and blind.
Galled, foundred, filtby, wanting no disease:
Botts, Glaunders, Spauin, broken in the wind,
Not a tooth left to mumpe on beans and pease:
Then this Companion, (most unkindly kind)
Will let thee have this Palfray, if thou please,
If now (past good) thou scornest to receive him,
Heel slay his skin off, and the dogs shall have him.
(50)
Betwixt thy God and thee, such is the case:
When thou art young, strong, sound of wind and lim.
Thy soul and body shuns his heavenly Grace,
Thou will not serve thy God, nor wait on him:
But (heedlesse) headlong run'st a hellish race,
Till age has brought thee to the graves hard brim:
Then (being clogged with sin, diseased and foul)
Thou offrest God thy body and thy soul.
(51)
But do thou think he is at thy command,
Or that his mercy must attend thy leisure?
Or do thou think thou can in judgment stand
And escape the justice of his high displeasure?
Or do thou think that his Almighty hand
Is shortened? or that his supernall pleasure
Regards not how the Sons of Men do live?
Or that without Repentance he will forgive?
(52)
Sly Satan's Rage is almost at an end,
And well he knows his domination's short.
He therefore now does all his Engines bend
To batter and confound our fleshly Fort;
He and his Ministers do all attend
To draw us to his damned infernal Court.
For if he lose our souls at latest cast.
Twill be too late when all his power is past.
(53)
And therefore now he plots his devilish drifts,
To separate us from our God so loving:
In making us unthankful for his gifts,
And by our heinous sins his Anger moving,
Whilst wings of Faith our prayers upwards lifts
To praise our Maker (as is best behouing)
Then Satan kills our Zeal, and unawares
We are entangled in vile worldly snares.
(54)
God made enough, all men to satisfy,
Yet not enough to give one Man content:
For he that had the worlds whole foueraigntie,
Would covet for a further continent.
Ambitious thirst of fading Dignity
(As though they were for ever permanent)
Does banish Love, and every heavenly Motion,
Blinds all our Zeal, and murders our Devotion.
(55)
It Is truly writ in many a thousand story,
And thousand thousand sheets of blotted paper
Declares how terrene things are transitory,
Incertaine certain, wasting like a Taper.
How frothy painted Pomp, and greedy Glory
When least we think, does vanish like a vaper.
Experience teaches this, and truth bewraies it,
And various humane accidents displaies it.
(56)
To day great Dives in a purple coat,
With Epicurian Appetite does feed:
His cups with Wine do ouerflow and floate,
His baggs with quoyne, his heart from fear is freed,
And on the world, and wealth does only dote,
(As if his death, his life should not succeed.)
He loves himself, himself loves him again,
And liu's a hated wretch, of God and Men.
(57)
Nor stone, or dropsy, or the groaning Gowt
Can make him with his wealth to live in hate,
He (maugre pain) takes pleasure to find out
New Proiects to increase his too great state;
To marry much to much, he casts about,
And never dreams of his expiring date,
Until he hear the fatal bell to towle,
And Hell stand gaping to devour his Soul.
(58)
I'haue heard of an extortionizing Curr,
That has been numbd and senseless, as a logg;
Who neither limb, or leg, or joint could sturr,
But on his deathbed grunting like a Hog^
And almost speechless with his rattling Murr,
Yet care of Coin his conscience did so clogg,
That not a thought of Heaven he could afford,
But ten ^ the hundred was his latest word.
(59)
Thus Gold that should be captive unto all,
Does captiuate his Keeper, as a slave:
Who like an Idol does before it fall,
And never means another God to have.
And when Heavens Pursiuant, gr^m-Death, does call
To warn him to his vn-a-voyded Grave,
Until his Jaws be craw'd, and ram'd with mold,
He Will speak or (speechles) make a sign for gold.
(60)
We ought no formed Creature to adore,
Or frame will worship in our idle brain:
Nor of the Angels must we ought implore,
For Man and Angels help is all but vain;
Yet pur-blind Avarice still gapes for more,
And makes his Mammonuish God his gain:
He plays the Bawd, his money is the Whore,
Whilst it breeds Bastards, he does hold the door:.
(61)
He thinks his life Angelical, because
Amongst the Angels he does spend his time:
And Royal he will be, for in his paws
The Royalls are insnarde like birds in lime:
And with his Nobles he ordeineth Jaws,
That base extortion shall not be a crime.
He marks how Kingdoms, Provinces, and Towns,
Are ouer-ruled by his cursed Crowns.
(62)
But if he note his Angels, what they be;
Not heavenly, nor yet those from Heaven that fell:
But they are in a third, and worse degree
Dumb damned senseless ministers of Hell.
They cannot smell, or feel, taste, hear, or see,
And thousand times being told, yet cannot tell,
They Are locked, and barred, and bolted up in thrall,
Which shows their Nature not Angelical.
(63)
His Royalls does not Royallize himself,
Or make him better then he is, or was,
In spite of all his ill got cankered Pelf,
He Is but a miserable golden Ass:
The Devils dear darling, a most hateful Else,
Which as Hells Factor on the Earth does pass.
Were every hair about him made a Royal,
He were a Wreath, to God and Men disloyal.
(64)
His Nobles no way does enoble him,
Their Counsel cannot mend his Rascal mind:
His heart's obdurate, and his eyes are dim
To think or see, t'ward good to be inclinde.
He Will venture soul and body, life and ^^^^^
To scrape and scratch what he must leave behind.
His Nobles thus, ignobly make him live,
And headlong to the Devil, their Master, drive.
(65)
Amongst his Marks he never marketh how
He spends, or lends, or gives, his ill got store:
He marks to make it multiply and grow,
And for the use of Fifty takes a score.
He never dreads Heavens dreadful angry bro^^e,
But daily grinds the faces of the poor.
Let vengeance thunder, and let Hels dog bark,
Amongst his Marks, of Grace he has no mark.
(66)
And though a world of Crowns are in his hand,
For every Crown might he a Kingdom have,
His state no better (in my mind) should stand
Then a rich Beggar, or a kingly Slave.
He should his Crowns, and they not him command,
They (Vassall-like) should do what he should crave.
Lo thus the Crowns their Sovereign ouerswayes,
They rule and Reign, he like a Slave obeyes.
(67)
Thus Angels to a C^usffe, are a curse,
His Royalls makes his baseness far more base:
His Nobles, his ignoble mind make worse;
His Marks, are marks and figures of disgrace:
And Crowns usurps in his Niggard purse,
And in his heart Contentment has no place.
For Angels, Royalls, Marks and Crowns
Can put no virtue, in the minds of Clownes.
(68)
The only slave of slaves, is Moneys slave,
He pines in plenty, staru's amidst his store:
Dies living, and does live as in a Grave,
In wealthy- want, and in abundance poor:
The Goods he has, he badly does depratte,
And only cares how he may purchase more.
For he himself cannot afford himself
A good meals meat, for wasting of his pelf.
(69)
His feare's his wealth, his torment his delight,
His Conscience foul, affrightfull is his sleep:
His hope despair, his mirth in sadness dight,
His joys are Cares, what he has got to keep:
His Rest, is restles unrest day and night,
And in a Sea of Melancholy deep,
Amidst his large possessions liu's in lack,
And dies in debt to's belly and his back.
(70)
Me thinks I hear a Miser-Churle object,
None railes at Wealth, but those which live in want:
The idle Grasshopper cannot affect
The toylesome labors of the frugall Ant:
The ^^^digall by no means will be checked
So much as when his Purses lining's scant.
The Fox does scorn the Grapes, but wot you why?
Because out of his reach, they hang too high.
(71)
So does a sort of poor and needy Hyndes,
The scum and dregs, of every Common wealth:
The shag-rag-shag-hand crew, whose boundles minds
Must be supplide with shifting, or by stealth.
Like sick men, when their pains their Reason blinds
They envy all men that are well in health.
So does a swarm of Drones, and idle mates
Revile and envy at our happy states.
(72)
But let them storm, and ra^^e, and curse, and swear,
Within our coffers, we will keep the Gold:
Let them themselves, themselves in pieces tear.
What we have got with toil, with care we will hold.
What is it does men to reputation rear,
But when their goods and wealth grows manifold,
We care not then, let needy Rascals rail
Till Tyburne eat them, or some loathsome Iayle.
(73)
Thus does a Wretch his thirst of Gain excuse,
And makes his bad trade good with show of thrift:
Himself, (continual) with himself does muse
Upon some purchase, or some gaining drift;
And as a Hog, his downward looks do use
To poare, and not aloft his eyes to lift.
He takes Heavens fruit, and hoordeth up the same,
And never remembers God, from whence it came.
(74)
But fill thy baggs, till they are ouer-filld,
And empt thy conscience more, (if more thou can)
Raise higher rents, and let thy Land be tilled,
And tell thy self thou art a happy man.
Pull down thy Barnes, and boasting bigger build,
As if thy blessed state were new began.
Then comes a voice, with horror and off right,
Thou fool, I Will fetch away thy soul this night.
(75)
And tell me then, who shall these Goods possess
That thou have damned thy self to purchase them?
Who shall be heir to all thy vain excess,
For which thy soul, that dear (too dear) bought I^^^^,
In hazard is, of endless wretchedness
Be'ing banished from the new Jerusalem.
The goods are ill, that does the world control,
Whose cursed gain, does lose the Owners soul.
(76)
What Is in the world should make men wish to live,
If men could well consider what it is:
What in the world that happiness can give,
Which is not drowned in sorrows black Abis^?
What goods in the world can a man atchieue,
But woe and misery, o'rewhelmes his bliss?
No pleasures, or contentments steadfast are:
For all we can call Outs, is only Care.
(77)
I'haue seen a Gallant, mounted all in gold
Like Alexander, on Bucephalus:
The ground (in his conceit) too base to hold
Him, whom the smiles of Fortune favors thus.
But in his height of heat, how soon he is cold,
By death, snatched from his pomp, himself, and us!
His Name, and Noble-Mushrom-fame forgot,
And all things (but his shame) must lie and rot.
(78)
The beauteous Lady, that appears a Saint,
Of Angels form, and Heaven admired hue:
That can (by Art) defective Nature paint,
And make false colors to the eye seem true:
Yet Death at last, her brau'ry does attaint,
And (spite her Art) she must pay Natures due.
The rarest features, and the fairest forms
Must dye and rot, and be consumed with wormer.
(79)
Wealth, Beauty, as they are abusde or used,
They make the Owners either cursed or blessed:
As Good or Ill is in the mind infusde,
They add a joyful rest, or woes unrest:
To use them well they are blessed, but if abusde,
Thy God does thee and them loath and detest:
And turns his blessings, which should most content thee,
To dreadful cursings, which shall still torment thee.
(80)
Seek then Heavens Kingdom, and things that are right,
And all things else shall be upon thee cast:
Thy days of Joy shall never turn to night,
Thy blessed state shall everlasting last.
Live still, as ever in thy Makers sight,
And let Repentance purge thy vices past.
Remember thou must drink of deaths sharp cup,
And of thy Stewardship account give up.
(81)
Had thou the beauty of fair Absolon,
Or did thy strength the strength of Sampson pass:
Or could thy wisdom match wise Solomon,
Or might thy riches Cressus wealth surpass;
Or were thy pomp beyond great Babylon,
(The proudest Monarchy that ever was,)
Yet Beauty, Wisdom, Riches, Strength, and State,
Age, Death, and Time, will spoils and ^^^^^.
(82)
Make of the World, no more then as it is,
A vale of Cares, of miseries, and woes:
Think of it, as the sink of all amiss,
That blinds our Senses with deceiving shows:
Account it as a den of balefull bliss,
The which (unthought of) all estates o'rethrowes,
How Satan in it bears a Lordly sway,
And how none but his subjects it obey.
(83)
And whilst thou runn'st this transitory race,
Use well the blessings God to thee has sent:
Do Good with them whilst thou have time and space,
And know they are but things unto thee lent.
Know that thou must appear before Gods face,
To answer if they well, or ill be spent.
If thou have spent them well, then heaven is thine,
If ill, thou art damned to hell, by doom Divine.
(84)
But ten times happy shall that Steward be,
Which at the last the Lord shall faithful find:
Heart, tongue or eyes, cannot think, speak, or see
The glory that to him shall be assignde.
He shall out-passe the Angels in degree,
He shall outshine all Stars that ever shinde.
He shall for ever, and for ever sing
Eternal praises to his God and King.
(85)
Unto which God the Father, first and last,
Whose goodness, all conseru's, preseru's, and seeds:
To God the Son, whose merits down has cast
Sin, death, and hell, (due unto sinners meeds.)
To thee O Holy Ghost, that ever wast
The blessing that from Sire, and Son proceeds;
And to the vn-deuided Three in One,
All Power, and Praise, and Glory be alone.
FINIS.
TO THE TRVELY WORTHY, AND RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN MORAY, L. VISCOUNT ANNAN,
EARL OF Annandale, one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Royal Bedchamber;
Earths Honors, and Heavens happiness.
THis Book, (Good Sir) the issue of my brain,
Though far unworthy of your worthy view,
Yet I in duty offer it to you,
In hope you Gently it will entertain.
And though the Method and the Phrase be plain,
Not Artlike writ, as to the style is due,
Yet is it void of any thing untrue;
And truth, I know, your favor shall obtain.
The many favors I from you have had,
Has forced me thus to show my thankful mind:
And of all faults, I know no vice so bad
And hateful, as ingratefully inclinde.
A thankful Heart, is all a poor man's pelf,
Which, (with this Book) I give your Worthy Self.
Your Worships, ever most obliged, JOHN TAILOR.

THE SEVERAL SIEGES, ASSAVLTS, SACKINGS, AND FINAL DESTRVCTION OF the Famous,
Ancient, and memorable City of JERUSALEM.
THe Justice, Mercy, and the Might I sing
Of heavens inst, merciful, Almighty KING.
By whose foreknowledge all things were elected,
Whose power has all things made, and al protected,
Whose Mercies flood has quenched his Justice flame,
Who was, is, shall be One, and still the same.
Who in the Prime, when all things first began,
Made all for Man, and for himself made Man.
Made, not begotten, or of humane birth,
No Sire but God, no Mother but the Earth;
Who never knew Childhood, of the ^ucking teate,
But at the first was made a man complete.
Whose inward Soul, in God-like form did shine
As Image of the Majesty Divine.
Whose supernatural wisdom, (beyond Nature)
Did name each sensible, and senseless creature,
And from whose Star-like, Sand-like Generation,
Sprung every Kindred, Kingdom, Tribe, and Nation.
All people then, one language spoke alone,
Interpreters the world then needed none:
There lived then no learned deep Grammarians,
There were no Turks, no Scythians, no Tartarians,
Then all was one, and one was only all
The language of the universal Ball.
Then if a Traveler had gone as far
As from the Artick to the Antartick star,
If he from Boreas unto Auster went,
Or from the Orient to the Occident,
Which way soever he did ^^^ or mind,
He had been sure his Countryman to find.
One hundred, thirty winters since the Flood,
The Earth one only language understood:
Until the son of Cush, the son of Cham,
A proud cloud-scaling Tower began to frame,
Trusting that if the world again were drowned,
He in his lofty building might rest sound;
All future Floods, he purposd to prevent,
Aspiring to Heavens glorious Battlement.
But high Jehovah, with a puff was able
To make ambitious Babel out a babble.
(For what is man, that he should dare resist
The great Almighties power, who in his fist
Does gripe Eternity, and when he please
Can make, and unmake, Heaven, and Earth, and Seas?)
For in their expectation of conclusion,
He plag'd them all with sundry Tongues confusion.
Such Gibrish Gibble Gabble all did tangle,
Some laugh, some fret, all prate, all diffring wrangle;
One calls in Hebrew to his working Mate,
And he in Welsh Glough when Comrage does prate.
Another gapes in English, or in Scotch,
And they are answered in the French or Dutch,
Caldaicke, Syriacke, and Arabian,
Greek, Latin, Tuscan, and Armenian,
The Transiluaniae, and Hungarian,
The Persian, and the rude Barbarian;
All these, and diverse more then I can number,
Misunderstanding tongues did there incumber.
Thus he that sits in Heaven their plots derided,
And in their height of pride, their tongues divided.
For in this sudden unexpected chang,
The wife and husband, Sire and son were strange,
The Brother could not understand the Brother,
The Daughter stands amazed at her Mother,
By every one a several part is acted,
And each unto the other seemesdistracted.
Thus by the justice of the Lord of Hosts
Each several tongue was driu'n to several coasts,
And GOD (peculiar) to himself did choose
His most beloved, yet hard-hearted Jews.
Iehouahs honor with them then did dwetl,
His name was only known in Israel,
Salem his habitation was of yore,
In Sion men his Glory did adore.
The Eternal Trine, and Trine Eternal One
In Jury then was called on alone,
The sons of Heber, were the adopted stock,
Gods only Chosen, holy sacred Flock,
Amongst all Nations, them he only liked,
And for his own use, them he culd and pik'd;
Them his sin-killing, saving word he gave
T'instruct them, what condemned, and what would save,
To them he gave his word, his Covenants band,
His Patriarks his Prophets, and his hand
Did bless, defend, instruct, correct, and guide
The Jews and no one Nation else beside.
For them, a world of wonders has he done,
To them, he sent his best begotten Son,
On them, a Land he freely did bestow,
Where milk and honey plentiously did flow,
With them he was, till they from him did turn,
And wilfully against his blessings spurn;
All heavenly earthly Souls, or Bodies good
They lacked no temp'rall, or eternal food.
His Temple builded in Jerusalem,
Where he had daily sacrifice from them,
Where though their service was defect and lame,
The Almighties mercy did accept the same.
(For though Man's sin is great, God has decreed
To take his best endeavor for a deed.)
And whilst they in his love and fear abode,
They were his people, he their gracious God.
But when impieties began to breed
And ouergrow old Jacobs sacred seed,
When they from good to bad began to fall,
From ill to worse, from worst, to worst of all,
When Gods great mercies could not them allure,
And his sharp threatenings could not them procure,
When each ones body was unto the soul
A loathsome Dungeon, to a prisoner foul.
When sin (al shameless) the whole Land o'rspreads,
Then God threw dreadful vengeance on their heads:
And for their heinous heaping sin on sin,
Jerusalem has often assaulted bin.
First, Shishak, Egypts King, with might and maine
Made hauock there, in Rehoboams Reign;
The City, Temple, Golden vessels, Shielas,
All (as a prey) to the Egyptians yields.
Next loas came, the King of Israel,
In Amaziahs, days with fury fell;
He brought Judea to Samariaes thrall,
King, Kingdom, Princes, Peers, and people all.
Then thirdly, Rezin King of Aram came
In Abaz time, with sword and furious flame.
The Assyrian great Zonach'rib was the next,
By whom good Hezekiab was perplexed.
But when blasphemous Pagans, (puffed with pride)
Contemptuously the God of gods deside,
The Lord of Lor^s (whom no power can withstand)
Took his own gracious, glorious cause in hand,
He used no humane Arm, or spear, or sword,
But with his All-commanding mighty Word,
One Angel sent to grisly Plutoes den,
A hundred, eighty, and five thousand men.
Then fifthly was Jerusalem subdude,
In Iudaes blood, the ^^^yrians hands imbrude,
Manasses godless Glory did expire,
All yield unto the insulting foes desire;
Usurping Conquest all did seize upon,
The King in chaines-bound, sent to Babylon,
Till he (repenting) to his God did call.
Who heard his cry, and freed him out of thrall.
Then sixthly, Pharaob-Necho Egypts King,
To great distress all Iudaes Land did bring,
With fell confusion all the Kingdom filled,
And (with a Dart) good King Josias killed.
The Shepherd, for his wandering sheep was struck,
The godly Prince, from godless people took;
So this just, zealous, and religious Prince,
(Whose like scarce ever Reigned before, or since)
The Almighty (to himself) did take again,
As knowing him too good for such bad men.
Nabuchadnezer, next made them obey,
When Zedekiah did the Scepter sway:
King, Kingdom, Peers, and people, all overthrown,
All topsie-turuy, spoyld, and tumbled down;
The cursed Caldeans did the King surprise,
Then slew his Sons, and next plucked out his eyes:
Then unto Babylon he was conuayde,
In Chains, in Priso, and in Darkness laid,
Till death his Corpse, did from his soul divide,
He lived a slave, and sadly, gladly did.
The City, and the Temple burnt and spoyld,
With all pollution every place was soyld;
The holy vessels all away were borne,
The sacred Garments which the Priests had worn,
All these the Caldees, (void of all remorce)
Did carry unto Babylon perforce.
Which, seventy years, in slavery and much woe
They kept, and would by no means let them go,
Till Persian Cyrus did Earths glory gain,
Who freed the Jews, and sent them home again;
He rendered back their vessels and their store,
And bad them build their Temple up once more.
Which many years in glorious state did stand,
Till Piolomy the King of Egypts band
Surpised the Jews, and made them all obey,
Assaulting them upon the Sabbath day.
Next after that, from Rome great Pompey came,
And Iudaes force, by force, perforce did tame:
Then did the Caesar's bear the earthly sway,
The universal world did them obey.
And after that, the Roman power did place
The Idumean Herod's graceless Grace,
Him they created Tetrarch (demi King)
Against whom the Jews did boldly spurn and ^ling,
For they had sworn that none but David's seed
In the seat Royal ever should succeed.
But Sossius, and King Herod's Armies strength
Did ouer-run them all in breadth and length,
By hostile Arms they did them all provoke,
To bear the burden of their awful yoke.
And lastly, when the Romans ouer-run
By valiant Titus, old Vespasians son;
Then fell they to an vnrecouer'd wane,
They all in general, were or slain or taken,
Then was the extirpation of them all,
Their just, worst, last, most fatal, final fall.
Thus mercy (being mocked) pluckd judgment down,
Gods favor being scorned, prouokes his frown;
Above all Nations he did them respect,
Below all Nations he did them deiect;
Most unto them his favor was addicted,
Most upon them his fury was inflicted;
Most near, most dear, they were to him in love,
And farthest off his wrath did them remove;
He blessed, he cursed, he gave, and then he took
As they his Word obeyde, or else forsook.
How often Iebouab seemed his sword to draw
To make them fear his precepts and his Law,
How often he raisd them, when they hedlong fell,
How often he pardond, when they did rebel,
How long did Mercy shiue, and Justice wink,
When their foul crimes before Gods face did stink!
How often Repentance, like a pleasing savor,
Repurchasd Gods abused gracious favor!
When he did blessings upon blessings heap,
Then they (ungrateful) held them mean and cheap,
Their plenty made them too too much secure,
They their Creators yoke would not endure.
They (graceless) fell from goodness and from grace,
And kicked and spurned at Heavens most glorious face.
The Prophets, and the Seers that were sent
To warn them to amendment, and repent,
They stoned, they killed, they scorned, they heat, they bound,
Their goodness to requite, their spite did wound.
The Prophets came with love, and purchased hate,
They offered peace, and were returned debate;
They came to save, and were unjustly spilled,
They brought them life, and were unkindly killed,
No better entertainment they afford
Unto the Legates of their loving Lord.
Thus were the Lab'rers in GODS Vineyard used,
Thus was their love, their care, their pains abusde;
Their toils and travails had no more regard,
Bonds, death, and tortures, was their best reward.
At last the Almighty from his glorious seat
Perceived his servants they so ill entreat,
No more would send a Prophet or a Seer,
But his own Son, which he esteemed most dear.
He left his high Tribunal, and down came,
And for all Glory, enterchang'd all shame,
All mortal miseries he underwent
To cause his loued-louelesse Jews repent;
By Signs, by Wonders, and by Miracles,
By Preaching, Parables, and Oracles,
He wrought, and sought, their faithless faith to cure
But ever they obdurate did endure.
Our blessed Redeemer came unto his own,
And amongst them neither was received or known;
He whom of all they should have welcomed best,
They scorned and hated more then all the rest.
The GOD of principalities and powers,
A Sea of endless, boundless mercy, showers
Upon the heads of these unthankful men,
Who pay love, hate; and good with ill again.
Their murdrous-minded-malice never lest,
Till they the Lord of life, of life bereft;
No tongue, or pen, can speak, or write the story
Of the surpassing high immortal glory,
Which he (in pity and in love) forsook,
When he on him our frail weak nature took.
To save Man's soul, his most esteemed ^era,
And bring it to the new Jerusalem,
From Greatest great, to least of least he fell
For his belouee chosen Israel.
But they more mad then madness, in behavior,
Laid cursed hands upon our blessed Savior.
They killed th'ternall Son and Heirs of Heaven,
By whom, and from whom, all our lives are given,
For which the great Almighty did refuse.
Disperse, and quite forsake the saithlesse Jews;
And in his Justice great omnipotence
He left them to a reprobated sense.
Thus sundry times these people fell and rose.
From weal to want, from height of joys to wo^^^
As they their gracious GOD forsook, or took,
His mercy either took them, or forsook.
The swart Egyptians, and the Isralites,
And raging Rezin King of Aramnes,
Then the Assyrians twice, and then again
The Egyptians ouer-run them all amain;
Then the Caldeans, and once more there came
Egyptian Ptolomy, who them o'recame.
Then Pompey, next King Herod, last of all,
Vespasian was their universal fall.
As in Assyria Monarchy began,
They lost it to the warlike Persian,
Of Ni^rods Race, a Race of Kings descended,
Till in Astiages his stock was ended;
For Cyrus unto Persia did translate
The Assyrian Sovereign Monarchizing state.
Then after many bloody bruzing Arms
The Persian yielded to the Greeks Alarm's,
But (smoake-like) Grecian glory last^d not,
Before 'twas ripe, it did untimely rot.
The worlds Commander, Alexander did,
And his Successors did the world divide;
From one great Monarch, in a moment springs
Confusion ( Hydr^-like) from selfe-made Kings,
Till they (all wearied) slaughtered and forlorn,
Had all the earth dismembered, rent and to^rne;
The Romans took ^duantage of their fall,
And ouer-run, captiu'de, and conquered all.
Thus as one nail another out does drive,
The Persians the Assyrians did deprive;
The Gracians then the Persian pride did tame,
The Romans then the Graecians overcame,
Whilst like a vapor all the world was tossed,
And Kingdoms were transferd from coast to coast;
And still the Jews in scartred multitudes
Delivered were to sundry seruitudes,
Changed, given, bought, and sold, from land to land,
Where they not understood, nor understand.
To every Monarchy they were mad slaves,
Egypt and Aram, Caldea them out-braues;
Assyria, Persia, Gracia, lastly Rome
Invaded them, by heavens just angry doom.
Four Ages did like ^^^^ of ^^^ Heler pass,
(...)
^^^^ Age, ^^^ (...)
T^^^^^ and reverend Judges did decide,
^he third by Kings, ^^^ ^ght^ he, ^^^^^, bad, wor^^, and ^^^^^.
The ^^^^ by Prophets, who them blessed or carst,
As their dread ^^^^^ ^^mmanded, or forbid
To bless, or curse, ^^^ ^o the Prophets did.
Our Sa^^^^r, weeping on the ^^^^^, did view
The C^^^, and ^^retold what should ^^^^^;
And in his ^ender pirty (...)
Said, Oh JERUSALEM, JERUSALEM,
Thou ill'st the Prophets, ^^^^ death did ding,
Those that were lent, thee ^^^^^^ grace to bring,
How often, and often, would ^ (for your own good)
Have gathered you, as does a ^^n her brood!
But you would not: and the^^^ to you all
Your houses shall to deso^^ on fall.
Which came to pass, according; as he said,
Which in the second part is here displaide.
THE LAST AND MOST LAMENTABLE Destruction of the Ancient, Famous, and Memorable
City and Temple of JERUSALEM; being destroyed by VESPASIAN, and his Son
TITUS.
COnfusion, Horror, Terror, dreadful Wars,
Demesticke, for reign, inward, outward Iars,
Shafts shot at Judah in Ie^ouahs ire,
Infectious plague, war, famine, sword, and fire,
Depopulation, desolation, and
The fiuall conquest of old Jacobs Land.
These are the Theames my mournful Muse rehearses,
These are the grounds of my lamenting Verses.
Josephus wrote these things in ample wise,
Which ^ thus briefly do Epitomize:
Which worthy Author in large scope relates
His Countries alterations, and estates.
The Books of his Antiquities do tell,
How oftentimes th'arse, how often they fell,
How often God favored them, how often his frown
From height of greatness cast them headlong down,
The Seventh book of his Wars declares plain,
How Roman Conquest did the Kingdom gain,
How death did tyrannize in sundry ^^apes,
In sword, in fire, in famine, and in R^^e.
Who loves to read at large, let him read ^^ is,
Who likes compendious briefes, let him read this.
Since Hebers sons the Country first enioyde,
Six times it has been wasted and destroyde,
Twice three times spoyld, and thirteen times in all,
Wars force, or Composition made it thrall,
Compare all wars, that chanced since the Creation,
They all are nothing to their desolation;
No story, or no memory describes
Calamity to match old Isr'els Tribes:
For if each Land the bloody broils recount,
(To them) 'twere but a molehill to a Mount:
All which (for sin) in the Almighties fury
Was heaped upon the sinful Land of Jury:
And almost sixteen hundred winters since
Did great Vespasian, Romes Imperial Prince,
With brave young Titus, his stout valiant son,
Iudeaes King dome spoil and ouer-run.
And with an Army Royal, and renound,
They did Jerusalem beleaguer round.
With force, with stratagems, with warlike powers,
With Rams, with Engines, scaling ladders, Towers,
With all the Art of either might or slight,
The Romans upon each advantage wait.
Whilst the besieged, that within did dwell,
Amongst themselves to fell sedition fell;
"Like neigh'bring bauins, lying near each other,
"One burns, and burning each one burn another;
So did the Jews each other madly kill,
And all the streets with their slain corpses fill.
Eleazer, Simon, John, all disagree
And rend Jerusalem in pieces three.
These each contending who should be the chief,
(More then the Romans) caused their Countries grief.
John scorned Eleazer should be his superior,
And Eleazer thought John his inferior;
And Simon scornd them both, and each did scorn
By any to be ruled, or ouer-borne;
The City sundred thus in triple factions,
Most horrid, bloody, and inhumane actions
Were still committed, all impieties,
(In sundry sorts of vile varieties)
All sacrilegious and ungodly acts
Were counted Noble meritorious facts.
They strived each other to surpass in evil,
And labored most, most how to serve the Devil.
These men, of grace and goodness had no thought,
But daily, madly against each other fought.
They hurly burly all things ouerturn'd,
Their storehouses with victuals down they burned,
With hearts more hard then Adamantine rocks,
They drailed Virgins by the Amber locks;
The Reverend Aged they did rend and tear
About the streets by snowie ancient hair;
Young Infants, some their harmless brains dash out,
And some on points of Lances borne about,
That it is not possible to write with pen,
The barbarous outrage of these deuillish men:
For they (unmindful of the Roman force)
Themselves did waste and spoil without remorce.
Their cruel slaughters made their furious foes
Relent and weep, in pity of their woes,
Whilst they (relentlesse Villains) void of pity
Consume, and ruinate their Mother-Citty.
The Channels all with purple gore o'r-flowde,
The streets with murdered carcasses were strowde:
The Temple with unhallowed hand defilde,
Respect was none, to age, sex, man, or child;
Thus this three-headed, hellish multitude
Did waste themselves, themselves themselves subdude,
Whilst they within still made their strength more weak,
The Roman Rams th'opposed walls did break:
Whose dreadful battry, made the City tremble,
At which the Factious all their powers assemble,
And all together (like goods friends) unite
And against their foes they sally forth and sight.
"Like a swollen River, bounded in with banks
"Opposed long, with Pike-like Reedy Ranks,
"At last the ambitious torrent breaks his bounds,
"And ouer-runs whole Lordships, and confounds
"The living and the liuelesse, that dares bide
"The fury of his high-insulting pride.
Even so the Jews from out the City venter'd,
And like a s^ood the Roman Army entered,
O'rwhelming in their desperate madness all
That durst withstand them, or assault the wall.
They set the fearful Engines all on fire,
And bravely fighting made their foes retire;
The battle done, back came these hare-braind men,
And each the others foe divide again.
Pell mell confusion, then again began,
All order straight unto disorder ran;
Their corn and victuals, all consumed with fire,
Their hunger-starued bodies 'gin to tire,
Provision in a moment, spoyld and wasted,
Which kept (might well) for many years have lasted.
Then Famine, like a Tyrant roames and rages,
Makes faint (yet furious) hauock of all ages,
The rich, the poor, the old, the young, all dies,
All starved, and fleshlesse bare Anatomies,
This was a plague of plagues, a woe of woes,
On every side their death did them enclose,
But yet the manner how to lose their breaths,
Did more torment them then an host of deaths.
To sally forth, the Romans shed their blood,
To stay within, they starve for want of food,
And if they would go forth, the gates were shut,
And if they staid within, their throats were cut:
That if they stay, or go, or go, or stay,
They Are sure to meet destruction every way;
But of all torments, hunger is the worst,
For through the stony walls (they say) 'twill burst;
These people with war, woe, and want, beset,
Did strive how they might to the Romans get,
They hopde to find more mercy in their swords,
Then their still-dying famisht state affords.
Man's wit is sharpest when he is oppressed,
And wisdom (amongst evils) likes the least.
They knew Vespasian for a Noble foe,
And one that did not glory in their woe,
They thought it best his ^lemency to try,
And not immurde with hungry famine dye.
Resolved thus (dispairing in their hopes)
A number slyding down the walls with ropes,
Fled unto Tytus, who bemoand their case,
Relieuing them, and took them to his Grace.
Thus forty thousand near with famine strau'd,
Were all vnhop'd for, by their f^^s preserved
The City Soldiers searched each house to see
Where any victuals might conuayed be,
And if they any found, they thought it fit
To beat the owners for concealing it.
But if they saw a man look plumpe and fat,
His throat they presently would cut for that,
They thought him too much pampered too well fed,
And to save meat and drink, they strike him dead.
Some men and women, Rich and Nobly borne,
Grave all they had for one poor strike of corn,
And hid themselves and it below the ground,
In some close vault they ^at the same vn-ground.
If any could get flesh, they eat it raw,
The stronger still, the weakest ouer-awe,
For hunger banished natural respect,
It made the husband his own wife reject,
The wife does snatch the meat from out his hand
Which would and should her love and life command.
All pity from the Mother was exilde
She tears and takes the victuals from her Child,
The Child does with the Parents play the thief,
Steals all their food, and lets them pine in grief.
Nor Free or Bondman, Fathers, nor yet Mothers,
Wives, Husbands, servants, masters, sisters, brothers,
Propinquitie or strong Affinity,
Nor all the rights of Consanguinitie,
No Law, or Rule, or Reason could bear sway,
Where strength commands, there weakness must obey.
The pining servant will no master know,
The son his father will no duty show,
The Commons did no Magistrate regard,
Each one for one, and but for one he card,
Disordred, like the cart before the horse,
All reu'rence and respect did yield to force.
These Miscreants with vigilance all watched
Where they could see a door, or locked or latch'd,
There they supposd the people were at meat,
And in their outrage open the doors they beat,
Where entering, if they found them feeding fast,
From out their throats they tear the meat in haste,
Half eaten, half uneaten, they constrain
The wretched people cast it up again.
They halde them by the ears the house about,
To force them bring supposed victuals out;
Some by the thumbs hanged up, some by the toes,
Some pricked with bodkins, some with many blows
Tormented were, to force them to reveal
Meat, when they had not any to conceal.
Now all was fish that fell into the net,
And all was food that fraud or force could get;
Grass; hay, bark, leaves of trees, and Dogs, and Cats,
Toads, frogs, worms, snailes, flies, maggots, mice and rats,
All filthy stinking and contagious roots,
The cover of their Coaches, shoes, and boots.
All vermin, and the dung of fowls and beasts,
Were these poor wretches miserable feasts;
Things loathsome to be named in time of plenty,
Amongst the f^am'd distressed Jews were dainty.
This famine ran beyond all Natures bounds,
All motherly affection it confounds,
No blood or birth, with it compassion won,
It forced a Woman kill her only Son,
She ripped him and dis-ioynted lim from lim,
She dressed, she boyld, she broyld, and roasted him,
She eat him, she interred him in her womb,
She made his births place his untimely tomb.
From her (by Nature) did his life proceed,
On him (unnatural) she her self did seed,
He was her flesh, her sinews, bones and blood,
She (eating him) herself, herself made food.
No we her misery can equallize,
No grief can match her sad calamities,
The Soldiers smelt the meat and straight assemble,
Which when they saw (with horror) made the^ tremble
Each one with staring hair, and ghastly look,
Affrighted, and amazed, the house forsook
This horride action, quickly overcame
These men, whom force of man could never tame.
Thou that do live like to a fatted Brawne,
And cramst thy guts as long as thou can yawne,
Thou that do eat and drink away thy time,
Accounting Gluttony a God, no Crime,
Thou must have Foul as high as heaven that pearc'd
And have the bowels of the Ocean searched,
And from all places near so far re^ote,
Have dainties for thy all-deuouring throat,
Whose pamperd paunch never leaves to feed and quaff,
Till it be made a Hogs trogh, filled with draff.
Think on Jerusalem amidst thy Riot,
Perhaps 'twill move thee to a temperate diet.
And you brave Dames, adorned with Iems, and Jewels,
That must have Cawdles, Cullisses and Grewels,
Conser^'s and Marchpanes, made in sundry shapes,
As Castles, Towers, Horses, Bears and Apes,
You, whom no Cherries like your lick rish tooth,
But they must be a Pound a pound forsooth,
Think on Jerusalem amidst you glory,
And then you will be less dainty, and more sorry.
What there auaild their beauty, strength, or riches,
(Three things which all the spacious world bewitches
Authority and Honor helped them not,
Wrong trod down Right, and Justice was forgot,
Their greatest, chiefest, only earthly good
Was ('it was no matter how they g^t it) Food.
One little piece of bread they reckond more
Then erst they did of bags of Gold before,
One scrap, which full fed corpse away do ^ling,
With them, had bin a ransom for a Kin.
The loathsome garbadge which our Dogs refuse
Had bin a dish of state amongst the Jews.
Whilst Famine played the Tyrant thus within,
The Roman Army strived the walls to win,
Their Enginers, their Pioners and all
Did mine and ^atter, and assault the wall.
Jerusalem had three strong walls of stone,
And long 'twas ere the Romans could get one,
The dearth and death of sword and famine spread
The streets, that living trod upon the dead,
And many great men's houses full were filled
With carkases, which the seditious killed:
That with the stench of bodies putrifide,
A number numberles of people did.
And burial to the dead they yielded not,
But where they fell, they let them stink and rot,
That plague, and sword, and famine, all three strove
Which should most bodies from their souls remove.
Insensible of one another woes,
The Soldiers then the liueles corpses throws
By hundreds and by thousands over the walls,
Which when the Romans saw their dismal falls
They told to Titus, which when he perceived
He wept, and up t'ward heaven his hands he heau'd,
And called on GOD to witness with him this,
These slaughters were no thought, or fault of his.
Those wretches that could escape from out the City,
Amongst their foes found ^oth relief and pity.
If the seditious any catch that fled,
Without remorse they straitway struck him dead.
Another misery I must unfold,
A many Jews had swallowed store of gold,
Which they supposd should help them in their need
But from this treasure did their ^a^e proceed.
For being by their enemies fed and cherisht,
The gold was cause that many of them perished;
Amongst them all, one poor unhappy creature
Went privately to do the need; of Nature,
And in his Ordure for the Gold did look,
Where being by the straggling soldiers took,
They ripped him up and searched his maw, to find
What Gold or Treasure there remained behind.
In this sort, (whilst the soldiers gaped for gain)
Was many a man and woman ripped and slain.
In some they found gold, and in many none,
For had they gold, or not gold, all was one,
They were vnboweld by the barbarous foe,
And searched if they had any gold or no.
But now my Story briefly to conclude,
Vespasians forces had the walls subdude,
And his triumphant Banner was displaide
Amidst the streets, which made the Jews dismayed,
Who (desperate) to the Temple did retire,
Which (with ungodly hands) they set on fire.
Whilst Noble Titus, with exceeding care
Entreated them they would their Temple spare,
Oh save that house (quoth he) o quench, oh slake,
And I will spare you for that Houses sake,
Oh let not aftertimes report a Story
That you have burnt the worlds unmatched glory,
For your own sakes, your children, and your wives
If you do look for pardon for your lives,
If you expect grace from Vespasians hand,
Then save your Temple Titus does command.
The Jews with hearts hard, offered mercy heard,
But neither mercy, or themselves regard,
They burnd, and in their madness did confound
King Salomons great Temple to the ground.
That Temple which did thirty millions cost,
Was in a moment all consumed and lost,
The blessed Sanctum Sanctorum, holiest place
Blessed often with high Iehouahs sacred Grace,
Where (at one offering) as the Text says plain,
Were two and twenty thousand Oxen slain,
One hundred twenty thousand Sheep beside
At the same time for an oblation did.
That house of God (which reigns above the thunder)
Whose glorious fame made all the world to wonder,
Was burnt and ransackt, spite of humane aid,
And level with the lowly ground was laid.
Which when Vespasian and young Titus saw,
They cride kill, kill, use speed and marshall Law;
The Roman soldiers then (inspirde with rage)
Spard none, slew all, respect no sex or age;
The streets were drowned in a purple flood,
And slaughterd carcasses did swim in blood.
They slew, whilst there were any left to slay,
The ablest men, for slaves they bare away.
John, Simon and Eleazer, wicked fiends,
As they deserved, were brought to violent ends.
And from the time the Romans did begin
The siege, until they did the City win,
Sedition, sword, fire, famine, all depriues
Eleven hundred thousand, of their lives.
Besides one hundred thousand at the least
Were taken, and sold, as each had been a beast.
And from the time it was at first erected
Till (by the Remanes it was last dejected)
It stood (as it in histories appears)
Twenty one hundred, seventy and nine years.
But yet ere God his vengeance down did throw,
What strange prodigious wonders did he show,
As warnings how they should destruction shun
And cause them to repent for deeds misdon;
First the Firmament, The Offended Lord
Showed them a Comet like a fiery sword,
The Temple and the Altar diverse nights
Were all enuiron'd with bright burning lights,
And in the midst of the Temple there
Vnnat'rally a Cow a Lamb did bear,
The Temples brazen gate, no bolts restrain,
But (of it self) it open flew amain.
Armed Men and Chariots in the Air assembled,
The pondrous Earth, affrighted, quaked, and trembled,
A voice cride in the Temple, to this sense,
Let us depart, let us depart from hence.
These supernat'rall accidents, in sum.
Foretold some fearful judgment was to come:
But yet the Jews accounted them as toys,
Or scarcrow bugg^beares to fright wanton ^oyes,
Secure they reuell'd in Jerusalem
They thought these signs against their foes, not them
But yet when ^^^^ and death had all performed,
When ruin, spoil, and furious flames had stormed,
Who then the desolated place had seen,
Would not have known there had a City been.
Thus Judah and Jerusalem all fell,
Thus was fulfilled what Christ did once foretell,
Sad deseletion, all their joys bereft,
And one stone on another was not left.
FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND TRVELY VER I VOVS LADY, and Noble Patroness of
good endeauours, MARY, Countess of BVCKINGHAM.
Right Honorable Madame:
AS the Graces, the Virtues, the Senses, and the Muses, are emblem'd, or
alluded to your Noble sex, and as all these have ample residence in your worthy
disposition: To whom then but to your self, being a Lady in goodness
complete, should I commit the patronage of the memory of the great Lady of
Ladies, Mother to the High and Mighty Lord of Lords? And though I (a Tailor)
have not apparelled her in such garments of elocution and ornated style, as
befits the glory and eminency of the least part of her Excellency, yet I
beseech your Honor to accepther for your own worth, and her Sons
worthiness, which Son of hers, by his own merits, and the powerful mercy of
his Father, I heartily implore to give your Honor a participation of his
gracious Mothers eternal felicity.

Your Honors in all humble service to be commanded, JOHN TAILOR.

The Argument and cause of this Poem.
BEing lately in Antwerpe, it was my fortune to ouerlooke an old printed book
in prose, which I have turned into verse, of the life, death, and burial of
our blessed Lady: wherein I read many things worthy of observation, and many
things frivolous and impertinent; out of which I have (like a Be) sucked the
sacred honey of the best authorities of Scriptures, and Fathers which I best
credited, and I have left the poison of Antichristianisme to those where I
found it, (whose stomachs can better digest it) I have put it to the Press,
presuming it shall be accepted of Pious Protestants, and charitable Catholics:
as for lukewarm Nutarlists, that are neither hot nor cold, they do offend my
appetite, and therefore up with them. The Schismatic Separaust, I have many
times discourst with him, and though he be but a Botcher, or a Button-maker,
and at the most a lump of opinionated ignorance, yet he will seem to wring
the Scriptures to his opinions, and presume to know more of the mysteries of
Religion, then any of our reverend learned Bishops and Doctors.

I know this work will be vnrelished in the pestiferous pallats of the
dogmaticall Amsterdammarists, but I do, must, and will, acknowledge a most
reverend honor and regard unto the sacred memory of this blessed Virgin Lady,
Mother of our Lord and Redeemer JESUS; and in my thoughts she shall ever have
superlatiue respect above all Angels, Principalities, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, or Saints whatsoever, under the blessed Trinity; yet
(mistake me not, as there is a difference betwixt the immortali Creator, and a
mortal creature, so (whilst I have warrant sufficient from God himself, to
invoke his name only) I will not give Man, Saint, or Angel, any honor that
may be derogatory to his Eternal Majesty.

As amongst women she was blessed above all, being above all, full of Grace, so
amongst Saints. I believe she is supreme in Glory: and it is an infallible
truth, that as the Romanists do dishonor her much, by their superstitious
honorable seeming attributes; so on the other part, it is hellish and odious
to God and good men, either to forget her, or (which is wor^e) to remember her
with impure thoughts, or unbeseeming speech for the excellency of so Divine a
Creature. I confess my self the meanest of men, and most unworthy of all to
write of her, that was the best of Women: but my hope is, that Charity will
cover my faults, and accept of my good meaning, especially having endeavored
and striuen to do my best: So wishing all hearts to give this holy Virgin such
honor as may be pleasing to God, which is, that all should pattern their
lives, to her lives example, in lowliness and humility, and then they shall be
exalted, where she is in Glory with eternity.

JOHN TAILOR.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF THE MOST BLESSED AMONGST ALL WOMEN, THE VIRGIN MARY,
The Mother of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
BEfore the fire, air, water, earth were framed,
Sun, Moon, or any thing unnamed, or naun'd,
God was, who never shall end, nor never began,
To whom all ages and all time's a span:
By whose appointment each thing fades or grows,
And whose eternal knowledge all things knows.
When Adams sin plucked down supernall lre,
And Justice judged him to infernal fire:
The Mercy did the execution stay,
And the great price of man's great debt did pay.
And as a Woman tempted Man to vice.
For which they both were thrust from Paradise:
So from a woman was a Saviors birth,
That purchased Man a Heaven for loss of earth:
Our blessed Redeemers Mother, that blessed She,
Before the World by God ordained to be
A chosen vessel fittest of all other,
To be the Son of Gods most gracious Mother:
She is the Theme that does my Muse inuit,
Unworthy of such worthiness to write.
I will no prayers nor inuocations frame,
For intercession to this heavenly Dame,
Nor to her name one fruitless word shall run,
To be my Mediatresse to her Son,
But to the eternal Trinity alone,
I Will sing, He sigh, He invoke and moan.
I prize no creatures glory at that rate,
The great Creators praise t'extenuate.
But to the Almighty,( ancunt of all days,)
Be all dominion, honor, laud, and praise.
I write the blessed conception, birth, and life,
Of this beloved Mother, Virgin, Wife:
The joys, the griefs, the death, and burial place
Of her, most glorious, gracious, full of grace.
Her Father IOACHIM, a virtuous man,
Had long lived childlesse with his wife S. ANNE,
And both of them did zealously intend,
If God did ever Son or Daughter send,
That they to him would dedicate it solely
To be his servant, and to live most holy:
God heard, and granted freely their request,
And gave them MARY (of that sex the best.)
At three years age, she to the Temple went,
And there eleu'n years in devotion spent:
At the end of fourteen years it came to pass,
This Virgin unto JOSEPH spoused was.
Then after four months time was past and gone,
The Almighty sent from his tribunal throne
His great Ambassador, which did unfold
The great'st embassage ever yet was told.
Hail MARY full of heavenly grace (quoth he)
The (high omnipotent) Lord is with thee:
Blessed amongst women (o^ Gods gracious doom)
And blessed be the fru^^ of thy blessed womb.
The Angels presence and the words he said,
This sacred undefiled Maid dismayed,
Amazed, musing what this message meant,
And wherefore God this messenger had sent:
Fear not (said GAERIEL) MARY most renowned.
Thou with thy gracious God have savor fo^^^^;
For lo, thou shall conceive and bear a Sun,
By whom redemption and saluation's won:
And thou bis saving Name shall JESUS call,
Because hee'l^ come to save his people all.
She humbly, mildly, heavens high Nuncius hears:
But yet to be resolved of doubts and fears,
How can these things (quoth she) accomplished be,
When no man has knowledge had with me?
The Holy Ghost (the Angel then replide)
Shall come upon thee, and thy God and guide,
The power of the most High shall shadow thee,
That Holy thing that of thee borne shall be,
Shall truly called be the Son of God.
Be whom Sin, Death, and Hell, shall down be trod.
Then MARY to these speeches did accord,
And said, Behold the Handmaid of the Lord,
Be it to me 'according to' thy well.
I am thine own obedient servant still.
This being said, she turned her Angel tongne,
My soul does magnist the Lord, (the song)
My spirit, and all my faculties, and doyce,
In God my Savior solely does rejoice:
For though man's sins provoke his grievous wrath,
His humble handmaid he remembered has.
For now behold from this time hence I forth shall
All generations me right blessed call:
He that is mighty me has magnifide,
And bo'y is his name: his mercies hide
On them that fear him (to provoke his rage)
Throughout the spacious world from age to age.
With his strong arm he has showed strength, and batterd
The proud, and their imaginations scatterd.
He has put down the mighty from their seat,
The mecke and humble he exalted great:
To fill the hungry he is provident,
When as the rich away are empty sent:
His mercies promised Abr'am and his seed,
He has remembered, and help Isreal's need.
This Song she sung with heart and holy spright,
To land her Makers mercy and his might:
And the like Song sung with so sweet a strain
Was never, nor shall ever be sung again.
When MARY by the Angels speech perceived,
How old ELIZABETH a child conceived,
To see her straight her pious mind was bent,
And to Jerusalem in three days she went.
And as the Virgin (come from Nazareth)
Talked with her kinfwoman ELIZABETH,
JOHN Baptist, then unnamed, an unborn boy,
Did in his Mothers belly leap with joy:
Both Christ and John vnborae, yet John knew there
His great Redeemer and his God was near.
When Joseph his pure wife with child espide,
And knew he never her accompanide,
His heart was sad, he knew not what to say,
But in suspect would put her quite away.
Then from the high Almighty Lord supreme,
An Angel came to Joseph in a Dream,
And said, Fear not with MARY to abide,
For that which in her blessed womb does recide,
Is by the Holy Ghost in wonder done,
For of thy wise there shall be borne a Son,
From him alone Redemption all begins,
And he shall save his people from their sins.
This being said, the Angel past away,
And Joseph with his Virgin-wife did stay:
Then he and she with speed prepared them
To go to David's City Bethelem.
Through winters weather, frost, and wind, and snow,
Four weary days in travel they bestow.
But when to Bethlem they approached were,
Small friendship, and less welcome they found there:
No chamber, nor no fire to warm them at,
For harbor only they a Stable gat:
The Inn was full of more respected guests,
Of Drankards, Swearers, and of godless beasts:
Those all had rooms, whilst Glory and all Grace,
(But among beasts) could have no lodging place.
There (by protection of the Almighties wing,)
Was borne the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings.
Our God with us, our great Emanuel,
Our Jesus, and our vanquisher of hell.
There in a cratch a ^^ well was brought forth,
More then ten thousand thousand worlds is worth,
There did the humane nature and divine,
The Godhead with the Manhood both combine:
There was this Maiden-mother brought to bed,
Where Oxen, Kine, and Horses lodged and fed:
There this bright Queen of Queens with heavenly my,
Did hug her Lord, her Life, her God, her Boy,
Her Son, her Savior, her immortal Bliss,
Her sole Redeemer, she might rock and kiss.
Oh blessed Lady, of all Ladies blessed:
Blessed for ever, for thy sacred breast
Fed him that all the famisht souls did feed,
Of the lost sheep of Isreal's forlorn seed.
A Stable being Heaven and earths great Court.
When forty days were ended in that sort,
This Virgin Mother, and this Maiden-Bride,
(All pure) yet by the Law was purifide.
Old Simeon being in the Temple than,
He saw the Son of God, and Son of man.
He in his aged arms the Babe embraced,
And ioying in his heart he so was graced,
He with these wordswisht that his life might cease:
Lord, let thy Servant now depart in peace,
Mine eyes have seen thy great salvation,
My Love, my Jesus, my Redemption:
Unto the Genteles everlasting light,
To Israel the glory and the might.
Hope, faith and zeal, truth, constancy and love,
To sing this Song did good old Simeon move.
Then turning to our Lady most divine,
Thy Son ( said he) shall once stand for a sign,
And he shall be the cause that many shall
By faith or unbelief arise or fall.
He shall be raild upon without desert,
And then sorrows sword pierce through thy heart.
As Jesus fame grew daily more and more,
The tyrant Herod is amazed sore.
The Sages said, Borne was great Iudaes King,
Which did usurping Herod's conscience fling:
For Herod was an Idumean base,
Not of the Kings of Iudahs Royal Race:
And hearing one of David's true-borne Line
Was borne, he feared his State he should resign:
And well he knew he kept the Jews in awe,
With slavish fear, not love, against right and law.
For it is most true: "A Prince that is feared of many,
"Must many fear, and scarce be loved of any.
Herod beleaguered with doubts, fears and woes,
That Jesus should him of his Crown depose,
He Chafed and vexed, and almost grew stark mad,
To usurpation he did murder add:
An Edict sprung from his hell-hatched brain,
Commanding ad male Infants should be slain
Of two years old and under through the Land,
Supposing Jesus could not escape his hand.
But God to Joseph down an Angel sent,
Commanding him by slight he should, prevent
The murd'rers malice, and to Egypt fly,
To save our Savior siem his tyranny.
Our blessed Lady with a careful flight,
Her blessed Babe away did bear by night;
Whilst Bethelem with bloody villains swarms,
That murth'red Infants in their mothers arms:
Some slaughtered in their cradles, some in bed,
Some at the dugge, some newly borne struck dead:
Some sweetly fast asleep, some smiles ewake,
All butchered for their Lord and Saviors sake.
Their woeful mothers madly here and there
Ran rending of their checkes, their eyes, and hair:
The Tyrant they with execrations cursed,
And in despair, to desperate acts out-burst.
Some all in sury end their woeful lives
By banefull poison, halters, or by knives:
And some with sorrow were so fast combined,
They wept, and wept, and, wept themselves stark blind:
And being blind (to lengthen out their mones)
They piec'd their sorrows out with sighs and groans,
Thus with vnceasing grief in many a mother,
Tears, sighs, and groves did one succeed the other.
But till the Tyrant Herod's days were done,
The Virgin staid in Egypt with her Son.
Then back to Nazareth they returned again.
When twelve years age our Savior did attain,
Her Son, her self, her Husband, all of them
Together trauell'd to Jerusalem;
The Virgin there much sorrow did endure,
The Most pure Mother lost her Child most pure.
Three days with heavy hearts, with care and thought
Their best beloved they diligently sought:
But when she found her Lord she held most dear,
Joy banished grief, and love exiled fear.
There in the Temple Jesus did confute
The greatest Hebrew Doctors in dispute:
But Doctors all are dunces in this case,
To parley with The Eternal Son of Grace:
The Immortal, mighty, Wisdom and the Word,
Can make all humane sapience mere absurd.
Soon after this, (as ancient Writers say,)
God took the Virgins Virgin-spouse away.
Good Joseph did, and went to heavenly rest,
Blessed by the Almighties mercy among the blessed,
Thus Mary was of her Good Man ^ cre^t,
A Widow, Maiden, Mother being lose:
In holy contemplation she did spend
Her life for such a life as never shall end.
Search but the Scriptures, as our Savior bid,
There shall you find the wonders that he did:
As first, how he (by his high power divine)
At Canan turned Water into Wine:
How he did heal the blind, deaf, dumb and lame:
How with his word he winds and seas did tame:
How he from men possessed siends dispossessed:
How he to all that came gave ease and rest:
How with two fishes and five loaves of bread,
He fed five thousand: how he raised the dead:
How all things that he ever did or taught,
Past and surpast all that are taught or wrought:
And by these miracles he sought each way
To draw souls to him, too long gene altray.
At last approacht the full pre^xed time,
That GODS blessed Son must dye for man's cursed crime.
Then Jesus to Jerusalem did go,
And left his Mother full of grief and woe,
Oh woe of woes, and grief surpassing grief,
To see her Savior captived as a thief:
Her Love (beyond all loves) her Lord her all,
Into the hands of sinful slaves to fall!
If but a mother have a wicked son,
That has to all disordred orders run,
As treasons, rapes, blasphomings, murder, theft,
And by the Law must be of life berest;
Yet though he suffer justly by desert,
His suffering surely wounds his mothers heart.
Suppose a woman have a virtuous child,
Religious, honest, and by nature mild,
And he must be to execution brought,
For some great fault he never did nor thought,
And she behold him when to death he is put:
Then sure tormenting grief her heart must cut.
These griefs are all as nothing unto this,
Of this blessed Mother of eternal bliss:
Her gracious Son that never did a^nisse,
His graceless servant with a Judas kiss
Betrayed him unto misbeleening slaves,
Where he was led away with bills and staves,
To Anna^, Caiphae, Pilate, and to those
That to The Immortal God were mortal foes.
Ah Judas, could thou make so base account
Of Him, whose worth does heaven and earth surmount?
Did thou esteem of 30. paltry pence,
More then the life of the eternal Prince?
O monstrous blindness, that for so small gain,
Sold endless bliss, to buy perpetual pain!
Is It possible damned avarice could compel
Thee sell heavens Kingdom for the sink of hell?
Our Father Adam unto all our woes,
Did for an Apple blessed Eden lose:
And Esau borne a Lord, yet like a slave,
His birthright for a mess of pottage gave:
And poor Gehizi telling of a lie,
His covetousness gained his leprosy.
And though the text their deeds do disallow,
Yet they made better matches far then thou.
I do not here impute this deed of shame
On Judas, because Judas was his name:
For of that name there have been men of might,
Who the great battles of the Lord did fight,
And others more. But sure this impure blot
Sticks to him, as he is named Iskarriott;
For in an Anagram Iskarriott is,
By letters transposition, traitor kis.
ISKARRIOTT Anagramms. TRAITOR KIS.
Kiss, Traitor, kiss, with an intent to kill,
And cry all hail, when thou do mean all ill,
And for thy fault no more shall Judas be
A name of treason and foul infamy,
But all that fault I Will on Iskarriott throw,
Because the Anagram explaines it so.
Iskarriott for a bribe, and with a kiss,
Betrayed his Master, the blessed King of Bliss:
And after (but too late) with conscience wounded,
Amazed, and in his senses quite confounded,
With crying, Woe, woe, woe, oh woe on me,
I have betrayed my Master for a fee:
Oh I have sinned, sinned past compare,
And want of grace and faith pluckes on despair.
Oh too-too late it is to call for grace!
What shall I do? where is some secret place,
That I might shield me from the wrath of God?
I have deserved his everlasting rod.
Then farewell grace, and faith, and hope, and love,
You are the gifts of the great God above,
You only on The Elect attendants be:
Despair, hell, horror, terror is for me,
My heinous sin is of such force and might,
'Twill empt The Exchequer of Gods mercy quite:
And therefore for his mercy I Will not call,
But to my just deserved perdition fall.
I still most graceless have all grace withstood,
And now I have betrayed the guiltless blood.
My Lord and Master I have sold for pelf,
This having said, despayring, hanged himself.
There we leave him, and now must be expressed
Something of her from whom I have digrest.
The Virgins heart with thousand griefs was nip^;,
To see her Savior flouted, hated, whipped,
Despightfulnesse beyond despite was used,
And with abuse past all abuse abused.
His apprehension grieved her heart full sore,
His cruel scourges grieved her ten times more,
And when his blessed head with thorns was crowned
Then floods of grief on grief her soul did wou^d,
But then redoubled was her grief and fear,
When to his death his Cross she saw him bear.
And lastly (but alas not least nor last)
When he upon the tree was nailed fast,
With bitter tears, and deep heart-wounding groves,
With sobs, and sighs, this Maiden-Mother moanes.
What tongue or pen can her great grief unfold,
When Christ said, Woman, now thy Son behold?
That voice (like Ice in June) more cold and chill,
Did dangerously wound, and almost kill:
Then (as old Simeon prophesi'd before)
The sword of sorrow through her heart did gore.
And if 'twere possible all women's woes
One woman could within her breast enclose,
They were but puffes, sparks, mole-hills, drops of rain;
To whirl-winds, meteors, Kingdoms, or the maine:
Unto the woes, griefs, sorrows, sighs, and tears,
Sobs, gronings, terrors, and a world of fears,
Which did beset this Virgin on each side,
When as her Son, her Lord, and Savior did.
Thus he, to whom compared, all things are dross,
Humbled himself to death, even to the Cross:
He that said, Let there be, and there was light,
He that made all things with his mighty might,
He by whom all things have their life and breath,
He humbled himself unto the death;
Unto the death of the cursed Cross: this he,
This he, this He of he is did stoop for me:
For me this Wel-spring of my souls relief,
Did suffer death, on either hand a thief:
The one of them had run a theeuing race,
Robbed God of Glory, and himself of Grace:
He wanted lively faith to apprehend,
To end his life for life that never shall end:
With faithless doubts his mind is armed stiff,
And does revile our Savior with an If.
If that thou be the Son of God (quoth he)
Come from the Cross, and save thy self and me.
The other Thief, armed with a saving faith,
Unto his fellow turned, and thus he says;
Thou guilty wretch, this man is free and clear
From any crime for which he suffers here:
We have offended, we have injured many,
But this man yet did never wrong to any,
We justly are condemned, he false accused,
He has all wrong, all right to us is used,
He Is innocent, so are not thou and I:
We by the Law are justly judged to dye.
Thus the good Thief even at his latest cast,
Contrary to a Thief, spoke truth at last.
And looking on our Savior faithfully,
(Whilst Christ beheld him with a gracious eye)
These blessed words were his prayers total ^^^,
O Lord when thou shall to thy Kingdom come,
Remember me. Our Savior answered then
A doctrine to confute despairing men,)
Thou (who by lively faith laist hold on me)
This day in Paradise with me shall be.
Thus as this theefes life was by theft supplide,
So now he stole heavens Kingdom when he did.
And I do wish all Christians to agree,
Not t'liue as ill, but dye as well as he.
Presumptuous sins are no way here excused,
For here but one was saved, and one refused.
Despair for sins has here no rule or ground,
For as here is one was lost, so one was found.
To teach us not to sin with wilful pleasure,
And put repentance off, to our last leisure.
To show us though we lived like Jews and Turks,
Yet Gods great mercy is above his works.
To warn us not presume, or to despair,
Here Is good example in this theeuing pair.
These seas of care (with zealous fortitude)
This Virgin past among the multitude.
(Oh gracious pattern of a sex so bad)
Oh the supernall patience that she had,
Her zeal, her constancy, her truth, her love,
The very best of women her does prove.
Maids, wives, and mothers, all conform your lives
To hers, the best of women, maids, or wives.
But as her Sons death made her woes abound,
His resurrection all grief did confound:
She saw him vanquished and inglorious,
And after saw him Victor most victorious:
She saw him in contempt to lose his breath,
And after that she saw him conquer death:
She saw him (blessed) a cursed death to dye,
And after saw him rise triumphantly:
Thus she that sorrowed most, had comfort most,
Joy doubly did return, for gladness lost,
And as before her torments tyrannized,
Her joy could after not be equalliz'd:
Her Sons (all-wondred) resurrection,
Her Saviors glorious ascension,
And last, the Holy Ghost from heaven sent down,
These mighty mercies all her joys did crown.
Suppose a man that were exceeding poor,
Had got a thousand tons of golden ore,
How would his heart be lifted up with mirth,
As this great mass of treasure (most part earth)
But to be robbed of all in's height of glory,
Would not this lucklesse man be much more sorry
Then ever he was glad? for in the mind
Grief more then joy does most abiding find.
But then suppose that after all this l^sse,
The gold is well refined from the dress,
And as the poor man does his loss complain,
His weath (more pure) should be rel^^ again.
Amidst his passions (in this great relief)
I doubt not but his joy would conquer grief.
Even so our bressed Lady having lost
Her joy, her lewell she esteemed most,
Her all in all, the heaven and earths whole treasure,
Her gracious heart was grieved out of measure.
But when she found him in triumphant state,
No tongue or pen her joy could then relate.
She lost him poor and ^are, and dead and cold,
She found him rich, most gl^^^ to behold.
She lost him when upon his back was hurld
The burden of the sins of all the World:
She lost him mortal, and immortal found him,
For crown of thorns, a crown of glory crowned him.
Thus all her griefs, her loss, her cares, and pain,
Returned with joys inestimable gain.
But now a true relation I will make,
How this blessed Virgin did the world forsake.
It Is probable that as our Savior bid
Saint John to take her home, that so he did:
And it may be supposed she did abide
With him, and in his house until she did.
John did out-liue The Apostles every one,
For when Domitian held The Imperial Throne,
To th'Ile of Pathmos he was banished then,
And there the Revelation he did pen:
But whilst John at Jerusalem did stay,
God took the blessed Virgins life away.
For after Christ's Ascension it appears,
She on the earth suruiued fifteen years,
Full sixty three in all she did endure,
A sad glad pilgrimage, a life most pure.
At sixty three years age her life did fade,
Her soul (most gracious) was most glorious made,
Where with her Son, her Savior, her Lord God,
She everlastingly has her abode,
In such fruition of immortal glory,
Which cannot be described in mortal story.
There mounted (meel^e) she sits in Majesty;
Exalted there is her humility.
There she that was adorned full of Grace,
Beheld her Maker and Redeemers face.
And there she is amongst all blessed spirits
(By imputation of our Saviors merits,)
She there shall ever and for ever sing
Eternal praise unto The Eternal King.
When she had paid the debt that all must pay,
When from her corpse her soul was past away:
To Gethsemany, with lamenting cheer,
Her sacred body on the Beer they bear.
There in the earth a Jewel was interred,
That was before all earthly wights preferred,
That Holy wife, that Mother, that pure Maid,
At Gethsemany in her grave was laid.
LENVOY.
This work deserves the work of better wit,
But I (like Pilate) say, What Is writ is writ:
If it be liked: poor artlesse I am glad,
And Charity I hope will mend what is bad.
I know my self the meanest amongst men,
The most vnlearnedst that ever handled pen:
But as it is, into the world I send it,
And therefore pray commend it, or come to end it.
FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WORTHY, and Learned Gentleman, Sr. THOMAS Richardson
Knight, Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and Speaker
in the High Court of PARLIAMENT, etc.
A double Anagramme. THOMAS RICHARDSON, AS MAN HONORDE CHRIT, SO CHRIST HONERD
A MAN.

YOur name includes, that As Man honorde Christ,
So God again through Christ honored a Man:
For if Man truly honor the most Highest,
Then Christ to honor Man both will and can.
Right Worthy Lord, this in your name is true,
You honor Christ, and Christ has honored you.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
But that I am assured that your Noble disposition, in all parts is suitable to
the inside of this Book, I should never have dared to Dedicate it to your
Patronage: for as it is a Divine Poem, so ha^^ your Worship a religious heart;
As it has an honest intention, so have you a breast ever full of ^^^ thoughts,
which bring forth worthy actions: as it is a whip or Scourge against all sorts
of priat, so h^^e you ever been an vfaigned lover of Courteous humanity and
humility, I humbly beseech your Honor, (although the method and style be
plain,) to be pleased to give it favorable entertainment, for the honesty
that is in it, and the dutiful affection of the Author,

Who is most obsequiously obliged to your Honor, JOHN TAILOR.

TO NO MATTER WHO, NO GREAT MATTER WHERE, YET TO BE READ, THERE IS MATTER
WHY, ALTHOUGH NOT MVCH MATTER WHEN.
IT is no matter in whose hands or censure this my Superibae Flagellum, or
Whipping, or Stripping of Pride fall into: If it come into the view of true
Nobility or Gentry, I know it will be charitably accepted. If into the hands of
degenerate yongsters, that esteem Pride more then all the Liberal Sciences,
who account the four Cardinal virtues, inferior to their own carnal vices,
such a one will put me off with a scornful tush, a pish, or a mew, and commit
my Book to the protection of Ajax. If a wise man read it, I know it will be
discreetly censured; if a Fool, his Bolt is soon shot, and I am armed against
it; if a Learned man peruse it, he will bear with my bad Schollership; if an
unlearned, I care not for his opinion; if a man of knowledge view it, he will
pardon my ignorance; if an ignorant Ass see it, he will bray out his own; if
an honest rich man spy it, he will be the poorer in spirit, though not in
purse; but if a proud Dives handle it, he will esteem it worse then his
Dogs; if a proud Courtier read it, he will tear it to tatters; whilst a
Generous Affable Gentleman, will lovingly entertain it. If beauty chance to
behold it, it will bid it welcome, if Pride stand not in the way; if a strong
man that is not proud of it, grow acquainted with the contents of my meaning, I
think it will content him; if Parents, or children, or all, or any body, that
are not poisoned with pride, do but see or hear it distinctly, read and
understand it with judgment, I am persuaded it will pass and repasse, with
friendly usage, but if any of the contrary faction come within the Air of it,
they will use it in some sort, as bad as the hangman will use them. And So much
for, To no matter who.

It is no great matter where this be read, for as a good man (being banished)
is never out of his Country, because all Countries are his, so my Book in
Church, Court, City, Country or Cottage, is one and the same; it may perhaps
alter the place where it comes from worse to better, but the place can never
alter the honest intents of it, from better to worse. Therefore no great matter
where.

To be read there is matter, why because it strikes at the root of a most
deadly sin, which almost as bad as an universal deluge, has ouerflowed the
most part of the world; and though the Preachers on Earth, (Gods Trumpets, and
Ambassadors from Heaven) do diligently and daily strike at this abomination,
with the eternal Sword of the everlasting Word, yet what they cut down in the
day, like Mushromes, it grows up again thick and three^old in the night; for
whilst the husbandman sleeps, the envious man sowes tares.

Wherefore, I having a talent of knowledge lent me, by which I know that I must
render an account one day, how I have employed it, and having written near
forty several Pamphlets in former times, I purpose henceforward (God willing)
to redeem the time I have so misspent, employing my Pen in such exercises
(which though they be not free from a relish of mirth. yet they shall be
clear from profanation, scurrillity, or obsceannesse. I do know, Pride is at
such a height, that my Molehill Muse can never by mineing at her foot, shake
her head; for where Divinity preuailes not, Poetry in meddling does but show
the Suns brightness with a Candle. Yet forasmuch as I know that Pride cast
Angels out of Heaven, made devils in hell, threw man out of Paradise, was a
maine causer of the drowning of the first World, is a deuourer of this world,
and shall ever be accursed in the world to come, by this knowledge, I have with
a mixed inuectiue mildness, showed in this Book the vanities of all sorts of
Pride, not that I hope for amendment, but to show my honest intendment.

I have seen six or seven fashion hunting Gallants together sit scorning, and
deriding a better man then themselves, only because either his Hat was of the
old Block, or that his Ruff was not so richly laced, his Cloak has been
too plain, his Beard of the old translation, his Boots and Spurs of the
precedent second edition, and for such slight occasions a man has been
slighted, ieerd and wonderd at, as if he had been but a Zany to the fashion,
or a man made for the purpose for them to whet their scorn upon, and therefore
to read this, there is a matter why.

It is not much matter when, for be it read on Friday the Turks Holyday, on
Saturday the Jews Sabbath, on Sunday the Lords Day, or on any day or all
days, nights or hours, there is Divinity with Ala^ritie, Poetry with mirth,
and every thing so interwouen, one with another, that if it please not the
generality, yet I hope in particularitie it will tolerably censured by all that
hate Pride, and love humility. And therefore, not much matter when:

JOHN TAILOR.

A FEW LINES, TO SMALL PVRPOSE, AGAINST THE SCANDALOVS ASPERSIONS, that are
either maliciously, or ignorantly cast upon the Poets and Poems of these Times.
THere does a strange, and true opinion run,
That Poets write much worse, then they have don:
And how so poor their daily writings are,
As though their best inventions were threadbare.
And how no new things from them now do spring,
But all has ref'rence from some other thing:
And that their daily doings do reveal,
How they from one another filch and steal,
As if amongst them 'twere a statute made,
That they may freely use the theeuing trade.
And some there are that will not stick to say,
That many Poets living at this day,
Who have the Hebrew, Latin, Greek, at will,
And in the Italian and the French have skill,
These are the greatest thieves they say, of all
That use the Trade (or Art) Poetical.
For ancient Bards, and Poets in strange toungs,
Compiled have their verses and their songs:
And those to who^ those tongues are rightly known,
Translating them, make others verse their own,
As one that steals a Cloak, and presently
Makes it his own, by alt'ring of the dye.
So whole books, and whole sentences have bin
Stolen, and the stealers, great applause did win,
And by their filching thought great men of fame,
By those that knew not the right Authors name.
For mine own part, my Conscience witness is,
In'er was guilty of such theft as this,
Unto such robbery I could never reach,
Because I understand no foreign speech.
To prove that I am from such filching free,
Latin and French are heathen-Greeke to me,
The Grecian, and the Hebrew Charactars,
I know as well, as I can reach the Stars.
The sweet Italian, and the Chip Chop Dutch,
I know, the man in the Moon can speak as much.
Should I from English Authors, but purloyne,
It would be soon found counterseited coin.
Then since I cannot steal, but some will spy,
^le truly use mine own, let others lie.
Yet to excuse the writers, that now write,
Because they bring no better things to light:
It Is because bounty from the world is fled,
True liberality is almost dead.
Reward is lodged in dark oblivion deep,
Bewitch't (I think) into an endless sleep,
That though a man in study take great pains,
And empt his veins, puluerize his brains,
To write a Poem well, which being writ
With all his Judgment, Reason, Art, and Wit,
And at his own charge, print and pay for all,
And give away most free, and liberal
Two, three, or four, or five hundred books,
For his reward he shall have nods and looks;
That all the profit a man's pains has gat,
Will not suffice one meal to feed a Cat.
Yet still Noble Westminster, thou still art free,
And for thy bounty I am bound to thee:
For had not thou, and thy Inhabitants,
From Time to Time relieved and helped my want
I had long since bid Poetry adieu,
And therefore still my thanks shall be to you.
Next to the Court, in general I am bound
To you, for many friendships I have found.
There (when my purse has often wanted bait)
To fill or feed it, I have had receite.
So much for that, I Will now no more rehearse,
They show their loves in prose, my thanks in verse:
When death, Mecanas did of life deprive,
Few of his Noble Tribe were left alive,
This makes invention to be mean and hard,
When Pride and Avarice does kill reward.
And yet me thinks, it plainly does appear,
Men's writings are as good as e're they were.
Good lines are like a Banquet ill imployd,
Where too much feeding has the stomach cloyd,
Good verses fall sometimes (by course of fate)
Into their hands that are preiudicate.
And though the Writer never so well has pend,
Yet they will find fault with what they cannot mend.
Thus many a learned well composed line,
Has bin a Pearl that is cast before a swine.
Or more familiarly to make compare;
Like Aqua vitae given unto a Mare.
These fellows, (glutted with variety)
Hold good lines in a loathed saciety,
Whilst paltry Riming, Libels, Tigges and Jests,
Are to their appetites continual feasts,
With which their fancies they do feed and fill,
And take the Ill for good, the Good for ill.
Whilst like to Mo^keyes, scorning wholesome meat)
They greedily do poysnous spiders eat.
So let them feed until their humors burst,
And thus much bold to tell them here I durst,
That Poetry is now as good as ever,
If to bounty, relieve her would endeuer.
Men's minds are worse then they have bin of yore,
Inuention's good now, as it was before.
Let liberality awake, and then
Fach Poet in his hand will take a pen.
And with rare lines enrich a world of paper,
Shall make Apollo, and the Muses caper.
SVPERBIAE FLAGELLVM, OR THE WHIP OF PRIDE.
When all things were as wrapped in sable night,
And If any man fetch his Story higher, let him take my book for naught.
Ebon darkness muffled up the light:
When neither Sun, or Moon, nor Stars had shinde,
And when no fire, no Water, Earth, or Wind,
No Harvest, Autumn, Winter, when no Spring,
No Bird, Beast, Fish, nor any creeping thing,
When there was neither Time nor place, nor space,
And silence did the Chaos round embrace:
Then did the Archwork master of this All,
Create this Massy Universal Ball,
And with his mighty Word brought all to pass,
Saying, but Let there be, and done it was.
Let there be Day, Night, Water, Earth, Herbs, Trees,
Let there be Sun, Moon, Stars, Fish, Foul that flees.
Beasts of the Field, he said but, Let there be,
And all things were created as we see.
Thus every sensible and senseless thing,
The High-Creators Word to pass did bring:
And as in viewing all his works he stood,
He saw that all things were exceeding good.
Thus having furnished Seas, and Earth and Skies,
Abundantly with all varieties,
Like a Magnificent and sumptuous Feast,
For the entertainment of some welcome Guest,
When Beasts and Birds, and every living Creature,
And the Earths fruits did multiply by Nature;
Then did The Eternal Trinity betake
It self to Council, and said, Let us make,
Not Let there be, as unto all things else,
But LET US MAKE MAN, that the rest excels;
According TO OUR IMAGE LET US MAKE
MAN, and then did The Almighty Red Earth take,
With which he formed Adam, every limme,
And (having made him) breathed life in him.
Lo, thus the first Man never was a Child.
No way with sin original defiled:
But with high Supernat'rall Understanding,
He over all the World had sole commanding.
Yet though to him the Regency was given,
As Earths Lieutenant to the God of Heaven,
Though he commanded all created things,
As Deputy under the King of Kings;
Though he I so highly here was dignifide,
To humble him, not to be puffed with Pride,
He could not brag, or boast of high borne birth,
For he was formed out of slime and earth:
No beast, fish, worm, foul, herb, weed, stone, or tree,
But are of a more ancient house then he;
For they were made before him, which proves this,
That their Antiquity is more then his.
Thus both himself, and his beloved Spouse,
Are by Creation of the younger house,
And whilst they lived in perfect Holiness, Imperfect Holiness and
Righteousness.

Their richest Garments were bare Nakedness,
True Innocence were their chiefest weeds,
(For Righteousness no Masque or Visor needs.)
The royal'st robes that our first Parents had,
Was a free Conscience with Uprightness clad;
They needed never to shift; the clothes they wore,
Was Nakedness, and they desired no more
Until at last, that Hell-polluting sin,
With Disobedience soiled their Souls within,
And having lost their holiness Perfection,
They held their Nakedness an Imperfection,
Then (being both ashamed) they both did frame
Garments, as weeds of their deserved shame.
Thus, when as sin had brought Gods curse on man,
Then shame to make Apparel first began:
E're man had sinned, most plain it does appear,
He neither did, or needed Garments wear,
For his Apparel did at first begin,
To be the Robes of penance for his sin.
Thus all the brood of Adam, and of Eve,
The true use of Apparel may perceive,
That they are Liueries, Badges unto all
Of our sins, and our Parents woeful fall.
Then more then mad, these mad-brain'd people be
(Or else they see, and will not seem to see)
That these same Robes (with Pride) that makes them swell,
Are tokens that our best desert is hell.
Comparison.
Much like unto a Traitor to his King
That would his Country to destruction bring,
Whose Treasons being proved apparently,
He by the Law is justly mg'd to dye,
And when he looks for his deserved death,
A Pardon comes and gives him longer breath,
I think this man most madly would appear
That would a halter in a glory wear,
Because he with a halter merited
Of life, to be quite desinherited.
But if he should vainegloriously persist
To make a Rope of silk or golden twist,
And weare't as a more honorable show,
Of his Rebellion, then course hemp or towe,
Might not men justly say he were an Ass,
Triumphing that he once a Villain was,
And that he wore a halter for the nonce,
In pride that he deserved hanging once?
Such with our heavenly Father is the Case,
Of our first Parents, and their sinful Race,
Apparel is the miserable sign,
That we are Traitors to our Lord divine,
And we (like Rebels) still most pride do take
In that which still most humble should us make.
Apparel is the prison for our sin
Which most should shame, yet most we Glory in;
Apparel is the sheet of shame as't were
Which (for our penance) on our backs we bear,
For man Apparel never did receive,
Till he eternal Death deserved to have.
And thus Apparel to our sense does tell
Our sins against Heaven, and our desert of Hell.
How vain is it for man, a clod of Earth,
To boast of his high progeny, or Birth,
Because (perhaps) his Ancestors were good,
And sprung from Royal, or from Noble blood,
Where Virtuous worth did in their minds inherit,
Who gained their Honors by Desert and Merit;
Whose service for their Country never fai'ld,
Who (justly) lived beloved, and did bewaild;
Whose Affability, and Charity,
Guided with pious true sincerity,
Who to their states loved all their lives to join
Love before Lands, Compassion before Coin?
Yet when they did, left wealth, place, state, and name,
To Heirs, who bury all in Pride and shame,
But as the Sacred Truth most truly faith,
"No man is saved by another Faith;
So though some honorable Rascals have
Turned their good Fathers to their timelesse grave,
And like Ignoble noble Reprobates,
Possess their names, possessions and estates,
Yet (for they want their Virtues and Deserts)
They are but Bastards to their better parts.
Manasses was good Hezechtahi son,
And with his Crown into a Vice did run;
The Sire the title of good King did gain,
The Sonn's Abominations alt did stain;
Honor is better well deserved then had,
To have it undeserved, that Honor's bad.
In Rome an ancient Law there sometimes was,
Men should through Virtue unto Honor pass.
And it is a Rule that evermore has bin,
"That Honor's best which a man's self does win.
It Is no Inheritance, nor can it run
Successively from Father to the Son;
But if the Father nobly were inclined,
And that the Son retain his worthy mind,
If with his Fathers goods he does possess
His goodness, all the world must then confess,
That that Sons Honor does it self display
To be the Fathers equal every way.
Thus good men's Honors can no Honor be
To their degenerate posterity,
But it is a man's own Virtue, or his Vice,
That makes his Honor high or low in price.
Of Birth, or Parents, no man can be proud,
Pride of Apparel here is disallowed,
Pride of our Riches is most Transitory,
Pride of our Beauty is a sading Glory:
Pride of our wisdom is most foolish sorly:
Pride of our holiness is most unholy,
Pride of our strength is weakness in our thought,
And Pride in any thing is come to naught.
Pride has bin Author of the worst of Eails,
^^ay 14. 14.
Transforming glorious Angels, into Devils,
When Babels Tower began proudly to aspire,
With toungs confusion, they were paid their hire.
Through Pride the King of Babels glory ceast.
Daniel 4. Daniel 5.
And for seven years it turned him to a beast;
And Baltazar that next him did succeed,
Lost life, and left his Empire to the Acts 10. Josep^us lib I^. cap. 7 Act^. 8
Plutarch, in the life of of A'^ler, He was poisoned at Babylon
Mede,
For Pride, to Tire and Zidons wicked Kings
Acts 12. Josep^us lib ^^. cap. 7 Acts. 8 Plutarch, in the life of of
Alexander, He was poisoned at Babylon
The Prophet a most just destruction brings.
Herod midst his ungodly glory vain,
Through Pride was eaten up with worms, and slain,
Great The Medes and Persians.
Alexander, King of Macedon,
Disdaind to be his father Phillips son,
But he from Jupiter would be descended,
And as a god be honored and attended,
Yet Bain'de at Babylon he proved but man,
His godhead ended foolish as't began.
There was in Sicilie a proud Physician.
Menecrates, and he through high ambition,
To be a god, himself would needs prefer,
And would (forsooth) be named Jupiter,
King Dionysius making a great feast,
This foole-god daigned there to be a guest,
Who by himself was at a table placed,
(Because his godhead should the more be graced)
The other Guests themselves did feed and fill,
He at an empty table still, sat still.
At last with humble low Sir Reverence,
A fellow came with fire and Frankincense,
And offered to his godship, (saying then)
Perfumes were fit for gods, and meat for men:
The god in anger rose incontinent
Well laughed at, and an hunger'd, home he went.
The Roman Emperor Domitian
Would be a god, was murdered by a man.
Caligula would be a god of wonder,
And counterfeite the lightning, and the thunder;
Yet every Real heavenly Thundercracke,
This Caitife in such fear and terror struck,
That he would quake, and shake, and hide his head
In any hole, or underneath his bed.
And when this godless god had many slain,
A Tribune dashed out his ungodly brain.
"And thus the Almighty still against Pride does frown,
"And casts Ambition headlong tumbling down.
Great Pompey would be all the worlds superior,
And Caesar unto none would be inferior;
But as they both did live ambitiously,
So both of them untimely deaths did dye.
The one in Egypt had his final fall,
The other murdered in the Capital.
A number more Examples are beside,
Which shows the miserable fall of Pride:
And do men think to go to Heaven from hence
By Pride, which cast the Angels headlong thence?
Or do they through their Pride suppose to dwell
With God, when Pride did make the Devils in hell?
It is a Vice which God abhors and hates,
And against it does denounce most fearful threats.
Oh, what a hellish vanity is it then,
That does bewitch vain women, and vile men,
That rather then their Pride and they will sever,
They will be seuer'd from their God for ever?
I will not say but Wisdom, Beauty, Health,
Strength, Courage, Magnanimity, and Wealth,
Empires and Kingdoms, rule of Sea, and Land,
Are blessings given by Gods all-giuing hand;
But not because on whom they are bestowed,
Should in the stead of Humbleness wax proud,
Or with vain glory have their hearts vpheau'd:
For why? 1. Cor. 4.
what ere they have, they have received:
And therefore Christian Kings their style do grace
King By the Grace of God, of such a place;
Because by his especial providence
They hold Maiesticall Pre-eminence.
And as there is distinction of Estates,
Some Emp'rours, Kings, and mighty Potentates,
Superiors and Inferiors, each degree,
As Gods foreknowing Knowledge did foresee:
Yet he did not bestow his bounteous Grace,
To make the great men proud, or mean men base;
Abundant wealth he to the Rich does lend,
That they the poor should succor and defend.
He has given strength and vigor to the strong,
That they should guard the weak from taking wrong:
To some he knowledge does and wisdom grant,
Because they should instruct the Ignorant:
But unto no man God his gifts does give,
To make him proud, or proudly here to live.
For Pride of state, birth, wisdom, beauty, strength,
And Pride in any thing, will fall at length,
But to be proud of Garments that we wear,
Is the most foolish pride a heart can bear.
For as they are the Robes of sin and shame,
Yet more may be considered in the same:
Be they compact of silk, or cloth of Gold,
Or cloth, or stuffes, (of which there is manifold)
Let them be laced and faced, or cut, or plain,
Or any way to please the wearers brain,
And then let him or her that is so clad,
Consider but from whence these stuffes were had,
How Mercers, Drapers, silkmen were the Iaylers,
And how the Executioners were Taylers,
That did both draw and quarter, slash and cut,
And into shape, misshapen Remns-ants put.
Consider this, and you will grant me than,
That Garments are the workmanship of man.
Which being granted no man can deny,
But that it is most base Idolatry,
To Adore or worship a proud paltry knave,
Because the Mercers shop has made him brave.
Or is it not a foolish vile mistaking,
To Honor things that are a A Tailor is but a man; therefore it is idolatry to
worship his workmanship.
Taylers making?
I make a vow, that never whilst I live
A Reverence to Apparel will I give;
Some goodness in the wearer I Will expect,
Or else from me he shall have small Respect;
If in him virtue, and true worth I see,
He shall have heart and hand, and cap and knee.
It Is laudable there should be diff^rence made!
Betwixt a Courtier, and a man of Trade:
For sense or reason never would allow,
A Prince to wear a habit for the Plow:
Nor that a Carter vainly should aspire,
To thrust himself into the Court attire.
Distinctions of Office, and Estates
Should habit men according to their rates.
Thus I rich Garments no way do condemn,
But I say no man should be proud of them.
In Rome, a worthy Law there once was made,
That every man, of each degree and Trade,
Some mark or badge, about him still should bear,
Whereby men knew what all men's callings were.
The Consuls bearing the Imperial sway,
(To whose command the rest did all obey)
In token they had power to save or spill,
Had Rods and Axes borne before them still.
The Censors, Tribunes, AEdiles, and the Praetors,
The Prouosts, Questors, and the Conseruators,
And as their offices were sundry varied,
So were they known by things before them carried.
The Mercer in his hat did wear some tuffe,
Or shred of Silk, or Gold, his trading stuff;
Drapers a piece of List, Weauers a quill,
Or shuttle, and the Millers wore a Mill.
And as men sundry callings did apply,
So they wore Emblemes to be known thereby.
But if that Law were but enacted here,
How like a plucked crow, would Pride soon appear?
Some Tailors would be very mad at that,
To wear each one a Bodkin in his hat;
There Is many a wealthy Whoremaster would skip,
And stamp, and start, if he should wear a whip:
But yet if every thief of each degree
Were bound to wear a halter, God bless me:
A Butcher still should wear a Calfe or Bull,
My self (a Waterman) an Oar or Skull.
And so of every trade both high and low,
Men (by their badges) would their functions know.
And if this Law the State would but allow,
Some would wear Calves skins, that wear velvet now.
Then Iacks and Iill, and John a Drones his issue,
Would not be trapped thus in Gold and Tissue.
It Is strange a coxcomb should be crammed with pride,
Because he has got on a Satin hide:
A Grogreine outside, or a silver Case,
Some fourteen groce of buttons, and Gold lace;
When as perhaps the corpse that carries all,
Has more diseases then an Hospital,
And (which is worst of all) his Soul within,
Stinks before God, polluted with all sin.
Rome great Arch-tyrant Nero, amongst all
The matchless vices he was taxed withal,
(The which in Histories are truly told,)
Was said to have shoo-ties al wrought o'r with gold,
If in an Emperor (that did command
Almost the whole world, both by Sea and Land,
Who countermaunded Indian Mines and Iems,
Jewels, and almost all earths Diadems,)
To wear gold shoo-strings were a noted crime,
What may it then be called at this time,
When many, below Hostlers in degree,
Shall (in that point) be decked as brave as he?
Thus Pride's an ouerweening self opinion,
A soule-destroyer, come from Hels dominion;
Which makes vianglorious fools, and new found Madams
Forget they are of Eues good brood and Adams,
But yet though pride be a most deadly sin,
What numbers by it do their livings vviane?
A world of people daily live thereby;
Who (were it not for it) would starve and dye.
Thus (by coruption of the time) this Devil
Is grown a good, bad, necessary evil.
She is the Mercers only fruitful crop,
She is the Silkman, and the Embrod'rers prop;
She is the Haberdashers chiefest Stock,
She feeds the Hat-fellers with block on block:
She makes the Dyers daily live to dye,
And dye to live, and get great wealth thereby;
She (every Winter) does the Draper feed,
With food and fuel She supplies his need.
She is the Tailors goddess; and upon her
He daily does attend to do her honor;
All the inventions of his studious pate,
He at her shrine does ever consecrate,
He rakes the world for fashions that excel,
From Germany, from France, from Spain, from He^,
And vvouid himself be out of fashion qui^c,
But that Pride in new fashions does delight.
Silke-vveauers (of the which abundance are)
Were not for Pride, would hue, and dye most bare:
Sempsters with ruffs and cuffs, and quoifes, and caules,
And falls, (were not for pride) would soon have falls.
The Shoomakers neat, spanish, or polony,
Would have but single-soal'd receipt of money.
The sweet perfumers would be out of favor,
And hardly could be sauers by their savor.
The glittering Ieweller, and Lapidary,
(But for Prides help) were in a poor quandary.
The Goldsmiths plate would stand upon his shelfe,
And's Rings and Chains he might wear out himself.
Thus Pride is grown to such a height, I say,
That were she banished, many would decay:
For many hundred thousands are, you see,
Which from 'Pride only, have meat, clothes, and fee.
No marvel then she has so many friends,
When as such numbers on her still depends,
Pride is their Mistres, the maintains them still,
And they must serve her, or their case is ill.
But as so many numbers numberless,
Do line and flourish here by Prides excess:
So are there more upon the other side,
Toild and tormented still to maintain Pride.
The painful Plowmans pains do never cease
For he must pay his Rent, or lose his lease,
And though his Father and himself before,
Have often relieved poor beggars at their door;
Yet now his Fine and Rent to high is reared,
That his own meat, and clothes are scarcely cleared,
Let him toil night and day, in light and dark,
Lie with the Lamb down, rise up with the Lark,
Dig, delue, plow, sow, rake, harrow, mo^v, lop, fell,
Plant, graft, hedge, ditch, thresh, winnow, buy and sell;
Yet all the money that his pains can win,
His Landlord has a purse to put it in.
What though his Cattle with the Murraine dye,
Or that the Earth her fruitfulness deny?
Let him beg, steal, grieve, labor and lament,
The Quarter comes, and he must pay his Rent:
And though his Fine and Rent be high, yet higher
It shall be raised, if once it does expire:
Let him and his be hunger-staru'd and pin'de,
His Landlord has decreed his bones to grind:
And all this carke and care, and toil of his,
Most chiefly for this only purpose is,
That his gay Landlord may wear silk and feather,
Whilst he poor drudge can scarce get frize or leather;
Because his Land-lady may dog the fashion,
He Is racked and tortured without all compassion;
Because his Landlords Heir may have renown
Of Gentle, though the Father be a Clown:
Because his Landlords daughters (decked with pride)
With ill-got portions may be Lad, side.
In brief, poor tenants pinch for clothes and food
To dawb with pride their Landlords and their brood.
The time has bin (and some alive knows when)
A Gentleman would keep some twenty men,
Some thirty, and some forty, less or more,
(As their Reuenews did supply their store.)
And with their Charities did freely feed
The Widow, Fatherless, and poor man's need,
But then did Pride keep residence in Hell,
And was not come upon the earth to dwell:
Then Love and Charity were at the best,
Exprest^in Action, not in words professed.
Then conscience did keep men in much more aw,
Than the seuerest rigor of the Law,
And then did men fear God (with true intent,)
For's Goodness, not for fear of punishment.
But since the Leprosy of Pride has spread
The world all over, from the foot to head:
Good bounteous housekeeping is quite destroyed,
And large revenues other ways imployd;
Means that would four men meat and means allow,
Are turned to garters, and to roses now,
That which kept twenty, in the days of old,
By Satan is turned satin, silk, and gold,
And one man now in garments he does wear,
A thousand akers, on his back does bear,
Whose ancestors in former times did give,
Means for a hundred people well to live.
Now all his shrunk, (in this vain glorious age)
T'attire a coach, a footman, and a page,
To dice, drink, drabs, tobacco, hanks and hounds,
These are the expense of many thousand pounds,
Whilst many thousands starve, and daily perish,
For want of that which these things used to cherrish.
There is another Pride, which some profess,
Who pinch their bellies, for their backs excess:
For though their guts through want of fodder clings,
That they will make sweet filthy fiddle strings;
Yet they will suffer their mawes pine and lack,
To trap with rich caparisons the back.
These people, (for their Pride) do Justice still,
Upon themselves, although against their will.
They do in their own stomachs, try, examine,
And punish outward Pride, with inward famine.
But sure the people can be good for nothing,
Whose reputation only lies in clothing:
Because the hangman often may execute,
A thief or traitor in a satin suit,
And that suit which did from the gallows drop,
May be again hanged in a Broakers shop,
And then again hanged, and bought, and worn,
And secondly (perhaps) to Tiburne borne:
And so at sundry times, for sundry crimes,
The Hangman may fell one suit sixteen times,
And every Rascal, that the same did fit,
To be exceeding pockie proud of it.
And all this while, (if I be not mistook)
It rests unpaid for, in the Mercers book.
Thus many simple honest people have,
Given worship to a Broakers wardrobe slave,
Thus Tiburne ornaments may be the chief,
To grace a graceles arrant whore, or thief.
A Seruing-man, I in cast clothes have seen,
That did himself so strangely ouerweene,
That with himself he out of knowledge grew,
And therefore all his old friends he misknewe,
Until at last his Glory did decrease,
His outside faced with tatters, rags and grease,
Then did the changing time, the youth transform
From Pride, to be as lowly as a worm.
A many of these fellows may be had,
That Is meek or proud, as clothes are good or bad.
I leave true Noble Gentry all this while,
Out of the reach of my inuectiue style,
It Is fit that those of worthy race and place,
Should be distinguished from the Vulgar base.
Particulars I Will not to question call,
My Satyr is against Pride in general.
Soft Raiment is in Princes Courts allowed,
Not that the wearers should thereof be proud:
For worth and wisdom knows most certainly,
That Hell gives pride, and Heaven Humility,
And be their garments never so rare or rich,
They never can make Pride their hearts bewitch.
Then if all sorts of men considred this,
Most vain the pride of any raiment is,
For neither Sea, land, fish, foul, worm, or beast,
But man's beholding to the most and least.
The silly Sheep puts off his coat each year,
And gives it to forgetful man to wear:
The Ox, Calfe, Goat, and Dear do not refuse
To yield their skins, to make him boots and shoes,
And the poor silke-worme labors night and day,
T'adorne and granish man with rich array:
Therefore if men of this did rightly think,
Humility would grow, and pride would shrink.
Fowls of the air dee yield both fans and plumes
And a poor Ciuet-cat allows perfumes.
The Earth is ripped and bowel'd, rent and torn,
For gold and silver which by man is worn:
And sea and land are raked and searched and sought,
For Jewels too far fetched, and too dear bought.
Thus man's beholding still (to make him trim)
Unto all creatures, and not they to him.
Nature (without man's help) does them supply,
And man without their help would starve and dye.
If men (I say) these things considered well,
Pride then would soon be tumbled down to hell.
Their golden suits that make them much renowned,
Is but the guts and garbage of the ground:
Their Ciuet (that affords such dainty sents)
Is but a poor Cats sweating Excrements;
Their rarest Jewels (which most glister forth)
Are more for outward show then inward worth,
They are high valued at all times, and season,
But for what reason, none can give a reason,
The best of, them like whoores, has ever bin,
Most fair without, and full of bane within.
And let a great man wear a piece of glass,
It (for his sake) will for a Diamond pass;
But let a man that is of but mean degree,
Wear a fair Diamond, yet it glass must be.
This valuing of a Jewel is most fit
It should not grace a man, man should grace it.
A good man to his suite is a repute,
A knaves repute lies only in his suit.
And for a stone, that but three drams has weighed,
Of precious poison, hundreds have bin paid.
And who can tell how many lives were lost,
In fetching home the Bables of such cost?
(For many of them as are as dearly bought,
As if they from The field of blood, that the Jews bought with thirty pieces
of silver, which Iudos brought back again after he betrayed Christ, Man. 27 7.
Acts 1.19.
Acheldama were brought.)
Yet some rush through (fantastques pates to please)
Rocks, sands and change of air, rough winds and seas
Storms, te^pests, gusts, flawes, pirates, sword, and fire,
Death, or else slavery, (never to retire.)
And thus prides various humors to su^fice,
A number hazard these calamities;
When our own Country does afford us here,
Jewels more precious, nothing nigh so dear.
A whetstone is more necessary sure,
A grindstone much more profit does procure:
But for a A millstone is a peerless Jewel.
millstone, that is a Jewel rare,
With which no other stone can make compare.
The loadstone is the means to find the rest,
But of all stones the millstone is the best.
Free stones and ar^ifi^^ ^^ ricks ^^ grant,
Are stones, which men in building cannot want ^
And the flintstone can yield us ^^ and heat,
But yet the millstone yields us bread to eat.
The tilestone keeps us dry, the roadestone bydes,
And holds fast Boats, in tempests, winds, and tides,
The chalk stone serves for lyme, or for account
To score, how reck'nings do abate or mount.
Pebles, and gravel, mend high ways, I know,
And ballast ships, which else would overthrow.
And this much i will maintain here with my pen,
These are the stones that most do profit men:
These, these are they, if we consider well,
That Saphirs, and the Diamonds do excel,
The Pearl, the Em'raald, and the Turkesse bleu,
The sanguine Corrall, Ambers golden hiew,
The Crystal, lacinth, Acha^c, Ruby red,
The Carbuncie Squar^d, cut, and pollished,
The Onix, Topaz, laspar, Hematite,
The fable let, the Tutch, and Chrysolite;
All these considred as they are indece,
Are but vain toys that do man's fancy feed;
The stones I named before, do much more good
For building, ^avling, lodging, firing, food.
Yet Jewels for their lawful use are sent,
To be a luster, and an ornament
For State, magnificence, and Princely port,
To show a Kingdoms glory, at the Court;
And God (I kno^) ordained them to be worn;
Superior States to honor and adorn,
And for the uses the^ were made are good,
If (as they should be) they are understood:
T'adorne our persons they are still allowed,
But not to buy too dear, or make us proud.
The holy Ghost in Exodus recites,
How Aaron (High Priest of the Israelites)
Twelve several stones did on his Breast Plate bear,
Which of the twelve Tribes a remembrance were;
But they were mystical, prophetique tropes,
And figures of Saluations future hopes.
But God did never give or Gold or ^emme,
Or Jewel, that we should take pride in them.
The Deu'ill laughed lately at the stinking stir,
We had about Two inuectiue Pamphlets against the monstrous and shape^ less
disguises of men and women.
Hic Mulier, and Haec Vir,
The Masculine appareld Feminine,
And Feminine attired Masculine,
The Woman-man, Man-woman, choose you whether,
The Female-male, Male-female, both, yet neither;
He is Pantonsinicks, that themselves bedights,
Like shameless double sex'd Hermaphrodites,
Virago Roaring Girls, that to their middle,
To know what sex they were, was half a Riddle,
Brave trimmed and trussed, with daggers and with dags,
Stout Captain Maudlins feather bravely vvags,
Lieutenant Female Soldiers.
Dol, and valiant Ensign Besse,
All^rm'd with impudence and shamelessness;
Whose Calves eg-starch may in some sort be taken
As if they had been hanged to smoke like Bacon,
Whose borrowed hair (perhaps) not long before
Dropped from the head of some diseased Whore,
Or one that at the Gallows made her Will,
Late choked with the Hangmans Pickadill.
In which respect, a Sow, a Cat, a Mare,
More modest then these foolish Females are.
For the bruit beasts (continual night and day)
Do wear their own still (and so do not they.)
But these things have so well bin banged and firk'd,
And Epigram'd and Satyr'd, whipped and Ierk'd,
Cudgeld and bastinadoed at the Court,
And Comically stag'de to make men sport,
Iyg'd, and (with all reason) mocked in Rhyme,
And made the only scornful theme of Time;
And Ballad-mongers had so great a task,
(As if their mases all had got the laske.)
That no more time therein my pains I Will spend,
But freely leave them to amend, or end.
I saw a fellow take a white loaves pith,
And rub his masters white shoes clean therewith,
And I did know that fellow, (for his pride)
To want both bread and meat before he died.
Some I have heard of, that have been so fine,
To wash and bathe themselves in milk or wine,
Or else with whites of eggs, their faces garnish,
Which makes the^ look like visors, or new varnish.
Good bread, and ^atmeale has bin spilt like trash,
My Lady Polecats dainty hands to wash:
Such there has bin, but now if such there are,
I wish that want of food may be their share.
Some practice every day the Painters trade,
And strive to mend the work that God has made:
But these deceivers are deceived far,
With falsely striving to amend, they mar:
With deu'lish daw^ing, plast'ring they do spread,
Deforming so themselves with white and red,
The end of all their cunning that is shown,
Is, God will scarcely know them for his own.
In a great frost, bare-brested, and vnlac't,
I have seen some as low as to their waste:
One half attyr'd, the other half stark bare,
Shows that they half ashamed, half shameless are,
Half, (or else all) from what they should be erring,
And neither fish or flesh, nor good red herring.
I blowed my nails when I did them behold:
And yet that naked Pride would feel no cold.
Some every day do powder so their hair,
That they like Ghosts, or Millers do appear:
But let them powder all that er'e they can,
Their Pride will stink before both God and man.
There was a trades-mans wife, which I could name,
(But that I Will not divulge abroad her shame)
Which a strong legion of good garments wore,
As gowns and petticoates, and kirtles store,
Smocks, headtires, aprons, shadows, shaparoons,
(Whimwhams, and whirligiggs to please Baboones)
Jewels, rings, ooches, brooches, bracelets, chains;
(More then too much to fit her idle brains)
Besides, she paid (not counting muffes and ruffes)
Four pounds six shillings for two pair of cuffes.
'Twill make a man half mad, such worms as those,
The general gifts of God should thus ingrosse:
And that such numbers want their needful use,
Whilst hellish Pride peruerts them to abuse.
Now a few lines to paper I will put,
Of men's Beards strange and variable cut:
In which there is some do take as vain a Pride,
As almost in all other things beside.
Some are reaped most sudstantiall, like a brush,
Which makes a Natural wit known by the bush:
(And in my time of some men I have heard,
Whose wisdom have bin only wealth and beard)
Many of these the proverb well does fit,
Which says Bush natural, More hair then wit.
Some seem as they were starched stiff and fine,
Like to the bristles of some angry swine:
And some (to set their Loves desire on edge)
Are cut and prun'de like to a quick set hedge.
Some like a spade, some like a forke, some square,
Some round, some mowed like stubble, some stark bare,
Some sharp Steletto fashion, dagger like,
That may with whispering a man's eyes out pike:
Some with the hammer cut, or Roman T,
Their beards extrauagant reformed must be,
Some with the quadrate, some triangle fashion,
Some circular, some ^uall in translation,
Some perpendicular in longitude,
Some like a thicket for their crassitude,
That heights, depths, bredths, triforme, square, ouall, round,
And rules Gec' metricall in beards are found,
Besides the upper lip's strange variation,
Corrected from mutation to mutation;
As't were from tithing unto tithing sent,
Pride gives to Pride continual punishment.
Some ( spite their teeth) like thatched ^ues downward grows,
And some grows upwards in despite their nose.
Some their mustatioes of such length do keep,
That very well they may a maunger sweep:
Which in Beer, Ale, or Wine, they drinking plunge,
And suck the liquor up, as't were a Sponge;
But it is a Slouens beastly Pride, I think,
To wash his beard where other men must drink.
And some (because they will not rob the cup,
Their upper chaps like pot hooks are turned up,
The Barbers thus (like Taylers) still must be,
Acquainted with each ^uts variety:
Yet though with beards thus merrily I play,
It Is only against 'Pride which I inueigh:
For let them wear their hair or their attire,
According as their states or minds desire,
So as no puffed up Pride their hearts possess,
And they use Gods good gifts with thankfulness.
Against Pride of Worldly wisdom.
There Is many an idle shallow pated Gull,
Thinks his own wisdom to be wonderful:
And that the State themselves do much forget,
Because he in authoritie's not set:
And having scarcely wit to rule a Cottage,
Thinks he could guide a Kingdom with his dotage.
True wisdom is man's only guide and guard,
To live here, to live better afterward.
It is a rich man's chief preeminence,
And it is a poor man's stay, and best defense.
But worldly wisdom is the ground of all
The mischiefs that to man did ever fall.
Gods Wisdom is within the Gospel hid,
Which we to Cor. 2. 7.
search, are by our Savior bid.
Thus Pride of humane wisdom is all vain,
And foolish fancies of men's idle brain.
Against Pride of humane knowledge.
Pride of our knowledge, we away must throw,
For he knows most, which least does seem to know:
One Apple from the Tree of life is more,
Then from the tree of knowledge half a score:
It Is good for us to know our Masters will,
But the not doing it, makes knowledge ill.
There Is many know, the Just in heaven shall dwell,
Yet they unjustly run the way to hell.
The life Eternal no way can be won,
But to know God, and John 17. 3.
Jesus Christ his Son.
Christ (to his people) by his word and passion,
Taught men the joyful Luke 1. 73.
knowledge of salvation.
^^rather had by knowledge, raise my chance,
Then to be poor with barbarous ignorance;
Yet better 'twere I nothing understood,
Then to know goodness, and to do no good.
Thus knowledge, worthy is of dignity;
But not to make the knowers proud thereby.
For if men would, to know themselves endeuer,
Pride of their knowledge would infect them never.
Against Pride of riches.
Pride of our riches is a painful pleasure,
Like sumpter horses laden with rich treasure,
^o misers bear their wealth as they are able,
Till Death the hostler makes the grave their stable.
There Is some take pride in treasure basely got,
Have it, yet want it, as they had it not;
And though to get it, no vile means they spare,
To spend it on themselves they seldom dare;
How can a base extortionizing Bore,
Get riches ill, and give God thanks therefore?
^Tis all one, if a thief, a bawd, a vvitch,
Or a Bribe-taker should grow damned rich,
And for their trash, got with their hellish pranks,
The hypocriticke slaves will give God thanks.
No, let the litter of such helhound vvhelps,
Give thanks to th'Deuill (author of their helps)
To give God thanks, it is almost all one,
To make him partner in extortion.
Thus if men get their wealth by means that is evil,
Let them not give God thanks but thank the Devil.
Yet wealth the gift of God has ever bin,
But not such wealth that is only got by sin;
Nor any wealth, if men take pride therein.
And those who pu^ their foolish confidence
In Riches, trusting to their false defense;
Those that with Mammon are bewitched so,
Our Savior against them threats a fearful Luke 24.
vvoe.
Humility with Riches may be blessed.
But Pride's a poison God does still detest.
Against Pride of Learning.
Pride of our Learning's vain, it does appear,
For though men study many a weary year,
And learned as much, as possible the brain,
Or scope of man's Inventions may attain,
Yet after all their studies, truth does show,
Much more is what they know not, then they know,
To learn by bad men's vices, vice to shun,
By good men's good, what should by us be done:
This is the learning we should practice most,
Not to be proud thereof, or vainly boast,
Against being proud of Princes savors.
A Princes favor is a precious thing,
Yet it does many unto ruin bring;
Because the hauers of it proudly use it,
And (to their own ambitious ends) abuse it.
If men that are so stately and so strange,
Would but remember how time often does change,
And note how some in former times did speed,
Comparison.
By their examples they would take some heed:
For as a cart-wheele in the way goes round,
The spoake that is highest is quickly at the ground,
So Envy, or just cause, or misconceit,
In Princes Courts, continually do wait,
That he that is this day Magnifico,
To morrow may go by Ieronimo.
The spoakes that now are highest in the wheels,
Are in a moment lowest by the heels.
Haman was proud, past reasons bounds or scope,
And his vain glory ended in a rope,
And his ten sons, in duty to obey
Their father, follovved him the selfsame way.
Those men that harbor Pride within their breast,
Do seldom end their days in peace and rest.
But if they do, disgrace and shame withal,
Are the chief vvayters on their funeral.
Where honor is with noble virtue mixed,
It like a rock stands permanent and fixed,
The snares of envy, or her traps of hate
Could never, nor shall ever hurt that stare:
Like Adamant it does beat back the battry
Of spiteful malice, and deceiving flattry,
For it with pride can never be infected,
But humbly is supernally protected,
Such with their Kings shall ever be beloved,
Against Pride of beauty.
And like to fixed stars, stand fast, unmoved.
Those that are proud of Beauty, let them know,
Their Pride is out a fickle, fading show.
A smoke, a bubble, a time-tossed toy,
A Luna-like, frail, ever changing joy.
For as a tide of flood, flowed to the height,
Does (in a moment) fall to ebbing straight:
So beauty, when it is most fair and fine,
(Like new plucked flowers) does presently decline.
That man or woman's virtue does excel,
If with their beauty chastity does dwell:
But Pride of beauty is a mark most sure,
That th'owners of it use to procure
The Papbian pastime, and the Cyprian game,
The sports of Venus, and the acts of shame,
To breed the heat of Enpids lustful flame.
Often beauty has fair chastity displaced,
But chastity has beauty ever graced.
For it is a maxim, Those have ever bin,
That are most fair without, most foul within.
Too often has beauty, by disloyalty,
Branded it self with lasting infamy,
That one frail creature, (nobly well descended)
(Proud of her fairenes) foully has offended,
And on her house and kindred, laid a blot,
That the dishonor never will be forgot.
But a fair feature virtuously inclined,
A beauteous outside, and a pious mind,
Such are Gods Images Epitomies,
And Cabinets of heavens blessed treasuries:
And therefore be thy feature, fair or foul,
Let inward virtues beautify the soul.
Against Pride of our strength.
Pride of our strength, shows weakness in our wit,
Because the Collicke, or an Ague sit,
The rooth-ach, or the pricking of a pin,
Often lets the strength out, and the weakness in.
The Tribe of Dans great glory, Judges 16. 19.
Samsons strength,
By a weak woman was orethrowne at length.
And sure there is many do themselves much wrong
In being proud because they are made strong,
For a great number living now there are,
Can wrestle, throw the sledge, or pitch the bar,
That on their backs four hundred weight can bear,
And horse-shooes (with their fists) in sunder tear,
Yet never use their strength in any thing,
To serve their God, their Country, or their King.
But with outrageous acts their lives pursue,
As if God gave them strength but as their due,
As though they like the Giants could remove,
And hurl great mountains at the head of Jove,
Or like Gargantua or Polipheme,
Or Gogmagog, their boystrous fancies dream,
That they more wonders by their strength can do,
Then Hercules could e're attain unto.
Let those Goliabs, that in strength take pride,
Know that the Lord of Hosts does them deride,
And what they are (that proudly brag and swell
Of strength) let any man but note them well,
If hurt or sickness make their strength decay,
A man shall never see such Cowes as they.
Being strong, their minds on God they never set;
In weakness, justly he does them forget:
Strength, thus like headstrong Iades they do abuse it,
For want of Reasons bridle how to use it.
Against Pride of our having children.
Pride of our children's vain; our proper stem
Must either dye from us, or we from them.
If our examples of the life we live,
Enrich them not more then the gifts we give,
If (disobedient) they despise instruction,
And will peruersly run into destruction;
Much better had it bin, we had not bin
Begetters of such Imps of shame and sin.
Children no duty to such Parents owe,
Who suffer vice their youth to ouergrow,
Neglect to teach thy son in younger years,
He shall reject thee in thy hoary hairs,
The way to make our children us obey,
Is that our selves from God run not astray,
Such measure to our Maker as we mete,
It Is just, that such, we from our children get.
The Apostle Paul exhorts more and less,
To be all children in maliciousness:
That is to say, as children harmeles be,
So we should from maliciousnes be free.
Thus Pride of birth, apparel, wealth, strength state,
And Pride of humane wisdom God does hate:
Of knowledge, learning, beauty, children and
The Pride of Princes favor cannot stand.
And Pride in any thing shall evermore,
Be barred and shut from heavens Eternal door,
For whosoever will believe and look,
Shall find examples in the sacred hook:
That God has ever against the proud withstood,
And that a proud heart never came to good.
He faith, Pride is Toby 4. 13.
destruction, and again
That Pride is Toby 4. 13.
hateful before God and men:
How Prides beginning is from God to fall,
And of all sin is the Toby 4. 13.
original.
Who takes hold on Pride, in great affliction
Shall be o'rethrowne, filled with Gods malediction, Eccles, 10.

Pride was not made for man, man has no part
In pride, for God Proverbs 16. Pro. 29. Eccles.29. Matt. 23. Luk 1418. Luke
1. Judith 9.
abherreth a proud heart,
And it is decreed by the Almighties doom,
That pride unto a fearful fall shall come.
A person that is prend, never pleased God yet:
For how can they please him whom they forget?
Yet as before I said, again I Will say,
That pride to such a hight is grown this day:
That many a thousand thousand family,
Were not for pride would beg, or starve and dye.
And the most part of them are men of might,
Who in prides quarrel will both speak and fight:
I therefore have no hope to put her down,
But Satyre-like, to tell her of her own.
There is another pride which I must touch,
It is so bad, so base, so too too much:
Against libellers. Most of these Libellers have an Itching vein of Riming,
which with much seratching makes scuruy lines and so from itch to scratch, from
scratch to scuruy, and from scuruy to scabbed they proceed in time, with their
b^^thing, to be termed (by knaves and fools) scald Poets.
Which is, if any good man's fortune be,
To rise to Honorable dignity,
Or through infirmity, or wilfulness,
Men fall unhappily into distress.
That Libellers do spirt their wits like froth,
To rail at Honor, and dishonor both.
These Mungrell whelps are ever snarling still,
Hating men's goodness, glorying in their ill,
Like blood-hound ^^rs, they daily hunt and sent,
And rhyme and Iigge on others detriment:
Supposing it a very virtuous thing,
To be an arrant Knave in libelling.
Forsooth these Screech-owles would be called the wits,
Whose flashes fly abroad by girds and fits:
Who do their mangy Muses magnify:
Making their sports of men's calamity,
But yet for all their hateful hellith mirth,
They are the vilest cowards on the earth:
For there is not one that does a libell frame,
Dares for his ears subscribe to it his name.
It Is a base brutish pride to take a pen,
And libell on the miseries of men;
For why all men are mortal, weak and frail.
And all, from what they should be, fall and sail.
And therefore men should in these slip'ry times
Bewail men's miseries, and hate their crimes:
Let him that stands, take heed he does not fall.
And not rejoice in men's mis-haps at all.
It is too much for Libellers to meddle,
To make their Muse a Hangman or a Beadle:
At men's misfortunes to deride and jest,
To add distress to those that are distressed.
As I do hold men's vices to be vile,
So at their miseries I Will never smile,
And in a word (left tediousness offend)
A Libelier's a Knave, and there is an end.
Thus having of Prides various forms related,
And how of God, and good men it is hated:
I think it fit some Lines in praise to write,
Of Virtues which to Pride are opposite.
For vice with show of Virtue blindes the eye,
And Virtue makes vice known apparently.
When falsehood is examined and compar^d
With Truth, it makes truthhaue the more regard.
The Crow seems blackest, when the Swan stands near
And goodness makes the ill most bad appear:
So virtues that are contrary to vices,
Make them contemptible, and base in prices:
The praise of Humility.
Humility, if it be well embraced,
It makes disdainful Pride, disdained, disgraced:
Humility is a most heavenly gift,
The Stayre that does (to Glory) men up lift.
None but the meek and lowly humbled spirit
Shall true eternal happiness inherit:
Those that are humble, honor Eecles 19.
God always,
And only those will he to honor raise.
If thou be'st great in state, give thanks therefore.
And humble still thy self, so much the more.
He that is humble, loves his Christian brother,
And thinks himself Phil. 2. 3.
inferior to all other:
Those that are meek, the Lord shall ever guide,
And Psalm. 25. 9. Psalm. 138. 6.
teach them in his ways still to abide.
For though the Lord be high, he has respect
Unto the Prou. 22.4.
lowly, whom he will protect.
Humility, and lowliness goes on,
Still before honor, (as says Solomon)
He that is humble here and free from strife,
Shall for Mat. 23. 12.
reward have glory, wealth, and life.
He that himself does humble, certainly,
Our Savior says, shall be Mat. 23. 12.
exalted high.
He that with Christ will wear a glorious Crown,
Must cast himself, (as Christ did) humbly down.
And like to the rebounding of a ball,
The way to rise, must first be, low to fall.
For God the Father will accept of none,
That put not on the meekenes of his Son:
If proudly, thou do lift thy self on high,
God and his blessings, from thee, still will fly:
But if thou humble, meek, and lowly be,
God and his blessings will come down to thee.
If thou would travel unto heaven, then know,
Humility's the way that thou must go.
If in presumptuous paths of Pride thou tread,
It Is the right wrong way that to hell does lead.
Know that thy birth, attire, strength, beauty, place,
Are given unto thee by Gods special grace:
Know that thy wisdom, learning, and thy wealth,
Thy life, thy Princes favor, beauty, health,
And whatsoever thou can goodness call,
Was by Gods bounty given unto thee all.
And know that of thine own thou do possess
Nothing but sin, and woeful wretchedness,
A Christians pride should only be in this,
When he can say that God his Father is.
When grace and mercy, (well applide) afford,
To make him brother unto Christ his Lord.
When he unto the holy Ghost can say,
Thou art my Schoolmaster, whom I Will obey;
When he can call the Saints his fellows, and
Say to the Angels, for my guard you stand,
This is a laudable, and Christian pride,
To know Christ, and to know him crucified.
This is that meek ambition, lovv aspiring,
Which all men should be earnest in desiring:
Thus to be proudly humble, is the thing,
Which will us to the state of glory bring.
But yet bevvare; pride hypocritical,
Puts not humilities cloak on at all:
A lofty mind, with lowly cap and knee,
Is humble pride, and meek hypocrisy.
Ambitious minds, with adulating looks,
Like courteous (Crovvne-aspiring) King Henry the fourth.
Bullinbrookes,
As a great ship ill suited with small sail,
As Judas meant all mischief, cride, All hail,
Like the humility of Absalon:
This shadowed pride, much danger vvaites upon.
These are the counterseite (God save ye Sirs)
That have their flatteries in particulars,
That courteously can hide their proud intents,
Under varieties of complements,
These Vipers bend the knee, and kiss the hand,
And swear, (svveet Sir) I am at your command,
And proudly make humility a screvv,
To wring themselves into opinions view.
This pride is hateful, dangerous, and vile,
And shall it self (at last) it self beguile.
Thus pride is deadly sin, and sin brings shame,
Which here I leave to hell, from whence it came.
FINIS.
TO THE MOST HIGH AND ALMIGHTY God the Father, Creator of the World, and to the
King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and only Ruler of Princes, Jesus Christ, the
Glorious Redeemer of the World, And to the most holy and Blessed Spirit, the
Comfort of all true Believers, and Sanctisier of the World, Three Persons, and
one Eternal Omnipotent God.
MOst mighty, gracious, merciful, and glorious God, that triest the heart, and
searchest the reins, from whom no secret is hid; in the assurance of thy
neuer-failing clemency, and hope of thy gracious acceptance, I humbly offer to
thy most dread Majesty, these my poor labors, which out of thine own Word,
and by and through thy blessed assistance, I have (for the glory of thy great
Name compiled) I acknowledge my self the meanest of men, and the most unworthy
of thy unworthy servants, to present my polluted and imperfect duty to thee,
that art the Fountain of perfection, purity and holiness; but thou that
know mine intentions meek and humble, free from the expectation of worldly
applause, and only aiming to reprehend and reform the too much, too frequent
impieties of Cursing and Swearing, so hateful to thee, and so abusiue to thy
Law, upon the knees of my heart I prostrate my self before the feet of thy
Mercy seat, beseeching thee for thy Names sake (too much profaned) for thy
Glories sake, too much abused, for thy Sons sake, who with thy self art
neglected, contemned and reviled, that thou will be pleased to arise, O Lord,
and scatter thine enemies; that though this work of mine be but weak, and I
the workman far weaker, yet through my frailty be thou pleased to show thy
power; let my lines be like Shamgars Goad, Judges, 3 31. Like Iaels Nail,
Judges 4.21. Or che Iawe-bone which Samson fought withal, Judges 15. Or David's
Sling, 1. Sam. 17. That (through thy might) these accursed Philistines, with
uncircumcised hearts, may be either amended or confounded; That all the
reuiling Rabshakehs may be made to know, that thou art icalous of thy glory: so
bless, I beseech thee, these my labors, that children reading them, may be
seasoned with a fear and reverence of thy Maiestic: that those who already do
hate Cursing and Swearing, may hereby be the more confirmed in that godly
hatred: That the wretched careless blasphemers and accursed takers of thy Name
in vain, may be ashamed and reformed, that thereby thou may be glorified,
thy Church comforted and edified, and our sinful lives amended, and finally
our souls everlastingly saved, through thy mere and infinite mercy, and our
blessed Saviors boundless merits: To whom (with thee and the holy Ghost) be
all praise, power and glory, now and for ever.

Thy Eternal Majesty's lowest and least of thy ungracious servants, JOHN
TAILOR.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH, AND MY DREAD Sovereign, CHARLES, by the Grace
and Providence of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender,
etc.
My Gracious Sovereign,
I Your Majesty's poor undeserved servant, having formerly (oftent ^^^es)
presented to your Highness many small Pamphlets (the best fruits of my lean
and sterill invention) and always your Princely affability and beunty did
express and manifest your Royal and generous disposition: and whereas your
Gracious Father (of ever blessed and famous memory) did not only like and
encourage, but also more then reward the barren gleanings of my Poetical
inventions: so now I am bold to present unto your Majesty this my best and
superlatiue part of my last studies, I know (Royal Sir) that man's Pilgrimage
here must have a period; and as the Tr^^ falls East or West, so it rises, and
He that knows the heart, does know that I do (not hypocritically) take to
heart, that many numberless Blasphemies, Curses and Oaths, which are
carelessly, presumptuously and damnably breathed every day, hour and minute,
against the Almighty and infinite Majesty of God: Sure I am, that God takes my
part in resisting and writing against these crying crimes, and I am persuaded
that your Majesty has an innated Christian hured of them, I likewise know
that all good men do abhor and detest them; and as on the one side I will
(or would) not be a Stoicke or Precisian, nor on the other side an Atheist, so
in the midway I have written this small Treatise, to express my self a
Christian, and what a Christian in these points should be; and though the work
be small and rudely compiled, though I (the Author) am altogether meritlesse of
any good, yet is the matter great, and so great, that it merits the protection
of all such as do acknowledge there is a God. Wherefore I humbly beseech your
Majesty to accept and Patronize this poor labor of mine, that your powerful
approuement of it, may make it pass through all your Kingdoms and Territories
Cum Priuilegio, that children by reading it in their youths, may have an
ingrafted hatred of these sins; that elder people may thereby here formed
from them; that all in general may loath and abhor them; that God may be
honored, and our souls eternally saved.

Your Majesty's humble Subject and servant, JOHN TAILOR.

AGAINST CVRSING AND SWEARING.
GOD, by whose incomprehensible power all things were made of nothing, Genesis
1. By whose unspeakable mercy all true Believers are Redeemed, Isay 52, 3. By
whose Almighty Providence, all things (great and small) are conserved, Mat. 10.
29. And nothing can pass without it, Pro. 16. 33. Whose Name is holy, Luke 1.
49. Whose name is a strong Tower to defend the Righteous, Pro. 28. 10. And a
consuming fire against obstinate impenitent sinners, Deuteronomy. 4. 24. Who is a
jealous and revenging God, Nahum. 1. 2. Who fills Heaven and Earth, and sees
all things, Jeremy 23. 24. Who is the Lord of Hosts, 2 Sem. 6. 17, 18. Who
has sworn by Himself, that to him every knee shall bow in fear and
reverence of his dreadful Majesty, Isay, 45. 23. Who has been so gracious,
that he has made Man only for his own service, and so bountiful, that he
has made all other Creatures for the service of Man: who blessed him, and gave
him power to bless in the glorious Name of the Lord of Hosts, 2 Samuel 6. 17,
18. Who in a fearful voice of Thunder, did in mount Sinai proclaim his
sacred Law, and denounced this dreadful and terrible Judgment, that he would
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain, even that God has
forbidden us to curse. Exodus 20. 7.

But to bless them that Curse us, Romans 12. 14. Luke 6. 28. Mat. 5.44. Yet
nevertheless, by the temptation of that old and irreconciliable enemy of God
and Man, by the malice and mischief of that old Dragon and subtle Serpent the
Devil, Man has mounted and spread to such a height and breadth these execrable
vices of Cursing, Swearing and Blaspheming, that all estates and conditions,
high and low, great and small, oldor young, male and female, are universally
possessed with these impieties, and by long custom it is in a manner almost as
natural as eating, drinking or sleeping, as though there were no God that had
forbad these crying crimes, or no hell reserved for a punishment of them.

In this small Treatise I do not put pose to condemn all sorts of Cursing or
Swearing, for that were to declare and pronounce my self Accursed: but my
intent is (as God pleases to enable me) to declare how far these two
brethren Curses and Oaths are lawful or unlawful: and because I find Cursing
to be the most elder and of most antiquity, I purpose first to show (as far
as I have assured warrant) my opinion concerning Curses and Execrations.

Curses and Cursing are divided into four several kinds. As
First, From God to Man, Secondly, From Man to Man. Thirdly, From Man to
himself. Fourthly, From Man to God.


The first is Just, for God did never Curse any Man, Family, Tribe, Kingdom or
Nation, but, there was a just deserving of that Curse: for Man being altogether
sinful, and God infinitely Just, Gods Curse is due and just for the
transgression of Man.

The Second is uncharitable, as when one Man curses another, for all Men (that
are Christians) who have one and the same Redemption in the blood of
Christ^esus, who do in the Lords Prayer call God Our Father, are forbidden to
Curse, and commanded to them that Curse us.

The third is, when a man shall Curse himself, which is more uncharitable, for
Charity should begin ar home: and can that man be thought to wish well to any
man, that wishes hurt to himself? or may it be conceived, that he that is so
graceless to Curse himself, has the grace to pray for another?

The fourth is, when Man does Curse God, (which is most damnable) for can there
be a most execrable sin, then such impious ingratitude, that the Creature
should Curse the Creator^^ that the redeemed should Blaspheme her Redeemer: or
that impiety should mount to such a height of impudency as to curse' the
blessed Spirit?

Of these four in Order.
FOr the first, God did most justly Curse our first Parents in Paradise, and in
all People and Nations (being of their offspring) are originally polluted with
their transhressions, and miserable subjects to the same Curse, and do all
generally undergo the same punishment, which is, that the Man shall eat his
Bread in sorrow, labor, and in the sweat of his face all the days of his
life, and that the Womaman shall bring forth her children in pain and sorrow,
and be subject to the rule of her husband, Genesis 3.

Also the same time God Cursed the Earth (for the sin of Adam) which Curse
was, that it should bring forth Thorns and Thistles, and without man's great
toil and labor, the Earth does yield us very small sustenance.

Likewise God did most justly Curse Kain for murdering his innocent brother
Abel^ the Curse was, that Kain should be a vagabond, and a runnagate upon the
face of the Earth, and that his labors should be accursed; for when he tilled
the ground, it should not yield the strength of her fertility unto him, Genesis 4.

In the 26. of Leuiticus, God does denounce most fearful Curses against all
wilful and obstinate transgressors of his Law, as first that he will afflict
their bodies with diseases, verse 16. And that he will set his face against
them, that they shall fall before their enemies, and be subject unto them:
That he will make their Heaven as Iron, and their Earth as Brass. That their
labor and strength shall be spent in vain, and that their Trees shall be
frui^ less: That the Sword, Pestilence and Famine, shall make them desolate.

Furthermore in the 28. of Deutoren^mie, from the 16. verse to the end of the
Chapter, there is nothing but the dreadful Curses of Almighty God against the
contemners and profane breakers of his Testimonies.

Likewise in the 27. of Deuteronomy. are 12. Curses denounced against rebellious and
careless offenders.

In Genesis 9. 3. God does promise Abrsham to Curse those that Curse him.

God in the 29. of Jeremy and 17. verse, does by the mouth of the Prophet
threaten the destruction of Jerusalem with their King and people, with the
Curses of Famine, Sword and Pestilence, and that they should be a reproach and
an hissing, or a contempt, scorn, and terror to all Nations and Kingdoms of
the Earth.

Also the same Prophet in the 48. Chapter verse 10. does Curse all those that
are negligent in doing the work of the Lord: from which Curse none are
excluded, be they high or low, rich or poor, Ecclesiastical or Civil.

The Lord does also declare all men accursed that trust in the help or power
of Man, making weak flesh their arm or defense, and distrusting the mighty
power of the Almighty, Ierem. 17. 5.

In the second of Samuel, chap. 3. verse 29. the Kingly Prophet David does
denounce a bitter Curse upon Ioab and his posterity, because Ioab had
treacherously slain Abner the son of Ner, (the laid Abner having King Dauid's
leave to go in peace) the which Curse fell upon Ioab afterward: for when David
was in his deathbed, he gave a charge to his son King Solomon, 1 King, chap.
2. and 5. ^verse, that because Ioab had slain Abner, and Amasa (2 S^m. 20.10.)
against the Law of Arms, or the Kings permission or knowledge, that Solomon
should not suffer his gray head to go to the Grave in peace, which Curse was
accomplished, for Solomon sent Benaiah with a command to kill him, which was
accordingly performed in the Tabernac'e at Jerusalem, close by the Alter,
whither Ioab was fled, in hope the holiness and dignity o^ he place would have
been his refuge and sanctuary from the indignation of the King, ^ Kings 2. 34.

Our Savior Christ in the 23. of Saint Matthew, does denounce 8. several
Curses or woes against the Hypocritical Seribes and Pharesies: and in the 23.
chapter the miserable damned are described by the name of Goats, who standing
on the left hand, are enforced to hear that unrecoverable sentence of, Depart
ye Cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his anels.

The holy Patriacrk Noah did propehtically Curse all the posterity of his son
Cham, which Curse stands in force against all those that are disobedient to
their Princes, Parents, Magistrates and Governors, Genesis.9.25.

The universal flood, wherein all mankind perished (except eight persons) was
Gods dreadful and consuming Curse, for the manifold and insupportable sins
of the whole world, Genesis 7.

The Patriarch ^saack (by the spirit of prophecy, by Gods appointment) did
pronounce all those to be Cursed that Cursed Iaob, Genesis 27. 29.

The Prophets generally in sundry places do (by the direction of the holy
Ghost) proclaim many Curses against the enemies of God, and contemners of his
Commandments.

These are the first sort of Curses, namely from Gods just Judgments, either
by himself, his Patriarckes, Prophets, or by his Son our Savior Christ
Jesus, These manner of Cursings, are Man^owne deseruings, and therefore they
are for Gods glory in the punishment of sinners.

The second, Curses from Man to Man.
THis kind of Cursing is altogether against the rules of Christianity and
Charity, for all Christians being members of one head, which is Christ Jesus,
who is the fountain of all blessing and blessedness, it follows by
consequence, that all those who are addicted to Cursing or Cursed speeches, are
not members of that Head of blessedness.

Balaam the Prophet desires and wishes to dye the death of the righteous, and
yet in the 22. of Numbers, Balak King of the Moabites did so corrupt the
Prophets conscience with the hope of reward or a bribe, that he was willing to
Curse the people of Israel: and though God in the 12. verse of the same
chapter, does forbid Balaam to Curse them, saying unto him, They are blessed:
yet did covetousness so blind him, that he dared to ask or expect Gods leave
the second time to Curse them, verse 19. which leave or permission he thought
he had got, but that his Ass, before himself, saw the resisting power of the
Almighty, verse 27.

When Alsal^^ rebelled against his father David, and that David in great
extremity was forced to flee, whilst his son pursued him, 2 Sumuel, 16.
Shimei the son of ^^ra, ran toward King David, reuiling and Cursing him,
saying, that all the blood that was shed of the house and family of Saul, was
by Gods Justice fallen upon his head, and that the Lord had deprived him of his
Kingdom, and given it to his son. Absalen.

Here you see, that although God has commanded us to pray for all men, and not
to curse one another, yet this wicked wretch Shimei, did Curse his King, his
Sovereign, the Lords anointed, a Prophet, a type of Christ, and a man after
Gods own heart.

This is one infallible mark or token whereby the good and bad may be
distinguished and known one from another, that the wicked does Curse the
Godly, and wish them hurt, and the godly does pray for the good conversion of
the wicked, and wish them all earthly and heavenly happiness.

The Wiseman gives good counsel to all people in the 10. of Ecclesiastes,
verse 20. Curse not the King, no, not in thy thought, neither Curse the rich
man in thy bed chamber, for the soul of the Heaven shall carry the voice, and
that which has wings, shall declare the matter. The Apostle does exhort, that
prayers, intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men, and namely and
especially for Kings, and all that be in authority, 1 Timethy, 2. 1, 2. and in
the 1 Peter, 2. We are commanded to fear God and honor the King. Whereby it
is plain, that whosoever does Curse the Prince or Ruler, does Curse Gods
Deputy, and Ordinance, for the which sin they must never expect any other
ways, but the ways of the Accursed: besides in many places of the Scripture
we are commanded to pray one for another, and not in any place we are bid to
Curse, but the contrary we are enjoined to bless those that Curse us, and
pray for them which hurt us, Luke 6. 28.

The Curses of wicked persons are like arrows shot upright, which are likely
to fall upon the heads of the shooters, or as feathers cast into the wind,
which fly back in the face of him or her that throw them: yet is Cursing the
last and poorest revenge that can be had for any injury; as when men are
oppressed or ouer-borne, that they have no power or means to help or redress
themselves, when friends, credit, power, and money do fail, yet Cursing
remains, as long as breath lasts, they have a bottomless inexhaustible
treasure of Curses, to bestow upon any man, whom they know or imagine has
wronged them. But herein they show how negligent they are in following the
example of our Savior, who prayed earnestly for his enemies, yea even for
those that persecuted him to the most shameful death of the Cross, with these
words, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do. Yet does the Prophet
David Curse his enemies most bitterly in the 55. Psalm and verse 15. and
Psalm 59. verse 3. and Psalm 140. 9, 10. But it must be considered, that
those whom David did Curse, were Atheists, Heathen, Infidels, malicious
unrepentant Idolaters, and blasphemers of the Divine Majesty, and so they were
Gods enemies, and therefore David by the Spirit of God had warrant to Curse
them: and yet if David had Cursed his own peculiar enemies, it had been no
example for our imitation, for we are not to take the infirmities of the best
and most glorious Saints and servants of God, for the Paterns to rule and
square our lives by, but it must be their virtuous conversation, that we all
must take for our direction.

Holy Job and Jeremy in their afflictions, in the their frail passions, did
curse the days of their birth, Job 3. Jeremy 20. 14, 15, 16.

It is fearful to hear in these days, with what feruency people do Curse
one another, and how dull and coldly they pray to God either to avoid his
Curse, or obtain his blessing: Parents to their children, wives and husbands,
all degrees wishing most heavy Judgments of God, to fall one upon another,
that although the Plague be but newly (by the great Father of mercy) taken from
us, yet the mouths of many are filled with the cursed desire, and daily
wishing for it again. But, my dear brother, I heartily beseech thee, as thou
have a hope to hear one day that blessed voice in the 25. of Saint Matthew, of
Come ye blessed, by the hope and trust that you have it shall be spoken to you,
avoid all manner of Cursing and bitter excerations. And this shall suffice to
finish this second part of this Treatise, namely, the Curse of Man to Man.

The third, when Man Curses himself.
THose Kind of Cursers are most desperate daring sort of wretches, who do
make so small account of the Curse that any man can pronounce or wish against
them, that they dare to desire Gods heavy Curses to fall upon themselves and
their families; yea they are so hellish-mad, that they will beat their breasts,
and with loud clamours (as it were) meet the vengeance of Heaven halfe-way, to
pluck it on their heads: would so many else in theit desperate madness desire
God to Damn hein, to Renbunce them, to Forsake them, to Confound them, to
Sink them, to Refuse them? and would so many so earnestly beseech the Devil
to take them, and Hell to receive them, if they did either love Heaven, hate
Hell, or love themselves? If they believed there were eternal Glory prepared
for the Blessed, and everlasting torments for the Accursed, they would never so
violently wish, or desire the other.

When Pontius Pilate sat in Judgment upon our Savior Jesus Christ, his
conscience knowing, and his tongue affirming Christ to be just, yet himself,
called himself innocent of his blood, although he pronounced the unjust
Sentence of death against him, saying to the people, I am innocen^ of the blood
of this lust man^, look you to it. The people presently answered all, and
said, His blood be upon us, and on our children, Math. 27. 24, 25. Which Curse
how it took effect upon them, you may read in Josephus first Book of the
wars of the Jews, the 1. 2, and 3. chapters, how that within less then 50.
years, the Roman Emperor Vespasian with his son Ti^us, besieged Jerusalem
eighteen months, in which space there dyed by War, Famine, and the Sword,
eleven hundred thousand of them, the City sacked and razed, and the Jews
carried away into perpetual slavery and captivity, because they bought and
sold the Son of God for thirty pence: where, for a further manifestation of
the former Curse; which they wished to fall on them and their posterity, we see
the Jews at this day have continued these sixteen hundred years a dispersed
and despised Nation over all the Earth, being scorned and afflicted more then
any others, having neither Government or Commonwealth, but in most miserable
bondage both of soul and body, deprived both of heavenly doctrine, and earthly
comfort.

The Apostle Saint Peter Cursed himself, Math. 26, 74. But this was a
suffering or permission of God, whereby he might know his own weakness,
that so confidently would promise his Master (Christ) never to deny him; and
this example of Peter's fall is left for our instruction, as a Glass or Mirror
of our humane frailty, that seeing so glorious an Apostle and Saint of God,
when he presumed of himself, to have most ability of strength that then he
fell most fearfully; how then can we, who are so many degrees short of his
perfection, so many steps below him in life and conversation? how can we (I
say) have that foolish impudence, as to put any trust or confidence in our own
strength, (which is but smoke) or any thing but an assured faith in Christ
Jesus? But there are too too many that imitate the frailty of this blessed
Saint, in denying Christ, and Cursing themselves: but the number are but few
which do repent as Peter did, and go out and weep bitterly; which true
repentance and unsained contrition, must be the means for the attainment of
Gods pardon in our sins remission.

Note the servant love of that man of God, Moses, Exodus, 32. 32. Which for the
zeal which he bore to the glory of God, the increase of the Church, and the
hearty affection of the people when they had provoked the Lords wrath, that he
was ready to consume them for their idolatry with the Golden Calfe, then Moses
prayed for them, that if God would not pardon their sin, he prayed that he
might be for ever blotted out of the Book of life, so much he did prefer
Gods glory, that rather then it should be so diminished, he desired to undergo
the grievous Curse of eternal damnation.

The like example of zeal to Gods glory and love, of the forlorn and rejected
Jews, is expressed by Saint Paul, Romans, 9. 3. Where he says, For I would
wish myself to be separated from Christ, for my brethren, that are my kinsmen
according to the flesh. Thus these two blessed Lamps, or Beacons (which God
appointed to illuminate his Church) did desire the dreadful Curse of Gods
heavy and eternal wrath to fall upon them for ever, rather then Gods honor
should be violated, or their brethren before ever reprobates. These two last
Curses of Moses and Paul, against themselves, were so great and good examples
of true zeal to God, and love to our neighbors, that though it be long since
they lived, yet I have not read or heard of any that ever imitated them. Moses
as a Type of Christ before his Incarnation, and Paul as a follower of Christ's
example after his bitter death and passion, did both wish themselves to be
accursed, to the end that thereby so many of their miserabeb rethren might be
blessed: so our Savior Christ, (though he were, and is the fountain of all
blessing) yet he was contented to be made a Curse for as many as would lay
hold on the promises of God by faith in him, Galatians 3, 23, 14. And thus I
conclude my third part of this Treatise, of Man Cursing himself.

Fourthly, When Man Curses or Blasphemeth God.
THis sin is (as it may rightly be called) a degree beyond sin: for this is
the sword, which the Devil does put into madmens hands, wherewith they do
wound themselves mortally: for there were never yet any, that durst to lift up
this Cursed weapon of Blasphemy against God, but that the point thereof did
always turn into their own bosoms, to their destructions, or most grievous
calamities, as Pharaoh, when he said, Who is the Lord? I know not the Lord,
neither will I le^^ Israel go, Exodus, 5. 2. and Sennacherib King of Assyria,
by the mouth of his servant Rabshakeh, blasphemed the Name of the Lord of
Hoasts, 2. Kings 18. Where he does impiously extol the Heathen Idols, above
the God of Israel, saying (verse 34. and 35.) Whence is the God of Hamath, and
of Arpad? Where is the God of Sepharuatm, Heua and Iuab? How have they
delivered Samaria out of mine hand? The like did Holophernes, Judith, 6. 3.
when he threatened the Israelites in Bethuliah, saying, That their God should
not deliver them. When he had set up his golden Image, threatening all that
would not fall down and worship it, with most cruel torments to death, he
proudly said, Who is that God that can deliver you out of mine hands?

Nicanor, Lieutenant General or Captain of the Host of King Demetrius, 2.
Machabeus, 15. Against Judas Machabeus and the Host of Israel, whom he purposed
to invade upon the Sabbath day, said, verse 3. Is there a Lord in Heaven, that
commands the Sabbath day to be kept and (verse 4.) when they said, There is a
liui^^ Lord which rules in the Heaven, who commanded the seventh day to be
kept, then he said, And I am mighty upon Earth to command them for to arms
themselves, and to perform the Kings business.

But this Blasphemons miscreant had his hire: for he lost 35000. of his men in
the battle, and himself was slain, and his head, hand and shoulder, brought
in triumph to the City of Jerusalem, and his accursed tongue cut out, and cut
in small pieces, and given to the fowls of the Air, as the same chapte^ does
declare.

The Scribes and Pharisees (Mark 3. 22.) did Blaspheme our Savior, and said
he had: Devil, and that through the power of Beelzebub he did cast out Devils
out of the possessed.

But as the lives of these, and all other Blasphemers were odious and
execrable, so were their deaths and punishments miserable and remarkable: for
Pharaoh (after the enduring of many most grievous plagues) lost his Kingdom
and his life, he and all his Army being drowned in the red Sea, Exodus 14. 27,
28. Sennacherib for his Blasphemy, lost in one night 185000. men, all of them
being slain by the Angel of the Lord, himself being forced to flee to save
his life: where, at his return to his Kingdom, he was slain by his own
sons in the Temple at Nineueh, as he was at the ungodly worship of his god
Nisroch, 2. Kings, 19. 37.

Holophernes, (that blasphemous Champion) was by Gods just Judgment, being
asleep in his Tent, and drunken, although he were in his Camp amidst a great
Army of his own rusty Soldiers, yet was his head smote from his shoulders (by
a woman) and carried unto the City of Bethulia, and there upon the highest
place of the walls set up in memorial of Gods vengeance, and his peoples
victory, ^deth, 14. 1.

Nebuchadnezzar was for his blasphemy deprived of his manly reason and
Kingdom, and for seven years space, lived as a beast among the beasts of the
field, Daniel, 4. 30.

The Scribes and Pharisees, who were the on^y men in reverend estimation amongst
the ^ewes (as being the writers and expounders of the Laws, for their
blasphemy were delivered up into most miserable captivity and ^^erpetuall
slavery, as is before expressed.

God is jealous of the honor of his Name, that he commanded the blasphemer ^o
be stoned to death, Leuiticus, 24. 14. Which was forthwith executed upon him in
the ^3. verse.

For which cause, when that blessed man Job was in his greatest afflictions,
sitting in ^^shes, full of Byles and sores, then his wife persuaded him to
Curse or blaspheme God and dye, Job, 2. 9. She well knowing that the Law was so
strict, that for every such ^ffence there was a speedy execution of death, and
so by that means she would have persuaded him to have been quickly dispatched
out of his pain and misery.

Briefly then to conclude this short Treatise Cursing, I beseech you brethren,
by the ^percies of God, that you all have an especial ^^are, not to blaspheme
the holy and glorious Name of our good and gracious Creator, Redeemer and
Sanctifier, that we by our Cursing, do not turn his blessings into a Curse
upon us and our posterity, here and eternally thereafter, that we be not so
much out of ^oue, charity, and obedience, as to Curse our Superiors,
neighbors, or any other persons, or lastly, that we be not so wilfully ^^ad,
to Curse ourselves: all which Cursed ^^eanes, are the causes to pluck down
upon our heads the dreadful Curses of the Almighty, as it has done in all
times and ages upon Blasphemers and Cursers.

Against Swearing.
WHen man has so far offended God by his disobedience, that he had thereby
purchased to himself and all his posterity perpetual damnation, not knowing
which way to turn himself from the Almighties wrath, and much less knowing
how to be repossest in his favor, when undeserved, unknown, unhoped for man's
infinite misery, was to be cured by his Creators infinite mercy, then at that
time if God had given man leave to ask some great gift which he might be
redeemed by, had he had license to desire or request what he would, that might
be sacrificed to God to satisfy his Justice for sin, and to recover that
eternal happiness which was most miserably lost. If man had had this liberty
to ask and choose a Redeemer, surely I am verily persuaded, that he would never
have been so bold as to have requested God to give his well-beloued only
begotten Son to be crucified for him, as in these days a condemned
malefactor would be indiscreet and unkind, if he should entreat his innocent
friend to dye for him, but if he should request the Judge on the Bench, or the
King on his Throane, that either of them would do him the favor as to suffer
his son to be executed for him, if an offender should make such an
unreasonable request, I imagine he would either be accounted mad or impudently
foolish.

Seeing the case was such that man was altogether in misery remediless, then
did the God of mercy and Father of all consolation show himself to be in
mercy boundless, then did he promise to send his Son to be a Savior and
Redeemer for as many as before and after his coming, should lay hold on the
merits of his death and passion, which he suffered for the Redemption of all
true believers.

At last (in the fullness of time) the eternal Godhead was pleased to be so
far abased as to leave the blessed heavens, to visit personally the cursed
earth, to forsake the glorious Throne, and Crown of unspeakable glory and
Majesty, and by taking our frail nature upon him in the womb of the Virgin,
to undergo all shame and calamity, and after many travels, and suffering
innumerable reproaches, to take the sins and transgressions of the whole
World upon his shoulders, and (being free from sin) was made sin for us,
and to redeem us from the Curse of the Law, and the eternal wrath of God his
Father, was pleased to offer himself for a sacrifice of propitiation and
reconciliation; and to purchase us eternal glory, by his ignominious, cruel,
and shameful death of the Cross.

This was a Love, transcending all Love so far, that no heart of Man or
Angel could ever conceive the last part of it, that the King of Kings, Lords
of Lords, should willingly and freely dye for his mortal enemies.

Seeing that Gods love was so infinite to us so many ways, as in creating us,
not Beasts or Vermin, but Men, in redeeming us (when we were in captivity to
the Devil for ever) with no less price then the precious heart blood of his
own Son, for these and the rest of the multitude of his mercies: let us all
in general, and every Swearer and Blasphemer in particular, examine our
consciences, how we do with thankfulness requite this our good and gracious
God, for his unmeasurable love and mercy toward us.

How many of us, with very little search, may find our bosoms crammed full of
rebellious treacheries, ingratitude, that in stead of giving God glory, praise,
and thanks for all his benefits, do most accursedly, (or maliciously) swear
him over and over, from the head, to the foot, not leaving any part or
attribute of him vnabused, or not sworn by his body, his soul, his sides, his
heart, his wounds, his blood, his entrails, his bones, his feet, nay, they
will not forbear him ^^ much as his nails; so that the Jews were more kind
and less cruel in crucifying of him for they meddled neither with his soul
or his bones: but these wicked miscreants (who are falsely called Christians)
do their best endauours with all deuillis^ greediness, to cruci^^^ again the
Lord of life, and to tear him in pieces with oaths betwixt their cursed teeth.

I have read in the Turkish History, that is the a battle betwixt Amurath
third Emperor of the Turks, and Lazarus Despot of Ser^^^^ that the Archers
were so many in the Turkish Army, that in the fight they did as it were rain
in showers upon the Christians, and with the multitude of the Arrows like a
clou^^ they darkened the earth. And it is to be feared that every hour in the
day, more oaths and shot at the Majesty of God, by wicked C^tiffes, then the
Turks did shoot Arrowers ^^^ the Christians in that battle; so that if our
Savior had come into the World with a purpose to work our perpetual
destruction, and that the Devil had been the best friend we had in our
redemption, if it had or could have been so, could men strive either to
require the love of the one, with more service, or the malice of the other with
more abuse? for Swearing is now in such high request, that some man does hold
it a disparagement to his reputation not to swear; but to go to Church, he
thinks it too civil a course: or to give God thanks either before, or after
meals, he is altogether ashamed, and like a Micher muffles his face in his
hat, saying sometimes either nothing, or nothing that any man can hears or
understand: but to swear and abuse the Name of God he is never ashamed, but
with open mouth he roares out his oaths, stamping with his feet, and beating
his breast with more feruency then he said his prayers.

I have heard a swearer most earnestly pray now and then to God, but it has
been ^^^ beseech God to damn him, or forsake him and on the other side I have
heard the same Rescall to beg and entreat the Devil to take his soul and
body, making such great account of Hell, that rather then he would go without
it, he will request his bread, meat, or drink to be his damnation; but to
desire God to forgive his sins, or to be thankful for all his benefits, to
entreat salvation by true repentance ^, through the merits of Christ Jesus,
these are things which he esteems not worth the asking for, and altogether
against the garb of his Gentleman-like humor.

Now judge with thy self, whosoever thou be that reads this, do thou
think thou dealest well with God, and that he deserves no better usage at thy
hands? A good name, as Solomon faith, is as a precious Ointment, and men are so
chary and wary, that they will by all means avoid any scandal or dishonor of
their names, and it is Capital Treason for any subject to abuse or vilify his
King or Princes name: Yet is God, who is Almighty, AEternall, Incomprehensible,
the God of all glory, Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities and Powers, whose name
is Wonderful, ^^y, and Just; at whose, Name every knee should bow with fear
and reverence, before whose Throne the blessed Armies of Cherubins, Seraphins,
Archangel;, Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Saints, and Martyrs do
continually sing Hallelutsh: This great God, whom the very Devils in Hell do
believe, and fear and tremble at his dreadful wrath, James 1.19. yet does the
earth breed monsters worse then Devils, and retains and seeds more accursed
fiends then Hell does, who with their ungodly breath, do as often as they can,
belch their odious oaths and blasphemy, against the majesty of their
Immortal Maker and Redeemer, without any feeling or touch of conscience,
insomuch that they would be ashamed to use their enemies, or their vassals, or
slave in such contemptible manner, as they do their God and Savior, and they
would be highly offended to have half the like abuse offered to themselves;
and which is more, they would and should be all hanged, or worse, if they spoke
but one quarter of such treason against their natural King, as they do
against the Immortal King of Kings.

A Servant is the better to be beloved or hated for so much as in respect the
Master whom he serves be good or bad: and can any villains deserve more to
be hated, abhorred and spewed out of the company of Christians, then common
swearers, (the Devils best servants) who are the Archtraitonrs against the
Majesty of Heaven? who like the fool do say in their heart, that there is no
God, and so do hold the third Commandment to be a fable, where God forbids
swearing, saying, That he will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in
vain.

Oh what a miserable case shall those wretched souls be in, who at the
dreadful Bar of Gods Judgment shall be by the Lord condemned and judged
guilty of swearing, forswearing, blasphemy, and taking of the name of the Lord
in vain?

Suppose a man were tranailing alone upon some Plain, Heath, or Desert, where
many cross ways lead toward diverse places, and he being a stranger (and
amazed) goes on, not knowing whether he go right or wrong, at last, by chance
he espieth a man, and asks him it he be in the way to such a place or no?
The party answers him, that he is quite out of his way a mile, (or half a
mile, more or less) but faith he, I will show you how you may with less
travail come into your way again: then he directs him to take his course
cross to such a Tree, or House, or Gate, or other mark, and so consequently
shows him the easiest means to find his way again: for which courresie what
thank the I rauailer will give him, and say that if ever it lies in his
power, that he will require his kindness in a larger measure. On the contrary,
let a man hear a wretch curse, blaspheme, and swear, and say to him, My
friend you are quite out of the way to Heaven, and if you do hold that course,
you will never come thither, for you are now going down hill, the high broad
way to the Devil. If a man should tell a profane swearer this, all the
thanks he should have, would be contempt, derision, scorn, and hard words,
or perhaps a right roaring Rascal would be so liberal as to swear ten or
twelve oaths more, and bestow a knock or a stab upon him that mildely
reproved him.

If the penalty of twelve pence for every oath had been duly paid (as the
Statute has in that case provided: I do verily believe, that all the coined
money in England would have been forfeited that way: for little children that
can scarce go or speak plain, can make a shift to swear lispingly. Meat,
drink, clothing, or any neceflaries that we use, or any bargain, buying or
selling, do very seldom pass betwixt party and party, without oaths,
swearing, and oftentimes falsely; so that commonly it is no match, except the
name of God be abused in it: At Dice, Cards, Bowls, or at any other game or
recreation, it is lamentable to hear how ungodly villains will outdare the
Devils in Hell, in abusing he glorious Name of God. And I verily think that
Venison is too oftentimes more unseasonably seasond with oaths in the taking,
then it is with corns of Pepper and salt in the baking: so that if the Law
were executed which St. Leuis King of France made, that every Swearer and
Blasphemer should have their tongues cut out; I am doubtful that more then
three quarters of the people in Christendom would be tonguelesse: for in these
days men are seldom wearied with swearing, as I have read of an Italian, that
at his game was tired in that kind, who commanded his man to help him to
swear, till he himself had gathered his breath again.

And it is to be feared, that there are some who do make a living or trade of
swearing: as a fellow being asked once of what occupa^ion he was? made answer
that he was a vitnesse, which was one that for hire would swear in any man's
cause; be it right or wrong.

The veriest villain that ever abused the name of God, may learn from a Dog
to be a better Christian, for if he do take a Whelpe and bring him up, giving
him but meat fit for a Dog, he may see how the Curre will attend him, follow
him, watch his house, and to the best of his ability, guard and defend his
Masters person from wrong or violence, and at no time he will ever forsake him,
although he might have a far better Master: But if at any time he should wax
stubborn, and fly in his Masters face, otherwise bite him, then surely such a
Master would either hang such a Dog, or knock out his brains.

Thus as Solomon bids the sluggard go to the Pismire, to learn labor and
disigence, so I counsel the blasphemous Swearer, to make his Dog his
pattern, for his better behavior; for, much worse then the worst of Dogs is
he, that knows God to be his Maker, Redeemer, preserver, conseruer and keeper,
and yet for all this a contrary to his knowledge, and against his conscience,
will audaciously, impiously, and ingratefully revile, rail and blaspheme the
glorious, name of this his most bountiful and merciful God.

He that reuiles, or scandals his Sovereign Prince is rightly accounted
worthy to dye the death of a Traitor: and whosoever do abuse, slander or
impeach the reputation of Judges, Rulers and Magistrates, there is a Pillory, a
whipping, with sometimes loss of ears, and goods, for an exemplary
punishment. Thieves are hanged for stealing, and incontinent persons are
sometimes punished for adultry and fornication: but swearing and abusing the
name of God, is esteemed less then a venial sin, being (by regardlesse
conniuence) rather approved, then reproved, and as it were by intolerable
toleration, defended, rather then punished. All which the Lord did in his
foreknowledge know, namely: that men should be remiss and negligent in the
punishing of all those that be dishonourers of his Name, and therefore he
took the cause, judgment and punishment into his own hands, with this
irreuocable sentence, that he will not hold him guiltless that takes his name
in vain: so that the Swearer and Blasphemer may see that although, through
Greatness of Riches, Office, Favor, or Flattery, men do pass over this
great offense slightly, yet God does most assuredly promise and pay them their
hire in this world, Ecclesiasticus, 23. For though thou think God hears
thee not, but is as deaf a^^^^ said Baal was, yet thou shall one day k^^^^^
that he that made the eye, sees, and he that made the care, hears, and he
will also give them their eternal wages in the world to come (except true
repentance and remission) as is most severely threatened in many places of holy
Scripture.

In brief to conclude, take Christ's counsel, Swear not at all, Mat. 5. 34.
Except lawfully and trully before a Magistrate, for the confirmation of a
truth, which kind of oath or swearing is for Gods glory, and commanded by
himself, as it is written in Deuteronomy. ^6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God
and serve him, and shall Swear by his Name. And Ler. 4. 2. Thou shall swear,
The Lord lives, and thou shall swear by his Name, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. and again,
Every tongue shall swear by me, Esaias, 45. 23. and again, And he that swears
in the earth, shall swear by the true God. These sorts of oaths are so
lawful, that Gods glory in them is manifested; Justice dignified, Contentions
pacified. In this sort when thou swearest God only must be thy oath: for it
is for his glory that an oath taken lawfully in his Name, is the decision of
truth, because he is the God of truth, and he is a jealous, God, and will net
give his glory to another, Esaias, 48.11. And let it be thy greatest care, to
hold and esteem the Name of God in such reverence and fear, that thou never
do name or mention, him, but with adoration and admiration'; let the
faithless Jew be thy pattern, who does never Name God in any Curse, oath, or
irreverent manner: let the misbeleeuing Turk teach thee, for he will not abuse
his false deceiving Prophet Mahomet: let the Pagan reach thee, who with such
dutiful blindness do adore base and contemptible Creatures: let Gods mercies
move thee to love him, so that living here in his fear, and departing hence in
his favor, thou may be for ever partaker of his everlasting Love, which God
grant, for the Name and sake of Jesus Christ the Righteous, to whom with the
Father and holy Ghost, be obediently and duly rendered by men and Angels, all
honor, glory, might, Majesty, dominion and thanksgiving now and for evermore.

Christian admonitions, against the two fearful sins of Cursing and
Swearing, that the grieuousnesse of those sins may be loath remembered, and
avoided, whereby the hatred of them may possess the heart of every Christian.
Against Cursing.
FIrst, (if thou will live in a holy fear and reverence of the Name of God)
thou must consider what thou art, and learn to know thy self; for he that
truly knows himself, is aman of very happy acquaintance, for by this thou
shall know thy self to be Earth, Genesis 2. 7. conceived in sin, Psalm. 51. 5.
Borne to pain. Job, 5. 7. Evil, Eccle. 9. 3. Wretched, Romans 7. Filthy, Job,
15. Corrupt, abominable, and doing nothing good, Psalm. 14. Mortal, Romans 6.
Vain, Psalm 62. Wicked, Esaias, 9. Unprofitable, Romans 3. Vanity, altogether more
light then Vanity, Psalm. 62. Sinful, 1 Kings 8. Miserable, 1 C^rinth. 15.
Dust and Ashes, Genesis 18. Gods enemy, Romans 8. A child of wrath, Ephesians, 2. 3.
A worm, Job, 25. Worms meare, Esaias, 51. Nothing, yea less then nothing, Esaias
40. 17.

Having thus by the Touchstone of Gods Word tried, and examined thy miserable
estate and condition, and therewithal knowing thy self, then on the other
side, consider (as near as thy frailty will permit) the power of God in
creating thee, his mercy in Redeeming thee, his love, in preserving thee, his
bounty, in keeping thee, his promise to glorisie thee in Heaven, if thou honor
him on earth, and his Judgments to condemn thee, if thou blaspheme and
dishonor him.

Our Savior Christ, being the Head of Blessedness, and of all that are or
shall be blessed, how is it possible that any Accursed or Cursing person can
be a member of that Blessed Head; who has expressly forbidden us to Curse,
but to bless them that Curse us? Luke, 6. Mat. 5. Romans 12. And in the 1^ 9.
Psalm, It is said to him that accustomes himself to Curse, Cursing was his
delight, therefore shall it happen unto him, he loved not blessing, therefore
it shall be far from him.

And seeing no man can merit the least part of blessings remporall, how, or
with what face can one that lives accursedly, or uses cursing (here,) hope for
a Kingdom of Eternal blessedness hereafter?

It is fearful to hear how, and with what cold dullness, many men do pray
for blessings either for themselves or for other, and (contrarily) with what
vehemence they will Curse: as some have willed and wished themselves Gods
Plague, the Pox, and other mischiefs, and some have too often bid the Devil
take them, God Sink them: Renounce, Confound, Consume, Refuse, and Damn them:
and yet these filly graceless earthwormes, have an ambitious deceitful aim
to be blessed, partakers of the blessed Kingdom of Heaven.

Therefore if thou have a desire of Eternal blessedness, know that the way
thither, is not by Cursing: if thou have a hope to escape the dreadful
sentence of, Go ye Cursed, Mat. 25. Then give thy mind to prayer and
blessing, and then shall thou have the joyful welcome of, Come ye blessed
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. To the
which God of his mercy bring us all. Amen.

Against Swearing.
Having with a Christian humility considered thy own base and contemptible
estate and condition, then think with thy self, what an Incomprehensible,
Glorious, Infinite and Almighty Majesty thou offendest and blasphemest with
thy ungodly Swearing, who has said, that he will not hold him guiltless, that
takes his Name in vain.

And much better were it at the last day, for that miserable wretch, that he
had been created a Toade, a Viper, or the most loathsome creature, then to
appear before that great and dreadful Tribunal, and there to be accused by
the Devil and his own conscience, for Swearing and for Forswearing, and
Blaspheming the blessed Name of the Eternal God, where no excuse can serve, no
Advocate can plead, no Proxey or Enoyne is to be granted, but presently the
guilty Caitif is commanded to utter darkness and perpetual torments.

There is some excuse for the ignorant Jews, that crucified our Savior
because they knew not what they did: but for a professed Christian, who knows
God to be his Creator, and that Jesus Christ paid no less then the peerless
and most precious blood of his heart fore man's Redemption, how can any one that
knows and believes these things, hope for salvation by that blood, wounds,
heart and body, which he so often blasphemes and tears betwixt his accursed
teeth? So that there is no Traitor so bad, or treason so great, as is against
the Majesty of heaven, nor has the Devil any that does him more pleasing
service, then an odious and common Swearet does, and herein he goes beyond all
the Devils in hell in impiety and contempt of God: for Saint James says, Cap.
2. 19. That the Devils do believe there is a God, and that they also tremble
in fear of his mighty power; but the Swearer, though he does know and believe
there is a God, yet he believes not his Word, or fears or trembles at his
Judgments.

Besides these endless torments ordained in hell for odious Swearers, God has
promised to afflict them in this life: for he says, The plague shall never go
from the house of the Swearer, Ecclesiasticus, 23.

So that the gain of a Swearer is nothing but the eternal wrath of God, the
hatred of all good men, the ill example to others, and the vexation and
discredit of himself, his kindred and friends, with a fearful reward
hereafter, (except true repentance obtain mercy.) What a foolish absurdity is
it for a man (being crossed in some wordly affairs, or gaming, or other
business, either material or triuiall) to revenge himself upon God, and
blasphemously fly in the face of his Maker, with Oaths and Excerations?

If we did consider what God has done for us, we would not so unthankfully
requite him: if we called to mind his gracious promise of glory everlasting, to
those that love and fear him, we should then hold his Name in such reverence
as becomes Christians: if his fearful threatenings against the takers of his
Name in vain, could terrify us, (no doubt) but we would be more careful and
circumspect in our lives and conuersations, as that we would be allured by his
mercies, or restrained by his Judgments.

GOd has naturally placed and enclosed the tongue of man within the
stone-walls of his teeth, and without those walls there are also the two
earthen Bulwarks or Rampieres of his lips: he has appointed Reason to be
the tongues guide and guardian, and he freely offers his Grace, to be Reasons
counselor and governor: wherefore let us flee to the Throne of Grace, and
beseech the God of Grace, that he will cause his saving Grace to guide our
Reason, that our Reason may rule our tongues, that Cursing may be cashiered,
Swearing suppressed: that (by Gods Spirit) our lips may be opened, that with
our mouths his Name may be praised: that Gods Name may be glorified, and our
sinful souls eternally saved, through the merits of our great and blessed
Redeemer Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father and the Blessed Spirit, be all
Honor, Power, Majesty, Glory, Dominion, and Thanksgiving, ascribed and
rendered (as is due) of men and Angels, both now and for evermore. Amen, Amen.

Against Swearing.
THou that these lines do either hear or read,
Consider with thy self, and take good heed.
Read them, and let them never be forgot,
They do concern thy soul, then slight them not.
The James.
Fiends of Hell believe there is a God,
And fear and tremble at his angry Rod:
They do confess his glorious Excellence,
And his Almighty powers Omnipotence.
But Man his choicest and his chiefest Creature,
Is so rebellious against God and Nature,
That he against Heaven dare both blaspheme and swear,
And (worse then Fiends) they not believe or fear:
So that the Earth does breed, feed, and retain
Worse Monsters then there does in Hell remain.
If men believed the Word that God has spoke,
They would believe that Word should never be broke.
In His enacted Law Exodus 20.
is one Decree,
That all who take his Name in vain, shall be
Accounted guilty, and his fearful wrath
Will hold them guilty of eternal death.
Again it is said, Let the Leuiticus 24.
Blasphemer dye,
Let him be stoned for his blasphemy;
And evil tongues, who dare to curse aduenter,
Shall into Heavens 1 Cot. 6.10.
blessedness not enter.
And Christ (when on the Earth he lived here)
Forbade us that at Mat.6.
all we should not swear.
And in th'leuenth of Deutoronomy again,
We are commanded not to swear in vain.
The God himself complains that men blaspheme him. Esaias, 52. 5. The names of
blasphemy are writ upon the 10. heads of Antichrist, Apoc 13. 1. Cursing i^ so
bidd^n by the Apostle, when he says, Bless, I say, and cursen^, Romans 12. 14.
Our Savior commands us to bless them that curse us, Mat. 5. 44. Bless them
that curse you, and pray for them which hurt you, Luke 6. 28. Accustom not thy
mouth to swearing, for in it are many falls, neither take up for a custom the
naming of the holy One, for thou shall not be unpunished for such things Eocle.
23. 9. The Plague shall never go forth from the house of the swearer, Id.m.
Who so swears falsely, calls the God of truth to witness a lie. Who so
swears as he thinks, may be deceived. Who so swears vnreuerendy, dishonors
God. Whosoever swears deceitfully, abuses Christian side^lity. Whosoever swears
idly, abuses the credit of a faithful oath. Whosoever swears accustomably, God
will plague him, E'fred an English Earl, conspiring to put our K. Adelstancs
eyes at Winebestes, forsware the treason in St. Peter's Church at Ree^ and fell
down dead presently. Godwin murdered Prince A^^^, brother to King Edward
Confessor, and being at dinner, the King charged him with the murder, then
Godwin swore by bread, and prayed it might choke him, if he were guilty: and
immediately it choked him in the place: his lands also sunk into the sea, and
are called Godwin sands. King Stephen forsware himself to King Henry 1. and
lived in continual trouble, and dyed in perplexity of mind Edward the 4.
brake his oath made at York, that he came not with intent to seize the
Kingdom., and breaking that oath, was punished with a troublesome reign, his
brethren and children all (except one) murdered and not any of his islue
reigned after him. Roger M^^tuner a great Peer of this land, for breaking his
oath to King Edward the II. was most ignomini^usly hanged, boweld and quartred.
M. Fox in his book of Martyrs declares of one Richard Long of Calice, that
forsware himself, to accuse one Smith for eating flesh in Lentt after which
oath Long went presently and drowned himself. One Gr^^wood at Hit^hant in
Sussolke, forsware himself, and his bowels bu^st out. One Widow Barues for
the like sin cast herself out of her window in Cornhill and brake her neck.
Anne Auertis forsware herself in Woodstreet for six pounds of Towe, desiting
God ^^^ might sink down, which fearfully happened. One L^a ^n Sunne-alley
without Bishops-gate forsware himself, and after ripped out his guts.
Heathen to blaspheme their gods abhorred,
Yet Christians wilfully blaspheme the Lord.
Who-euer to revile the gods were known,
In Rome, were from the Rock Tarpeius thrown,
The Egyptians Law was, he should lose his head,
Amongst Scythians, life and goods were forfeited.
These grievous punishments did Pagant use
Against all them that did their gods abuse.
King Donald's Law in Scotland's not forgot,
Who burnt them through the lips with irons hot.
And when King Edmund here had Regal State,
All Swearers he did excommunicate.
And Philip King of France (a Prince renowned)
Ordained that Blasphemers should be drowned.
The Emperor Maximilian did decree,
That all vain Swearers should beheaded be.
The Earl of Flanders, Philip, did ordain,
Their loss of life and goods that swore in vain.
Saint Lewis the King of France enacted there,
That for the first time any one did swear,
Into imprisonment one month was cast,
And stand within the Pillory at last.
But if the second time again they swore,
One with an iron hot their tongues did bore.
And who the third time in that fault did slip,
Were likewise boared through the vnder-lip.
For the fourth time most gricuous pains belongs,
He caused to be cut off their lips and tongues.
Henry the fifth of England, that good King,
His Court to such conformity did bring,
That every Duke should forty shillings pay
For every Oath he swore, without delay.
Each Baron twenty, Knights or Squires offense
Paid ten: and every Yeoman twenty pence.
The Boys and Pages all were whipped most fine,
That durst abuse the Majesty divine.
Thus Pagan Princes with sharp laws withstood
Profaning of their Gods, of stone, or wood.
And Christian Kings and Rulers formerly,
Have most severely punished blasphemy.
And shall a Heathen, or an Infidel,
That knows no joys of Heaven, or pains of Hell,
More reverence to his deuillish Idols show,
Then we do to the true God whom we know?
If we remembered well but what we were,
And what we are, we would not dare to swear.
Poor trunks of earth filled with uncertain breath,
By nature heirs to everlasting death:
Most miserable wretches, most ingrate
Against God, that did elect us, and create.
Redeemed, conseru'd, preserved, and sanctified,
And gives us hope we shall be glorified.
H'hath given us being, life, sense, reason, wit,
Wealth, and all things his Providence thinks fit:
And for requital, (we quite void of grace)
Curse, swear, and do blaspheme him to his face.
Oh the supernall patience of our God,
That bears with Man (a sin polluted clod)
When half such treasons against an earthly King,
Would many a Traitor to confusion bring!
Suppose a man should take a Whelp and breed him,
And stroke him, and make much of him, and feed him,
How will that curre love him beyond all other?
Never forsaking him to serve another?
But if he should most disobediently,
Into his Masters face or throat to fly,
Sure every man that lives upon the ground,
Would say a hanging's sit for such a hound.
And worser then so many dogs are they
That against their God with oaths do bark and bray.
And if repentance do not mercy win,
They Will hang in Hell like Hell Hounds for that sin.
Of all black crimes from Belzebubs damned treasure,
This swearing sin no profit yields, or pleasure:
Nor gains the swearer here but earths vexation,
With change of his salvation for damnation.
It is a sin that yields us no excuse.
(For what excuse can be for Gods abuse?)
And though our other faults by death do end,
Yet Blasphemy does after death extend,
For to the damned in Hell this curse is given,
They for their pains blaspheme the God of Heaven.
Examples on the earth have many been,
As late in sundry places have been seen.
At Mantua two brave Russians in their games
Swore and blasphemed our blessed Saviors name,
Where Gods just judgment (full of fear and dread)
Caused both their eyes to drop from out their head.
In Rome, a child but five years old that swore,
Was snatched up by the Devil, and seen no more,
And at Ragouse, a Mariner did swear,
As if he would Gods name in sunder tear;
When falling ouer-boord, was drowned and tossed,
And nothing but his tongue was only lost.
Remember this, you sinful sons of men,
Think how that Christ redeemed you from Hells den
His mercy he has given in magnitude,
Requite him not with vile ingratitude.
He made the Ears and Eye, and hears and sees
The swearers execrable oaths and lies.
The Godhead of the Father they contemn:
Against the Sons Redemption they blaspheme:
The Holy Spirit grievously they grieve,
And headlong into Hell themselves they drive,
It is in vain for mortal men to think,
Gods Justice is asleep, although it wink:
Or that his arm is shortened in these times,
That he cannot reach home to punish crimes.
Oh think not so, it is but the Devils illusion,
To draw us desperately to our confusion.
Some say that it is their anger makes them swear,
And oaths are out before they are aware,
But being crossed with losses and perplexed,
They think no harm, but swear as being vexed:
And some there are that swear for complement,
Make oaths their grace, and speeches ornament,
Their sweet Rhetorical fine eloquence,
Their reputations only excellence,
Their valor, whom the Devil does inflame
To Abuse their Makers and Redeemers Name.
Think but on this, you that do God forget,
Your poor excuses cannot pay this debt:
Remember that our sinful souls did cost
A price too great, to be by swearing lost.
And blessed was our last good Parliament,
Who made an Act for swearers punishment,
And blessed shall be each Magistrates good name,
That carefully do execute the same.
Those that are zealous for Gods glory here,
(No doubt) in Heaven shall have true glory there,
Which that we may have, humbly I implore
Of Him that rules and reigns for evermore,
The Eternal Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
Before whose Throne blessed Saints and Angels sings,
All power, praise, glory, Majesty, thanksgiving,
Ascribed be to him that is ever living.
FINIS.
TO THE TRVELY GENEROUS AND NOBLE KNIGHT, SIR JOHN MILLISSENT, SERIEANT PORTER
TO the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
RIght worthy Knight, when first this Book I writ
To You, I boldly Dedicated it:
And having now enlarged both Prose and Rhyme,
To you I offer it the second time.
To whom should I these sorrows recommend,
But unto You, the Cities Noble Friend?
I know, you are much grieved with their Grief,
And would adventure Life for their relief:
To You therefore these Lines I Dedicate,
Wherein, their Sorrows partly I relate,
I humbly crave acceptance at your hand:
And rest
Your Servant ever at command, JOHN TAILOR.

TO THE PRINTER.
MY Conceit is, that these are very lamentable Verses, and will grieve many the
reading; they so express Death to Life, and make mortality immortal: I wish,
that as many as can make use of such Lines, had Copies, the rest may want them.

Here and there a Verse may occasion a Tear; then the Author is a true
VVater-Poet indeed; but elsewhere, there wants not a hand-kercheffe to dry
that Tear. So is the whole work a A Sweete-bitter, or Bitter-sweet.
(...)and deserves an Approbation at least from

JOHN TAILOR, of Oriell College in Oxford.

THE PRAEFACE.
IN this lamentable time of general Calamity, our heinous sins provoking
Gods just Indignation, this heavy visitation and mortality; I being attendant
upon the Queens Majesty at Hampton Court, and from thence within two miles of
Oxford with her Barge (with much grief and remorse) did see and hear
miserable and cold entertainment of many Londoners; which, for their
preservation fled and retired themselves from the City into the Country. Whence
I noted the peoples Charity, and great amendment, ^or they had given over one
of the seven deadly sins, which was Coueto^^nesse, and in many places were so
far out of love of a Citizens money, that they abhorred and hated either to
^ouch or receive it; entertaining them with bitter worme-wood welcome, (which
herb was ^n more request amongst many of them, then any of the heavenly
Graces or Cardinal Virtues) ^et the herb of Grace was in much estimation,
although the name of it was a document that they had occasion to Rue the Time;
I further perceived that they were so far from believing or ^rediting any
man, that they would or durst not trust their own noses, but were doubtful,
that that sense would conspire with the Plague to murder them, wherefore (like
cunning Mari^ers, or mole-catchers,) they would craftily in their streets and
highways fetch the wind of any man, although they were over shoes and boots,
and sometimes tumbled into a ditch for their ^abours. This was the time when a
man with a nightcap at noone, would have frighted a whole Parish out of their
wits, when to call for Aquae-vitae (though it had bin but to make a drench for
^ sick horse) was enough to have his house shut up. When Lord have mercy upon
us, made many of them tremble more then God Refuse, Renounce, Confound, or
Damn. When a man travailing ^n the habit of a Citizen, was a mere Bulbegger;
when for a man to say that he came from Hell, would yeed him better well-come
without money, then one would give to his own father and mother that came from
London. In this time of man's great mise^y and small mercy, I took my pen in
hand and wrote this ensuing discourse: I have (as near as I could) suited it
sadly, according to the nature of the subject. And truly, because that the bare
and naked truth was so clear and ample, that I need not to stuff it out with
frivolous fables or fantastical fictions; with my soul, I thankefully
acknowledge Gods great mercy extended toward me (one of the most wretched and
wicked) in that so many thousands of better life and conversation, have fallen
on my right hand and on my left, and round about me; yet has his gracious
protection been my guard, for the which in my gratitude to my God, and to
avoid the sin of idleness, I have written, what those that can, may read.

THE FEAREFVLL SVMMER: OR LONDONS CALAMITY.
THe Patience and long suffering of our God,
Keeps close his Quiver, and restraines his Rod,
And though our crying Crimes to Heaven do cry
For vengeance, on accursed Mortality;
Yea though we merit mischiefs manifold,
Blessed Mercy does the hand of Justice hold.
But when that Eye that sees all things most clear,
Expects our finits of Faith, from year, to year,
Allows us painful Pastors, who bestow
Great care and toil, to make us fruitful grow,
And daily does in those weak Vessels send
The dew of Heaven, in hope we will amend;
Yet (at the last) he does perceive and see
That we unfruitful and most barren be,
Which makes his indignation frown,
And (as accursed Fig Trees) cut us down.
Thus Mercy (mocked) plucks justice on our heads,
And gri^uous Plagues our Kingdom ouerspreads:
Then let us to our God make quick returning,
With true contrition, fasting and with mourning:
The Word is God, and God has spoke the Word,
If we repent he will put up his sword.
He Is grieved in panishing, He Is slow to Ire,
And HE a sinners death does not desire.
If our Compunction our Amendment show,
Our purple sinues He Will make as white as snow.
If we lament our God is merciful,
Our scarlet crimes he will make as white as wool.
Fair London that did late abound in bliss,
And wast our Kingdoms great Metropolis,
It Is thou thar art deie^^^ed, low in state,
Disc^^^late, and almost desolate,
(The hand of Heaven that only did protect thee)
Thou have prouok'd moil justly to correct thee,
And for thy pride of Heart and deeds unjust,
He lays thy Pomp and Glory in the dust.
Thou that wast late the Queen of Cities named,
Throughout the world admired, renowned, and fam'e
Thou that had all things at command and will,
To whom all England was a hand-maide still;
For raiment, fuel, fish, foul, beasts, for food,
For fruits, for all our Kingdom counted good,
Both near and far remote, all did agree
To bring their best of blessings unto thee.
Thus in conceit, thou seem'dst to rule the Fates,
Whilst peace and plenty flourished in thy Gates,
Could I relieve thy miseries as well,
As part I can thy woes and sorrows tell,
Then should my Cares be eased with thy Relief,
And all my study how to end thy grief.
Thou that were late rich, both in friends and wealth,
Magnificent in state, and strong in health,
As chiefest Mistress of our Country prized,
Now chiefly in the Country art despised.
The name of London now both far and near,
Strikes all the Towns and Villages with scare,
And to be thought a Londoner is worse,
Then one that breaks a house, or takes a purse.
He that will filch or steal, now is the Time,
No Justice dares examine him, his crime;
Let him but say that he from London came,
So full of Fear and Terror is that name,
The Constable his charge will soon forsake,
And no man dares his M^^nus to make.
Thus Citizens plag'd for the City sins,
Poor entertainment in the Country winnes.
Some fear the City, and fly thence amain,
And those are of the Country feared again,
Who against the^ bar their windows and their doors,
More then they would against Tu^ks, or Jews or Moors,
^hinke if very Spaniards had come there,
their well-come had bin better, and their cheer.
Whilst Hay-cock lodging, with hard slender fare,
Welcome like dogs unto a Church they are,
^are makes them with the Ana^aptists join,
For if an Hostess do receive their coin,
She in a dish of water, or a paile,
Will now baptize it, lest it something aile.
Thus many a Citizen well flor'd with gold,
Is giad to lie upon his mother ^old,
His bed the map of his mortailty,
His curtains clouds, and Heaven his Canopy.
The russet Plow-swaine, and the Leathren Hind,
Through fear is grown unmannerly, unkind:
And in his house (to harbor) he will prefer
An Infidel before a Londoner:
And thus much friendship Londoners did win,
The Devil himself had better welcome bin:
Those that with travel were tired, fam^, and dry,
For want of drink, might sla^e, and choke, and dye:
For why the hob-nau'd Boores, inhumane Blocks,
Uncharitable Hounds, hearts hard as Rocks,
Did sufter people in the field to sink,
Rather then give, or sell a draught of drink.
Milke-maides and Farmers wives are grown so nice,
They think a Citizen a Cockatrice,
And Country Dames, are waxed so coy and brisk,
They shun him as they will shun a Basiliske:
For every one the sight of him would siye,
All scaring he would kill them with his eye.
Ah woeful London, I thy grief bewail,
And if my sighs and prayers may but prevail;
^^mbly beg of God that he will be pleased,
^^ Jesus Christ, his wrath may be appeared,
Withholding his dread Judgments from above,
And once more graspe thee in his arms of love.
In mcrcy all our wickedness remit,
^^r who can give thee thanks within the pi^?
Strange was the change in less then 3-months space,
^ioy, in woe, in grace, and in disgrace:
^healthfull April, a diseased June,
and dangerous July, brings all out of tune.
that City whose rare objects pleased the eyes
With much content and more varieties,
^^^ that was late delightful^ to the ears,
With melody Harmonious, like the Spheres:
She that had all things that might please the scent,
And all she felt, did give her touch content,
Her Cinque Port scences, richly fed and cloyd
With blessins bountiful, which she enjoyed.
Now 3-months change has filled it full of fear,
As if no Solace ever had been there.
What do the Eyes see there but grieved sights
Of sick, oppressed, and distressed wights?
Houses shut up, some dying, and some dead,
Some (all amazed.) flying, and some fled.
Streets thinly man d with wretches every day,
Which have no power to flee, or means to stay,
In some whole street (perhaps) a Shop or twain
Stands open, for small takings, and less gain,
And every closed window, door and stall,
Makes each day seem a solemnt Festival.
Dead Co^^es carried, and recarried still,
Whilst ^^ty Corp^es scarce one grave does fill.
With LORD HAVE MERCY UPON US, on the door,
Which (though the words be good) does grieve men sore.
And over the doore-posts fixed a cross ^^ed
Betol-^ning that there Death some blood has shed.
Some with Gods marks or T^kens do espte,
These Marks or Takens, show them they must die.
Some with their Carbuncles, and sores new burst,
Are fed with hope they have escaped the worst:
Thus passes all the week, till Thuedayes Bill
Shew^vs what thousands death that week did kill.
That fatal Rel, does like a razor cut
The dead, tl ^^uing in a maze does put,
And he that has a Christian heart, I know,
Is grieud, and wounded with the deadly blow.
These are the obie^s of the Eye, now hear
And mark the mournful music of the Ear;
There do the brazen Iron tongued loud bells
(Deaths clamorous music) ring continual knells,
Some losty in their notes, some sadly towling,
Whilst fatali dogs made a most dismal how ling,
Thus it was in June, July, August and September.
Some frantick^ ra^ing, some with anguish crying,
Some singing, praying, groaning, and some dying,
The healthful grieuing, and the sickly groaning,
All in mournful diap^ten m^aning.
Here, Parents for their Childrens lo^^e lament.
There, Childrens grief for Parents life that is spent:
Husbands deplore their loving Wines decease:
Wines for their Husbands weep remediless:
The Brother for his Brother, friend for friend,
Do each for other mutual sorrows spend,
Here, Sister mournes for Sister, Kin for Kin,
As one grife ends, another does begin:
There one lies languishing, with slender fare:
Small comfort, less attendance, and least care,
With none but Death and he to tugge together,
Until his corpse and soul part each from either.
In one house one, or two, or three does fall,
And in another Death plays sweepe-stake all.
Thus universal sorrowful complaining:
Is all the music now in London reigning,
Thus is her comfort sad Calamity,
And all her Melody is Malady.
These are the objects of the eyes and ears,
Most woeful sights, and sounds of griefs and fears.
The curious rast that while me did delight
With cost and care to please the Appetite
What she was went to hate, she does adore,
And what is high prized, she held despised before,
The drugs, the drenches, and untoothsome drinks,
Fear gives a sweetness to all several stinks,
And for supposed Anudotes, each Palate
Of most contagious weeds will make a Sallate,
And any of the simplest Mountebankes
May cheat them (as they will) of Coin and thanks,
With scraped powder of a shooing-home,
Which they will believe is of an Vmcorne.
Angelicacs, distasteful root is gnawed,
And herb of Grace most Ruefully is chaw'd.
Garlic offends neither taste, nor smell,
Fear and opinon makes it relish well,
Whilst Beazer stone, and mighty Mitbridate,
To all degrees are great in estimate,
And Triacles power is wonderously expressed,
And Dragon Water in most high request.
These against the Plague are good preservative.
But the best cordial is t'amend our lives.
Sinne's the maine cause and we must first begin
To cease our griefs, by ceasing of our sin.
I do believe that God has given in store
Good medcines to cure, or case each fore,
But first remove the cause of the disease,
And then (no doubt but) the effect will cease.
Our sinn's the Cause, remove our sins from hence,
And God will soon remove the Pestileace,
Then every medicine (to our consolation)
Shall have his power, his force his operation,
And till that time, experiments are not
But Paper walls against a Cannon shot.
On many a post I see Quacke-sainers Bills
Like Fencers Challenges, to show their skills:
As if they were such Masters of defente
That they date combat with the Pestilence;
Meet with the plague in any deadly fray,
And brag to bear the victory away,
But if then patients pariently believe them,
They Will cure them (without fail) of what they give them;
What though ten thousands by their dre^ches perish
They made them parposely themselves to cherish,
Their Art is a mere Artlesse kind of lying.
To pick their living out of others dying.
This sharp inucctiue no way seems to touch
The learned Physician, whom I honor much,
The Paracelsians and the Galennists,
The Philosophical grave Herbahsts.
These I admire and reverence, for in those
God does dame Natures secrets fast enclose,
Which they distribute, as occasion serve
Health to reserve, and health decai'd conserve.
It Is against such Rat-catchers I bend my pen
Which do mechanically murder men,
Whose promises of cure, (like lying knaves)
Does beggar men, or send them to their graves.
Feeling.
Now London, for the sense of feeling next,
Thou in thy feeling chiefly art perplexed:
Thy heart feels sorrow, and thy body anguish,
Thou in thy feeling feel'st thy force to languish,
Thou feelst much woe, and much calamity,
And many millions feel thy misery:
Thou feel st the fearful Plague, the Flix, and Feur
Which many a soul does from the body suter.
And I beteech God for our Saviors merit,
To let thee feel, the Comfort of his Spirit.
Last for the solace of the Smeling
smell or ^^^^:
Some in contagious rooms are closely pen^,
Whereas corrupted Air they take, and give
Till time ends, or lends liberty to live.
One with a piece of tasseld well tarr'd Rope,
Does with that nose-gay keep himself in hope;
Another death a wispe of worme-wood pull,
And with great Judgment crams his nostrils full;
A third takes off his socks from's sweating feet,
And makes them his perfume along the streets:
A fourth has got a powne'd Pommander box,
With woorme-wood juice, or sweating of a Fox,
Rue steeped in vinegar, they hold it good
To cheer the senses, and preserve the blood.
Whilst Bellets Bonefire-like, and faggots dry
Are burnt in the streets, the Air to purify.
Thou great Almightis, give them time and space,
And purify them with thy heavenly Grace,
Make their repentance Incense, whose sweet faure
May mount unto thy Throne, and gain thy f^ure
Thus every sense, that should the heart delight,
Are Ministers, and organs to affright.
The Citizens do from the City run.
The Countries fears, the Citizens do shun:
Both fear the Plague, but neither fears one jot
The evil ways which has the plague begot.
This is the way this sickness to prevent
Fear to offend, more then the punishment.
All trades are dead, or almost out of breath
But such as line by sickness or by death
The Mercers, Grocers, Silk-men, Goldsmiths, D^per
Are out of Season, like noone burning Tapers
All functions fail almost, through want of buyer
And every art and mystery turn Dyers,
The very Watermen give over plying,
Their rowing tade does fail, they fall to dring.
Some men there are, that r^^e by others falls
Propheticke Augurists in vrinals,
Those are right watermen, and row so well,
They either land their fares in Heaven or Hell.
I never knew them yet, to make a stay
And land at Purgatory, by the way:
The Reason very plainly does appear
Their patients feel their Pargatory here.
But this much (Reader) you must understand
They commonly are paid before they land.
Next unto him the Apothecarie thriues
By Physic bills, and his preservatives:
Worme-eaten Sextons, mighty gains do witine,
And natty Grane-makers great commings in.
And Cossin-makers are well paid their rent,
For many a woeful wooden tenement,
For which the Trunk-makers in Paul's Churchyard,
A large Revenue this sad year have shared
Their living Customers for Trunkes were fled,
They now made chests or Cossins for the dead.
The Searchers of each corpse good gainers be,
The Bearers have a profitable fee,
And last, the Dog-killers great gains abounds
For Brayning brawling currs, and foisting hounds.
These are the grane trades, that do get and save
Whose gravity brings many to theit grave.
Thus grieved Lonaon, sit'd with mones and groans
Is like a Golgotha of dead men's bones:
The field where death his bloody fray does fight
And killed a thousand in a day and night.
Fair houses, that were latee exceeding dear,
At fifty or an hundred pounds a year,
The Landlords are so pitiful of late
They Will let them at a quarter of the rate.
So he that is a mighty moneyed man,
Let him but thither make what haste he can,
Let him disburse his gold and silver heap.
And purchase London it is exceeding cheap,
But if he tarry but one three months more,
I hope 'twill be as dear as 'twas before.
A Country cottage, that but lately went
At four marks, or at three pounds yearly rent.
A Citizen, whose mere necessity
Does force him now into the Country fly,
Is glad to hire two Chambers of a Carter
And pray and pay with thanks five Pounds a quarter.
Then here is the alteration of this year
The Cities cheapenes makes the Country dear.
Besides another mischief is, I see
A man dares not besicke although he be:
Let him complain but of the sio^c or gout
The plague has struck him, presently they doubt.
My self has been perplexed now and then,
With the wind Colic, years above thrice ten,
Wh'ch in the Country I drust not repeat
Although my pangs and gripes, and pains were great.
For to be sick of any kind of grief
Would make a man worse welcome then a thief,
To be drunk sick, which or'st did credit win,
Was feared infectious, and held worse then sin.
This made me, and a many more beside,
Their griefs to smother, and their pains to hide,
To tell a merry tale with Visage glad,
When as the Colic almost made me mad.
Thus mere dissembling, many practiced then,
And midst of pain, seemed pleasant amongst men,
For why, the smallest sigh or groan, or shrieke
Would make a man his meat and lodging seek.
This was the wretched Londoners hard case
Most hardly welcome into any place,
Whilst Country people, where so'ere they went
Would stop their Noses to avoid their sent,
When as the case did often most plain appear
'Twas only they themselves that stunke with fear
Nature was dead (or from the Country run)
A Father durst not entertain his Son,
The Mother sees her Daughter, and does fear her,
Commands her, on her blessing not come near her.
Affinity, nor any kind of Kin,
Or ancient friendship could true welcome win,
The Children scarcely would their Parents know
Or (did if they,) but slender duty show:
Thus fear made nature most unnatural,
Duty undutiful, or very small,
No friendship, or else cold and miserable,
And generally all uncharitable.
Nor London Letters little better spod
They would not be received (much less be read)
But cast into the fire and burnt with speed
As if they had bin Heretics indeed.
And late I saw upon a Sabbath day
Some Citizens at Church prepared to pray;
But (as they had bin excommunicate)
The good Church-warde^s thrust them out the gate.
Another Country virtue I Will repeat,
The peoples charity was grown so great
That whatsoever Londonor did dye,
In Church or Churchyard should not buried lie.
Thus were they scorned, despised, banished,
Excluded from the Church, alive, and dead,
Alive, their bodies could no harbor have,
And dead, not be allowed a Christian Grave:
Thus was the Countries kindness cold, and small,
No house, no Church, no Christian burial.
Oh thou that on the winged winds do sit
And see our misery, remedy it,
Although we have deserved thy vengeance hot,
Yet in thy jury (Lord) consume us not.
But in thy mercies sheath thy slaying sword,
Deliver us, according to thy word,
Shut up thy Quiver, stay thy angry rod
That all the world may know thou art our God,
Oh open wide the gate of thy compassion
Assure our souls that thou art c^^r Salvation.
Then all our thoughts and words, and works, we will frame
To magnify thy great and glorious Name,
The ways of God, are intricate, no doubt
Unsearchable, and pass man's finding out,
He at his pleasure works wondrous things
And in his hand does hold the hearts of Kings,
And for the love, which to our King he bears,
By sickness he our sinful Country cleares,
That he may be a Patron, and a guide
Unto a people purged and purified.
This by a president is manifest;
When famous late Elizabeth deceast,
Before our gracious James put on the Crown,
Gods hand did cut superstuous branches down,
Not that they then that were of life bereft,
Were greater sinners then the number left:
But that the Plague should then the Kingdom clear
The good to comfort, and the bad to fear:
That as a good King, God did us assure,
So he should have a Nation purged and pure.
And as Elizabeth when she went hence,
Was waited on, as did be seem a Prince:
Of all degrees to tend her Majesty,
Near forty thousand in that year did dye,
That as she was beloved of high and low:
So at her death, their deaths their loves did show,
Whereby the world did note Elizabeth,
Was lovingly attended after death.
So mighty James (the worlds admired mireur)
True faiths defending friend, stern Foe to Error,
When he Great Britains glorious Crown did leave,
A Crown of endless glory to receive,
Then presently in less then eight months space
Full eighty thousand follow him a pace.
And now that Royal James intombed lies,
And that onr gracious Charles his room supplies,
As Heaven did for his Father formerly
A sinful Nation cleanse and purify.
So God, for him these things to pass does bring,
And mends the Subjects for so good a King.
Upon whose Throne may peace and plenty rest,
And he and his Eternally be blessed.
NOw for a Conclusion in Prose, I must have one touch more at the
uncharitableness and ingratitude of those beastly, barbarous, cruel Country
Canibals, whom neither the entreaty of the healthy, or misery of the sick
could move to any spark of humanity, or Christian compassion; their
ingratitude being such, that although the City of London has continually
extended her bounty toward the Countries in general and particular
necessities: for repairing their Churches, Bridges and high ways, for their
wrackes by sea, for their losses by fire, for their ^inundations by water, for
many Free-scholes, Alme-houses and other works of piety and charity, most
largely and abundantly expressed, and most apparently known unto them; yet
notwithstanding all these and much more then I can recollect, these Grunting
Girigashites, these Hogrubbing Gadarens, suffers the distressed sons and
daughters of this famous fostering City to languish, pine, starve and dye in
their streets, fields, ditches and highways, giving or allowing them no
relief whilst they lived, or burials being dead: whose lives in (many places)
might have been saved, with the harbors and entertainment which the currish
Nabals did afford their swine.

They have their excuses, and by the fault of their hard-heartednesse upon the
strict command from the Justices and Magistrates; alas, a staff is quickly
found to beat a dog: for let it be granted, that the Justices and men of
Authority did command and counsel then to be wary and careful, yet I am sure
that neither God or any Christian or good Magistrate did ever command or exhort
them to be cruel unmerciful, unthankful, barbarous, inhumane, or
uncharitable: for it there were ^^ are any, either Justice or other of that
hellis: and hoggish disposition, let him or them expect to howl with Dives,
for being so vncompassionate.

What have you been but murderers of your Christian brethren and sisters? for
the rule of charity, says, that whosoever heeor they be, that may relieve or
help the necessities of others, and does reject or neglect it by which means
those that are in want do perish, that they are murderers; and as many of our
Country Innes and Alehouses have unchanged their signs because they will give
no harbor (upon any condition) to neither whole or sick, so without
Repentance and Gods great mercy, some of them must expect to hang in hell for
their inhospitable want or pity.

What madness did possess you? did you think that none but Citizens were
marked for death, that only a black or civil fu^ of apparel, with a
Ruffe-band, was only the Plagues livery? No, you shall find it otherwise: for
a Russet Coat or a sheepe-skin cover, is no Armor of proof against Gods
Arrows; though you shut up and barracado your doors and windows, as hard as
your hearts and heads were Ramd against your distressed brethren, yet death
will find you, and leave you to judgment.

The Book of God does yield us many presidents and examples, that we are to be
careful to preserve life: it is madness to stand wilfully under a falling
house, or to sleep whilst the water ouer-flow us, to run desperately into the
fire: or not avoid a shot, or a stroke of a sword: It is lawful to avoid
famine, to shun the Leper, the great or small Pox, and many other diseases: for
if Physic be good to restore health, it is wisdom to preserve health to
prevent Physic. The skillful Mariner in a dangerous storm or tempest, will
make the hest haste he can into a safe haven or a good harbor. I am commanded
to love my neighbor, and to be careful to help him in the preservation of
his life, and therefore I must be respectfull of mine own.

Our Savior Christ (although he was God omnipotent) whose beck, or the least
of his commands could have consumed Herod, and crushed him and his Tyranny to
nothing, yet did he please not to use the power and strength of his Godhead,
but (for our instruction and example) showing the weakness and imbecility of
his humanity, he fled from Herod into Egypt.

By this which has been written, it is apparent, that it is lawful for any
man to absent himself (if his calling will permit the same) from manifest and
approaching danger o^ his life: Beasts, Fowls and Fishes will shun their
destruction, Worms and contemptible vermin (as lice and sl^as) will crawle,
creep, and skip, to save themselves from death, therefore man that has being,
Life, Sense, Reason, and Hope of immortality, may lawfully seek his own
preservation. But if there be any that have, out of a slavish or
vnchristian-like fear, fled or runne-away from this famous City in this
lamentable visitation; I mean such as left neither prayer or purse to relieve
those that underwent the grievous burdens of sickness and calamity; such as
trusted more in the Country aid, then in heavenly providence, such as imagined
that their safety was by their own care and industry, not remembering that
their sins and transgressions have helped to pull down Gods wrath upon their
afflicted brethren and Sisters; I say, if any such there be, that attribute
their preservation to their own discreet carriage, giving the praise to the
means, not much minding the All-sufficient cause and Giver of the means: If
any such have fallen into the discourteous paws of the sordid Rusticles, or
Clownish Coridons, let them know that Gods blessings are worth thanks, and
that they were iuslly plagued for their unthankfulness.

And some have been too swift and fearful in flying, so, many have been too
slow and aduenturous in staying, depending too much upon a common and desperate
opinion, that their times are fixed, that their days are numbered, and that
their lives are limited: so that till God has appointed they shall not dye,
and that it lies not in them, or any power of man to lengthen life: All these
Assertions are true, and I must needs grant unto them. But for as much as God
is the Land Lord of life, and puts it (as his Tenants) in our frailc Tenements;
although the Land Lord knows when the Tenant shall depart; yet we are
ignorant, and know neither when, where, nor how: therefore, though there be no
flying from death when God has appointed it, so we, not knowning the time when
we shall dye must seek to preserve life, by shunning perils and dangers of
death: let us make much of life whilst we have it, for we do not know how
long we shall keep it; and let us have a care to live well, and then, I am
sure, we are out of fear to dye ill.

Being it is both natural, lawful and commendable, to avoid all these dangers
aforesaid, I hold it much reason to shun the place or person infected with
the Plague or Pestilence. But here may arise an objection, for Master
Mulligrubs, Mistress Fump, Goodman Beetle the Constable, Gaffer Lagg the
Hedgborough, and Block the Tythingman will say, that they did but seek their
own safeties and preseruations in not entertaining the Londoners, for they
were ignorant, and did not know who were in health or clear, and who were
infectious, in which regard, they thought it the surest course to relieve or
harbor none at all: this is partly answered before, for no man does or can
tax them for being wary and careful, but for their vnchariblenesse, and
unchristianlike dealing, both to the quick and dead; for the Town of Henden
in Middlesex, seven miles from London, was a good Country president, if the
rest had the grace to have followed it: for they relieved the sick, they
buried the dead in Christian burial, and they (being but a small Village) did
charitably collect eight pounds at the lest, which they sent to relieve the
poor of Saint Andrews in Holborne, besides they allowed good weekly wages to
two men, to attend and bury such as dyed; and though they are no Pharisees, to
ploclaime their own charity, yet I could not ouerslip their deserved
commendations. In many other places there has been much goodness and
Christian love expressed, for the which (no doubt) but there is more then an
earthly reward in store: For I tax not all Towns and Villages, though I
think most of them do harbor some in the shapes of men, with the minds of
Monsters.

A man sick of an Ague, lying on the ground at Maydenhead in Barkeshire, with
his Fit violently on him, had stones cast at him by two men of the Town (whom
I could name) and when they could not cause him to rise, one of them took a
Hitcher, or long Boate-hooke, and hitch'd in the sick man's Breeches, drawing
him backward, with his face groueling on the ground, drawing him so under the
Bridge in a dry place, where he lay till his Fit was gone, and having lost a
new Hat, went his way.

One was cast dead into the Thames at Stanes, and drawn with a Boat and a rope
down some part of the River, and dragged to shore and indiched.

One at Richmond was drawn naked in the night by his own Wife and Boy, and
cast into the Thames, where the next day the corp^ was found.

One at Stanes carried his dead Wife on his back in a Coffin, and feign to be
Bearer, Priest, Clarke, Sexton, and Graue-maker himself: thete and many more I
could speak upon knowledge, and should I write all that I am truly informed
of, my Book would out-swell the limits of a Pamphlet; let it suffice that God
has not forgotten to be gracious and merciful; our sickness he has turned
to health, our mourning into joy, and our desolations into full and wholesome
habitations: and though the Country in many places does begin to share in
this Contagion, let them not doubt, but they shall find the City more
charitable and hospitable then they deserve or can expect. And so God in mercy
turn his fierce wrath both from them and us.

FINIS.
TO ALL THOSE THAT HAVE BEEN, ARE, WILL, OR WOULD BE MASTERS OF A SHILLING OR
TWELVE-PENCE.
SIR John Mandeuill, an English Knight, a famous Trauailer, and discouerer of
foreign Manners, Regions, and Rarieties; Christopher Collumbus, Magellane,
Hernando Cortez, Don Diego de Almagro, Drake, Hawkins, Frosbushir, Baskeruile,
Cauendish, and many more worthy Trauailers of our own and other Nations, whose
honorable, dangerous, and laudable atchieuements, have made their meritorius
names to be Recorded, to the admiration of the time past, present, and to
future postcrity: yet if it be well considered, it will plainly appear, that
all their laborious endeauours had an end with their lives: But the Trauailer
that Itreate of, the Thrice-treble-triumphant Troynouantine Twelue-pence, is
like a perpetual motion, in a continual travel, to whose Journey there can
be no end, until the world come to a final dissolution and period. For the
progress of Coriat was but a walk in regard of my Shillings per ambulation:
and if the ink and Paper-murthering fictions should be true of Amadis de
Gaul, Huon, Sir Egre, Beuis, Guy, the Mirror of Knighthood, the seven
Champions, Chinon, Sir Dagonet, Triamore, Monsieur, Mallegrindo, Knight of the
frozen I Will: If it were possible that all their lies should be true, of the
great Travels of those imaginarse and never seen worthies, yet must they all
come short of the praise that is due to my traveling Twelue-pence. I could
have bussied my brains about many other subjects, as quick Epigrams, biting
Satyrs, Sharp Iambicks, soothing Elegies, pleasant Pastorals Odes, Madrigals,
or Roundelayes; alluring Sonnets, flattering Epithalamiums, or lying Epitaphs,
Panegericks, or name-seruing Acrosticks, and Annagrams, losty Tragedy, lowly
Comedy, riddling Moral, or stately Heroicks: either of all these I could have
poorly handled, but that any Muse stumbled by chance upon this Twelue-peny
subject, wherein I would have the Reader to consider, what in some places I
speak only of a Shilling or Twelue-pence, and in some places generally of
Money. ^^ have set down the manner of my Shillings shifting of Masters, more
often then the Serieants do; for they use the old Sherifs like Almanacks out
of date, and yearly serve the new; but Twelue-pence has sometimes twelve,
sixteen, or twenty Masters in a day. In a word (Reader) I do not beg your
favor, ^raue your acceptance, entreat your kindness, implore your love, or
request your friendship; for it is not any of these in particular that! seek
or care for: but generally at all I aim, and for all I hope, and being in that
hope, I leave you to Read and Judge of my ensuing Labors, and my
Twelue-pences Travels.

Yours, as you please to be mine, JOHN TAILOR.

THE TRAVELS OF TVVELVE-PENCE.
Imagine Reader (to his grief and glory,)
Twelue-pence him self declares his wandering story:
Relating how he first was borne and bred,
And how about the world he Travailed.
IF any one (as I dare boldly done)
No man dares confess his whole life and actions, as my Twelue-pence does.
His Bitth, his breeding, and his Life declare:
Let him appear, and I dare lay my neck,
He will be hanged, or else deserve a check.
From vast America's rude barbarous bounds,
Where the best metals do grow, the Earth is most barren, which is an Emblem
that they that hoord or hide money, are barren of all fruits of goodness.
From rocky barren soil, and sterill grounds,
Where men did not their Creator know,
And where the Deuil's the God to whom they bow,
There from my Heathen Dam, or mother Earth
With Pains and travail, I at first had birth.
A hundred strong men-midwiues, dug their way
Into her bowels, to find. where I lay
With Engines, Spades, Crows, Mattocks, and such matters,
They ripp'd and tore her harmless womb to tatters,
And but they did within the midway catch me,
They would have dig'd to Hell it self to fetch me.
At last they found me, mixed with dirt and dross,
Corruption vnrefin'd, eclipst my Gloss,
And from the Earth I in the fire was tried,
And into Ingots purged and Purchase.
purifide.
From Polidore Virgil. Menes might be first inuentor of Come in Egypt, yet not
of a Twelve pence, but I think money was an Ca^^^ time, and I am sure that
Abraham bought a field for burial with money.
Paphlagonia, some my birth do count,
Near Sandracugium, a most famous Mount,
And that poor Slaves which were co^demn'd to die,
Were forced to dig for me laboriously,
Whereas the dampish Mines infecting air
Killed the poor wretches, and so eased their care,
Some say that Polidore Virgil. Menes might be first inuentor of Come in Egypt,
yet not of a Twelve pence, but I think money was an Ca^^^ time, and I am sure
that Abraham bought a field for burial with money.
Menes, an Egyptian King,
Me to the shape of Coin, at first did bring:
But when they saw that people, greedily,
For me did run into all villainy,
The Priests did curse the King, that first invented
Me, that so many ways their minds tormented,
For till they knew me, they affirmed true;
No Ennie, Pride, or Avarice they knew.
Thus with great labor, and the death of men,
I first was borne, and afterward again
He that to Money did convert me first,
Was by the Priests and People, bann'd and cursed.
With blood and curses I at first began,
And ever since have been a curse to man.
Yet for me some excuses may be shown,
The name of Twelue-pence, was as then not known,
Diversity of Coins over all the world
Were scattered universally, and hurld,
In Courts, in Cities, and in warlike Camps,
E're I was made, they all used other stamps.
There were some Sicles, some A small Piece of Spanish Coin, six of them to
an^^ glish penny.
Meruiades,
An As, a Drochma, a Sesterties,
Quadrens, Sextanes, Minaes, (it appears)
Didrachmaes, and Sportulas and Denteres.
My name at first did from the Romans come,
(As Cooper says) they called me Solidum,
Or from a Soldier it was named thus,
(As 'twere his daily wages) Sollidus,
For though the Times are subject to mutation,
Yet from Soldatus I have nomination:
Thus Twelue-pence has an ancient Warrior bin,
Although men know not when! did begin.
And by experience all the world can tell,
Soldatus does love Sollidus so well,
That always every Soldier is unwilling,
Long to be kept asunder from a Shilling:
If he does want me, a month, two, Soldiers wanting their pay, will want good
will to serve. A brass piece of Bohcnuan coin. twelve of them to a penny.
or three,
He Will grumble, and go near to Mutiny.
He has no mind to draw his Sword and fight,
But (discontented) bids the wars goodnight.
When let but Solidus come to his hand,
He Will fight as long as he can go or stand,
Regarding nor remembering child or wife,
He Will hazard and endanger limb and life.
And thus by way of argument it is pend,
A Shilling is a Soldiers loved friend.
A Shilling's much more ancient then a pound,
And in pronouncing gives a better found:
As for example; which is most month-filling
Of fifty pounds, or of a thousand shilling,
A thousand pounds, may make the accent rore,
But twenty thousand shillings foundeth more.
Thus of two sillables I am compacted,
When into one the hounds are all extracted.
The Germane Dollers are my Iuniers far,
So are the Copesticks of the Brabanuer.
The Spanish, Royal, piece of four and eight,
On me for my antiquity may wait,
The Floren, Guelder, and French Cardecue
To me are vpstarts, if Records be true,
The Grosh, The Anatomy of Twelue-pence or a shilling.
Potchandle, Stuter, Doyte, and Sowse,
Compared with me, are all scarce worth a Lowse:
Nor can the Atcheson or the Baubee
For my antiquity compare with me.
The half Crown is on horseback mounted hie,
Yet never trauail'd half to far as I;
The Scottish Mark's a dang'reus piece of Coin,
It Is just a hanging price, if one purloyne,
There is no such hazard in the stealing me,
I am three half pence lower in degree,
And as in pence I for a Jury stand,
I have eleven Coins under my command:
And (to grace all the rest) my proper self,
Like a Grand Iury-man make up the Twelfe.
But for men shall not think I brag or prate,
Those whom I do command Ile^ nominate.
Nine pence (three quarters) with his Harp be friends me,
And six pence with half service still attends me,
The Four pence half, penny ^^^^ comes siddling on,
The Grout my third pence does depend upon:
The third-pence is a quarter way for still,
The twopence in six parts attends my will.
Three halfe-pence the ^^^^ to my commanding sway,
And eight of them at once does me obey:
The ^^^^^ pence are all my little Cozens,
And does attend my service by the dozens.
Three farthings by sixteen attend in plenty,
And halfe-pence to the sum of some and twenty,
And last (for Pages) on my State does wait,
Of dapper farthing tokens forty eight.
But ^'re I did attain my shape and form,
I abid the brunt of many a furious storm;
I or this the world I would have well to wot,
Mine honor was with pains and danger got.
I past the raging tear and flaming fire:
And gained a face and Cross for all my hire;
It would almost dissolve a heart of slint,
To be so used as I was in the Mint:
The pains of Purgatory cannot be
But actions to these things that fell on me.
For what I did endure, had man but felt,
It had (like Kitchintstuffe) have made him melt,
Then my Tormentors, all at once agrees
From my great heat, tolet me cool or freeze,
And dead and cold, me then again they martyred,
Me all in pieces they be cut and quartir'd,
Weighing the mangled mammoers; they pronounce
That five of me in weight should be an Five shillings weight an ounce.
ounce.
Then to the Anuill was I brought in haste,
Whereas with Hammers they did me bumbaste,
And there they never left belab'ring me,
Until they brought me to the shape you see.
Thus I mine honor, and my form did win,
Through many dreadful dangers I was in.
And thought there scarce does memory remain,
What I was e're thy siyt King Edwards reign,
Yet long before his time I was in value,
As read in good true written Stories shall you.
My stamp (when Rome did keept the world in awe)
Was four swift Steedes that did a Chariot draw,
Which figured, that I to and fro should run
An endless Journey that would never be done.
I am made endless, round, which does portend,
Till the world end, my Journey never shall end.
And men may plainly in my roundnesse see,
An Emblem of the world rotundity.
Round is the Globe, round is the Hemisphere,
Rond runs the Moon and Sun, each month and year,
Round ran the Empire from the Assiran Kings,
Round unto Persian, Greece, and Rome it flings,
Round to great Britame, it is come I know,
Whence (hemmed round with the Sea) it cannot go.
But the maine cause that makes it stay and stand,
Is where it is guarded by the Almighties hand.
Round from the North to East, to South and West,
All Arts have still run round, it is manifest.
The Jews, the Egyptians, Caldies, Persians,
Devised Arts, and were Astrologians,
And true experience does approve it thus,
Their knowledge is run round from them to us.
The age of man goes round, a child at first,
And like a child returns unto his dust.
His body and his limbs, his eyes, his head,
All in round forms are made and fashioned,
The roots, the fruits, the flowers, and the Trees,
All in a round conformity agrees,
Our drinking healths run round, with nimble quicknes,
Until at last too many healths brings sickness:
When store of money to men's hands do come,
They say they have received a good round sum;
And when a man does take a Knave up soundly,
It Is said, he told him of his faults most roundly.
The Hangman hangs a Traitor, or a Thief,
And is about his business round, and brief.
Round are the dishes where we put our meat,
Our Cups, wherein we drink, are round complete:
Round is our Butter, round our Cheeses are,
Round are the clothes which on our backs we wear,
Beasts, fowls and fish, that every where abound,
Are (for the most part) every where made round.
Round are all wedding Rings, implying will,
Men's cares run round, like horses in a mill.
Thus having plainly showed, why and wherefore
I am made round, now to my task once more.
About my circle, I a Posie have,
The Title, God unto the King first gave.
The circle that encompasseth my face,
Declares my Sovereigns Title, by Gods grace,
Upon my other side is, In English, I have put (or placed) God my helper.
POSVI DEVM,
Whereto is added ADIVTOREM MEVM,
The which last Poesy Annagrammatiz'd,
Wisdom, admit me power, true comprised,
Wisdom at first upon me did bestow
Such power that for a Shillinh I should go,
When Wisdom gave me power, I was then
A servant, not a Master unto men.
Now, Power Anaagram of the Latin Motto of Posui, placed into English words,
Wisdom admit me Power.
makes me wisdom force perforce
Improper, like the Cart before the Horse.
For in this Age, so many friends I find,
My power's before, and Wisdom comes behind.
He that for me and for my kin can rake
Hi's wife, (although a Coxcombe) for my sake,
He that wants me, shall be esteemed an Ass,
Although he be as wise as e're man was. The Annagram turned backward, Wisdom
comes behind money.

For there is such league one in Triplicity
Sworn firm betwixt the Devil, the world, and^,
That those who to the one true servants be,
Are captive bondslaues unto a^l the three.
Great sway upon the earth to us is given,
Por well we know we never shall come in heaven,
And all that in us take delight and mirth,
Their only heaven is here upon the earth.
And covetous they are not, in this case,
Because they covet for no better place;
So much for that: now to my shape again,
You see my face is beardlesse, smooth and plain,
Because my Sovereign King Edw. was crowned at nine years of age, and dyed
before he was sixteen.
was a child it is known,
When as he did put on the English Crown.
But had my stamp been bearded, as with hair,
Long before this it had been worn out bare;
For why with me the vnthrists every day,
With my face downwards do at shoue-boord Edw. shillings for the most part at
used at shooue board.
play,
That had I had a beard, you may suppose
They Had worn it off, as they have done my nose.
Yet does my bare face sometimes, now and than,
Make a young beardlesse Boy, outface a man,
For any Boy and I, do both agree,
To outface any man that does want me.
A cross upon the cross of a Twelue-pence.
I bear upon my other side,
(A glorious figure of true Christian pride)
And with that cross I any man can cross,
From wrong to injury, from harm to loss,
And in me is such working powerfulness,
That those that have me, can both cross and Here I mean generally of money,
and not simply of our Twelue-pence.
bless
The English and French Arms, the Lions and flowers,
Show es France a subject once to Englands powers,
And when my Master did respire his breath,
His sisters, Mary, and Elizabeth
Ordained new Twelue-pences with me to join,
But altered not my badge upon my Coin.
Except a little, which King Philip did,
Which Queen Elizabeth did soon forbid.
But since the coming of my Sovereign James,
The badge upon my K. Edw. Q. Mary, Q. Elizabeth, and king James, all their
shillings of equal weight and value, and therefore my twelue-pence has upon
his back the Royal A^^ here expressed in verse.
back more worth proclaims
And to mix state with truth, truth with delight,
Upon the Arms I carry, thus I write.
Upon the Kings Arms.
THree Lions Passant (borne by former Kings)
Subdues the Harp, quarters the Ireland.
flowers of The Flower de ^^^ of France.
France
Fourth Lion Rampant, equal honor brings,
Though having power to war, does peace advance, Lion of Scotland.

united in great James this Royal style,
^^ng of great Britain, France, and Irelands I Will.
^ Thus Readers, having printed for your reading,
^y birth, my rising, my estate, and breeding:
^y Badge, my face, my Cross, my Annagram,
^ow mighty in my great command I am,
^ow will tell some travels I have had,
^^me (as I remember) I Will recite,
should I name all, 'twere almost infinite.
^Ne asked the Diogenes.
Cinnicke wise Athenian,
^ The cause why silver looked so pale and wan?
^o, in reply was quick, and answered strait,
^^ because so many for it lay in wait.
and did men think in what diversity
^f fashions men for me in wait do lie,
^hey would agree together in a tale,
that I had reason to look wan and pale.
^haue of Treason, bin made Instrument
^^ betray Kingdoms, and to circumuent,
^^ undermine, and to subvert the states
^f Empires, and of mighty Potentates.
^^aue caused murder, cruel Homicide,
^^ule Fratricide, unnatural Paricide.
^^r which a curse does unto me remain,
^^ Runuagate, and a Vagabond like Caine.
^^d though that God in thundering Majesty
^^rbad man to have any Gods but he,
^^t many thousands that command, forget,
^^ot minding God, their minds on me Twelue-pence is a shrift.
they set.
^^o purchase me, men have forsworn and sworn,
^^nd from the Book of life their names have torn.
^^r me the Sabbath is profaned with works
^^f Christians labors, worse then Jews or Turks.
^^r me those Parents that have nursed and bred
^^heir children, by them are dishonored,
^^r to have me (to endless joy or woe)
^^me children care not where their Fathers go.
^with the deu'ls sole help (my sole partaker)
^^aue bin an universal Cuckold-maker:
^^r where nor wit, or beauty could come in,
^^any shape I could admittance win.
^^make the Husband sometimes keep the door,
^^he whilst (for me) his wife does play the whore.
^^nd many times (to move all hell to laughter)
^^made a Mother Bawd unto her Daughter.
^^forc'd a Virgin cast off continence
^^nd Chastity, and put on Impudence.
^^made a reucrend Judge to take a Bribe,
^^made a Scribe a forged Name subscribe,
^^caus'd a Miser sell his soul to hell,
^because I here on Earth with him should dwell. On money.

And eighteen years be kept me day and night
Locked in a Chest, not seeing any light.
And though my lot was thus a Slave to be,
Yet was he a far worser Slave to me;
For he had vowed himself to death to pine,
Rather then spend one penny pot of wine,
Although he late had swallowed down his throat,
Stinking fresh Herrings threescore for a Groat.
And he did bide this slavish misery,
On purpose to debar my liberty.
At last this poor, base penurious Knave,
Was borne (the way of all flesh) to his Grave;
And his brave heir upon his back had got
A mourning merry suit, long looked I wot,
He the next day let sly the ill got treasure,
And I began to see some worldly pleasure;
From my old Masters Chest I was assumed
To my young Masters pockets, sweet perfumed;
'T a bawdy house, of the last new translation
He bare me with him, for his recreation,
There for a maydenhead he played a game,
Where eightscore more before had done the same.
There did my Master Knave discharge the score,
And went, and left me with my mistress Whore.
I stayed not in her service long, for she
Was not two days before she set me free,
For having got a Frenchisied heat,
She was prescribed a Diet and a sweat,
She gave me to the Surgeon, for some Lotion,
For Unguents, and a gentle working Potion,
For Plasters, and for ointments in a Box,
And so I left my Mistress, with a Pox.
The Surgeon me to the Physician sent,
From him I to the Vintners rents dearer then any almost by half.
Apothecary went,
But there I thought that Hell I had been in,
And all the Fiends had in his Boxes bin.
For it appeared to me that all his drugs
Had got the names of the infernal Bugs:
Zarzaparilla, Colloquintida,
Auxungia Porci, Cassia Fistula,
Egiptiacum, Album Camphiratum,
Black Oxicrotium, and whire Sublimatum.
But soon my Master freed me from my fear,
He to the Tavern went and left me there.
And whilst l in the Vintners house remained,
Some knowledge of my Masters state I gained.
Let no man say that drunk, my self I show,
For what I speak, I understand and know.
I Will show some discommodities that wait
(For the most part) on every Vintners state.
First, if a row of houses stands together,
All of one bigness formed, no odds in either,
If one of them be to a Vintner let,
Amongst the rest at double rent it is set.
Next, if French Wine be twenty pound the Tonne,
But a poor penny in a quart is won:
Besides, he sometimes in the Caske does find,
Of Lees six Gallons, for a Lagge behind.
And more, when in the Celler it is laid,
The Carmen, and Wine-Porters must be paid.
And by misfortune if the Caske be weak,
There or four Gallons in the ground may leake,
Or taking vent, it may grow dead and flat,
And then the Vintner little gets by that.
And if he be a fellow of free heart,
He now and then must give a pint or quart.
His Candles (night and day) are burning still
Within his Seller, lest his Wines should spill:
And if two Kennell-rakers chance to come,
To come in the evening, they must have a room,
And over one bare pint will sit and prate,
And burn a Candle out (perhaps) thereat,
Whilst all the Drawers must stay up and wait
Upon these fellows, be it never so late:
The whilst a Candle in the Kitchen wastes,
Another to his end in the Seller hastes,
One with the Guests, another at the Bar,
Thus for one pint, four Candles burning are.
By daylight, this I have seen some to do,
Call for a pipe, a pint, and Candle to,
By that time he has done, it is quickly counted,
To what large sum the Vintners gains amou^ted.
Besides all this, his charge is ever great,
For servants wages, clothes, and fire, and meat,
For linen, washing, Trenchers, loss of Plate,
For Glasses broken (by the course of Fate)
All, or the most of this is most true on mine own knowledge.
Besides, he has some scores, which if you look,
They make his posts look white, and black his book:
And if a debtor seven long years do stay,
But six pence for a quart of wine he will pay,
When if a Merchant do a Vintner trust
For his forbearance dear he answer must.
And when some Guests hane liquer in their brains,
How they will swagger in their roaring strains,
Out go their swords, and by the ears they fall,
And now and then one's nailed unto the wall.
The man and's wife abused, his servants beaten,
No moneys paid for what is drunk or eaten,
His house in question brought, a man is killed,
His and his wives heart both with sorrow filled,
And whereas other Trades their labors end
At night, till midnight He does still attend,
Besides if Drawer he never so good a man, yet every pa^iry fellow will
call^oy, fill more Wine.
At every Grooms command officiously
He waits, and takes hard words most courteously.
He that amongst these harms can purchase profit,
Much good may't do him, he is worthy of it.
My Masters Vintner Trade, I thought to touch,
Because I cannot think his gains is much,
I love them all, my lines here manifests,
And so God send them honest sober guests.
From thence unto the Wine-Marchant I went,
He presently me to the market sent:
For Butter, and for Eggs I was exchanged,
And to the Country with my Dame I ranged.
Her Husband gave me to a laboring Ditcher,
He to the Alehouse went, and banged the Pitcher.
To stay long there, I was exceeding loath.
They used so much deceit with nick and froth.
My Master Host, unto the Brewer gave me,
The Malt-man came on Monday, and would have me,
He to the Alehouse brought me back in haste,
From thence I quickly to the Baker past,
My service there was very short and brief,
He placed me with a Miller and a Thief,
That was a merry Master for the nonce,
He got his living cogging with two stones;
I next dwelt with a Butcher, that had tricks
To live and thrive by Mutton and by pricks.
Thus have I often been tossed to and fro,
From bad to worse, from misery to woe,
From miserable Slaves, to Prodigals,
To arrant Thieues, and to good Hospitals,
To good and bad, to true ^en and to Taylers,
I have set down all these Masters of Twelve pence, ^^^: order as they are in
degree, but as he travailed from^^ to man, good and bad, poor and rich,
without any order.
To Fiddlers, Pipers, Fishmongers, and Sailors,
To Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, Tinkers, Peddlers,
To Fruiterers, for Pipins, Plumbs, and Medlers,
To Silk-men, Sadiers, Turners, Tylers, Glasiers,
To ^ripewines, Mealme^, Gardners, Grasiers, Brasiers,
To Plummers, Brick lay'rs, Smithes, and Carpenters,
To Dyers, Goldsmiths, and to Playsterers,
To Noblemen, to Water-me^, and to Ioyners,
To honest men, to Knaves, to clipping Coyners,
To Knights, to Beggars, Scriu'ners, Colliers, Lawiers,
To Stationers, to Printers, Silk-men Sawyers,
To Fools, to Wisemen, Dunces, and to Doctors,
To Harlots, Varlots, Sericants, Baylisfes, Proctors,
To Papists, Protestants, and Puritans,
To Traitors, Subjects, Matchiuillians,
To Catchpoles, Beadles, Iaylors, Ironmongers,
To Cooks (whose labors do assuage men's hungers)
To Cuckolds, Bawdes, to greasy Pimps and Panders,
To Cowards, valiant men and stout Commanders,
To Fishers, Fowlers, Shepherds, Queristers,
To Feather-makers, Girdlers, Barristers,
To Players, Bearewards, Fencers, to good fellows,
To those that make no breath, yet ca^ make bellows,
To Pewt'rers, Shoomakers, and Buttonmakers,
To Marshals men, and dirty kenell-rakers,
To Leather-sellers, Armourers, and Curriers,
To Iuglers, Iesters, Masons, Barbers, Spurriers,
To Woodmongers, to Tapsters, and to Salters,
To Ropemakers, for Cables, Ropes, and Halters,
To Painters, Pointers, Hackney-men, and Skinners,
To Hearb-wiues, Fish-wiues, and such scolding sinners
To Cutlers, Parrators, to Posts, to Judges,
To Druggists, Felmougers, and to toyling Drudges,
To Hatters, Powlterers, Coniurers, and Farmees,
To Priests, Clerks, Sextanes, Sorcer^rs, and Charmers,
To Bowyers, Chandlers, and Astronomers,
To Gulls, to Gallants, and Embroyderers,
To Basket-makers, Milke-maydes, Iewellers,
To Comfit-makers, and Soliciters,
To Yeomen, Hostlers, and to Vnder-Shrieues,
To Millainers, to Chamberlaines, and Thieues,
To Cappers, Faulkners, Plow-men, Haberdashers,
To Coopers, Weauers, Scullions, Cobblers, Trashers,
To Hunts-men, Gunners, Grauers, Rhethoricians,
To Coachmen, Tuckers, Potters, and Musicians,
To Reapers, Spinners, Caruers, and Suruayors,
To Orators, to Carriers, and Puruayors,
To Clothiers, to Logicians, Mowers, Sheermen,
To Clockemakers, Collectors, Min^rs, Carmen,
Tobacco-sellers, Netmakers Men, Boys,
To Sharkes, Stales, Nims, Lif^s, Foysts, Cheats, Stands, Decoyes
^a Cutpurse, and a Pocket picking Hound,
To as mad Rogues as ever trod on ground.
To married men, to Batchelers, to Lads,
To sober fellows, and to drunken Swads,
To Maids, to Wives, to Widows, and Whores,
To liberal minds, and hungry hide-bound Boores,
To Midwiues, Chimney-sweepers, Beadles, Nurses,
To Seampsters, Laundresses, and Gossips purses,
To Drummers, Draimen, Pirates, Drawers, Glouers,
To trumpets, Whitsters, Ratcatchers, and Drouers,
To Hang-men, Sidemen, to Churchwardens, Cryers,
To Fluits, Horse-coursers, Sellers, and to Buyers,
To Prisoners, to Night-farmers and to Broome-men,
To all estates of forraigners and Freemen:
^ could name more, if so my Muse did please,
Of Mowse Traps, and tormentors to kill Fleas:
For Ballads, Table-bookes, and Conny-skins,
For ends of Gold and Silver, Points and Pins:
For Knights, and Madames made of Ginger-bread,
And many a stale and musty maydenhead.
These Masters have I served, and thousands more
Of all degrees and Trades, on seas and shore.
And amongst all the places that I had,
Whereas I found one good, I got ten bad;
If I did serve a poor man but one day,
I five year (for it) with the rich would stay.
I have bin Twelue-pence seventy od long year,
And to the world I Will make it plain appear, Here are a strange gallymawsrey
of Twelue-pences Ma^sters, honest men and Knaves like herbs and weeds in a
Hotchpotch.

That where I had one Master loved the poor,
I had ten Drunkards, that did love a Whore,
For each hours service good men had of me,
To my great grief I served bad people three.
I wear the Kings badge, yet fly from the King,
And to a Misers Chest I profit bring.
The words I have are Latin, which implies,
That I should wait upon the learned and wise,
But for one Scholar, that can understand,
I have served twenty Artlesse fools command.
My service to the Poets has bin evil,
I ran more swift from them, then from the Devil,
I know not well the cause, but they and I
Together long could never keep company.
I have a true excuse that will defend me,
They Poets and money are in emulation.
love me not, which makes them quickly spend me.
But there is no great love lost 'twixt them and me,
We keep asunder, and so best agree.
They that do love me best, beyond Our English Coin is well be loved beyond
the Seas.
Sea dwell,
For there I am like to a soul in hell,
From whence there is no returning, and so I
In the Low Countries or in Germany,
If they do get me once upon their shore,
It Is ten to one I never see England more.
I have served Cut-purses, and highway Fellows,
And have brought ten thousand to the Gallows,
Were he the arrantst Thief that ever 'twang'd,
For my love he would venture to be hanged.
Some Seriueners, and some Post Knights (it appears)
To loving me too much, have lost their ears,
There Is many a renerend Bawd rode in a Cart,
For bearing unto me a loving heart,
There Is many a swee-fac'd Punk has bin perplexed,
Whipped, and behind her When a Whore is whipped, she is vexed behind her back.
back, much grieved and vexed,
Some of my Masters, would take pains to have me,
And like to Barbers, wash, clip poll, and shave me,
In this I only differ from a Whore,
We both have wicked followers great store;
The whore they may kiss, clip and coll, and strip,
Me they may safely kiss, but never clip.
And now and then, like imitating Apes,
With Brass, Tin, Iron, they counterfeit my shapes.
They loved me more then honesty requires,
But commonly the Hangmrn pays their hires.
Thus though I be but of a small account,
I have had power to make my Master mount,
And some again (by their own had endeavor)
I have had power to sink them down for ever.
To some I am (in coming) slow as I ^ad,
But quick as Quicke-siluer, again soon sted.
Suppose that any mischief that could be,
Had lately bin by the only means of me,
As casting good men into great distress,
T'vndoe the Widow and the Fatherless,
A long delaide suit, longer to prolong,
Or hanged a guiltless man, that did no wrong:
Corrupted a chaste Maid, enticed a Wife
To folly, and to loath her Husbands life.
If I had bin the means to work all this,
Or ten times more such actions of amiss,
Yet do I look as white as Innocence,
And never blush, at the most vile offense.
Nay more, there is none will (for my faults refrain me,)
But every one will straitway entertain me.
If treason (through my means) be thought or wrought,
I never am unto my trial brought:
For I have had the trial touch before,
And am so known, I shall be tried no more.
For though I be in ill, chief foremost Actor,
No man suspects me for a malefactor,
And if there be one man that will reveal me,
There are at least ten thousand will conceal me.
Indeed I was a Pagan Silver first sound amongst Pagans and Heathen.
borne at first,
And since in Christendom I have been nursed,
So they might have me to increase their pelf,
Many are turned worse Pagans then my self.
For I no God or deity did know,
To whom I should my love and service show:
But they forsake their God, whom they know well,
And make a God of me, and Infidel.
So, though I be but of a Heathen state,
I am no base Apostate, Reprobate.
Look on the herbs, the flowr's, the fruits, the trees,
Fowls of the air, the painful laboring Bees,
And ask their Owners why they breed and spring,
His answer is, they must him money bring.
Note but the toyling Plowman, he is sowing,
He Is hedging, ditching, taking, reaping, mowing,
Goes to bed late, and rises before day,
And all to have my company, he will say.
For me with dagled Gowns, and dirty ham'd
The Hall at Westminster, in the Term is crammed,
Such writing, running, sweating, interceding,
Removing Causes, Pleading, Counterpleading,
Ask the cause why, the answer true will be,
All men labor for money, but not with a like devotion.
Their wrangling and their strife is all for me.
Look in the Town, how folks throng to and fro,
So thick, one cannot for another go,
And how the Shops with Wares are furnished out:
How every one stares, pryes, and gapes about.
Demand the reason, all will answer make,
They watch, and wait, cause they would money take.
I know, not why my reputation's such,
But still my credit has been wondrous much,
I am more willing taken, now and then
Then a sealed Bond of any Ready money is as good as any man's bond.
Aldermen,
For by long proof, the Proverb true does say,
That ready money ever will away.
I am no worse then I have been of old,
When thrice my worth, for me was bought and sold,
For I could once have paid a quarters rent
For a small Garden, and a Tenement,
And that (for me) of Barley, Wheat or Rye,
Three times as much as now a man might buy:
The cause why now I not so much attain,
Is (that I am not lighter half a grain)
But that through greediness, and hateful pride,
I still am ill imployde, and worse applide:
For though the world be in a totr'ring state,
A Shilling is a constant Twelue-pence.
Yet am I constant always at one rate,
Let house, land, clothes, food, high or lower rise,
I am in value, always at one si^e,
Raise the price up, or let it fall down low,
A shilling is but Twelve pence, all men know,
I am the same I was, it is only men
Have lost the consciences they harbored then.
I might (as they might use me) be a blessing.
And they make me the cause of their transgressing,
Some to obtain me into mischief run,
And some to spend me have destruction won:
Here I spci^^ generally of money.
There Is many a Master, where I used to dwell,
That took delight (with me) to purchase hell.
And all the vicious ways they ran a side,
They made the Devil and me, their only guide;
(Perhaps) their Fathers went to hell to have me,
And their mad heirs run the same way to leave ^^
The whilst a haire-brain'd needy crew beset me,
And gallop to the Deu'll amain, to get me.
Thus vilely, how to get, and keep, and spend me,
Three quarters of the world do still attend me.
I have made Marriages in many a place,
Where has bin neither beauty, wit, or grace,
All Is one for that, I am of that high price,
I can make vice seem virtue, virtue vice.
I am of that great power, and high command,
In joining house to house, and land to land:
That where one has a dwelling to abide,
One hundred knows not where their heads to hide^
And as one may three hundred ^enants have,
Five hundred know not where to have a grave.
Far though from Earth man has original,
And to the Earth, from whence he came dothfall,
Though he be Earth, and can claim naught but earth
(As the frail portion due unto his birth)
Yet many thousands that the earth does breed.
Have no place (certain) where to lodge or feed:
In which respect men's pleasures are behind
The Birds, and Beasts, for they contentment find
With the provision dame Nature gives,
Free (wiout money) every Creature lives.
Their food, attire, their Caves, dens, holes, and rests,
They have and held, as their own interests.
and man, that has a reasonable soul,
whose reason countermands each beast and foul,
Within whose face, a Majesty is seated,
^eyond all Creatures that were e're created;
Yet let him but want money, and it is plain,
It Is the only brief and abstract of disdain,
^espised, scorned, dejected, and contemned,
and round^bout with miseries behem'd.
^earch all the worlds Records from age, to age,
And view Times variable Pilgrimage:
Note that though ^ortnue (in her totr'ring guise)
Has played at Football with great Monarchies,
Yet shall you find how ever States have varied,
How-euer things were carried or miscarried,
That money still bare the commanding sway,
To whom both right and wrong, and all obey.
Should all the Witches in the whole world sit
^n Counsel, and employ their damned wit,
And have the aids of all the fiends of hell,
With many a mumbling Necromantick spell,
And all this toil and pains of their should be,
To bring Pecunia into infamy,
To cast my Lady Argent in disgrace,
And make some other thing supply her place:
The fruits of all their labors they should find,
Would be like throwing feathers against the wind:
For in man's heart it is rooted with such love,
That nothing else but Death can it remove.
And many humane reasons do approve it,
That above all things earthly he should love it,
Do thou want honor, money strait will buy it.
Although ten thousand needy Slaves envy it.
Would thou an o^lice thy estate to rear,
Money will help thee to it man, never fear:
Do want wit how to guide and govern it?
If thou have money thou can want no wit.
Art thou a damned Matchiuillian,
Thy money makes thee held an honest man.
Have thou a scuruy face, take this of me,
If thou have money, it is not seen in thee.
Would have a Whore, a coach, smoke, drink, or dice?
Money will bring thee all at any price.
Woul'dst have all pleasures in variety,
Money will thy insatiate want^ supply:
Then seeting money can do what it will,
Have not men reason to regard it still?
Some things there are that money cannot win,
But they are things men take small pleasure in
As Heaven, and a good Conscience, Virtue, Grace,
He that loves Money, cannot these embrace.
For he whose heart to Money, is inclined,
Of things Celestial has but little mind.
If Money were a woman, I do see,
Her case most pity pitiful would be,
Because I think she would ^^^ ^^^^ have,
Except a Go^ty miserable Knave:
One that all night would by her lie and Groan,
Gripped with the Co^^icke, or tormenting Stone,
With stinking coughing gruting, spitting, spauling,
And nothing ^ut Contag^ us Catterwal^ing.
Besides he would be so Jealous day and night,
He would not suffer her go out of sight:
That sure I think her Case far worie would be,
Then is the Turkish Galley slavery.
^or none but such as th^se whom Age has got,
Are in the Love of Money extreme hot.
And when as Hearing, Sent, and Test, and sight,
Are gone, yet ^eeling Money's their delight.
The whilst a Young Man, full of strength and pride,
Would make her go by water, Run and Ride,
Force in all things to supply his need,
For Recreation, or to Cloth and Feed,
Compel her to maintain him fine and brave.
And in a word make her his Drudge or Slave,
And all his Love to her would be ^ose,
For he would but ki^e her, and so let her go.
Thus if It were a Woman as I say,
Her Case were lamentable every way:
For Old men Old m^n love money vi^^.
within Doors would ever worr'y her,
And youngmen round about the world would hurry her.
That were she matched with either young or old,
Her miseries would still be manifold.
But this Commanding bright Imperious Dame,
Used well or ill, She Is evermore the same:
Lock her, or Let her loose, the cares not which,
She still has power the whole world to bewitch.
I call to mind, I heard my Twelue-pence say,
That he has ^^^ at Christmas been at play:
At Court, at the Innes of Court, and every where
Throughout the Kingdom, being far and near.
At Passage, and at Strange alteration
Mumchance, at In and in,
Where Swearing has bin counted for no Sin,
Where Fullam high and Low-men bore great sway,
With the quick help of a ^^ard Cater ^rey.
My s^illing said such swaggering there would be
Among the wrangling Knaves for me (quoth he)
Such s^outing, ^^^^ dring, thrusting, thronging, setting,
Such striving, crowding, iustling and such betting,
Such storming, ^retting, ^uming, chasing sweating,
Refuse, ^enounce me, ^^^ne me, swe^ring, cheating,
So many heavy curses, p^^gues and poxes,
Where all are losers but the Butlers boxes:
That ^^re in h^ll the D^^^^^ are in ^^^^^.
^^ curse and to blaspheme^ as they. ^^^ there
Whilst without ^^^ of ^^^^^ offense,
They abuse the (...),
And this wicked ^^^ that they do make,
Is me from one another h^^^ to rake. And t^w^^y games ^^^^
^^^^ ^^^^^

That though I were a Pagan borne, I see
They make themselves much worse to pocket me.
My shilling is no Putitan for all this.
These Gam^sters make this time a time of mirth,
In memory of their blessed Saviors birth:
Whose dear remembrance, they do annually
Observe with extreme edious gluttony,
With gurmandizing beastly belly filling,
With swinish drinking, and with drunken swilling,
With ribald Songs, Iigges, Tales, and gaudy clothes,
With bitter cursings, and most fearful oaths,
That svre my shilling says, the I speak not against honest mirth, friendly
Gaming, nor good cheer, but against the unlawful use of these Recreations,
and abuse of God.
Heathen will
Not entertain the Devil half so ill;
But worship Satan in more kind behavior,
Then some professed Christians do their Savior.
In Saturnes reign when money was unfound,
Then was that age with peace and plenty crowned,
Then mine was thine,: Thine mine, and all our lives,
All things in common were, except our wives.
But now the case is altered (as they say)
Quite topsie-turuy the contrary way:
For now men's wealth is privately kept close,
The whilst their wives are commonly let loose.
For he whom love of money does besot,
For's own soul, or's wives body, much cares not.
It bewitched Achan at the siege of Ai,
For which the Israelites did lose the day:
It made Ge^ezi false in his affairs,
And gained the Leprosy for him, and's heirs,
It with the Apostle Judas bore such sway,
That it made him the Lord of life betray;
And Joshua 7.
Ananias and his wretched wife,
By sudden death it made them lose their life;
And Divine stories, and profane, recite
Examples of such matters infinite,
2 Kings 5.
It Is said in Salomons Dominions,
That Silver was as plenty as the Stones:
But sure the sin of Couerise was not
Amongst them either borne, or scarce begot.
For all that Silver, and a great deal more,
Raked and Ripped from the Europian shore,
From Asia, and Sun-parched Africa,
And from the womb of vast America,
Acts 5.
From which last place the Potent King of Spain,
Eleven millions in one year did gain,
And from Pottozy Mines he daily had
Three hundred thirty thousand Ryals made.
To speak what mighty sums King David won,
And left them unto Solomon his Son,
1 Kings 10. 27.
Of Gold one hundred thousand Talents fine,
Silver one Thousand and thousand, from the Mine,
Besides from Ophir he had at the least,
Three thousand Golden talents of the best.
Purchase.
Josephus does of David's Tomb thus write,
How th'hidden Treasure there was infinite,
The Basins, Candlesticks, and Censors all,
Lamps, Organs, Instruments most musical,
Ports, Altar, Tables, Hindges the Gates to hold,
They were all made of pure Refined Gold.
Besides six hundred Shields and Targets more,
The King causd all with Gold be plated over.
Besides the Richnes of his Royal Throne,
The like whereof elsewhere 1 Chro. 22. A Talent of Gold is in value 600.
Crowns.
was never none.
When the Great Macedonian did subdue
Darius, Joseph in the seventh Book of his Antiquit^^^
and his haples Persian Crew,
It Is said his Treasure did so much abound,
Twenty nine thousand Talents there was found.
And more he says (if we may credit this)
How that in Susa and And more the Captains 5000. Talents, and 10000, ^^^^ of
Gold, and 10000. Talents of Silver, besides Brass ^^ Iron.
Persepolis,
They found, of Silver to increase their store,
One hundred seventy thousand Talents more.
When Cyrus Conquered Croesus Quintus Curtius.
Croesus lost
Three hundred millions of good Gold almost,
It Is writ that Midas Two Cities in Persia.
Treasure so amounted
Innumerable, not be Accounted.
Sardanapalus an Assyrian A^^^ 60. millions of Crowns.
King,
Near eight score millions to the fire did bring.
Where fifteen days did burn his house, and pelf,
His whores, and ('among the rest) his wretched self.
And Plutarch says, Mark A King of Phrigia.
Anthony spent clear
Of Gold, full six score millions in one year.
What should I speak of Cleopatraes Treasures,
Or wealth, or Triumphs of the Roman Caesar's?
Or what they were whose riches have bin such?
Or who they are that now possess too much?
But here is the question, seeing times of old
Did yield such store of silver and of gold,
And seeing daily more and more is found,
Dug in abundance from the solid ground,
I muse which way the Devil all is gone,
That I, and thousand thousands can have none.
I know my self as able to abuse it,
As any man that knows well how to use it,
But sure I never should my Master make it,
But as my servant take it, and forsake it.
I have described in particular
What Twelue-pence is, how it has trauell'd far:
How to all ages, Sexes, Trades and Arts,
It comes and goes, it tarries and departs:
A mon^^ centious Prince.
Of Crowns, which was much of it is Soldiers pay

^^ could tell further how it does command,
^^ A shilling is a Press master.
pressing men to serve by sea or land,
^ow Bakers thirteen penny loaves do give
^ll for a shilling, and thrive well and live,
^ow it a pottle of good Clarrct buys,
^ow it is a quart of rich Canarics prise,
^ow for a thousand things it is daily ranging,
and is so round a sum, it needs no changing,
^ow up and down the world he still does fi^rit,
and takes no more rest then an ayery spirit.
Then at the last my Muse to mind does call,
The mighty power of money in general,
And how all ages still have had good store,
Musing the cause my self can have no more.
And A requst to Mon^y.
Money having writ all this for thee,
Show not thy self ungrateful unto me:
But as I know thou can, so preethee grant
That when I want, thou will supply my want,
Reward thy Poet, that does set thee forth,
I Will love thee still, according to thy worth.
FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL AND TRVELY GENEROUS SIR JOHN FEARNE KNIGHT.
Noble Sir,
THe world suffi^iently knows that you know what Ships and shipping are, that
you have plowed the dangerous O^ean, and furrowed over the ragged bosom of
Neptune: ^et nevertheless I know that you have took n^tice of my old and
we^ther-beaten Land-Nauy, being built without either ^imber or iron, rig'd
nithcut r^^es or cordage, whose Ordnance are discharged without match or
powder, whose victuals are neither bread, drink, fish, flesh, or good
Ked^erring, whose voyages are not performed with wind and water, yet ever in
action like aterpetual motton; ^^ when you shall please to fa^^ur me so much as
to peruse and survey my strange Fleet or Armado, you ^ill then per ceiue that
your self has sailed in (or at the least) b^orded most of my Ships of note:
for you are ^ell accquainted with the Lordship, you are a friend to the
Schollership, you have laid the Ladyship ^boord, you have entered the
Apprentiship, you are well known in the Courtship, you have saild in the
Goodfellowship, you love the Friendship, you affect the Fellowship, you know
the Footmanship, you are ^ild in the Horsemanship, you have surprised and taken
the^ Worship, and you know^, that belongs to the Woodmanship, the Wardship, and
Stewardship; I d^e for some, reasons not ^^ddle ^th all, and I ^^inke you have
seldom or never had any dealings with them: the sum of all is, I must ^^^^;
desire your ^orships parden, for my alrupt Dedication, assuring you that it was
only my love and ^^^ that put me on, without any expectance of I aronage,
protection or reward: and with my best wishes for they perpetuity of your
^resene and ever future selicitie, I rest,

Your Worships to command whilst I have being, JOHN TAILOR.

AN ARMADO, OR NAVY OF SHIPS AND OTHER VESSELS, WHO HAVE THE ART TO SAIL BY
LAND, AS WELL AS BY SEA.
THE NAMES OF THE SHIPS, WITH THE NVMBER OF THE SQVADRONS.
1 The Lord-SHIP, whose Squadron were of Ships and other Vessels, twelve in
all. 2 The Scholler-SHIP, with ten others in all. 3 The Lady-SHIP, with twelve
others. 4 The Goodfellow-SHIP, with twelve others. 5 The Apprentice-SHIP, with
four others. 6 The Court-SHIP, with eleven others. 7 The Friend-SHIP, with
four others. 8 The Fellow-SHIP, with five others. 9 The Footman-SHIP, with
five others. 10 The Horseman-SHIP, with four others. 11 The Surety-SHIP, with
seven others. 12 The Wor-SHIP, with three others. 13 The Wood man-SHIP, with
seven other.
Besides there were seven other needless Ships, which were in the natures of
Voluntaries, or hangers on upon the Navy, as namely, The Mary Carry-Knaue, The
Knaues-encrease, The Superfluous, The Careless, The Idle, The Coxcomb^ The
Braggard. And what man soever he be, that has, or does not sail in some one
Ship of this my Fleet, Let him come to me, and I will Ship him, and allow hi^
double wages.

THE DESCRIPTION HOW THE WHOLE NAVY IS VICTVALLED WITH THIRTY TWO SORTS OF
LING, BESIDES OTHER NECESSARIES.
FIrst, thirty thousand couple of Change-LING, appointed only for the diet of
such fellows who had honest parents, and are themselves changed into very
Rascals. Secondly, Dar-LING, this fish was dearer ^^en fresh Salmon, (for it
was consecrated to ^e Goddess Venus) it was of that high price ^^at some men
have consumed their whole ^ordships, Manners and credit, in two or three ^^eres
only in this kind of diet, therefore it ^^not a dish for every man's tooth: for
none but ^^aue Sparks, rich heirs, Clarissimoes and Magnificoes, would go to
the cost of it.

Thirdly, Shaue-LING, which was only for ^e diet of Priests, Monks, and
Friars.

Fourthly, Fond-LING, this fish was Cock^eys, and other pretty youths, over
whom ^^eir Parents were so tender, that a man might ^^erceiue by there manners,
they had been bet^^r fed then taught.

Fifthly, Tip-LING, a dish for all men.

Sixthly, Vnder-LING, this fish was shipped ^or witty younger brothers, poor
Scholars that have neither friends nor money.

Seventhly, Starue-LING, this Ling was ^nely for the B^rke beggarly, which was
manned ^ith old discharged Seruing-men, and may^ned cassiered Soldiers, and
Mariners.

Eighthly, Strip-LING, provided for Pages, ^^ackeyes, and Foot-boyes.

Ninthly, ^oo-LING, a dish for every man's ^^yet.

Tenthly, Sward-LING, against stomach, ^^ut yet a dish of good use.

Eleventh, Grumb-LING, a discontented kind of fish for the poorer sort of
people to chaw upon: for when they do think themselves wronged by their
Superiors, and dare not utter their minds openly, then they seed upon
Grumb-LING.

Twelfth, Wrang-LING, this Ling was falted by sixteen Pettifoggers, in a long
troublesome Term: it is held to be a lasting dish, and will serve the whole
Fleet with their posterities, to the second and third generation.

Thirteen, Troub-LING, was provided by certain double diligent Constables, to
the molestation of their sleepy watch, and the charge of many a man that would
quietly have gone to their lodging.

Fourteen, Prowe-LING, is a plentiful fish, upon which many thousands do
live, but by using it too much, it choakes a great number: and as fishermen
do bait their hooks with one fish to catch other, so is this Ling (for the
most part) taken with three other sorts of Ling, as with Iug-LING, Brab-LING,
until by hook or by crook it is taken with Ang-LING, I have seen many of
these ProwLING fishermen end their lives like Swaus (in a manner singing) and
sometimes making their wills at Wapping, or looking through a hempen window at
St. Thomas Waterings, or the three legged instrument near Paddington. There
were many other sorts of Ling sent to the Navy, which (to avoid prolixitie) I
will but name, as Quarrell-LING, was for the diet of some of the Noble Science,
some for Roaring boys, and Rough-hewd Tittery tues.

The nineteenth sort of Lingwas FnmbLING, which is for their dyets who have
been long married and can get no children.

The twentieth, was Ming-LING, which was for Wine-merchants, Vintners, Brewers,
and Apothecaries. Iumb-LING, and TumbLING, for the keepers and Cupidian
haunters of vaulting houses. ^id-LING, Fud-LING, and Stumb-LING, from the
Schools of Dancing, and Drinking.

The twenty sixth sort of Ling was BungLING, which was the fare of Quack
saluers, Mountebankes, Ratcatching Watercasters, and also for all botching
Artificers and cobling Tradesmen. Mumb-LING was for those that had no need of
the Tooth-drawer. StetLING money was at such a Scant-LING, that scarcely it was
for any honest man's HandLING.

The thirty one sort of Ling was PoleLING, (I do not mean a Pole of LING;)
nor Barbars Pole-LING, which is an universal dish, it needs no mustard, for
many a Commonwealth finds it tar enough without sauce, yet many men have
run in and out of great Estates by this only fish: it serves for the diet of
Proiect-mongers, Monopolitanians and diligent Sute-^oggers.

The last Ling was Pill-LING, which is much of the nature of Pole-LING, and so
with Pole-LING and Pill-LING, I conclude my thirty two sorts of LING.

For other sorts of fish they had Carpe enough for a word speaking, great store
of Cods-heads, Sharkes more then a good many; plenty of Dog-fish, and
Poor-Iohns in great abundance.

For flesh it was so plentiful, that he that loved Beef might have every day
a stone (if he had a stomach to eat it:) their Mutton was neither Ewenor
Lamb, but to my knowledge they wanted no Weather: They had also good store of
Venison, but it was Rascal Dear, or Dear Rascals with some Fawnes; they had
likewise store of foul, as Gull, Goose, Widgeon, Woodcocke, Buzzard, Owls,
Cormorants, Quails, Railes, Cuckooes, Wag-tailes, Ring-tailes, and Birtoures.
Their fruit was Medlers, and Wildings, and instead of a Flawne or a Custard,
they were glad sometimes to dine and to suppe with Fool.

For preservation of their healths, they h^^^ neither Mithridate, or any other
Drugge: for one Doctor Scowregut (who married with ^^^^^ rence, the only
Daughter to Sir reverence Sti^^^ stink, of Hole-hauen in the County of R^^^
million Glisterpipe-maker) was the Physici^^^ to the whole Navy, who did
compound a preservative of poudred Coxcombes with A^^^^ milk, which did very
well agree with the ^^ natures.

Their Bread and Drink I had almost forgotten; indeed it was not Ruske as the
Spaniar^^^ use, or Oaten-Cakes, or Bannacks, as in Nor^^ Britain, nor Biscuit
as Englishmen eat; but ^^ was a Bread which they called Cheat-bread, an^ a mad
fellow told me, it was so called, because the Baker was never like to be paid
for i^. Their Drink was brewed with a malt, mai^^ only with Wild-cats, but
instead of Hops, the^ was s^ore of Rue, with a little Hearts ease. An^^^ thus
were they victualled: Now I proceed ^^ the description of the Navy.

Why these Ships are called SHIPS.
I Have little to say to the Reader because I neither know him nor his
conditions, therefore to avoid lying and flattery, in putting the styles of
Christian. Gentle, Courteous, friendly, learned or honest upon the Atheist,
barbarous, hateful, Ignorant, or dishonest; the Reader gets no Epistle ^^^ all
of me: if he be good and well inclined, it is the better for himself; and if
otherwise, it shall not be much the worse for me, there is the point. Now the
reasons why all these words, or names of my Moral Navy are called SHIPS, or
do end with the word or syllable SHIP, as LordSHIP, Lady-SHIP, Friend-SHIP,
and the like etc: The reasons I take to be these which follows, and as I
imagine most significate; first the whole life of man is a SHIP under sail:
for, be it either day or night, storm or calm, light or dark, hot or cold,
Winter or Summer, yet the SHIP is in her course, ever going in her voyage: so
likewise Man, let him go, sit, stand, ride, run, work, play, sleep or
wake, yet he is still going onward in his mortal passage. A SHIP is ever in
need of repairing, so is a man either in body, mind, or goods. A Ship is ever
unsteady; a Man is always mutable: some SHIPS are hard to be steered; some
men are harder to be guided. Some Ships bear so great a sail that they bear
their masts by the Board and make all split again: some Men do spread such a
Clue in a clame, that a sudden storm half sinkes them and tears all. Some
SHIPS are so favored by the wind, that they make rich voyages and quick
returns; some men are so fortunate, that wealth and promotions do fall in
their mouths. Some SHIPS run through many a storm with much danger, and yet
are so unlucky, that they never make a good voyage; some Men (being borne under
a threepeny planet) can neither by pains, watching, labor or any industry be
worth a groat. Some SHIPS by being ouerladen have been cast away; some men by
taking in too much have been forced to cast all away. SHIPS do wallow, and
heave, and set upon the Sea; Men do stumble, reele and stagger on the land.
Some Ships have their cracks and imperfections gayly hid with painting; some
men have heir bad intents colored over with hypocrisy, and their diseased
carkases covered with good clothes. Some SHIPS do bring profitable
commodities, and some bring bables, toys and trifles; some Men do enrich a
Kingdom with their Wisdom, authority, and practice in virtue: and some men
do disgrace and impouerish a Monarchy by folly, ill employed power, and
sottishness in vanity. Some SHIPS will run to leeward extremely if the wind
be scant, some again will bravely bear it out to windward and weather it; so
some Men will shrink from their friends or from themselves, in a storm, or
trouble, or poverty; and some few again will bear up stiff, constantly,
contemning and opposing he brunts of Fortune. Some SHIPS are taken by others
and made prizes; some Men are captiued by others and made slaves. Some SHIPS
are commended more for their Bulk and beauty, then for any good service; and
some Men are more applauded' for their fortunes, then for any good conditions.
If I would insist longer on these comparisons, I could enlarge my Induction to
the bounds of a Phamphlet: therefore I will conclude it with King Salomons
similitude, Wisdom 5. cap. 10. That man's life passes as a SHIP that passes
over the waves of the waters: therefore I wish all men to be provided as good
SHIPS should be, let HOPE be their Cable, let charity and love Guard and
Compass, till they come happily to the Haven of GRAVES-END, and from thence to
that blessed Harbor which has no END.

The Lord-SHIP with her Regiment.
THe Lord-SHIP, a very Ancient and Honorable vessel of mighty Bulk and
burden, being sufficiently furnished with victuals, munition, tackling and
men, was under the Command of the Noble Don Diego de fifty Cankcemuscod, who
was Admiral or high Adellantado of the whole feet. The Captain of her was
Signior Caco Fogo, (a Neapolitan of Ciuita Vecchia) a sweet affable Gentleman,
yet of so dainty a disposition, and so experienced in Navigations, that he could
not endure the sent of the Pumpe, and for the more sweet keeping of the Ship,
he protested that he would have no more of those stinking Pumps to Sea with
him: he came very honestly by his place, for he bought it with his money,
besides the help of a Ladies letter: and to give him his due, he was well
skilled in the Ass-trolobe, and could take the Elevation of the Pole, as well
with a Battoone or a Broomestaffe, as with any lasobs Staff in Africa. In
foul weather he most constantly kept his Cabin, giving himself wholly to
fasting and meditation, often Casting up his acounts as near as he could,
bearing himself so equally betwixt well doing and ill taking, that in all the
whole voyage no man could tax him for taking any harm, or doing any good.

The Masters name was Petrus Vaineglorious, his Mate Hugo Hypocrifie, men that
have steered the course in the Lord-SHIP many hundred years: The Boat-swaine
and his Mate were Scoff and Derision, with Gripe the Steward, Avarice the
Purser, and Lawrence Delay the Paymaster; kinsman to Tom Long the Carrier:
which three last are thought to be very arrant Knaves, who have spoiled the
Government of the whole Ship. In brief, the Gunner, Coockeswaine, Swabber, and
Ship-boyes were plentifully stored with pride, flattery, and other the like
Gentleman like virtues.

The Ships that went in the same Regiment or Squadron, with the Lord-SHIP, were
these that follow, namely,

1 The Ambition, 2 The Presumption, two stout Ships of very lofty sail and
great burden. 3 The Oppression, a Ship of account and estimation. 4 The
Costly, a ship of great charge. 5 The Mutable, a brave Ship, but in no course
steady. 6 The Self-love, a great Ship, but of small service. 7 The Delight, a
fair ship to the eye. 8 The Hopewell, a ship of great expectation. 9 The Debt,
a ship of great burden and much receipt. 10 The Satisfaction, a large long
ship, a very Cart, a slugge and slow of sail. 11 The Promise, a ship very
unsteady, yet her sails ever full.
The Scholler-SHIP with her Regiment.
THis Ship is a very ancient Ship, and was built at the first, and has been
ever since repaired with infinite cost, pains and study. She has been of
that worthy estimation, that the Monarchs, Kings, Princes, and Estates of the
world, have made it their chiefest felicity to sail in her: all famous Divines
and Philosophers have steered her, and been steered by her. Some of our
greatest Mariners have been much troubled with plurifies, pluralities I would
say, and some have been great merchants a Steeple fair, but it was in the old
time, Si- Money, was as good as ready Money. The Arts Mathematical and
metaphysicall have been the rich prizes and purchases of her painful
voyages: and now at this present (though the world be much altered with her)
She tries her fortunes in this aduentrous Navy. The Captains name was
Sapience, the Master Sxperience, his Mate Knowledge, and every other Officer
correspondent, being munition'd and victualled for the enterprise she set
sail, with her squadron or Regiment of Ships here under named.

1 The Serious, a ship laden with Gravity. 2 The Foresight, a ship worthy of
much regard. 3 The Desert a ship of great service and small payement. 4 The
Industrious, a good profitable ship.
Then there attend her five small Pinnaces and Frigots, namely, the Dogmatest,
the Captious, the Preiudicate, the Carper, and the ^ritick. These five were
manned with yo^^^ Bachelours of Art, Puny Innes of Courtmen, and humorous Poets,
who with their continual cudgelling one another with broken verses, had almost
beaten Priscians brains out.

The Lady-SHIP with her Regiment.
THis Lady-SHIP was a very comely Ship to the eye, set out with most excessive
and superfluous cost, she was most richly adorned and beautified with Flagges,
Streamers, Pen^ons, and Wastcloaths: there was more time spent in rigging of
her, then in all the rest of the Fleet one after another: her cordage and
tackling was of fine silver twist, only her En^^ing rope was pure gold: her
sails were silk, of all the colors in the Rainebow: her Masts and yards were
strong and serviceable: her Guyse, Bolins, Sheats, Tacks, Braces, iyes, and
^^^^^ were all very costly: her Gaskets, Martlines, Cables hawsers, Fish and
Cattrope, Boyghroape, and Boaterope, Boltrope and Toprope, the Guestrope,
Bucketrope, and Forterope, Shrowdes, Lanyards, Ratlings, Halliers, Ropeyarns,
founding Lines, were all of rare stuffes of great price and small profit; and
contrary to any other ship, she had neither Forestay or Backstay, for the wind
lay in her will, and if she pleased to sail any whither, there was no
command had power to stop her, or Cable and Ankers strength to hold her. In a
word, she was a fine timbred ^essell, and had the virtue to sail without any
Compass, and indeed she was altogether for fair weather, for if it stormed,
rained, or blewe, or Sun-shinde too hot, she would lie at Ankor, and keep her
harbor a month together, so that neither force or fair means could ever
vnmoue her.

Her Ordnance or Artillery were in her chase or head, and her powder and
munition were in her Stern or Poope, she is somewhat tickle in steerage, but
in sight she is sufficient to sink or blow up, as many as dare Board or
Grapple with her. She was laden out with poor beggarly Commodities, as Lead,
Tin, Leather, Tallow, Corn, and Broad-cloth, but she came richly fraughted
home with Apes, Monkeys, Mirkins, Marmosets, Spanish Potatoes, Estridges
feathers, Island Dogs, St. Martins Beads and Bracelets, Cobweb-Lawne,
Tiffanies, dainty dun Popingay green Parrots, and Parakitoes. The Masters name
was Vantty, who had the chief command and guide of the Ship and Regiment, who
in steering of his course, was neither miserable or liberal, but altogether a
most worthy, worthless, careful, negligent, prodigal.

The other ships and Vessels that were in her Regiment under her command, were
named as follows.

1 The Dainly, a ship purposely built for the carriage of such things as were
far fetched and dear bought, and by consequence prouerbially good for Ladies.
2 The Pride, an intolerable gaudy vessel, of an exceeding losty sail, with
top and top gallant. 3 The Coy, a little Frigot, of small, service. 4 The
Disdain, a great ship of much use, but of very strange course or steerage. 5
The Nice, a Frigot that carried the sweet meats or confectionary. 6 The
Fashion, a Gallysoist, only for the service of the wardrope. 7 The Babble, a
small Frigot only for pleasure. 8 The Toy, a Pinnace, that was appointed to
attend and follow the Fashion. 9 The wanton, a Katch. 10 The Gengawe, a Hoygh.
11 The Whim^rham, a Drumler.
All these three were of most especial use and service for the Ladyship, whose
chief charge and employment was to wear, eat, and drink the best, and
withal not to pester, wrong or oppress the fleet ^^^^^ good examples, or
directions.

The Good fellow-SHIP with her Regiment.
THis Ship is very old, and much out of reparations: She has been of such use
and employment, that she has sailed into all Countries of the inhabitable
world; she only is the greatest traveler, for there is not a Haven or harbor
under the Sun, but she has cast Anchor in it. Wine Merchants, Vintners,
Brewers, and Victuallers, have thrust themselves into the whole Lordships, by
the often returns, lading and vnlading of this ship; yet now she is so
weather-beaten, with the storms of time, and so wind-shaken with too much use,
that through want she is not able to bear half the sail which she formerly
has done.

In the golden age, when Saturn reigned, (long before the two wrangling words
Thine and Atine, had set the world together by the ears) then was the Good
fellowship in such request, that all Estates and conditions failed in her, then
her voyages and quick returns (her lading being for the most part hearty
love, and true affection) did maintain and keep such unity, that whosoever
was not a Mariner or Sayler in her, was ^csteemed as a branded stigmatized
infamous person.

But at last her Nauigators began to steer another course, for some of them
had learned the art of covetousness, and with a deuillish kind of bawdry, called
usury and extortion, made gold and silver engender and beger yearly so much,
and so much the hundred, when Tailors, like so many wicked spirits, flew from
one Country to another, bringing home more fashions, then would kill a hundred
thousand horses; when for the maintenance of those fashions, the earth was
equally shared and divided amongst the people (some all, and some not a foot)
with hedges, ditches, bounds, mownds, walls, and marks, when my La^^^^^^ Rusty
began to take such a thrifty order, that all the meare in the kitchen should be
cheaper, then the washing and painting of her Visage, (if you allow the
poudring of her bought or borrowed Periwig into the bargain) when the world
came to this pass, then this Good Ship, this Good-fellowship being forsaken of
her Pilots, Masters, and Mariners, all her Sailors in little time declined to
be no better then Swabbers, so that through want of skillful managing and
reparation, and with extreme age, she is nothing so serviceable z^ she has
been, yet as she is, she sets forward with her best ability in this Voyage.
The Cay^^^ taines name was Hercules Dumplin, a Norsol^^ Gentleman, the Master
Gtles Gammon, (...) borne at Rumforde, the rest of the Mariners ^^ were needles
to name them.

The other Ships and vessels that were ^^ the same Regiment with the
Goodfellowship^^ were these.

1 The Drunken Sisse, a great ship, it^^ thought she was built at
Middleborough; b^^^ howsoever, she has made many voyages in to England: she is
so beloved, that she nee^^^ not press any man to serve in her: for all so^^ of
people do daily come aboard of her, and freely, and voluntarily offer her
their best se^^uice, so that it is a wonder to see how brauety she is manned:
and (many times) women d^^ take their turns at helm, and steer the^^ courses
as well as men. She is a ship contrary to all other ships, for she rowles,
reeles, and tumbles, most of all when she is in a calm h^^bour; and the more
lading she takes in, the more unsteady she is; for if the sea be as calm as a
milke-pan, yet is she ever tossing, which makes her Mariners sea-sicke, and
subject ^^^ much casting. Her Ordnance are Gallow^ Pottles, Quarts, Pints, and
the mizers G^^lon: with three hoop'd Pots, Kannes, Goddards: in the which
Artillery, almost every one has the skill to charge and discharge maintaining
the fight as long as they can either stand or understand. The Master of her is
an ^msterdam'd man, his name is Cornetis van Broaken-guleh; the Master Gunner
was end D^nis whirlpoele, a man of Deep, with Gulf the Purser, Snallow the
Boat-swaine, and Swili the Steward. 2 The second ship in the Regiment with the
Good Fellow- ship, was the sow of Flushing she was a vessel unseemly to the
eye, but yet serviceable. 3 The Carowse, a ship of hot service, and as the
Spider suckes the sweetness of the fairest flowers, converting their juice
into poison so the sailors in this ship, have taken a vseto drink other men's
healths, to the amplifying ^^ their own diseases. 4 The Quaffe, a quick smart
ship, much of ^^ebulke and carriage of the Carowse. 5 The Bissle of Breda, a
small ship, yet in ^^ntinuall service, her worst fault is, she is so ^^we
built, that her Mariners can hardly keep themselves dry. 6 The Sleeper of
Roterdam, a great ship, of exceeding necessary use, and much employment, ^^e is
to the whole Regiment, in nature of an Hospital or Spittle, for-when any of
them are ^^ounded, Pot-shot, Iug-bitten, or Cup sha^^n, so that they have lost
all reasonable facul^^es of the mind, and in a manner are so mad, ^^at they
dare speak felony, whistle treason, ^^d call any Magnifico a mungrell; in such
des^erate cases as this, the distracted parties are ^^ought aboard the Sleeper,
where Time like a ^^ood Cloth worker, with setting a good nap ^^on their
threed-bare eyes, their wits that ^^ere spent, and like Northern Cloth shrunk
^^ the wetting, are speedily recovered. So likewise for the limbs and members
of ^^e body she is the only AEsculapian Taber^^acle; and to speak the truth,
St. Winifrides Well, the Bath, or the Spaw, are not to be ^^mpared to this
ship, for speedy ease and ^^re: for I have seen many that were so dim^^ghted,
that they could not see their way at ^^oone-day, and others have been so
defe^^iue in their speech, that they could not speak ^^ne wife word; others so
lame of their legs, ^^at they could neither go or stand, and with ^^ few
hours lying aboard of this easy ship, ^^eir fights, speech, and legs, have
been ^ll recovered.

7 The Whiffe, a small Pinnace of Varina. 8 The Puff, a Bark of Virginia. 9
The Vapor, a Frigot of Trinidado. 10 The Snusse, a Caruell of Barmoudoes. 11
The Bark-beggerly, before mentioned, manned with old cashiered Soldiers,
Mariners, and Seruingmen, negligent tradesmen, with ^ome few Courtiers, whose
diet is only Starve- Ling.
The Apprentice-SHIP.
THis ship is very slow of sail, so that a man may make two East India
voyages, or gridle the terrestrial Globe twice about (as Sir Francis Drake did
once,) before she can make a return; the Compasle whereby she shows her
course, is for (the most part) in our Troyneuantine Ocean, within the sound of
Bowbell; in stead of a Map or Carte, she is directed by an Indenture, whereby
she has more knowledge in the time to come, then any Witch or Conjurer; for by
only looking on it, the least Ship-boy that is in her, can tell when her voyage
will be done; she is a vessel that is both singular and single, for none but
single persons must board her; and (to avoid double dealing) she has banished
Matrimony out of her quarters, for seven years or more; her Mariners, do
(against their wills) endure much hardness, as hunger, thirst, heat, cold,
watching, toil, and travel; yet many times they are allowed more Lamb and
Ribroste then they would have; yet by patience and long suffering, many of them
do change to be preferred: (in time) they sail in the Lordship, Courtship,
Surety-ship, or some other bottom of Honor or eminency; for they claim a
freedom of all Trades whatsoever, and are so mystical in their diversities of
mysteries, that not one man living can describe them: yet (for the most part)
weight and measure are their guide, by weight from the Scruple to the Dram, to
the Tun, to the three Tons, and to the three hundred thousand millions: and
by measure, from the half quarter Pint, to the whole quarter Sack; from
less then the Inch to the Ell, to the Furlong, to the Firmament, and down to
the bottom of the Celler, to the Ocean and the Taylers hell, who indeed are
accounted the best bread men in the ship, and such as go through stitch with
what they take in hand. There are diverse functions which never do come aboard
of this ship, as Cuckolds, Wittols, and others which I could name: but to
supply these wants, she is seldom unfurnished of young lying Knaves, Whores,
and Thieves, who (as the Cockle grows among the wheat) do sail in the
Apprentice-SHIP, and share as much benefit as most of her laboring Matiners.
She has small attendance, for indeed she is the only bounden servant in the
Navy, only there is a sluggish vessel called the Tedious, that sails with
her, with four final Pinnaces, as 1 The Lodge. 2 The Dut. 3 The Wash. 4 The
W^^ng.


And sometime double, single, or no apparel is allowed to the Sailors when the
voyage is ended.

The Court-SHIP, with her Regiment.
COurt-SHIP, is a vessel of Royal and magnificent burden, of eminent
Command, and invincible force, if she be well manned, carefully rig'd,
discreetly ballac'd and wisely steered; she is of that impregnable strength,
that neither the storms of saucy censure, the Gusts of Mallapart babbling, the
flawes of Envy, the Tempests of temporising tale bearers, or the smooth calmes
of Flattery, can make her sail to any other Harbor then the famous Ports and
Havens of Virtue, Honor and perpetual happiness.

But (to use Sea-tearmes and Phrases) there are a Crew of unprofitable
Steale-shares, peremptory Hetshots, idle Flat-sheates, and unserviceable
vessels Loose-Guise, that do attempt to board this admiredship, and so having
boorded her (like Drones) they eat, and live upon the labors and deserts of
the painful, industrious Mariners; these are the youth that after they have
foysted themselves into some mean place of Office, though it be but a Swabber,
Liar, or Liars Mate (always provided, that they have sworn themselves into
good clothes) then let all their acquintance and friends stand further off, for
the esteem themselves to be no more mortal, ^^ that a man had far better
speak to the Master and Owner of the ship himself, thea^^ any of these
Pucke-foists: yet there is gre^^ show of zeal in their salutation to any ^^^
they meet, for the word God save y^^, it is a common as the Air with them,
but in ^^^ they neither mind God, nor the party ^^^ speak to, and (like an
Apefor an Apple) they can kiss their pawe, inuiting a man to the^ Cabin; but
whosoever takes them at the^^ word, they hold him to want manners, a^^ to be a
fellow of no breeding. The ignou^^^ Ass that carried the Egyptian Goddess
^^^^ procession, when the more ignorant people kneeled down to adore the
Goddess, t^^ witless Ass thought it had been in reuere^^ to him: so in like
manner these vpstart Sh^^ boys, having once crept into an inferio^ Office in
the ship, and withal being couet^ with silk, and good borrowed beaten Satt^^
linde and butterd through with Plush or Ve^^uet, they arrogantly imagine, that
all the^^uerence or respect that men do, either ^^^ their undeserved place, or
gaudy outside, ^^ done to their persons; but I would have the^ understand,
that they are honored and worshipped, with the same devotion as the bat^^rous
Brasilians, Americans, and Virginians d^^ adore the Devil withal, which is
not forth hope of any good which they expect, but ^^^ fear of the hurt which
they suppose the Deu^^^ can do them. The conclusion is, that wh^^ a storm or
tempest comes, the Noble, sto^^ skillful Nauigator stands to his tackling, and
courageously applies himself either to To^ and yard, Helm, and Lead, from
Post ^^ stem, and from Prow to Quarter, when all th^^ service Monsieur Mushr^me
and his Mate ^^^ do, is either to eat, sleep, spewe, and sti^^ and at last
for some notorious or meritorious work, they are duck'd from the yard a^^ of
State, into the deep sea of disgrace, and turned ashoare like Caines Imps,
preferred ^^ their due estates of Runagates and vagabonds.

The Squadron of ships that went under the command of the Court-SHIP.

1 The Renown, a Ship of worthy port, ^rength, and burden, manned with
approved and experienced Soldiers, and Sailors. 2 The Courage. 3 The
Resolution. 4 The Foresight. 5 The Expedition. 6 The Loyalty. The Perseverance,
six tall Ships of most ex^ellent service and performance.

7 The Complement. 8 The Brisk. 9 The Strange, Three gallant Pinnaces, but ^f
very small use, profit or service. 10 The Obliuious, a ship of great bur^en
and most plentifully manned, with those ^^at had forgotten their Parents,
kindred, ^^iends, birth, estate, breeding, and indeed, ^^ch as were so far out
of knowledge to know ^^ny man, that they had no acquaintance of themselves, and
being mere strangers to ^^eir own qualities and conditions; and thus ^as the
Court-SHIP appointed and attended: ^uch of the great Ordnance, were promises,
^e powder breath, and airy performance ^ere the Shot, which by reason of the
tossing ^f the billow, and unquiet surges of the sea, ^id often miss the
mark.
The Friend-SHIP
Was a Vessel of great account and estimation, Dautd and lenathan, ^^amon and
Pithias, Pilades and Orestes, Alexander and Lodowicke, Scipio and Lealius, did
lo^ingly and unfeignedly sail in her: indeed she ^as ever free for all co^mers
of what Country, exe, age, or state soever, for the word Friend ^mportes free
end, which is as much as the end and intention of Friend-SHIP is free: In these
^atter times, she should have gone to sea, but ^here were not men to be gotten
to man her, ^o for a shift they were feign to furnish her with Kindred, Nunkles,
and Couzins, with here and there a false Brother: Herod and Pilate, went aboard
this ship (with a shameful deal of love from the teeth outward) but their
purpose was to destroy innocent blood. It was a merry world when Fidelity was
Master of this Ship, Constancy his Mate, and Platne-dealing the Boatswaine,
but those worthy Mariners are dead, and an old Proverb, As sure as Check with
them: in a word, the old ship is decayed and rotten, having only the bare name
left, for she is so much past service, that she can hardly steer or bear
sail, with an adverse contrary gale, she will fall to Leeward much abominably,
yet with a prosperous and fortunate wind, she will spread all her Canuasse
exceeding saire, and hypocritical, and so I will describe no further, because
she is grown to that cheap rate, that a man may have her at Bellingsgate for
a box of the care.

The Friend-SHIP had two very small Pinnaces in her Squadron, named, 1 The
Cogge. 2 The Forced, other attendants she had few or none, for indeed none but
these two and one great ship called the Fraud, were in request.


The Fellow-SHIP with her Regiment.
THis Ship was in old time a Ship of unity and equality, when every man thought
better of his neighbor then of himself, then the Master and his Mate (in
loving simpathy) had inward fellow feeling of the griefs, pains, toils,
labors, infirmities, and wants of the meanest Sayler or Ship boy; but now the
case is so altered, that though we be all of one house, yet not all Fellows:
and though all'in one Livery, yet (by your leave) no FellowSHIP, for by that
consequence, many times the Page, the Foote-man the Coachman and his horses
might challenge Fellow-SHIP, by their trapping and comparable Caparisons;
Indeed, self-love has bred such a disunion and disconsonance amongst men,
that one thief does disdain Fellowship with another: so that this Ship (to
patch up her reputation in some poor fashion) because she will be manned and
laden with none but with fellows, she caries none but Football players, and
Watermen: her lading being plowing Oxen, Coachhorses, Boots, Spurs, Shoes,
Pantoffles, Slippers, Galloshes, Gammashoes, Sockes, Cuffes, Gloves, Gantlets,
case of Rapiers, and such things as were by Art or Nature coupled and made
fellows; this ship was once of that estimation, that Julius Caesar would have
been content to have sailed in her, but that the great Pompey scorned any
equality, and would by no means board the Fellow-SHIP with any man. In brief
she is a vessel of such duplicity, that a fellow with one eye, one ear, hand,
stone, leg, or foot, must not enter her, nor any Sculler, or single soald
person come within the shadow of the smokes shadow of her Ordnance.

The Ships that went in her Regiment or Squadron were these.

1 The Distrust, a ship that sails always near the Fellow-SHIP. 2 The
Pickethanke, a ship of great employment, that commonly says out of sight or
hearing, her lading being for the most part, private complaints, whispering
intelligences, and secret informations. 3 The Brawle, a turbulent ship in
continual action. 4 The Snarle, a small dogged Pinnace, of more use then
profit.
The Foot-man-SHIP with her Regiment.
THis Ship is of most ancient and greatest antiquity, for she was before any
other Ship was thought on, our old father Adam sailed in her, and was the first
Footman in the world. And Prince Absalon the son of David had no less then
fifty of these terrestrial Amblers to pass before him: how it came to be
called a Ship, I cannot relate, but by an Anagramaticall or mystical
conjecture, the only trade of a Foote-man is running, and running away, and
quite contrary to valou^ or manhood, he is accounted the best ^^^ amongst
them, that can run fastest, and he ^^^ called and esteemed a man of good
Foot-manSHIP: which word Anagramatiz'd, is Foe t^ Man-SHIP, importing, that
running away ^^ an enemy, or foe to Manhood, valor and ^^^ solution, (thus
much by way of Paradox.)

Let the wind blow where it will, yet at ^^ weathers this Ship sails a Trot,
her lig^^ footed, nimble-heel'd Mariners (likk so ^^ ^^ny dancers) capring in
the Pumpes and vani^^ of this sinful world, sometimes a Morris^^ Trenchmore of
forty miles long, to the T^^ of Dusty my dear, Dirty come then to me, D^^ of
the mire, or I wayle in woe and plunge in p^^ all these dances have no other
music, exce^^ now and then he chance to hear an oath, or ^^ curse or two
from the Coachman.

The Sailors, the most part and best of the^^ are bred in a Kingdom of much
fertility ^^^ plenty, called Realdine, where, after they h^^ all their youth
been accustomed to we^^ Brogues and Truzes, their fare being m^^ times
shamrookes, oaten-bread, beans ^^ butter milk, armed upon stark naked, with
^^^ Dart, or a Skeane, steeld with the spirit of ^^^ quabah, then they cross a
ditch of eig^^ hours sail, and land in the most flourish^^ Kingdom of
Trtabr^e, where by their go^^ Footman SHIP they are turned out of the ^^^ old
habits, into Iackets of good Preter plup^^ fect Velvet, plated with silver, or
Arge^^^ viuum, (for the quickenesse) and all to be ^^ embrodered back and
side, with the ^^^ gold twist, and the best of the silke-worme sometimes with a
Court (a Coat of Guard ^^ should say,) or a Coat of Regard, being ^^^ guarded,
unregarded, with such as deal ^^ feather, ribbans and points, that he seems
^^ be a running Haberdashers shop of ^^^ wares.

Yet are those men free from pride: ^^ their greatest ambition is, not to ride,
but ^^ foot it, or else to sweep chimneis, or ^^ turn Costermongers; this is
the altitude ^^ ^^^ ^^eir aim, and the profundity of their selicity,
^^euerthelesse they know themselves to b^e ^reat men's Trappings, courageous
Torchearers, illustrious Fire-drakes, glorious and ^^mptuous Turmoylers, they
are far from ^e griping sins of Usury and Extortion, and ^e such
Philosophical contemners of the ^orld, that every day they tread it under
their ^et and trample on it; and they are such ha^rs of wickedness, that they
leave it in all ^laces where they come: they are not coue^ous of other men's
lands, for theymake all ^e haste they can every day to leave it behind ^em;
they are so much to be trusted, that their words are as good as their bonds,
yet in ^is their humility they may compare with ^mperours, for they are as
brave as Nero, and can drink with Tiberius: To conclude, ^e Foot-man-ship is
manned with well breathed Mariners, who after all their long, painful, and
faithful service, are shipped in the Barke^eggerly, and brought to an Anchor in
the Ha^en of Cripplegate.

There were in the Regiment with the Footman-Ship four small Pinnaces.

1 The Sweat, a vessel of warn imploiment or hot service. 2 The Meyle, a
Fregate that will endure ^uch soul weather. 3 The Toil, a Bark for all
weathers, Winter Summer. 4 The Cripple, an old Drumler quite past service
The Horseman-SIHP with her Squadron.
HOrseman-SHIP had not so fair a beginning as Foot-man-ship, for Cain was the
first vagabond and runnagate in the world, was also the first that backed and
mannadge a Horse (as Polidor Virgil says,) no doubt after he had murthred his
brother, seeing he could not run from the horror of his conscience, he
practiced Horseman-SHIP, because perhaps he thought to ride from himself. This
Ship has more paces then Time has; and the comparison may hold well, for in
long vacations, quarter days, against payment of Bonds, absence of true
friends, or protracting of Maids marriages, after the Banes have been asked,
in these cases the Lawyer, the Landlord, the Usurer, the friends, and the
Contracted couple, do think time to be foundred, and stark lame, or quite
tired, and that his best pace is after fourteen miles in fifteen days;
whilst many a poor Clyent, an^ unprovided ^enant, or unfurnished debtor, or a
fellow going to be hanged, they think time is all upon the spur, and that
he runs at full speed a wild gallop. And as a Ship at sea sails formetimes
by the wind, sometimes before the wind, sometimes with a quarter wind,
sometimes with a stone sheate, and sometimes with tack hard aboard, and Bolin
stertch'd and sheate close after, by all which winds she sails several
paces: So Horseman-SHIP has the frot, the Amble, the Rack, the Pace, the
false and wild Gailop, or the full speed, and as several vessels at sea do
make a Navy, as Carracks, Argoseys, Hulkes, Ships, Barks, Pinnaces, Hoighs,
Drumlers, Fregates, Brigandines, Caruels, Catches, Galleys, Gallions; so this
Horse-man-ship has to attend her, her Spar^sh ^^^^^^, her Barbary horse, her
Naples Courser, her Germane Steed, her Flanders Mare, her Galloway Nagge, her
irish Habby, her Frenchi Cheuela, her W^^sh Pals^ay, her English All, her
Smithsield lade, and her Bartholomeus Hebby-horse; and contrary to all other
Ships, which have their Bridle, Helm or Rudder in their stern or tail, the
Horsemanship is altogether directed and steered by the head, whereby, for want
of good managing, many times the Rider makes a headlong voyage (like a man of
good forecast) over the horse^ head. And as Horsemen are none of the best
Mariners, so Mariners are commonly the worst Horsemen, as one of them being
upon a tired Hackeney once, (his companions prayed him to ride faster) ^^ ^^^^
he was (...).

Another mounted upon a soundred Jade, that stumbled three or four times
headlong, the Sayler imagined that his horse was too much Iaden a head, or
foreward on (as the sea phrase is) and therefore to ballaste him, that he might
go or sail with an even keele, he alighted and filled his Irekin sleeves full
of stones, and tied them fast to his horse crouper, supposing to make his
stern as deep laden as his head, to avoid stumbling.

Indeed this Horsemanship is never unfurnished of a Iades trick, or two at a
pinch or time of need, (and contrary to any other ship) in the fairest
weather it will heave, set, wince, kick, fling, and curuet, like a Midsummer
Morris-dancer, or as if the Devil were practizing a French Lauolta or
Corranto: but I cannot blame them to be lusty, for they are not put to such
hard allowance as many poor Seafaring Mariners are, with a snatch and away,
but Horsemanship has rack and manger, so much at command, that prouender
pricks them, either to Tilt or Tourney, or long, or short journey, and if good
littrature may be in a horse, then I am sure many of them are so well litter'd,
and they are so proud of it, that every morning and evening, the Groom,
Hostler, or Horse-keeper, are feign to smooth, cogge and Curry favor with
them. It was reported lately in a Current (for current news) that a Troop of
French Horse, did take a Flecte of Turkish Galleys, in the Adriaticke sea,
near the Gulf of Venice, the news was welcome to me, though I was in some
doubt of the truth of it, but after I heard that the horses were shod with very
thick cork: and I am sure I have heard of many impossibilities as true as
that.

Of all living things, a Horse has the^ strangest burial being dead; for
Wolves, Dogs, Swines, Kites, Ravens, Crows, and such beast and birds, of prey
and rapine, are commonly the living sepulchers of dead Horses: and now I
remember that thirty years since, I read of a rich and magnificent funeral of
a Horse, which was the beloved Palfray of the famous Emperor Nero, and as
near as I can, I will describe the manner of it.

This Horse was a present sent to the Emperor from Naples to Rome, being a
stately beast, in color milk white, except here and there a sinall black
spot, like a fleabiting, for which Nero caused him to be named Fleabitten Otho
for the love he bare to one Otho, a parasiticall Courtier, who was Emperor
after him ne^ except Ga^ba, In brief Nero took such a liking to the Horse,
that he vowed to the immortal Gods, that if the beast dyed whilst he lived, he
would have him buried with all solemni^ and funeral Pomp, as was becoming
the Horse of so great a Monarch; and as fortune would have it, within some few
months, the Horse proved himself a mortal beast, yielding his breath into
the air, his carcass being too compendious an abridgement or Epitotty for the
magnitude or amplitude of his spirit.

All the College of Horsleeches and F^^riers in Rome, were commanded to his
embowelling, to see if in their mature wisdoms they could find by the
symptoms of what disease he dyed, eueryr man spent his judgment some said he
dyed of a surfeit, having no measure of himself, being pamperd with the
delicate delights of the Court; others said, that he understood of the oath
which his Master N^^ had taken concerning his pompous burial and therefore for
very pride he dyed, to ma^^ his name famous by his obsequies: but them was one
old Ho^sleech that contradicted them^^ all, and he did affirm that he dyed of
a hea^^^ grief and sudden melancholy, whereupon the stables-Groomes were
examined, wh^^ quickly cleared all doubts.

Truly said one of them, this skillful Gentleman has rightly guessed, for
leading Fleabitten Otho to the water, (after he had drunk a health to the
Emperor) as he was coming back to the stable, two of the Senators Horses
met him, taking the wall of him, n^^giuing him any reverence or dutiful
respect, he being his Majesty's only favorite (of a Horse) for which
disobedience of theirs, be presently fell sick, took his bed, made his will,
and set his goods in such order, as shall be declared.

When these news came to the Emperor he being grieved for his Horse, and
offended with the two Senators, who had taught their Iades no better manners,
then to take the w^l of his Majesty's Horse, he dismissed them from their
Offices, and made two of his own stable Grooms Senatoars in their rooms, and
after proceeded to the funeral of his Horse, in manner and form following.

First, two hundred poor gald Hackneis, and next three hundred laboring
Asses, all all covered with black Cotton, going two and two, every one having
two bottles of hay on their backs, the only gift of the deceased; then a
hundred hunting Nags, and fifty Coache-horses, with ten Horses of State, with
each two horse loaves for their diet bread. Then followed the Plebeians in
mourning habit two hundred in number; next the stableGroomes, Puruayers,
Clerks of the stable, Farriers, Horse-leeches, and Gentlemen of the stable,
three hundred.

Then went the Sadlers, Charioteeres, Waggoners, Catters, Sumptermen, Littermen
and Coachmen three hundred.

After them Singers, Pagan Priests: Flamnines and Archflammines, seventy.

Then the Hearse richly behung with Scut^heons, Devices, Mottoes, and Impresses.

After them the Emperor Nero chief mourner and his Train borne up by Otho,
and ^^ong sporus.

Next went two old Asses all in black Vel^^et as mourners of State or Cheuals
de dueil.

Then followed Agripina ( Nero his mother) with the fair Popeta, and the
beautiful Act, ^^ two of his Concubines) and after them Galba Nimphidius
Vitellius, with others: it is thought that sencca sat all the while in his
study, laughing at the Funeral.

Lastly, a great troop of straggling attendants: The Hearse being set down in
Cam^us Martius, Otho began this speech which follow^^th, in blancke Verse.

I Niurious death, to make an Emperor mourn
Fleabitten Otho's timelesse Exequies,
Who might have lived, and borne great Conquerors,
And been the father of most valiant Coltes;
Lament, ye Meedes, whereon this Palfray grazed,
Ah I strew the streets of Rome with rotten hay (griese
Let Pease, Beans, Oars, and horse-bread must with
Rust Curry-combes, and Saddles rent in sunder,
Break stirrop-leathers, g^rthr and bridke, break,
Fall rack and manger p^ank ^^li^in^ wa^^,
For you shall never support (...) his weight ^egure,
You stable Grooms, ^^ combed ^^^^ emp^d mane,
And often were graced to m^^e up Otho's t^ine,
Sigh, groan, and ^^^^^^, and bowl and cry,
In li^^^^ and ho^^ dung ^^^ting^^^:
Think how brane Otho did his ^^^^ resplre,
Who with his heels has often struck sparkling fire.
Here Nero Speaks.
THe brauest beast that ever Emperor backed,
I hat thump'd the field of Mars with greater grace
Then ^^egas^si caring Tritones
About the valleies near the Muses Hills,
In battalle ^^^^fier then the Northern wind,
But in a triumph stout and full of seat,
Listing his hooses, as if he learned the ground.
And meant to make the ^^^^^^ port his weight.
As ma^nerly and moderate at his meat
As is a Bridegroom on his wedding day,
For never would he touch a lock of hay,
Or smell unto a heap of prouender
Un till be heard anoyse of Trumpe^s found,
Whereby he knew Our meat was served in.
But after meals, how he would medirate
Upon his Tutors reverend documents,
And by himself would ^^^^ what was taughe him,
Offering to run the Ring, and fetch Curuets,
To trot in state as we were on his back,
And to ^^-doe his schole-master in Art^,
The thought of these things ( Otho) kills my heart,
Otho speaks to the two Asses.
THen these poor Animals have cause to weep,
Most reverend Asses, you have lost a friend,
A friend, a father have your worships lost,
Who would have given you pensions in your age,
And made you Beadsmen, fi^e from Cariages.
When he lay speechless, on his death bed, then
He pointed to the hay-lost with his heels,
As who should say, If I dye, give it them.
Then to the Wardens of his Company,
(For he was made free of the Blacke-Smiths Craft)
He turned about, bade them pull off his shoes,
And take them as true tokens of his l^u^.
And as he dying showed his love to them,
Because his Master did delight in Plays,
He win'd that of his ^^^e should ^^ ^^^ be made,
And of his tail, a head-tire for a Devil.
One Ass be made his sole Exceutor,
The other Ouer-seer of his will:
Grant, Jupiter they, may perform the same
To do andoue-see, that men may say,
They were Just Ouer-seers another day.
Epitaph.
Here lies the ^orse, whose four foot Progeny
Did trot in Li^^ed before the walls of Tfoy:
Yea in the (...) of the Greeks perdye,
And on his breast this Motto, Tar ma soy,
Kin (By the Sire) to winged Peg ^^ut,
And by the Mother, to the King of Mules
Whose Uncle was the great Bucephalus,
Whose Arms, four Horse shoes, and the field was Gules.
To conclude, this Horsemanship after many storms, tempests, gusts, and flawes
came at last home to her ancient haven the Beare-garden, richly laden with
these commodities following.

The Chinegall, the Nauelgall, Windgall, Spurgall, Lightgall, and Shacklegall,
the Worms, the Staggers, the Mallenders, and Sallenders, Scratches,
Pole-euill, the Anticore, and the Pompardye, the Dropsy, the Fever, the
Palsy, the Glanders, the Frenzy, the Cough, and the Colt-euill, the Yellowes,
the Fashions, the Splinters, the Spanines, the Ring-bones, the Quitter-bones,
the Curbes the Rotten-f^ush, and the Crownescab, the Hide-bound, the Hawes, the
Crestfall, the Viues, the Bloody-riffes, the Crampe, and the Canker, the
Howkes, the Toothake, the Surfeit, the Tonghurt, the Paps, and the Bladders, the
Tyrednesse, the Lowsinesse, the Surbare, the Farley, the Pose, and the
Strangle, the Broaken wind, the Hoofe-bound, the Botch, the Bots, the Wen in
the Groyne, the Rot in the Lungs, the Ky^es the Pearl, and the Pin, and the
Web, the Cloyde, the Blood-shot, the Wrung in the Withers, the Strain, the
Prick in the sole, the Loose in Hoof, the Graneld, the ^oundring, and the
Shedding of the hair, the Horse-hipped, the Wrench, the Neckecricke, and the
Shoulder splar.

These are the commodities wherewith the Horsemanship was sraight, which are so
shared and divided, that a man cannot light of any horse, young or old, but he
is furnished with one, two, or more of these excellent gifts.

The Ships that attended in the Squadron or Regiment with the Horseman ship,
were these.

1 The Race, an aduenturous vessel of mu^^ expectation, and admirable
swiftness. 2 The Pos^e, a vessel of much use, quicken turn, and exceeding
hazard, toil and muell. 3 The Hackenay, a most serviceable Pinnace that
endures all weathers, and is so common that she is to be hired by any or used
by all.
The Suretie-SHIP, with her Regiment.
THis is a Ship of great antiquity, a^^^^ makes more voyages then all the rest
^^^ the Navy, she is the only Marchant-aduenturer under the Sun, for they
that sail ^^^ her, do hazard goods, lands, money, reputation, friends,
kindred, credit, liberty ^^^ life; of all which rich commodities (always ^^ at
her returns) she is to provident, that ^^^^^ makes one Iayle or other her
Warchou^^ where it is more safely kept under lock an^^ key, then the golden
Apples of the Hespa^^^^^ were guarded by Dragon; she is so easie^^^^ be
boorded, that a man need not trouble ^^^ feere to enter her, or use any boat
to come ^^ her, for if all her Mariners should go to ^^^ by water, then were a
Water-man the rich^^ trade below the Moon; only a dash with ^^^ pen, the
writing of a man's name, passing ^^^ word, or setting his mark (though it
be^^^^ the form of a pair of Pot-hookes, a Cross, ^^^ crooked billet, or a M
for John Tompsen, ^^^ of these facile ways has shipped a man into th^^
Suretie-SHIP, during his life and his ha^^^ after him, and though the entrance
into her ^^^^^ so easy, yet she is so full of impertinent as^^^ needy
courtesy, that many men will lend ^^ hand into her, with more fair
entreaties, t^^^ quests and inuitations, then are common^^^^ used to a Mask at
the Court, or a groce^^^ Gossips in the Country, and being once ^^ tred, a ten
penny nail driven to the head ^^^ ^^s soon leap out of an oaken post, as a man
may ^^et ashoare again: she is painted on the out^^de with vows and promises,
and within her ^re the stories of the tattered Prodigal, eating Husks with
the Swine, the picture of Niobe, with A^^ecto, Tesiphene, and Megera. dancing
^achrimae: Her Arms are a Goose quill or ^en, couchant in a sheep skin field
^able: the Motto above N uerint un uersi, the supporters ^^ Usurer, and a
Scriuener, the crest a W^^d ^^ke, the Mantles red wax, with this other Motto
beneath, Sealed and de^^cra, this Ship has the Art to make parchement the
dearest stuff in the world: For I have seen a piece little bigger then my two
hands, that has cost a man a thousand pound; I my self paid a hundred ^ound
once for a small rotten remnant of it. ^^he is rig'd most strangely, her ropes
and ca^^^ are ^onditions and Obligations, her Anchors ^^re Leases forfeited,
her Lead and Line are Morgages, her maine sails are interchangeable
indentures, and her top-sayles Bills and Bonds, ^er small shot are Arrests and
Actions, her great Ordnance are Extents, out-law^ies and Executions: All her
deckes are stuck with tenter^^^^^, ^uo^es, to hold those last that enter her,
her ^^ading is Locks, keys, Bolts, Shakles, Mana^^^, Fetters, Grates, Traps
for vern in, Gri^^^s for wild Guls, Baytes for tame Fools, Sp^tn^gs for
Woodcockes, ^senets for Connies, T yles for mad Buc^^es, Pens for Geese,
Hooks for Gudgeors, snares for Buzzards, B idles for old lades, ^bes for
Colts, Pusals for Bulfinches and Hempen-steps for Asses, and besides all this,
she is plentifully stored with want, hunger cold, poverty, and nakedness.

The Ocean that she sails in, is the spacious Marshall SEA, sometimes she
ankers at the King's Bench, sometimes at the Gulf of the Gate House, sometimes
at the white-Ly^n Greek sometimes at Nergate Rode, sometimes, at Zudgate Baye,
sometimes at Wood street Harbor, and sometimes at the Poultrey Haven.

There is great reason to call a man being bound for another, Surety SHIP, for
a ship is an unruly benst, it she be not surely tied, moted, and ankered, and
therefore to be a surety is as much to say Ty sure, the addition of the word
ship, being a kind of metaphorical allusion, to the turbulent to ^ of the
^nfortunate sorety, upon the restless waves and billows of miserable
varieties and mutabilities of time and trouble.

And though Surety SHIP be (for the most part) preind^^^ and benfell only to
it ^^^^, yet as in the Sea, the ^^ting of one wane proceeds or to the fall of
another; so one out of the ^^^es of Surety-SHIP ^^^, (like Beetles or S^^^^
which breed out of Dung) there do spring a swarm or generation of virtues
(Viper, I was about to say) as busy Sol citours, numble-tongu'd (...), g^eedy
Servants, hungry Ye men, devouring (...), boystrous Ba(...) merciless, dogged
^^^l ^^ and currish (...) for as Butchers trade is to hue upon the slaughters
of beasts; so cannot the Kennels, Litters and Styes of those aboue-named (...)
or C^^bals, live, eat, or subsist, but upon the confusion of men, and as a
Horse being dead in the fields and stripped, is a banquet for Dogs, Hogs, Ravens,
Kites, and Crows, so is a Surety to those Vermins, who devour and prey upon
his estate and Ca^kase, both alive and dead.

But for conclusion of this blunt point, I think I have mistaken all this
while in calling Suret^ship, for the consequence and success of the voyage
will better allow it the name of Surety Sheep, which is a warning or document
to Ty^ne Sheepesure, which I imagine to be a significant inuersion of the word
for, as the bridle and harness of a live horse, is for the most part made of
the kin of a dead horse, so he that is bound for another man's debt, is like a
silly innocent sheep (of which flock I may for my rank and calling be a
Bell-weather) with a bond of a dead sheep skin tied sure, as a ^^^^^^, either
to pay the debt, or surely he is sure to lie (if his ability help not) where I
would be loath to be his bedfellow.

The Ships and Pinnaces that are in the Regiment with the Surety SHIP, are
these ^^^^.

1 The Aduenturous, a desperate hot ship, very hard to be guided or steered in
any steady course. 2 The Kindheart, a ship that will sail any whither, or to
what Port a man would have her. 3 The Feole, a ship of great burden, and for
sail, and steerage much like the Kinde^^^^. 4 The Negligence an Argosey that
through want of good fore sight, brought the Suretyship in great danger. 5 The
Decay, a ship much broken. 6 The S^ape-th^s^, a small ragged Catch, that hangs
or depends upon the whole Regiment.
The Wor-SHIP with her Squadron or Regiment.
THough the first syllable of this Ships name be Worse, whereby she is called
Worse-SHIP, yet she is a better ship then many are aware of, and indeed she is
far too good for every, or for any Knave to come aboard her. In my opinion
she does not belong to any mortal man, for God himself is both Owner and
Master of her.

Yet many there are who claim an interest in her, as first the Devil would
have her belong to him, for which cause he makes many barbarous Nations to
adore and WOR-SHIP him, and to sacrifice themselves, their children, and all
that they esteem dearest unto them, to his internal Hell-hood, and for his
better holding and keeping of this Worship, he has his Ministers and Agents,
in the most Kingdoms of Christendom, who with their juggling leagerdemaine,
has guld, blinded, and besotted many thousands of all Estates, ages, sexes,
that they will fall down and worship Stocks, Stones, Blocks, Idols, Images,
Relics, dead men's bones, or a piece of bread, as the heathen Idolatrous
Egyptians did formerly adore and Worship Onions and Garlic.

And as there are many that for desert are worthy Pilots, Steeremen and
Mariners in the worship, and are shipped into her only for their merits, so
there are a great many, and more then a good many, that by falsehood and
indirect courses, have shipped themselves in her ^^^ for as Cornelius Agrippa
says in his Vanity ^^ Sciences, some have gotten the worship by co^ting throats
in the wars; some by being great men's Bawdes, or Cuckolds in peace; some for
marrying cast stale Concubine, or Bastard^^ some by bribery, extortion or
oppression; some by false weights and measures; some by ^^^ cessiue
drunkenness of others; some by these some upon credit; some for ready money,
and some for favor; which is a word crept ^^^ the place of merit ^ince the
days of Quin^^^ the Orator: the most corrupted Justice ^^^ board her; the
slothfullest Divine will haven Cabin in her; the carpet Knight will be ship^^
in her; the most cowardly Captain will ente^^^ her; and many of least faith
and conscience will lay claim to her: she having store o^ such false owners,
I say no more of her, b^^ commit her to the mercy of Wind, Tide, a^^^^ Time.

There went with her in her Regiment, these that follow.

1 The Abuse, an old ship, too much i^ use. 2 The Purchasse, a vessel all for
Simony ^^^ ready money. 3 The Mittimus, a dangerous Bark, whose word is, At
your peril.
The Huntsmans-SHIP; or Woodman-SHIP, with her Squadron or Regiment.
A Good Huntsman is a good Woodman, and a Wood-man is a mad man in the North
parts of England, for when they think that a man is distracted or frenzy, they
will say The man is Wood, (meaning Mad) the reason why it is called
Woodman-SHIP, I take it to be thus derived, as first a ship has a multiplicity
of Ropes, Cordage, Masts, Rigging and Ground-tackle (which I have partly named
before in the Lady-ship,) so has this Woodman-ship, diverse and sundry terms
Art, (almost past numbering) as you must ^^^ Rowse a Bucke, Start a Hare, and
vnkennell a ^^^ again you must Harbor a Heart, and Lodge ^^agge, or a Bucke;
and in process of time ways a Hars or a Bucke do come to perfe^on, which
many men (through imperfe^on) do never attain to: as a Bucke is first ^^aune,
the second year a Priket, the third ^^ell the fourth a Sore, the fifth a Bucke
of ^^ first head, and the sixth year a Bucke: so a ^^rt is the first year a
Calse, the second a Bro^^^ the third a Spaide, the fourth a Staggard, the ^^th
a Stagge, and the sixth year a Ha^t, (but ^^me are of the mind, that a Stagge
cannot be Heart) until some King or Prince have almost ^^nted his heart out:
besides these ambiguous ^ntigrigated Phrases, the horns have many ^^gmaticall
Epithites, as a Heart has the Burs, ^e Pearls, the Antliers, the Surantlers,
the Roy^^ ^^^ the Surroyals, and the Croches. A Buckes ^^rnes are composed of
Burre, Beam, Branch, ^^duancer, Pal^^e, and Spelier. And to decline ^^m the
Crown or horn, to the Rump or ^^rouper: A Dear, Bore, a Hare, a Fox, ^d a
Wolf, have no more tail then a Iacke^^es^^-Apes, for it is a Deeres Single, a
Bores ^^ath, a Hare or Connies Scut, a Foxes Bush, ^^d a Wolfes Stern; besides
there are most excellent Terragraphicall and mundified names ^d titles; for
that which is in Welsh a Ba^r, ^^ French a ^ Marde, I could name it in English,
but (Sir Reverence for that) in Wood^^-ship, it is called a Deeres Fewmets, a
Bore, or ears Leasses, a Hare or Conneys Crottores, a ^oxe or a Badgers
Feance, and an Otters ^^aintes, all which in English is a, T, etc. I ^^inke
Nimrod the great Hunter would have ^ere a made man or a Wood-man, if he had
^^died half the wild and harebraind terms, ^at belongs to this SHIP: and
sure it made ^^cteon horne-mad, in his too vehement pur^te of the Game; for
what Necromanticke ^^ell, are Rut, Vault, Slot, Pores, and En^^ ^yes Abatures,
and Foyles, Frayenstockes, ^ith and Fell, Layres, Dewclawes, and Dowl^^ ^rs,
drawing the Covert, Blemishes, Sewel^^ ^g, Auant-laye, Allaye, Relaye,
Foreloy^ng Hunt-cownter, Hunt-change, Quarry, Reward, and a thousand more such
Vtopian fragments of confused Gibberish, that should I proceed farther, I
should in stead of an understanding Wood-man, show my self to be an ignorant
mad man.

Is it not a worthy piece of service for five or six men in the Country
(whose dwellings are four or five miles asunder, to make a mad match) to meet
together on such or such a morning to hunt or course a Hare, where if she be
hunted with Hounds, she will lead them such dance, that perhaps a Horse or
two are killed, or a man or two spoiled, or hurt with leaping hedges, or
ditches, at the least after four or five days preparation, and some ten
pounds charge among men, horses, and dogs, besides an infinite deal of toil
and trouble, and an innumerable number of oaths and curses: after this great
deal of do, the maine purchase can be ^^o more then a poor silly Hare,
which is but a dry meat, and will take more butter in the basting, then her
carcass is worth.

Our ancient Progenitor or first King of this Island (Brute) was so expert in
this Woodman-ship, that he killed his own father Siluius, shooting him with an
arrow, mistaking him for a Heart, a Stagge or a Bucke: and William the second,
surnamed Rusus, King of England, was by the like mischance of a shot made at a
Dear, (by Sir Walter T^^^ell Knight) slain with the glance of an arrow
agoinst a tree, in the Newforrest in Hampshire.

I thank Coopers Dictionary that tells me that Venator is a Hunter, and
Venatrix a Huntresse, or a Woman Hunting, and that Meretrix is a Whore or a
Woman Hunted: all these words having deriuation from, or allusion to ^enersu^,
^^^^ ^^^h^^^^us, for though Diana the hunting Goddess of Chastity be a
constant Venatrix, yet Venus the Queen of Love never fails a right W^^^man of
a Meretrix. But if Venator and Venatri^^^ ^^ald hunt as much as Meretrix is (or
^^^^ ^^^^) hunted, I think verily that there has not been (or in time would
not be) one Dear left in many of the greatest Forests, Parkes, and Chases of
Christendom.

Besides, there is not a perfect Mariner in the Woodman-SHIP, but he has
ingrafted in him a most abundant gift of promising, for one of them will swear
and vow to give more Dear away to sundry persons, then there are under the
keeping and command of six or seven of them: and I have heard, that one white
Bucke in a small Park (in a place which I could name within the Walls of
Christendom) has been given away at least to a thousand several persons, by
one Keeper, and the said Keeper is so kind, that he will never deny a Bucke to
whosoever will ask. A Dear friend (whom I love Dear) did promise me a Decre
four years since, and four Dear iourneyes I made for my Dear, and still
with delays and demurres I was put off from my Decre, with promises, that at
such and such a time I should have my Dear, but now I am in despair of my
Dear, and I mean to take no more care for my Dear; And so Adue my Dear; but
indeed he that had the bounty to promise me this Dear, has the grace to
blush whenever he sees me, and therefore I do love him for his modesty and
shamefastness, and had it not been for that, and that I do love him indeed,
I would long before this time have sung him a Kerry-Elison, that should have
made him been glad to have promised me a brace of Bucks more, to have stopped my
mouth withal, although in performance my Dear had been nonest inuentus.

In a word, of all sorts of Dear I hold s^u^^^ Venison to be the most honestly
gotten, because the Thieves are so quiet, close, priu^^ and silent at their
work, that they have no leisure to swear or curse, as men do when it ^^
lawfully taken, and my conceit is, that why oaths and curses are most
restrained, the^ most honesty, and piety remains. But commonly swearing,
execrations, and drinking are the ceremonious Rites of a Buckes, or Hares
death, and obsequies.

With the cry of the Hounds,
And the Echo resownds
Through the Meade, through the fallow,
With the Horn, with the hallow,
With the Horse loud neigh, and the Back at a B^^
And with the Deers fall, and the Horn sounding ^^^
My Pen bids Hunting Woodman-SHIP farewell.
The Ships and Pinnaces that served in t^^ Regiment under the Woodman-SHIP, ^^^
these.

1 The Chanter. 2 The Bawman. 3 The Ringwood. 4 The Slut. 5 The Beuty. 6 The
Daysie. 7 The Kilbucke, with diverse others, all the^^ being for course, or
chase.
FINIS.
THE PRAISE, ANTIQVITY, AND COMMODITY OF BEGGERIE, BEGGARS, AND BEGGING.
A Beggar from an Antiquity of Beggars.
Ancient house begins,
Old Adams son, and heir unto his sins:
^d as our father Adam did possess
^e world, there is not a Beggar that has less.
^r whereof is the world compact and framed
^t Elements, which to our sense are named,
^e Earth, the Air, the Water, and the Fire,
With which all live, without which all expire?
^ese, every Beggar has in plenteous store,
^d every mighty Monarch has no more.
^or can the greatest Potentate alive,
^e meanest Beggar of these things deprive.
^e Universality.
Earth is common, both for birth or Graves,
^r Kings, and Beggars, Freemen, and for Slaves:
and a poor Beggar as much Air will draw,
^^ he that could keep all the world in awe,
^he Earth. Air. ^^ Fire
Water, be it Rivers, Seas or Spring,
^ts equal for a Beggar as a King.
and the Celestial Sunn's bright If these elements could be bought and ^^ the
poor Beggars should have small room for birth, ^^buriall.
fire, from Heaven
^^ongst all estates most equally is given,
^^iu'n, not to be ingrost, or bought, nor sold,
^r gifts and bribes, or base corrupted gold.
^^ese things nor poor or rich, can sell nor buy,
^^e for all living creatures, till they dye.
^^ Emperor, a great command does bear:
^^ yet a Begger's more secure from fear.
King may use disports (as fits the season)
^^ yet a Beggar is more safe from Treason.
Prince (amidst his cares) may merry be,
^^ yet a Beggar is from flatt'rers free.
A Duke, is a degree magnificent,
But yet a Beggar may have more content.
A Marquess is a title of great fame,
A Beggar may offend more, with less blame.
An Earl, an honorable house may keep,
But yet a Beggar may more soundly sleep.
A Vizecount may be honored and renoun'd,
But yet a Begger's on a surer ground.
A Baron, is a Style beloved and Noble,
But yet a Beggar is more free from trouble.
A Knight, is good (if his deserts be such)
But yet a Beggar may not owe so much.
A good Esquire is worthy of respect,
A Begger's in less care, though more neglect.
A G^ntleman, may good apparel wear,
A Beggar, from the Mercers book is clear.
A Seruing-man that is young, in older years
Often proves an aged Beggar, it appears.
Thus all degrees and states, what e're they are,
With Beggars happiness cannot compare:
Heaven is the roof that Canopies his head,
The Clouds his Curtains, and the earth his bed.
The Sun his fire, the Starre's his candle light,
The Moon his Lamp that guides him in the night.
When scorching Sol makes other mortals sweat,
Each tree does shade a Beggar from his heat:
When nipping Winter makes the Cow to quake,
A Beggar will a Barn for harbor take,
When Trees and Steeples are o're-turn'd with wind,
A beggar will a hedge for shelter find:
And though his inconveniences are store,
Yet still he has a salve for every sore,
He for new fashions, owes the Tailor nothing,
Nor to the Draper is in debt for clothing:
A Beggar, does not beggar or deceive
Others, by breaking like a bankerupt Knave.
He Is free from shoulder-clapping Sergeants claws,
He Is out of fear of Enuies cankered jaws:
He lives in such a safe and happy state,
That he is neither hated, nor does hate.
None bears him malice, rancour, or despite,
And he dares kill, those that dare him backe-bite.
Credit he neither has, or give to none,
All times and seasons, unto him are one:
He longs not for, or fear a quarter day,
For Rent he neither does receive or pay.
Let Nation against Nation wars denounce,
Let Cannons thunder, and let Musket bounce:
Let armies, armies, force against force oppose,
He nothing fears, nor nothing has to lose.
Let Towns and Towers with batt'ry be o're-turn'd,
Let women be deflowered and houses burned:
Let men fight pell-mell, and lose life and lim,
If earth and skies escape, all is one to him.
O happy begg'ry, every liberal Art
Has left the thanklesse world, and takes thy part:
And learning, conscience, and simplicity,
Plain dealing, and true perfect honesty,
Sweet Poetry, and high Astronomy,
Musickes delightful heavenly harmony,
All these (with begg'ry) most assuredly
Have made a friendly league to live and dye.
For Fortune has decreed, and holds it fit,
Not to give one man conscience, wealth, and wit:
For they are portions which to twain belong,
Wit, wisdom, wealth, and conscience, are not usually hereditary, or in one
man.
And to give all to one were double wrong,
Therefore although the Goddess want her eyes,
Yet in her blinded bounty she is wise.
I will not say, but wealth and wisdom are
In one, ten, or in more, but it is most rare:
And such men are to be in peace or wars,
Admired like black Swans, or like blazing Stars.
Two sorts of people fills the whole world full,
The witty Beggar, and the wealthy Gull:
A Scholar, stored with Arts, with not one cross,
And Artlesse Nabal stored with Indian dross.
I have seen learning tattered, bare and poor,
Whilst Barbarism domineerd with store:
I have known knowledge, in but mean regard,
Whi^^st ignorance has robbed it of reward:
And with Coxcombs, I have heard dispute,
Whilst profound Judgments must be dumb and mute.
Apollo with advice did wisely grant,
That Poets should be poor, and live in want:
And though plain Beggars they do not appear.
Yet their estates do show their kin is near.
The batrennesse of Parnassus.
Parnassus Mount is fruitless, bare and sterill,
And all the Muses poor in their apparel:
Bare legged, and footed, with disheuel'd hair,
Nor Buskins: Shoes, or Head-tires for to wear.
So far they are from any show of thrift,
They scarce have ever a smock themselves to shift.
The poverty or beggary of the Muses.
Homer that was the Prince of Poetry,
Was a blind Beggar, and in poverty:
And matchless Ovid, (in poor wretched case)
Exiled from Rome to Pontus in disgrace.
And Mantuan Maro, Virgill, he^^ borne in a ditch, and afterward being in Rome
in service ^^ Augustus Caesar, to whom he many times gave learned verses the
Emperor always rewarded him with bread.
for some space in Rome,
Was to Augustus but a Stable-Groome:
His verses show he had a learned head,
Yet all his profit was but bread and bread.
A Lowse has six feet, from whose creeping spra^^
The first Hexameters, that ever crawled:
And ever since, in memory of the same,
A Lowse amongst the Learned is no shame.
Then since the A Lo^^^ ground of the first Hexameters.
Mountains barren Muses bare,
And Prince of Poets had a Beggars share:
Since their blind Sovereign was a Beggar poor,
How can the Subjects but be void of store?
What are their figures, numbers, types and trope^
But Emblems of poor shadows, and vain hope^
Their allegories, similies, allusions,
Threed-bare do end in beggarly conclusions:
Nor can their Comedies, and Tragedies,
Their Comitragy, Tragicomedies,
No pastoral preterplupastorall,
Their Moral studies, and Historical,
Their sharp I-ambick, high Heroic Saphique,
And all wherewith their painful studies trali^^
All these cannot allow a means complete,
To keep them out of debt with clothes and me^^
And though a Poet have th'accomplish'd parts
Of Learning, and the Axioms of all Arts:
What though he study all his brains to dust,
To make his Fame unmortall, and from rust,
Reuoluing day by day, and night by night,
And waste himself in giving others light,
Yet this is all the Guerdon he shall have,
That begg'ry will attend him to his grave.
He (in his own Conceit) may have this bliss,
And sing, My mind to me a Kingdom is.
But it is a Kingdom wanting form or matter,
Or substance, like the Mooneshine in the water.
For as a learned Parnassus.
Poet wrote before,
Gross Gold runs headlong from them to the Bo^^
For which this vnauoyded Vow I Will make,
To love a Beggar for a Poets sake.
I that never drank of Agganippes Well,
That in Parnassus Suburbs scarce do dwell,
That never tasted the Pegasian Spring,
Or Tempe, nor e're heard the Muses sing, Chris. M^^

I^ (that in Verse) can only Rhyme and smatter
^uite from the purpose, method, or the matter.
^^t some for friendship, Ignorance, or pity,
^ill say my lines may pass, indifferent, pretty:
and for this little, Itching, Versing vain,
With me the Beggar vows he win remain.
But if I could but once true Poetry win,
^^e would stick close to me, is as my skin.
^^nd sure if any man beneath the Sky,
^^nd to his Nurse a Witch, it must be I,
^^or I remember many years ago,
Then I would Cry, as Child on use to do:
^^y Nurse to still me, or to make me cease
^^o^ crying, would say, Hush lamb, pray thee peace.
^^t I (like many others froward boys)
Would yawle, and bawle, and make a wawling noise.
^^en she (in anger) in her arms would snatch me,
and bid the Beggar, or Bull-begger catch me;
With take him Beggar, take him, would she say,
When did the Beggar such hard holdfast lay
^^ou my back, that yet I never could,
^r ever shall enforce him leave his hold.
^^e reason therefore why I am not Rich,
^hinke is, 'cause my Nurse was half a witch.
^^t since it is decreed that I must be
Beggar, welcome begg'ry unto me:
^^ patiently embrace my destined Fate,
^^nd live as well as some of higher Rate.
^t shall my begg'ry no strange Suites devise,
^^ Monopolies to catch Fleas and Flies:
^^ the Sole making of all Butchers pricks,
^^ Corkes for bottles, or for every six
^^elt Seacrab, Flounder, Playce, or Whiting mop;
^^e, as a Duty unto me to drop,
^^r to mark Cheeses, I Will not beg at al^,
^^r for the Mouse-trap Geometrical.
^^r will I impudently beg for Land,
^^r (with Ambition) beg to have Command:
^^meate, or clothes, or that which few men give,
^^ never beg for money whilst I live.
^t money I esteem a precious thing,
^^cause it bears the picture of my King:
^^ to my King I will a servant be,
^^d make his pictures servants unto me,
^^e only Begg'ry ever I Will embrace,
^^ beg for grace, of him that can give grace,
^^ho all things feeds and sils, and ouer-seeth,
^^ho gives, and casts no man in the teeth.
^^ much for that, now to my The an^e again.
^^nat virtues Begg'ry still does entertain.
^^st amongst Beggars, there is not one in twenty,
^^ has the Art of memory most plenty:
^^en those that are possessed with riches store,
^^e'r they were in Beggars stare and poor)
^^ey quite forget it, and will ever hate
^^ memory of any Beggars state.
For fortune, favor, or benignity,
May raise a Beggar unto dignity:
When like a bladder, puffed with pride and pelf,
He Will neither know his betters, nor himself,
But if a Beggar has bin wealthy ever,
He from his mind puts that remembrance never.
And thus if it be rightly understood,
A Beggars Memory is ever good.
Nor he by Gluttony, or swinish surfeit,
Does purchase sickness with his bodies forfeit.
On bonds, or bills, he borrowes not, or lends,
He neither by extortion gets or spends.
No Usury he neither takes or gives:
Oppress he cannot, yet oppressed he lives.
Nor when he dies, he leaves no wrangling heirs
To lose by Law that which was his or theirs.
Men that are blind in judgment may see this,
Which of the Rich, or Beggars has most bliss:
On which most pleasure, Fortune seems to hurl,
The Lousy Beggar, or the gowty Churl:
The Ragged Beggar sitting in the Stocks,
Or the Embrodered Gallant with the Pocks,
A Beggar every way is Adams Son,
For in a Garden Adam first begun:
And so a Beggar even from his birth,
Does make his Garden the whole entire Earth.
The fields of Corn does yield him straw and bread,
To Feed and Lodge, and Hat to hide his head:
And in the stead of cutthroat slaughtering sha^bles,
Each hedge allows him Berryes from the brambles.
The Bullesse, hedg-Peake, Hips, and Hawes, and, Sloes,
Attend his appetite where ever he goes:
As for his Sallets, better never was,
Then acute Sorreli, and sweet three-leau'd Grass,
And for a Sauce he seldom is at charges,
For every Crabtree does afford him Vergis,
His banquet, sometimes is green Beans, and Peason,
Nuts, Pears, Plumbes, Appies, as they are in season.
His music waytes on him in every bush,
The Mauis, Balfinch, Blackbird and the Thrush:
The mounting Lark sings in the lofty Sky,
And Robin-redbrest makes him melody.
The Nightingale chants most melodiously,
The chirping Sparrow, and the chattering Pie.
My neighbor Cuckoo, always in one tune,
Sings like a Townesman still in May and June.
These feathered Fiddlers sing, and leap, and play,
The Beggar takes delight, and God does pay.
Moreover (to accomplish his Content)
There Is nothing wants to please his sight or sent.
The Earth embrodered with the various hew
Of Green, Red, Yellow, Purple, Watched, Blue:
Carnation, Crimson, Damask, spotles White,
And every color that may please the sight.
The odoriferons Mint, the Eglantine,
The Woodbine, Primcrose, and the Cowslip fine,
The Honisuckle, and the Dasfadill,
The fragrant Time, delights the Beggar still.
He may pluck Violets in any place
And Rue, but very seldom herb of Grace:
Hearts-case he has and Love and Idle both,
It in his bones has a continual growth.
His Drink he never does go far to look,
Each Spring's his Host, his Hostess is each Brook:
Where he may quasse and to it again by fits,
And never stands in fear to hurt his wits,
For why that Ale, is Grandam Natures brewing,
And very seldom sets her Guests a spewing,
Unmixed, and vnsophisticated drink,
That never makes men stagger, reele and wink.
Besides, a Beggar has this pleasure more,
He never pays, or never goes on score:
But let him drink and quasse both night and day,
There Is neither Chalk, nor Post, or ought to pay.
But after all this single-soar'd small Ale,
I think it best to te^l a merry tale:
There was a Rich hard miserable Lord,
That kept a knauish Fool at bed and board,
(As Great men often affected have such Elues,
And loved a Fool, as they have loved themselves.)
But Nature to this Fool such virtue gave,
Two simples in one Compound, Fool and Knave,
This Noble Lord, ignobly did oppress
His Tenants, raising Rents to such excess:
That they their states not able to maintain,
They turned stark Beggars in a year or twain.
Yet though this Lord were too too miserable,
He in his House kept a wels furnished Table:
Great store of Beggars daily at his Gate,
Which he did feed, and much Compassionate.
(For it is within the power of mighty men,
To make five hundred Beggars, and feed Ten.)
At last, upon a time the Lord and's Fool,
Walked after dinner their hot bloods to cool,
And seeing three or fourscore Beggars stand
To seek relief from his hard-clutched hand,
The Nobleman thus spoke his Fool unto,
Quoth he, what shall I with these Beggars do?
Since (quoth the Fool) you for my Judgment call,
I think it best we straightwayes hang them all.
That were great pity, then the Lord replied,
For them and me our Savior equal died to
The are Christians (although Beggars) therefore yet
Hanging's uncharitable, and unfit.
Tush (said the Foose) they are but beggars tho,
And thou can spare them, therefore let them go:
If thou will do, as thou have done before,
Then can in one year make as many more.
And he that can pick nothing from this tale,
Then set him with the Bergger drink small Ale.
Thus is a Beggar a strange kind of creature,
And begg'ry is an Art that lives by Nature:
For he neglect all Trades, all Occupations,
All functions, Mysteries, Arts, and Corporations,
He Is his own Law, and does even what he sist,
And is a perfect right Gimnosophist.
A Philosophical Pythagoras,
That without care his life away does pass.
A Beggar never grows mad with too much study.
A Lawyer must for what he gets take pains,
And study night and day, and toil his brains,
With diligence to sift out Right from wrong,
Writes, travels pleads, with hands, and feet and tongue;
And for to end Debate, does often debate
With Rhetoric, and Logic Intricate:
And after all his travel and his toil,
If that part which he pleads for get the soil,
The Clyent blames the Lawyer, and the Laws,
And never minds the badnes of his Cause.
It Is better with a Beggar that is dumb,
Whose tongue-lesse mouth does only utter mam:
In study, and in care, no time he spends,
Dumb Rhetoric mooues Charity.
And has his business at his fingers ends.
And with dumb Rhetoric, and with Logic mute,
Lives and gains more, then many that Dispute.
The weak Beggars have great advantage over the strong.
If case a Beggar be old, weak or ill,
It makes his gains, and commings in more still;
When Beggars that are strong, are paid with mocks,
Or threatened with the Cage, the Whip, or Stocks.
He Is better borne then any Prince or Peer,
In's Mothers womb three quarters of a year:
Beggars (for the most p^^) well borne.
And when his birth has made her belly slack,
She four or five years, bears him at her back.
He lives as if it were grim Saturnes Reign,
Or as the golden age were come again.
Virtues that Beggars have.
Moreover many virtues do attend
On Beggars, and on them do they depend:
Humility. Patience. Fortitude. Temperance.
Humility's a Virtue, and they are
In sign of Humbleness, continual bare:
And Patience is a virtue of great worth.
Which any beggar much expresses forth,
I saw a Beggar Rayl'd at, yet stood mute,
Before a Beadle, of but base repute.
For Fortitude a Beggar does excel,
There Is nothing can his valiant courage quell:
Nor heat or cold, thirst, hunger, Famines rage,
He dares out-dare Stocks, whipping-posts, or Cage.
He Is of the greatest Temperance under heaven,
And (for the most part) feeds on what is given.
He waytes upon a Lady, of high price,
It waytes on Charity, and worthy bountiful Mistress.
Whose birthplace was celestial Paradise.
One of the Graces, a most heauely Dame,
And Charity's her all-admired Name;
Her hand's never shut, her glory is in giving,
On her the Beggar waytes, and gets his living,
His State's more Antiquity
ancient then a Gentleman,
He from the Elder brother (Cain) began:
Of Runagates and vagabonds he was
The first that wandering over the earth did pass.
But what is a Vagabond and a Runagate?
^^ie Anagramatiz'd I will relate:
RVNAGATE,
Anagram,
A GRAVNTE.
VAGABONDE,
Anagram.
GAVE A BOND.
And many well-borne Gallants, mad and fond,
Have with a Grant so often Gave a Bond,
And wrapped their states so in a Parchment skin,
They Vagabonds and Runagates have bin.
Beggary descended from Cain, who was the first man that ever was borne, and
heir apparent to the whole world.
A Begger's nob'ly borne. all men will yield,
His getting and his birth b'ing in the field:
And all the world knows it is no idle fable,
To say and swear the field is Honor, Courrosie, Socutity, Bounty, Power,
Frutality.
honorable.
A Beggar is most courteous when he begges,
And has an excellent skill in making legs,
But if he could make Arms but half so well,
For Herauldry his cunning would excel.
A Beggar in great safety does remain,
He Is out of danger to be robbed or slain:
In fear and peril he is never put,
And (for his wealth) no theife his throat will cut.
He Is far more bountiful then is a Lord.
A world of hangers on at bed and board:
Which he does lodge, and daily cloth and feed
Them and their issue, that increase and breed;
For it is disparagement, and open wrong,
To say a Begger's not a thousand strong:
Yet have I seen a Beggar with his Many,
Come at a Playhouse, all in for one penny:
And though of creatures Lice are almost least,
Yet is a Lowse a very valiant beast.
But did not strength unto her courage want,
She would kill Lion, Bear, or Elephant.
What is it that she can, but she dares do?
She Will combat with a King, and stand to it too:
She Is not a starter like the dust-bred-Flea,
She Is a great traveler by land and sea,
And dares take any Lady by the Rea.
She never from a battle yet did fly.
For with a Soldier she will live and dye.
And sure (I think) I said not much amiss,
To say a Lowse her self a Soldier is.
An Host of Lice did to submission bring
Hard-hearted '^ haraob the Egyptian King,
But when these cruel creatures do want meat,
Man's flesh and blood like Canibals they eat.
They are unto the Beggar, Natures gifts,
A Beggar is no shifting fellow.
Who very seldom puts them to their shifts,
True friendship.
These are his Guard, which will not him forsake,
Till Death, a coarse does of his carcass make.
A Beggar lives here in this vale of sorrow,
And travels here to day, and there to morrow.
The next day being neither here, nor there:
But almost no where, and yet every where.
He never labors, yet he does express
Beggars are travelers.
Himself an enemy to Idleness.
In Court, Camp, City, Country, in the Ocean,
A Beggar is a right perpetual motion,
He is seldom idle, though he never works Devotion.
His great devotion is in general,
He either prays for all, or preyes on all.
Universality.
And it is universally professed,
From South to North, from East unto the West.
On his own merits he will not rely;
He is a lover of good works.
By other men's good works he will live and die.
That begg'ry is natural all men know,
Beggary is natural and general to all the world.
Our naked coming to the world does show;
Not worth a simple rotten ragge, or clout,
Our silly carcasses to wrap about.
Beggary is perpetual.
That its will is, and has perpetual bin,
All goes as naked out, as they came in,
We leave our clothes, which were our couers here,
For Beggars that come after us to wear.
The generality of beggary.
Thus all the world in general Beggars are,
And all alike come in, and go out bare.
And whosoever lives here in the best degree,
It is must necessary for every one to live and dye a Beggar.
Must (every day) a daily Beggar be:
And when his life has run unto his date,
He dies a Beggar or a Reprobate.
(Good Reader, pray misconster not this case,
I mean no profanation in this place)
Then since these virtues wait on beggary,
As mild Humility, and Charity,
And Temperance, Honor, Health, Frugality,
With Patience, Fortitude, and Courtesy,
Security, Universality,
Necessity and Parpetu^ie,
And since heaven sends the Subject and the Prince
All Beggars hither, and no better hence,
Since begg'ry is our portion and our lot,
Our Patrimony, birthright, and what not?
Let us pursue our function, let us do
That (which by nature) we were borne unto.
And whilst my Muse a little does repose,
I Will Character a Beggar out in prose.
NOw it follows, that I show some of their forms, carriage, manners, and
behavior, their several Garbs, tones, and salutations, that they accost their
Clyents or Benefactors withal, for they can wisely, and discreetely suite
their Phrase and language, to be correspondent to their own shape, and suitable
to whomsoever they beg of, as for example, suppose a Beggar be in the shape
or form of a maundering, or wandering Soldier, with one arm, leg, or eye,
or some such maime; then imagine that there passes by him some Lord, Knight,
or scarce a Gentleman, it makes no matter which, then his Honor, or his
Worship shall be affronted in this manner.

Brave man of Honor, cast a favorable look upon the wounded estate of a
distressed Gentleman, that has borne Arms for his Country in the hottest
broils of the Netherlands, with the loss of his members; Cleueland has felt
my strength; I have bickered with the French, at Breast and Deep; I have past
the Straights, the dangerous Gulf: the Groyne can speak my service (Right
Honorable) with no less then two dangerous hurts hardly brought off from
Bummill Leaguer, which I would unwillingly discover to your manlines, whose
belief shall be therein as much auailable as eyesight. Fortune has only
left me a tongue to bemone my losses, and one eye to be a witness of your
noble bounty; I would be loath to weary your Lordship with the relations of my
travels, to whom the story of these wars are as familiar as to my self,
your worthy liberality is the spur to valor, and the safeguard of his
Country, and in your honorable memory, my tongue shall supply the defects of
my limbs, and proclaim your merits through the seventeen Provinces, whither
your bounty shall bear this withered body, to interre it with the blood which
I left there as a pledge of my return.

This is the maritall or decayed military kind of begging; which if he speed,
then he can fit himself with a prayer accordingly, for the prosperity of his
liber all benefactor, as thus:

Peace be to thy loins (Right Honorable) and plenty at thy board, oppression
in the Country, and extortion in the City; embroder thy carcass, and keep
thy Concubite constant, that Taylers may sue to thee for work, more then for
payment, and Seriear^ may stand and gaze at thy fair progress by the
Compters, whilst thy Coach-mares shall whurry thee far from Attachments.

Then (after ascrub or ashrug) you must receive he meets with a Lawyer, and
fitting his ph^^^ to his language, he assaults him thus, and ioy^e issue.

Humbly shows to your good Worship, your poor suppliant having advanced his
b^^ in the late wars of Sweden, Copenhag, and Stocke-Holland; after
Replications in particular, and Reioynders drawn, with bloody pes^^^ and
dreadful characters, your petition^^ joined issue in that fearful day of
hearing, to the grand Castle of Smolesco, where he ca^ off with the loss of
his inheritance, having the evidence of his limbs violently rent from him, to
make an open passage to the bene^^lent charity of such pious persons as is
your Worship, for you are the true Soldiers ^^ the Country, whose wars
concern the domestique peace of our Nation, as such as myself does the
foreign. My breeding was Gentle, Sir, and my birth English, a younger brother,
and driven to my shifts, to avoid the foul accidents of homebred miseries; I
measured foreign paces, and was delivered abroad of my breeding at home, in
which estate the hand of your bounty must support me, or ^^^ calamity will
crawle over me, which has no Surgeon but the gallows, to which I hope the Law
will not deliver me, seeing it tame so fair a face as the reverend aspect of
your master-ships countenance.

By this time you must suppose that his bounty being awaked, he gives him
somewhat; when with our respondent prayer he thus takes his been vale.

May the Iermes be everlasting to thee, thou man of tongue, and may contentions
grow and multiply, may Actions beget Actions, and Cases engender Cases as
thick as hops, may every day of the year be a Shrouetuesday; let
Proclamations forbid fighting, to increase actions of battry, that thy Cassocke
may be three pilde, and the welts of thy Gown may not grow threed-bare.

Perhaps he meets with same Country Farmer, or some honest Russet home spu.
plain dealing, ^^^^ sug^er whom he assaults with a valley of his ^^^ bra^^does
in manner and form following.

You shall do well to take notice (Countryman and friend) that I am a
Soldier and a Gentleman, who having bin made Fortunes Tennis-ball, was lately
cast upon these coasts of my Country, by the merciles cruelty of the raging
tempestuous seas, where I have been in that distress, that the whole
Christian world durst not so much as look on: mine Arms have been feared by
all the enemies that ever beheld them advanced, and my command has been
dreadful through Europe, Asia, Africa and America, from the Suns Eastern
rising to his Western declination. I was the first man that entered (despite
the mouth of the Cannon) into the famous City of Pertrega a City five times
greater then Constantinople, where the great Turk then kept his Seraglio,
Basha Caphy, Basha Inda, and Mustapha Despot of Seruta, being my prisoners,
whose ransomes yielded my sword three millions of Hungarian Ducats; with which
returning, thinking to make thee and the rest of my Nation rich, the ship which
transported me (being ouer-laden) took such a leake, not a mortal eye being
able to see one penny of that vncountable treasure, my self (as you see
preserved) a miserable spectacle of unfortunate chance, for getting astride
upon a demyculuering of braste, I was weatherbeaten three leagues on shore, as
you see, an ominous map of man-quelling calamity, to the relief whereof, my
fellow and friend, (for so my now poverty makes me vouchsafe to call thee) I
must entreat thy manhood, by offering a parcel of thy substance; make no
delays, Sir, for I would be loath to exercise my valor on thee, and make thee
the first Christian that should feel the impregnable strength and valor of my
victorious arm, which has done to death to many Turks, Pagans and Infidels,
as cannot be truly numbered.

After all this super sl^us sustian, the poor man ^^^^ draws and gives him
some small m^te, more for fear, cr^^ing, then either for love or charity. His
fury being abated, he takes his leave thus:

Fair be thy Harvest, and foul thy Winter, that plenty may fill they Barnes,
and fear of scarcity raise thy price, may thy Landlord live unmarried that
thy fine may not be raisde, to buy thy new Land-lady a French petricoate; or a
new Blockt Beauer, nor thy rents raisde, to keep her tire in fashion.

Invention many thousand ways could go,
To show their variations to and fro:
For as upon the some of man attends,
The world the flesh, the devil, (where wicked friends)
So likewise has a Beggar other three,
With whom his humor never could agree.
A Justice of Peace is as the world to a Beggar, a Beadle as the flesh, and a
Constable as the ^^^^.
A lustice to the world he does compare,
And for his flesh, a Beadle is a mare:
But he, that he of all accounts most evil,
He thinks a Constable to be the Devil.
And it is as easy for him as to drink,
To blind the world, and make a A Justice will wink or connue^^^ at a Heave
faults when partly for pity, and partly to avoid trouble
lustice wink:
The Beadle (for the flesh) it is little pain,
Which smart he can recover soon again.
But yet the Devils (the Consta^) a spirit,
From hole to hole that hunts him like a ferrit,
A whipping will be soon cured
Both day and night he haunts him as a ghost,
And of all furies he torments him most.
All Is one for that, though to me things fall out ill,
A Beggar seldom rides up Holbenn hill:
Nor is he taken with a th^^^ trap,
And made dispute with Doctor Stories A Constable is a hugbeare to a Beggar.
cap.
A common th^efe, for every great he gains,
His life does ^^^ture, besides all his pains:
For every thing he cares, or drinks, I wears,
To lose his cares, or gain a rope he fears. ^^^^^^

But for a Beggar, be it he or she,
They are from all these choking dangers free.
And though (for sin) when mankind first began,
A curse was laid on all the race of man,
That of his labors he should live and eat,
And get his bread by travel and by sweat;
But it that any from this curse be free,
A Beggar must he be, and none but he.
For every fool most certainly does know,
A Beggar does not dig, delue, plow, or sow:
He neither harrowes, plants, lops, fells, nor rakes,
Nor any way he pains, or labor takes.
Let swine be meazeld, let sheep die and rot,
Let moraine kill the cattle, he cares not:
He will not work and sweat, and yet he will feed,
And each man's labor must supply his need.
Thus without pains or care, his life he will spend,
And lives until he dies, and there is an end.
But I this reckning of beggry make,
That it much better is to give then take:
Yet if my substance will not serve to give,
I Will (of my betters) take, with thanks, and live.
FINIS.
TO THE MIGHTY MONARCH OF MONTZAGO, THE MODEL OF MAGNANIMITY, the map of
man-darring Monster-quellers, the thrice three times trebble triple renowned
Alphebo, ornamented honorable Knight of Standsalio, Treldedo, Maroua, Fregero,
Andalowsia, and the skie-scaling mountain of Muffetto: Illustrious Pheander,
victorious and valorous Champion to Don Phoebus, great Duke of Delphos, and the
Oracle of Apollo; Marquess of Muzetta, and the lake Asse-phaltites: Earl of
Vtopia; Lord and Dominator of the Promontory of Polipratemost: The unconquered
all conquering Maiden Knight, by revelation, by creation, by procreation, and
contentation: the unmatched Phoenix, and fourefold Commander of the Enchanted
Islands, by nomination, by Banner, by warlike atchieuements, by nativity, by
descent and process, matchless and unparalleled Sir Thomas Parsons, Knight of
the Sun, great cousin Vermin to the seldom seen Queen of Fayries, and
hopeful heir apparent to her invisible Kingdom.
Unmatchable Cheualiere, I am bold to commit a poor Goose to your impregnable
protection and patronage, I knon there will be as much to do in the keeping of
her, and with a much danger, as was the conquest of the Golden Fleece, the
Apples of the Hesperides, or the saving of Andromeda by Perseus: and but that
your valiant atchieuements are known ^^ approved, I would never have put my
Goose to your invincible Guard: the enemies that ^^ assault you, or attempt to
take her from you, are many, whom in dutious courtesy I will describe unto
y^^: First, the Powlters will assail you with a terrible battry of rotten
Eg-shot, to surrender the innocent Goose, that they may murder, imbowell,
plu^ke, and prostitute her to sale of who gives most. See^^^, the Vthal^^^ will
come upon you with a fresh alarm for her feathers, to stuff the empty
paunches of then B Isters, Pillowes, and hungry Bed-tikes. Thirdly, the Cooks
in squaarans, a^^i'd with Dripping pannes and s^^s, instead of Spears, before
they will lose their F^^s, (and the^ king of their fingers to b^ote) will fight
heoly for the Goose till all smoke again. Fourthly, the Apothecaries (rather
then they will want the sweetness of the pinguidity or fe^und^ous fat of the
Gooses axung^a (vulg ^^ called g^^ ^ they will so pelt ^^ ^^ with pil^s,
instead of pellets, that they will make all stink again. Fifthly, the kit
^^a-ma^de will throw s^alding ^ater at you, but she will have one of her wings
to sweep down C^bwebs, and dcspossesse Spiders of the habitations they have
built out of their own bowels. Sixthly, the ^let^hers, and Archers, s^^eare
they will ^^inke your skin full of ^^t-holes, but they will have ^er ^^^ s,
to make them ^^^ ^^^^^ dead, then the Goose could living. Seventhly, the Poets
for her Quils, will call another penny ^l^sse, thread ^^^ Parliament, and
ordain Satiricall Statutes, and Tr^g^all Acts against you, and ^^^ their
scatt^red imaginations they will s^ale the skies as high as sullen Saturnes
altitude, and rake into the ^^ west p^^sund^^y of Barrathrum, forraging through
the earth, air, and seas; but they will stigmatize, canterize, and
Epigramatize, Anagramatize you, till you make a surrender. Eig^tly, the Lawyers
well sirke and first you tossing you betwixt hard fortune and ill luck, that
you will be almost mad, or be in great danger to have very little^^ lest.
Ninthly, the scriu^ners, public N^tari^s, or notorieus publi^^ans, will not
only join with the Lawyers, and the Poets against you: but they will never
procure you any money when you need, without excessive brokage, great credit,
or good security. Tenthly, Shopkeepers (if you hold the Gooses Quils from
them) have sworn, that they will ever keep you out of their books. And
lastly, schoole-boyes will throw whole voleyes of stones at you, where-euer
they see you, if you allow them not Pens, though it be but to scrible or make
ewes letters.

Thus having laid open to your Herculean view, the labors and dangers that you
are like to suffer in protecting the Goose Now I think it fit (under
correction) to cloze up my Dedication with some dutiful counsel, that though
your enemies are mighty and many, and that they do prevail against you, and
with their multitude take from you both the flesh and feathers of the Goose,
(which indeed belongs not to you, nor do I dedicate them to you) yet here is
your true honor, and that which makes all me admire you, that her better part,
her genious, her intellectual understanding, her capacity, and reverend
gravity, her wisdom, and her very spirit; neither man, Devil, or Dragon, is
able to bereave you of, as long as you have a sword to defend it. I have
dedicated a Book of a Beggar at this time to Archy, but most noble Sir, only
to you my Goose, so leaving you: Not doubting of your acceptance, and
protection: I wish you such increase of honor as is suitable to your Heroicke
enicau^urs and inimitable wisdom.

He that truly neither wonders or admires at your worthiness. JOHN TAILOR.

TAILORS GOOSE DESCRIBING THE VVILDE GOOSE, THE Tame Goose, the Tailors Goose,
the Winchester Goose, the Clack Goose, the Soleand Goose, the Huniburne Goose,
Goose upon Goose, the true nature and profit of all Geese, the honorable
victories of the GrayGoose-wing, the worthiness of the Pen, the Description of
Goosetoft, and Goose Fair, with the valor of the Gander.
By JOHN TAILOR.
When restless Phoebus seemed himself to rest
His flaming Carr, descending to the West,
And Hesperus obscured her twinkling light:
Then in a sable mantle (Madame night)
Took of the world the sole command, and keep
Charming the eyes of mortals found a sleep:
She sent dull Morpheus forth, and Somnus both,
(The Leaden Potentates of Sleep and Sloth)
Who unto every one good rest imparts
Save Lovers, guilty minds, and careful hearts.
The stealing hours, creep'd on with sleeping pace,
When masqued Midnight showed her Ebon face;
When Hagges, and Furies, Witches, Fairies, Elues,
Ghosts, Sprites, and Coblins do disport themselves:
When send imaginary dreams do reign
In form less forms, in man's molested brain:
On such a time, I sleeping in my bed,
An vnaccustom'd dream came in any head,
Me thought as near unto a Rivers side,
Within a pleasant Grove I did abide,
That all the feathered birds that swims or flies,
Or lives betwixt the breeding earth and skies,
One at the least of every several sort,
Did for their recreation there resort.
There was such a variety of notes,
Such warbling and such whistling from their throats:
The Base, the Tenor, Trebble, and the Mean,
All acting various Actions in one Scene:
The sober Goose (not thinking ought amiss)
Amongst the rest did (harthly) keake and hiss:
At which the Peacocke, and the pyde-coate lay;
Said, rake the feolish gaggling Goose away.
The Goose (though angry) with a modest look,
Seemed as she gently this affront would brook,
When all the Fowls in general out did break,
Commanding her she should not dare to speak,
Away the meianc holly Goose returned,
And in a bank of Reed she sat and mourned,
Complaining against the hateful multitude,
And justly taxing with Ingratitude
The Race of all mortality; and then
Is none (quoth she) turniuing amongst men,
That will my true worth search and understand,
And in my quarrel take a Pen in hand,
And in a stately high Heroicke style,
My Predecessors noble Acts compile,
From age to age descending unto me,
That my succeeding Issue all may see
The admirable deeds that I have done,
And run that worthy course that I have run.
O impious age, when there is no defense
For Virtue, and for hated Innocence:
When Flatt'rers, Fools, and Fiddlers are rewarded,
When I must live inpittied, unregarded!
Me thought these last words ended with a keake
Of such force, as if her heart would break.
At which I starting, wak'ned from my dream,
And made the Goores wrong, my Muses theme:
IN arose, put on my clothes, sat down, and than
I took my Pen in hand, and thus began.
^ From dark obliuious den I here let loose
The imprisoned honor of the famous Goose:
In her creation and original,
And after in the Law Leuiticall,
And at all times before and since the Flood,
Goose has justly gained the name of good.
^o value her with any other Bird,
Comparisons are weak and mere absurd:
First, for her flesh, she is man's daily fare:
She Is good, she is cheap, she is plenty, and she is rare:
Sake her, or roast her, use her as you will,
And Cook, her as she should be, she is good still:
But as great sums are made with little driblets,
So put the Hares head against the Gooses giblets;
And men may piece a dinner up (perhaps)
Which otherwise would rise with hungry chaps:
For the old Proverb, I must here apply,
Good meat men may pick from a Gooses eye.
She is good fresh, but better two days salted,
For then she will try if Ale or Beer be Malted;
Her grease is excellent ( prohatumest)
For such as numnesse in their joints molest:
For the Sciatica, the Crampe, or Gowte
It either cures or eases, out of doubt.
Mixed with Stauesacre, and Argentum vine,
^^ will not leave a man a Lowse alive.
Her lungs and liver into powder dride,
And fasting in an Asses milk applide,
As an experienced cordial for the Spleen,
As oftentimes it has approved been.
Her brains, with Salt and Pepper, if you blend
And eat, they will the understanding mend.
Her Gall, if one be but with drink oppressed,
Or meat, or fruit, and cannot well digest:
But swallow't down, and take the 'tother cup,
And presently 'twill fetch the rest all up.
And thus a Goose, for medicine and for food,
^^ have Anatomized exceeding good.
As for her qualities, whilst she does live,
She does example and instinction give:
Her modesty, and affability,
Shows she is descended from Gentilitie,
For if they be a hundred in a troop,
To a Barn door in courtesy thei'l stoop.
How neat and comely they themselves will pick,
That no one feather out of order stick:
How gravely they from place to place will waggle,
And how (like Gossips) freely they will gaggle,
That sure I think, the fashion of her prate,
Our wives at Gossipings do imitate.
In A good Goose.
pli^^ie and in Gesner I do find,
That Geese are of strange sundry sorts and kind.
In Scotland there are Geese which grow on Trees,
(Which much from humane reason disagrees)
Bred by the Air and Suns all-quickning fire,
That never was Egg, nor ever had Dam or Sire.
Then there is a Soleand Goose, which they so call,
Because the female has but one in all. Books which I never read.

Sole is as much to say, as be alone,
These ^oland Geese do breed in a little Island in Scotland, two mile within
the Sea, called the Basse, between twenty five and thirty meles beyond
Batwick, where they are in such abundance, that the Lord (or Owner) of the
Island does yearly receive for these Geese two hundred pound ster^ing.
And never Soleand Goose did hatch but o^e:
Or else the name of them may well proceed
From the Dams foot-sole, whence they all do breed,
Which in her Claw she holds until it hatch,
The Gander fetches food, the Goose does watch.
The Winchester Goose.
THen there is a Goose that breeds at Winchester,
And et all Geese, my mind is least to her:
For three or four weeks after she is roast.
She keeps her heat more hotter then a tossed.
She Is seldom got or hatched with honesty,
From Fornication and Adultery,
From reaking Lust, foul Incest, beastly Rape,
She has her birth, her breeding, and her shape.
Besides Whoremongers, Panders, Bawds and Pimpes,
Whores, Harlets, Curtezans, and such base Impes,
Luxurious, letcherous Goats, that hunt in Flocks,
To catch the Glangore, Grinkums, or the Pockes.
Thus is she got with pleasure, bred with pain,
And scarce ere comes where honest men remain.
This Goose is worst of all, yet is most dear,
And may be had (or heard of) any where.
A Pander is the Cater to the Feast,
A Bawd the Kitchen Clerk, to see her dressed.
A Whore the Cook, that in a pockey heat,
Can dress a dish fit for the Devil to eat.
The hot whore-hunter for the Goose does serve,
The whilst the Surgeon, and Physician carue.
The Apothecary gives attendance still,
For why the sauce lies only in his Bill.
There has a Turkey at Newmarket bin,
Which to this Goose was somewhat near a kin:
And some report, that both these Fowls have seen,
Their like, that is but a pair of sheeres between.
And one of them (to set them only forth)
Costs more the dressing then they both are worth.
This Goose is no way to be tolerated,
Bat of good men to be despisde and hated,
For one of these, if it be let alone,
Will eat the owner to the very bone.
Moreover, it from Nature is contrary,
And from all other creatures does vary:
For of all breeding things that I could hear,
The Males do still beger, and Females bear
But this has ever a Dam masculine
Eagendred by a Father Feminine.
Quite kim kam, wiw waw, differing from all other,
The Sir's a Female, and a Male the Mother.
But cease, my Muse, soil not thy purer strain,
With such contagious mud, rouse, rouse again,
From this polluted puddle, and once more,
Take the same Theme in hand thou had before.
The Tailors Goose.
But yet a little mirth does make me stay:
A Tailors Goose comes wadling in my way,
A thing I cannot give the Epithet
Of Male or Female, or Hermaphrodite.
Of Vulcans brood it is, whose Dam and Sire,
Was windy bellowse, smoke, and flaming Fire,
By Nature it should much delight to lie,
For in a Forge it had Nativity,
Yet it with lying does no hurt commit,
Stealing is more addicted unto it;
And yet to Steel it is so near a kin,
That to be true, it does opinion win.
It Is mittlo to the hard back, I am sure,
And it is a dish will ten men's lives endure.
Be it of age a hundred winters long,
It is as tender as 'twas when 'twas young.
A Cook from it can get but slender fees,
It has no Gibblets, like to other Geese.
It neither breeds nor feeds, yet does this good,
It does help others to get clothes and food.
And of all Geese she is tamest, she is not roame,
This Goose a man may always have at home.
It Is diet only for an Estrich tooth,
It cannot cog, yet very much does smooth.
It puts down all the Fowls that ere man saw,
It Is often roasted, yet it is ever raw,
It is a Bird that every slut may dress,
It knows no wars, yet every day does press.
And to conclude, it is a mess of meat,
Which whosoever can digest it, let him eat.
The praise of the Gray Goose wing.
THe Winchester and Tailors Goose I see,
Are both too heavy, and too hot for me:
I will return the honor to Emblaze,
Of the Gray Goose that on the green does graze.
To speak of wandering Wild-goose in this place,
Were (like a Goose) to run the Wild-goose chase:
The Egyptians did observe their wonted guise,
How in the Sky they flew triangle-wise,
Which with one Corner forward, is their drift,
Thus figured to cut the Air more swift.
For me the wilde-Goose is too high a game.
My mind is only to the Goose that is tame,
I in her Fleshes praise have wrote before,
But yet her Feathers do deserve much more.
They are of far more estimate and price
Then th'Estrich, or the bird of Paradise,
The Raven, the Crow, the Daw in mourning digit^^
The prating Pie attyr'd in black and white,
The Buzzard, Redshanke, Kite, Owl, Gull, and Rook^,
The fabled Phoenix that breeds where (go looke^^
The Pheasant, Partridge, Turtle, Plouer, Pidgeon,
The Woodcock, Woodquist, Woodpecker, and Wi^^
The Iay, the Snipe, the Teale, the Cock, the Hen, sg^^
The Chogh, the Lark, the Lapwing, and the Wra^^
The Falkon, the Gerfalkon, Hobby, Marlin,
The Sparrowhauke, the Goshauke, Tassell, Starlin,
The Haggard, Keistrell, Lanneret, Cormorant,
The Caperkelly, and the Termagant,
The Bunting, Heathcocke, Crane, and Pelican,
The Turkey, Mallard, Ducke the Storke, the Swan,
The Pewet, Parrot, and the Popinjay,
The Eagle, and the Cassawaraway,
The Sheldrake, Bittour, Black bird, Nightingale,
The Cuckoo that is always in one tale,
The Sparrow of the hedge, or of the house,
The Ringdoue, Redbrest, and the Tittimouse,
The Bulunch, Goldfinch, Ringtaile, Wagtaile, and
The Hearne that lives by water and by land:
The Swallow, Martin, Lennet, and the Thrush,
The Mauis that sings sweetly in the bush;
The Morecoote, the Kingfisher, and the Quail;
The Peacock, with his proud vainglorious tail
These sorts of Birds that I have named before,
If they were thrice redoubled three times more,
And let men value them but as they are,
They cannot with the Goose (for worth) compeare
Many of these do feed on Carrion still,
And still are Carrion, ever being ill,
Neither in flesh or feathers they afford
To do man service at his bed or board.
And some of them yield Plumes, and ornaments
For Ladies, and for Knightly Tournaments:
But let these toys be weighed but just and right,
And thei'le be found as vain as they are light.
Others there are, as Parrots, Stares, Pyes, Dawes,
Are mightily accounted of, because
They can speak perfect none-sence, prate and ch^^^^
Feeding the ear: these fowls makes fools these ^^
Then there are others great, and small in size,
But great all for the greatness of their price,
Most pleasantly their flesh men do denoure,
The sauce lies in the reckoning, sharp and sour
Some are to sing continually in Cages,
And get but bread and water for their wages.
And others, with great pains men do procure
With cost of Manning, Diet, Hood, Bells, Lure;
^^ pleasure's little, and the gain is small,
Goose for profit does surprise them all.
Then with her flesh man's, stomach she has sed,
^^ gives him ease and comfort in his bed;
He yields no whim-whams wavering on his crest,
^^ the relieues him with repose and rest.
^d though the world be hard, she lays him soft,
^e bears the burden, and he lies aloft:
^t him be drunk, or weary, sick or same,
^e's semper idem, always one the same.
^^us to supply our wants, and serve our needs,
^ood meat and lodging from a Goose procedes.
^^sides she loves not far abroad to gad,
^t at all times she is easy to be had;
^^ if (to satisfy man's hungry gut)
^e waited still that he her throat should cut.
^n need not be at charge for Hawks and Dogs,
and ride, and run over hedge, ditch, mines, and bogs:
^e's quickly caught, and dressed well, eats as pleasant
^^ (far fetched dear bought) Partridge or a Pheasa^t.
Throughout the world the Trumpe of Fame loud rings,
^^emblaze the glory of the Gooses wings:
The Roman Eagle never had spread so far,
^ut that the gray Goose was the Conqueror.
^ostris King of Egypt with her feather,
^^ain'd storms and showers of Arrows, like foul weather,
and overcame the Jews, the Assirians,
^h' Arabians, Scithians, Germans, Thracians.
The Huns, the Goths, the Vandals, and the Gals,
With Arrows made great Rome their seu'rall thrals:
The Philistines were mighty Bow-men all,
With which they got the conquest of King Saull.
^rus with thousands of his Persians
With Shafts were slain by the Messagetans,
^^urkes, Tartars, Troyans, and the Parthians,
^anes, Saxons, Sweuians, and Polonians;
^ea all the Nations the whole world around,
The gray-Goose-wing has honored and renound.
But why should I roame far and wide aloof,
When our own Kingdom yields sufficient proof?
But search the Chronicles, it is most plai^e,
That the Goose-wing brave conquests did obtain.
Remember valiant Edwards name (the third)
How with the wing of this deserving Bird,
When to small purpose served his Shield or Lance:
At Cresste he ore-top'd the power of France.
And after that, remember but again
That Thunderbolt of war, that Mars of men,
The black Prince Edward, his victorious son,
How he at P^^ctiers a brave battle won,
Where the French King and many Peers were taken,
Their Nobles, and their Gentles most part slain,
And thirty thousand of their Commons more,
Lay in the field all weltring in their gore.
Henry the fifth (that memorable King)
All France did unto his subjection bring,
When forty thousand of the French men lay
At Agincount, slain in that bloody fray.
And though true valor did that conquest win.
But for the Gooses wing it had not bin.
In these things, and much more then I can say,
The Gooses feather bore the prize away.
If I should write all in particular,
What this rare feather has atchieu'd in war,
Into a sea of matter I should run,
And so begin a work will never be done.
And thus from time to time it has appeared,
How the gray Goose has bravely domineered:
With swiftly cutting through the empty sky,
Triumphantly transporting victory
From land to land, offending and defending
The Conquest on the Arrows still depending.
Our English Yeomen, in the days of old,
Their names and fames have worthily ^^told
Witness that Leath, that stout admired three,
Brave Adam Bell, Clim Clough, Will Clowdeslee.
I could capitulate, and write upon
Our English Robin Hood, and little John,
How with this feather they have won renown,
That evermore their memories shall crown.
And ever the Devil these damned Gunnes devised,
Or hellish powder here was exercised,
With the Goose-wing we did more honor get,
More nobly gained, then Gunnes could ever yet.
And how has Vice our worthy Land infected,
Some thing in praise of the exercise of shooting.
Since Archery has been too much neglected?
The time that men in shooting spent before,
Is now (perhaps) peru^rted to a Whore,
Or bowling, swearing, drink, or damned Dice,
Is now most Gentleman-like exercise.
But for these few that in those days remain,
Who are addicted to this shooting vein,
Let men but note their worthy disposition,
And we shall see they are of best condition,
Free honest spirits, such as men may trust,
In all their actions, constant, true, and just.
It is a thing I have observed long,
An Archers mind is clear from doing For the most part this is general.
wrong:
It is a K. Henry the 8. did with the consent of the 2. estates in the
Parliament, enact a Stature, for shooting^ which Statute is still of force,
though not in use.
note worthy respect, and mark,
An Archer is no base defamed Sharke,
Not given to pride, to covetousness, or
To swearing, which all good men do abhor,
Nor does he exercise, or take delight,
To cheat, to cogge, to lie, and to backe-bite,
But with most loving friendly conversation,
He practices this manly recreation.
There was a Statute in the eighth Henry's reign,
Which Statute yet does in full force remain,
And as it stands in force, so does my Muse
With that it were observed, and kept in use.
Within these few years (I to mind do call)
The Yeomen of the Guard were Archers all,
A hundred at a time I often have seen,
With Bows and Arrows ride before the Queen Elizabeth.
Queen,
Their Bows in hand, their Quiuers on their shoulders,
Was a most stately show to the beholders:
And herein, if men rightly do observe,
The Arrows did for two good uses serve:
First for a show of great magnificence,
And trusty weapons for to guard their Prince.
Prince Charles (our hope of Britains happiness)
Does his affection oftentimes express:
With many Noble men of worthy race,
Do with their best performance, shooting grace:
And long may these The Highland-men or Red-shanks in Scotland, are exceeding
good archers.
superior Worthies live,
Example to the inferior sort to give,
That though this exercise be much declined,
May some supporters and defenders find.
King Saul's brave son (true-hearted Jonathan)
2 ^am. 1. 18.
David's true friend, a Prince, a valiant man,
Did in this noble quality excel,
As the true story of his life does tell.
King David made a Law, and did command,
That shooting should be taught within this land.
Thus from true Histories we plainly see,
That shooting is of great antiquity:
And that the glory of the Gooses wings
Has been advanced by Princes, Lords, and Kings,
And that yet Princes, Peers, and Potentates,
And best of all conditions, and estates.
Do give to Archery the praise and prise
Of the best, manly, honest exercise.
The praise of the Gooses Quill.
ANd thus for shooters having showed my skill,
I Will now say somewhat for the Gooses Quill.
Great Mars his Train of Military men
I leave, and turn the Shaft into a Pen:
The Gooses feather acts sundry parts,
And is an Instrument both of Arms and Arts.
Many divine and heavenly mysteries,
And many memorable Histories
Had with blind Ignorance been ouer-growne,
And (were it not for the Pen) had never bin known.
The Muses might in Parnass hill have staid,
Their fames had never bin through the world displaid
But that the Gooses Quill with full consent,
Was found to be the fittest Instrument
To be their Nuntius, and to disperse
Their glory through the spacious Universe.
Grammar (that of all Science is the ground)
Without it in forgetfulness were drowned,
And Rethorick (the sweet rule of eloquence)
Through the Goose Quill distills it is Quintess^^^
Logic with definitions (I am sure)
Were nothing, or else very much obscure:
Astronomy would lie, or lie forgot
And scarce remembered, or regarded not;
Arithmetic would err exceedingly,
Forgetting to divide and multiply:
Geometry would lose the Altitude,
The craslic Longitude and Latitude:
And Music in poor case would be o're-throwne,
But that the Goose Quill pricks the Lessons down
Thus all the liberal Sciences are still
In general beholding to the Quill.
Embassages to far remoted Princes.
Bonds, Obligations, Bills, and Evidences,
Letters twixt foe and foe, or friend and friend,
To gratulate, instruct, or reprehend,
Assurances, where faith and troth is scant,
To make the faithless to keep covenant;
The Potent weapon of the reverend Law,
That can give life or death, save, hang, or draw,
That with a Royal, or a noble dash,
Can from the Kings Exchequer fetch the Cash.
To most shopkeepers it a reckoning makes,
What Is got or lost, what he lays out, or takes:
Without the Goose a Scriuener were a fool,
Her Quill is all his only working tool:
And sure a Goose is of a wondrous nature,
Contrary to each other living creature,
Things that in water, earth, or air have growth,
And feed and live, bite only with the mouth:
But the Goose with sophisticated skill,
Does bite most dangerously with her quill,
Yet is she free from prodigality,
And most of all bites partiality:
She often with biting makes a Knight a detter,
A shrewd biting beast.
And rankle to a Beggar, little better.
She often has bit a Gallant from his land
With quick conueyance, and by slight of hand:
Sometimes his biting is as durable,
As is a Gangren most incureable,
And many that into her fangs do fall,
Do take the Counters for their Hospital;
A Forger, or a Villain that forsweares,
Or a False-witnesse, she bites off their ears:
On me her power she many times has shown,
And made me pay more debts then were mine o^^^
Thus does her Quill bite more then do her chaps,
To teach fools to beware of after-claps.
They say in Latin that a Gooses name
^^ ANSER, which made in Anagram,
SNARE, in English, which does plain declare,
That she to fools and knaves will be a snare. Hereupon began the Proverbs,
of good Goose bite not.
,
^deede she often has been a snare to me,
^y self was in the fault, alas not she.
The memorable honor of the Goose saving the Capitol at Rome.
But now to show her neuer-dying name,
And how at Rome she wan deserving fame:
When barbarous Brennus, cruel King of Galls,
And wasted Italy, and razed Romes Walls:
When deuastation did depopulate,
With sword and furious fire the Roman state.
When many a throat was tyrannously cut,
And all the City to the sack was put:
When many of the Citizens did fly
^^to the Capitol to live and dye,
Whereas the Image of great Jupiter,
The rip rap, thwick thwack thumping thunderer)
Was of refined gold, adorned, adored,
Where helples fools, poor helples help implored.
The Capitol a goodly building was,
And did (for strength) by Art and Nature Pass,
^o that the people that were there within,
Thought it impregnable, that none could win:
But slender watch upon the walls they kept,
And (thinking all secure) secure they flept,
They thought Jove's Statue, and his Temple there,
Was a sure guard, that foes they need not fear:
But Jove these dangers did not understand,
Or else he had some other work in hand:
Perhaps poor Io like a Cow in shape,
He like a Bull then wronged with beastly rape,
Or like a Swan for Leada, he thought fit,
^n that fowls form, that foul fault to commit:
^erchance that time fair Danae to entrap,
He rained bewitching gold into her lap;
^de then (perhaps) did to Alemena go,
And made a Cuckold of Amphitrio,
Or else to Semele that time he came,
And burnt his burning love with lightnings flame,
Perhaps with H^^^ he the Ram did play,
Or with E^^ipa toy'd the time a way,
Mu^^^^sine he could not let alone,
Or he to Hib^^^ that time was gone,
^t may be to An^^^^pa he went,
Or to Aster^^ for his more content,
Or it may be he lay within his bed,
And played and fooled with wanton Ganimede:
Jupiter could not or would not help to defend the Capitol, or else like many
brave whoremasters, he had more mind of his leachery then his honor: so that
had it not been for the Goose, his golden Image had been taken prisoner by
the enemy. Cornelius Agrippa, in his vanity of Sciences. page 137. Cap. 81.
But whither Jupiter that time was got,
He to defend the Capitol was not,
Unless he were transformed wondrous strange,
And to a Gooses shape his Godhead change:
For all the Guard were sleeping at that time,
When as the armed Galls the walls did clime.
Then when the Watch did to destruction sleep,
The careful Goose true sentinel did keep,
She spide the foe, and keak'd out an Alarm,
At which the Sleepers waked, and cried, Arm, Arm:
Then they their Enemies in fury slew,
Which down the battlements in heaps they threw.
And thus a Goose the honor did obtain.
To save the Romans, which had else been slain:
And to preserve the famous Capital,
And set Rome free from the insulting Gall.
The Roman General that time, as then
Was manly Manlius, a stout man of men,
The Senate gratefully did raise anon,
An Altar with a golden Goose thereon;
And for the Gooses service had been such,
They allowd almes-Oares from the common Hutch,
For old and sick decayed Geese to feed,
In memory of that brave Gooses deed.
Why should the Eagle be the Bird of Jove,
When as the Goose deserves so much love?
It Is plain and evident the Goose was cause,
That all Rome escaped from speedy Martial laws.
Yet did the Romans (like ungrateful Nags)
Advance an Eagles portrait in their Flags,
When as Cornelius Agrippa says,
The Goose deserved it more by many ways.
Now having done the Capitol Goose right,
I Will try ^ some other ways to bree delight.
Goostoft in Lincolnshire.
IN Lincolnshire an ancient Town does stand,
Called Goostoft, that has neither fallow'd Land,
Or Woods, or any fertile pasture ground,
But is with warry Fens incompast round.
The people there have neither Horse or Cow,
Nor Sheep, nor Ox, or Ass, nor Pig, or Sow:
Nor Cream, Curds, Whig, Whay, Buttermilke or Cheese,
Nor any other living thing but Geese.
The Parson of the Parish takes great pains,
And tyth Geese only, are his labors gains:
If any charges there must be defrayed,
Or Impositions on the Town is laid,
As Subsidies, or fifteenes for the King,
Or to mend Bridges, Churches, any thing.
Then those that have of Geese the greatest store,
Must to these Taxes pay so much the more.
Nor can a man be raisde to Dignity,
But as his Geese increase and multiply.
And as men's Geese do multiply and breed,
From Office unto office they proceed.
A man that has but with twelve Geese began,
In time has come to be a Tythingman:
And with great credit past that Office thorough
(His Geese increasing) he has bin Headborough.
Then (as his Flock in number are accounted)
Unto a Constable, he has bin mounted.
And so from place to place he does aspire,
And as his Geese grow more he is raised higher.
It Is only Geese there that do men prefer,
And it is a rule, no Geese, no Officer.
At Hunnibourne, a Town in Warwickeshire,
What Gogmagog Gargantna Geese are there,
For take a Goose that from that place has bin,
That Is lean, and naught but feathers, bones and skin,
And bring her thither, and with little cost
She Will be as fat as any Bawd, almost.
For take four Geese, and with a like expense,
Feed one there, and the others two miles thence,
And she that feeds at Hunnibourne shall be
More worth in weight and price, then the other three.
She shall with flesh unable be to go,
I cannot yield the Reason, but it is so A Woman's Reason.

Goose Fair at Stratford Bow, the Thursday after Whitso^ide.
AT Bow the Thursday after Pentecost,
There is a Fair of Green Geese, ready roast,
The Description of Greene-goose. Fair
Where as a Goose is very dogcheape there,
The Sauce is only somewhat sharp and dear,
There (o'r they scarce have feathers on their back)
By hundreds and by heaps they go to wrack,
There is such Baking, rosting, broyling, boiling,
Such swearing, drabbing, dancing, dicing, toyling,
Such shifting, sharking, cheating, smoking, stinking,
Such Gormondizing, cramming, guzling, drinking:
As if the world did run on wheels away,
Or all the Devils in hell kept Holiday.
And as Herbs, Flowers and Weeds together grow,
So people are that day at Stratford Bow,
There sits a Cheater with a simple Gull,
And there an honest woman, there a Trull,
Yonder a Fiddler daubed with grease and Ale,
And there an Ass telling an idle tale.
There Is one a Rosting, yonder is one a Stewing,
And yon's one drinks until he fall a spewing:
There Is a kind Cuckold with his Wife does ^^d^
To exercise the office of a Pander,
His Pimpship with his Punke despite the home,
Eat Gosling giblets in a fort of Corn.
There is ran tan Tom Tinker and his Tib,
And there is a Iugler with his fingers glib.
There throngs a Cutpurse, with his working tool,
And there is gallant Coxcombe, there is Fools
There Is four or five together by the ears,
And tumble in the Dirt like Dogs and Bears.
One staggering there has got the drunken yox,
And there one swaggering's fast within the Stocks
Thus with these Gadeymaufry humors still,
These Linsey-wolsey postures Good and ill,
These mingle mangle, motly toys they spend
The time, till night does make them homew^^^
Then they return as wise as Geese away,
For whom so many Geese were slain that day. W^^^.
They brought both wit and money with the^ thithe,
But with the Geese it is all devoured together.
And if they were but taught as well as fed,
More Coin were saved, and many a wiser head.
Thus (as my Muse is able) I have told
How that a Gooses use is manifold.
How many several sorts of Geese there are,
Some wild, some tame, some too near some too far
How from her flesh and entrails, it is plain,
Food, Physic, Lodging, Arts, Arms, and good Society all from a Goose.
Good food and Physic daily we obtain:
How freely she does play the true Vpholster,
And fill with Feathers, pillowes, bed and bolster.
And how in many an honorable War,
The gray Goose wing has bin the vanquisher.
The necessary uses of her Quill,
How to the good it is good, Ill to the ill.
And Shooting here (according to my love)
To be a noble Exercise I prove.
And how the Goose Romes Capitol did save,
(As says the Story) I described have.
And now let men examine well and try,
If any Bird in water, earth, or sky,
Or all in general together are,
With the good Goose (for worth) to make Compare.
Many absurdly, idle, foolish, base,
Will call a man a Goose in foul disgrace:
When if men rightly understood the same,
A man is honored with a Gooses name.
For though the Eagle be of Birds the King,
Yet it is a ravenous, greedy hurtful thing.
And he that with that title me should call,
I had as leiue he called me Thief with all.
She while she lives does yield relief to many,
And alive or dead, beholding not to any.
She has maintained ten thousand men,
With food, and Physic, Lodging, Shafts and Pen,
And lastly (not to charge them any wuyes)
Her own Quill here, writes her own worthy praise.
Because a Goose is common, and not dear,
She amongst fools is small esteemed here.
So Black berryes, that grow on every bryer,
Because they are plenty, few men do desire:
Spanish Potatoes are accounted dainty,
And English Persneps are course meat, though plenty.
But if these Berryes or those Roots were scant,
They would be thought as rare, through little want,
That we should eat them, and a price allow,
As much as Strawberryes, and Potatoes now.
Why Bread is common, having still our fill
We think not on, because we have it still:
But if we want Bread, then we do remember,
We want the ground work of our belly timber.
The Light is common, which few think upon,
Till Night does put her blindfold mufler on,
And all attyr'd in mourning black as pitch,
Then men miss light, and tumble in the Ditch.
^o should we want a Gooses Flesh and Feather,
The quantity of but five years together:
We than should all confess with one consent,
How that a Goose were superexcellent.
Many good blessings we too much forget,
Cause they are near and cheap, not far to fet.
^^e thinks I hear some Cuckoo, or some Iay,
Some Daw, some Pie, some Gull, or Buzzard say,
That I have given the Goose her worthy style,
But have forgot the Gander all this while.
He give them Answer (though they merit none)
^^ do include both sexes under one,
It Is known to every persit understander,
A Goose is much superior to a Gander.
For though a man, a Mare or Gelding stride,
We briefly say, he does on Horseback ride:
And though a Gelding be the beast that bare,
We called a Horse, that is neither Horse or Mare
So Ganders under name of Geese do go,
The Gooses worthiness deserves it so.
Once I remember, Riding on my way
In Barkshire, near unto a Town called Bray,
I on my Journey as I past along,
Rode by a Goose, a Gander and their young:
(I neither minding them nor yet their Crew)
The Gander in my face with fury flew,
Who in his fierce encounter was more hot,
Then if he had bin Spanish Don Quixot.
But sure himself so bravely he did bear,
Because his Love and Lady Goose was there:
And 'twas a spuire his Chiualry unto,
To have his sweet heart see what he did do.
My Horse he started, to the ground I went,
Dismounted in that (Ganderous) tournament.
I should say Dangerous, but sure I am
That GANDEROVS is a DANGEROUS Anagram.
The Gander was mine enemy, what tho,
I Will honor worthy Valor in my foe.
He Tilted bravely, and in liew of it,
The Gooses Quill, the Ganders praise has writ.
Thus for the Goose I having done my best,
My toyled Muse retires unto her rest:
I Will shut my Inckhorne, and put up my Pen,
So take my Goose amongst you, Gentlemen.
FINIS.
TO THE FISHMONGERS, AND BVTCHERS, GREETING.
FRiendly, frolic, frank, free-hearted, famous flourishing Fishmongers; And
brave, bold, battring, Beefe-braining Butchers, to both your Companies in
general I wish health and happinessed acknowledge you to be Haberdafhers for
the belly, and I wish a plentiful increase of good appetites and hungry
stomachs, that every one in their calling may prove valiant of their teeth,
whereby you may feed merrily by the profit you receive bynimble-chop'd feeders.
I have plainly and briefly set down Jack a Lents good deeds and his bad, his
friends and his foes, the great need and necessity that we have of his
coming once a year into this Kingdom, and the great pity that he is no
better entertained and observed. And though it be written in a merry style, yet
I dare presume that mirth and truth walk together in it. In a word, read it
if you like, and judge it as you lift, please your selves and I am pleased: and
let I. S. hold Jack a Lents stirrup whilst he alights, for of all men I have
most reason to prefer him for a trick he showed me lately. So I rest yours
ever, and his as far as he dares swear for twelue-pence.

JOHN TAILOR.

JACK A LENT HIS BEGINNING AND ENTERTAINMENT: with the mad prankes of his
Gentleman-usher ShroueTuesday that goes before him, and his Footman Hunger
attending.
OF Jack an Apes I lift not to endite,
Nor of Jack Daw my Gooses quill shall write:
Of Jack of Newbery I will not repeat,
Nor Jack of both sides, nor of Skip-Iacke neat.
^o praise the Turnspit Jack my Muse is mum,
Nor of the entertainment of Jack Drum
^e not rehearse: nor of Jack, Dagge, Jack Date,
Jack fool, or Jack a Dandy, I relate:
Nor of Black Iacks at gentle Buttry bars,
Whose liquor oftentimes breeds household wars:
Nor Jack of Do^er that Grand Jury Jack,
Nor Jack Sauce (the worst knave amongst the pack.)
But of the Jack of Iackes, Great Jack a Lent,
To write his worthy acts is my intent;
How he is attended with a mess of Iackes,
Whose fame my Artlesse weak invention cracks,
Jack Hirring and Jack Sprat, Jack Straw, Jack Cade,
These are the Iacks with which my pen must trade.
TO speak of the original of this Iacks, or from whence the name of Jack has
derivation, I think it not impertinent to show you: Therefore I would have
all men understand that Jack is no Christian, nor was ever baptized, but is
sprung (like a Musrom) out of the corruption of the name of John; for before,
John's were, I did never find mention of any Iacks except black Iacks: and
there was an old courteous Epithet attributed to John (as gentle John) but now
so many Iacks are made Gentles, that most John's and Iacks make no further
account of Gentilitie then glorious Titles and gaudy Sures: so much for Jack.

Now for the name and beginning of Lent (as near as I can I will describe) the
word Lent does signify, a thing borrowed: for except a thing be borrowed, how
is it lent? and being lent, it follows by consequence that it was borrowed.
But from whom it was so free of the loan of this Lent, that would be known.

First then you must conceive, that the true Etimologie, or ancient name of
this Lent, is Lean-tide, which being Anagramatiz'd (Landit) for the
chiefe^prouision that he is furnished withal being fish, and such seafaring
fare, that except he land it, there will be but cold takings in the fish
markets: for Jack a Lent has no society, affinity or propinquitie with flesh
and blood, and by reason of his leanness (as Nymshag an acient Vtopian
Philosopher declares in his Treatise of the Antiquity of Gingerbread, Lib. 7.
Page 30000.) he should have been a foot man to a Prince of that Empire named
Lurguish Haddernot; but Lent showed him the trick of a right footman, and ran
away from him faster then an Irish Lackquey, and from that time to this was
never seen^ in Vtopia. Besides, he has the Art of Legerdemaine beyond all the
Iuglers in Egypt or Europe, for with a trick that he has, he is in England,
Scotland, France, Ireland, and the most part of the Christian world at one and
the self same time, yet for all this nimblenesse and quick agility, he was
never seen to swear, which is no marvel, because he has not any fat or
pinguidity in his incorporeall corpse. He has a wise named Fasting, as lean as
himself, yet sure I think she is as honest as barren: but it were very
dangerous for an Epicure or a Puritan to have a bastard by her, for there were
no other hope, but that the father of the brat (if it should prove male) would
tutor it in all disobedience against both Lent and Fasting: for although Lent
and Abstinence be but forty days endurance, yet to these valiant men of their
teeth it seems forty years, for they put the Letter (e) into the word Fast,
and turn it into Feast. And though a man eat fish till his guts crack, yet if
he eat no flesh he fasts, because he eats as fast as he can. For the word
Fast is to be taken in many senses, as to fast from feeding, and to feed fast,
to be bown to fast, and to be bound fast.

The Fast from feeding is diverse ways performed.

1 Some there are that fast for pure devotion, with a zealous abstinence from
any kind of corporal food for a space, because they will bring down and
curb their unbridled affections, and tame their fleshly desires, that so the
exercise of spiritual contemplation may be the more seruent, their repentance
more unfeigned, and their prayers more acceptable. 2 Another Fast is
hypocritical or sophistical, as a holy Maid that enjoined her self to
abstain four days from any meat whatsoever, and being locked up close in a
room, she had nothing but her two Books to feed upon, but the Books were two
painted Boxes, made in the form of great Bibles with claspes and bosses, the
inside not having one word of God in them, nor any fault escaped in the
printing, but the one well filled with Suckets, and sweet meats, and the other
with Wine, upon which this devout Votary did fast with zealous meditation,
eating up the contents of one Book, and drinking contentedly the other.
Then there is a Fast called in spite of your teeth, and that is, Will ye
nill ye, when a man's stomach is in Folio, and knows not where to have a
dinner in Decimo sexto. This Fast I have often met withal at the Court, and at
diverse great men's houses, not because there has wanted meat, but because some
h^^^ wanted manners, and I have wanted imp^dence.

But Jack a Lents Fast is otherwise then ^^^^ these, for I am as willing to
fast with him as ^^^^ feast with Shrouetide: for he has an army ^^^^ various
dishes, an host of diverse fishes, w^^^ fallets, sawces, sweet meats, Wine,
A^^^ Beer, fruit, roots, Reasons, Almonds, Spices ^ with which I have often
(and care not much to do more often) made as good a shift^^^^^^ fast, and with
as good a zeal performed it, ^^^^ a Brownist will go to plow upon a Christmas
day.

Thus having showed the original of this Jack, it follows next, that I
declare his yearly entertain^ment into this I Will of Great Britain, what
privileges he has, to whom he is best welcome, who are glad of his departure,
what friends or foes he has, and when he inhabiteth all the year after his
going from hence.

Always before Lent there comes wadling fat gross bursten-gutted groom,
called Shroue-Tuesday, one whose manners shows, the^^ he is better fed then
taught: and indeed he is the only monster for feeding amongst all the days of
the year, for he denoures more f^^^ in fourteen hours, then this whole
Kingdom does (or at the least should do) in ^^^^ weeks after: such boiling
and broyling, such roasting and toasting, such stewing, and bre^ing, such
baking, frying, mincing, cutting caruing, devouring, and gorbellyed gurmo^^
dizing, that a man would think people did take in two months provision at once
into their paunches, or that they did ballast their bell^^^ with meat for a
voyage to Constantinople, or ^^^^ the West Indies.

Moreover, it is a goodly fight to see how the Cooks in Great men's Kitchins,
do fry in their masters suet, and sweat in their own grease, that if ever a
Cook be worth the ^^^^ting it is when Shroue-Tuesday is in town, fo^^ he is
so stued and larded, roasted, basted, and almost ouer-roasted, that a man may
eat the rawest bit of him and never take a surfeit. In a word, they are that
day extreme choleric, and too hot for any man to meddle with, being Monarchs
of the Marow-bones, Marquesses of the Mutton, Lords high Regents of the Spit
and the Kettle, Barons of the Gridiron, and sole Commanders of the Drying Pan.
And all this hurly burly, is for no other purpose but to stop the mouth of this
Land-wheale ShroueTuesday. At whose entrance in the morning, all the whole
Kingdom is in quiet, but by that time the clock strikes eleven, which (by the
help of a knauish Sexton) is commonly before nine, then there is a bell rung,
called The Pancake Bell, the sound whereof makes thousands of people distracted,
and forgetful either of manner or humanity: Then there is a thing clad
wheaten flower, which the sulphory Necromanticke Cooks do mingle with water,
eggs, spice, and other tragical magical enchantments, and then they put it
by little and little, into a Drying Pan of boiling suet, where it makes a
confused dismal hissing (like the Learnean Snakes in the reeds of Acheron,
^tix or Phlegeton) until at last by the skill of the Cook, it is transformed
into the form of a Flap-iack, which in our translation is called a Pancake,
which ominous incantation the ignorant people do devour very greedily (having
for the most part well dined before:)but they have no sooner swallowed that
sweet candyed bait, but straight their wits forsake them, and they run
stark mad, assembling in routs and throngs numberless of ungoverned numbers,
with uncivil civil commotions.

Then Tim Tatters (a most valiant villain) with an Ensign made of a piece of
a Bakers mawkin fi^t upon a Broome-staffe, he displaies his dreadful colors,
and calling the ragged Regiment together, makes an illiterate Oration, stuffed
with most plentiful want of discretion: the conclusion whereof is, that
somewhat they will do, but what they know not. Until as last comes marching
up another troop of Tarterdemalians, proclayming wars against no matter who,
so they may be doing. Then these youths armed with cudgels, stones, hammers,
rules, trowels, and hand-sawes, put Play houses to the sack, and Bawdy-houses
to the spoil, in the quarrel breaking a thousand quarrels (of glass I mean)
making ambitious brickbats break their necks, tumbling from the tops of lofty
chimnies, terribly vntyling houses, ripping up the bowels of feather-beds, to
the enriching of vpholsters, the profit of Plaisterers, and Dirtdawbers, the
game of Glasiers, Ioyners, Carpenters, Tylers and Bricklayers. And which is
worse, to the contempt of Justice: for what auailes it for a Constable with an
army of reverend iusty Bill-men to command peace to these beasts, for they with
their pockets in stead of Pistols, well char'd with stone-shot, discharge
against the Image of Authority, whole volleyes as thick as hayle, which
robustions repulse puts the better sort to the worser part, making the band of
vnscowred Halberdiers retire faster then ever they came on, and show exceeding
discretion in proving tall men of their heels. Thus by the unmannerly manners of
Shroue-Tuesday Constables are baffled, Bawds are banged, Punckes are pillaged,
Panders are plagued, and the chief Commanders of these valourous villiacoes,
for their reward for all this confusion, do in conclusion purchase the
inheritance of a Iayle, to the commodity of Iaylors, and discommodity to
themselves, with a fearful expectation that Tiburne shall stop their
throats, and the Hangman take possession of their coats, or that some Beadle
in bloody Characters shall imprint their faults on their shoulders. So much for
Shroue-Tuesday, Iacke-a-Lents Gentleman Usher, these have been his humors in
former times, but I have some better hope of reformation in him hereafter, and
indeed I wrote this before his coming this year 1617. not knowing how he
would behave himself, but tottering betwixt Despair and Hope, I leave him.

Shroue-Tuesday having played these parts aforesaid, does Exit, and next day
Lent begins to enter, who is entertained by a grave, formal, Reverend
Statesman, called Civil Policy: But you must understand that Lent would very
feign take up his lodging here with Religion, but Religion will not be
acquainted with him, and therefore Civil Policy has the managing of the
business. But it is a wonder to see what Munition and Artillery the Epicures,
and Caniball Flesh-eaters do provide to oppose Lent, and keep him out at the
staffes end, as whole barrels of poudered beef blow him up, tubs of Porke to
pistol and shoot him through with his kindred hunger, famine, and desolation,
Baricadoes of Bacon, as strong and impregnable Bulwarks against inuasiue
battery. Which Civil Policy perceiving, causes Proclamations straight to be
published for the establishing of Lents Government, but then to see how the
Butchers (like silenced Schismatics) are dispersed, some ^iding into the
Country to buy Oxen, Kine, Calves, Sheep and Lambs, leaving their wives, men
and maids, to make provision of Pricks for the whole year in their absence:
some again of the inferior sort do scout into Stables, Priuies, Sellers, Sir
Francis Drakes Ship at Detford, my Lord Mayors Barge, and diverse secret and
unsuspected places, and there they make private Shambles with kil-calfe
cruelty, and Sheepe-slaughtering murder, to the abuse of Lent, the deceiving
of the Informers, and the great griese of every zealous Fishmonger.

For indeed Lent in his own nature is no blood-sucker, nor cannot endure any
bloodshed; and it is his intent, that the Bull, the Ox, the Ram, the Goat, the
Buck, or any other beast, should be free to live in any Corporation without
molestation: it is Lents intent, that the innocent Lamb, and Essex Calfe,
should survive to wear the crest of their Ancestors: that the Goose, the
Buzzard, the Widgeon, and the Woodcocke, may walk fearelesse in any market
Town, check by io^e with a Headborow, or a Tithingman.

The Cutthroats Butchers, wanting throats to cut,
At Lents approach their bloody Shambles shut:
For forty days their tyranny does cease,
And men and beasts take truce and live in peace:
The Cow, the Sow, the Ewe may safely feed.
And lough, grunt, bleate, and fructify and breed,
Cocks, Hens, and Capons, Turkey, Goose, and Widgeon,
Hares, Conyes, Pheasant, Partridge, Plouer, Pidgeon,
All these are from the breake-neck Poulters paws
Secured by Lent, and guarded by the laws,
The goaring Spits are hanged for fleshly sticking,
And then Cooks fingers are not worth the licking.
But to recount the numberless Army that Lent does conduct, the great Munition
and Artillery that he has to withstand those that gainstand him, his weapons
of offense and defense, and variety of hostile Acoustrements that his host is
armed withal: if I should write all these things, my memory must be
boundless, because my work would be endless. First, marches Sir Lawrence
Ling, with his Regiment, an ancient Seafaring Gentleman: next follows
Colonel Cod, oftentimes bleeding fresh in the Battle: then comes Captain
Stocke-fish, a well beaten Soldier, and one that is often proved to endure
much; Sir Salmon Salt, in a pitiful Pickle valiantly abides the conflict, and
Gilbert Gubbins all to tatters like a ragged soldier many times pieces out a
broken supper. The maiesticall king of Fishes, the heroical most magnificent
Herring armed with white and red, keeps his Court in all this hurly-burly,
^not like a tyrannical tear throat in open arms, but like wise Dtogenes in a
Barrel, where if any of his Regiments either do or take injury, though he
want the sword of Justice, yet he has the scales, which I imagine he carries
not for naught. The great Lord Treasurer to this mighty Prince (old Oliver Cob)
is very inward with him, and knows more of his secrets then all his Privy
Counsel besides: and when his hard-rowd Master means to show himself in his
red bloody colors, then in fury he associates himself with two notorious
Rebels, Jack Straw, and Jack Cade, who do incompasse him round, and beleager
him on each side, guarding his person from the fury of wind and weather.

The wet Fishmongers all this while (like so many Executioners) vnkennell the
salt Ecles from their brinie Ambuscadoes, and with marshall Law hang them up:
the Stock Fish having tried a terrible action of battry is condemned to be
drowned, the Ling, Haberdine, Greene-fish, and Cole-fish, are drawn and
quar^ered into poles, backs, and tails, and (like Rebels in Ireland) hanged
with a with: nay the King of fishes himself cannot escape, but ^^^yrannically
broyld upon a Gridiron. Then comes Iacke-sauce with a spoon creeping out of a
Mustard pot, armed in a pewter sawcer, a desperate fellow, and one that dares
take Dauy Ap Diggon, or Shon Ap Morgan, by the nose, and many times (with the
spirit of Teuxbury) he will make a man weep being most merry, and take the
matter in snuff being well pleased

The Whiting, Rotcher, Gournet, and the Mop,
The Seat and Thorneback, in the net does drop:
The pide-coat Mackrell, Pilchard, Sprat, and Soale,
To serve great lack-a Lent amain do trole.
In the Reareward comes Captain Crab, Lieutenant Lobster, (whose catching
claws always puts me in mind of a Sergeant) the blushing Prawne, the
well-armed Oyster, the Scollop, the Wilke, the Mussell, Cockle, and the
Perewinkle, these are hot shots, Veneriall prouocators, fishy in substance, and
fleshly in operation. The poor Anchoue is pitifully pepperd in the fight,
whilst the Sturgeon is ^eg'd randed, and iold about the ears, and in
conclusion, without dissembling eaten with Fennel the Emblem of flattery: But
the An^houe is oftentimes revenged upon his eaters, for being devoured raw, he
broils in their stomachs so hotly, that before the heat be quenched the
eaters are drenched in the blood of Bacchus, Sack and Claret, that though a
man be as wise as a Constable at his entrance, his wit sometimes is so shrunk
in the ^wetting, that he may want the understanding of an Ass.

Then there are a crew of neere-bred freshwater soldiers, our Thamessisians,
our Comrades of Barking, our Eastern, and Western Riuer-rouers, these youths
are brought and caught by whole shoales, for indeed they are no fighters, but
mere white-liuerd, heartlesse runawayes, like the Turks Asapye, that if the
Fishermen (like diligent Catchpoles) did not watch narrowly to catch them by
hook and by crook, by line and leisure, Lent might gape for Gudgeons, Roach
and Dace, were it not for these Netmongers, it is no^flat lie to say, the
Flounder might lie flat in his watery Cabin, and the Eele (whose slippery tail
put me in mind of a formal Courtiers promise) would wriggle up and down in
his muddy habitation, which would be a great discommodity for schoole-boyes,
through the want of scourges to whip Gigs and Towne-Tops.

The Breame, the Lamprey, Barbell, But, and Pike,
Secure might keep the River, Pond, and Dike:
Carps, Tench, Perch, Smelts, would never come to land,
But for Nets, Angles, and the Fishers hand:
And bawsing queanes that use to sell and buy,
Would cry, because they want where with to cry.
To speak of the honesty of Fishermen, and the account that we ought to make
of their Calling, it was the faculty of Simon, Andrew, James and John, the
blessed Apostles, and by a common Rule, all Fishermen must be men singularly
endued, and possessed with the virtue of patience, for the Proverb, says, If
you swear you shall catch no fish, and I my self have been an eyewitness,
when seven or eight Anglers have employed their best Art and industry two
hours, and in the end they have not been able to share one Gudgeon or a
Bleake amongst them all, the cause has been, either there was no fish to be
caught, or else one impatient fellow of the Company has sworn away good luck.

I could run ten Kingdoms (or Reames) of paper out of breath, in the praise
of this lean Jack, and his spawnes (Ember weeks, Fridayes, and fasting
days) But I suppose there are none more sorrowful in the time of his being
here then Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, for through the Royal Court, the Innes of
Court, the City and Country, all the better sort wear mourning black as
long as Lent is in Town: But so soon as he is gone, then they change colors,
and feast, banquet, revel, and make merry, as if the Land were freed from some
notorious Termagant Monster, some murdering Plague, or some devouring Famine.

The Bakers metamorphose their trade from one shape to another, his round
halfe-penny loaves are transformed into square wigges, (which wigges like
drunkards are drowned in their Ale) the Rowles are turned to Simnels, in the
shape of Bread-pyes, and the light puffed up four cornerd Bun, does show that
the knavery of the Baker is universal, in Asia, Europa, Afrike, and America:
for since Colliers and Scriueners have purchased the possession of the Pillory
from them, their light bread brings in heavy gains, where if by chance a Batch
or a Basket full being examined by the scales of Justice, and the Bread
committed to Newgate for want of weight, and the Baker to the Counter for lack
of conscience, yet he knows he shall out again, and with a trick that he
has, in one week he will recover the consumption of his purse again, by his
moderate light handling of the medicine of meal, Yeast, and Water.

But now suppose that Palme-sunday is past, and that you see Lent, and both the
Fish-streets sing loath to depart, whilst every Fishmonger wrings his hands, and
by the reason of cold takings, beats himself into a heat, whilst (to their
great grief) whole herds of Oxen, and flocks of Sheep, are driven into every
Town for no other purpose, but to drive Lent out of the Countery.

Then pell-mell murder, in a purple hue,
In reeking blood his slaughtering paws imbrew:
The Butchers Axe (like great Alcides Bat)
Dings deadly down, ten thousand thousand flat:
Each Butcher (by himself) makes Marshall Laws,
Cuts throats, and kills, and quarters, hangs, and draws.
It is a thing worthy to be noted, to see how all the Dogs in the Town do
wagge their tails for joy, when they see such provision to drive away Lent,
(for a Dog, a Butcher, and a Puritan, are the greatest enemies he has) but
there is one day in the year that Dogs in general are most afraid, and
that is the Friday after Easter, for they having past five weeks without
seeing any flesh, and endured a hard siedge by Lent and fish-bones, then at
Easter they see flesh on the Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday
day, and when the Fraiday comes, they see great store of fish again, the poor
Cu^^^^ (all in a pitiful quandary) stink for woe, for fear that another
Lent is come suddenly upon them, thus they continue in that dogged perplexity
till the Sunday following when the appearance of flesh makes them have a
feeling, that they were more afraid then hurt.

But imagine Lent is gone, but who knows whither he is gone? that would be
known: for it cannot be but that so mighty a Monarch as he, has his inroades
and his outloapes, his standing Court of continual residence, as well as his
tents, houses, and places of remoouall for pleasure and progress. For he comes
to us by way of annual visitaiton: to the Capuchin Friars he comes twice every
year, foe they keep two Lents, because they will be sure to fast double, for
when a thing is well done (it is an old saying) it is twice done, and by
consequence a thing being twice done, must be well done: I know not why they
do it, but some say, that it is a work of Supearr rogation, and so I leave
them.

But Lent keeps his continual court with the holy Couents of the unsanctified
fathers, the Friars Carthusians, these are they that have made a perpetual
divorce between beasts and birds, these are they that have confirmed an
everlasting league with Lent, and all the ragged Aquarian Regiments of the
spacious Kingdom of Pisces. For when they enter into their order first, they
are enjoined never to touch or taste any manner of flesh whatsoever, which they
do inuiolably perform: for let hunger, and thin-gutted famine assault them
never so cruelly, so that there were no fish to be had, yet they hold it
meritorious to starve and famish, rather then to eat flesh. For indeed in
cases of necessity they have power to metamorphose flesh into fish: (as for
example) when any Town is besiedged and sharply assailed with war without,
and famine within, that meat is fallen into such a consumption, that fish is
gone, and flesh is scarce, then these ^enerable fathers (by Apostaticall power
which they have) can take a Sir-loyne of Beef, and thrust his knighthood into
a tub of water, and command him to come forth transformed into a Ling, and so
for all kind of flesh else, they can turn a Pig to a Pike, a Goose, ^o a
Gurnet, a Hen to a Herring, a Sow to a Salmon, and an Owl to an Oyster: and
all these are no wonders to them, for they are all as nothing to their
exorcising trick of Transsubstantiation in the Sacrament: for it is not
possible for any thing to be impossible to them that can make their Maker, and
conjure their Savior into a piece of bread, and eat him when they have done.
With these enemies of ^^arnalitie Lent has domestical perpetuity, ^^ese
observe his Laws more firmly, then they do either the first or second Table,
and twenty Citizens shall break politickely, and take up their lodging in Luds
unlucky gate before they will crack the least Iniunction that is articulated
betwixt Lent and them.

Thus having showed the progress, egresse and regresse of this Mediterranian,
Atlanticke, Belgicke, Gallobelgicus, this Caspian, Ibe^rian British, Celticke,
Callidonian, commanding Marine countermander, I think it not amiss to declare
what good he does in this Kingdom the time of his being here, and how much
more good he would do if he were rightly observed.

As it is a matter of conscience to obey superior and supreme Magistrates, so
in that respect I hold it a conscience to abstain from flesh-eating in Lent:
not that I think it to be ^vncleane to the clean, or that the eating or not
eating, is meritorious: for I am persuaded that a man may go to heaven as well
with a leg of a Capon, as with a red Herring. But seeing Lent is ordained to
a good intent, for the increase and preservation of Calves, Lambs, Swine, and
all kind of beasts, and birds whatsoever, whereby the breeding and
multiplicitie of these creatures makes our Land the terrestrial Paradise of
plenty, and so is (by the bountiful blessings of the Almighty all-giuing
Giver) able to maintain her self, and relieve many neighboring Realms, and
Regions. Surely they are no good Commonwealths men, that wilfully will break
so tolerable aninstitution, as to refrain six or seven weeks in a year from
flesh, having so much variety and change of fish and other sustenance more then
sufficient.

It is most certain, that if Lent were truly kept, and the fish days in
every week duly observed, and that every house in this Kingdom did spend but
the quantity of two Haberdine or Greenfish in a week, that then this Kingdom
of great Britain both for meat and Mariners would be the Mistress of the
world, and for wealth and riches superlatiue to the Mines of America.

But the nature of man is so perverse, that like Pandoraes Box, he will be
tooting and prying soonest into that which he is most restrained from, wherein
he shows himself to be no changeling, but the natural son of Adam, and
heir to his frailty and disobedience: for in common reason (for a common
good) if there were no statutes, no precepts or commands for the keeping of
Lent and fishdayes, men would of themselves, (and by their own instigation
(bridle their fleshly appetites with the inafle of discretion. It is an
unmeasurable detriment to this Kingdom, the abuse, neglect, and contempt of
this so laudable and commodious an institution, and the due observing of it
duly would be invaluable, I think past the reach of Arithmeticke: but I have
often noted, that if any superfluons feasting or gurmondizing, pancsi-cramming
assembly do meet, the disordered business is so ordered, that it must be
either in Lent, upon a Friday, or a fasting day: for the meat does not relish
well, except it be sawe'd with disobediente and contempt of Authority. And
though they eat Sprat on the Sunday, they care not, so they may be full gorged
with flesh on the Friday night.

Then all the zealous Puritans will feast,
In detestation of the Romish beast.
For mine own part (as I have before written I hold fish or flesh no Maxims,
Axioms, or grounds of Religion, but those that wilfully and contemptuously do
care flesh in the Lent (except such whose appetites are repugnant to fish, and
whose nature has not been used to it, except such as are sick, and women
with child, for all which there is a lawful toleration) except such, I say,
he that feasts with flesh in Lent, I wish he might be constrained to fast with
fish all the year after for his contempt.

Wide and large is the way that I might travel in this spacious business: but
few words are best, especially if they be spoken to the wife, and if any poor
Iacke-a-Lent do ha^ pen into the hands of a fool, it is but a Foo^ and a Jack,
or two fools well met, but he^ is the ods, a wise man will make much of^^
Jack for his plain dealing, when a fool will quarrel with him, and falling
together by the ears, tear one another clothes, and the Iacks paper-ierkin
goes to wrack.

CERTAIN BLANKE VERSES WRITTEN of purpose to no purpose, yet so plainly
contrived, that a Child of two years old may understand them as well as a
good Scholar of fifty.
GReat Iacke-a-Lent, clad in a Robe of Air,
Threw mountains higher then Alcides beard:
Whilst Pancradge Church, armed with a Samphier blade,
Began to reason of the business thus:
You squandring Troglodites of Amsterdam,
How long shall Cerberus Tapster be?
What though stout Asax lay with Proserpine,
Shall men leave eating powdered Beef for that?
I see no cause but men may pick their theeth,
Though Brutus with a Sword did kill himself.
Is Shooters-hill turned to an Oyster pie,
Or may a May Pole be a butterd Plaice?
Then let Saint Katherins sail to Bride-well Court,
And Chitterlings be worn for statute lace.
For if a Humble be should kill a Whale
With the butt-end of the Antarticke Pole,
It Is nothing to the mark at which we aim:
For in the Commentaries of Tower Ditch,
A fat stewed Bawd has bin a dish of state.
More might be said, but then more must be spoke,
The weights sell down because the Jack rope broke.
And he that of these lines does make a doubt,
Let him sit down and pick the meaning out.
FINIS.
TO ALL MY LOVING ADVENTVRERS, BY WHAT NAME OR TITLE SOEVER, MY GENERAL
SALVTATION.
REader, these Travails of mine into Scotland, were not undertaken, neither in
imitation, or emulation of any man, but only devised by my self, on purpose
to make trial of my friends, both in this Kingdom of England, and that of
Scotland; and because I would be an eye-witnes of diverse things which I had
heard of that Country; and whereas many shallow-brain'd Critickes, do lay an
aspersion on me, that I was set on by others, or that I did vnrgoe this
project, either in malice, or mockage of Master Benjamin Ionson, I vow the
faith of a Christian, that their imaginations are all wide, for he is a
Gentleman, whom I am so much obliged for many undeserved courtesies that I have
received ^m him, and from others by his favor, that I durst never to be so
impudent or in^atcfull, as either to suffer any man's per swasions, or mine own
instigation, to incite ^^^, to make so bad a requital, for so much goodness
formerly received; so much for at, and now Reader, if you expect

That I should write of Cities situations,
Or that of Countries I should make relations:
Of brooks, crooks, nooks; of rivers, boorns and rills,
Of mountains, fountains, Castles, Towers and hills,
Of Shieres, and Pieres, and memorable things,
Of lives and deaths of great commanding Kings,
I touch not those, they not belong to me:
But if such things as these you long to see,
Lay down my Book, and but vouchsafe to reed
The learned Camden, or laborious Speed.
And so God speed you and me, whilst I rest yours in all thankfulness: IO:
TAILOR

THE PENNYLES PILGRIMAGE, OR THE MONEY-LESSE PERAMBVLATION, OF JOHN TAILOR,
ALIAS, THE KINGS MAJESTY'S WATER-POET. HOW HE TRAVAILED ON FOOT, FROM LONDON
TO EDENBOROVGH IN Scotland, not carrying any Money to or fro, neither Begging,
Borrowing, or Asking Meat, Drink or Lodging.
LIst Lordings, list, (if you have lust to list)
I write not here a tale of had I wist:
But you shall hear of travels, and relations,
Descriptions of strange (yet English) fashions.
And he that not believes what here is writ,
Let him (as I have done) make proof of it.
The year of grace, accounted (as I ween)
One thousand, twice three hundred and eighteen,
And to relate all things in order duly,
'Twas Tuesday last, the foureteenth day of July,
Saint Revels day, the Almanacke will tell ye
The sign in Virgo was, or near the belly:
The Moon full three days old, the wind full South;
At these times I began this trick of youth.
I speak not of the Tide, for understand,
My legs I made my Oars, and rowd by land,
Though in the morning I began to go,
Good fellows trooping, flocked me so,
That make what haste I could, the Sun was set,
Ere from the gates of London I could get.
At last I took my latest leave, thus late
At the Bell Inn, that is extra Aldersgate.
There stood a horse that my prouant should carry,
From that place to the end of my fegarie,
My Horse no Horse, or Mare, but gelded Nagge,
That with good understanding bore my bag:
And of good carriage he himself did show,
These things are ex'lent in a beast you know.
There in my Knapsack, (to pay hungers fees)
I had good Bacon, Biscuit, Neates-tongue, Check,
With Roses, Barberies, of each Conserues,
And Mitridate, that vigrous health preserues:
And I entreat you take these words for no-lyes,
I had good Aqua vita, Rosa so-lies:
With sweet Ambrosia, (the gods own drink)
Most ex'lent geere for mortals, as I think.
Besides, I had both vinegar and oil,
That could a daring saucy stomach foil.
This foresaid Tuesday night 'twixt eight and ^^^
Well rigged and ballac'd, both with Beer and W^^
I stumbling forward, thus my iaunt begun,
And went that night as far as Aslington.
There did I find (I dare affirm it bold)
A Maydenhead of twenty five years old,
But surely it was painted, like a whore,
And for a sign, or wonder, hanged at door,
Which shows a Maidenhead, that is kept so long,
May be hanged up, and yet sustain no wrong.
There did my loving friendly Host begin
To entertain me freely to his Inn:
And there my friends, and good associates,
Each one to mirth himself accommodates.
At Wel-head both for welcome, and for cheer,
Having a good New tonne, of good stale Beer:
There did we Trundle down health, after health,
(Which oftentimes impaires both health and wea^^^
Till cuery one had filled his mortal Trunk.
And only Nobody was three parts drunk.
The morrow next, Wednesday Saint Swithens day,
^rem ancient Islengton I took my way.
^^ Hollywell I was enforced carrowse,
^^le high, and mighty, at the Blind-mans house.
^ut there is a help to make amends for all,
That though the Ale be great, the Pots be small.
^t High-gate hill to a strange house I went,
And saw the people were to eating bent,
^^either borrowed, Craved, Asked, Begged or Bought,
^ut most laborious with my teeth I wrought.
^ did not this, 'cause meat or drink was ^cant,
^ut I did practice thus before my want;
^^ike to a Tilter that would win the prize,
Before the day he will often exercise.
^ I began to put in ure, at first
These principles against hunger, against thirst.
^^lose to the Gate, there dwelt a worthy man,
That well could take his whiffe, and quaffe his Can,
^^ight Robin Good Fellow, but humors evil,
^oe call him Robin Fluto, or the Devil.
^ot finding him a Devil, freely hearted,
With friendly farewels I took leave and parted.
And as along I did my Journey take,
^dranke at Broomes well, for pure fashions sake.
^wo miles I traveled then without a bayte,
^he Sarazens head at Whetstone entering straight,
^found an Host, might lead an Host of men,
^ceeding Fat, yet named Lean, and Fen.
And though we make small reckoning of him here,
^^ce's known to be a very Great man there.
There I took leave of all my Company,
^ade all farewell, yet spoke to Nobody.
^ood Reader think not strange, what I compile,
^or Nobody was with me all this while.
And Nobody did drink, and, wink, and scinke,
And on occasion freely spent his Chinke.
^any one desire to know the man,
^alke, stumble, Timndle, but in Barbican.
^her's as good Beer and Ale as ever twang'd,
And, in that street kind Nobody is hanged.
^^ leaning him unto his matchless fame,
^o St. Albanes in the Evening came,
Where Master Tailor, at the Sarazens head,
^nask'd (unpaid for) me both lodged and fed.
^^^ Tapsters, Hostlers, Chamberlaines, and all,
^i'd me a labor, that I need not call,
^he Iugges were filled and filled, the cups went round,
^^^d in a word great kindness there I found,
^^ which both to my Cousin, and his men,
^^ still be thankful in word, deed, and pen.
^^ Thursday morning there I made my stay,
^d then I went plain Dunstable highway.
^^ very heart with drought me thought did shrink,
^ent twelve miles, and no one bade me drink.
Which made me call to mind, that instant time,
That Drunkenness was a most sinful crime.
When 'Pud^^le-hill I footed down, and past
A mile from thence, I found a Hedge at last.
There stroke we sail, our ^^con, Cheese, and Bread,
We drew like Fiddlers, and like Farmers fed,
And whilst two hours we there did take our case,
My Nag made shift to mump green Pulse and Pease.
Thus we our hungry stomachs did supply,
And drank the water of a Brook hard by.
Away t'ward Hockley in the hole, we make,
When straight a Horsman did me ouer-take,
Who knew me, and would feign have given me Coin.
I said, my Bonds did me from Coin inioyne,
I thanked and prayed him to put up his Chinke,
And willingly I wisnt it drowned in drink.
Away rode he, but like an honest man,
I found at Hockley standing at the Swan,
A formal Tapster, with a ^ugge and glass,
Who did arest me: I most writing was
To try the Action, and straight put in bale,
My fees were paid before, with sixe-pence Ale.
To quit this kindness, I most willing am,
The man that paid for all, his name is Dam,
At the Greene-dragon, against Grayes-Inne gate,
He lives in good repute, and honest state.
I foreward went in this my roauing race,
To Stony Stratford I toward night did pace.
My mind was fixed through the Town to pass,
To find some lodging in the Hay or Grass,
Bu^ at the Queenes-Armes, from the window there,
A comfortable voice I chanced to hear,
Call Tailor, Tailor, and be hanged come hither,
I looked for small entreaty and went thither,
There were some friends, which I was glad to see
Who knew my Journey; lodged, and boorded me.
On Friday morn, as I would take my way,
My friendly Host entreated me to stay,
Because it rained, he told me I should have
Meat, Drink, and Horse-meate and not pay or crave.
I thanked him, and for's love remain his debtor,
But if I live, I will requite him better.
(From Stony Stratford) the way hard with stones,
Did founder me, and vex me to the bones.
In blustering weather, both for wind and rain,
Through Tocetter I trotted with much pain.
Two miles from thence, we sat us down and dinde,
Well bulwark'd by a hedge, from rain and wind.
We having fed, away incontinent,
With weary pace toward Dauentry we went.
Four miles short of it, one o're-tooke me there,
And told me he would leave a Judge of Beer,
At Dauentry at the Horse-shoe for my use.
I thought it no good manners to refuse,
But thanked him, for his kind unasked gift,
Whilst I was lame as scarce a leg could lift,
Came limping after to that stony Town,
Whose hard streets made me almost halt right down.
There had my friend performed the words he said,
And at the door a Judge of liquor staide,
The folks were all informed, before I came,
How, and wherefore my journey I did frame,
Which caused mine Hostess from her door come out,
(Having a great Wart rampant on her snowt.)
The Tapsters, Hostlers, one another call,
The Chamberlaines with admiration all,
Were filled with wonder, more then wonderful,
As if some Monster sent from the Mogull,
Some Elephant from Afric, I had been,
Or some strange beast from the Amazonian Queen.
As Buzzards, Widgions, Woodcocks, and such foul,
Do gaze and wonder at the broad-fac'd Owl,
So did these brainelesse Asses, all-amaz'd,
With admirable Non sense talked and gazed.
They knew my state (although not told by me)
That I could scarcely go, they all could see,
They drank of my Beer, that to me was given,
But gave me not a drop to make all even,
And that which in my mind was most amiss,
My Hostess she stood by and saw all this,
Had she but said, Come near the house, my friend;
For this day here shall be your Iourneyes end,
Then had she done the thing which did not,
And I in kinder words had paid the shor.
I do entreat my friends, (as I have some)
If they to Dauentry do chance to come,
That they will balke that Inn; or if by chance,
Or accident into that house they glance,
Kind Gentlemen, as they by you reap profit,
My Hostess care of me, pray tell her of it.
Yet do not neither: Lodge there when you will,
You for your money shall be welcome still.
From thence that night, although my ibones were sore,
I made a shift to hobble seven miles more ^,
The way to Dunchurch, foul with dirt and mire,
Able, I think, both man and horse to tire.
On Dunsmore Heath, a hedge does there enclose
Grounds, on the right hand, there I did repose.
Wits whetstone, want, there made us quickly Iarn,
With knives to cut down Rushes, and green Feame,
Of which we made a field-bed in the field,
Which sleep, and rest, and much content did yield.
There with my mother Earth, I thought it fit
To lodge, and yet no Incest did commit:
My bed was Curtain'd with good wholesome airs,
And being weary, I went up no stayres:
The sky my Canopy, bright Phebe shinde,
Sweet bawling Zepbiru^ breathed gentle wind,
In heavens Star Chamber I did lodge that night,
Ten thousand Stars, me to my bed did light;
There baracadoed with a bancke lay we
Below the lofty branches of a tree,
There my bed-fellowes and companions were,
My Man, my Horse, a Bull, four Cowes, two St^^^
But yet for all this most confused rowt,
We had no bed-staues, yet we fell not out.
Thus Nature, like an ancient free Vpholster,
Did furnish us with bedstead, bed, and bolster;
And the kind skies, (for which high heaven be t^^^ ^^^)
Allowed us a large Covering and a Blanket:
Auroras face began light our lodging dark,
We arose and mounted, with the mounting Lark,
Through plashes puddles, thick, thin, wet and dry
I traue^'d to the City Couentry.
There Master Doctor Holland caused me stay
The day of Saturn; and the Sabbath day.
Most friendly welcome, he did me afford,
I was so entertained at bed and board,
Which as I dare not brag how much it was,
I dare not be ingrate and let it pass,
But with thanks many I remember it,
(Instead of his good deeds) in words and wn^^^
He used me like his son, more then a friend,
And he on Monday his commends did send
To Newhall, where a Gentleman did dwell,
Who by his name is hight Sacheuerell.
The Tuesday Iulyes one and twentieth day,
I to the City Lichfield took my way,
At Sutton Coffill with some friends I met,
And much ado I had from thence to get,
There I was almost put unto my trumps,
My Horses shoes were worn as thin as pu^^^
But nob^ Vnlean; a mad smuggy Smith,
All reparations me did furnish with.
The shoes were well removed, my Palsrey shod,
And he referred the payment unto God.
I found a friend, when I to Lichfield came,
A Ioyner, and John Piddock is his name,
He made me welcome, for he knew my iaunt,
And he did furnish me with good prouant:
He offered me some money, I refused it,
And so I took my leave, with thanks excused it.
That Wednesday, I a weary way did pass,
Rain, wind, stones, dirt, and dabbling dewie gr^^^^
With here and there a pelting scattered village,
Which yielded me no charity, or pillage:
For all the day, nor yet the night that followed.
One drop of drink I Am sure my gullet swallowed.
At night I came to a stony Town called Stone.
Where I knew none, nor was I known of none:
I therefore through the streets held on my pace,
Some two miles farther to some resting place:
At last I spide a meddow-newly mowde,
The hay was rotten, the ground half o're-flow^^^
We made a breach, and entered horse and man,
There our pauillion, we to pitch began,
Which we erected with green Broom and H^^^
T'expell the cold, and keep the rain away;
The sky all muffled in a cloud began lowre,
And presently there fell a mighty shower,
Which without intermission down did power,
From ten a night, until the mornings Four.
We all that time close in our couch did lie,
Which being well compacted kept us dry.
The worst was, we did neither sup nor sleep,
And so a temperate diet we did keep.
The morning all enrob'd in drifling fogges,
We being as ready as we had bin dogs:
We need not stand upon long ready making,
But gaping stretching, and our ears well sl^aking:
And for I found my Host and Hoslesse kind,
^ like a true man left my sheets behind.
That Thrusday morn, my weary course I framed,
Unto a Town that is Newcastle named,
(Not that Newcastle standing upon Tine)
But this Town situation does cons^^e
Near Ches^ire, in the famous County Stafford,
And for their love, low them not a straw for it;
But now my versing Muse craves some repose,
And whilst she sleeps ^^e spowt a little prose.
In this Town of Newcastle, I oner-tooke ^n Hostler, and I asked him what the
next Town was called, that was in my way toward Lancaster, he holding the end
of a riding rod in his mouth, as if it had been a Fluit, piped me this answer
and said, Talk on the hill; I asked him again what he said, Talk on the
hill: I demanded the third time, and the third time he answered me as he did
before, Ialke on the hill. I began to grow choleric, and asked him why he
could not talk, or tell me my way as well there as on the hill; at last I was
resolved, that the next. Town was four miles off me, and that the name of it
was, Talk on the hill. I had not traueled above two miles farther: but my last
nights supper (which was as much as nothing) my mind being informed of it by
my stomach. I made a virtue of necessity, and went to breakefast in the Sun:
I have ^ared better at three Suns many times before now, in
Aldersgate-Streete, Criplegate, and new Fishstreet, but here is the odds, at
those Suns they will come upon a man with a ^auerne bill as sharp cutting as
a Taylers Bill of Items: A Watch-mans hill, or a Welch-hooke falls not half to
heavy upon a man; besides most of the ^intners have the law in their own hands,
and ^aue all their Actions, Cases, Bills of Debt, and such reckonings tried at
their own Bars: from whence there is no appeal. But leaving these
impertinencies, in the material Sunneshine, we eat a substantial dinner, and
like miserable Guests we did budget up the reuersions.

And now with sleep my Muse has eased her brain,
I Will turn my style from prose, to verse again.
That which we could not have, we freely spared,
And wanting drink, most soberly we fared.
We had great store of soul (but 'twas foul way)
And kindly every step entreates me stay,
The clammy clay sometimes my heels would trip,
One foot went foreward, the other back would slip.
This weary day, when I had almost pait,
I came unto Sir Vrian Legh's at last,
At ^^dlington, near Mackifield he does dwell,
Beloved respected, and reputed well.
Through his great love, my stay with him was fixed,
From Thursday night, till noone on Monday next,
At his own table I did daily eat,
Where at may be supposed, did want no meat,
He would have given me gold or silver either,
But I with many thanks, received neither.
And thus much without slattery I dare swear;
He is a Knight beloved far and necre.
First he is beloved of his God above,
(which love, he loves to keep, beyond all love)
Next with a Wife and Children he is blessed;
Each having Gods fear planted in their breast.
With fair Demaines, Reuennue of good Lands.
He Is fairly blessed by the Almighties; hands.
And as he is happy in these outward things,
So from his inward mind continual springs
Fruits of devotion. deeds of Piety,
Good hospitable works of Charity,
Just in his Actions, constant in his word,
And one that won his honor with the sword.
He Is no Carranto, Capring, Carpet Knight,
But he knows when, and how to speak or fight.
I cannot flatter him say what I can,
He Is every way a comple^^ Gentleman.
I write not this, for what he did to me,
But what mine ears, and eyes did hear and see,
Nor do I pen this to enlarge his fame,
But to make others imitate the fame.
For like a Trumpet were I pleased to blow,
I would his worthy worth more amply show,
But I already fear have been too bold.
And crave his pardon, me excusd to hold.
Thanks to his Sons and servants every one,
Both males and females all, excepting none.
To bear a letter he did me require,
Near Manchester, unto a good Esquire:
His kinsman Edmond Prestwitch, he ordained,
That I was at Manchester entertained
Two nights, and one day, ere we thence could pass,
For men and horse, roast, boiled, and oats, and grass:
This Gentleman not only gave harbor,
But in the morning sent to me his Barbor,
Who lau'd, and shau'd me, still I spared my purse,
Yet sure he left me many a hair the worse.
But in conclusion, when his work was ended,
His ^lasse informed, my face was much amended.
And for the kindness he to me did show,
God grant his Customers beards faster grow,
That though the time of year be dear or cheap,
From fruitful faces he may mow and reap.
Then came a Smith, with shoes, and Tooth and Nail,
He searchd my horse hoou^s, me^ding what did fail,
Yet this I note my Nag, through stones and dirt,
Did shift shoes twice, ere I did shift one shirt:
Can these kind things be in oblivion hid?
No, Master Prestwitch, this and much more did,
His friendship, did command and freely gave
All before writ, and more then I durst crave.
But leaving him a little, I must tell,
How men of Manchester did use me well,
Their loves they on the tenter-hookes did rack,
Roast, boyld, baked, too too much, white, claret, sack,
Nothing they thought too heavy or too hot,
Can followed Can, and Pot succeeded Pot,
That what they could do, all they though too little,
Striving in love the Traveler to whittle.
We went into the house of one John Pinners,
(A man that lives amongst a crew of sinners)
And there eight several sorts of Ale we had,
All able to make one stark drunk or mad.
But I with courage bravely flinched not,
And gave the Town leave to discharge the shot.
We had at one time set upon the Table,
Good Ale of Hisope, 'twas no Esope fable:
Then had we Ale of Sage, and Ale of Malt,
And Ale of Woorme-wood, that could make one hair,
With Ale of Rosemary, and Bettony,
And two Ales more, or else I needs must lie.
But to conclude this drinking Alye tale,
We had a sort of Ale, called Scuruy Ale.
Thus all these men, at their own charge and cost,
Did strive whose love should be expressed most.
And farther to declare their boundless loves,
They saw I wanted, and they gave me Gloves,
In deed, and very deed, their loves were such,
That in their praise I cannot write too much;
They merit more than I have here compiled,
I lodged at the Eagle and the Child,
Whereas my Hostess, (a good ancient woman)
Did entertain me with respect, not common.
She caused my Linen, Shirts, and Bands be washed,
And on my way she caused me be refresht,
She gave me twelve silk points, she gave me B^^^^
Which by me much refused, at last was taken,
In troath she proved a mother unto me,
For which, I evermore will thankful be.
But when to mind these kindnesses I call,
Kind Master Prestwitch Author is of all,
And yet Sir Vrian Loigh's good Commendation,
Was the maine ground of this my Recreation.
From both of them, there what I had, I had,
Or else my entertainment had bin bad.
O all you worthy men of Manchester,
(True bred bloods of the County Lancaster)
When I forget what you to me have done,
Then let me headlong to confusion run.
To Noble Master Prestwitch I must give
Thanks, upon thanks, as long as I do live,
His love was such, I never can pay the score,
He far surpassed all that went before,
A horse and man he sent, with boundless bounty,
To bring me quite through Lancaster large C^^^^^
Which I well know is fifty miles at large,
And he defrayed all the cost and charge.
This unlooked pleasure, was to me such pleasure,
That I can never express my thanks with measure.
So Mistress Saracoale, Hostess kind,
And Manchester with thanks I left behind.
The Wednesday being Iulyes twenty nine,
My Journey ^ to Freston did confine,
All the day long it rained but one shower,
Which from the Morning to the Eue'n did power,
And I, before to Preston I could get,
Was sowsd, and pickeld both with rain and swe^^
But there I was supplied with fire and food,
And any thing I wanted sweet and good.
There, at the Hind, kind Master Hind mine ^^^^,
Kept a good table, baked and boyld, and roast,
There Wednesday, Thursday, Friday I did stay,
And hardly got from thence on Saturday.
Unto my Lodging often did repair,
Kind Master Thomas Banister, the Mayer,
Who is of worship, and of good respect,
And in his charge discreet and circumspect.
For I protest to God I never saw,
A Town more wisely Governed by the Law.
They told me when my Sovereign there was last,
That one man's rashness seem^d to give distaste.
It grieved them all, but when at last they found,
His Majesty was pleased, their joys were crowned,
He knew, the fairest Garden has some weeds,
He did accept their kind intents, for deeds:
One man there was, that with his zeal too hot,
And furious haste, himself much ouer-shot.
But what man is so foolish, that desires
To get good fruit from thistles, thorns and bry^^^
Thus much I thought good to demonstrate here,
Because I saw how much they grieved were;
That any way, the least part of offense,
Should make them seem offensive to their Prince.
Thus three nights was I staid and le dg'd in Preston,
And saw nothing ridiculous to lest on,
Much cost and charge the Mayor upon me spent,
And on my way two miles, with me he went,
There (by good chance) I did more friendship get,
The under Shriefe of Luncashire we met,
A Gentleman that loved, and knew me well,
And one whose bounteous mind does bear the bell.
There, as if I had bin a noted thief,
The Mayor delivered me unto the Shriefe.
The Shriefes authority did much prevail,
He sent me unto one that kept the layle.
Thus I perambuling, poor John Tailor,
Was given from Mayor to Shriefe, from Shriefe to Tailor,
The Tailor kept an Inae, good beds, good cheer,
Where paying nothing, I found nothing dear:
For the under Shriefe kind Master C^^^ill named,
(A man for housekeeping renowned and famed)
Did cause the Town of Lancaster afford
Me welcome, as if I had been a Lord.
And it is reported, that for daily bounty,
His mate can scarce be found in all that County.
The extremes of mizer, or of prodigal,
He shunnes, and lives discreet and riberall,
His wives mind, and his own are one, so fixed,
That Argus eyes could see no odds betwixt,
And sure the difference, (if there difference be)
Is who shall do most good, or he, or she.
Poor folks report, that for relieuing them,
He and his wife, are each of them a lem;
Atth'Inne, and at his house two nights I staide,
And what was to be paid, I know he paid;
If nothing of their kindness I had wrote,
Ungrateful me the world might justly note:
Had I declared all I did hear, and see,
For a great flatt'rer then I deemd should be,
Him and his wife, and modest daughter Besse,
With Earth, and Heavens felicity, God bless.
Two days a man of his, at his command,
Did guide me to the midst of Westmerland,
And my Conductor with a liberal fist,
To keep me moist, scarce any Alehouse mist.
The fourth of August (weary, halt, and lame)
We in the dark, t'a Town called Sebder came,
There Master Borrowd, my kind honest Host,
Upon me did bestow unasked cost.
The next day I held on my journey still,
Six miles unto a place called Carling hill,
Where Master Edmond Branthwaite does recide,
Who made me welcome, with my man and guide.
Our entertainment, and our fare was such,
It might have satisfied our betters much;
Yet all too little was, his kind heart thought,
And five miles on my way himself me brought,
At Orton he, I, and my man did dine,
With Master Corney a good t^^^ D^^^^e,
And surely Master Branthwait's well beleu'd,
His firm integrity is much approved:
His good effects, do make him still affected
Of God and good men, (with regard) respected:
He sent his man with me, over Date and Down,
Who lodged, and boorded me at Peereth Town,
And such good cheer, and bedding there I had,
That nothing, (but my weary self) was bad;
There a fresh man, (I know not for whose sake)
With me a journey would to Carlisle make:
But from that City, about two miles wide,
Good Sir John Dolston lodged me and my guide.
Of all the Gentlemen in Englands bounds,
His house is nearest to the Scottish grounds,
And Fame proclaims him, far and near, aloud,
He Is free from being cou^tous, or proud:
His son Sir George, most affable, and kind,
His fathers image, both in form and mind,
On Saturday to Carlisle both did ride.
Where (by their loves and leaves) I did abide,
Where of good entertainment I found store,
From one that was the Mayor the year before,
His name is Master Adam Robinson,
I the last English friendship with him won.
He ( grates) My thanks to Sir John and Sir George Dalstone, with Sir Henry
Gurwin.
found a guide to bring me through,
From Carlisle to the City Eudenborough:
This was a help, that was a help alone,
Of all my helps inferior unto none.
Eight miles from Carlisle runs a little River,
Which Englands bounds, from Scotlands grounds does sever,
Over Esk I waded.
Without Horse, Bridge, or Boat, I over did get
On foot, I went, yet scarce my shoes did wet.
I being come to this long-look'd-for land,
Did mark, remarke, note, renote, viewd and scand:
And I saw nothing that could change my will,
But that I thought my self in England still.
The Kingdoms are so nearly joined and fixed,
There scarcely went a pair of Sheares betwixt;
There I saw sky above, and earth below,
And as in England, there the Sun did show:
The hills with Sheep repleate, with corn the dale,
The before named Knights had given money to my Guide.,62 which he lose some
partat every Ale. house.
And many a cottage yielded good Scott'sh Ale;
This County (Annadale) in former times,
Was the cursed climate of rebellious crimes:
For Cumberland and it, both Kingdoms borders,
Were ever ordered, by their own disorders,
Such sharking, shifting, cutting throats, and thiouing,
Each taking pleasure in the others grieuing:
And many times he that had wealth to night,
Was by the morrow morning beggerd quite:
To many years this pell-mell fury lasted,
That all these borders were quite ipoyl'd and wasted,
Confusion, huily-burly reigned and rend'd,
The Churches with the lowly ground were leueld;
All memorable monuments defaced,
All places of defense o'rethrewne and rac'd.
That who so then did in the borders dwell,
Lived little happier then those in hell.
But since the all-disposing God of heaven.
Has these two Kingdoms to one Monarch given,
Blessed peace, and plenty on them both has showered,
Exile, and hanging has the thieves deuowr'd,
That now each subject may securely sleep,
His Sheep and Neat, the black the white does keep,
For now those Crowns are both in one combinde,
Those former borders, that each one confinde,
Appears to me (as I do understand)
To be almost the Center of the Land,
This was a blessed heaven expounded riddle,
To thrust great Kingdoms skirts into the middle.
Long may the isntrumental cause survive,
From him and his, succession still derive
True heirs unto his virtues, and his Throane,
That these two Kingdoms ever may be one^.
This County of all Scotland is most poor,
By reason of the outrages before,
Yet mighty store of Corn I saw there grow,
And as good grass as ever man did mow:
And as that day I twenty miles did pass,
I saw eleven hundred Neat at grass,
By which may be coniectur'd at the least,
That there was sustenance for man and beast.
And in the Kingdom I have truly scand,
There Is many worser parts, are bettor mand,
For in the time that theeuing was in ure.
The Gentles fled to places more secure.
And left the poorer sort, to abide the pain,
Whilst they could never find time to turn again.
That Shire of Gentlemen is scarce and dainty,
Yet there is relief in great abundance plenty,
Twixt it and England, little odds I see,
They eat, and live, and strong and able be,
So much in Verse, and now I Will change my style,
And seriously I Will write in Prose a while.
To the purpose then: my first nights lodging in Scotland was at a place called
Mophot, which they say, is thirty miles from Carlisle, but I suppose them to be
longer then forty of such miles as are betwixt London and Saint Albanes, (but
indeed the Scots do allow almost as large measure of their miles, as they do
of their drink, for an English Gallon either of Ale or Wine, is but their
quart, and one Scottish mile (now and then, may well stand for a mile and a
half or two English) but howsoever short or long, I found that days journey
the weariest that ever I footed; and at night being come to the Town, I found
good ordinary Country entertainment; my fare and my lodging was sweet and
good, and might have served a far better man then my self, although my self
have had many times better: but this is to be noted, that though it rained not
all the day, yet it was my fortune to be well wet twice, for I waded over a
great river called Eske in the morning, somewhat more then four miles distance
from Culile in England, and at night within two miles of my lodging; I was
feign to wade over the River of Annan in Scotland, from which River the County
of Annandale, has it is name, And whilst I waded on foot, my man was mounted on
horse-backe^, like the George without the Dragon. But the next morning, I arose
and left Mophot behind me, and that day I traueled twenty one miles to a sorry
Village called Blithe, but I was blithe my self to come to any place of
harbor or succor, for since I was borne, I never was so weary, or so near
being dead with extreme travel; I was founderd and refounderd of all four,
and for my better comfort, I came so late, that I must lodge without doors all
night, or else in a poor house where the good-wife lay in Childbed, her
husband being from home, her own servant maid being her nurse. A Creature
naturally compacted, and artificially adorned with an incomparable homelines;
but as things were I must either take or leave, and necessity made me enter,
where we gat Eggs and Ale by measure and by tale. At last to bed I went, my
man lying on the floor by me, where in the night there were Pigeons did very
bountifully mute in his face: the day being no sooner come, and having but
fifteen miles to Edenborough, mounted upon my ten toes, and began first to
hobble, and after to amble, and so being warm, I fell to pace by degrees; all
the way passing through a fertile Country for Corn and Cattle: and about two
of the clock in the afternoon that Wednesday, being the thirteenth of August,
and the day of Clare the Virgin (the sign being in Virgo) the Moon four
days ^old, the wind at West, I came to take rest, at the wished, long
expected, ancient famous City of Edenborough, which I entered like Pierce
pennilesse, altogether monyles, but I thank God, not friendlesse; for being
there, for the time of my stay, I might borrow, (if any man would lend) spend
it I could get, beg if I had the impudence, and steal, if I durst adventure
the price of a hanging, but my purpose was to house my horse, and to suffer him
and my apparel to lie in durance, or Lauender in stead of Litter, till such
time as I could meet with some valiant friend, that would desperately disburse.

Walking thus down the street, (my body being tired with travel, and my mind
attyred with moody, muddy, Moore-ditch melancholy) my Contemplation did
devoutly pray, that I might meet one or other to prey upon, being willing to
take any slender acquaintance of any map whatsoever, viewing, and circumviewing
every man's face I met, as if I meant to draw his picture, but all my
acquaintance was Nonest Inuentus, (pardon me Reader, that Latin is none of
mine own, I swear by Priscians Parteranion, an oath which I have ignorantly
broken many times.) At last I resolved, that the next Gentleman that I met
withal, should be acquaintance whether he would or no: and presently fixing
mine eyes upon a Gentleman-like object, I looked on him, as if I would suruay
something through him, and make him my perspectiue: and he much musing at my
gazing, and I much gazing at his musing, at last he crossed the way and made
toward me, and then I made down the street from him, leaving to encounter with
my man, who came after me leading my horse, whom he thus accosted. My friend
(quoth he) does yonder Gentleman, (meaning me) know me, that he looks so
wistly on me? Truly Sir, said my man, I think not, but my Matter is a
stranger come from London, and would gladly meet some acquaintance to direct
him where he may have lodging and horse-meate. Presently the Gentleman, (being
of a generous disposition) ouer-tooke me with unexpected and undeserved
courtesy, brought me to a lodging, and caused my horse to be put into his
own stable, whilst we discoursing over a pint of Spanish, I related as much
English to him, as made him lend me ten shillings, (his name was Master John
Maxwell) which money I am sure was the first that I handled after I came from
out the walls of London: but having rested two hours and refreshed my self,
the Gentleman and I walked to see the City and the Castle, which as my poor
unable and unworthy pen can, I will truly describe.

The Castle on a lofty Rock is so strongly grounded, bounded, and founded,
that by force of man it can never be confounded; the Foundation and Walls are
vnpenetrable, the Rampires impregnable, the Bulwarks invincible, no way but
one to it is or can be possible to be made passable. In a word, I have seen
many Straights and Fortresses, in Germany, the Netherlands, Spaipe, and
England, but they must all give place to this unconquered Castle, both for
strength and situation.

Amongst the many memorable things which I was showed there, I noted especially
a great piece of Ordnance of Iron, it is not for battery, but it will serve to
defend a breach, or to toss balies of wilde-fire against any that should
assail or assault the Castle; it lies now dismonted. And it is so great
within, that it was told me that a Child was once gotten there: but I, to make
trial crept into it, lying on my back, and I am sure there was room enough
and spare for a greater then my self.

So leaving the Castle, as it is both defensive against any opposition, and
magnificke for lodging and receite, I descended lower to the City, wherein I
observed the fairest and goodliest street that ever mine eyes beheld, for I
did never see or hear of a street of that length, (which is half an English
mile from the Castle to a fair Port which they call the Neather-bow) and from
that Port, the street which they call the Kem^^^^ate is one quarter of a mile
more, down to the Kings Palace, called Holy-rood-House, the buildings on each
side of the way being all of squared stone, five, six, and seven stories high,
and many by-Lanes and Closes on each side of the way, wherein are Gentlemen's
houses, much fairer then the buildings in the high street, for in the
highstreet the Merchants and Tradesmen do dwell, but the Gentlemen's mansions
and goodliest houses are obscurely fonnded in the aforesaid Lanes: the Walls
are eight or ten foot thick, exceeding strong, not built for a day, a
week, or a month, or a year; but from Antiquity to Posterity, for many
Ages; There I found entertainment beyond my expectation or merit, and there is
fish, flesh, bread and fruit, in such variety, that I think I may offencelesse
call it super fluity, or saciety. The worst was, that Wine and Ale was so
scarce, and the people there such Mizers of it, that every night before I went
to bed, if any man had asked me a civil question, all the wit in my head could
not have made him a sober answer.

I was at his Majesty's Palace, a stately and Princely seat, wherein I saw a
sumptuous Chapel, most richly adorned with all appurtenances belonging to so
sacred a place, or so Royal an owner. In the inner Court, I saw the Kings
Arms cunningly carved in stone, and fixed over a door aloft on the wall, the
red Lion being the Crest, over which was written this inscription in Latin,
Nobis hat inu^cta miserunt, 106. proaui. I enquired what the English of it was?
it was told me as follows, which I thought worthy to be recorded. 106.
Forefathers have left this to us vnchnquered. This is a worthy and memorable
Motto, and I think few kingdoms or none in the world can truly write the
like, that notwithstanding so many inroades, incursions, attemps, assaults,
Civil wars, and foreign hostilities, bloody battles, and mighty foughten
fields, that maugre the strength and policy of enemies, that Royal Crown and
Scepter has from one hundred and seven descents, kept still unconquered, and
by the power of the King of Kings (through the grace of the Prince of peace) is
now left peacefully to our peaceful King, whom long in blessed peace, the God
of peace defend and govern.

But once more, a word or two of E^^^^^ rough, although I have scarcely giuent
it that due which belongs unto it, for their lofty and stately buildings, and
for their fair and spacious street, yet my mind persuades me that they in
former ages that first founded that City did not so well in that they built it
in so di^^ commodious a place; for the Sea, and all nauigable rivers being the
chief means for the enriching of Towns and Cities, by the reason of
Traffic with foreign Nations, with exportation, transportation, and receite
of variety of Marchandizing; so this City had it been built but one mile
lower on the Sea fide, I doubt not but it had long before this been comparable
to many a one of our greatest Towns and Cities in Europe, both for
spaciousness of bounds, Port, state, and riches. It is said, that King James
the fifth (of famous memory) did graciously offer to purchase for them, and to
bestow upon them freely, certain low and pleasant grounds a mile from them on
the Sea shore, with these conditions, that they should pull down their City,
and build it in that more commodious place, but the Citizens refused it: and so
now it is like (for me), to stand where it does, for I doubt such another
profer of remouall will not be presented to them, till two days after the
Fair.

Now have with you for Leeth, whereto I no sooner came, but I was well
entertained by Master Barnard Lindsay, one of the Grooms of his Majesty's
Bedchamber, he knew my estate was not guilty, because I brought guilt with me
(more then my sins, and they would not pass for current there) he therefore
did replenish the vaustity of my empty purse, and discharged a piece at mec
with two bullets of gold, each being in value worth eleven shillings white
money: and I was credibly informed, that within the compass of one year,
there was shipped away from that only Port of Leeth, four score thousand
Boles of Wheat, Oats, and Barley into Spain, France, and other fortaine
parts, and every Bole contains the measure of four English bushels, so that
from Leeth only has been transported three hundred and twenty thousand
bushels of Corn; besides some has been shipped away from Saint Andrews,
from Dundee, Aberdeene, Desert, Kirkady, Kinghorne; Burnt-Iland, Dunbar, and
other portable Towns, which makes me to wonder that a Kingdom so populous as
it is, should nevertheless sell so much bread^orne beyond the Seas, and yet to
have more then sufficient for themselves.

So I having viewed the Haven and Town of Leeth, took a passage Boat to see
the new ^^rondrous Well, to which many a one that is not well, comes far and
near in hope to be made well: indeed I did hear that it had done much good,
and that it has a rare operation to expel or kill diverse maladies; as to
provoke appetite, to help much for the avoiding of the gravel in the bladder,
to cure sore eyes, and old ulcers, with many other virtues which it has, but I
(through the mercy of God, having no need of it, did make no great inquisition
what it had done, but for nouelty I drank of it, and I found the taste to be
more pleasant then any other water, sweet almost as milk, yet as clear as
cristall, and I did observe, that though a man did drink a quart, a pottle, or
as much as his belly could contain, yet it never offended or lay heavy upon
the stomach, no more then if one had drank but a pint or a small quantity.

I went two miles from it to a Town called Burnt-Iland, where I found many of
my especial good friends, as Master Robert ^ay, one of the Grooms of his
Majesty's Bedchamber, Master David Drummend, one of his Gentlemen Pentioners,
Master James Acmooty, one of the Grooms of the Privy Chamber, Captain Muray,
Sir Henry Witherington Knight, Captain Iyrie, and diverse others: and there
Master Hay, Master Drummond, and the good old Captain Murray did very
bountifully furnish me with gold for my expenses, but I being at dinner with
those aforesaid Gentlemen, as we were discoursing, there befell a strange
accident, which I think worth the relating.

I know not upon what occasion they began to talk of being at Sea in former
times, and I (amongst the rest) said, I was at the taking of ^a^es: whereto an
English Gentleman replied, that he was the next good voyage after at the
Islands: I answered him that I was there also. He demanded in what ship I was? I
told him in the Rainebowe of the Queens: why (quoth he) do you not know me?
I was in the same ship, and my name is Witherington.

Sir, said I, I do remember the name well, but by reason that it is near two
and twenty years since I saw you, I may well forget the knowledge of you. Well
said he, if you were in that ship, I pray you tell me some remarkable token
that happened in the voyage, whereupon I told him two or three tokens; which he
did know to be true. Nay then, said I, I will tell you another which (perhaps)
you have not forgotten; as our ship and the rest of the fleet did ride at
Anchor at the I Will of Flores (one of the Isles of the Azores) there were some
fourteen men and boys of our ship, that for nouelty would go ashore, and
see what fruit the Island did bear, and what entertainment it would yield us:
so being landed, we went up and down and could find nothing but stones, heath
and moss, and we expected Oranges, Limonds, Figs, Muske-millions, and
Potatoes: in the mean space the wind did blow so stiff, and the Sea was so
extreme rough, that our Ship-boate could not come to the land to fetch us, for
fear she should be beaten in pieces against the rocks: this continued five
days, so that we were almost famished for want of food: but at last (I
squandring up and down) by the providence of God I happened into a Cave or poor
habitation, where I found fifteen loaves of bread, each of the quantity of a
penny loaf in England, I having a valiant stomach of the age of almost of a
hundred and twenty hours breeding, fell to, and ate two loaves and never said
grace: and as I was about to make a Horse-loafe of the third loaf, I did put
twelve of them into my breeches, and my sleeves, and so went mumbling out of
the Cave, leaning my back against a Tree, when upon the sudden a Gentleman
came to me, and said, Friend, what are you eating? Bread, (quoth I.) For Gods
sake said he, give me some. With that, I put my hand into my breech, (being my
best pantrey) and I gave him a Loaf, which he received with many thanks, and
said, that if ever he could requite it, he would.

I had no sooner told this tale, but Sir Henry Witherington did acknowledge
himself to be the man that I had given the Loaf unto two and twenty years
before, where I found the Proverb true, that men have more privilege then
mountains in meeting.

In what great measure he did requite so small a courtesy, I wi^ relate in
this following discourse in my Return through Northumberland: So leaving my
man at the Town of Burnt Island, I told him, I would but go to Sterling, and
see the Castle there, and withal to see my honorable friends the Earl of
Mar, and Sir William Murray Knight, Lord of Abercarny, and that I would
return within two days at the most: But it fell out quite contrary; for it
was fine and thirty days before I could get back again out of these Noble
men's company. The whole progres of my travel with them, and the cause of my
stay, I'cannot with gratefulness omit; and thus it was.

A worthy Gentleman named Master John Fenton, did bring me on my way six miles
to Dumfermling, where I was well entertained, and lodged at Master John Gibb
his house, one of the Grooms of his Majesty's Bed chamber, and I think the
oldest Servant the King has: withal, I was well entertained there by Master
Crighton at his own house, who went with me, and showed me the Queens Palace;
(a delicate and Princely Mansion) withal I saw the ruins of an ancient and
stately built Abey, with fair gardens, orchards, meadows belonging to the
Palace: all which with fair and goodly revenues by the suppression of the
Abbey, were annexed to the Crown. There also I saw a very fair Church, which
though it be now very large and spacious, ^yet it has in former times been
much larger. But I taking my leave of Dumfermling, would needs go and see the
truly Noble Knight Sir George Bruce, at a Town called the Coor as: there he
made m^^ right welcome, both with variety of fare, and after all, he
commanded three of his men^^s direct me to see his most admirable Cole mines;
which (if man can or could work wonders) is a wonder: for my self neither in
any travels that I have been in, nor any History that I have read, or any
Discourse that I have heard, did never see, read, or hear of any work of man
that might parallel or be equivalent with this vnfellowed and vnm^^chable
work: and though all I can say of it, cannot describe it according to the
worthiness of his vigilant industry, that was both the occasion, Inuentor, and
Maintainer of it: yet rather then the memory of so rare an Enterprise, and so
accomplished a profit to the Commonwealth shall be raked and smothered in the
dust of oblivion, I will give a little touch at the description of it, although
I amongst Writers, as like he that worst may hold the candle.

The Mine has two ways into it, the one by sea and the other by land; but a
man may go into it by land, and return the same way if he please, and so he
may enter into it by sea, and by sea he may come forth of it: but I ^^
varieties sake went in by sea, and out by land. Now men may object, how can a
man go into a Mine, the entrance of it being into the sea, but that the Sea
will follow him, and so drown the Mine? To which objection thus I answer, That
at low water, the sea being ebd away, and a great part of the sand bare; upon
this same sand (being mixed with rocks and cragges) did the Master of this
great work build a round circular frame of stone, very thick, strong, and
joined together with glutinous or bitumous matter, so high withal that the Sea
at the highest flood, or the greatest rage of storm or tempest, can neither
dissolve the stones so well compacted in the building or yet ouerflowe the
height of it. Within this round frame, (at all adventures) he did set workmen
to dig with Mattockes, Pickaxes, and other instruments fit for such purposes.
They did dig forty foot down right, into and through a rock. At last they
found that which they expected, which was Sea-cole, they following the vein of
the Mine, did dig ^^rward still: So that in the space of eight and ^^enty or
nine and twenty years, they have ^^gged more then an English mile under the
^ea, that when men are at work below, an hundred of the greatest ships in
Britain ^ay sail over their heads. Besides, the Mine ^ most artificially cut
like an Arch or a Vault, ^^ that great length, with many nookes and ^ ways:
and it is so made, that a man may ^alke upright in the most places, both in and
^^t. Many poor people are there set on work, which otherwise through the want
of imploy^ent would perish. But when I had seen the line, and was come forth
of it again; after ^y thanks given to Sir George B^uce, I told ^m, that if
the plotters of the Powder Treason ^ England had seen this Mine, that they
(per^^ps) would have attempted to have left the ^arliament House, and have
undermined the ^hames, and so to have blown up the Barges and Wherries,
wherein the King, and all ^e Estates of our Kingdom were. Moreo^er, I said,
that I could afford to turn Tap^er at London, so that I had but one quarter
of ^ mile of his Mine to make me a Celler, to ^^epe Beer and Bottle-ale in.
But leaving ^ese Jests in Prose, I will relate a few Verses ^at I made merrily
of this Mine.

That have wasted, Mo^ths, weeks, days, and hours
In viewing Kingdoms, Countries, Towns, and
Without al measure, measuring many paces, (towers,
and with my pen describing many places,
With few additions of mine own deuizing,
Because I have a smacke of Cortatizing)
^ur Mandeuill, Primaleon, Don Quixot,
^^reat Amadis, or Huon, traueld not
^ I have done, or been where I have been,
^^ heard and seen, what I have heard and seen;
^or Britains Odcombe(Zany brave Vlissis)
^^ all his ambling, saw the like as this is.
^was in (would I could describe it well)
^^ dark, light, pleasant, profitable hell,
^and as by water I was wasted in,
^ thought that I in Charons Boar had bin,
^^ut being at the entrance landed thus,
^hree men there (in stead of Cerberus)
^^^^^^me in, in each one hand a light
^^ guide us in that vault of endless night,
There young and old with glim'ring candles burning
Dig, delue, and labor, turning and returning,
Some in a hole with baskets and with baggs,
Resembling furies, or infernal haggs:
There one like Tantall feeding, and there one,
Like Sisiphus he ^owles that restless stone.
Yet all I saw was pleasure mixed with profit,
Which proved it to be no tormenting Tophet:
For in this honest, worthy, harmless hell,
There never did any damned Devil dwell:
And the Owner of it games by 't more true glory,
Then Rome does by fantastic Purgatory.
A long mile thus I past, down, down, steep, steep,
In deepenesse far more deep, then Neptunes deep,
Whilst over my head (in fourefold stories hie)
Was Earth, and Sea, and Air, and Sun, and Sky:
That had I dyed in that Cimerian room,
Four Elements had covered over my tomb:
Thus farther then the bottom did I go,
(And many Englishmen have not done so;)
Where mounting Porposes, and mountain Whales,
And Regiments of fish with finnes and Scales,
Twixt me and Heaven did freely glide and slide,
And where great ships may at an anchor ride:
Thus in by Sea, and out by land I past,
And took my leave of good Sir George at last.
The Sea at certaines places does leake, of soake into the Mine, which by the
industry of Sir George Bruce, is all conveyed to one Well near the land; where
he has a device like a horse-mill, that with three horses and a great chain
of Iron, going downward many fadomes, with thirty six buckets fastened to the
chain, of the which eighteen go down still to be filled, and eighteen
ascend up to be emptied, which do empty themselves (without any man's labor)
into a trough that conueyes the water into the Sea again; by which means he
saues his Mine, which otherwise would be destroyed with the Sea, besides he
does make every week ninety or a hundred Tons of salt, which does serve most
part of Scotland, some he sends into England, and very much into Germany: all
which shows the painful industry with Gods blessings to such worthy
endeauours: I must with many thanks remember his courtesy to me, and lastly
how he sent his man to guide me ten miles on the way to Sterling, where by
the way I saw the outside of a saire and stately house called Allaway,
belonging to the Earl of Mar, which by reason that his Honor was not there, I
past by and went to Sterling, where I was entertained and lodged at one Master
John Archibalds, where all my want was that I wanted room to contain half
the good cheer that I might have had there; he had me into the Castle, which
in few words I do compare to Windsor for situation, much more then Windsor in
strength, and somewhat less in greatness; yet I dare affirm, that his
Majesty has not such another hall to any house that he has neither in England
or Scotland, except Westminster Hall which is now no dwelling Hall for a
Prince, being long since metamorphosed into a house for the Law and the profits.

This goodly Hall was built by King James the fourth, that married King Henry
the eights sister, and after was slain at Flodden field; but it surpasses all
the Halls for dwelling houses that ever I saw, for length, breadth, height and
strength of building, the Castle is built upon a rock very lofty, and much
beyond Edenborough Castle in state and magnificence, and not much inferior to
it in strength, the rooms of it are lofty, with carved works on the seelings,
the doors of each room being so high, that a man may ride upright on
horseback into any chamber or lodging. There is also a goodly fair Chapel,
with Cellers, Stables, and all other necessary Offices, all very stately and
befitting the Majesty of a King.

From Sterling I rode to Saint Iohnston, a fine Town it is, but it is much
decayed, by reason of the want of his Majesty's yearly coming to lodge there.
There I lodged one night at an Inn, the goodman of the house his name being
Petricke Pettcarne, where my entertainment was with good cheer, good lodging,
all too good to a bad weary guest. Mine Host told me that the Earl of Mar,
and Sir William Murray of Abercarny were gone to the great hunting to the Brca
of Mar; but if I made haste I might perhaps find them at a Town called
Breekin, or Breechin, two and thirty miles from Saint John stone whereupon I
took a guide to Breekin the next day, but before I came, my Lord was gone from
thence four days.

Then I took another guide, which brought me such strange ways over
mountains and rocks, that I think my horse never went the like; and I am
sure I never saw any ways the might fellow them. I did go through a Country
called Glaneske, where passing by the side of a hill, so steep as the ridge of
a house, where the way was rocky, and not above a yard broad in some places, so
fearful and horrid it was to look down into the bottom, for if either horse
or man had slipped, he had fallen (without recovery) a good mile downeright; but
I thank God, at night I came to ^ lodging in the Lard of Eggels Land, where I
lay at an Irish house, the folks not being able to speak scarce any English,
but I supped and went to bed, where I had not lain long, but I was enforced to
rise, I was so stung with Irish Musketaes, a creature that has six leg, and
lives like a monster altogether upon man flesh, they do inhabit and breed
most in fl^^tish houses, and this house was none of the cleanest, the beast is
much like a louse in England, both in shape and nature; in a word, they were to
me the A. and the Z. the Prologue and the Epilogue, the first and the last that
had in all my travels from Endenborough; and had not this High-land Irish house
helped ^^ at a pinch, I should have sworn that all Sealand had not been so
kind as to have bestowed a Louse upon me: but with a shift that I had, I
shifted off my Canibals, and was never m^^ troubled with them.

The next day I traveled over an exceeding high mountain, called mount
Skeene, where I found the valley very warm before I went to it; but when I
came to the top of it, my te^^ began to dance in my head with cold, like
Virginals iacks; and withal, a most familiar mist embraced me round, that I
could not see thrice my length any way: withal, it yeeldest so friendly a
deaw, that it did moysten through all my clothes: Where the old Proueri^^ of a
Scottish Miste was verified, in wetting me to the skin. Up and down, I
think this hi^^ is six miles, the way so uneven, stony, and full of bogges,
quagmires, and long heath, that a dog with three legs will out-runnes horse
with four: for do what we could, we were four hours before we could pass
it.

Thus with extreme travel, ascending and descending, mounting and alighting, I
came at night to the place where I would be, in the ^^ea of Man, which is a
large County, all composed of such mountains, that Shooters ^hill, Gads hill,
Highgate hill, Hampsted hill, ^Birdlip hill, or Maluernes hills, are but
Molehills in comparison, or like a Liver, or a Gi^^^ ^^ard under a Capons wing,
in respect of the altitude of their tops, or perpendicularitie of their
bottomes. There I saw Mount Benawne, with a furrd'd mist upon his snowie head
in stead of a nightcap: (for you must understand, that the oldest man alive
never saw but the snow was on the top of diverse of those hills, both in Summer,
as well as in Winter) There did I find the truly Noble and Right Honorable
Lords John Erskin Earl of Mar, James Stuarl Earl of Murray, George Gordon
Earl of Engye, son and heir to the Mar^uesse of Huntley, James Erskin Earl
of Bughan, and John Lord Erskin, son and here to the Earl of Mar, and their
Countesses, with my much honored, and my best assured and approved friend, Sir
William Murray Knight, of Abercarny, and hundred of others Knights, Esquires,
and their followers; all and every man in general in one habit, as if (...)
had been there, and made Laws of Equality: For once in the year, which is
the whole month of August, and sometimes part of September, many of the
Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom (for their pleasure) do come into these
high-land Countries to hunt, where they do conform themselves to the habit
of the High-land-men, who for the most part speak nothing but Irish; and in
former time were those people which were called the Red-shankes. Their habit
is shoes with but one, sole apiece; stockings (which they call short hose)
made of a warm stuff of diverse colors, which they call Tartane: as for
breeches, many of them, nor their forefathers never wore any, but a ierkin of
the same stuff that their hose is of, their garters being hands or wreathes of
hay or straw, with a plead about their shoulders, which is a mantle of diverse
colors, much finer and lighter stuff then their hose, with blue flat caps on
their heads, a handkerchiefe knit with two knots about their neck: and thus
are they attyred. Now their weapons are long bows and forked arrows, Swords
and Targets, Harquebusses, Muskets, Durks, and Loquhabor-Axes. With these Arms
I found many of them armed for the hunting. As for their attire, any man of
what degree soever that comes amongst them, must not disdain to wear it: for
if they do, then they will disdain to hunt, or willingly to bring in their
Dogs: but if men be kind unto them, and be in their habit; then are they
conquered with kindness, and the sport will be plentiful. This was the reason
that I found so many Noblemen and Gentlemen in those shapes. But to proceed to
the hunting.

My good Lord of Mar having put me into that shape, I rode with him from his
house, where I saw the ruins of an old Castle, called the Castle of
Kindroghit. It was built by King Malcolm Canmore (for a hunting house) who
reigned in Scotland when Edward the Confessor, Harold, and Norman William
reigned in England: I speak of it, because it was the last house that I saw in
those parts; for I was the space of twelve days after, before I saw either
House, Corne-field, or habitation for any creature, but Dear, wild Horses,
Wolves, and such like creatures, which made me doubt that I should never have
seen a house again.

Thus the first day we traueld eight miles, where there were small cottages
built on purpose to lodge in, which they call Lonquhards, I thank my good Lord
Erskin, he commanded that I should always be lodged in his lodging, the
Kitchen being always on the side of a bank, many Kettles and Pots boiling,
and many spits turning and winding, with great variety of cheer: as Venison
baked, sodden, roast, and stu'de Beef, Mutton, Goats, Kid, Hares, fresh
Salmon, Pigeons, Hens, Capons, Chickins, Partridge, Moorecoots, Heathcocks,
Caperkellies, and Termagants; good Ale, Sack, White, and Claret, Tent, (or
Allegant) with most potent Aquavitae.

All these, and more then these we had continually, in superfluous abundance,
caught by Faulconers, Fowlers, Fishers, and brought by my Lords Tenants and
Purueyers to victual our Camp, which consists of fourteen or fifteen
hundred men and horses; the manner of the hunting is this: Five or six hundred
men do rise early in the morning, and they do disperse themselves diverse
ways, and seven, eight or ten miles compass, they do bring or chase in the
Dear in many herds, (two, three or four hundred in a heard) to such or such
a place, as the Noblemen shall appoint them; then when day is come, the Lords
and Gentlemen of their Companies, do ride or go to the said places, sometimes
wading up to the middles through bournes and rivers: and then they being come
to the place, do lie down on the ground, till those foresaid Scouts which are
called the Tinckhell, do bring down the Dear: But as the Proverb says of a
bad Cook, so these Tinckhell men do like their own fingers; for besides
their bows and arrows which they carry with them, we can hear now and then
a Harquebusse or a Musket go off, which they do seldom discharge in vain:
Then after we had stayed there three hours or thereabouts, we might perceive
the Dear appear on the hills round about us, (their heads making a show like
a wood) which being followed close by the Tinkhell, are chased down into the
valley where we lay; then all the valley on each side being waylaid with a
hundred couple of strong Irish Greyhounds, they are let loose as occasion
serves upon the heard of Dear, that with Dogs, Gunnes, Arrows, Durkes, and
Daggers, in the space of two hours, fourscore fat Dear were slain, which
after are disposed of some one way, and some another, twenty and thirty miles,
and more then enough left for us to make merry withal at our Rendez-vous. I
liked the sport so well, that I made these two Sonnets following.

Why should I waste Invention to endite,
Ouidian fictions, or Olympiam games ^^
My misty Muse enlightened with more light,
To a more noble pitch her aim the frames.
I must relate to my great Master JAMES,
The Calydonian annual peaceful war;
How noble minds do eternize their fames,
By martial meeting in the Brea of Mar:
How thousand gallant Spirits came near and far,
With Swords and Targets, Arrows, Bows, and Guns,
That all the Troop to men of judgment, are
The God of Wars great never conquered Sons.
The Sport is Manly, yet none bleed but Beasts.
And last the Victor on the vanquished feasts.
IF Sport like this can on the Mountains be,
Where Phoebus flames can never melt the Snow:
Then let who lift delight in Vales below,
Skie-kissing Mountains pleasure are for me:
What brauer object can man's eyesight see,
Then Noble, Worshipful, and worthy Wights,
As if they were prepared for sundry fights,
Yet all in sweet society agree?
Through heather, moss, mo^gst frogs, and bogs, and fogs,
Amongst craggy cliffes, and thunder battered hills,
Hares, Hinds, Bucks, Roes are chased by Men and dogs,
Where two hours hunting fourscore fat Dear kills,
Low land, your Sports are low as is your Seat,
The High-land Games and Minds, are high and great.
Being come to our lodgings, there was such Baking, Boiling, Roasting, and
Stewing, a^ if Cook Russian had been there to have sealded the Devil in his
feathers: and after supp^^ a fire of Firre-wood as high as an indifferent
May Pole: for I assure you, that the Earl of Mar will give any man that is
his friend, for thanks, as many Fur trees (that are as good as any ships
masts in England) as are worth (if they were in any place near the Thames, or
any other portable river) the best Earldom in England or Scotland either: For
I dare affirm, he has as many growing there, as would serve for masts (from
this time to the end of the world) for all the ships, Carackes, Hoyes,
Galleyes, Boats, Drumlers, Barks, and Water-crafts, that are now, or can be
in the world these forty years.

This sounds like a lie to an unbeliever; but I and many thousands do know
that I speak within the compass of truth: for indeed (the ^ore is the pity)
they do grow so far from ^y passage of water, and withal in such rockie
Mountains, that no way to convey them is ^^ssible to be passable, either with
Boat, ^^dorse, or Cart.

Thus having spent certain days in hun^^ing in the Brea of Mar, we went to
the next County called Bagenoch, belonging to the Earl of Engie, where having
such sport and entertainment as we formerly had; after four or ^^^^ days
pastime, we took leave of hunting ^or that year; and took our journey toward
^^ strong house of the Earls, called Ruthen in ^^^^^, where my Lord of Engie
and his Noble Countess (being daughter to the Earl of Argile) did give us
most noble welcome three days.

From thence we went to a place called Ballo ^^^^^, a fair and stately house,
a worthy Gentleman being the Owner of it, called the ^^^^^ of Grant, his wife
being a Gentlewoman honorably descended being sister to ^heright Honorable
Earl of Atholl, and to Sir Patricke Murray Knight; she being both inwardly and
outwardly plentifully adorned with the gifts of Grace and Nature: so that ^^^
cheer was more then sufficient; and yet much less then they could afford us.
There ^^^^ there four days, four Earls, one ^^^^, diverse Knights and
Gentlemen, and their servants, footmen and horses; and every ^^^^ four long
Tables furnished with all varieties: Our first and second course being
three^core dishes at one board; and after that always a Banquet: and there if
I had not for^ornee wine till I came to Edenborough, I think ^ had there
drank my last.

The fifth day with much ado we gate from thence to Tarnaway, a goodly house
of the Earl of Murrayes, where that right Honorable Lord and his Lady did
welcome us four days more. There was good cheer in all variety, with some
what more then plenty for advantage: for indeed the County of Murray is the
most pleasantest, and plentiful Country in all Scotland; being plain land,
that a Coach may be driven more then four and thirty miles one way in it,
along by the Seacoast.

From thence I went to Elgen in Murray, an ancient City, where there stood a
fair and beautiful Church with three steeples, the walls of it and the
steeples all yet standing; but the Roofes, Windows, and many Marble Monuments
and Toombes of honorable and worthy personages all broken and defaced: this
was done in the time when ruin bare rule, and Knox knocked down Churches.

From Elgen we went to the Bishop of Murray his house which is called Spinye,
or Spinaye: a Reverend Gentleman he is, of the Noble name of Dowglasse, where
we were very well wel-comed, as befitted the honor of himself and his guests.

From thence we departed to the Lord Marquess of Huntleyes, to a sumptuous
house of his, named the Bogg of Geethe, where our entertainment was like
himself, free, bountiful and honorable. There (after two days stay) with
much entreatie and earnest suite, I gate leave of the Lords to depart toward
Edenborough: the Noble Marquess, the Earl of Mar, Murray, Engie, Bughan, and
the Lord Erskin; all these, I thank them, gave me gold to defray my charges in
my journey.

So after five and thirty days hunting and travel, I returning, past by
another stately mansion of the Lord Marquesses, called Strobeggi, and so over
Carny monnt to Breekin, where a wench that was borne deaf and dumb came into
my chamber at midnight (I being asleep) and she opening the bed, would feign
have lodged with me: but had I been a Sardanapalus, or a Heliogabalus, I
think that either the great travel over the Mountains had tamed me; or if
not, her beauty could never have moved me. The best parts of her were, that
her breath was as sweet as sugar-carrion, being very well shouldered beneath
the waste; and as my Hostess told me the next morning, that she had changed
her Maidenhead for the price of a Bastard not long before. But howsoever, she
made such a hideous noise, that I started out of my sleep, and thought that
the Devil had been there: but I no sooner knew who it was, but I arose, and
thrust my dumb beast out of my chamber; and for want of a lock or a latch, I
staked up my door with a great chair.

Thus having escaped one of the seven deadly sins as at Breekin, I departed
from thence to a Town called Forfard, and from thence to Dundee, and so to
Kinghorne, Burnt Island, and so to Edenborough, where I stayed eight days, to
recover my self of falls and bruises which I received in my travel in the
High-land mountainous hunting, Great welcome I had showed me all my stay at
Edenborough, by many worthy Gentlemen, namely, old Master George Todrigg,
Master Henry Leuing flow, Master James Henderson, Master John Maxwell, and a
number of others, who suffered me to want no wine or good cheer, as may be
imagined.

Now the day before I came from Edenborough, I went to Leeth, where I found my
long approved and assured good friend Master Benian^^^ Johnson, at one Master
John Stuarts house: I thank him for his great kindness toward me: for at my
taking leave of him, he gave me a piece of gold of two and twenty shillings to
drink his health in England. And withal, willed me to remember his kind
commendations to all his friends: So with a friendly farewell, I left him as
well, as I hope never to see him in a worse estate: for he is amongst Noblemen
and Gentlemen, that know his true worth, and their own honors, where, with
much respective love he is worthily entertained.

So leaving Leeth, I returned to Edenborough, and within the port or gate,
called the Netherbowe, I discharged my pockets of all the money I had and as I
came pennilesse within the walls of that City at my first coming thither; so
now at my departing from thence, I came moneylesse out of it again; having in
company to convey me out, certain Gentlemen, amongst the which was Master
James Atherson, Lord of Gasford, a Gentleman that brought me to his house,
where with great entertainment he and and his good wife did welcome me.

On the morrow he sent one of his men to bring me to a place called Adam, to
Master John Acmootye his house, one of the Grooms of his Majesty's
Bedchamber; where with him and his two brethren, Master Alexander and Master
James Acmootye, I found both cheer and Welcome, not inferior to any that I
^^^^ had in any former place.

Amongst our viands that we had there, ^ must not forget the Soleand Goose, a
mo^^ delicate Foul, which breeds in great abo^dance in a little Rock called
the Basse, which stands two miles into the Sea. It is very good flesh, but it
is eaten in the form as we ^^^ Oysters, standing at a side-boord, a little
before dinner, unsanctified without Grace; and after it is eaten, it must be
well liquored with two or three good rowses of Sherrie or C^^rie sack. The
Lord or Owner of the Basse do^ profit at the least two hundred pound yeer^^ by
those Geese; the Basse it self being of ^ great height, and near three
quarters of a mile in compass, all fully replenished with Wildfowle, having
but one small entrance ^ to it, with a house, a garden, and a Chapp^ in it; and
on the top of it a Well of pure fr^^^ water.

From Adam, Master John and Master I^^^ Acmootye went to the Town of Dunbarr
^^^^ me, where ten Scottish pints of wine were consumed, and brought to nothing
for a farewell there at Master James Baylies house I took leave, and Master
James Acmootye commi^^^ for England, said, that if I would ride with ^^^, that
neither I nor my horse should want^^ ^^ twixt that place and London. Now I
having ^ money or means for travel, began at once ^^ examine my manners and
my want: at last my want persuaded my manners to accept of this worthy
Gentleman's undeserved courtesy. So that night he brought me to a place called
C^per-spath, where we lodged at an Inn, the li^^ of which I dare say, is not
in any of his M^^^sties Dominions. And for to show my thankfulness to Master
William Arnet and his wife, the Owners thereof, I must explain their
bountiful entertainment of guests, which is this:

Suppose ten, fifteen, or twenty men and horses come to lodge at their house,
the men shall have flesh, tame and wild-fowle, fish with all variety of good
cheer, good lodging, and welcome, and the horses shall want neither hay or
prouender: and at the morning at their departure the reckoning is just nothing.
This is this worthy Gentlemen's use, his chief delight being only to give
strangers entertainment gratu: And I am sure, that in Scotland beyond
Edenborough, I have been at houses like Castles for building; the master of
the house his heaven, being his blue Bounet, one that will wear no other
shirts, but of the Flax that grows on his own ground, and of his wives,
daughters, or servants spinning; that ^^^th his Stockings, Hose, and Ierkin of
the Wool of his own Sheep backs; that never (by his pride of apparel)
caused Mercer, Draper, Silk man, Embroyderer, or Haberda^^^^ to break and
turn bankerupt: and yet this plain home-spunne fellow keeps and maintains
thirty, forty, fifty servants, or perhaps more, every day releeuing three or
four score poor people at his gate; and besides all this can give noble
entertainment for four or five days together to five or six Earls and
Lords, besides Knights, Gentlemen and their ^^llowers, if they he three or
four hundred men, and horse of them, where they shall not only feed but
feast, and not feast, but banker, this is a man that desires to know nothing so
^^^^ ^^^ his duty to God and his King, whose ^^^^ cares are to practice the
works of ^^^^^, Charity, and Hospitality: he never studies the consuming Art
of fashionlesse fashions, he never tries his strength to bear four or five
hundred Acres on his back at once, his legs are always at liberty, not
being settred with golden garters, and mana^^ed with artificial Roses, whose
weight (sometime) is the Relics of some decayed Lordship: Many of these
worthy housekeepers there are in Scotland, amongst some of them I was
entertained; from whence I did truly gather these aforesaid observations.

So leaving Coberspath, we rode to Barwicke, where the worthy old Soldier and
ancient Knight, Sir William Bowyer, made me welcome, but contrary to his will,
we lodged at an Inn, where Master James Acmooty paid all charges: but at
Barwhicke there was a grievous chance happened, which I think not fit the
relation to be omitted.

In the River of Tweed, which runs by Barwicke, are taken by Fishermen that
dwell there, infinite numbers of fresh Salmons, so that many households and
families are relieved by the profit of that fishing; but (how long since I know
not) there was an order that no man or boy whatsoever should fish upon a
Sunday: This order continued long amongst them, till some eight or nine weeks
before Michaelmas last, on a Sunday, the Salmons played in such great abundance
in the River, that some of the Fishermen (contrary to Gods law and their own
order) took Boats and nets and fished, and caught three hundred Salmons;
but from that time until Michaelmas day that I was there, which was nine
weeks, and heard the report of it, and saw the poor peoples lamentations,
they had not seen one Salmon in the River; and some of them were in despair
that they should never see any more there; affirming it to be Gods Judgment
upon them for the profanation of the Sabbath.

The thirtieth of September we rode from Barwicke to Belford, from Belford to
Anwicke, the next day from Amrick to Newcastle, where I found the noble Knight,
Sir ^^enry witherington; who, because I would have no gold nor silver, gave me
a bay Mare, in requital of a loaf of bread that I had given him two and
twenty years before, at the Island of Flores, of the which I have spoken
before. I ouertooke at Newcastle a great many of my worthy friends, which were
all coming for London, namely, Master Robert Hay, and Master David Drummond,
where I was welcomed at Master Nicholas Tempests house. From Newcastle I rode
with those Gentlemen to Durham, to Darington, to Northalerton, and to Topel^sse
in Yorkshire, where I took my leave of them, and would needs try my
pennilesse fortunes by my self, and see the City of York, where I was lodged
at my right Worshipful good friend, Master Doctor Hudson one of his Majesty's
Chaplains, who went with me, and showed me the goodly Minster Church there,
and the most admirable, rare-wrought, vnfellowed Chapter house.

From York I rode to Doncaster, where my horses were well fed at the Bear,
but my self found out the honorable Knight, Sir Robert Anslruther at his
father in laws, the truly noble Sir Robert Swifts house, he being then high
Sheriff of Yorkshire, where with their good Ladies, and the right Honorable
the Lord Sanquhar, I was stayed two nights and one day, Sir Robert Anslruther
(I thank him) not only paying for my two horses meat, but at my departure, he
gave me a letter to Newarke upon Trent, twenty eight miles in my way, where
Master George Atkinson mine Host made me as welcome, as if I had been a French
Lord, and what was to be paid, as I called for nothing, I paid as much; and
left the reckoning with many thanks to Sir Robert Anstruther.

So leaving Newarke, with another Gentleman that ouertooke me, we came at night
to Stamford, to the sign of the Virginity (or the Maydenhead) where I
delivered a Letter from the Lord Sanguhar; which caused Master Bates and his
wife, being the Master and Mistress of the house, to make me and the Gentleman
that was with me great cheer for nothing.

From Stamford the next day we rode to Huntington, where we lodged at the
Post-masters house, at the sign of the Crown; his name is Riggs. He was
informed who I was, and wherefore I undertook this my pennilesse Progress:
wherefore he came up to our chamber, and supped with us, and very bountifully
called for three quarts of Wine and Sugar, and four Iugges of Beer. He did
drink and begin healths like a Horse-leech, and swallowed down his cups
without feeling, as if he had had the dropsy, or nine pound of Sponge in his
maw. In a word, as he is a Post, he drank post, striving and calling by all
means to make the reckoning great, or to make us men of great reckoning. But
in his payment he was tired like a Jade, leaving the Gentleman that was with me
to discharge the terrible Short, or else one of my horses must have lain in
pawn for his superfluous calling, and unmannerly intrusion.

But leaving him, I left Huntington, and rode on the Sunday to Puckeridge,
where Master Holland at the Faulkon, (mine old acquaintance) and my loving and
ancient Host gave me, my friend, my man, and our horses excellent cheer, and
welcome, and I paid him with, Not a penny of money.

The next day I came to London, and obscurely coming within More-gate, I went
to a house and borrowed money: And so I stole back again to Iflington, to the
sign of the Maiden head, staying till Wednesday, that my friends came to meet
me, who knew no other, but that Wednesday was my first coming: where with all
love I was entertained with much good cheer: and after Supper we had a play of
the life and death of Guy of Warwick, played by the Right Honorable the Earl
of Darb^ his men. And so on the Thursday morning being the fifteenth of
October, I came home to my house in London.

THE EPILOGVE TO ALL MY ADVENTVRERS AND OTHERS.
THus did I neither spend, or beg, or ask,
By any course, direct or indirectly:
But in each tittle I performed my task,
According to my bill most circumspectly.
I vow to God, I have done SCOTLAND wrong,
(And (justly)' against me it may bring an Action)
I have not giuen't that right which does belong,
For which I am halle guilty of detraction:
Yet had I wrote all things that there I saw,
Misiudging censures would suppose I flatter,
And so my name I should in question draw,
Where Asses bray, and prattling Pies do chatter:
Yet (armed with truth) I publish with my Pen,
That there The Almighty does his blessings heap,
In such abundant food for Beasts and Men;
That I never saw more plenty or more cheap.
Thus what mine eyes did see, I do believe;
And what I do believe, I know is true:
And what is true, unto your hands I give,
That what I give, may be believed of you.
But as for him that says I lie or dote,
I do return, and turn the Lie in's throat.
Thus Gentlemen, amongst you take my ware,
You share my thanks, and I your moneys share.
Yours in all observance and gratefulness, ever to be commanded, IO: TAILOR.

FINIS.
THE GREAT EATER OR PART OF THE ADMIRABLE TEETH AND STOMACHS EXPLOITS OF
NICHOLAS WOOD, OF HARRISOM IN THE COUNTY OF KENT. HIS EXCESSIVE MANNER OF
EATING WITHOUT MANNERS, IN STRANGE AND TRVE MANNER DESCRIBED, BY JOHN TAILOR.
REcords and Histories do make memorable mention of the diversity of
qualities of sundry famous persons, men and women, in all the Countries and
Regions of the world, how some are remembered for their Piety and Pity; some
for Justice; some for Severity, for Learning; Wisdom, Temperance, Constancy,
Patience, with all the virtues Divine, and moral: Some again, have purchased
a memory for Greatness and Tallness of body; some for Dwarfish smalnesse; some
for beautiful outsides, fair feature and composition of Limbs and stature,
many have gotten an earthly perpetuity for cruelty and murder, as Nero,
Commodus, and others: for Leachery, as Heliogabalus: for Drunkenness,
Tiberius, ( alias Biberius:) for Effeminacy, as Sardanapalus: for Gluttony,
Aulus Vitellius, who at one supper was served with two thousand sorts of
fishes, and seven thousand sowles, as Suetonius writes in his ninth Book, and
Josephus in his fifth Book of the Jews wars. Cal^gula was famous for
Ambition, for he would be adored as a God, though he lived like a Devil,
poisoning ^^^ Uncle, and deflowring all his Sisters: And in ^^ ages and
Countries, time has still produc^^ particular persons, men and women, either
^^^ their vertnes or their vices, to be remembered that by meditating on the
good, we may b^ imitating their goodness, and by viewing ^^^^ bad, we might be
eschewing their vices.

To descend lower to more familiar examples, I have known a great man very
exp^^^ on the Iewe-harpe; a rich heir excellen^^ Noddy, a Justice of the Peace
skillful ^^ Quoytes; a Merchants wife a quick Ga^^^ster at Irish (especially
when she came to be^ring of men) that she would seldom miss ^^^^tring.
Monsieur La Ferr a Frenchman, ^^^ the first inuentor of the admirable Game^
Double-hand, Hot-cockles, and Gregory Da^^^^ an English man, devised the
unmatchable mystery of Blind-man-buffe. Some have ^^^ a gility to ride Poast;
some the facility ^^runne Poast, some the dexterity to ^^^^ Post, and some the
ability to speak, po^^ For I have heard a fellow make a Hackney ^^ his tongue,
and in a moment he has gallop'd^ ^ye from China to London, without Bridle or
^addle, Others do speak poast, in a thick ^^^^ing kind of Ambling-trot, and
that in ^^ch speed, that one of them shall talk more ^^ one quarter of an
hour, then shall be understood in seven years. And as every one ^^^h
particular qualities to themselves, and di^^onant from others, so are the
manners of ^iues (or livings) of all men and women va^ious one from another; as
some get their li^ing by their tounges, as Interpreters, Law^ers, Orators, and
Flatterers; some by ^^yles, as Maquerellaes, Concubines, Cur^^^anes, or in
plain English, Whores; Some by their feet, as Dancers, Lackeyes, Footmen, and
Weauers, and Knights of the public or common order of the Forke; Some by
their brains, as Politicians, Monopolists, Proiectmongers, Suit-ioggers, and
Starga^ers; Some (like the Salamander) live by fire, ^s the whole Race of
Tubalcaine, the Vul^anean Brood of Blacksmiths, fire-men, Colliers, Gunners,
Gun-founders, and all sorts of mettle-men; Some like the Cameleon, by the Air,
and such are Poets, Trumpetters, Cornets, Recorders, Pipers, Bag-pipers; and
some by smoke, as Tobaconists, Knights of the Vapor, Gentlemen of the Whiffe,
Esquires of the Pipe, Gallants in Fumo; Some live by the Water as Herrings do,
such are Brewers, Vintners, Dyers, Mariners, Fishermen, and S^ullers; And many
like Moles live by the Earth, as griping Usurers, racking Landlords, toyling
Plowmen, moyling Laborers, painful Gardners, and others.

Amongst all these before mentioned, and many more which I could recite, this
subject of my Pen is not (for his quality) inferior to any: and as near as I
can, I will stretch my wit upon the Tenters, to describe his name and
Character, his worthy Acts shall be related after in due time duly.

And, Be it known unto all men, to whom these presents shall come, that I John
Tailor, Waterman of Saint Saviors in Southwarke, in the County of Surrey, the
Writer hereof, etc. will write plain truth, bare and threed-bare, and almost
starke-naked-truth, of the descriptions, and remarkable, memorable Actions of
Nichol^^ Wood, of the Parish of Harrisom in the County of Kent, Yeoman, for
these considerations following.

First, I were to blame to write more then truth, because that which is known
to be true, is enough.

S^condly, that which is only true, is too much.

Thirdly, the truth will hardly be believed, being so much beyond man's reason
to conceive.

Fourthly, I shall run the hazard to be accounted a great liar, in writing
the truth.

Lastly, I will not lie, on purpose to make all those liars that esteem me so.

Yet by your leave, Master Critic, you must give me license to flourish my
Phrases, to embellish my lines, to adorn my Oratory, to embroder my speeches,
to enterlace my words, to draw out my sayings, and to bumbaste the whole suite
of the business for the time of your wearing. For though truth appears best
bare in matters of Justice, yet in this I hold it decent to attire her with
such poor rags as I have, in stead of Robes.

First then; the place of his birth, and names of his parents are to me a mere
Terraincognita, as far from my knowledge, as content from a Usurer, or
honesty from a Bawd, but if he be no Christian, the matter is not much, he
will serve well enough for a man of Kent; and if his education had been as his
Feeding, it is evident he had been of most mighty breeding; he has gotten a
foul name, but I know not if it came to him by Baptism, for it is partly a
Nickname, which in the total is Nicholas, I would abate him but a Saint, and
call him Nicholas Shambles, and were the goodness of his purse answerable to
the greatness of his appetite, out of all question, no man below the Moon
would be a better customer to a shambles then he, for though he be chaste of
his body, yet his mind is only upon flesh, he is the only Tugmutton, or
Muttonmonger betwixt Dover and Dunbarr: for he has eaten a whole Sheep of
sixteen shillings price, raw at one meal (pardon me) I think he left the
skin, the wool, the horns, and the bones: but what talk I of a Sheep, when
it is apparently known, that he has at one repast, and with one dish, feasted
his Carkas with all manner of meats? All men will confess that a Hog will
eat any thing, either fish, flesh, foul, root, herb, or excrement, and this
same noble Nick Nicholas, or Nicholas Nick, has made an end of a Hog all at
once, as if it had bin but a Rabbet ^ucker, and presently after, for fruit to
recreate his palate, he has swallowed three peckes of Damsons, thus
(Philosophically) by way of a Chimicall In^usion, as a Hog will eat all
things that are to be eaten, so he in eating the Hog, did in a manner of
extraction distill all manner of meats through the Limbeck of his paunch.

But hold a little, I would be loath to cloy my Reader with too much meat and
fruit at once^ so that after your Sheep, Hog and Damsons, I think it best
to suffer you to pawse and pick your teeth (if you have any) whilst I spend a
few words more in Paraphrasing upon his surname. Wood is his Appellation,
Denomination, or how you please to term it.

Some of the ancient Philosophers have compared man to a Tree with the bottom
upwards, whose root is the Brain, the Arms Hands, Fingers, Legs, Feet and
Toes, are the Limbs, and Branches, the comparison is very significant, many
Trees do bring forth good fruit, so do some few men; Some stately Trees
grow high and fair, yet stand for nothing but shades, and some men grow high
and lofty, yet are nothing but shaddows; Some Trees are so malignant, that
nothing can prosper under the compass of their branches; and some men are so
unlucky, that very few can thrive in their service. And as of one part of a
Tree a Chair of State may be made, and of another part a carved Image, and of
a third part a stool of office; So men, being compounded and composed all of
one mould and mettle, are different and disconsonant in estates, conditions,
and qualities. Too many (like the barren Fig Tree) bear leaves of hypocrisy,
but no fruits of Integrity, who serve only for a flourish in this life, and a
flame ^^ that hereafter.

So much for that: now to return to my Theme of Wood, (indeed this last
disgressio^ may make my Reader think that I could no^ see wood for trees) what
Wood he is, I know not, but by his face he should be Maple, o^ Crab-tree, and
by his stomach, sure he i^ heart of Oak; some say he is a Meddler, but by his
stature, he seems like a low short Pine, and certain I am, that he is
Popular, a well tymberd piece, or a store house for belly timber.

Now Gentlemen, as I have walked you amongst the Trees, and through the Wood, I
pray set down, and take a taste or two mo^e of this Banquet.

What say you to the Leaf or Flecke of ^ Brawne new killed, to be of weight
eight pound, and to be eaten hot out of the Bores belly raw? much good do you
Gallants, was it not ^ glorious dish? and presently after (in stead of ^uckets,
twelve raw puddings. I speak not one word of drink all this while, for indeed
he is no drunkard, he abhorres that ^winish vice: Alehouses, nor Tapsters
cannot nick this Nick with froth, curtoll Cannes, tragical blacke-pots, and
double-dealing bumbasted Iugges, could never cheat him, for one Pin^^ of Beer
or Ale is enough to wash down ^ Hog, or water a Sheep with him.

Two Loins of Mutton, and one Loyne of Veale were but as three Sprats to him:
Once at Sir Warrham Saint Leigers house, and at S^^ William Sydleyes he showed
himself so valiant o^ Teeth, and Stomach, that he ate as much as would well
have served and sufficed thirty men, so that his belly was like to turn
bankerupt and break, but that the Seruing-men turned him to the fire, and
anointed his paunch with Grease and Butter, to make it stretch and hold; and
afterward being laid in bed, he slep^ eight hours, and fasted all the while:
which when the Knight understood, he commanded him to be laid in the stocks,
and there to endure as long time as he had lain bedrid with eating.

Pompey the Great, Alexander the Great, T^^berlan^ the Great, Charlemagne or
Charles the ^reat, Arthur the Great: all these gat the ^itle of Great, for
conquering Kingdoms, ^^d killing of men; and surely eating is not a ^^ea^er
sin then rapine, theft, manslaugh^^ and murder. Therefore this noble Ea^a^^^
does well deserve the Title of Great: where^^re I instile him Nicholas the
Great (Eater:) and as these forenamed Greats have ouer^rowne and wasted
Countries, and Hosts ^f men, with the help of their Soldiers and ^^llowers;
so has our Nick the Great, (in ^^ ^^ own person) without the help or aid ^f
any man, overcome, conquered, and de^oured in one week, as much as would have
^^fficed a reasonable and sufficient Army in a ^^y, for he has at one meal
made an assault upon seven dozen of good Rabbets at the lord Wootons in Kent,
which in the total is ^^ure-score, which number would well have ^^ffic'd a
hundred, threescore, and eight hun^ry Soldiers, allowing to each of them half
a ^^abbet.

Bell, the famous Idol of the Babylonians, was mere imposture, a Iuggling
toye, and a ^heating babble, in comparison of this Nicho^^an, Kentish
Tenterbelly, the high and mighty ^uke All paunib, was but a fiction to him.
Milo ^he Crotonia^ could hardly be his equal: and ^oclner of Windsor was not
worthy to be his ^^ot-man. A quarter of fat Lamb, and three^ore Eggs have
been but an easy colation and three well larded Pudding-pyes he has at ^ne
time time put to foil, eighteen yards of ^lacke Puddings (London measure)
have suddenly been imprisoned in his sowse-tub. A ^ucke raw with guts,
feathers, and all (ex^ept the bill and the long feathers of the wings) ^ath
swomme in the whirlepole or pond of his ^^awe, and he told me, that threescore
pound of Cherries was but a kind of washing meat, and that there was no tacke
in them, for he ^ad tried it at one time. But one John Dale was ^oo hard for
him at a place called Lennam, for ^he said Dale had laid a wager that he would
fill ^oods belly, with good wholesome victuals for ^^, shillings, and a
Gentleman that laid the contrary, did wager, that as ^oone as noble Nick ^ad
eaten out Dales 2. shillings, that he should presently enter combat with a
worthy Knight, called Sir Loyne of Beef, and overthrow him; in conclusion,
Dale bought 6. pots of potent, high, and mighty Ale, and twelve new penny white
loaves, which he sop'd in the said Ale, the powerful fume whereof, conquered
the conqueror, robbed him of his reason, berest him of his wit, violently took
away his stomach, intoxicated his Pian ater, and entered the Sconce of his
Pericranion, blinde-folded him with sleep; setting a nap of nine hours for
manacles upon his threed-bare eyelids, to the preservation of the roast Beef,
and the unexpected winning of the wager.

This invincible Ale, victoriously vanquished the vanquisher, and over our
Great Triumpher, was Triumphant: But there are presidents enough of as potent men
as our Nicholas, that have subdude Kings and Kingdoms, and yet they themselves
have been captived and conquered by drink; we need recite no more examples
but the Great Alexander, and Holophernes, their ambition was boundless, and so
is the stomach of my Pens subject, for all the four Elements cannot cloy him,
fish from the deepest Ocean, or purest River, fairest Pond, foulest Ditch, or
dirtiest puddle: he has a receite for Foul of all sorts, from the Wren to the
Eagle, from the Titmouse to the Estrich, or Cassawar away, his paunch is either
a Coope or a Roost for them: He has (within himself) a stall for the Ox, a
room for the Cow, a stye for the Hog, a Park for the Dear, a warren for
Coneies, a storehouse for fruit, a dayery for Milk, Cream, Curds, Whay,
Butter-milke, and Cheese: his mouth is a Mill of perpetual motion, for let the
wind or the water rise or fall, yet his teeth will ever be grinding; his guts
are the Rendez-vous or meeting place or Burse for the Beasts of the fields, the
Fowls of the Air, and Fishes of the Sea; and though they be never so wild or
disagreeing in Nature, one to another, yet he binds or grindes them to the
peace, in such manner, that they never fall at odds again. His eating of a
Sheep, a Hog, and a Duck raw, does show that he is free from the sin of
niceness or curiosity in his Dyert. (It had been happy for the poor, if
their stomachs had been of that constitution, when ^^acoales were so dear
here.) Besides, he never troubles a Larder, or Cupboord to lay cold meat in,
nor does he keep any Cats or Traps in his house to destroy vermin, he takes so
good a course, that he lays or shuts up all safe within himself; in brief,
give him meat, and he never stands upon the cookery, he cares not for the
Peacocke of Sames, the Woodcock of Phrygia, the Cranes of Malta, the Pheasants
of England, the Caperkelly, the Heathcocke, and Terniagant of Scotland, the
Goat of Wales, the Salmon, and Vsquabah of Ireland, the Saw^edge of Bolognia,
the Skink of Westphalia, the Spanish Potato, he holds as a babble, and the
Italian Pigge he esteems as poison.

He is an English man, and English diet will serve his turn. If the Norfolk
Dumplin, and the Devonshire White-pot, be at variance, he will a^one them, the
Bag-puadings of Gloucester shire, the Blacke-puddings of W^rcester shire, the
Pan-puddings of ^h^^pshire, the white puddings of Somersetshire, the
Hasty-puddings of Hamshire, and the Pudding pyes of any shire, all is one to
him, nothing comes amiss, a contented mind is worth all, and let any thing
come in the shape of fodder, or eating stuff, it is welcome, whether it be
Sa^sedge, or Custard, or Eg-pye, or Cheese-cake, or Flawne, or Fool, or
Fr^yze, or Tanzy, or Pancake, or Fritter, or Flapiacke, or Posset,
Galley-ma^srey, Mackeroone, Kickshaw, or Tantablin, he is no puling Meacocke,
nor in all his life time the queasinesse of his stomach needed any saucy
spur or switch of sour Veriuice, or acute Vinegar, his appetite is no
straggler, nor is it ever to seek, for he keeps it close prisoner, and like a
courteous kind Iaylour, he is very tender over it, not suffering it to want any
thing if he can by any means procure it: indeed it was never known to be so
far out of reparations, that it needed the assistance of Carrdle, Alebery,
Iulep, Cullisse, Grewell, or stewd-broth, only a mess of plain frugall
Country Pottage was always sufficient for him, though it were but a
washing-bowle full, of the quantity of two pecks, which porrenger of his, I my
self saw at the sign of the white Lion at a Village called Harri^^m in Kent,
^^^ Hostess of which house did affirm, that ^^ did at once wash down that
Bowl full portage, with nine penny loaves of bread, ^^ three Iugges of Beer.

Indeed, in my presence (after he had b^^ken his fast) having (as he said)
eaten one po^tle of milk, one pottle of potage, with bread, butter, and
cheese: I then sent for him, to ^^^ aforesaid Inn, and after some accomodat^^^
salutations, I asked him if he could eat ^^^ thing? He gave me thanks, and
said, that ^^^ he had known, that any Gentleman wo^^^ have invited him, that
he would have spa^^^ his breakefast at home, (and with that he ^^^^ me as
aforesaid, what he had eaten) yet ne^^thelesse (to do me a courtesy) he would
s^^^^ me some small cast of his office, for he had o^^ hole or corner in the
profundity of his s^^^^ house, into which he would stow and bess^^ any thing
that the house would afford, at ^^^^ peril and my cost. Whereupon I summo^^ my
Hostess with three knocks upon the Table^ two stamps on the floor, with my
fist and ^o^ at which she made her personal appearance with a low Curtsie,
and an inquisitiue W^^^^ lack ye? I presently laid the authority of bold Guest
upon her, commanding that all ^^^^ victuals in the house should be laid on the
T^ble. She said, she was but slenderly prouide^ by reason goodman Wood was
there, but w^^ she had, or could do, we should pre^ca^^ have: so the cloth
was displaid, the salt ^^ advanced, six penny wheaten loaves w^^ mounted two
stories high like a Rampi^ three sixe-penny Ve^le pyes, walled sh^^ about, and
well victual'd within, were presented to the hazard of the Scalado, one pon^^
of sweet butter (being all fat and no bones) was in a cold sweat at this mighty
preparations one good dish of Thorneback, white as A^baster or the Snow upon
the Scithian mountains, and in the Rear came up an inch th^^ shyuer of a Peck
household loase; all which provision were presently, in the space of ^ hour
utterly confounded, and brought to ^^ thing, by the mere and only valourous
desterity of our unmatchable grand Gurmou^^ he courageously past the Pikes, and
I cleared ^^shot, but the house yielded no more, so ^^^^ Guess arose
unsatisfied, and my self ^^ contended in being^ thrifty and saving my ^oney
against my will.

^^ did there offer him twenty shillings to bring ^^ up to my house on the
Bank-side, ^^ there I would have given him as much ^^od meat, as he would eat
in ten days, ^^e after another, and five shillings a day every ^^, and at
the ten days end, twenty shil^ings more, to bring him down again. I did ^y
offer ten shillings to one Jeremy Robinson ^Glouer (a man very inward with
him) to at^^nd an^ keep him company, and two shillings six pence the day, with
good diet and ^^lging: all which were once accepted, vn^^^ Wood began to
ruminate and examine what ^^ruice he was to do, for these large allow^ces. Now
my plot was to have him to the ^eare-garden, and there before a house full of
^^eople, he should have eaten a wheel barrow ^ll of Tripes, and the next day,
as many pud^ing should reach over the Thames (at a ^^lace which I would measure
betwixt London and sRichmond) the third day, I would have allowed him a fat
Calfe, or Sheep of twenty ^hillings price, and the fourth day he should ^aue
had thirty Sheep Gathers, thus from day to day, he should have had wages and
diet with variety; but he fearing that which his me^ts would amount to unto,
brake off the match, ^aying, that perhaps when his Grace, (I guess who he
meant) should hear of one that ate so much, and could work so little, he
doubted there would come a command to hang him: where upon our hopeful
Beare-garden business was shiuerd, and shattered in pieces.

Indeed he made a doubt of his expected performance in his quality, by reason
of his being grown in years, so that if his stomach should fail him
publicly, and lay his reputation in the mire, it might have been a
dis^aragement to him for ever, and especially in Kent, where he has long been
famous, he would be loath to be defamed; But as weak as ^he was, he said, that
he could make a shift to destroy a fat Weather of a pound in two hours,
provided that it were tenderly boild, for he has lost all his teeth (except
one) in eating a quarter of Mutton, (bone, and all) at Ashford in the County
aforesaid, yet is he ^ery quick and nimble in his feeding, and will rid more
Eating work away in two hours, then ten of the hungriest Carters in the
Parish where he dwells. He is surely noble (for his great Stomach) and
virtuous, chiefly for his patience in putting up much; moreoeuer he is thirfty
or fruga^l, for when he can get no better meat, he will eat Ox Livers, or a
mess of warm Ale-graines from a Brew House. He is provident and studious
where to get more provision as soon as all is spent, and yet he is bountiful
or prodigal in spending all he has at once: he is profitable in keeping
bread and meat from mould and Maggots, and saving the charge of salt, for his
appetite will not wait and attend the poudring; his courtesy is manifest, for
he had rather have one Farew^^ then twenty Godbwyes: Of all things, he holds
fasting to be a most superstitious branch of Popery, he is a maine enemy to
Ember weeks, he hates Lent worse then a Butcher or a Puritan, and the name of
Good Friday affrights him like a Bulbegger; a long Grace before meat, strikes
him into a Quotidian Ague; in a word, he could wish that Christmas would dwell
with us all the year, or that every day were metamorphoz^d into
Shrouetuesdayes; in brief, he is a Magazine, a storehouse, a Receptacle, a
Burse, or Exchange, a Babel or confusion for all Creatures.

He is no Gamester, neither at Dice, or Cards, yet there is not any man within
forty miles of his head, that can play with him at Maw, and though his pasture
be never so good, he is always like one of Pharaohs lean Kine; he is swarty,
blackish hair, Hawk-nosed (like a Parrot, or a Roman) he is wattle-lawde, and
his eyes are sunk inward, as if he looked into the inside of his intrayles,
to note what custom'd or vncustom'd goods he took in, whilst his belly (like a
Maine-sayle in a calm) hangs ruffled and wrinkled (in folds and wrathes) flat
to the mast of his empty ca^kasse, till the storm of abundance fills it, and
violently drives it into the full sea of satisfaction.

LIke as a River to the Ocean bounds,
Or as a Garden to all Britains grounds,
Or like a Candle to a flaming Linck
Or as a single Ace, unto Sise Cinque,
So short am I of what Nick Wood has done,
That having ended, I have scarce begun:
For I have written but a taste in this,
To show my Readers where, and what he is.
FINIS.
TO THE (SIR REVERENCE) RICH WORSHIPPED Mr TRIM TRAM SENCELES, GREAT IMAGE OF
AVTHORITY and Hedgborough of the famous City of Goteham, and to the rest of
that admired and unmatchable Senate, with their Corruptions and Families.
MOst Honorificicabilitudinitatibus, I having studied the seven Lubberly
Sciences (being nine by computation) out of which I gathered three conjunctions
four mile Asse-vnder, which with much labor, and great ease, to little or no
purpose, I have noddicated to your gray, grave, and grauelled Prate ^ction. I
doubt not but I might have had a Patron nearer hand, as the Deane of Dunstable,
or the Beadle of Layton Buzzard, but that I know the Phrase, Method and Style,
is not for every man's understanding, no my most renowned Pythagor-Asses, for
you this Hogshead of invention was brewed and broched, for I am ignorantly
persuaded, that your wisdom can pick as much matter out of this Book in one
day, as both the Universities can in twelve months, and thirteen Moons, with
six times four years to boot. I know your bounties too exding, for as old
mother Baly said, the wit of man was much, when she saw a dog muzzled. Every
man is not borne to make a Monument for the Cuckoo; to send a Trifoote home
alone, to drive sheep before they have them, or to Trundle cheeses down a
hill. So saluting you with more prespect then the Mayor of Loo did the Queens
Ape, I take leave to leave you, and rest yours to bid you welcome, if you came
within a mile of my house to stay all night.

Yours Rolihaytons.

To Nobody.
Upon a Christmas Even, somewhat nigh Easter, anon after Whitsuntide, walking
in a Coach from London to Lambeth by water, I ouertooke a Man that met me in
the morning before Sun set, the wind being in Capricorn, the Sign Southwest,
with silence I demanded many questions of him, and he with much pensiveness
did answer me merrily to the full, with such ample and empty replications, that
both our understandings being equally satisfied, we contentiously agreed to
finish and prosecute the narratio of the Unknown Knight Sir Gregory Nonsense:
so sitting down upon our shoulders, resting uneasily on a bank of Sicamors,
under a tree of Odoriferous and contagious Camomile, after three sighs,
smilingly uttered in the Hebrew Character, two groans from the Chaldean
Dialact, five sobs from the Arabian Sinquapace, six dum ps from the Germane
Idiome, nine Moods of Melancholy from the Italian tongue, with one hub hub
from the Hibernian outcry. And last he laughed in the Cambrian tongue, and
began to declare in the Vtopian speech, what I have here with most diligent
negligence Translated into the English Language, in which if the Printer has
placed any line, letter or syllable, whereby this large volume may be made
guilty to be understood by any man, I would have the Reader not to impute the
fault to the Author, for it was far from his purpose to write to any purpose,
so ending at the beginning, I say as it is ap plawsefully written and commended
to posterity in the Midsummer nights dream. If we offend, it is with our good
will, we came with no intent, but to offend, and show our simple skill.

Rolihayton.

The names of such Authors Alphabetically recited, as are simply mentioned in
this Work.
AMadis de Gaul. Archy Arms. Beuis of Hampton. Boe to a Goose. Charing Cross.
Coakley. Dunsmore Cow. Dauy Wager. Euanwich Muffe. Fri^r and the boy. Fubs his
Travels. Garagon^ua. Gammon of West phallia. Grigs Granam. Hundred merry tales.
Huon of Burdeux. Jack Drum. Knight of the Sun. Knave of Diamonds. Lanum.
Long Meg. Mad Mawlin. No body. O tool. Proofs of OOOO. Quinborough Oysters.
Ready money. Shooters Hill. Singer. Sir Thomas Persons. Tarleton. Tom Derry.
Tom Thumb. Vnguentum Album. Will Summers. Wit whither will thou? Woodcocke of
our side. Xampelloes Quiblines. Yard of Ale. Zany on tumbling.
SIR GREGORY NONSENSE HIS NEWS FROM NO PLACE.
IT was in June the eight and thirtieth day,
That I embarked was on highgate Hill,
After discourteous friendly taking leave:
Of my young Father Madge and Mother John,
The Wind did ebb, the tide flou'd North Southeast,
We hoist our Sails of Colloquintida.
And after 13. days and 17. nights,
(With certain Hiroglyphi^ke hours to boot)
We with tempestuous calmes, and friendly storms,
^plit our maine topmast, close below the keele.
^ut I with a dull quick congruity,
^ook 19. ounces of the Western wind,
And with the pith of the pole Artichocke,
Saild by the flaming Coast of Trapezond,
There in a Fort of melting Adamant,
Armed in a Crimson Robe, as black as Iet,
I saw Alcides with a Spiders thread,
^ead Cerberus to the Prononticke Sea,
Then cutting further through the marble Maine,
^^ongst flying Bulls, and 4. legged Turkicocks,
A d^mbe fair spoken, welfac'd aged youth,
Sent to me from the stout Stimphalides,
With tonguelesse silence thus began his speech:
^^ustrious flap-iacke, to thy hungry doom,
Low is the ground I eleuate my cause,
As I upon a Gnat was riding late,
In quest to parley with the Pleiades,
I saw the Duke of Hounsditch gaping close,
^n a green Arbor made of yellow starch,
Betwixt two Brokers howling Madrigales,
A Banquet was seemed in of Lampraie^ bones,
Well pickel'd in the Tarbox of old time,
When Demogorgon saild to Islington;
Which I perceiving with nine chads of steel,
Straight flew unto the coast of Pimlico.
^T' inform great Prester John, and the Mogull,
What exlent Oysters were at Billingsgate.
The Mogull (all enraged with these news,)
Sent a black snaile post to Tartaria,
To tell the Irishmen in Saxony,
The dismal downfall of old Charing Cross.
With that nine butter Firkins in a flame,
Did coldly rise to Arbitrate the cause:
Guessing by the Sinderesis of Wapping,
Saint Thomas Watrings is most ominous.
For though an Andiron, and a pair of Tongs,
May both have breeding from one teeming womb,
Yet by the Calculation of Pickt-hatch,
Milk must not be so dear as Muskadell.
First shall Melpomene in Cobweb Lawn^
Adorn great Memphis in a Mussell boat,
And all the muses clad in Robes of Air,
Shall dance, Leuoltons with a Whirligig,
Fair Pluto shall descend from Brazen Dis,
And Poliphensus keep a Seamsters shop,
The I Will of Wight shall like a diue-dapper,
Devour the Egyptian proud Piramides,
Whilst Cassia Fistula shall gurmundize,
Upon the flesh and blood of Croydon cole dust,
Then on the banks of Shoreditch shall be seen,
What it is to serve the great Vtopian Queen.
This fearful period with great joyful care,
Was heard with acclamations, and in fine,
The whilst a lad of aged Nestors years,
Stood sitttng in a Throne of massy yeast:
(Not speaking any word) gave this reply:
Most conscript Vmpire in this various Orb,
I saw the Caedars of old, Lebano^,
Read a sad Lecture unto Clapham heath,
At which time a strange vision did appear,
His head was Buckrum, and his eyes were sedge,
His arms were blue bottles, his teeth were straw,
His legs were nine well squared Tobacco Pipes,
Clothed in a garment all of Dolphins eggs,
Then with a voice erected to the ground,
Lifting aloft his hands unto his feet,
He thus began, Cease friendly cutting throtes,
Clamor the Promulgation of your tongues,
And yield to Demagorgons policy.
Stop the refulgent method of your moodes,
For should you live old Paphlagonias years,
And with Sardan^p^lus match in virtue.
Yet Airo^os will with a Marigold,
Run through the Mountains of the Caspian Sea.
When you shall see above you and beneath,
That nothing kills a man so soon as death,
Aquarius joined with Pisces, in firm league,
With Reasons and vindictiue Arguments,
That pulueriz'd the King of Diamonds,
And with a diogoricall relapse,
Squeaz'd through the Sinders of a Butterflye,
Great Oberon was mounted on a Waspe,
To signify this news at Dunstable.
The Weathercock at Pancrage in a fume,
With Patience much distracted hearing this,
Replied thus briefly without fear or wit,
What madness does thy Pericranion seize,
Beyond the Dragons tail Artyphilax.
Think thou a Wolf thrust through a sheep-skin, glove,
Can make me take this Gobling for a Lamb:
Or that a Crocadile in Bariy broth,
Is not a dish to feast don Beelzebub,
Give me a Medler in a field of blue,
Wrapped up stigmatically in a dream,
And I will send him to the gates of Dis,
To cause him fetch a sword of massy Chalk,
With which he wan the fatal Theban field,
From Romes great mitred Metropolitan.
Much was the quoile this brauing answer made,
When presently a German Coniurer,
Did open a learned Book of Palmistry,
^ram'd full of mental reseruations
The which beginning with a loud low voice,
With affable and kind discourtesie,
He spoke what no man heard or understood,
Words tending unto this or no respect,
Spawne of a Tortoyse hold thy silent noise,
For when the great Leuiathan of Trumps,
Shall make a breach in Sinous Tennis Court.
Then shall the pigmey mighty Hercules,
Skip like a wilderness in Woodstreet Counter,
Then Taurus shall in league with Ha^iball,
Draw Bacchus dry, whilst Boreas in a heat,
Inuellop'd in a Gown of Isicles:
With much discretion and great want of wit,
Leave all as wisely as it was at fir^^,
I mused much how those things could be done.
When strait a water Tankard answered me,
That it was made with a Parenthesis,
With thirteen yards of Kerfie and a half,
Made of fine flax which grew on Goodwinsands,
Whereby we all perceived the Hernshawes breed,
Being trusted with a charitable doom,
Was near Bunhill, when strait I might discry,
The Quintescence of Grub street, well distild
Through Cripplegate in a contagious Map.
Bright Phaeton all angry at the sight,
Snatched a large Wool-packe from a pismires mouth.
And in a Tailors Thimble boi'ld a Cabbage.
Then all the standers by, most Reverend, Rude,
Judged the case was most obscure and clear,
And that three salt Ennigmates well applied,
With fourescoure Pipers and Arions Harp,
Might catch Garagantua through an augor-hole,
And it was no doubt but mulley Mahamet,
Would make a qua^fing bowl of Gorgous skul,
Whilst gormundizing Tantalus would weep,
That Polipheme should kiss Auroraes lips,
Tri-formed Cinthia in a Sinkefoile shape,
Met with the Dogstarre on Saint David's day,
But said Grimalkin mumbling up the Alps,
Made fifteen fustian fumes of Pasticrust.
This was no sooner known at Amsterdam,
But with an Ethiopian Argosey,
Manned with Flap-dragons, drinking vpsifreeze,
They past the purple gulf of Basingstoke.
This being finished, search to any end,
A full odd number of just sixteen dogs,
Drencht in a sulpher flame of scalding Ice,
Sung the Besonian Whirlepooles of Argeire,
Mixed with pragmaticall potato Pies,
With that I turned my ears to see these things,
And on a Crystal wall of Scarlet dye,
I with mine eyes began to hear and note,
What these succeeding Verses might portend,
Which furiously an Anabaptist squeak'd,
The audience deafly listening all the while.
A most learned-Lye, and Illiterate Oration, in lame galloping Ri^^ fustianly
pronounced by Nimshag, a Gi^^^sophicall Phoolosopher, in the presence of
Ac^^tophel Smel-smocke, Annani-Asse Aretine, Is^^^ Nabal, Fransiscus
Ra-viliaco, Garnetto Iebusito, ^^ do Salpetro Fauexit Pouderio, and many other
g^^^ Senators of Limbo. Translated out of the vulg^^ Language, of
Terraincognita, and is as material as any part of the Book, the meaning
whereof a blindman may see without Spectacles as well at midnight, as at noone
day.
THe Story of Ricardo, and of Bindo,
Appeared like Nylus peeping through a wi^^
Which put the wandering Jew in much amazem^^^
In seeing such a voice without the Cazement,
When lo a Bull; (long nourished in Cocitus,
With sulphur horns, sent by the Emperor T^^,
Asked a stigmatike Paraclesian question,
If Alexander ever loved. Ephestion.
I seeing each to other were much adverse,
In mirth and spore set down their minds in sad ^^^
Which as my brains with care have coined and mi^^^
With plenteous want of judgment here it is pri^^
But if Grimalkine take my line in dudgioa,
The case is plain, I pray good Readers judge ^^^,
That Esop that old fabulisticke Phrygian,
From the Nocturnall stoud or lake called Stigi^,
Came to the Court at Cree^e, clad like a Legate,
The Porter kindly to him opened the-Gate,
He past through Plutoes Hall in Hell most horr^^,
Where g^as^ing cold mixed with combustious torid,
Where all things that are good and goodness wanted,
Where pla^^^ of ^^ p^rdition still are planted,
Where Ghosts and Go^^ lings all in sulphur su^^d,
And all the f^^nds like Cuck olds were cornuted, ^^
At last he audience got in Plumes presence,
And of his whole Embassage this was the sense
^o thee Tartarian Monarch now my Rime-is,
And therefore mark my Prologue, ^^^ Imprimis,
Thou that in Lim^^^ ^^^ as 'twere Rex Reg^ant,
^earewith my wit, which is not ^^^^^ or pregnant,
^ come, from Ho^dsditch, Long-lane, and from Bridewel,
Where all that have liu^d ill, have all not did well,
Where as the Vices show like Virtues Cardinal,
Where Is money store and conscience very hard in all,
Through thy protection they are monstrous thriuers,
Not like the Dutchmen in base Doyts and Stiuers,
For there you may see many a greedy grout-head,
With^^^ or wit, or fence, almost without-head,
^eld and esteemed a man whose zeal is feruant,
And makes a show as he were not your servant.
To tell this news I came from many a mile hence,
^or we do know there is ods twixt talk and silence.
With that the smug-fac'd Pluto shook his vestment,
Deep ruminating what the weighty Ieftment,
Calling to mind old D^^^^^^ Hearball,
With Taciturnity and Actions verbal,
Quoth he, I care for neither Friend or Kinsman,
Nor do I value honesty two pinnes man:
^^^ it is a Maxim Mortals cannot hinder,
The doughty deeds of Wakefields huffe cap Pinder,
Are not so pleasant as the fair Aurora,
When Ni^^^d rudely played on his Bandora.
For it is not fit that any. Turk or Persian,
Should in a Cloke-^^g hide a fever Tertian,
Because the Dog-starte in his cold Meridian,
Might arm himself in fury most quotidian.
With that, most quick a Pettifoggers tongue went.
^Well oild with A^^n^^, Argent, or such unguent)
^s't ^it (quoth he) here should be such incroachment,
By such whose fathers never know what a Coachment;
Or shall their Scutchions fairly be indorsed,
Who riding backward iudishly were horsed?
For though in I^^^^ it be ^^re and frequent,
Where to the wall most commonly the weak went,
Yet neither can the Sultan or the Sophy.
Show any Presidents for such a Trophy.
By Rules of Logic, he is a kind a Catiue,
And makes no reckoning of his Country native,
That does with feeble strength, love with derision.
And without bloodshed makes a deep incision,
Why should a man lay either life or lim^ny,
To be endangered by a falling Chimney.
For though the prosecution may be quaintly,
Yet may the execution end but faintly,
Let Us call to mind the famous acts of Hector,
When aged Ganymede carousing Nectar,
Did leave the Greeks much matter to repine on;
Until the: Wooden Horse of trusty Synon,
Foald a whole litter of mad Colts in Harness,
As furious as the host of Holopherne^^
But to the purpose here is the long and short out,
All that is said, has not been much important,
Nor can it be that what is spoke is meant all,
Of any thing that happens accidental.
We will examine wisely what the Foe sent,
And whether he be innocent or nocent.
In weighty matters let us not be too serious,
There Is many an Eunuch has bin thought venerious^.
And it is a thing which often has bin heard on,
That he that labors, does deserve his Guerdon.
Let us the first precadent time examine,
You Will find that hunger is the cause of famine,
The Birds in Summer that have sweetly chirped,
Ere winter has been done, have been extirped.
He may wear Robes, that nere knew what a Ragme^t,
And ho^ ha^ feasts, may fast without a fragme^t,
The end proves all, I care not for the Interim,
Time now that summers him, will one day winter him,
To outward view, and Senses all exterier,
Amongst all fools I never saw a verier,
Then he that does his liberty prohibit,
To fall in danger of a fatal Iibbit.
Nor for this purpose here to talk come I,
How silver may be mocked with Alcamy.
I often have heard that many a Hawke has muted,
Whereby the Faulkners Clothes have bin polluted.
This may be avoided if the Knight Sir Reverence,
Be wa^y with a negligent perseverance:
For men of Judgment never think it decent,
To love a stinking Pole-cat well for thefent.
But if a man should seriously consider,
Where Charity is fled or who has hid her,
He in the end would give this worthy sentence,
The earth has been accursed since she went hence^
The times are biting, and the^ days Caniculer,
And mischief girds about the Globes orbicule^,
How from the Country all the plain Rusticity,
Lives by deceit, exiling plain simplicity.
A face like Rubies mixed with Alablaster,
Wastes much in Physic, and her water-caster,
That whosoe'r perceiues which way the stink went,
May ^^^^ and censure she is a great delinquent.
Why should a Bawd be furred with Budge and Miniuer,
As if she were a Lady, or Queen Guiniuer,
When as perhaps there is many a modest Matron,
Has scarcely meat, or money, clothes, or patron?
And wherefore should a man be grown so stupid;
To be a slave to Ven^u or to Cup^a?
He Is but a fool that hoping for a vain prize,
Being captiued can have no bail or maine prize.
For he that has no shift let him determine,
He shall be bitten with Fleas, Lice, or vermin.
This being all his speeches, Pia Matter,
He called a Sculler, and would go by water:
When strait the Stygian Ferriman a rare one,
Old amiable currish courteous Caron,
Rowed with a whirlwind through the Acheron tick,
And thence unto the AzureSea proponticke,
There Neptune in a burning blue Pauilion,
In state did entertain this slow Postillion,
There Proteus in a Robe of twifted Camphire,
With a grave beard of monumentall Samphire,
Quoth he, shall we whose Ancestors were warlike,
Whose rich Perfumes were only Leeks and Garlike,
Whose noble deeds nocturnall and diurnall,
Great Towns and Towers did top^ie turuy turn al,
Shall all their valor be in us extinguished?
Great love forbid, there should be such a thing wished,
Though Cleopatra was Octanian's rival.
It is a thing that we may well conniue all,
Amongst the Ancient it is vndisputable,
That women and the winds were ever mutable,
And it is approved where people are litigious,
There every Epicure is not religious,
Old Occamus knowing what they meant all,
Brought Z^phirus unto the Oriental,
And he by Argument would prove that love is
A thing that makes a wise man often a Nouice:
For it is approved, a Greyhound or a Beagle,
Were not ordained or made to hunt the Eagle,
Nor ca^ the nimblest Cat that came from Gotta^^,
Search the profundity of Neptunes bo^tom.
Let roaring Cannons with the Welkin parley,
It Is known, good liquor may be made with Barley,
And by experience many are assured,
Some grounds are fruitful, if they be manure^
For in the rudiments of health or sanity,
An arrant Whore is but a price of vanity:
Some men with fury will procrastinate,
And some with leaden speed make haste in at,
But in conclusion many things impurely,
Die in the birth, and never end maturely.
The man that seeks straying minds to weane all,
From venial vices, or offenses penal:
Had he the forces of the Turkish Navy,
He would ly down at last and cry pec^^^^,
Of one thing I have oftentimes took notice,
The fool that is old, and rich, much apt to dote is;
And by the light of Pollux and of Cast^^,
A Woolfe in Shepherds weeds is no good Pastor.
Those that do live a Commicke life by Magic,
Their Sc^anes in their Catastrophes are tragic.
And he that one the world would be chief Primat,
May give occasion for wise men to rhyme at.
Before men fell to wrangling disagreement,
A Lawyer understood not what a fee meant:
It was a time when Guilt did fear no censure,
But love, and peace, and charity was then sure.
Now fathers (for their bread) dig and delue it.
The whilst the Sutten Sons are lived with Velvet
Thus do I make a hotch potch mesle of Ne^s^^^
In dark Enigmaes, and strange sense upon sense:
It is not foolish all, nor is it wise all,
Nor is it true in all, nor is it lies all.
I have not sh^w'd my wits acute or fluent,
Nor told which way of late the wa^dring Jew were
For mine own part I never cared greatly,
(So I fare well) where those that dress the meat ^^
A miserable Knave may be close fisted,
And prodigal expense may be resisted,
I neither care what Tom, or Jack, or Dicke sed,
I am resolved and my mind is fixed,
The case is, not as he or I, or you sed,
Truth must be fonnd, and witnesses produced,
My care is, that no captious Reader bear hence,
My understanding, wit, or reason here-hence.
On purpose to no purpose I did write all,
And so at noone, I bid you here good night all.
THen with a tuchbox of transalpine tar,
Turning thrice round, and stirring not a jot,
He threw five tun of red hot purple Snow,
Into a Pigmeis mouth, nine inches square,
Which strait with melancholy moved,
Old Bembus Burgomaster of P^ckt-hatch,
That plunging through the Sea of Turnebull stree^^,
He safely did ariue at Smithfield Bars.
Then did the Turnetripes on the Coast of France,
Catch fifteen hundred thousand Grasshoppers,
With fourteen Spanish Needles bumbasted,
Poach'd with the Eggs of fourscore Flanders Mares,
Mounted upon the foot of Cancasus,
They whorld the football of conspiring fate,
And brake the shinnes of smugfac'd Mulciber:
With that grim Pluto all in Scarlet blue,
Gave fair Proserpina a kiss of brass,
At which all Hell danced Trenchmore in a string,
Whilst Ach^ron, and Termagant did sing.
The Mold warp all this while in white broth bathed,
Did Carroll Didoes happiness in love,
Upon a Gridiron made of w^^ting-mops,
Unto the tune of John come kiss me now,
At which Auernus Music began to rore,
Enthroned upon a seat of three-leau'd grass,
Whilst all the Hibernian Kernes in multitudes,
Did feast with Shamerags stewed in Vsquebagh,
At which a banquet made of Monopolies,
Took great distaste, because the Pillory
Was hunger-star^'d for want of Villianes ears,
Whom to relieve, there was a Mittimus,
Sent from Tartaria in an Oyster Boat,
At which the King of China was amazed,
And with nine gra^^'s of Rewba^be stellified,
As low as to the altitude of shame,
He thrust four Onions in a Candle-case,
And s^^^ld the meaning of the worlds misdoubt,
Thus with a Dialogue of crimson starch,
I was inflamed with a num-cold fire,
Upon the tenter hooks of Charlemaine.
The Dogstar howld, the Cat a Mountain smilde,
And Si^^ drank Muskadell and Eggs,
In the ^^^nd hoof of huge Bucephalus,
Time turned about, and showed me yesterday,
Clad in a Cowne of mourning had I wist,
The motion was almost too late they said,
Whilst sad despair made all the World stark mad,
They all arose, and I put up my pen,
It makes no matter, where, why, how, or when.
Some Sense at last to the Learned.
YOu that in Greek and Latin learned are,
And of the ancient Hebrew have a share,
You that most rarely oftentimes have sung
In the French, Spanish, or Italian tongue,
Here I in English have imployd my pen,
To be read by the learned Englishmen,
Wherein the meanest Scholar plain may see,
I understand their tongues, as they do me.
AS MVCH HAPPINESS AS MAY BE WISHED, ATTEND THE Two hopeful Impes, of
Gentility and Learning, Mr RICHARD and GEORGE HATTON.
YOu forward Pair, in Towardly Designs,
To you I send these sowsde Salt Water Lines:
Accept, Read, Laugh, and breathe, and to it again,
And still my Muse, and I, shall yours remain.
JOHN TAILOR.

PROLOGVE.
I Now intend a Voyage here in Wri^^,
From London unto York, help to ^^dire,
Great Neptune lend thy Aid to me, ^^^^^^
Through thy tempestuous W^ues with ma^^y a blast,
And then I Will true describe the Towns, and men,
And manners, as I went and came age^n.
A Very Merry VVherrie-FerryVOYAGE. OR, YORK for my Money.
THe Year which I do call as others do,
Full 1600. adding twenty The year of our Lord.
two:
The Month of July that is for ever famed,
(Because 'twas so by July was named so by Caesar.
Julius Caesar named)
Just when six days, and to each Day a Night,
The dogged The Dogdayes were 6. days entered.
Dog-dayes had begun to bite,
On that day which does blessed Remembrance bring,
The name of an Apostle, and our King,
On that remarkable good day, Saint James,
I undertook my Voyage down the Thames.
The sign in I observe signs, winds, tides, days, hours, times,
Sci^uations and manners.
Cancer, or the Ribs and Breast,
And AEolus blew sweetly, West Southwest.
Then after many farewels, Cups and Glasses,
(Which oftentimes has made men worse then Asses
About the waste or No one if you will take it ^o^.
Navel of the Day,
Not being dry or Drunk, I went my way.
Out wherry somewhat old, or struck in age,
That had endured near 4. years Pilgrimage,
And carried honest people, Whores, and Thieues,
Some Sergeants, Bayliffes, and some Boats are like Barbars Chayres, Hackneyes,
or Whores: common to all estates
vnder-Shrieues,
And now at last was her lot to be
Th'aduentrous bonny Bark to carry me.
But as an old Whores Beauty being gone
Hides Natures wrack, with Artlike painting on:
So I with Colors finely did repair
My Boats defaults, and made her fresh and fair.
Thus being furnished with good Wine and Beer,
And Bread and Meat (to banish hungers fear)
With Sails, with Anchor, Cables, Sculs and Oars,
With Card and Compass, to know Seas and Shores,
With Lantern, Candle, Tinder-box and Match,
And with good Courage, to work, ward, and watch,
Well manned, well shipped, well victual'd, we appointed,
Well in good health, well timbred and well ioynted:
All wholly well, and yet not half Fox'd well,
Twixt Kent, and Essex, we to Grauesend fell.
There I had welcome of my friendly Host,
(A Grauesend Trencher, and a Grauesend Tossed)
Good meat and lodging at an easy rate,
And rose betimes, although I lay down late.
Bright Lucifer the Messenger of Day,
His burnisht twinkling splendor did display:
Rose cheek'd Aurora hid her blushing face,
She spying Phoebus coming gave him place,
Whilst Zephirus, and Auster, mixed together,
Breathed gently, as fore-boding pleasant weather.
Old Neptune had his Daughter Thames supplide,
With ample measure of a flowing Tide,
But Thames supposde it was but borrowed goods,
And with her Ebbes, paid Neptune back his Floods.
Then at the time of this Auspicious dawning,
I rowzd my men, who Scrubbing, stretching, yawning,
Arose, left Gra^esend, Rowing down the stream,
And near to Lee, we to an Ancker came.
Because the Sands were bare, and Water low,
We rested there, till it two hours did Flow:
And then to travel went our Galley foyst,
Our Ancker quickly weighed, our sail up hoyst,
Where thirty miles we past, a mile from shore,
The water two These flat Sands are called the Spits.
foot deep, or little more.
Thus past we on the brave East Saxon Coast,
From 3. at morn, till 2. at noone almost,
By Shobury, Wakering, Fowl^nesse, Tutingham,
And then we into deeper water came.
There is a crooked Bay runs winding far,
To Maulden, Estersord, and Colchester,
Which cause it was much about, (to ease men's pain)
I left the Land, and put into the main.
With speed, the crooked way to escape and pass,
I made out strait for Frinton and the Nasse.
But being 3. Leagues then from any Land,
And holding of our Maine-sheate in my hand,
We did espy a cole-blacke Cloud to rise,
Forerunner of some Tempest from the Skies;
Scarce had we sailed a hundred times our length,
But that the wind began to gather strength:
Stiff Eolus with Neptune went to Cuffes:
With huffes, and puffes, and angry Counter-Buffes,
From boy sterous gusts, they fell to fearful flawes,
Whilst we 'twixt wind and water, near Deaths jaws,
Tossed like a Cork upon the mounting maine,
Up with a whiffe, and straightway down again,
At which we in our minds much troubled were,
And said, God bless us all, what weather's here?
For (in a word) the Seas so high did grow,
That Ships were forced to strike their topsails low:
Mean time (before the wind) we scudded brave,
Much like a Ducke, on top of every wave.
But nothing violent is permanent,
And in short space away the Tempest went.
So farewell it; and you that Readers be,
Suppose it was no welcome Guest to me:
My Company and I, it much perplexed,
And let it come when I send for it next.
But leaving jesting, Thanks to God I give,
It Was through his mercy we did escape and live,
And though these things with mirth I do express,
Yet still I think on God with thankfulness.
Thus ceast the Storm, and weather began to smile,
And we rowed near the shore of Horsey I Will.
Then did illustrious Titan gin to steep
His Chariot in the Western Ocean deep:
We saw the ^arre-spent Day, withdraw his light,
And made for Harwich, where we lay all night.
There did I find an Hostess with a Tongue
As nimble as it had on Gimmols hung:
'Twill never tire, though it continual toiled,'
And went as yare, as if it had bin Oiled:
All Is one for that, for ought which I perceive,
It is a fault which all our Mothers have:
And is so firmly grafted in the Sex,
That he is an Ass that seems thereat to vex.
Apollo^s becames began to guild the Hills,
And West Southwest the wind the Welkin fi^s,
When I left Harwich, and along we' Rowed
Against a smooth calm stood that stiffly flowed,
By Bawdsey Haven, and by Orsord Nasse,
And so by Aldbrough we at last did pass.
By Lestoffe we to Yarmouth made our way,
Our third days travel being Saturday,
There did I see a Town well fortifide,
Well governed, with all Natures wants supplide;
The situation in a wholesome air,
The buildings (for the most part) sumptuous, fair,
The people courteous, and industrious, and
With labor makes the Sea enrich the Land.
Besides (for ought I know) this one thing more,
The Town can scarcely yield a man a Whore:
It is renownd for Fishing, far and near,
And sure in Britain it has not a Peer.
But noble Nash, thy fame shall live always,
Thy witty Pamphlet, the red It has not a fellow in England for fishing. A
Boc^e called The praise of the red Herring.
Herring praise,
Has done great Yarmouth much renowned right,
And put my artlesse Muse to silent quite.
On Sunday we a learned Sermon had,
Taught to confirm the good, reform the bad;
Acquaintance in the Town I scarce had any,
And sought for none, in fear to find too many,
Much kindness to me by mine Host was done,
(A Mariner named William Richardson)
Besides mine Hostess gave to me at last
A Cheese, with which at Sea we brake our fast,
The gift was round, and had no end indeed,
But yet we made an end of it with speed:
My thanks surmounts her bounty, all men sees
My gratitudes in Print: But where is the Cheese?
So on the Monday, betwixt one and twain,
I took my leave, and put to Sea again,
Down Yarmouth Road we'row'd with cutting speed,
(The wind all quiet, Arms must do the deed)
Along by Castor, and Sea-bordring Towns,
Whose Cliffes and shores abide stern Neptunes frowns,
Sometimes a mile from land, and sometimes two,
(As depthes or sands permitted us to do)
Till drawing toward night, we did perceive
The wind at East, and Seas began to heave:
The rolling Billows all in fury roares
And tumbled us, we scarce could use our Oars:
Thus on a Lee-shore darkness 'gan to come,
The Sea grew high, the winds 'gan hiss and hum:
The foaming curled waves the shore did beat,
(As if the Ocean would all Norfolk ^ate)
To keep at Sea, was dangerous I did think,
To go to Land I stood in doubt to sink:
Thus landing, or not landing (I supposed)
We were in peril And a ship Carpenter. WE were in a puzzell.
round about enclosed;
At last to row to shore I thought it b^st,
Among many evils, thinking that the least:
My men all pleased to do as I command,
Did turn the Boats head opposite to land,
And with the highest wave that I could spy,
I bade them row to shore immediately.
When straight we all leaped ouer-boord in haste,
Some to the knees and some up to the waste,
Where suddenly 'twixt Owle-light and the dark,
We plucked the Boat beyond high water mark.
And thus half sowsd, half stewd, with Sea and sw^^^
We land at Cromer Town, half dry, half wet.
But we supposing all was safe and well,
^^^ shunning We were like Flounders alive in a drying pan, that leaped into
the fire to save themselves.
Sylla, on Caribdis fell:
For why, some Women, and some Children there
That saw us land, were all possessed with fear:
And much amazed, ran crying up and down,
That Enemies were come to take the Town.
Some said that we were Pirates, some said Thieves,
And what the women says, the men believes.
With that four Constables did quickly call,
Your aid ^ to Arms you men of Cromer all!
Then straitway forty men with rusty Bills,
Some armed in Ale, all of approved skils,
Divided into four stout Regiments,
To guard the Town from dangerous Events;
Brave Captain These were the names the cumbersome Cromorian Constables.
Pescod did the Vantguard lead,
And Captain Clarke the Rereward governed,
Whilst Captain Wiseman, and hot Captain K^mble,
Were in the main Battalia fierce and nimble:
One with his squadron watched me all the night,
Left from my lodging I should take my slight:
A second (like a man of simple note)
Did by the Sea side all night watch my Boat,
The other two, to make their names Renownd,
Did Guard the Town, and bravely walk the Rownd.
And thus my Boat, my self, and all my men,
Were stoutly Guarded, and Regarded then:
For they were all so full with fear possessed,
That without mirth it cannot be expressed.
My Invention does Curuet, my Muse does Caper,
My pen does dance out lines upon the Paper,
And in a word, I am as full of mirth,
As mighty men are at their first sons birth.
Methinkes Moriscoes are within my brains,
And Heyes, and Antiques run through all my veins:
Heigh, to the tune of Trenchmoore I could write
The valiant men of Cromers sad affright:
As Sheep do fear the Wolf, or ^eese the Fox,
So all amazed were these senseless Blocks:
That had the Town been fired, it is a doubt,
But that the women there had pist it out,
And from the men Reek'd such a fearful sent,
That people three People did come the^ther 3. or 4. miles about, to know what
the matter was.
miles thence mused what it meant,
And he the truth that narrowly had sifted,
Had found the Constables, had need to have shifted.
They did examine me, I answered than
I was John Tailor, and a Waterman,
And that my honest fellow Job and I,
Were servants to King James his Majesty,
How we to York, upon a Mart were bound,
And that we landed, fearing to be drowned.
When all this would not satisfy the Crew,
I freely opened my Trunk, and bade them view,
I showed them Books, of Chronicles and Kings,
Some Prose, some Verse, and idle Sonettings,
I showed them all my Letters to the full:
Some to Yorkes Archbishop, and some to Hull,
But had the twelve Apostles sure been there
My witnesses, I had been never the I had as good have said nothing.
near.
And let the use all Oaths that I could use,
They still were harder of belief then Jews.
They wanted faith, and had resolved before,
Not to believe what ever we said or swore.
They said the world was full of much deceit,
And that my Letters might be Diligent Officers.
counterfeit:
Besides, there is one thing bred the more dislike,
Because mine Host was known a Catholic.
These things concurring, people came in Clusters,
And multitudes within my lodging Musters,
That I was almost wooried unto death,
In danger to be stifled with their breath.
And had mine Host took pence apiece of those
Who came to gaze on me, I do suppose,
No Jack an Apes; Baboone, or Crocodile
Ever got more money in so small a The dancing on the Ropes, or a Puppet play,
had come short of his takings, accounting ti^e for time.
while.
Besides, the pesants did this one thing more,
They called and drank four shillings on my score:
And like vnmanner'd Mungrells went their way,
Not spending ought, but leaving me to This was more then I could willingly
afford.
pay.
This was the household business: in mean space
Some Rascals ran unto my Boat: apace,
And turned and tumbled her, like men of Gothare,
Quite topsie turuey upward with her bottom,
Vowing they would in tatters piece-meale tear
The cursed Pirates Boat, that bred their fear;
And I am sure, their madness (to my harm)
Torca Board out, much longer then mine arm.
And they so brus'd, and split our Wherry, that
She leak'd, we cast out water with a Hat.
Now let men judge, upon this truths revealing,
If Turks or Mores could use more ^^^^'rous dealing;
Or whether it be fit I should not write
Their envy, foolish fear, and mad despite.
What may wise men conceive, when they shall note,
That five unarmed men, in a Wherry Boat,
Naught to defend, or to offend with stripes,
But one old And the sword was rusty with Saltwater, that it had need of a
quarters warning ^ro it would come out.
sword, and two Tobacco-Pipes,
And that of Constables a Murninall,
Men, women, children, all in general,
And that they all should be so valiant, wise,
To fear we would a Market Town surprise.
Inail that is writ, I vow I am no liar,
I muse the Beacons were not set on fire.
The dreadful names of Talbot, or of Dr^k^,
Never made the ^oes of England more to quake
Then I made Cromer; for their fear and dolor,
Each man might smell out by his neighbors Abraue sent.
Collor.
At last, the joyful morning did approach,
And Sol began to mount his flaming Coach:
Then did I think my Purgatory done,
And rose betimes intending to be gone;
But holla, stay, 'twas otherwise with me,
The mess of Constables were shrunk to three:
Sweet Mr Pescods double diligence
Had horst himself, to bear intelligence
To Justices of Peace within the land,
What dangerous business there was now in hand:
There was I forced to tarry all the while,
Till some said he rode four and twenty mile,
In seeking men of worship, peace and quorum,
Most wisely to declare strange news before vm.
And whatsoever tales he did recite,
I Am sure he caused Sir Austin Palgraus, Knight,
And Mr Robert Kempe a Justice there
Came before me, to know how matters were.
As conference 'twixt them and I did pass,
They quickly understood me what I was:
And though they knew me not in prose and looks,
They had read of me in my verse, and books;
My businesses account I there did make,
And I and all my company did take
The lawful Oath of our Allegiance then,
By which we were believed for honest men.
In duty, and in all humility
I do acknowledge the kind courtesy
Of those two Gentlemen; for they did see,
How much the people were deceived in me.
They gave me Coin, and Wine, and Sugar too,
And did as much as lay in them to do,
To find them that my Boat had torn and rent,
And so to give them worthy punishment.
Besides Sir He would have had us to have staid three or four days with him.
Austin Palgraue bade me this,
To go but four miles, where his Dwelling is,
And I and all my Company should there
Find friendly Welcome, mixed with other Cheer.
I gave them thanks, and so I Will give them still,
And did accept their Cheer in their good will.
Then 3. a Clock at afternoon and past,
I was Dischar'd from Cromer at the last.
But for men shall not think that Enuiously
Against this Town I let my Lines to fly:
And that I do not lie, or scoff, or fable,
For them I will write something Charitable.
It is an Ancient Market Town that stands
Upon a lofty Cliffe of mouldring Sands:
The Sea against the Cliffes does daily beat,
And every tide into the Land does eat,
The Town is poor, unable by Expense,
Against the raging Sea to make defense:
And every day it ea^eth further in,
Still wasting, washing down the sand does win,
That if some course be not taken speedily,
The Town's in danger in the Sea to lie.
A goodly Church stands on these brittle grounds,
Not many fairer in Great Britains bounds:
And if the Sea shall swallow't, as some fear,
It Is not ten thousand pounds the like could rear.
No Christian can behold it but with grief,
And with my heart I wish them quick relief.
So farewell Cromer, I have spoke for thee,
Though thou did much unkindly deal with me,
And honest Mariners, I thank you there,
Laboriously you in your arms did bear
My Boat for me, three furlongs at the least,
When as the tide of Ebb was so decreast,
You waded, and you launched her quite afloate,
And on your backs you bore us to our Boat.
The unkindness that I had before, it come,
Because the Constables were troublesome:
Longed to be busy, would be men of action,
Whose labors was their travels satisfaction:
Who all were borne when wit was out of Town,
And therefore got but little of their own:
So farewell Pescod, Wiseman, Kimble. They longed for imploiment, and rather
then be idle, would be ill occupied.
Clarke,
Four sons of Ignorance (or much more dark)
You made me lose a day of brave calm weather.
So once again farewell, fare ill together.
Then 'longst the Norfolk Coast we row 'dout-right
To Black^ey, when we saw the coming Night,
The burning eye of Day began to wink,
And into Thetis lap his beams to shrink.
And as he went, stained the departed Sky,
With red, blue, purple, and vermillion Dye,
Till all our Hemisphere laments his lack,
And mourning night puts on a Robe of black,
Bespangled diversely with golden sparks,
Some moveable, some Sea-mens fixed marks.
The milky way that blessed Astrea went,
When as she left this Earthly continent,
Showed like a Crystal cawsey to the Thrones
Of Jove and Sa^^rn^, pau'd with precious Stones.
Old Oceanus, Neptune, The God of Rivers, Springs, Brooks, Floods, and
Fountains.
Iunachu^,
And two and thirty huffe-capt AEolus,
Had all taken truce and were in league combined,
No billows foaming, or no breath of Wind;
The solid Earth, the Air, the Ocean deep
Seemed as the whole world had bin fast asleep.
In such a pleasant Even as this came I
To Blackney, with my Ship and Company.
Thereas I found my ent^rtainment good
^^^ welcome, drinking, lodging, and for food.
^he morrow when Latonaes Sun 'gan rise,
and with his Light illumines mortal eyes:
When Cocks did Crow, and Lambs did bleat and bl^a,
^mounted from my Couch, and put to Sea.
^ike Glass the Oceans face was smooth and calm,
The gentle Air breathed like Arabian Balm,
^^^, storms and flawes, lay sleeping in their Cells,
Whilst with much labor we Rowed o'r the Wells.
^his was the greatest We Rowed above 100. miles that day.
Day of work indeed.
and it behou'd us much, to make much speed:
^or why, before that day did quite expire,^
^^epast the dangerous Wash, to Lincolnshire.
And there in three hours space and little more,'
We Rowed to Boston from the Norfolk shore:
Which by Report of people that dwell there,
^^^ six and twenty mile, or very near.
^he way unknown, and we no Pilot had,
^^^^^, Sands and Shoales; and Tides all raging mad,
^hen Sands our passage many times denide,
^^^ put us sometimes Sands Iying crooked^^ our way, making us go three or
four miles about at low ^^^
three or four miles wide,
^^^ides the Flood runs there, with such great force,
^at I imagine it out-runnes a Horse:
and with a head some 4.foot high that Rores,
^^^ on the sudden swells and beats the Shores.
^^umbled us a ground upon the Sands,
and all that we could do with wit, or hands,
^o^ld not resist it, but we were in doubt,
^ would have beaten our Boats bottom out.
^^hath less mercy then Bear, Wolf, or Tiger,
and in those Countries it is called the It is so called in Mr. Dr^ytous second
part of Polya^^^ in his treatise of Humber.
Hyger.
We much were unacquainted with those fashions,
and much it troubled us with sundry passions:
^e thought the shore we never should recover,
and looked still when our Boat would tumble over.
^^^ He that made all with his word of might,
^^ought us to Boston, where we lodged all night.
^^^ morrow morning when the Sun 'gan peep,
^^wak'd and rubbed mine eyes, and shak'd off sleep,
^^d understanding that the River went,
^^om Boston up to Lincoln, and to Trent,
^^^mber, Owse York, and (taking pain)
^e need not come in sight of Sea again,
^ik'd the motion, and made haste away
^^^ Lincoln, which was 50.mile, that Day:
^^ich City in the 3.King Edwards Reign,
^s the only staple, for this Kingdoms gain
^or, Leather, Lead, and Wool, and then was seen
^ue times ten Churches there, but now Fifteen:
^^^ bra^e Cathedral Church there now does stand,
that searcely has a fellow in this Land:
It Is for a Godly use, a goodly Frame,
And bears the blessed Virgin Mary's name.
The Town is Ancient, and by course of Fate,
Through Wars, and Time, defaced and Ruinate,
But Monarchies, and Empires, Kingdoms, Crowns,
Have rose or fell, as Fortune smiles or frowns:
And Towns, and Cities have their portions had
Of time-tost Variations, good and bad.
There is a Proverb, part of which is this,
They say that Lincoln was, and London is.
From thence we past a Ditch of Weeds and Mud,
Which they do (falsely) there call It is a passage cut through the Land eight
miles from Linecolne into Trext, but through either the peoples poverty or
negligence, it is grown up with ^eedes, and mudde, so that in the Summer it is
in many places almost dry.
Forcedike Flood:
For I Will be sworn, no flood I could find there,
But dirt and filth, which scarce my Boat would bear,
It Is 8. miles long, and there our pains was such.
As all our travel did not seem so much,
My men did wade and draw the Boat like Horses,
And scarce could tugge her on with all our forces:
Moyl'd, toiled, myr'd, tired, still labr'ing, ever doing,
Yet were we 9.long hours that 8.miles going.
At last when as the Day was well-nigh spent,
We gat from Forcedikes floodles^e flood to Trent.
Even as the Windows of the Day did shut,
Down Trents swift stream, to Gainsburough we put,
There did we rest until the morning Star,
The joyful doors of Dawning did vn-barre:
To Humbers churlish streams, our Course we framed,
So Named, for Drowning of a King so named.
And there the swift Ebb tide ran in such sort,
The Wind at East, the Waves brake thick and short,
That in some doubts, it me began to strike,
For in my life, I never had seen the like.
My way was up to York, but my intent
Was contrary, for from the fall of Trent
I I went fifteen mile out of Trent down Humber on purpose to see H^ll, when
my way was quite con^^ary.
fifteen mile went downwards East Northeast,
When as my way was upward West Southwest.
And as against the Wind we madly venture,
The Waves like Pirates board our Boat and enter,
But though they came in fury, and amain,
Like Thieves we cast them ouer-boord again.
This Conflict lasted two hours to the full,
Until we gate to Kingston upon Hull:
For to that Town I had a Proved friend,
That Letters did and Commendations send
By me unto the worthy Magistrate,
The Mayor, and some of's Brethren, in that State.
Besides I had some Letters, of like Charge,
From my good Friend, the Master of the Barge,
Unto some friends of his, that they would there
Give me Hull Cheese, is much like a loaf out of a Brewers Basket, it is
Composed of two simples, Mauk and Water, in one Compound, and is Cousin
Germane to the mightiest Ale in England.
Hull Cheese, and welcome and good Cheer.
Sunday at Mr Majors much Cheer and Wine,
Where as the Hall did in the Parlour Dine,
At night with one that had bin Shrieue I Supped,
Well entertained I was, and half well Cup'd:
On Monday noone, I was invited than
To a grave Iusticer, an Alderman,
And there such Cheer as Earth and Waters yield,
Showed like a Harvest in a plentious Field.
Another I must thank for his Good will,
For he Pressed The meaning of those marks are only known to the Townsmen there.
on to bid me welcome still.
There is a Captain of good Life and Fame,
And, God An ingenuous man named Machabeus.
with us, I often have called his Name.
He welcomed me, as I had bin his fellow,
Lent me his silken Colors, Black and Yellow,
Which to our Mast made fast, we with a Drum
Did keep, till we to York in Triumph come.
Thanks to my loving Host and Hostess Pease,
There at mine Inn, each Night I took mine ease:
And there I gat a Cantle of Hull Cheese
One Evening late, I thank thee Mr. I.I.
Machabees.
Kind Roger Parker, many thanks to thee,
Thou shew'dst much undeserved love to me,
Laid my Boat safe, spent time, Coin and endeavor,
And made my money counted Copper ever:
But as at Feasts, the first Course being past,
Men do reserve their Dainties till the last,
So my most thanks I ever whilst I live,
Will to the Mayor, and his Brethren give,
But most of all, to shut up all together
I give him thanks that did Commend The River of Hull is 20.miles in length,
cut with men's labor, to the in^^nite Commodity of the Country.
me thither,
Their Loves (like Humber) ouerflow'd the banks,
And though I Ebb in worth, I Will flow in Thanks.
Thus leaving off the Men, now of the Town
Some things which I observed I Will here set down:
And partly to declare it is praise and worth,
It is the only Bulwark of the North.
All other Towns for strength to it may strike,
And all the Northern parts have not the like.
The people from the Sea much Wealth have won,
Each man does live as he were Neptunes Son.
Th'Antiquity thereof a man may Reed
In Reverend Cambdens works, and painful Speed:
How in King Edwards Reign first of that Name
Then called Wike. Then did they Kingston frame,
And then the Townsmen cut a The River of Hull is 20. miles in length, cut
with men's labor, to the in^^nite Commodity of the Country.
River there,
An ex'lent Haven, a Defense or Peer:
Built with excessive Charge, to save it from
Fierce Humbers Raging, that each Tide does come.
From time to time, more Greatness still it gaind,
Till lately when the Eighth King Henry Reigned,
He made it greater, by his often Resort,
And many times kept there his Royal Court,
He Walled it well, built Battlements, and Gates,
And (more with Honor to augment their States)
He built two Blockhouses, and Castle strong,
To Guard the Town from all Inuasiue wrong,
He gave the^ much Munition, Swords, Shafts, Bows,
And Brazen Ordnance, as the world well knows,
Which Guns he gave them for the Towns defense,
But were in 88. all borrowed thence,
With promise they again should be sentbacke:
But the performance ever has been slack.
Now in this Iron age, their Guns I see,
Are mettle like the Age, and Iron be:
And glad they would be, if they could obtain,
To change that mettle, for their own again.
Four well built Gates, with bolts, and locks, and bars,
For ornament or strength, in Peace or Wars:
Besides, to keep their Foes the further out,
They can Drown all the Land three miles about.
It Is plentifully served with Flesh and Fish,
As cheap, as reasonable men can wish.
And thus by Gods grace, and man's industry,
Dame Nature, or men's Art does it supply.
Some 10.years since Fresh water there was s^^,
But with much Cost they have supplied that wa^^;
By a most ex'lent Water-worke that is made,
And to the Town in Pipes it is conuai'd,
Wrought with most Artificial engines, and
Performed by Thou Art of the Industrious hand
Of Mr He built another fair water-worke at York, of Free-^^^^^, which does
the City exceeding service.
William Maultby, Gentleman,
So that each man of Note there always can
But^ turn a Cock within his House, and still
They have Fresh Water always at their will,
This have they all unto their Great Content,
For which, they each do pay a yearly Rent.
There is a Proverb, and a Prayer withal,
That we may not to three strange places fall:
From Hull, from Hallifax, from Hell, it is thus,
From all these three, Good Lord deliver us.
This praying Prouerb's meaning to set down,
Men do not wish deliverance from the Town:
The Town's named Kingston, Hul's the furious River:
And from Hulls dangers, I say, Lord deliver.
At Hallifax, the Law so sharp does deal,
That whosoever more then 13.Pence does steal,
They have a Iyn that wondrous quick and well,
Sends Thieues all headless unto Heaven or Hell.
From Hell each man says, Lord deliver me,
Because from Hell can no Redemption be:
Men may escape from Hull and Hallifax,
But sure in Hell there is a heavier tax,
Let each one for themselves in this agree,
And pray, From Hell good Lord del^^^r me.
^he Proverb and the Prayer expounded plain,
^ow to the Orders of the Town again:
^^^it merits praise for Government,
^or^ then all Towns in Britains continent,
^^ first their Charity does much appear,
^hey for the Poor have so provided there,
^^at if a man should walk from Morn till Night,
^ shall not see one Beggar; nor a Mite
^ my thing shall be demanded ever,
^^uery one there does their best endeavor
^o make the Idle work, and to relieve
^^^^ that are old and past, or Sickness grieve.
^poore men's Children have a House most fit,
^hereas they Sow, and Spin, and Card, and Knit:
^here all of them have something still to do,
^s their Capacities will reach unto,
^o that no ldle person, Old or Young
^ithin the Town does harbor or belong.
^^ yearly costs five hundred pounds besides,
^o since the Town, from Hull and Humbers tides,
^or Stakes, for Bauins, Timber, Stones, and Piles,
^which are brought by Water many miles,
^or Workmens labor, and a world of things,
^^hich on the Town excessive charges brings.
^^hich with perili, industry and sweat,
^hey from the bowels of the Ocean get.
^hey have a Bridewell, and an ex'lent skill,
^o make some people work against their will:
and there they have their Lodging and their meat,
^ Whips a ^^^uery thing exceeding neat:
and thus ^^foule means always, they
^^ idle ^^^time to play.
^^sides for every ^^^ a or Marine cause
^hey have a house of Trinity, whose Laws
and Orders do Confirm, or else Reform
that which is right, or that which wrongs deform.
^^ is a comely built well ordered Place,
^^^ that which most of all the House does grace,
^re rooms for Widows, who are old and poor,
and have bin Wives to Mariners before.
^hey are for House-roome, food, or lodging, or
^or firing, Christianly provided for,
and as some dye, some do their places win,
^s one goes out, another does come in.
^ld I in all things give the Town it is due,
^ome fools would say I slatter'd, spoke untrue:
^r that I part^all in my writings were,
because they made me welcome, and good cheer:
^ut for all those that have such thoughts of me,
^ rather wish that them I hanged may see,
^hen that they justly could report, that I
Did Rhyme for victuals, hunger to supply;
Or that my Muse, or working brains should beat,
^o flatter, f^wne, or lie, for drink or meat: Mark, for all is true.

Let Trencher-Poets scrape for such base vailes,
I Will take an Oar in hand when writing sails;
And 'twixt the Boat and Pen, I ma^^^ no doubt,
But I shall shift to pick a living out,
Without base flattery, or fal^e coined words,
To mowld: Madams, or unworthy Lords;
Or whatso'er degree, or Towns ^^ Nations;
I ever did, and still will scorn such fashions.
Hearsay, I write not by hearsay.
sometimes upon a lie may sight,
But what I see and know, I dare to write.
Mine eyes did view, before my pen set down,
These things that I have written of this Town:
A new built Custom House, a fair Towne-Hall,
For solemn meetings, or a Festival:
A Mayor, twelve Aldermen, one Shrieue, Recorder,
A Towne-Clarke, altogether in one order,
And uniformity do govern so,
They need not slatter friend, or fear a foe,
A Sword, a Cap of maintenance, a Mace
Great, and well Guilt, to do the Town more grace:
Are borne before the Mayor, and Aldermen,
And on Festiuities, or high days then,
Those Magistrates their Scarlet Gowns do wear,
And have six Sergeants to attend each year.
Now let men say what Town in England is,
That truly can compare it self with this:
For Situation, strength and Government,
For Charity, for Plenty, for Content,
For state? And one thing more I there was told,
Not one Recusant all the Town does hold,
Nor (as they say) there is not a Puritan,
Or any nose-wise fool Precisian,
But great and small, with one consent and will,
Obey his Majesty's Injunctions still.
They say that once therein two Sisters dwelt,
Which inwardly the prick of Conscience felt,
They came to London, (having wherewithail)
To buy two Bibles, all Canonical,
The Apocry^ha did put them in some doubt,
And therefore both their books were bound without.
Except those two, I never did hear of any
At Hull, though many places have too many.
But as one scabbed sheep a slocke may mar,
So there is one man, whose nose did stand a jarre:
Talked very scuruily, and looked ascue,
Because I in a worthy Towns-mans Pue
Was placed at Church, when (God knows I never thought,
To sit there, I was by the Owner brought.
This Squire of low degree displeased than,
Said, I at most was but a Water-man,
And that they such great kindness setting forth,
Made more a'th flesh, then ever the broth was worth:
Which I confess, but yet I answer make,
'Twas more then I with manners could forsake:
He sure is some high-minded Pharisee,
Or else infected with their heresy,
And must be set down in their Catalogues,
They loved the highest seats in Synagogues,
And so (perhaps) does he, for ought I know,
He may be mounted, when I sit below:
But let him not a Water-man despise,
For from the water he himself did rise,
And winds and water both on him have smiled,
Else, The great Merchant he had never bin styled:
His Character I finely will contrue,
He Is scornful proud, and talking talkatiue:
A great Ingrosser of strange speech and news,
And one that would sit in the highest Pues,
But bate an Ace, he will hardly win the game,
And if I list, I could rake But I was ever better with forks to scatter, then
with Rakes to gather, therefore I would not have the Townes-men to mistake
chalk for Cheese, or Robert for Richard.
out his name.
Thanks Mr. Mayor, for my Bacon Gammon,
Thanks Roger Parker, for my small fresh Sammon,
'Twas ex'lent good, and more the truth to tell ye,
Boiled with a fine Plum-Pudding in the belly.
The sixth of August, well accompanied
With best of Townes-men to the waters side,
There did I take my leave and to my Ship
I with my Drum and Colors quickly skip:
The one did dub a dub and rumble, brave
The Ensign in the air did play and wave:
I launc'd, supposing all things had bin done,
Bownce, from the ^lock-house, quoth a roaring Gun.
And wauing Hats on both sides with content
I cried Adieu, adieu, and thence we went
Up H^mbers ^^ood that then amain did swell,
Winds calm, and water quiet as a Well:
We Rowed to Owse with all our force and might,
To Cawood, where we well were lodged all night.
The morrow, when as Phoebus 'gan to smile,
I forwards set to York eight little mile:
But two miles short of York I landed than,
To see that reverend At Bishops thorpe, where the right reverend Father in
God, Toby Matthew Archbishop of York his Grace did make me welcome.
Metropolitan,
That watchful Shepherd, that with care does keep
The infernal Wolf, from Heavens supernall Sheep:
The painful Preacher, that most free Almes-giuer,
That though he live long, is too short a liver:
That man, whose age the poor do all lament,
All knowing, when his Pilgrimage is spent,
When Earth to Earth returns, as Natures debtor,
They fear the Proverb, S^ldome comes the better,
His Doctrine and example speak his due,
And what all people says, must needs be true.
In duty I most humbly thank his Grace,
He at his Table made me have a place,
And meat and drink, and gold he gave me there,
Whilst^l my Crew in the Hal were filled with cheer:
So having dined, from thence we quickly past,
Through Owse strong Bridge, to York fair City ^^^^
Our drowning escaped, more danger was ensuing,
'Twas Size time there, and hanging was a brewi^^
But had our faults been never so Capital,
We at the Vintners Bar durst answer all.
Then to the good Lord Mayor I went, and told
What labor, and what dangers manifold,
My fellow and my self had past at Seas.
And if it might his noble Lordship please,
The Boat that did from London thither swim
With us, in duty we would give to him.
His Lordship pawsing, with a reverend hum,
My friend (quoth he) to morrow morning come:
In the mean space I Will of the matter think,
And so he bade me to go never and drink.
I drank a Cup of Claret and some Beer.
And sure (for ought I know) he There is some ^dd^^ between keeping and
spend^^^.
keeps good che^^^
I gave his Lordship in red gilded leather,
A well bound book of all my Works together,
Which he did take Here I make a full point, for I received not a point in ^^^
change.
.
There in the City were some men of note,
That gl^dly would give money for our Boat:
But all this while good manners bade us stay,
To have my good Lord Majors yea, or nay.
But after long demurring of the matter I thought it my duty (being we had come
a d^^^rous voyage) to offer out Boat to the chief Magistrate: f^^ why should
not my Boat be as good a monument, as T^^ C^^^ everlasting ouertrampling
land-conquering Shoes thought.
,
He well was pleased to see her on the water,
And then my men Rowed half an hour or more,
Whilst he stood viewing her upon the shore.
They bore his Lordships Children in her there,
And many others, as she well could bear.
At which his Honor was exceeding merry,
Saying it was a pretty nimble Wherry:
But when my men had taken all this pains,
Into their eyes they might have put their gains,
Unto his shop he did And forgot to say, I thank you good fellows.
perambulate,
And there amongst his Bars of Iron sat.
I asked him if he would our Boat forgo,
Or have her? And his Lordship answered, No.
I took him at his word, and said, God buy,
And gladly with my Boat away went I.
I sold the Boat, as I supposed most meet,
To honest ^^^ ^^tiall worthy Citizen, who has been Shrieue of York, and ^^^
keeps the George in Cunny street.
Mr. Kayes in Cunny street:
He entertained me well, for which I thank him,
And gratefully amongst my friends I Will rank him,
My kind remembrance here I put in paper,
To worthy Mr. Hemsworth there a Draper.
Amongst the rest he is one that I must thank,
With his good wife, and honest brother Frank.
Now for the City: It Is of state and Port,
Where Emperors and Kings have kept their Court,
939, year the foundation
Was laid, before our Saviors Incarnation,
By Ebrank was the fifth K. of Britain after Brule.
Ebrank who a Temple there did rear,
And placed a An Arch-Flam^^, which was as an idolatrous high Priest to Dians.
Flammin to Diana there:
But when King Lucius here the Scepter swaid,
The Idols level with the ground were laid,
Then Eleutherius, Romes high Bishop placed,
An Archbishop at York, with Titles graced,
Then after Christ 627.
Was Edwin Edwin and his whole family were baptized on Easter day the 12. of
April 6 7^.
baptized by the grace of heaven,
He plucked the Minster down, that then was wood,
And made it stone, a deed both great and good.
The City often has known the chance of wars,
Of cruel foreign, and of homebred iarres.
And those that further please thereof to read,
May turn the volumes of great Hollinshead,
It Is large, it is pleasant and magnificent,
The Norths most fertile famous ornament:
It Is rich and populous, and has indeed
No want of any thing to serve their need,
Abundance does that noble City make
Much abler to bestow, then need to take.
So farewell York Yorkshire the greatest shire in England, and 308. ^^^ about
Speed.
, the tenth of August then
Away came I for London with my men.
To dinner I to Pomfret quickly rode,
Where good hot Venison staid for my abode,
I thank the worshipful George Shillito,
He filled my men and me, and let us go.
There did I well view over twice or thrice,
A strong a fair, and ancient Edifice:
Reedifi'd, where it was ruined most,
At the high and hopeful Prince Pomfret Castle.
of Wales his cost.
I saw the room where Exton Prince Charles.
and his rowt
Of Traitors, Royal Richards brains beat out
And if that King did strike so many blows,
As hackes and hewes upon one pillar shows,
There are one hundred slashes, he withstood,
Before the Villains shed his Kingly blood.
From Pomfret then, unto my noble friend,
Sir Robert Swift at Doncaster we wend,
An ancient Knight, of a most generous spirit,
Who made me welcome far beyond my merit.
From thence by Newarke, I to Stam^ord past,
And so in time to London at the last,
With friends and neighbors, all with loving hearts,
Did welcome me with pottles, pintes and quarts.
Which made my Muse more glib, and blythe to tell
Thistory of my Voyage. So farewell. Sir Pierce of Exton Knight. King Richard
the second murdered there.

An Epilogue.
Thus have I brought to end a work of pain,
I wish it may requite me with some game:
For well I wot, the dangers where I ventered,
No full bag'd man would ever durst have entered:
But having further shores for to discover
Hereafter, now my Pen does here give over.
FINIS.
THE GREAT O TOOL.
ENglands, Scotlands, Irelands Mirror,
Mars his fellow, Rebels Terror:
These lines do gallop for their pleasure,
Writ with neither feet or measure;
Because Prose, Verse, or Anticko Story,
Cannot Blaze O Tools great Glory.
GReat Moguls Landlord, and both Indies King,
(Whose selfe-admiring Fame dot ^ lowdly ring)
Writes 4. score years: More Kingdoms he has right to,
The Stars say so: And for them be wi^ Fight to^.
And though this worthless Age will not believe him,
But clatter, spatter, slander, scoff and grieve him,
Yet he and all the world in this agree,
That such another TOOL will deuer be.
AN ENCOMIVM OR ENCO-MI-ASS. TRICK, DEDICATED TO THE UNLIMITED memory of Arthur
O Tool, or O Tool the Great: Being the Son and Heir of Brian O Tool, Lord
of Poores Court and far Collen, in the County of Dublin, in the Kingdom of
Ireland. The Mar^ and Mercury, the Agamemnon and Ulysses both for Wisdom and
Valor, in the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland.
Prologue.
Brave Vsquebough that fierce Hibernian liquor,
Assist my brain, and make my wit run quicker:
To heat my Muse like to a well warmed Chimney,
I beg thy merry aid kind Polyhimny.
I list not to call Fables into question,
Nor of Baboones, or idle bables jest I on:
And yet if Sense or reason here you look for,
For neither, or for either read this Book for,
And if perchance I do in any word lie,
Do, as I writ it, read it o'r absurdly:
Though in these days there are a Crew of fond men,
That for invention strive to go beyond men,
And write so humerous Dogmaticall,
To please my Lord and Lady what do you Cail,
With Inkehorne terms stiff quilted and bumbast^^,
And (though not understood) yet are well tasted.
And therefore I Will not reach beyond the bounds of
My weak capacity, nor search the sounds of
Deep Natures secrets, or Arts spacious cirquit:
My Muse is free from those, my self will her qu^.
But leaving idle toys, with toil endure I on,
To write the praise of this brave bold Centuti^^.
THE ARGUMENT AND MEANING of this following History.
IN all Ages and Countries, it has ever bin known, that Famous men have
flourished, whose worthy Actions, and Eminency of place, have ever been as
conspicuous Beacons Burning and blazing to the Spectators view: the sparks and
flames whereof has sometimes kindled Courage in the most coldest and
Effeminate Cowards; as Thersites amongst the Grecians, Amadis de Gaul, and Sir
Huon of Bordeaux in France: Sir Beuis, Gogmagog, Chinon, Palmerin, Lancelot,
and Sir Tristram amongst us here in England: Sir Degree, Sir Grime, and Sir Gray
Steel in Scotland; Don Quixot with the Spaniards, Gargantua almost no where,
Sir Dagonet and Sir Triamore any where: all these, and many more of the like
Ra^^ have filled whole Volumes, with the ayrie Imaginations of their unknown
and unmatchable worths: S^ Ireland amongst the rest, had the Honor to produce
and breed a spark of Valor, Wisdom, and Magninimity, to whom all the
Nations of the world must give place. The Great O Tool, is the tool that my
Muse takes in hand, whose praises (if they should be set forth to the full)
would make Apollo and the Muses Barren; To whom the nine Worthies were never to
be compared: betwixt whom, and Haniball, Scipio, the Great Pompey, or
Tamberlaine, was such odds, that it was unfit the best of them should ^ell his
stirrup, and who (by his own Report) in whom Ireland may rejoice, and England
be merry, whose Youth was Dedicated to Mars, and his Age to Westminster, which
ancient City, is now honored with his beloved Residence.

To the Honor of the Noble CAPTAIN O TOOL.
THou Famous man, East, West, and North, and
Southward,
^om Boreas cold rump, to Austers slauering mouthward,
^all Apolloes daughters all, to witness,
^uch would I praise thee, but my Wit wants fitnes^
^^ thou thy self (of thy self) can speak so-well,
^^ut though my Rimes not altogether goe-well,
^^et if the worlds applause would not atte^d thee
^ere al tongus mute, thy own tongue would commend thee
^^hy self (unto thy self) art Fames Trump blasting,
^o make thy name (like Buffe) tough, long and lasting.
Yet grant me, thou brave man, that never feared colors)
^^^ accept the poor Lines of an Artlesse Scullers:
^hy Bilboe often bathed in the blood of Foe man's,
^^ke Cai^s Marius, Consul of the Romans:
When thou haft seemed more dreadful in thy harness,
^hen Babels General great Holopbernes:
^ore in command then was Nabuchadnezzar,
and more renownd then Cayus Julius Caesar:
upon thy foes breast thou have often troad free,
^soa the Pagans did brave Boloignes Godfrey.
^ierce Meibridates the stout King of Po^tus,
^ thou do lead us, dares not to confront us:
^hy matchless valor ten to one more tried is,
Then ever was the Libian strong Alcides:
and all men know that never such an od piece
Of fighting mettle, sprung from Mars his Codpiece.
Upon the maine land and the raging Ocean,
Thy courage has attaind thee high promotion:
Thou never fear'dft to combat with Garganto,
Thy fam's beyond the battle of Lepanto:
The mighty Alexander of Macedo,
Never sought as thou have done with thy Tolede.
^e hold thee for a worthy, and no base one,
But one that could have won the fleece from Jason:
Thou durst oppose against Bore, Bear, Wolf or Lion,
and from the torturing wheel to fetch Ixion:
And I acknowledge that thy matchless valor is,
To kill Pasitbaes or the Bull of Phalleris:
Though age has ouertaine thee, yet thy will is,
To grapple with an Atax or Achilles,
Or with Hells Monarch envious ill faced Pluto,
And prove him by his horns a dambd Cornu^^.
Thou fearst no Devil, nor no Demogorgon,
Nor yet the valiant Welchman Shon a Morgan:
So that most Wizards, and most fortune tellers,
Approve thee for the greatst of Monster quellers:
And absolute and potent Dominator,
For War or Counsel both by land and Water:
In times of tumult thou amongst the Irish,
Have made them skip o'r bogs and quaginires mirish,
Whilst in the pursuit, like an angry Dragon,
Thou made them run away with not a rag on.
For had thy foes bin Thousands, with thy Pistall,
And thy good sword, thou bravely, would resist all.
Thou wast to us, as unto Rome was Titus,
And stoutly sent our foes to black Cocities.
To kill, and cut throats, thou art skild in that trick,
As if thou were the Champion to Saint Patri^ke:
I know not to which worthy to compare thee,
For were they living, they could not out-dare thee.
To thee what was great Tamberlaine the Tartar,
Or marched with thee what was our Britain Arthur?
Great Haniball, that famous Carthag^an,
Was not a mate for thee in mine opinion;
And all Seuerus virtues sum'd up total,
Remain in thee, if this blind Age would note all:
Thou shewdst thy self a doughty wight at Dublin,
When Irish Rebels madly brought the trouble in:
At Baltimore, Kinsale, at Cor^^^, and Yoghall,
Thou with thy power have made them often cry fogh^^
Often in thy rage, thou have most madly ran on.
The burning mouth of the combustious Cannon.
For in thy fury, thou have of been hotter,
More swifter then an Ambler, or a ^ rotter,
As witness can the bounds of fierce T^^^^nnel,
And the rough Bick^rings with the stour Odennell.
The slaves did seud before thee o'r the Quagmites:
Where many a war^^ke Horse, and many a Nagmires:
Thou kildst the gammon visag'd poor West^halians,
The Al-to-totterd^ torn Tatterdemalians:
The broaging, roaging, brawling, base Baz^^ians:
The swift-foot, light-heeld, runaway Sla^^onians,
Thou letst the^ have no ground to stand or walk on,
But made them fly as Doves do from a Falcon.
For if thou list in fight to lead a Band on.
Thy slaughtering sword, if thou but layst thy hand on,
Thy fearful foes would strait the place abandon,
Without or hose, or shoes, shirt, or a band on:
Thou letst them have no quiet place to stand on.
By tongue or pen it cannot well be verifide,
How many hundred thousands thou have terrifide,
For thou have rac'd more Castles, forts and Garrisons,
Beyond Arithmeticke, and past comparisons:
The Proverb says, Comparisons are odious,
I Will therefore leave them being incommodious.
In all thy actions thou have been impartial,
Accommodating thy designs as Martial,
In mortal battles and in bruising battery,
Thy ears would entertain no smooth-tongu'd flattery.
That though to all men thy exploits seemed very od,
Thou brought them still to an auspitious Period,
And as thy valor durst out-dare bold Hector,
Like wise P^^sses thou can speak a Lector:
Such policies thy wits mint could devise on,
Which wiser pates could never once surmise on:
With many a hundred never heard of Stratagem,
Thou have gor precious honor, is not that a Iem?
What tricks, or slights of war soere the foe meant,
Thou can desery and frustrate in a moment.
Upon his Wisdom, and Policy.
OF thy Heroic acts, there might be more said,
For sure they are but slightly touched aforesaid,
But Gods or Muses, Men, or Fiends infernal,
To blaze thee to thy worth, can never discern all:
And should I write but half that I know of thee,
Some Critics would persuade thee I did scoffethee.
Thus having showed thy valor, now I Will expound
Part of thy policies, and wisdom profound.
Vnfellowed, and vnfollowed, and unmatched,
Are the rare slights that in thy pate were hatched:
Of Engines, Mines, of Counterscarphs and Trenches,
And to keep clear the Camp from whoring we^ches:
To teach the Soldiers eat frogs, snailes and vermin.
Such Stratagems as these thou could determine.
That Cato, Plato, or Aurelius Marcus,
Wise Socrates, or reverend Aristarchus,
Diogenes, or wise Pithagoras,
Licurgus, Pliny, Anaxagoras,
Archidam^^ of Greece, or Roman Tully,
Could never demonstrate Sapience more fully;
And specially when there was any trouble like,
To vex, molest, or trouble the Republike:
That wit with valor, valor joined with wisdom
From all the world thou have attained this do^^
To be wars Abstract, Counsels Catechizer,
That can direct all, and all scarce the wiser.
A Complaint and a Petition to him.
THus thou of Yore have followed great ^elc^,
And shined in Arms like twins of bright La^^
But now those manly martial days are gone. A
Time of Cheating, swearing, drinking drabbing,
Of burst-gut feeding and inhumane stabbing,
The Spanish Pip, or else the Gallian Morbus,
Bone-bred diseases, mainely do disturb us:
That now more men by riot are confounded,
Then valiant Soldiers in the wars were wounded.
Mars yields to Venus, Gown-men rule the rost^^.
And men of War may fast, or kiss the post now.
The thundering Cannon and the rumbling Drum ^^^
The Instruments of War are mute and dumb ^^^
And stout experienced valiant Commanders,
Are turned Saint Nicholas Clarks, and highway ^^^
And some (through want) are turned base Pimps ^^^ Panders,
The watchful Corporal, and the Lansprezado
Are Merchants turned, of smoaky Trinidado.
His shop, (a fadome compass) now contains him,
Where midst the misty vapors he complains him,
That he who has made Forts and Castles caper,
Lives now Camelion-like, by Air and Vaper.
Whilst fools and flatterers thrive, it greatly gri^^es him,
When all Trades fail, Tobacco last relieues him,
Besides each day some hound-like senting Serg^^
Scoutes, gapes, pries, preyes, and tires him out for argeant:
And Long la^e Dogditch, dambd soul wanting Bro^^^
The Co^mou wealths bane and poor men's vnclo^^^
The Countries Spunges, and the Cities soakers,
The Peaces Pestilence, and Warriors cho^kers.
These beat their hogs-heads all, to try conclusions,
By base extorting, working our confusions.
The Soldier's naked, by the broakers bribing,
The Scriuener lives brave by sophisticke scribing,
The slaves grow rich (and it is not to be wo^dred)
By taking Forty intrest for a hundred.
And nasty beadles with their breath contaminous,
With What are you? and Who goes there? examin^^^^
With hums and hawes, Sir reverence, nods and becking,
With sensles nonsense, checks and Counter checking.
The brownbild Rug-gound be^ch do think it fitting,
To exercise their Office by committing.
Where our expense, with Ale their faces va^nish,
Whilst we incounterd, pay fines, fees and garnish.
And Tyburne, Wapping, and S. Thomas Watrings,
Poor Soldiers ends, to every neighboring State rings,
Whilst lowzy Ballad-mongers gape and look out,
To set some riming song, or Roguing Book out,
Where more then all is against the dead imputed,
By which means men are doubly executed;
That sure the Gallows has eat up more pe-ople,
Then would subdue and win Constantinople.
Orouze thee, rouse thee, then brave man of Action,
^ake Fur-gown'd peace burst into Armed faction:
T^o^ have a pate that can the State unsettle:
Be as thou have been then, a Man of mettle:
And now base Cowardice does seem to rust us,
Into some worthy business, quickly thrust us,
Now show thy self a noble Ahashu^rus,
And once more make our brauing foes to fear^ us,
Do thou but lead us on, and look but grimly,
And make no doubt, we will do the business trimly.
^^ngst all the tools of war, be thou great O Tool,
And never let the world esteem thee no Fool.
O make the wheel of reeling State, and Fate turn,
In spite of sullen melancholy Saturn^,
To ^rmes, but from the Arms of lustful Venus
^ do entreat thy warlike care to weane us.
^^t not the prick-card power of proud Pri^pus,
^^bonds of painted Curtezans entrap us,
And rouse us from our Acts and thoughts libidinous,
That (Traytor-like) in ambush do lie hid in us.
Let not thy Tents of worthles Martial discipline,
Returned to stinking Tap-houses to tipple in:
^^^t make the freezing pot of num-cold war-boyle,
And bubble to a hurly burly Garboyle:
Doeas thou have done often, most noble Spartan,
^^^ suken peace into a fever Quartane;
Dress like phoebus in his hot Meridian,
^^inoish all the world with a Quotidian,
^ know thy worth the world does all admire on,
Then clad thy self in burnisht steel and Iron.
I know that all men knows thou have bin tried well,
Discreetly thou can talk, fight run and ride well,
I know, the reach of thy politic skull can
Pluck rugged Mars from out the bed of Vnlean,
To make war roar more loud then any Bull can,
I know thou can do more then any Gull can.
I know thou hold'st it Valors ignominy.
To spend thy days in peaceful whip her Ginny.
Thy name and voice, more feared then G^y of Warwick,
Or the rough rumbling, roaring Mig of Bar^icke.
We should do somewhat, if we once were rouzed,
And (being Lousy) we might then be Lowsed.
Encourage Soldiers to demean them like men,
And measure Velvet with their Pikes brave Pikeme^.
Let shouts and clamors, woods, groves, dales, and hills fill
With dreadful noise and cries of follow, follow, kill, kill,
Let Drums cry dub, dub, and let Cannons thunder,
Tantara Trumpets, and let Cowards wonder:
Let Muskets bounce, bounce, let the W^lk in rumble,
Let Towns, Turrets, topsituruy tumble,
Do this (as well I know thou can do t wisely)
Exceeding careless, fearelesse and precisely.
And then thy Fame shall farther far be noysed,
Then Titans rays, or Justice scales are poysed.
And since thou know man's time on earth is short all,
Let mortal Actions make thy name Immortal.
Lenuoy.
IVdge O you Gentiles, what is writ is probable,
And though it seem a babble, yet it is no babble.
Doom amongst ill things, that the best is meant all,
And what is amiss, pray take as accidental:
For like a puny practizing Astronomy,
And knows no grounds nor rules, so far o'rgon am I,
In diuing to his valors whirlepit bottom,
That like the reverend Sages of old Gotam,
I now perceive how much I over shot am:
I Will wade no further in it, but in brief breuity,
Abrupt, absurd, abject, thus cast, thus leave it I.
These forced Rimes, fully stuffed with fruitless labor,
Has Curried my poor braine-pan like a Tabor:
And to recure me from this strange quandary,
Hence Vsquebaugh, and welcome sweet Canary.
FINIS.
TO THE NOBILITY, GENTRY, AND COMMVNALTY, WHO ARE INHABITANTS, OR WEL-WILLERS
TO THE WELFARE OF THE CITY OF SALISBVRY, AND COUNTY OF WILTSHIRE.
Right Honorable,
Worshipful, and loving Countrymen, I have named my Book and Voyage, The
Worst, or the Best, which Ieuer undertook and finished, and it lies in your
pleasures, to make it which you please; I am sure for toil, travail, and
danger, as yet I never bad a worse, or a more difficult passage, which the
ensuing Discourse will truly testify; yet all those perils past, I shall
account as pleasures, if my infallible Reasons may move or persuade you to
cle^re your River, and make it Nauigable from the Sea to your City; I have in
part touched what the profit and Commodities of it will be unto you, and I have
briefly showed the Inconveniences which you have through the want of it: I have
also declared, that the maine intent or scope of my coming unto you with a
Wherry, was, to see what lets or Impediments were the binderances unto so good
and beneficial a work. All which I have (according to my simple Survey, and
weak Capacity) set down, which with the merrinesse of my most Hazardous
Sea-progresse, I humbly Dedicate to your Noble, Worshipful, and worthy
Acceptances, ever acknowledging my self and my Labor in your services to be
commanded in all duty,

JOHN TAILOR.

A DISCOVERY BY SEA, FROM LONDON TO SALISBVRY.
AS our accounts in Almanacks agree,
The year called sixteen hundred twenty three:
^at Iulyes twenty eight, two hours past dinner,
^^e with our Wherry, and five men within her,
^ong the crystal Thames did cut and curry,
^^twixt the Counties, Middlesex and Surry:
^hilst thousa^dsgaz'd, we past the bridge with wonder,
^here fools and wise men go above and under.
^e thus our Voyage bravely did begin
^owne by S. Katherines, where the Priest fell in,
^^^ Wapping, where as hanged drowned Pirates dye;
^relle such Any Rat that eats Pie, is a pyrat.
Rats, I think as would eat Pie.)
and passing further, I at first observed,
^^t When I past down ^^^ River, there was not any Postor Horn there, but
since is most worthily Repaired.
Cuckolds-Hauen was but badly served:
^^^ there old Time had such confusion wrought,
^^t of that Ancient place remained naught.
^^o monumentall memorable Horn,
^^^ Tree, or Post, which has those Trophies borne,
Was left, whereby Posterity may know
Where their forefathers Crests did grow, or show.
Which put into a maze my muzing Muse,
^^h at the worlds neglect, and times abuse,
^at that stout Pillar, to Obliuions pit
^ould fall, whereon Plus vltra might be writ,
^at such a mark of Reverend note should lie
^rgot, and hid, in black obscurity,
^pecially when men of every sort
^^f countries, Cities, warlike Camps or Court,
unto that Tree are plaintiffs or defendants,
those All estates or degrees do ^^er lout of fear this Haven.
loves, or fears, are fellows or attendants:
^fall estates, this Haven has some partakers
^^^ lot, some Cuckolds, and some Cuckold-makers.
and can they all so much forgetful be
^^to that Ancient, and Renowned Tree,
that has so many ages stood Erected,
and by such store of Patrons been protected,
and now Ingloriously to lie unseen,
^s if it were not, or had never been?
Is Lechery waxed scarce, is Bawdry scant,
Is there of Whores, or Cuckolds any want?
Are Whore-masters decai'd, are all Bawds dead?
Are Panders, Pimps, and Apple-squires, all fled?
No surely, for the Surgeons can declare
That Venus wars, more hot then Marses are.
Why then, for shame this worthy Port mainetaine,
Let Us have our Tree, and Horns set up again:
That Passengers may show obedience to it,
In putting off their Hats, and homage do it.
Let not the Cornucopiaes of our land,
Unsightly and unseen neglected stand:
I know it were in vain for me to call,
That you should raise some famous Hospital,
Some Free-schoole, or some Almshouse for the pore,
That might increase good deeds, and open heavens door.
It Is no taxation great, or no collection
Which I do speak of, for This great erection:
For if it were, men's goodnesses, I know,
Would prove exceeding barren, dull, and slow:
A Post and Horns, will build it firm and stable,
Which charge to bear, there is many a beggar able;
The place is Ancient, of Respect most famous,
The want of due regard to it, does shame us,
For Cuckolds Haven, my request is still,
And so I leave the Reader to his will.
But holla Muse, no longer be offended,
It Is worthily Repaired, and bravely mended,
For which great meritorious work, my pen
Shall give the glory unto Greenwitch men.
It was their only cost, they were the Actors
Without the help of other Benefactors,
For which my pen their praises here adornes,
As they have beautified the Hau'n with Horns.
From thence to Debtford we amain were driven,
Whereas an Anchor unto me was given:
With parting pintes, and quarts for our farewell;
We took our leaves, and so to Greenwitch fell.
There shaking hands, adiews, and drinkings store,
We took our Ship again, and left the shore.
Then down to Erith, against the tide we went,
Next London, greatest Mayor town in Kent
Or Christendom, and I approve it can,
That there the Mayor was a Waterman,
Who gouernes, rules, and reigns sufficiently,
And was the Image of Authority:
With him we had Cheap Reck'nings and good cheer.
And nothing but his friendship we thought dear.
But thence we roused our selves and cast off sleep,
Before the daylight did begin to peep.
The tide by Granesend swiftly did us bring,
Before the mounting- Lark began to sing,
And ever we came to Lee, with speedy pace
The Sun 'gan rise with most suspicious face,
Of foul foreboding weather, purple, red,
His Radient Tincture, East, Northeast o'rspred:
And as our Oars thus down the River pulled,
Often with a Fowling-peece the Gulls we gulled,
For why, His name is Arthur Bray a Waterman of Lambeth, and a good Mar^^an.
the Master Gunner of our Ship
Let no occasion or advantage slip,
But charged and discharged, shot, and shot again,
And scarce in twenty times shot once in vain,
Foul was the weather, yet thus much I Will say,
If 't had been fair, Foul was our food that day.
Thus down along the spacious Coast of Kent
By Grane and Shoppeies Islands down we went,
We past the Nowre-head, and the sandy shore,
Until we came to The East end of the Nowre,
At last by Ramsgates Peer we stiffly Rowed,
The wind and tide, against us blowed and flowed,
Till near unto the Haven where Sandwitch stands,
We were enclosed with most dangerous sands.
There were we sowsd and slabberd, washed and dashed,
And grauell'd, that it made us We were five men, and two of us were afraid,
two were not afraid, and I was half afraid.
half abashed:
We looked and pried, and stared round about,
From our apparent perils to get out.
For with a Staff, as we the depth did sound,
Four miles from land, we almost were on ground.
At last (unlooked for) on our Larboord side
A thing turmoyling in the Sea we spide,
Like to a Meareman; wading as he did
All in the Sea his nether parts were hid,
Whose Brawney limbs, and rough neglected Beard,
And grim aspect, made half of us afeard,
And as he unto us his course did make,
I courage took, and thus to him I spoke.
Man, monster, fiend or fish, what-e'r thou be,
That trauelst here in Neptunes Monarchy,
I charge thee by his dreadful Three-tin'd Mace,
Thou hurt not me or mine, in any case,
And if thou bre'st produced of Mortal kinds,
Show us some course, how we the way may find
To deeper water, from these sands so shallow,
In which thou see^^ our Ship thus wash and wallow.
With that (he shrugging up his shoulders strong)
Spoke (like a Christian) in the Kentish tongue,
Quoth he, Kind sir, I am a Fisherman,
Who many years my living thus have wan
By wading in these sandy troublous waters
For Shrimps, Wslks, Cockles, and such useful ma^^^^,
And I will lead you, (with a course I Will keep)
From out these dangerous shallowes to the deep
Then (by the nose) along he led our Boat,
Till (past the flats) our Bark did bravely floa^^e.
Our Seahorse, that had drawn us thus at large,
I gave two groats unto, and did discharge.
Then in an hour and half, or little more,
We through the Downs at Deal went safe on sh^^^^
There did our Hostess dress the Foul we killed,
With which our hungry stomachs well we filled,
The morrow being Wednesday (break of day)
We toward Dover took our weary way:
The churlish winds awaked the Seas high fury,
Which made us glad to land there, I assure ye.
Blind Fortune did so happily contriue,
That we (as sound as bells) did safe ariue
At Dover, where a man did ready stand,
To give me Entertainment by the hand,
A man of mettle, mark and note, long since
He graced was to lodge a gracious Prince,
And now his speeches sum, and scope and pith
Is Jack, and Tom, each one his Cousin Smith,
That if with pleasant talk you please to warm it,
He is an Host much better then an Army,
A goodly man, well sed, and corpulent,
Filled like a bag-pudding with good content,
A right good fellow, free of cap and leg,
Of complement, as full as any Egg:
To speak of Him, I know it is of Folly,
He is a mortal foe to Melancholy,
Mirth is his life and trade, and I think very,
That he was got when all the world was merry:
Health upon health, he doubled and redoubled,
Till his, and mine, and all our brains were troub^^^
Unto our absent Bitters there we drank;
Whom we are bound to love, they not to thank.
By us mine Host could not great profit reap,
Our meat and lodging was so good and cheap,
That to his praise thus much I Will truly tell,
He used us kindly every way and well.
And though my lines before are merry writ,
Where-e'r I meet him, I Will acknowledge it.
To see the Castle there I did desire,
And up the Hill I softly did aspire,
Whereas it stands, impregnable in strength,
Large in Circumference, height, breadth, and leng^^
Built on a fertile plat of ground, that they
Have yearly growing twenty loads of Hay,
Great Ordnance store, pasture for Kine and Ho^^
Rampires and Walls, t'withstand inuasiue forces.
that it be well with truth and courage manned,
^^^ition, victuall'd, then it can withstand
^^he powers of twenty Tamberlaines (the Great)
^^^ the end with shame they would Retreat.
^^^ is governed by a grave and prudent ^^ Honorable the Lord Z^nch, Lord
Warden of the ^^^ ports.
Lord,
Whole Justice does to each their right afford,
Whole worth (within the Castle, and without)
^he five Ports, and the country all about,
^he people with much love, do still recite,
^^^ he makes the wrongers render Right.
^he kindness I received there was such,
^ut my remembrance cannot be too much,
^^wa Gun thrice eight foot length of Brass,
and in a Wheel I saw a comely Ass
^^^^^ like a Dog) that is turning of a Spit,
and draw as it were from the infernal pit,
those deep Abisse is perpendicular)
^he hundred fathom (or well near as far)
^^christaline, so clear, and cool a water,
^ut will in Summer make a man's teeth chatter:
^^d when to see it up, I there had stood,
^ranke thereof, and found it sweet and good.
^^^ farewell Castle, Dover, Dover Peer,
^^rewell, Oast Bradshaw, thanks for my good cheer.
^^^ bonny Bark to Sea was bound again;
^^^ Thursday morn, we lanch'd into the Maine,
^^^ Folston:^ and by Sangates ancient Castle,
^rainst the rugged waves, we tugge and wrestle
^^^ Hyde, by Ru^^ey, and by Rumney Marsh,
^^^, Tide against us, and the wind blew harsh,
^wixt Eolus and Neptune was such strife,
^^at I never felt worse weather in my life:
^^t and retost, retost and tossed again;
^^^ rumbling, tumbling, on the rolling Maine,
^boystrous breaking Billows curled locks
^petuo^sly did beat against the Rocks,
^^^ wind much like a Horse whose wind is broke,
^^^ thick and short, that we were like to choke:
^it cutragiously the billows shaues,
^^^ Gusts (like dust) blown from the bryny waves,
^^^ thus the winds and seas robustious gods
^^^ by the ears stark mad at furious ods.
^^ender Ship, turmoyld 'twixt shores and Seas,
^^ft or low, as storms and slawes did please:
^^^etimes upon a foaming Mountains top,
^^hose height did seem the heavens to underprop,
^^en straight to such profundity she fell,
^^^ she diu'd into the deepest Hell,
^^^ Clouds like ripe Apostumes burst and showered,
^^eir mastery watery substance headlong powered;
^^^ though all things were mutable and fickle,
^^ey all agreed to so^se us in a pickle,
^^^ waters fresh and salt, from Seas and Sky,
^^^ich with our sweat joined in triplicity,
That looking each on other, there we saw,
We neither were half stewd, nor yet half raw,
But neither hot or cold, good flesh or fishes
For Caniballs, we ha^ been ex'lent dishes.
Bright Phoe^us hid his golden head with fear,
Not daring to behold the dangers there,
Whilst in that straight or Exigent we stand,
We see and wish to land, yet durst not land,
Like rolling Hills the Billows beat and roate
Against the melancholy Beachie shore,
That if we landed, neither strength or wit
Could save our Boat from being sunk or split,
To keep the Sea, stern puffing Eols breath
Did threaten still to blow us all to death,
The waves amain (vnbid) often boorded us,
Whilst we almost three hours beleaguerd thus,
On every side with danger and distress,
Resolved to run on shore at Dengie Nesse.
There stand some thirteen Cottages together,
To shelter Fishermen from wind and weather,
And there some people were as I supposed,
Although the doors and windows all were clos'd^
I near the land, into the Sea soon leapt
To see what people those same houses kept,
I knocked and called, at each, from house to house,
But found no form of mankind, Man or No dwelling within near three miles of
^ose Cottages.
Mouse.
This news all sad, and comfortless and cold,
Unto my company I straightwayes told,
Assuring them the best way I did think,
Was to hale up the Boat, although she sink.
Resolved thus, we all together please
To put her head to shore, her stern to Seas,
They leaping ouerbo^rd amidst the Billows,
We plucked her up (vnsunke) like stout tall fellows.
Thus being wet, from top to toe we stripped,
(Except our shirts) and up and down weskip'd,
Till wind and Sun our wants did well supply,
And made our outsides, and our insides dry.
Two miles from thence, a ragged The towns name is Lydd, two miles from Rumney
in Kent.
town there stood,
To which I went to buy some drink and food:
Where kindly ouer-reckon'd, well misused
Was, and with much courtesy abused.
Mine Oastesse did account it for no trouble,
For single fare to make my payment double:
Yet did her mind and mine agree together,
That (I once gone) would never more come thither:
The Cabbins where our Boat lay safe and well.
Belonged to men which in this town did dwell:
And one of them (I thank him) lent us then
The Key to open his hospitable Den,
A brazen Kettle, and a pewter dish,
To serve our needs, and dress our flesh and fish:
Then from the Butchers we bought Lamb and sheep,
Beer from the Alehouse, and a Broom to sweep
Our Cottage, that for want of use was musty,
And most extremely rusty-fusty-dusty.
There, two days space, we Roast, and boil, and broile,
And toil, and moyle, and keep a noble coil,
For only we kept open house alone,
And he that wanted Beef, might have a Stone.
Our Grandam Earth (with beds) did al befriend us,
And bountifully all our lengths did lend us,
That laughing, or else lying Our beds were Cables and Roper, outry feather at
the least ^^^ fatham long.
down did make
Our backs and sides sore, and our ribs to ache.
On Saturday the winds did seem to cease,
And brawling Seas began to hold their peace,
When we (like Tenants) beggarly and poor,
Decreed to leave the Key beneath the door,
But that our Landlord did that shift prevent,
Who came in pudding time, and took his Rent,
And as the Sun, was from the Ocean peeping,
We lanch'd to Sea again, and left housekeeping.
When presently we saw the drisling skies
'Can powt and lowre, and Winds and Seas 'ganrise,
Who each on other played their parts so wild,
As if they meant not to be reconcilde,
The whilst we leap upon those liquid hills,
Where Porposes did show their sins and Gills,
Whilst we like various Fortunes Tennis ball,
At every stroke, were in the Hazard all.
And thus by Rye, and I walked to Winchel^ey, where I thank my Cousin Mr.
C^^^, the Mayor there, he ^^^ ^^^ kindly welco^^^.
Winchelsey we past
By Fairlegh, and those Rockie cliffs at last.
Some two miles short of Hastings, we percein'd
The Lee shore dangerous, and the Billows heard,
Which made us land (to escape the Seas distress)
Within a harbor, almost harbourlesse,
(We give God thanks) amongst the Rocks we hit,
Yet were we neither washed or sunk, or split.
Within a Cottage nigh, there dwells a Weauer
Who entertaind us, as the like was never,
No meat, no drink, no lodging (but the floor)
No Stool to sit, no Lock unto the door,
No straw to make us litter in the night,
Nor any Candlestick to hold the light,
To which the Owner bid us welcome still,
Good entertainment, though our cheer was ill.
The morrow when the Sun with flushed face
In his diurnall course began to trace,
The wind exceeding stiff and strong and tough,
The Seas outrageous, and extremely rough,
Our Boat laid safe upon the Boachy sand,
Whilst we to Hastings went or walked by land.
Much (to that Town) my thankfulness is bound,
Such undeserved kindness there I found.
Three nights we lay there, and three days we spent,
Most freely welcomed, with much merriment.
Kind Mr The Majors name was Mr Richard Boyse, a Gentleman, wh^^ laud^ble
life, and honest government is much beloved and ^^ proved.
Mayor his love above the rest:
Me and my crew, he did both feed and feast,
He sent us God, and came himself to us;
My thanks are these, because his love was thus,
Mine Host and Hostess Clayton thus I thank
And all good fellows there, I found so frank,
That what they had, or what could there be got,
They neither thought too heavy or too hot.
The winds and Seas continued still their course,
Inueterate seemed their rage, untamed their force,
Yet were we loath to linger and delay:
But once again to venture and away.
Thus desperately resolved, 'twixt hope and doubt.
Half sunk with lanching, madly we went out,
At twelve a clock at noone, and by Sunset
To Miching, or New Haven we did get.
There almost sunk (to save our Boat at last)
Our selves into the shallow Seas we cast:
And plucked her into safety to remain
Till Friday that we put to Sea again.
Then amongst our old acquaintance (storms and fla^^)
At every stroke near deaths devouring jaws:
The weary day we past through many fears,
And land at last quite sunk o'r head and ears.
All dropping dry, like five poor Rats half dro^^^^.
From succor far, we halde the Boat on ground,
Cast out our water, whilst we bravely dropped,
And up and down to dry our selves we hoped.
Thus we our weary Pilgrimage did wear,
Expecting for the weather calm and clear:
But storms, flawes, winds, seas, took no minutes r^^,
Continual fiercely blowing, West Southwest.
A Town called Gorting, stood near two miles w^^^,
To which we went, and had our wants supplide:
There we relieved our felues (with good compassion)
With meat and lodging of the homely fashion.
To bed we went in hope of rest and ease,
But all beleaguered with an Host of Fleas:
Who in their fury nip'd and skip'd so hotly,
That all our skins were almost turned to motly.
The bloody sight endured at least six hours,
When we (oppressed with their increasing powers)
Were glad to yield the honor of the day
Unto our foes, and rise and run away:
The night before, The Majors name was Mr Richard Boyse, a Gentleman, wh^^^
laud^ble life, and honest government is much beloved and ^^ proved.
a Constable there came,
Who asked my Trade, my dwelling, and my name:
My business, and a troop of questions more,
And wherefore we did land upon that shore?
To whom I framed my answers true, and fit,
(According to his plenteous want of wit)
But were my words all true, or if I li'd,
With neither I could get him satisfied.
^^^ asked if we were Pirates? We said no,
^^^ if we had, we would have told him so.)
^^^ said that Lords sometimes would enterprise
^scape, and leave the Kingdom, in disguise:
^^^ I assured him on my honest word,
^at I was no disguised Knight or Lord.
^^^ told me then that I must go six miles
^^^ lustice there, Sir John, or else Sir Giles:
^^^ ^old him I was loath to go so far:
^^^ he told me, he would my iourny bar.
^^s what with Fleas, and with the several prates
^^th' Officer, and his Ass-sociats,
^^e a rose to go, but Fortune bade us stay:
^^e Constable had stolen our Oars away,
^^d bome them thence a q^arter of a mile,
^^^ through a Lane, beyond a gate and style,
^^^ hid them there, to hinder my depart,
^^^ which I wished him hanged with all my heart.
^^^lowman (for us) found our Oars again,
^^ithin'a field well filled with Barley Grain.
^^^en madly, gladly out to Sea we thrust,
^^inst winds and storms and many a churlish Gust:
^^^ Kingston Chapel, and by Rushington,
^^^ little Hampton and by Middleton,
^^^ B^g^^^ fearful Rocks, which hidden lie
^^^ miles into the Sea, some wet, some dry:
^^ere we supposed our danger most of all,
^^we ^^ ^^^^^ remorcelesse Rocks should fall:
^^t by The Almighty's mercy and his might,
^^^ ^e Rowed to Selsey, where we stayed all night.
^ere, our necessity could have no Law,
^^^ want of beds, we made good use of Straw,
^^^ S^^, that old continual Traveler
^om T^^^^ lap, 'gan mount his flaming Car.
^^^ weather kept it is course, and blowed and raged,
without appearance it would ever be swag'd,
^hilst we did pass those hills, and dales, and Downs,
^^at had denour'd great ships, and swallowed Towns.
^^us after six or five hours toil at least,
^^^ past along by Wittering, West, and East,
^^on the Lee shore still the wind full South,
^^e came near Chichesters fair Havens mouth.
^^d being then half sunk, and all through wet,
^^ore feared then hurt, we did the Haven get.
^^us in that harbor we our course did frame
^^^ Portsmouth, where on Monday morn we came.
^^en to the Royal Fleet we Rowed aboard,
Where much good welcome they did us afford.
^othe Lord General, first my thanks shall be,
^^^ is bounty did appear in gold to me,
^^nd every one aboard the Prince I found,
^^^ stead of want, to make their loves abound,
^aptine Penrudduck there amongst the rest,
^^^ is love and bounty was to us expressed,
Which to require, my thankfulness I Will show,
and that I Will ever pay, and ever owe.
On Tuesday morning we with maine and might,
From Portsmouth crossed unto the ^^e of Wight:
By Cowes ftout Castle, we to ^ armouth hasted.
And still the winds and Seas fierce fury lasted.
On Wedn'^day we to Hursts strong Castle crossed,
Most dangerously sowsd, turmoyl'd and tossed:
Good harbor there we found, and nothing dear,
I thank kind ^atthew Fig, a right good fellow.
M. Fig, the Porter there,
He showed us there a Castle of defense
Most useful, of a round circumference:
Of such command, that none can pass those Seas
Vnsunke, or spoiled, except the Castle please.
On Thursday, we, our Boat rowed, pulled and haled
Unto a place, which is K^y Haven called.
The wind still blowing, and the Sea so high,
As if the lofty waves would kiss the sky,
That many times I wished with all my heart,
My self, my Boat, and Crew, all in a Cart;
Or any where to keep us safe and dry,
The weather raged so out ragiously.
For sure I think the memory of man
(Since winds and Seas to blow or flow began)
Cannot remember so stormy weather
In such continuance, held so long together,
For ten long weeks ever that, it is manifest,
The wind had blown at South or west Southwest,
And raised the Seas: to show each others power,
That all this space (ca^me weather) not one hour,
That whether we did go by Sun or Moon,
At anytime, at midnight, or at noone:
If we did lance, or if to land we set,
We still were sure to be half sunk, and wet.
Thus toyling of our weary time away.
That Thursday was our last long looked for day:
For having past, with peril, and much pain,
And plowed, and furrowed, o'r the daugerous maine,
O'r depths, and flats, and many a ragged Rock,
We came to Christ-Church Hau'n at five a clock.
Thus, God, in mercy, his just judgment sparing,
(Against our presumption, ouer-bold, and daring)
Who made us see his wonders in the deep,
And that his power alone aloft did keep
Our weather-beaten Bonte above the waves,
Each moment gaping to be all our Graves.
We sinking seap'd: then not to us, to Him
Be all the Glory, for he causd us s^im.
And for his mercy was so much extended
On me (whose temptings had so far offended)
Let me be made the scorn and scoff of men,
If ever I attempt the like again.
My love, my duty, and my thankfulness,
To Sir George Hastings I must here express:
His deeds to me, I must requite in words,
No other payment, poor men's state affords.
With fruitless words, I pay him for his cost,
With thanks to Mr. Templeman mine host.
So leaving Christ-Church, and the Haven there,
With such good friends as made us welcome ^^^
Some serious matter now I must compile,
And thus from verse to prose I change my style.
GOD, who of his infinite wisdom made Man, of his unmeasured mercy redeemed
him, of his boundless bounty, immense power, and eternal eye of watchful
providence relieues, guards, and conserues him; It is necessary, that every man
seriously consider and ponder these things, and in token of obedience and
thankfulness say with David: What shall I render? and the man having thus
searched considerately the Causer of his being, then let him again meditate
for Men should consider why God has given them a being in this life.
what cause he has a being: indeed it may be objected, that almost every
thing has a being; as stones have being, trees, herbs, and plants, have being
and life: Beasts, fowls, and fishes, have being, life, and sense: but to man
is given a Being, life, sense, and reason, and after a mortal, an immortal
euer-being. This consideration will make a man know that he has little part
of himself, which he may justly call his own: his body is Gods, he made it;
his soul is his, who bought it; his goods are but lent him, by him that will
one day call him to a reckoning, for the well or ill disposing of them: so that
man having nothing but what he has received, and received nothing but what is
to be employed in the service of God, and consequently his Prince and Country,
it is plainly to be perceived, that every man has No man is owner of himself.
the least share or portion of himself to boast of.

I have written this Preamble, not only to inform such as know not these
things already; but also to such whose knowledge is, as it were, fallen into a
dead sleep; who do live, as though there were no other being then here, and
that their life and being was ordained only of themselves, neither God,
Prince, or Country, having no share or portion of them, or of what they call
theirs. But oh you Inhabitants of Salisbury, I hope there are ^^^ such crawling
Cankerwormes, or Comm^^ wealth Caterpillars amongst you. Nay, I ^^^ assured of
the contrary, that there are ma^^^ who (with religious piety, open hands, ^^^
relenting hearts) do acknowledge that yo^^ goods are but lent in trust unto
you, and ^^^ patiently bear the ouer-burthensome ^^^uing of many hundreds of
poor wret^^^ which (were it not for your charity) wo^^^ perish in your streets.

This being entered into my consideration that your City is so Here is an honest
course set down for the inriching^^, your rich, and the relieuing of your
poor.
much ouercharged ^^^ poor, as having in three Parishes near ^^^ besides
decayed men a great many, and ^^^ those few which are of the wealthier sort,
^^^ continually onerpressed with sustaining ^^ wants of the needy, the City
being as it ^^^ at the last gasp, the poor being like Ph^^ohs lean Kine,
even ready to eat up the ^^^ ones: I have made bold to write this Tr^^tise
ensuing, both to entreat a constant per^uerance in those who have begun to do
go^^ works, and an encouragement or anima^^^ of all others, who as yet seem
slow in the^^ good proceedings. And if any thing he^^ written by me, be either
impertinent, ex^^uagant, rude, harsh, or ouer-bold, I humb^^ entreat you to
impute it rather to my want ^^^ judgment, learning, and capacity, then to any
presumption, or want of love and duty ^^^ the City and cause, which is
hereafter handled.

It is sufficiently known, that my intent and purpose at this time, was not to
make any profit to my selfe' upon any adventure (as it is deemed by many) by my
passage from London ^^ Salisbury with a Wherry, but I was entread by a His ^^^^
Gregory Bastable, and his ordinary place where he ^^^, or attends his labor,
is at the Temple, and there also ^^^ Thomas Estman, another Wiltshire man,
which wi^^ ^^
Waterman which was born in Salisbury that I would bear him company for the
discovery of the sands, flats, depths, shoales, Mils, and Wears, which are
impediments and' lets, whereby the River is not Nauigable from Christ-Church,
or the Sea to Salisbury. Which after many dangerous gusts, and tempestuous
storms at Sea, (which I have recited in verse before) it pleased God that at
the last we entered, the River, which in my opinion is as good ^^^ River, and
with some charge may be made as passable as the River of Thames is upwards
from Brentford to Windsor, or beyond it; the shallow places in it are not
many, the Mills ^need not be removed, and as for the Wears, ^no doubt but they
may with conscience be compounded for. By which means of Na^uigation, the
whole City and Country would be relieved, loyterers turned into laborers,
penury into plenty, to the glory of God, the dignity and reputation of your
City, and the perpetual worthy memory of all benefactors and well-willers unto
so noble a work.

If you will but examine your own knowledges, you shall find that in the whole
dominion of England, there is not any one Town or City which has a Nauigable
River at it, that is poor, nor scarce any that are rich, which want a River
with the benefits of Boats: The Town of Kingston upon Hull in Yorkshire, the
River there was cut out of Humber, by men's labors 20. miles up into the
Country, and what the wealth and estate of that Town is, (by the only
benefit of that River) it is not unknown to thousands: but you men of Sarum
may see what a commodity Navigations is, nearer hand; there is your neighbor
Sauthampton on the one side, and your dear friend Poole on the other, are a
pair of hansome looking-Glasses for you, where you may see your want in their
abundance, and your negligence in their industry.

God has placed, your being in a fertile soil, in a fruitful valley,
environed round with Cor^le, and as it were continually be^^^eged with plenty:
whilst you within (ha^^ing so many poor amongst you) are rather lookers upon
happiness then enioyers: moreover (by Gods appointment) Nature has saved you
the labor of cutting a River, for I think you have one there as old as your
City ready made to your hands: if you will be but industrious to amend those
impediments in it, I dare undertake to be one of the 3. or 4. men which shall
bring or carry 16. or 20. Tuns of goods betwixt the Sea and your City. Now,
with extreme toil of men, Horses and Carts, your wood is brought to you 18. or
20. miles, whereby the poor which cannot reach the high prices of your fuel,
are enforced to steal or starve in the Winter, so that all your near
adjoining woods are continually spoiled by them: which faults by the benefit of
the River would be reformed: for the new Forest stands so near to the
water, that it is but cut the wood and put it into a Boat, which shall bring
as much to your City as twenty Carts, and fourscore Horses: besides, by this
River you might draw to you a trade of Sea-coale, which would enrich you, and
help the plain and inland Towns and Villages where no wood grows. And for
the Exportation of your Corn from Port to Port, within our own Country, as
it is well known what abundance of your Barley is continually made into Malt
amongst you: which if you had carriage for it, might be brewed into Beer,
wherewith you might serve diverse places with your Beer, which is now served
with your Malt: besides carriages of Brickes, Tyles, Stones, Charcoales, and
other necessaries, which is now carried at dear rates by Horse or Carts, which
now you send in Carts, or on Horses backs, to Southampton, to Bristow, and to
many other places: so that the dearness of the Carriages eats up all your
commodities and profit; which discommodity may be avoided, if your River be
cleansed: and what man can tell what good in time may redound to your City from
the Sea, by foreign goods, which may be brought into Christ-Church Haven by
Shipping? nor can it be truly imagined, what new and useful profitable
businesses may arise in time by this means.

Our Forefathers and Ancestors did in their lives time in former ages do many
worthy and memorable works, but for all their industry and cost, they did not
(or could not) do all; but as there was much done to our hands, so there was
much left for us to do, and very sitting it was, that it should be so: for it
is against common sense and reason, our Fathers should toil in good works
like drudges, and we spend our times loytring like Drones: no, what they did,
was for our imitation. And withal, that we should be leaders of our
posterities by our examples, into laudable endeauours, as our progenitors have
before showed us: we are their sons and offspring, we have their shapes
and figures, we bear their names, we possess their goods, we inherit their
lands; we have materials of Stones, Timber, Iron, and such necessaries which
they had, (if not in greater abundance) and having all these, let us withal
have their willing and liberal hearts, and there is no question to be made,
but that our River of Au^n will quickly be cleansed, to the honest enriching of
the rich, and the charitable relieuing of the poor.

I am assured that there are many good men in the City and County of Wiltshire,
and others of worth and good respect in this Kingdom, who would willingly and
bountifully assist this good work: but ( like Gossips near a Style) they
stand straining courtesy who shall go first: or the Mice in the Fable, not
one will adventure to hang the Bell about the Cats neck: So that if one good
man would begin, it would be (like a health drank to some beloved Prince at a
great feast) pledged most heartily, and by Gods grace effected most happily.

You have already begun a charitable work amongst you, I mean, your common
Town Brew house, the profit of which you entend shall be wholly employed for
the supply of the poor and Impotents, which live in your City: from which sort
of people (being such a multitude) the Brewers there have found their best
custom: for no doubt but the meanest beggar amongst you, is (in some sort)
more valiant then the richest man: because the one dares to spend all he has
at the Alchouse, so dares not the other; for the poor man drinks stiffly to
drive care away, and has nothing to lose, and the rich man drinks moderately,
because he must bear a brain to look to what he has. And of all Trades in
the world, a Brewer is the Lodestone, which draws the customs of all
functions unto ^^^ It is the mark or vpshot of every man's aim, and the
bottomless whirlepoole that swallows up the profits of rich and poor. The
Brewers Art (like a wild Kestrell or vnmand Hawke) flies at all games; or like
a But le^^ box at Christmasse, it is sure to win, whosoever loses: In a
word, it rules and reigns (in some sort) as Augustus Casar did, for ^^ taxes
the whole earth. Your Innes and A^^houses are Brooks and Rivers, and their
Clyents are small Rills and Springs, who all (very dutifully) do pay their
tributes to the boundless Ocean of the Brewhouse. For all the world knows,
that if men and women did drink no more then sufficed Nature, ^^, if it were
but a little extraordinary now and then upon occasion, or by chance, as you may
term it; if drinking were used in any reason, or any reason used in drinking,
I pray ye what would become of the Brewer then? Surely we do live in an age,
wherein Some make a profit of quarelling, some pick their ^^^ out of conte^^^
and ^cbate some thrive and grow ^^^ glutto^y, many are bravely maintained by
Bribery, that, cheating roguery, and villainy: but put al these together and
^^yne to them all sorts of people else, and they all in gen^^^ are drinkers,
and consequently the Brewers C^^^^ ^^^ Customers.
the sue^^ deadly sins are every man's Trade and living. Pride is the maintainer
of thousands, which would else perish; as Mercers, Tailors, Embroydrers,
Silk-me^, Cutters, Drawers, Sem^sters, Laundresies, of which functions there
are millions which would starve but for M^dam Pride with her changeable
fashions. L^chery, what a continual crop of profit it yeel^^ appears by the
gallant thriuing, and gaudy outsides of many he and she, private and pa^^^like
sinner^, both in Citi^ and Suburbs. Co^erousnesse is Embroydered with
Extortio^, and warmly lined and furred with oppression. And though it be a
devil, yet is it most Idolatrously adored, honored, and worshipped by those
simple Sheepeheaded fools, whom It has undone and beggered. I could speak of
other vices, how profitable they are to a Commonwealth; but my invention is
thirsty, and must have one carouse more at the Brewhouse, who (as I take it)
has a greater share then any, in the gains which spring from the worlds
abuses: for Pride is maintained by the humble, yet one kind of Pride does live
and profit by another: Letchery is supported by the cursed swarm of Bawdes,
Panders Pimps, Apple-squires, Whores, and Knaves; and so every sin lives and
thriues by the members, Agents, Ministers, and Clyents, which do belong unto
them: but Drunkenness plays at all; all trades, all qualities, all functions
and callings can be drunk or tempore: note at any great Feast, or but at
eurey ordinary dinner or supper almost, when men are well satisfied with
sufficiency, that then the mystery of quaffing begins, with healths to many an
unworthy person (who perhaps) would not give the price of the Reckoning to save
all them from hanging (which make themselves sick with drinking such
unthankful healths,) I my self have of^entimes dined or supped at a great
man's Board, and when I have risen, the servants of the house have enforced me
into the Seller or Battery, where (in the way of kindness) they will make a
man's belly like a Sowse-rub, and enforce me to drink, as if they had a
commission under the devils great seal, to murder men with drinking, with such
a deal of complementall oratory, As, off with your Lap, Wind up your bottom,
Up with your taplash, and many more eloquent phrases, which Tul^^ or
Demosthen^s never heard of; that in conclusion I am persuaded three days
fasting would have bin more healthful to me, then two hours feeding and
swilling in that man^er.

If any man hang, drown, stabbe, or by a^y violent means make away his life,
the goods and lands of any such person, are forfeit to the use of the King: and
I see no reason but those which kill themselves with drinking, should be in the
same estate, and be buried in the high ways, with a stake drove through them:
And if I had but a grant of this suite, I would not doubt but that in seven
years (if my charity would but agree with my wealth) I might erect
Almes-houses, Free-schooles, mend highwayes, and make Bridges; for I dare
swear, that a number (almost numberless) have confessed upon their
deathbeds, that at such and such a time, in such and such a place, they drank
so much which made them surfeite, of which surfeite they languished and dyed.
Let these Lives be considered if I lie or not.
The maine benefit of these superfluous and man-slaughtering expenses comes to
the Brewer, so that if a Brewer be in any office, I hold him to be a very
ungrateful man, if he punish a Drunkard: for every stiff pot-valiant drunkard
is a Post, beam, or Pillar which holds up the Brew House: for as the bark is
to the tree, so is a good drinker to a Brewer.

But you men of Salisbury, wisely perceiving how much Evil to your City, has
come by the abuse of Good drink, you would now work by contraries, to draw
Good for your poor, out of these forepassed and present Evils. To draw evil
out of good, is devilish, but to work or extract goodness out of what is
evil, is godly, and worthy to be pursued. The abuse of good drink and
excessive drinking, has made many beggars amongst you, to the enriching of a
few Brewers, and now you would turn the world off from the Barrels, as I would
off from the Coach-wheeles, that the benefit of your new built Town Brew House
might relieve many of those poor amongst you, who have formerly bin
impouerished by the enriching of your Towne-Brewers. It is no doubt but they
will oppose this good work of yours, as the image-makers in Ephesus did Paul,
when he preached against their idolatrous worshipping Diana; but be not you
discouraged: for Nehemiah (in time) did build the Temple, although Sanballat
and Tobiah, Arabians, Ammonites.
many others did oppose him: for as your intents are Pious, so no doubt but God
will make your events prosperous.

Now to turn from Beer and Ale to fair water, (your River I mean) which if
it be cleansed, then with the profit of your TowneBrewhouse, and the commodity
of the River, I think there will be scarce a beggar or a loiterer to be found
amongst you. I have written enough before concerning the benefit of it, and to
encourage such as seem flow toward so good a work, which had it been in the
Low Countries, the Industrious Dutch would not so long have neglected so
beneficial a blessing, witness their abundance of Nauigable Rivers, and
ditches, which with the only labor of men they have cut, and in most places,
where never God or Nature made any River; and lately there is a River made
nauigable to St. Teades in Huntington-shire, wherein stood seven Mills, as
impediments in the way. And now the City of Canterbury are clearing their
River, that Boats may pass to and fro betwixt them and Sandwitch Haven: the
like is also in hand at Leedes in Yorkshire: Now, if neither former or present
examples can move you, if your own wants cannot enforce you, if assured profit
cannot persuade you, but that you will still be neglectiue and stupid, then am
I sorry that I have written so much, to so little purpose, but my hopes are
otherwise: if all blind, lame, and covetous excuses be laid aside, then those
who are willing, will be more willing, and those who are slack or backward,
will in some reasonable manner draw forward: And there is the mouth of an
uncharitable objection which I must needs stop, which is an old one, and only
spoken by old men; for (say they) we are aged and stricken in years, and if
we should lay out our moneies, or be at charges for the River, by the course
of Nature we shall not live to enjoy any profit to requite our costs: this
excuse is worse then Heathenish, and therefore it ill becomes a Christian, for
as I wrote before, man was not created, or had either the goods of mind, body,
or Fortune, bestowed on him by his Maker, but that he should have the least
part of them himself; his God, Prince and Country, claiming (as their due)
almost all which every man has. The oldest man will purchase land, which is
subject to barrenness, and many inconveniences; he will buy and build houses,
which are in danger of fire, and diverse other casualties; he will adventure
upon Wares or goods at high prices, which to his loss may fall to low rates;
he will bargain for cattle and Sheep, who are incident to many diseases, as
the Rot; the Murraine, and diverse the like, and all this will he do, in hope
to raise his state, and leave his heirs rich: at his death perhaps (when he
can keep his goods no longer, when in spite of his heart he must leave all)
he will give a few Gowns, and a little money to Pious uses, a Gross or two
of pe^ny loaves, and there is an end of him, so that there remains no more
memory of him.

But this good work of your River, is not subject to barrenness or sterility,
but contrarily it will be a continual harvest of plenty, it is not in danger
of being consumed, or wasted, but it is assured of a perpetual increase. The
names and memories of contributors toward it, shall be conserved in venerable
and laudable remembrance, to the eternizing of their fames, the honor of their
posterities, and the good example of succeeding times to imitate. Therefore you
men of Salisbury, I ^^^ treat you in this case to be good to your selves. Or
else you may say hereafter, If ^^^ had been Industrious, we had been happy:
If ^^ had not been covetous, we had been rich.

Now, to return to my travels and entertainements: As I passed up the River,
at the least 2000. Swans, like so many Pilots, swam in the deepest places
before me, and showed me the way. When I came to the Town of Ringwood (14.
miles short of Salisbury) I there met with his Majesty's Trumpeters, and there
my fellows Mr. Thomas Under hill, and Mr. Richard Stock, Mr. Thomas Ramsey,
Mr. R^^^ Lloyd, with others, which I name not, did walk on the bank, and gave
me two excellent flowrishes with their Trumpets, for the which I thank them
in print, and by word of mouth. At last I came to a Town called Forthing,
Bridge, where (not many days before) a grievous mischance happened; For two
men being swimming or washing in the River, a Butcher passing over the bridge
(with a Mastiffe Dog with him) did cast a stone into the water, and say, A
Ducke; at which, the Dog leapd into the River, and seized upon one of the men
and killed him: and the Butcher leaping in after, thinking to save the man, was
also slain by his own Dog, the third man also hardly escaping, but was
likewise bitten by him.

From thence I passed further, to a place called Hale, where we were welcomed
by the Right Worshipful, Sir Thomas Penrudduck Knight, whom we carried there
in our Boat, and who, I am assured, will be a forward and a liberal
Benefactor toward clearing of the River.

So passing on our course by the Villages of B^rg^te, Breamer, Chartford,
Downton and Stonely, we came to Langfoord, where we were well entertained by
the Right Honorable, the Lord Edward Gorge (Lord Baron of Dundalk, and Captain
of his Maties strong and defencible Castle of Hurst, in Hampshire) to whom in
love and duty we proffred the gift of our tattred, windshaken and weatherbeaten
Boat, which (after our being at Salisbury, being but two miles from thence)
his Lordship accepted. And though he knew she was almost unserviceable, yet
his Noble bounty was such, that ^he rewarded us with the price of a new Boat. I
had some conference with his Honor, concerning the impediments and clensing of
the River, and I know he is most forwardly and worthily affected toward it,
and no doubt if it be pursued, that then he will do that which shall become a
Gentleman of his Honorable calling and Rank.

So on the same Friday at night we came to Salisbury, where we brought our
Boat through Fisherton Bridge, on the West side of the City, taking our lodging
at the sign of the Kings head there, with mine Host Richard Estman, whose
brother Thomas, was one of the Watermen which came in the Boat thither from
London: on the morrow, I with my company footed it two miles to Wilton, where
at the Right Honorable the Earl of Pembrokes, my Lord Chamberlaines house, I
was most freely (and beyond my worth and merit) kindly welcomed, by the Right
Worshipful, Sir Thomas Morgan Knight, with whom I dined, and by whose command
I was showed all or the most part of the admirable contrived Rooms, in that
excellent, and well built house; which Rooms were all richly adorned with
Costly and sumptuous hangings; his Majesty some few days before having dined
there with most magnificent Entertainment, as did express the love of so
Noble a Housekeeper for so Royal a Guest: upon the sight of which house with
the Furniture, I wrote these following verses.

If Wholesome Air, Earth, woods, and pleasant Springs
Are Elements, whereby a house is graced:
If strong and stately built, contentment brings,
Such is the house of Wilton, and so placed.
There Nature, Art, Art, Nature has embraced;
Without, within, below, aloft complete:
Delight and state, are there so enterlac'd
With rich content, which makes all good, and great.
The Hangings there, with Histories repleat,
Divine, profane, and Moral pleasures giving,
With work so lively, exquisite, and neat,
As if man's Art made mortal creatures living.
In brief, there all things are composed so well,
Beyond my pen to write, or tongue to tell.
Then was I showed a most fair and large Armory, with all manner of provision
and Furniture, for Pike, Shot, Bills, Halberts, Iauelins, with other Weapons
and munition, which for goodness, number, and well-keeping, is not second to
any Noblemans in England: Afterward I went to the Stables, and saw my Lords
great Horses, whom I saw such, and so good, that what my vntutour'd Pen cannot
sufficiently commend, I am forced with silence to ouerpasse. But amongst the
rest, the pains and industry of an ancient Gentleman Mr. Adrian Gilbert, must
not be forgotten: for there has he (much to my Lords cost and his own
pains) used such a deal of intricate Setting, Grafting, Planting,
inoculating, Railing, hedging, plashing, turning, winding, and returning
circular, Triangular, Quadrangular, Orbicular, Ouall, and every way curiously
and chargeably conceired^ There has he made Walks, hedges, and Arbours, of
all manner of most delicate fruit Trees, planting and placing them in such
admirable Artlike fashions, resembling both divine and moral remembrances, as
three Arbours standing in a Triangle, having each a recourse to a greater
Arbor in the midst, resembles three in one, and one in three: and he has
there planted certain Walks and Arbours all with Not a Tree stands there, but
it bears one good or rare fruit or other.
Fruit trees, so pleasing and rauishing to the sense, that he calls it
Paradise, in which he plays the part of a true Adamist, continually toyling
and tilling. Moreover, he has made his Walks most rarely round and spacious,
one walk without another, (as the rindes of an Onion are greatest without, and
less toward the Center) and withal, the hedges betwixt each walk are so
thickly set, that one cannot see through from the one walk, who walks in the
other: that in conclusion, A round work is endless, having no end. I touch
not the matchless adjoining wood and walk of Rowlington here, whose praises
consists in it self, my penb^ing insufficient.
the work seems endless, and I think that in England it is not to be
fellowed, or will in haste be followed. And in love which I bear to the memory
of so industrious and ingenious a Gentleman, I have written these following
Anagrams.

Adryan Gilbert, Anagrams. Art redily began A breeding trial.

Art redily began a breeding trial,
When she inspired this worthy Gentleman:
For Natures eye, of him took fulle spiall,
And taught him Art, Art readily began,
That though Dame Nature was his Tutresse, he,
Outworkes her, as his works apparent be.
For Nature brings but earth, and feeds and plants,
Which Art, like Tailors, cuts and puts in fashion:
As Nature rudely does supply our wants,
Art is deformed Natures reformation.
So Adryan Gilbert mendeth Natures features;
By Art, that what she makes, does seem his creatures.
THus with my humble thanks to Sir Thomas Morgan, and my kind remembrance to
all the rest of my Lords Servants there, my legs and my laboring lines
return again to Salisbury, and from the next day (being Sunday) to Langford,
to my Lord Gorge his house, with whom I dined, and left my humble thanks for
the reckoning. In brief, my fruitless and worthy lip-labor, mixed with a
deal of Ayrie, and non substantial matter, I gave his Lordship, and the like
requital I bestowed on the right Worshipful Mr. Thomas Squibb, Mayor of
Sarum, with Mr. Banes, Mr ^^^^ Iuy, M. Windouer, with all the rest; and more
then thanks, and a grateful remembrance of their Honorable, Worshipful,
and friendly favors, I know they expect not, and less then such a common duty
as Gratitude I must not, or cannot pay. To shut up all in few words, I know,
his Majesty's pious inclination is so ample, that he will be graciously pleased
with any of your laudable endeauours for your welfare and commodity, if you
take good and speedy advice, then no doubt but the effects will be according to
your honest intendments.

So farewell, Salisbury, till we meet again, which I hope will be one day: in
the mean space I pray thee take this poor Pamphlet as a loving pledge of my
return. Me thinks I see already, Men, Horses, Carts, Mattocks, Shouels,
Spades, VVheelebarrowes, Handbarrowes, and Baskets at work for the cleaning of
your River: But if my thoughts do deceive me, and my expectation fail, I
shall ever hereafter give small credit to their intelligence. So once more,
Salisbury, I wish thee thankefully well to fare.

On Thursday the 21. of August I took Wo^chester in my way homewards: where I
saw a^ ancient City, like a body without a soul: and I know not the reason of
it, but for ought which I perceived, there were almost as many Parishes as
people. I lodged at the sign of the Cock, being recommended to the Host of
the house, by a token from Salisbury, but mine Host dyed the night before I
came, and I being weary, had more mind to go to bed then to follow him so
long a journey, to do my message, or deliver any commendations: but the whole
City seemed almost as dead as mine Host, and it may be they were all at
Har^^est work: but I am sure I walked from the ^^^ end of it to the other, and
saw not 30. people of all sorts: So that I think if a man should go to
Winchester for a Goose, he might lose his ^abour, for a Trader cannot live
there, by venting such commodities.

On Friday I gallopp'd a foot pace one and twenty miles, from Winchester to
Farneham; where I and one of my company hired a couple of Hampshire lenets,
with seven legs, and three eyes betwixt them, upon whom we hobbled
seventeen miles, to Stanes, whence on Saturday the 23. of August we footed it
to Brenford, and Boated it to LonDON.

The Scourge of Baseness: OR, The old Lerry, with a new Kicksey, and a new-cum
twang, with the old Winsey:
DEDICATED TO THE MIRROR OF GOOD FELLOWSHIP, THE PATTERN OF TRVE FRIENDSHIP,
AND the only nonparallell of iouiall Entertainment; Mr Andrew Hilton, at the
sign of the Horse-shoo, at Daintree; I. Tailor wishes daily increase of good
Guests, true payment, hearts content in this life, and afterward as much
happiness as his soul can desire.
Kind Sir, I have seen oftentimes men offering to snuff a candle, have
against their wills put it clean out; and an unskillful Chyrurgian taking a
small green wound in hand, has brought it to an old Ulcer. I would be loath,
for my part, to imitate either of these examples; for my intent is, confession
of the wrong I did you, and an endeavor to make amends. I do confess that I
did you wrong in print, in my book of my Travels to Scotland, and now in
print, I do make you a public satisfaction; For, I protest to God, that I
have heard so much good report of you, that I am double sorry that I was so
mistaken, and that I have been so long time before I have printed my
recan^tion. It was your Tapsters want of wit and manners, and my want of
discretion, that was the grounds of my too much credulity and temerity. For his
part I wish him no more harm, but that chalk may be his best payments,
Thunder may sour his Hogsheads, Rats gnaw out his spigots at midnight, and
himself to commit his wit to the keeping of a fool or a knave while he
lives; And your Ostlers, for gaping so greedily like Gudgeons upon me, I pray
that they may every day mourn in litter and horse dung. But these are but
Jests by the way: for as many as know you, have told me, that if you had been
at home, my entertainment had been better. If it had been so, it had been
more then you owed me, and more then I at that time could have required: but I
would have stretched my wit upon the tenters of Invention, in the praise of
Innes and Inne-keepers, I would have put the forgetful world in mind of the
good service that Rahab the Innekeeper did at Jericho, in hiding and preserving
the spies that were sent by Caleb and Joshua; I would have made the obliuious
logger-headed Age remember, that the Redeemor of the world did grace in Inn
with his blessed birth: What place then but an Inn was the High Court of
Heaven and earth, the residence and lodging of the immortal King, of
neuerending eternity? This and more I would have done, but what is past cannot
be recalled, and it is too late to put old omittings to new committings. And
so, my noble and thrice worthy Oast of Oasts, I omit not to commit you and
yours to the protection of him that made you, desiring you to take this merry
Pamphlet in good part, or in earnest of my better amends, and as a qualifier of
your just anger.

Yours in the best of his endeauours to be commanded, JOHN TAILOR

To the Reader.
MY hearty condemnations I send forth
Unto a crew of Rascals nothing worth,
Yet in some sort I wrong their high reputes:
^^^e of them are worth hanging for their suits)
^^ch as (to pay debts) have the means, not minds,
those words, and bonds, are constant as the winds,
Such as think satisfaction is a sin,
And he most virtuous that is in debt most in,
Such, for whose sakes, (to my apparent loss)
To Germany, I twice the Seas did cross,
To Scotland all on foot, and back from thence,
Not any Coin about me for expense,
And with a Rotten weak Brown paper Boat,
To Quinborough, from London I did floate:
Next to Bohemia, o'r the raging Maine,
And troublous Lands, I went and came again.
Next, with a Wherry, I to York did Ferry,
Which I did find a voyage very merry.
And lastly, Late I made a desperate launt,
From Famous Lnodon, (sometimes Troynouant)
To Salisbury, through many a bitter blast,
I, Rocks, and Sands, and foaming Billows past,
That in ten thousand mouths, the City round,
The lying, flying news was, I was drowned:
But I may see them hanged before that day,
Who are my Debtors, can, and will not pay:
These toylesome passages I undertook,
And gave out Coin, and ^^^ a hundred Book,
Which these base Mungrels took, and promised me
To give me five for one, some four, some three:
But now these Hounds, no other pay affords,
Then shifting, scornful looks, and scuruy words;
And sure I think, if I should harrow Hell,
Where Dinels, and cursed Reprobates do dwell,
I might find many there, that are their betters,
And have more conscience, then my wicked debtors.
Thus to my seuen-fold troop of friends and foes,
My thanks, and angry Muse, thus onward goes.
THE WHY AND THE WHEREFORE.
I Have published this Pamphlet, to let my rich debtors understand, that as
often as I meet them, I do look that they should pay me: and although I am
shamefaste in not asking my due, yet I would not have them shameless in
detaining it from me, because the sums are but small, and very easy for them
(in general) to pay, and would do me a particular good to rece^ue.

Secondly, I have sent this into the world, to inform same, that through their
want do shun ^^d avoid my sight and company, that they are much deceived in my
disposition; for I ever ^desteeme an honest heart and a willing mind, as well
as their performances.

Thirdly, there are some great men, who by reason of their extraordinary
employments, my small acquaintance, and less means of access unto them, with
my want of impudency, and their men's want of courtesy to inform the^; all
these are lets and demurs, against my satisfactions.

Lastly, the daily abuses that I have concerning the book of my Travels,
wherein I am accused for lies, and falsifications; but I do and ever will
steadfastly stand to the truth of every tittle of it, except the abuse that I
did to Master Hilton at Daintree, and that was not done on known malice
neither, but on blind ignorant information: and there is a second Edition of my
books of Travels coming forth, wherein I will Satyrize, Cauterize, and
Stigmatize all the whole kennell of curres that dare maliciously snarle against
manifest, apparent, and well known truths. In the mean space, you that are my
debtors, if you please to pay me, you shall therein put your selves out of a
bad number amongst which you yet are placed: if you will not pay me, take this
bone to gnaw upon, That I do hope to be ever better furnished with money,
then you shall be with honesty.

I.T.

A Table of the general heads, containing seven parts.
1 THose that have paid. 2 Those that would pay if they could. 3 Those that
walk invisible, and are not to be found. 4 Those that say they will pay, who
knows when. 5 Those that are dead. 6 Those that are fled. 7 Those Rorers that
can pay, and will not.
Those that To ever mean to pay,
Nothing at all this book does say:
To such my Satyr talks still,
As have not paid, nor ever will.
A KICKSEY VVINSEY, OR, A LERRY COME-TWANG: Wherein John Tailor has
Satyrically suited seven hundred and fifty of his bad debtors, that will not pay
him for his return of his journey from Scotland.
1. My thanks to those that have paid.
YOu worthy Worthies, of that liberal Tribe,
Who freely gave your words, or did subscribe:
And were not itch'd with the vainglorious worm,
To write and lie, but promise and perform,
Black Swans of Britai^e, I protest you are,
And seem (to me) each one a Blazing Star;
^e this inconstant Age so few affoords
^f men, whose deeds do counterpoi^e their words,
^^at finding one, me thinks I see a wonder,
^ore then Decembers Fruit, or Winters Thunder;
^^^ gratitude, I hold a vice so vile,
^^at I could n'r endure't a breathing while:
and therefore ere I Will prove a thanklesse lade,
^^me in his course shall run quite retrograde;
^ea, every thing shall hate his proper kind,
before ll harbor an ungrateful mind:
^^ed still I vow to quit you in some part,
With any best wishes, and a thankful heart.
^^^ much to you, my Muse has sung or said,
those loving bounties has the Scullor paid.
2. Those that would pay if they could.
ANd as for you that would pay if you could,
I thank you, though you do not as you should,
^^ promised fair, and wrote as free as any,
^^ Time has altered since, the case with many;
^^r moneys, like low Tides, are eb'd too low,
^^d when, it is lowest 'twill begin to flow.
^^^ seek a breech from breechlesse men 'twere vain,
^^d fruitless labor would requite my pain:
^^^^ were no Charity (as I suppose)
^^^ bid one wipe his nose, that wants a nose;
^^d sure my Conscience would be less then little,
^^enrich my self, by robbing of the Spittle:
^^ honest friends (to end this vain dispute)
^^ur barren states may spring, and bring forth fruit;
^ur wills are good, and whilst I keep your bills,
^^stead of Payment I accept good wills;
^ hope and expectation I will feed,
^^d take your good endeauours for the deed:
^aying that Crosses in your minds may cease,
^^^ Crosses in your purses may increase.
3. Those that are hard for me to find, and being found, were better lost.
ANother sort of debtors are behind,
Some I know not, and some I cannot find:
^^d some of them lie here and there, by spirts,
^^sting their lodgings oftener then their shirts.
^^chance I hear where one of these men lies,
^^d in the morning up betimes I rise,
^^d find in Shorditch where he lodged a night;
^ he to Westminster has taken his flight.
^me two days after thither do I trot,
^^d find his lodging, but yet find him not,
^^ he the night before (as people tell)
^th taken a Chamber about Clarken-well.
^^ither go I, and make a privy search,
^^st, he is in Southwark, near S. George his Church.
A pox upon him, all this while think I,
Shall I never find out where my Youth does ly^?
And having sought him many a weary boat,
At last, perhaps I find his chamber out:
But then the Gentleman is fast in bed,
And rest has seas'd upon his running head:
He has took cold with going la^e by water,
Or sat up late at Ace, Deuse, Trey, and Cater,
That with a Sink of fifty pieces price.
He sleeps till noone before his Worship rise;
At last he wakes; his man informs him strain,
That I at door do on his pleasure wait;
Perhaps I am requested to come near,
And drink a cup of either ale or beer,
Whilst-sucking English fire, and Indian vapor,
At last I greet him with my bill of Paper:
Well John(quoth he) this hand I know is mine,
But I this day do purpose to go dine
At the half Moon in M^lk-street, prithee come,
And there we will drink, and pay this petry Sum.
I take my leave, he in his sleeue does laugh,
Whilst I believe him, (like John hold my staff)
I in the Tavern stay, and wait his pleasure,
And he to keep his word can find no leisure.
Thus many a street by me recrost and crossed,
I in and out, and to and fro, am tossed,
And spend my time and coin to find one out,
Which having found, rewards me with a flout.
In this base fashion, or such like as this,
To me their scuruy daily dealing is:
As one's in's study, t'other's deep in talk,
Another's in his Garden gone to walk:
One's in the Barbers suddes, and cannot see,
Till chin and chaps are made a Roman T:
And for his making thus a Gull of me,
I wish his cut may be the Grecian P.
These men can kiss their claws, with Jack, how is it?
And take and shake me kindly by the fist,
And put me off with dilatory cogges,
And swear and lie, worse then a sort of dogs,
Protesting they are glad I am returned,
When they would be gladder I were hanged or burned.
Some of their pockets are often stored with chinke,
Which they had rather waste on drabs, dice, drink,
Then a small petty sum to me to pay,
Although I meet them every other day:
For which to ease my mind to their disgrace,
I must (perforce) in Print proclaim them base;
And if they pay me not (unto their shames)
I Will print their trades their dwellings and their names,
That boys shall hiss them as they walk along,
Whilst they shall stink, and do their breeches wrong:
Pay then, delay not, but with speed disburse,
Or if you will, try but who will have the worse.
4. Those that will and do daily pay me in drink and smoke.
A Fourth cure I must drop from out my quill,
Are some that have not paid, yet say they will:
And their remembrance gives my muddy mood,
More joy then of those that will never be good.
These fellows my sharp Muse shall lash but soft,
Because I meet them to their charges often,
Where at the Tavern (with free frollicke hearts)
They welcome me with pottles, pints, and quarts;
And they (at times) will spend like honest men,
Twelve shillings, rather then pay five or ten.
These are Right Gentlemen, who bear a mind
To spend, and be as liberal as the wind:
But yet their bounty (when they come to pay)
Is bountiful in nothing but delay.
These I do seek from place to place,
These make me not to run the wildgoose chase;
These do from day to day not put me off,
And in the end reward me with a scoff.
And for their kindness, let them take their leisure,
To pay or not pay, let them use their pleasure.
Let them no worser then they are, still prove:
Their powers may chance outdo me, not their love;
I meet them to my p^rill, and their cost,
And so in time there is little will be lost.
Yet the old proverb I would have them know,
The horse may starve the whilst the grass does grow.
5. Those that are dead.
A Fifth sort (God be with them) they are dead,
And every one my quittance vnder's head:
To ask them coin, I know they have it not,
And where naught is, there is nothing to be got,
I Will never wrong them with in^^ctiue lines,
Nor trouble their good heirs, or their as-signes.
And some of them, their line loss to me were,
In a large measure of true sorrow dear;
As one brave Lawyer, whose true honest spirit
Does with the blessed celestial souls inherit,
He whose grave wisdom gained preeminence,
To grace and favor with his gracious Prince;
Adorned with learning, loved, approved, admired,
He, my true friend, too soon to dust retired.
Besides, a number of my worthy friends
(To my great loss) death brought unto their ends:
Rest, gentle spirits, rest, with Eternizing.
And may your corpse have all a joyful rising:
There Is many living, every day I see,
Who are more dead then you in pay to me.
6. Those that are fled.
A Sixth, with tongues glib, like the tails of E^^^,
Has showed this land and me foul paires a he^^
To Ireland, Belgia, Germany, and France,
They are retired to seek some better chance.
'Twas their unhappy inauspicious Fate,
The Counters, or King Luds unlucky Gate;
Bonds being broke, the stones in every street,
They durst not tread on, lest they burnt their feet;
Smoke by the Pipe, and Ginger by the race,
They loved with Ale, but never loved the Mace.
And these men's honesties are like their states,
At pittious, woeful, and at low-priz'd rates;
For partly they did know when they did take
My books, they could no satisfaction make.
And honesty this document does teach,
That man shall never strive above his reach,
Yet have they reached, and ouer-reacht me still,
To do themselves no good, and me much ill.
But farewell, friends, if you again do come,
And pay me either all, or none, or some:
I look for none, and therefore still delay me,
You only do deceive me, if you pay me.
Yet that deceit from you were but my due,
But I look never to be deceived by you.
Your stocks are poor, your Creditors are store,
Which God increase, and decrease, I implore.
7. Those that are as far from honesty, as a Turk is from true Religion.
Seventhly, and last's a worthy worthless crew,
Such as heaven hates, and hell on earth does spe^,
And God renounce, and dam them, are their prayers,
Yet some of these sweet youths are good men's he^^
But up most tenderly they have bin brought,
And all their breeding better fed then taught:
And now their lives float in damnations stream,
To stab, drab, kill, swil, tear, swear stare, blasph^^^
In imitation worle then devils Apes,
Or Incubusses thrust in humane shapes:
As bladders full of others wind is blown,
So self-conceit does puff them of their own:
They deem their wit all other men surpasses,
And other men esteem them witless asses.
These puck foyst cockbrain'd coxcombs, shallow ^^^
Are things that by their Tailors are created;
For they before were simple shapelesse worms,
Until their makers licked them into forms.
It Is ignorant Idolatry most base,
To worship Satin Satan, or gold lace,
To Adore a velvet varlet, whole repute
Stinks odious, but for his persumed suite.
If one of these to serve some Lord does get,
His first task is to swear himself in debt:
And having pawned his soul to Hell for oaths,
He pawns those oaths for newfound fashion clothes.
His carcass cased in this borrowed case,
Imagines he does me exceeding grace:
If when I meet him, he bestows a nod,
Then must I think me highly blessed of God.
Perhaps (though for a Woodcocke I repute him,)
I v^ile my bonnet to him, and salute him:
But sure my salutation is as evil,
As infidels that do adore the Devil.
For they do worship Satan for no good,
Which they expect from his infernal mood,
But for they know he is author of all ill,
And o'r them has a power to spoil and kill:
They therefore do adore him in the dirt,
Not hoping any good, but fearing hurt.
So I do seem these minimicks to respect,
Not, that from them I any good expect;
(For I from dogs dung can extract pure honey,
As soon as from these wedgeons get my money)
But I (in courtesy) to them have bowde,
Because they shall not say, I am grown^ proud;
And sure if harmless true humility,
May spring from money, wanting poverty,
I have of debtors such a stinking store,
Will make me humble, for they will keep me poor.
And though no wiser then flat fools they be,
A good luck on them, they are too wise for me;
They with a courtly trick, or a flim flam,
Do nod at me, whilst I the noddy am:
One pare of Gentry they will never forget,
And that is, that they never will pay their debt.
To take, and to receive, they hold it fit,
But to require, or to restore's no wit.
Then let them take and keep, but knocks, and pox,
And all diseases from Pandora's box.
And which of them says that I rave or rail,
Let him but pay, and bid me kiss his T.
But sure the Devil has taught them many a trick,
Beyond the numbering of Arithmeticke.
I meet one, thinking for my due to speak,
He with cuasions does my purpose break,
And asks what news I hear from France or Spain,
Or where I was in the last shower of rain;
Or when the Court remooues, or what is a clock,
Or where is the wind (or some such windy mock)
With such fine scimble, scemble, spitter spattar,
^s puts me clean besides the money-matter?
Thus with poor mungrell shifts, with what, where, when?
^m abused by these things, like men,
And some of them do glory in my want,
^hey being Romista, Fa Protestant:
their Apostaticall imunction says,
^o keep their faith with me, is breach of faith:
For it is a Maxim of such Catholics,
It Is Meritorious to plague Heretics;
Since it is so, pray pay me but my due,
And I will love the Cross as well as you.
And this much further I would have you know,
My shame is more to ask, then yours to owe:
I beg of no man, it is my own I crave,
Nor do I seek it but of them that have,
There Is no man was enforced against his will,
To give his word, or sign unto my bill.
And is it not shame, nay, more then shame to hear,
That I should be returned above a year,
And many Rich-mens words, and bills have past,
And took of me both books, both first and last,
Whilst twice or thrice a week, in every street,
I meet those men, and not my money meet.
Were they not able me amends to make,
My conscience then would sooner give then take:
But most of those I mean, are full purs'd Hindes;
Being beggarly in nothing but their minds:
Yet sure me thinks, if they would do me right,
Their minds should he as free to pay, as write.
Near threescore pounds, the books I Am sure did cost,
Which they have had from me, and I think lost:
And had not these men's tongues so forward bin,
Ere I my painful journey did begin,
I could have had good men in meaner Raiment,
That long ere this, had made me better payment:
I made my journey for no other ends,
But to get money, and to try my friends:
And not a friend I had, for worth or wit
Did take my book, or past his word or writ:
But I (with thankfulness) still understood
They took, in hope to give, and do me good.
They took a book worth 12. pence, and were bound
To give a Crown, an Angel, or a pound.
A Noble, piece, or half piece, what they list,
They past their words, or freely set their fist.
Thus got I sixteen hundred hands and fifty,
Which sum I did suppose was somewhat thrifty;
And now my youths, with shifts, and tricks, and cauils,
Above seven hundred, play the sharking Iauils.
I have performed what I undertook.
And that they should keep touch with me I look:
Four thousand, and five hundred books I gave
To many an honest man, and many a knave;
Which books, and my expense to give them out,
(A long year seeking this confused rout)
I Am sure it cost me seuenscore pounds and more,
With some suspicion that I went on score.
Besides, above a thousand miles I went,
And (though no money) yet much time I spent;
Taking excessive labor, and great pains,
In heat, cold, wet, and dry, with feet and brains:
With tedious toil, making my heart strings ache,
In hope I should content both give, and take,
And in requital now, for all my pain,
I give content still, and get none again.
None, did I say? I Will call that word again,
I meet with some that pay now and then,
But such a toil I have those men to seek,
And find (perhaps) 2,3, or 4. a week,
That too too often, my losings gettings be,
To spend 5. crowns in gathering in of three.
And thus much to the world I dare auow,
That my often walks to get my money now,
With my expenses, seeking of the same,
Returning many a night home, tired and lame,
Meeting some thirty, forty in a day,
That sees me, knows me, owes me, yet none pay.
Used and abused thus, both in town and Court,
It makes me think my Scottish walk a sport:
I muse of what stuff these men framed be,
Most of them seem Mockado unto me,
Some are Stand-further off, for they endeauer,
Never to see me, or to pay me never.
When first I saw them, they appeared Rash,
And now their promises are worse then trash;
No Tasfaty more changeable then they,
In nothing constant, but no debts to pay.
And therefore let them take it as they will,
I Will canuase them a little with my quill.
To all the world I humbly do appeal,
And let it judge, if well these men do deal,
Or whether for their baseness, 'twere not fitter,
That I should use more gall, and write more bitter?
I wrote this book before, but for this end,
To warn them, and their faults to reprehend;
But if this warning will not serve the turn,
I swear by sweet Satyricke Nash his vrne,
On every pissing polt, their names I Will place,
Whilst they past shame, shall shame to show their face,
I Will hale fell Nemesis, from Dis his den,
To aid and guide my sharp revenging pen;
That fifty Popes Bulls never shall roar louder,
Nor fourscore Cannons when men fire their powder.
And sure, my wronged Muse could lines indite,
So full of horror, terror, and affright,
That they (like Cain) confessing their estates;
But little better then base Reprobates;
And hang themselves in their despairing moods,
But that I Will not be guilty of their bloods.
No, let such fellows know, that Time shall try
My mercie's greater then their honesty:
Nor shall my verse afford them no such favor,
To make them save the hangman so much labor,
They are contented still to patch and palter,
And I (with patience) with them each a halter,
They are well pleased to be perfidi^m fellows,
And my revenge bequeathes them to the gallows:
For I would have them th^s much understand,
Words are but wind, it is money that buys land:
Words buy no food, or clothes to give content,
Bare words will never pay my Landlord rent.
And those that can pay Coin, and pay but words,
My mind, a mischiese to them all affoords,
I count them like old shoes, past all men's mending,
And therefore may the Gallows be their ending:
If some of them would but ten hours spare
From drinking, drabbing, and superstuous fare,
From smoking English fire, and heathen stink,
The most of them might well pay me my chinke.
There Is no wound deeper then a pen can give,
It makes men living dead, and dead men live;
It can raise honor drowned in the sea,
And blaze it forth in glory, Cap.a.pea.
Why, it can seal the battlements of Heaven,
And stellifie men amongst the Planets seven:
It can make mizers, peasants, knaves and sooles,
The scorn of goodness, and the devils close stools,
Forgot had bin the thrice three Worthies names,
If thrice three Muses had not writ their fames:
And if it not with flattery be infected,
Good is by it extold, and bad corrected.
Let Judgment judge them, what mad men are those
That dare against a pen themselves oppose,
Which (when it likes) can turn them al to loathing,
To any thing, to nothing, worse then nothing.
Yet ever I went, these men to write did like,
And used a pen more nimbly then a pike;
And writ their names (as I supposed) more willing,
Then valiant Soldiers with their Pikes are drilling.
But this experience, by these men I find,
Their words are like their payment, all but wind;
But what wind it is, is quickly understood,
It is an evil wind, blows no man good:
Or else they make it to the world appear,
That writing is good cheap, and paying dear.
No paper bill of mine had edge upon it,
Till they their hands and names had written on it;
And if their judgments be not ouer-seene,
They would not fear, the edge is not so keen.
Some thousands, and some hundreds by the year
Are worth, yet they their piece or half piece fear;
They on their own bills are afraid to enter,
And I upon their pieces dare to venture:
But whosoever at the bill has better skill,
Give me the piece, and let him take the bill.
I have met some that odiously have lied,
Who to deceive me, have their names denied;
And yet they have good honest Christian names,
As Joshua, Richard, Robert, John and James:
To cheat me with base Inhumanity,
They have denide their Christianity,
A half piece, or a Crown, or such a sum,
Has forced them falsify their Christendom:
Denying good, ill names with them agree,
And they that have ill names, half hanged be,
^^d sure I think, my loss would be but small,
^^ aquittance they were hanged up all.
^ such I am past hope, and they past grace,
^d hope and grce both past's, a wretched case,
^ may be that for my offenses past,
^d has upon me this disturbance cast:
^be so I thank his Name therefore,
^nfessing I deserve ten times much more;
^s as the Devil is author of all ill,
^ill for ill, on the will he works still;
^mselfe, his servants, daily lie and lurk,
^ns cares on earth, or pains in hell to work.
^ how the case then with my debtors stands:
^^ey take the devils office out of's hands;
^menting me on earth, for passed evils,
^d for the devil, does vex me worse then devils.
^troch it is pity proper men they seem,
^d those that know them not, would never deem
^ut one of them would basely seem to meddle,
^ be the devils hangman, or his beadle.
^ shame for honesty, for both, for either,
^ my deserts desertlesse, or for neither
^charge your selves from me, you know wherefore,
^d never serve or help the Devil more.
^^^ heard some that Lawyers do condem,
^t I still must and will speak well of them;
though never in my life they had of me
^arkes, Counselors, or yet Atturneyes fee,
^et at my back return, they all concurred,
and paid me what was due, and never demurred.
^^me Counter Serieants, when I came again,
^ Against their nature) dealt like honest men.
^ wondrous accident perchance one may
^ rope out a needle in a load of hay:
and though a white Crow be exceeding rare,
^ blind man may (by fortune) catch a Hare,
^ may a Serieant have some honest tricks,
^ too much knavery does not ouermix.
^ewga^e (the University of stealing)
^id deal with me with upright honest dealing.
My debtors all (for ought that I can see)
^ill still remain true debtors unto me;
For if to paying once they should incline,
They would not then be debtors long of mine.
But this report I fear, they still will have,
To be true debtors even to their grave.
^ know there is many worthy proiects done,
The which more credit, and more coin have won,
And it is a shame for those (I dare maintain)
That break their words, and not require their pain:
^ speak to such, if any such there be,
^f there be none, would there were none for me.
But Mr Bearnard Caluard too well knows
The fruits of windy promise and fair shows,
With great expense, and ^orill, and much pain
He rode by land and crossed the raging Maine
In fifteen hours he aid ride and go,
From Southwarke near to Cal^ice, to and fro.
When he unto his roast, and detriment,
Showed us a memorable president,
In finding out a speedy worthy way,
For news 'twixt France and London in one day;
And ^et this well deserving Gentleman,
Is cheated of his Coin, dowhat he can,
From him they could both goods and money take,
But to him they will no satisfaction make,
Their promises were five, or ten for one,
And their performances are few, or none.
Therefore it is some comfort unto me,
When such a man of rank, and note, as he,
Instead of Coin is paid with promises,
My being cheated grieves me much the less;
Of worthy Gentlemen, I could name more,
That have past dangers both on seas and shore,
And on ^ood hopes did venture out their gold,
To some that will no faith, or promise hold,
But basely do detain, and keep back all
The expected profit, and the principal;
Yet this one comfort may expel our cross,
Though we endure, time, coin, and labors loss:
Yet their abuse does make our same more great,
It Is better to be cheated, them ^^^ cheat.
Those that are dead, or fled, or out of Town:
Such as know not, nor to them am known,
Those that will pay (of which there is some small number)
And those that smile to put me to this cumber,
In all they are eight hundred and some od,
But when they will pay me's only known to God.
Some crowns, some pounds, some nobles, some a royal,
Some good, some naught, some worse, most bad in trial.
I, like a boy that shooting with a bow
Has lost his shaft where weeds and bushes grow;
Who having searched, and raked, and scraped, and tossed:
To find his arrow that he late has lost:
At last a crotcher comes into his brain,
To stand at his first shooting place again;
Then shoots, and lets another arrow fly,
Near as he thinks his other shaft may lie:
Thus ventring, he perhaps finds both or one,
The worst is, if he los^ both, he finds none.
So I that have of b^o^^^ so many giu^n,
To this compare^^ ^igent am driven:
To shoo^e this Pamphlet and to ease my mind,
To lose more yet, of something lost to find.
As many broo^es, foords, showers of rain and springs,
Unto the Thames their often tribute brings,
These subjects paying, not their stocks decrease,
Yet by those payments, Thames does still increase:
So I that have of debtors such a swarm,
Good they might do me, and themselves no harm
Inuectiue lines, or words, I write nor say
To none but those that can, and will not pay:
And whosoever pays with good, or with ill will,
Is freed from out the compass of my quill.
They must not take me for a Stupid ass,
That I (unfeeling) will let these things pass.
If they bear minds to wrong me, let them know,
I have a tongue and pen, my wrongs to show;
And be he never so brisk, or neat, or trim,
That bids a pish for me, a tush for him;
To me they are rotten trees, with beauteous rhinds,
Fair formed caskets of deformed minds.
Or like dispersed flocks of scattered sheep,
That will no pasture, or decorum keep:
Some wildly skipping into unknown grounds
Stray into foreign and forbidden bounds;
Where some through want, some through excess ^^
The scab, the worm, the murraine, or the rot.
But whilst they wander guidelesse, vncontrolde,
I Will do my best to bring them to my fold;
And seeing sheepefold hurdles here are scant,
I am enforced to supply that want
With railing: and therefore mine own to win,
Like rotten forlorn sheep, I Will rail them in.
In defense of Adventures upon Returns.
FOrasmuch as there are many, who either out of pride, malice, or ignorance, do
speak harshly, and hardly of me and of diverse others, who have attempted and
gone dangerous voyages by sea with small Wherries or Boats, or any other
adventure upon any voyage by land, either Riding, Going, or Running, alleging
that we do tempt God by undertaking such perilous courses, (which indeed I
cannot deny to be true) yet not to extenuate or make my faults less then they
are, I will here approve that all men in the world are Adventurers upon
Return, and that we do all generally tempt the patience and long suffering
of God, as I will make it appear as follows.

Whosoever is an Idolater, a superstitious Heretic, an odious and frequent
swearer, or liar, ^ griping usurer, or uncharitable extortioner, does tempt
God, adventure their souls, and upon return, lose Heaven.

Whosoever is a whore-master, does adventure his health, and wealth, and his
returns are endless misery, beggary, and the pox.

Whosoever does contriue, plot, or commit treason, does adventure his soul to
the devil, and his body to the Hangman.

Whosoever does marry a young and beautiful maid, does adventure a great
hazard for a blessing or a curse.

Whosoever goes a long iourny, and leaves his fair wife at home, does most
dangerously adventure for horns, if she be not the ^^nester.

He that sets his hand to a bond, or pa^^ his word for another man's debt, does
A^uenture a great hazard to pay both principal and interest. Probatum est.

That Pastor who is either negligent or ^^^ charitable in his function, does
Aduent^^^ more then he will ever recover.

A Merchant does Adventure ship, and goods, amongst flats, shoales, deepes,
Pira^^, shelues, rocks, gusts, storms, flawes, tempests, mists, fogges,
winds, seas, heats, colds, and calmes, and all for hope of profit, which often
fayles.

That Tradesman that daily trusts more ware then he receives money for, does
Adventure for Ludgate, a breaking, or a cracking of his credit.

He or she who are proud either of beauty, riches, wit, learning, strength, or
any thing which is transitory, and may be lost, either by fire, water,
sickness, death, or any other c^sualty, do Adventure to be accounted
vaineglorious, and ridiculous Coxcombs.

He that puts confidence in Drabs, Dice, Cards, Balls, Bowls, or any game
lawful or unlawful, does adventure to be laughed at for a fool, or dye a
beggar vnpittied.

He that eats and drinks till midnight, and fights and brawles till daylight,
does Adventure for little rest that night.

To conclude, I could name and produce abundance more of Adventurers; but as
con^cerning aduenturing any more dangerous ^voyages to sea, with Wherries, or
any extraordinary means, I have done my last, only my frailty will now and
then provoke me to adventure upon some of those infirmities or vices, which
attend on our mortalities, which I think I shall be free from committing,
before my debtors have paid me all my money.

FINIS.
Tailors Motto.
DEDICATED TO EVERY BODY.
YEt not to every Reader do I write,
But only unto such as can Read right:
And with impartial censures can declare,
As they find things, to judge them as they are.
For in this age, Critics are such store,
That of a B. will make a Battledore,
Swallow down Camells, and at Gnats will strain,
Make Mountains of small Molehills, and again
Extenuate faults, or else faults amplify,
According as their carping censures fly.
Such are within the Motto of I have,
But though the gallant Gulls be never so brave,
And in their own esteem are deemed wise,
I have a mind their follies to despise.
There are some few that will their judgment season
With mature understanding, and with reason:
And call a spade a spade, a Sicophant,
A flattering Knave, and those are those I want.
For those that seem to read, and scarce can spell,
Who neither point, nor keep their periods well
Who do a man's invention so be-martyr,
So hanging, drawing, and so cut and quarter,
Making good lines contemptible threed-bare,
To keep my book from such as those I care.
Adue. JOHN TAILOR.

TAILORS MOTTO. ET HABEO, ET CAREO, ET CVRO. I HAVE, I WANT, I CARE.
IS any man offended? marry gep
With a horse nightcap, does your Iadeship skip?
Although you kick, and fling, and wince and spurn,
Yet all your Colts-tricks will not serve your turn.
Vice has insected you, against virtues force,
With more diseases then an aged horse:
If all ^^ade^ sa^e; of VVaterman I will turn Farrier. I do not think that
any Horse le^ch can blazon such a pedigree of matching n^ladi^s.
For some of you are hide-bound greedily,
Some have the yellowes of false Jealousy,
Some with the staggers, cannot stand upright,
Some blind with Bribes, can see to do no right,
Some foundred, that to Church they cannot go,
Broke-winded some, corrupted breath does blow,
Some hoofe-bound, some surbated, and some graueld
With traveling, where they should not have traueld,
Some are crest-falne through th'immoderate vice
Of gorgeous outsides, smoke, and drink and dice,
And some are full of ^allenders and scratches,
The neck-cricke, spauins, shouldersplat, and aches,
The ring-bone, quitter-bone, bots, botch, and scab.
And nauelgall, with coursing of the Drab.
The back, gall, light-gall, wind-gall, shackle-gall,
And last, the spur-gall, the worst gall of all,
A good found horse needs not my whip to fear,
For none but Iades are wrung in the withers here.
And do these Hackneyes think to run on still,
(Without a bit or snafsle) as they will,
And headstrong prancing through abuses, dash,
And escape without a Satyrs yerking lash?
No they must know, the Muses have the might,
The unjust justly to correct and smite,
To memorize victorious Virtues praise,
To make men's same or shame out-liue their day^,
To force injustice (though it do look big)
With his own nails his cursed grave to dig:
T'emblaze the goodness of a man that is poor,
And tell the vices of an Emperor.
All this the Muses dare, and will, and can,
Not sparing, fearing, flattring any man.
And so dare I, (if I just cause do see)
To write, from fear, or hate, or flattry free,
Or taxing any in particulere,
But general at all, is written here.
For had I meant the Satyr to have played,
In Aqua fortis, I would whips have laid,
And mixed my ink (to make it sharp with all)
With sublimate, and Cockatrices gall,
Which, with a Satyrs spleen, and fury fierce,
With the least ierke, would to the entrails pie^e,
And with a lash that is lustily laid on,
Would strip and whip the world, unto the bone:
I know that none at me will spurn or kick,
Whose consciences no villainy does prick,
And such as those will in their kennels lie,
And gnar and snarle, and grumble secretly,
But with full mouth, they dare not bark or bite,
But fret within, with rancor and despite.
For why (before the world) I make a vow,
There does not live that male, or female now.
Against whom I have so much as is a thought,
Much less, against them are my Verses wrought.
This Motto in my head, at first I took,
In imitation of a better Book:
And to good minds I no offense can give,
To follow good examples, whilst I live.
^or I had rather to abide detraction,
^^^od be an Ape in any honest action:
^hen wilfully into a fault to run,
^^hough it before had by a King bin done.
^^e not here reuil'd against my betters,
which make me fear no dungeon, bolts, or fetters:
^or be he never so great, that does apply
^^y lines unto himself, is worse then I.
^mooth is my style, my method mean and plain.
^ee from a railing, or inuectiue strain:
^^ harmeleffe fashion here I do declare,
^ine own rich wants, poor riches, and my care,
and therefore at my wants let no man grieve,
^xcept his charges will the same relieve:
and for my Wealth (except a rotten Boat)
^^ never feared the cutting of my throat.
^^nd those that for my cares do envy me,
^^all in them (if they list) great sharers be.
^^ll my taxations are in general,
^^oe any personal, or national:
^he troubles now in France, I touch not here,
^or of the Britain^ Fleet before Argi^re.
^or of the forces that the Turk does bring,
against the Poland Kingdom and their King,
^f Count Buckoy, of Beth'lem, Gabor, or
Of Spinola, or any Ambassador,
Nor Denmarks King, nor of the Emperor,
Nor Netherlands great Nauigable power,
Nor of Religious points my Muse does chant,
Of Ro^^ish Catholic, or Protestant:
Of Brownist, Hussite, or of Caluinist,
^^minian, Puritan, or Familist,
Nor against Corporation, trade, or Art,
My poor invention speaks in any part.
And therefore Critticke, snarle, and snap, and hang,
^f inwardly thou feel my Satyrs sang:
^is wisdom in thee, if thy spleen thou hide,
And mend thy self, before thy faults be spide.
Thus as I boldly have begun to enter,
Courageously I Will through the business venture.
Et Habeo, I have.
I Have a Soul, which though it be not good,
'Twas bought at a dear rate, my Saviors Blood:
And though the Devil continually do crave it,
Yet he that bought it, has most right to have it.
I (with my soul) have power to understand,
The sum of my Creators great Command:
And yet I have a Law within me still,
That does rebel against his Sacred Will.
But though (through merit) I have Hell deserved,
Through Mercy yet I have a Heaven reserved.
I have a reason, which can difference make
'Twixt good and bad, to choose, and to forsake:
I have a working, forward, and free will,
Wherewith I have inclined to do ill.
I have a Conscience, which does tell me true,
That for my sins the wrath of God is due:
And to relieve that Conscience terrified,
I have a Faith in Jesus Crucified.
I have a judgment, by the which I see,
And judge, how good and bad things different be:
And with just Censure, I distinguish can,
The odds beeweene a monster and a man.
But when with judgment on my self I look,
I straight ways am with fear and horror struck:
And finding my afflicted Conscience grudged,
I judge my self, for fear of being judged.
I have a Knowledge, by the which I know,
That all that is good in me, God did bestow:
And all my thoughts, and words, and actions evil,
I have them (like my neighbors) from the Devil.
By this my Knowledge, sometimes skill I have,
To know an honest man, and know a knave:
To know where I fare well, to come again,
Where Friends for love do only entertain,
To know that Envy, Pride and Letchery,
Sloth, Wrath, Avarice, and Gluttony,
Does make the world dance Antique in a string,
And all their followers to confusion bring.
I know that griping base Extortion,
As it gets wealth without proportion,
Even so, without proportion, rule or measure,
Shall be consumed that most accursed Treasure.
I know a swearer, when I hear his Oaths,
I know a Gull, although he wear good Clothes,
I know a Prodigal, by's lavish spending,
I know a Fool (my self) by too much lending.
I know I have discharged others Score,
But will (for ought I know) do so no more.
I know, that four and twenty letters teaches
All the whole world stongues, languages and speeches.
I know that I not any word can frame,
But in some Language it is an Anagram.
And though the world of sundry parts consists,
Yet all the world are Anagramatists.
I know the numbers numberless of faces,
That were are, shall be, at all times, and places,
Are all unlike each other, for we see,
They each from other may distinguished be.
I know, the difference of these voices are
Unlike each other, being near, or far,
And that men's several writings are contrary,
And in some things from one another vary,
And by this knowledge I have in ward sight.
How that the works of God are infinite.
I have credulity, that when I hear
A man anouch a thing, protest and swear,
I have given credit to him by and by,
Although the wicked wretch did swear and lie,
Because I have a hope that want of grace,
Does not our Makers Image quite deface,
As that a man who has wit, sense, or reason,
Dares to commit so horrible a treason,
As to call God to witness of his lies,
Thereby to countenance his villainies.
Thus through simplicity, and light belief,
I have belieu'd an acrant whore, or thief.
I have opinion, and have ever had,
That when I see a stagg'ring drunken swad:
Then that a man worse then an Ass, I see,
Because an Ass will never drunken be.
And yet in mine opinion I am bold,
(That friendship and society to hold)
The merry spending of an idle hour.
To take a cup, or two, or three, or four,
If soberly the meeting be well ended,
It Is tolerable, and to be commended,
And yet I have my imperfections too,
Which make me daily do, as others do:
For I (like many rich men) now and than,
Make show to be a very honest man:
But strong temptations dog me every hour,
Which to resist I have so little power,
That if (perhaps) I had their means, I think.
I should (as they do) dice, and drab, and drink,
And through infirmity, or wilfulness,
Run greedily to Riots vain excess:
For Honors do change Manners; wealth and place
Are (oftentimes) temptations to disgrace,
And did some Great men cast up their account,
To what their vain expenses do amount;
So much for needless quarts, so much for smoke,
Paid so much for Eringoes, (to provoke)
So much for Coach-hire, so much for a whore,
With Item, not three halfe-pence to the poor.
And who knows, if I had their means, I say,
But I should be as very a Knave as they ^
For I have imperfections, and a will,
And frail infirmities, ^ attempt what is ill,
That I in no good action cannot ^tand,
Except supported by The Almighty's hand.
I have a sense and feeling simpathy,
Of others woe, and want, and misery:
If one man does do good, another bad,
I (for them both) can be both glad, and sad.
For when I see a Great man raised hye.
I have a sense of his Nobility,
And wish, that all his Actions still may be,
To make him worthy of his dignity.
But when I see that Fortune 'ginnes to frown,
And from her fickle wheel to cast them down,
Though their soul faults I hate and do abhor,
Yet as they are men, I have a pity for.
For when a whore is whipped, a Bawd in the Cart,
A drunkard in the stocks, for his desert:
An arrant Knave, or periurde wretch to stand,
And makes the Pillory his failing band;
Or one, whose backward Fortune does prevail,
To make a bridle of a Horses tail,
With riding Retrograde, in the streets proclaim,
On their own backs and breasts, their faults and ^^^
When any Villain for his fault is tortured,
A Thief, or Traitor, hanged, or drawn and qua^^
As I do hope for mercy from Above,
As they are men, they do my pity move,
And I do grieve, the Devil has so much pow'^
Ma^s Reason, and Allegiance to devour;
And that of Grace they laid no faster hold,
But fall into these mischiefs manifold.
I have a Fortune that attends on me,
For never will I Fortunes vassal be:
And let her frown or smile, or hang her self.
And give me either poverty or pelf,
Or cast me low, or lift me up on hye,
Yet (spright her teeth) I Will live until I dye.
For all man's outward happiness, are things
Tied and bound fast to fickle Fortunes wings:
Which when she lift, she will alight and stay.
And when her wheel but turns, she flies away.
She Is bountiful to fools, and therefore I
Have small share in her liberality.
On wise men she does favors seldom fix:
For wisdom scorns her slights and iugling ^^^
And yet no industry of man alive,
(If Fortune frown on him) can make him thri^
For why, so powerful is the purblinde witch,
To raise up knaves, and make fools devilish ric^,
To set an Ass on top of all her wheel,
And to kick virtue backward, with her heel:
To raise a Piper, Pander, or a Iester,
And therefore hang the Hag, I do detest her.
She has strange tricks, and works for diverse ^^^
To make a Great man have more kin then friend^
But seldom she this good report does win,
To make a poor man have more friends then li^^.
A King in's Throne, a General in the war,
Places of best command, and reverence are.
But yet if Fortune frown on their affairs,
They shall be rich in nothing but in cares.
She Is like a Ianus with a double face,
To smile and Iowre; to grace, and to disgrace;
She lou's and loathes, together at an instant,
And in inconstancy is only constant.
Uncertain certain, never loves to settle,
But here, there, every where; in dock, out ne^^^
The man whom all her frowns or favors spu^^^
Regards not her wheel, how often it turns.
A wise man knows she is casier found then kept,
And as she a good, or bad, he does accept.
He knows she comes intending not to stay,
and gui's but what she means to take away.
^or by discretion is truly known,
^^er liberal gifts she holds still as her own.
And unto me her bounty has bin such,
that if she cak't again, I care not much.
I have love which I to God do owe,
With which I have a fear does in me grow:
^loue him for his goodness, and I fear
^^o angee him, that has loved me so dear.
^feare in lout, as he is a gracious God,
Not love for fear of his revenging Rod.
And thus a loving fear in me I have,
Like an adopted son, not like a slave.
^^ have a King whom I am bound unto,
^o do him all the service I can do:
To whom when I shall in Alegeance fail,
Let all the Devils in hell my soul assail;
If any in his government abide,
In whom foul Treacherous malice does recide
Against him, his Royal offspring or his friends,
^ wish that Halters may be all their ends.
And those that cannot most unfeignedly
^^y this, and swear, as consident as I:
Of what degree soe'r, I wish (one hour)
They were in some kind skillful Hangmans power.
I have a life was lent me before my birth,
By the great Landlord both of Heaven and Earth:
But though but one way unto life is common,
For All that ever yet was borne of woman,
Yet are there many thousand ways for death,
To dispossess us of our lives, and breath.
For why, the Lord of life (that life does make)
Will (as the pleases) life both give and take,
And let me (blameless) suffer punishment,
Or loss of goods, or causeless banishment,
Let me be hanged, or burned, or stabbed, or drowned.
A^'s one to me so still my Faith keep sound,
Then let my life be ended, as God will,
This is my mind, and hope shall be so still:
To get to Heaven, come thousand deaths together,
They Are welcome pleasures, if they bring me thither.
I know for certain, all Mortality,
When it begins to live, begins to dye;
And when our lives that back again we give,
We ever endless then do dye, or live.
When good men wish long life, it is understood
That they would longer live, to do more good:
But when a bad man wishes to live long,
It is because he feign would do more wrong.
And this one reason gives me much content,
Though I shall have no Marble Monument,
Where my corrupted Carcass may inherit,
With Epitaphs, to blaze my want of merit,
To waste as much to pollish and be-guild,
As would a charitable Almes-house build.
All which a gouty Usurer, or worse,
May have, and have poor peoples heavy curse,
That many times the senseless Marble weeps,
Because the execrated corpse it keeps.
When the mean space, perhaps the wretched soul,
In flames unquenchable does yell and howl.
I have a hope, that does my heart refresh,
How-e'r my soul be sundred from my flesh:
Although I have no friends to mourn in sack,
With merry insides, and with outsides black;
Though never so poorly they my corpse interre,
Without bell, book, or painted Sepulcher,
Although I miss these trisles Transitory,
I have a hope my soul shall mount to glory.
I have a vain in Poetry, and can
Set forth a knave to be an honest man;
I can my Verses in such habit clad,
To Abuse the good, and magnisie the bad.
I can write (if I lift) nor Rhyme or Reason,
And talk of felony and whistle Treason,
And Libell against goodness (if I would)
And against misery could rail and scould;
Foul Treachery I could mince out in parts,
Like Vintners pots, half pints, and pints and quarts.
Even so could I, with Libels base abound,
From a grain weight, or scruple, to a pound,
With a low note I could both say or sing.
As much as would me unto Newgate bring,
And straining of my voice a little higher,
I could obtain the Fleet at my desire:
A little more advancing of my note,
I from the Fleet, might to the Gatehouse flote,
Last, above Ela raising but my power,
I might, in state be mounted to the Tower.
Thus could my Muse (if I would be so base)
Run careless, by degrees, into disgrace,
But that for love of goodness I forbear,
And not for any servile flauish fear.
Time serving vassalls shall not me applaud,
For making of my Verse a great man's Bawd:
To set a luster, and a flattering gloss,
On a dishonorable lump of dross;
To slabber o'r a Ladies homely feature,
And set her forth for a most beauteous creature.
Nor shall my free invention stoop to adore,
A foul diseased, pocky painted whore.
Rewards or bribes my Muse shall never entice,
To wrong fair Virtue, or to honor Vice.
But as my Conscience does inform me still,
So will I praise the good, condemn the ill.
That man is most to be abhord of men.
Who in his cursed hand dares take a pen,
Or be a means to publish at the press
Profaned lines or obsceane beastliness,
Scurrility, or known apparent lies,
To animate or cover villainies;
A halter for such Poets, stead of Bays,
Who make the Muses whores, much worse then Thais,
Such Rascals make the Heliconian well,
(In estimation and respect) like hell.
And of all good men justly are rewarded,
Contemned and scorned like hell hounds, unregarded.
For Poetry (if it be used aright)
Sets forth our Makers mercy, and his might:
For though (through ignorance) it has some foes,
God may be praised in Verse as well as prose.
Poets in Comedies are fit for Kings,
To show (them Metaphorical) such things
As is convenient they should know and hear,
Which none but Poets dare to speak for fear.
A Poet's borne a Poet, and his trade
Is still to make: but Orators are made:
All Arts are taught and learned, we daily see,
But taught a Poet, never yet could be.
And as the Tree is by the fruit well known,
So by his writing is a Poet shown;
If he be well disposed, he will well indite,
If ill inclinde, he vicsously will write.
And be he good or bad, in his condition.
His Lines will show his inward disposition.
And to conclude this point and make an end,
The best amongst them has much need to mend.
I have a tongue, and could both swear and lie,
(If to such customs, I would it apply)
But often swearing now and then for swears,
And lying, a man's credit quite out wears;
I Will trust an arrant Thief to keep my purse,
As soon as one that loves to swear and curse:
For can it be that he that takes a use,
And custom, God in swearing to abuse,
Can it be thought he will make Conscience then,
To play the false dissembling Knave with men?
Nor can my supposition ever dream,
That he who dares his Makers name blasphome,
But that if Time would but occasions bring,
He would betray his Country, and his King.
For it is a Maxim, (no man can convince)
The man that fears not God, loves not his Prince.
And he that cares not for his soul, I think,
Respects not, if his Country swim or sink.
To lying I bear such a hate, that I
Will never (wittingly) affirm a lie:
I will not say, but I a lie may say,
But I will not affirm it any way:
It Is the maintaining falsehoods to be true,
To whom a liars odious name is due.
That all untruths are falsehoods, none denies,
But sure all falsehoods cannot be called lies.
For Esops fables, Ouids, art-like fictions,
(Although they are against truth mere contradictions,
Of humane transformations from their kind,
Of disputations 'twixt the Sun, and wind.
Of fowls, and beasts, and rivers, trees, and stones,
To tell each other of their joys or mones,
Of men tra^sform'd to dogs, bears, bulls, swine, ape^
Which shows that treasons, murders, incests, ^^^
Turn men into worse forms then beastly crea^^
When reason's dispossessed by brutish natures.
A fiction, fable, or a harmless jest
I tolerate, but lies I do detest.
The Egyptians had a Law, that every liar
Should strait-way be beheaded, for their hyre.
But if that Law were executed here,
Few Pettifoggers would be found I fear.
The very Court would forfeit now and than,
Many a complementing Gentleman.
But sure the City were the greatest share,
Where lying buys and sells a world of ware;
The Country sometimes would a head allow,
In selling Corn, a Horse, a Sow, a Cow:
And then a headsman would get store of pelse,
If he could but refrain to lie himself.
I have a memory like (as I do find)
A wallet, ^alfe before, and half behind.
In the forepart my neighbors faults I put,
Behind (quite from my sight) mine own are sh^^
Thus partiality runs like a stream.
To spy a Mout and not to see a Beam.
But when as reason memory collects,
T'examine my own impotent defects,
Then does it unto me such things record,
As make me (almost) of my self abhord.
It tells me, I was in corruption borne,
And to corruption that I shall return.
It tells me, that betwixt my birth and this,
I have done thousand thousand things amiss:
It bids me to remember what I am,
To what place I must go, and whence I came,
And with those thoughts, when as my mind is hye,
I am dejected through humility.
And this all Great men well remember may,
They are but Honorable clods of clay:
Or Reverend Right Worshipful grave dust,
And (whence they came) again they thither ^^^
I say, if foolish females, with fair features,
Would but remember they were mortal Cre^^^,
And that as their good Grandams died before,
Even so must they, and must be seen no more,
And all their gaudy glory be forgot,
Whilst they shall lie, consume, and s^inke, and ^ot:
If these things they would to remembrance call,
Their honyed pleasures would be mixed with Gall,
And all and every one their course would bend,
Within themselves, what is amiss to mend.
The memory, unto the soul is food.
That thinks, and says, and does the thing that is good
I have a heart does like a Monarch reign.
Who in any Microcosine does laws ordain:
^ffections, Senses, Passions, Subjects, Slaves,
^ome like good Courtiers, some like flattering knaves
With show of Virtue, hiding of their Vice,
They bring their Lord t'a foolish Paradise;
For when the heart thinks swearing an abuse,
Then Anger says it is a manly use,
And when to quaffe, the mind has no intent,
^ffection says, it is honest merriment,
The mind calls Letchery abomination,
^ence says, it is Gentleman like recreation,
The mind holds Covetousness worse then theft,
^ence calls it Husbandry, and frugall thrift,
Reason delights in liberality,
^ence counsels it to prodigality.
and thus these vassalls do their King mislead,
^ Whilst Reason seems to be asleep or dead.)
and thus this little Kingdom man does fade,
With hearing Traitors, when they do persuade.
^ have experience, by the which I find,
that some, though poor in purse, are rich in mind:
and they that have of wealth the greatest store,
^re, in content, most miserable poor:
There Is many a Mammonist does houses keep,
With lofty Turrets, and with Sellers deep;
With a most slately porch, and spacious hall
and kitchen, lesser then a Cobblers stall,
^here (in two days) a poor halse rack of Mutton
^roclaimes the Master of the house no Glutton,
Where soule-bewitching gold in bondage is,
^ As may the keepers be, in hells abisse.)
^here waking thoughts keep still the mind oppressed,
And frightfull dreams make rest, to be unrest,
and whereas fears by night, and doubts by day
^riue happiness, and sweet content away,
Much better their is my estate then theirs.
^ have content, and they the golden cares:
^ can feed well at home, and soundly sleep,
And what I have, not care to lose or keep.
^ have consideration, to perceive
^hat's best for me to take, and what to leave:
^hen I consider, pleasures past and gone,
^oth add affliction, to affliction,
though he that is low can very hardly rise,
^et he that is high, often falls to miseries
He that is down, his feare's already past,
^hilst he that is up, may have a slippery cast,
^ do consider, that I often did crave,
things both from God and men, unfit to have:
And many times, through inconsiderate wit,
Gifts, giuers and receivers are unfit.
He is a liberal man, that does deny.
that which will do the askers injury;
^here is a bounty, which I will reveal,
That he never giu's in vain, that giu's in zeal:
As prodigality brings want and woes,
^o liberality makes friends of foes.
It Is better for a man his purse to hold.
Then give, to make a beggar proud, or bold.
True bounty is (on earth) a special grace,
And has in heaven prepared a glorious place.
For as the Sun unto the moon giu's light.
Which light she gives again to us by night:
So God does give his gifts to lib'rall men.
Which they (to men that want) do give again.
But he that gives, should strait forget it quite,
What they that take, in memory should write.
And I accept alike, great gifts, and small,
Only to me the giuers mind is all.
It Is a base bounty when a man relieues
These prostituted Whores, or Knaves, or Thecues:
For still the Devil is bountiful to those,
That unto Virtue, are inueterate foes.
But many hold it for a generous part,
To give a man that is drunk, theother quart:
And in a humor (to have Drawers trouble)
Throw pottle Pots down stairs, to come up double;
When strait upon their knees, they all accord,
To drink a health to some unworthy Lord:
Some fusty Madam, or some carpet Knight,
'Till they can neither speak, or stand upright.
Then being all abominable drunk,
A Gallant drinks a health unto his Punke:
The which withal Sir Reucrence strait they are
Inioynd to do, upon their knees, all bare.
If any dare deny to pledge the Drab,
He Is in great danger of a mortal Stab:
For he accounts it worse then blasphe my,
That one should there his Mistress health deny,
Until at last, o'r charged with too much wine,
They wallow in their vomits, worse then swine.
Thus many a beastly rude Barbarran,
Gains little of a lib'rall Gentleman.
A worthy spirit, a rare Noble spark,
True bred, a merry Greek, or man of mark.
A right mad Trojan, a most ex'lent blade,
As bountiful a man as ever God made.
Thus many an idle fellow gets a name
Of Bountiful, through deeds of sin and shame.
Indeed he is liberal, that spends health and wealth,
And precious Time, in drinking others health:
If dropsy Drunkards fallen to poverty,
Should beg a Pension of his Majesty,
And in their humble suits would make it known,
How drinking of his healths, they lost their own,
I think, his Highness justly would reliene them,
And (for Rewards) to each a Halter give them.
But is it not strange, that man so mad should be,
Idolatrous, bare-headed on his knee,
Bow and fall down unto an absent Whore,
As the only Saint (or devil) he does adore?
But ever he will kneel unto his God, to crave
For mercy, his infected soul to laue:
Before he will beg Gods pardon for his crimes,
He swears him o'r and o'ra hundred times,
And takes it for a Gentlemanlike grace,
To spit his venome' against his Makers face,
And with his Oaths as false, as black is white,
God dam him, or renounce, or sink him quite:
Refuse him (or if not refuse) forsake him,
And now and then swears, Then the Devil take him.
Thus he in ordinary talk affords,
Amongst (truth and lies) more oaths then other words;
These are the bounteous youths I care not for,
And these I have a heart that does abhor.
From a rich knave of worshipful degree,
I have a mind to spare my cap and knee:
To a good man that is honest, poor and wise,
I have a heart that my affection ties.
Some sixteen times I on the Seas have been,
In Spain and Germany both out and in,
At Cales, at Ostend, Prague, and many a where,
And yet I do thank God, Cham here, Cham here.
I have a Wife which I was wont to praise,
But that was in my younger wooing days:
And though she is neither Shrew, nor Sheep (I vow
With Justice) I cannot dispraise her now.
She has an Instrument (that is ever strung,
To exercise my patience on) her tongue.
Put past all question, and beyond all doubt,
She Will never infect my forehead with the Gout.
A married man (some say) has two days gladness,
And all his life else, is a lingering sadness;
The one days mirth is, when he first is married,
Th'other's, when his wife's to burying carried.
One I have had, should I the other see,
It could not be a day of mirth to me.
For I (as many have) when I did woo,
My self (in tying fast) did not undo:
But I have by my long experience found,
I had been undone, had I not been bound.
I have my bonds of marriage long enjoyed,
And do not wish my obligation void.
I have a house where I do eat and sleep,
But bread, nonmeat, or drink in it (I keep.)
For many Lords, and great men keep good meat,
But I spend mine, to make good fellows eat.
And though no Turrets do my house bedecke,
There one may break his fast, before his neck.
I have a trade, much like an Alchymist,
That oft-times by extraction, if I list,
With swearing labor at a wooden Oar,
I Will get the coined refined silver Ore.
Which I count better then the sharking tricks
Of cooz'ning Tradsemen, or rich Politics,
Or any proud fool, ne's so proud or wise,
That does my needful honest trade despise.
I have some troubles, by the which I know
How flattring friends do ebb, and foes do flow:
Prosperity increases friendship much,
But adverse Fortune tries them with the tutch,
By troubles and by crosses I gain wit,
When daily pleasures do diminish it.
Thus (by his power that All-sufficient is)
I have had time and power to write all this:
And I have hope that He the time will grant,
That I may tell of some things that I want.
The Motto of I have is large and wide,
Which largely here, I could have amplifide,
For I have Joy, and Love, and Comforts here,
And I have folly, sorrow, doubt and fcare;
I have (in part) my fra^lty here revealed,
I have some Vices which I have concealed.
I have done as I have, then if I have
But pleased my friends, I have gained what I crane,
Yet my, I have, as great is every jot,
And as small too as any man's have not.
Et Careo, I want.
STrange is the penance of my humble Muse,
That must tell what I want without excuse.
What man (without much torture) would confess
His want, his beggary, and guiltiness;
But that the World would think him to be mad,
Or that he very small discretion had?
Yet (at this time) it is my fatal lot,
To tell I want, what other men want not.
And therefore to declare my wants most plain,
I want a bragging or a boasting vain;
In words or writing, any ways to frame,
To make my self seem better then I am.
I want fair virtue to direct my course.
And stand against the shock of vices force;
And (of my self) I no way can resist,
Against Hell, the World, the Flesh, or Antichrist:
For ought I know, I want a courage stout,
Afflictions and temptations to keep out:
And I do fear, should time of trial come,
My constancy would bide no Martyrdom.
But to help what I want, I want despair,
And hope supplies my want in all my care:
And as I want that bold-fac'd impudence,
As may give just occasion of offense:
So do I want base flattery with my pen,
To sooth my self, or to tax other men.
I do want goodness, for I clearly see,
All good I do or say, is not from me.
And amongst all the benefits I crave,
Goodness I want, and goodness I would have.
A man may seem too just, too full of wit,
But to be too good, never man was yet.
He that is great, is not made good thereby,
But he that is good, is great continually.
Thus great and good together's rare and scant,
Whilst I no greatness have, all goodness want.
I do want wit t'inuent, conceive and write,
To move my self or others to delight:
But what a good wit is, I partly know,
Which (as I can) I will define and show.
Wit is the offspring of a working brain,
That will be laboring, though it be in vain:
It Is called the Mother wit, by which I find,
She Is of the bearing, breeding, femall-kinde.
And some have of their mothers wit such store,
That in their fathers wisdom they are poor.
A good wit is a virtue that excells,
And is the house where understanding dwells:
With whom the mind, and memory, and sense,
And reason, keep continual residence:
For why, if Reason chance to be away,
Wit (like a Colt) breaks loose and runs astray.
There Is many that have got their wealth by wit:
But never wealth had power to purchase it.
Rich fools, and witty beggars every where,
Are the third part of Mankind very near,
And little friendship does blind Fortune grant
To me; for wit and money both, I want.
Yet for mine ears price I could undertake
To buy as much as would a Lybell make:
Or I could have as much, as fits these times
With worthless Jests, or beastly scurity Rimes:
To serve some Lord, and be a man of note,
Or wear a guarded unregarded Coat.
Wit for a fool I think enough I have;
But I want wit to play the crafty knave:
And then the Proverb I should finely fit,
In playing of the fool, for want of wit.
To Archie (at the Court) I Will make a iaunt,
For he can teach me any thing I want,
And he will teach me for a slender fee,
A foolish knave, or knauish fool to be.
Garrt grows old and honest, and withal,
His skill in knauish fooling is but small:
The Knight of the Sun can caper, dance and leap,
And make a man small sport exceeding cheap.
In the old' time, a wise man was a fool,
That had compared himself with great Otoole.
But his good days are past, he is down the wind,
In both his eyes and understanding blind.
But holla, holla, Muse, come back again,
I was half ranisht with a fooling vain:
And, if I had gone forward with full speed,
I Would played the fool for want of wit indeed.
As Frogs in muddy ditches use to breed,
So there is a wit that does from Wine proceed:
And some do whet their wit so much thereon,
Till all the sharpness and the steel is gone;
With nothing left but back, the edge gone quite,
Like an old Cat, can neither scratch nor bite,
The wit I want, I have, yet yields no profit,
Because a fool has still the keeping of it.
Which had it in a Wisemans head been planted,
I should not now want, what I long have wanted;
I want that undermining policy;
To purchase wealth with soul dishonesty:
And I do want, and still shall want, I hope,
Such actions as may well deserve a Rope.
I want a mind, bad company to haunt,
Which if I do, it seems I foresight want,
I want a Kingdom, and a Crown to wear,
And with that want, I want a world of care:
But might I be a King, I would refuse it,
Because I do want wisdom how to use it.
When an unworthy man obtaines the same,
He Is raised to high preferment for his shame:
For why, the office of a King is such,
And of such reverence as I dare not tutch:
Like to the Thunder, is his voice expressed,
His, Majesty, as Lightniug from the East,
And though he want the art of making breath,
He Is like a Demy-God, of life and death.
And as Kings (before God) are all but men,
So before men, they all are gods again.
He Is a good King, whose virtues are approved,
Feared for his Justice, for his mercy loud:
Who patterns all his Royal dignity,
By the just rule of Heavens high Majesty.
Who can distribute (to good men's content)
Reward for virtue, vices punishment,
Who loves a poor man's goodness, and does hate
All soul corruption in a man of State,
Combined in love with Princes near and far,
Most affable in peace, powerful in war:
And above all, religious, full of zeal,
To guard the Church, and guide the Commonweal.
And though such Kings as this, have seldom been,
Yet such a King as this I often have seen.
And as I want a Regal power and fame,
I want Revenues to maintain the same:
I think a King that is made of I should believe all were Gold that glisters.
Ginger-bread,
His Subjects would obey him with more dread:
And any knave that could but kiss his Claw,
And make a leg, would make me but Iack-Daw.
And as the Swallow all the Summer stays,
And when the winter comes, he flies his ways:
So flatt'rers would adore my happiness,
And take their flight, and leave me in distress,
To praise my vices, all the swarm of them
Would stock, and all my virtues would condem.
Much worse then Ravens is their flattery,
For Ravens eat not menvntill they dye:
But so a flattering knave may get and thrive,
He daily will devour a man alive.
Besides, the body only feeds the Foul:
But flattery often consumes both body and soul.
For like to trencher-Flies they ever prove,
Who still wait more for lucre then for love.
Thus, though I want a Kingly power Royal,
It Is against my will, to want will to be loyal.
And if that any King alive there be
That willingly would change estates with me,
I in my bargain should have gold for brass,
And he would be accounted but an Ass.
For any Kings estate, be it never so bad,
To change it with John Tailor, were stark mad.
A King of Clubs keeps subjects in more awe:
For he commands his Knave (except at Maw)
A King of Spades has more wit in his pate,
To delue into the secrets of his state:
The King of Diamonds is too rich and wise,
To change his pleasures for my miseries.
And for the King of Hearts, he is so beloved,
That to exchange with me, he will never be moved.
For I am full of fears and dangerous doubts,
And poorer far then is a King of Clouts:
I therefore will a Subject still remain,
And learn to serve, that am unfit to reign.
I want ten millions of good coined gold,
And with that want, want troubles manifold;
But if I had so much, what man can tell,
But that I should want grace to use it well?
Within the walls and skirts of Treynonant,
Many that have most goods, most goodness want:
For Charity and Riches seldom can
Have both possession in a wealthy man.
Fools that are rich with multitudes of Pieces,
Are like poor simple sheep with golden fleeces:
A knave, that for his wealth does worship get,
Is like the Devil that is a cock-horse set.
For money has this nature in it still,
Slave to the goodman, master to the ill.
The Couetons amidst his store is poor,
The mind content is rich and seeks no more.
Who couers most, has least, who couets least,
Has most; for why, sufficient is a feast.
Wealth unto mischiefs might my mind inchant,
And therefore's is much good for me I want.
I want a Son and Heir, and I perceive,
That he no portion could from me receive;
Unless I could bequeath him Poetry,
To add more poverty to poverty.
But as I do want Children, I want care,
And jealousy, in which some Fathers are:
For many of them rake and toil (Go^ ^ot)
To gather wealth for Heirs they never begot:
And run to Hell (through mischiefs) greedily.
For other men's misgotten Bastardy.
The greatest females underneath the sky,
Are but frail vessels of mortality:
And if that Grace and Virtue be away,
There Is Honor's shame, and Chastitie's decay.
For, if inconstancy does keep the door,
Lust enters, and my Lady prones a Whore:
And so a Bastard to the World may come,
Perhaps begotten by some stable Groom;
Whom the fork-headed, her cornuted Knight
May play and dandle with with great delight,
And thus by one base misbegotten son,
Gentility in a wrong line may run:
And thus soul lust to worship may prefer
The mungrell Issue of a Fruterer,
Or yeoman of the Bottles it may be:
Or some vnmannerd rascal worse then he,
And though the Stripling up in years does grow,
He shall want wit his father how to know:
But he shall know one that will father him,
And with good bringing up maintain him trim:
And loves him with affection, as he were
His own most natural In my English Latin Richard Swary, I find or coynd
this worthy word. The Heralds of this Office dwell at N^^^^^
Primogeniter.
The old Knight dies and freely gives him all,
And he being grown a Gallant fair and tall,
If with his cursed wealth he purchase can,
To wed the Daughter of some Nobleman,
And being thus enaebled much thereby,
Through his Alliance with Nobility;
He may in time possess an honored state,
Which God does curse, and all good people hate:
Then shall be searched, it possible it be,
Before Canis birth, to find his Petigree:
Then is some famous coat of Arms contrived,
From many worthy families derived.
And thus may Lust and Wealth raise many a Clown,
To Reputation, and to high Renown.
Thus many good men are deceived (perhaps)
In bowing of their knees, and dossing Caps,
And courteously commit Idolatry,
To a proud branch of Lust and Letchery.
For my part, I want means to gull men so,
I may be gulled with others goodly show.
If any find my Children meat or cloth,
I got them in my sleep, I Will take mine oath,
I cannot be deceived in my Heirs,
As some that are my betters may in theirs,
And as no Bastards my free mind perplexe,
So I want Iealousies, which some men vex.
Should thousands such as Hercules combine,
T'inspire with Jealousy this breast of mine,
Nor all the Goatish soul luxurious brood,
Could not possess me with that frantike mood,
She that I have, I know her continence,
And she as well does know my confidence;
And yet, for ought you know, both she and I
May want both honesty and Jealousy:
Though of our selves our knowledge is but small;
Yet somewhat we do know, and God knows all.
The man whose wife will be a whore indeed,
His Jealousy stands but in little steed:
Nor can holts, locks, or walls of brass suffice
Br^^ hundred hands, nor Arges eyes;
Not all the wit in man or Devils pate,
Can alter any man's allotted fate:
For if a Woman be to lewdness given,
And is not guided with the grace of Heaven;
She will find opportunity and time,
Inspight of watch or ward, to do the Crime:
But if she be with heavenly blessings graced,
As outward beautiful, and inward chaste;
Then may soul jealousy and false suspicion,
Against her nature alter her condition,
From good to bad, from bad to naught, and worse,
And turn her virtues to a vicious course.
For nothing can an honest mind infect,
So soon as jealousy and false suspect;
And this soul Fury many times has wrought,
To make the bad worse, and the good stark naught:
But never yet by it (as I could hear)
The good or bad, one jot the better were:
And therefore be my wife, or good, or ill,
I jealousy do want, and want it will.
I want dissimulation to appear,
A friend to those to whom I hatred bear:
I want the knowledge of the thriuing Art,
A holy outside, and a hollow heart:
Put as I am the, same I Will ever seem,
Not worse, or better, in mine own esteem,
For what attire soe'r my corpse does hide,
Or whether I do go on foot or ride:
Or were I with the Kings high favor graced,
Or at a great Lords board, at dinner placed,
And should I have all this, I were no more
But a poor Waterman, that at his Oar
Does (for a living) labor, tug, and pull
And carries both the Gallant and the Gull.
How-euer others do esteem of me,
Yet as I am, I know my self to be.
If I do chance to be in company,
Well welcomed, amongst true Gentility,
I know, in them it is a courteous part,
And that me it can be no desert,
I want that high esteemed excellence
Of sustian or Mockado Eloquence,
To flourish o'r or bumbast out my style,
To make such, as not under stand me, smile;
Yet i with Nonsense could contingerate,
With Catophiscoes Terragrophicate,
And make my self admired immediately,
Of such as understand no more then I.
Besides, I want the knowledge and the skill,
How these my lines may pasle now well or ill:
For as a learned Poet lately writ
With a comparison, comparing fit
Men's writings and inventions like to Cheese,
Which with some stomachs very well agrees:
Some love it, and some cannot well digest it,
Some ear not for it, and some quite derest it;
And so my lines to sundry hands may come,
Some pleasing, and displeasing unto some:
One likes it well, and very well commends it,
A second swears it is naught, and madly rends it,
A third cries mew, and serves his jaws awry,
And in a scornful humor lays it by:
Thus some like all, some somewhat, and some nothing,
And one man's liking is another lothing.
I want hope to please all men where I come,
I want despair, and hope I shall please some;
I want ingratitude to friends, I want
A willing mind, (what is written) to recant:
I want against any man peculiar spite,
I want a self-love unto what I write:
I want some friends that would my want supply,
I want some foes that would my patience try.
If all things that I want, I here should tell,
To a large volume then my book would swell;
For though my self my wants do boldly bear,
My wants of such great weight and number are,
That sure the burden of the things I want,
Would break the back of any Elephant.
Et Curo, I Care.
ICare to think upon the Theme I write,
For Care is careful, yielding no delight:
And though Care flows like a continual stream,
Yet Care is but a very barren Theme.
Upon I care was, my swift Muse could iog,
Like to an Irish Lackey o'r a bog;
But my poor wit must work upon I care,
Which is a subject (like my wit) most bare.
I care to keep my wife in that degree,
As that she always might my equal be:
And I do care, and at all times endeuer,
That she to have the mastership shall never.
I Care, and so must all that mortal are;
For from our births, unto out graves, our care
Attends on us, in number like our sins,
And sticks unto us close, as do our skins;
For the true Anagram of Learned Latin Lads tell me, that Curo comes near
curse
Care is Race,
Which shows, that whilst we on the earth have place,
So many miseries do us ensnare,
That all our life is but a Race of Care;
And when I call my life unto account,
To such great numbers do my Cares amount
That Cares on Cares my mind so much do lade,
As i of (nothing else but) Cares were made.
When I conceive I am besieged round
With enemies, that would my soul confound,
As is the Flesh, the World and ghostly Fiends,
How (sen'rally) their force and flattery bends,
To drive me to presumption or despare,
Tauoid temptations I am full of care.
When (consider what my God has done
For me, and how his grace I daily shun:
And how my sins (for ought I know) are more
Then Stars in sky, or Sands upon the shore,
Or withered leaves that Autumn tumbles down,
And that sins leprosy has ouergrowne
My miserable self from head to heel,
Then hopeful fears, and fearful cares I feel.
When I do see a man that conscience makes
Of what he speaks, or does, or undertakes;
That neither will dissemble, lie, or swear,
To have the love of such a man I care.
I care, when i do see a Prodigal
(On whom a fair estate did lately fall)
When as is spent his credit and his chink,
And he quite wasted to a snusse, does stink,
Who in the Spring, or Summer of his Pride,
Was worshipped, honored, almost deisi'd:
And (whilst the golden Angels did attend him)
What swarms of friends, and kindred did befriend him,
Persuading him, that give, and spend and lend,
Were virtues which on Gentry do depend?
When such a fellow fallen to misery,
I see forsaken and in beggary,
Then for some worthy friends of mine I care,
That they by such examples would beware,
A fool is he who gives (himself t'impaire)
And wise is he who gives what he may spare:
But those that have too much, and nothing give,
Are slaves of Hell, and pity it is they live.
But as the prodigal does vainly spend,
As though his ill sprung wel-spring, never would end,
Yet in his poverty he is better much,
Then a hard-hearted miserable Clutch,
Because the Prodigal lets money fly,
That many people gain and get thereby.
A Prodigall's a Commonwealths man still,
To have his wealth all common, it is his will,
And when he wants, he wants what he has not,
But misers want what they both have, and got.
For though man from the teate has weaned bin,
Yet still our infancy we all are in,
And from our birth, till death our lives does smother,
All men do live by sucking one another.
A King with Clemency and Royalty,
Does suck his Subjects love and loyalty:
But as the Sea sucks in the Rivers goods,
And Rivers back again, suck in the floods,
So good Kings, and true Subjects, always prove
To suck from each, protection, fear, and love.
All Clients whatsoever are Lawyers nurses,
And many times they do suck dry their purses:
But though the Lawyer seems in wealth to swim,
Yet many great occasions do suck him.
The Prodigalls estate, like to a flux,
The Mercer, Draper, and the Silkman sucks:
The Tailor, Millainer, Dogs, Drabs and Dice,
Trey-trip, or Passage, or The most at thrice;
At Irish, Tick-tacke, Doublets, Draughts or Chesse,
He flings his money free with carelessenesse:
At Nouum Mumcha^ce, mischance, (choose ye which)
At One and thirty, or at Poor and rich,
Russe, slam, Trump, noddy, whisk, hole, Sant, Newcut
Unto the keeping of four Knaves he will put
His whole estate, at Loadum, or at Gleeke,
At Tickle-me quickly, he is a merry Greek,
At Primesisto, Post and pair, Primero,
Maw, Whip-her-ginny, he is alib tall Hero;
At My-sow-pigg'd: and (Reader never doubt ye,
He Is skilled in all games, except) Look about ye.
Bowls, shoue-groate, tennis, no game comes a mist,
His purse a nurse for any body is;
Caroches, Coaches, and Tobacconists,
All sorts of people freely from his fists,
His vain expenses daily suck and soake,
And he himself sucks only drink and smoke:
And thus the Prodigal, himself alone,
Gives suck to thousands, and himself sucks none.
But for the miser, he is such an evil,
He sucks all, yet gives none suck but the Devil:
And both of them such cursed members are,
That to be neither of them both I care.
Thus young, old, all estates, men, maids, and wives,
Do suck from one another, all their lives;
And we are never weaned from sucking thus,
Until we dye, and then the worms suck us.
I care when I want money, where to borrow,
And when I have it, then begins new sorrow:
For the right Anagram of woe is owe.
And he is in woe that is in debt I know:
For as I cared before to come in debt,
So being in, my care is out to get.
Thus being in or out, or out or in,
Where one care ends, another does begin.
I care to keep me from the Serieants mace,
Or from a barbrous Bailiffs rough embrace:
Or from a Marshals man that mercy lacks,
That lives a cursed life by poor men's wracks,
From Sericants that are Saracens by kind,
From Bailiffs that are worse then Bears is mind:
And from a Marshals monsters trap or snare,
To keep me from such knaves as those I care,
A Pander (Hostler-like) that walks a whore,
And for a fee, securely keeps the door,
A Punck that will with any body do,
And give the pox in to the bargain too:
A rotten stinking Bawd, that for her crimes,
Seewd in a sweat has been some fifteen times,
A Drunkard, that delights to curse and swear,
To shun such company as those I care.
I care to please and serve my Masters will,
And he with care commands not what is ill.
I care to have them hanged that careless be,
Or false unto so good a Lord as he.
I care for all Religions that are hurld
And scatter do'r the universal world:
I care to keep that which is sound and sure,
Which ever and for ever shall endure.
I care t'auoyd all Sects and errors foul,
That to confusion have drawn many a soul.
For be a man, a Heathen, Turk or Jew,
With Care his miserable state I rue,
That he should have sense, reason, life and lim,
Yet will not know That God that gave them him,
And can a Christian think upon these things,
But it his heart with care and pity wrings;
That three parts of the world, the grace, does shun
Of their Creator, and his saving Son?
And as the Christians few in number be,
Yet how they in Religions disagree,
Kings subjects, parents, children much divided,
By hell misguided, and by Turks derided,
And can a Christian think how these things are,
But that his heart must be possessed with Care?
I would all Princes that do Christ profess,
And hope through him for endless happiness,
Their quarrels to each other to lay by,
And join against the common Enemy,
Who like a tempest oftentimes has come,
Advancing Mahomet in Christendom.
If Christian Kings this way would all prepare.
For such a glorious war as this I care.
And here (for mirths sake) some few lines are made
In the behalf of me, and of my trade:
But honest Reader, be not angry tho
They look Some six or eight lines are old of mine own, but I have much raced
them.
like verses I wrote long ago,
But they by many men were never seen,
And therefore fit to publish them I ween.
I that in quiet in the days of yore,
Did get my living at the healthful Oar.
And with content did live, and sweat and row,
Where like the tide, my purse did ebb and flow,
My fare was good, I thank my bounteous Fares,
And pleasure made me careless of my cares.
The watery Element most plentiful,
Supplide me daily with the Oar and Scull,
And what the water yielded, I with mirth,
Did spend upon the Element of earth,
Until at last a strange Poetique vein,
As strange a way possessed my working brain:
It chanced one evening, on a Reedy bank,
The Muses sat together in a rank:
Whilst in my boat I did by water wander,
Repeating lines of Hero and Leander,
The Triple three took great delight in that,
Called me a shore, and caused me sit and chat,
And in the end, when all our talk was done,
They gave to me a draught of Helicon,
Which proved to me a blessing and a curse,
To fill my pate with verse, and empt my purse.
By their poor gift I have experience found,
What Is fit to be reprou'd, and what renownd:
And that a Waterman a member is,
Which neither King nor Commonwealth can miss,
Yet we could well miss some that are too bad,
If better in their rooms were to be had:
But though abundance of them I could spare,
It Is only for the honest trade I care.
Some say we carry whores and thieves. It Is true,
I Will carry those that said so, for my due:
Our boats like hackney horses, every day,
Will carry honest men and knaves, for pay:
We have examples for it most divine,
Shall Gods gifts be common to good and bad, and our boats be private only to
the good.
The Sun upon both good and bad does shine,
Upon the dunghill and upon the Rose:
Upon Gods servants and upon his foes:
The wind, the rain, the earth, all creatures still,
Indifferently do serve both good and ill.
All tradesmen sell their ware continually,
To whores, or knaves, or any that will buy.
They never examine people what they are:
No more can we, when we transport a Fare.
Sappho a Poetresse, a Lady famed,
Did wed a Waterman was Phaon named:
Egypt Kings (with Oars) as histories do show,
King Edgar to's Parliament did row.
And when the waters all the world o'r-ran,
Old Noab was the only Waterman.
I care what quantity of this same stuff
I write: I may do much, or not enuffe:
To end it therefore I will have a Care,
And show the Watermans briese The character of a Waterman.
Character.
First, though he be not of the female kind,
Yet he is most like unto a Whore, I find:
For both, the more unready that they be,
Both are most ready for their trade, we see:
The Watermen in shirts, and Whores in smocks,
Both ship and fall to work, to increase their stocks.
Besides, a Waterman is much ungrateful,
(And yet is his ingratitude not hateful)
For under God) the River Thames a Watermans best friend, whom he delights to
cross.
Thamesis,
His chiefest friend, and best maintainer is,
It feeds and fills him, gives him daily treasure,
And he (to cross that Friend) takes pains with pleasure.
Mine own unkindness I have often expressed,
For when I crossed it most, it pleased me best.
And as an Hypocrite speaks fairest when
He most deceiues, so we poor Watermen,
Go backward when we do go forward still,
And forward, we go backward with good will.
Thus looking one way, and another rowing,
With forward backward, backward forward going,
To get my living I have thought it meet,
Much like a Weauer with both hand and feet,
Or like a Ropemaker, I in my trade
Have many hundred times run retrograde;
But though the Ropemaker do backward go,
Yet is his work before his face, we know;
And all the voyages I undertake,
My business still has bin behind my back.
But (in a word) let things be as they are,
Those whom I carry, to land safe, Leare.
When I do stand my labor to apply,
I neither use to call, or yall, or cry,
Or thrust, or shoue, or rake, or hale, or pull
The Gentleman, or Gentleman-like Gull,
A maid, a wife, a widow, or a trull.
Be he the greatest swearer on the earth,
Or the most dangerous these the^e'r had birth,
Be he or they as bad, or worse, or worst,
Then any that of God or man are cursed:
Yet (if it be their lots to be my sare)
To carry them and land them well I care.
For why? should I through careless negligence,
Drown but a Rascal by improuidence,
In me it were an action most untrue,
For robbing of the hangman of his due,
And be a velvet villain never so brave,
A silver, silken, or a satin slave:
And that I know, and do esteem him so,
Yet with great care his Rogueship will I row,
Because I would not wrong the courteous River,
With the base corpse of such a wicked liver;
I have a care to look about me round,
That he may live and hang, and not be drowned.
I take great care how I might Cares avoid,
And to that end I have my Cares imployd;
For long ago I do remember that
There was a Proverb, Care will kill a Cat.
And it is said, a Cat's a wondrous beast.
And that she has in her nine lives at least,
And sure if any Cat this care could shun,
It was the famous Cat of Whittington,
For whom was given a ship rich fraught with ware
And for a lucky Pusse like that, I care.
But if Care of such potent power be,
To kill nine lives, it may kill one in me;
And therefore it behoues me to beware,
That though I care not to be killed with care,
I care, and in my care take great delight,
(When by a Watch I do pass late at night)
Such answers to the Constable to shape,
As by good words I may the Counter escape.
My serious Cares and Considerations.
It Is said, the age of man is seventy years,
If eighty, it is full of griese and Cares,
And if we of our time account should keep,
How half our lives we do consume in sleep,
And for the waking half, account that too,
How little service to our God we do:
For till seven years be past and gone away,
We are incapable to do or pray.
Our Strange Eloquence.
Adolescency till our manly growth,
We waste in vanity and tricks of youth,
And as We travel to our iournyes end,
The more we live, the more we do offend.
In sixty years three thousand Sabbaths be,
Which are some eight years in account we see:
But of those Sundays let us think again.
How little service God has had of men,
And to the holiest man it will appear,
About one hundred hours in a year.
And so in threescore years God has not one,
Wherein his service we attend upon.
And if that (less then one)t'account were brought,
How many a nap, and many a wavering thought,
And wandering fancies do us round beset,
(That many times the text we do forget?)
Think but of this, and then the year before
Must be abated half, or some what more.
Thus many a Christian sixty years has trod
The earth, and not six months has sem'd his God.
When we our lives unequally thus share,
In thinking of it, I am full of care.
I care in all my actions so to live,
That no occasion of offense I give
To any man, with either pen or tongue,
In name, or same, or goods, to do them wrong,
For he is the greatest murderer alive,
That does a man of his good name deprive
With base calumnious slanders and false liess
It Is the worst villainy of villainies,
To blast a good man's name with scandals breath,
Makes his dishonor long furuiue his death:
For Infamie's a color did in grain,
Which scarcebliuion can wash out again.
As nothing's dearer then a man's good name,
So nothing wounds more deeper then desame,
Nature gave man a pair of ears and eyes,
And but one tongue, which certainly implies,
That though our sight and hearing still is free,
^^ must we not speak all we hear or see,
Then he is a Viper that does lies, invent,
To work thereby another detriment:
It Is sin to slander a notorious Knave;
But sin and shame a good man to deprave;
Thus good or bad, or whatsoever they are,
To do to neither of them wrong, I care.
I care to get good Books, and I take heed,
And care what I do either write or read:
Though some through ignorance; and some through spite,
^^ said that I can neither read nor write.
^^ though my lines no Scholership proclaim,
^^ I at learning have a kind of aim.
And I have gatherd much good observations,
From many humane and divine translations.
^ was well entered (forty Winters since)
^^ far as possum in my Accidence;
And reading but from possum to posset,
There I was mir'd, and could no further get:
Which when I think upon (with mind dejected)
^^ care to think how learning I neglected.
The poet Part of the Books of ^^ry that I have read.
Quid, (or Ovid if you will)
Being in English, much has helped my skill:
And Homer too, and Virgil I have seen,
And reading them, I have much bettered been.
^^frey of Bulloyne, well by Fairfax done,
^^^ that much love has rightly won:
Did Chaucer, Sidney, Spencer, Daniel, Nash,
^^dip'd my finger where they used to wash.
As I have read these Poets, I have noted, Books that I have read of Poesy.

Much good, which in my memory is quoted.
Of Histories I have perusde some store,
As no man of my function has done more.
The Golden legend, I did over toss,
And found the Gold mixed with a deal of dross.
^^ have read Plutarchs Morals and his Lives,
And like a Be, sucked Honey from those Hiues.
^sepbus of the Jews Knowles of the Turks,
Marcus Aurelius, and G^^ works:
^yd Grimstane, Montaigne, and Suetonius
Agrippa, (whom some call Cornelius)
Grave ^^^ and C^^bden, Purchase, Speed,
Did Monumentall ^^^ and Hollinshead:
And that sole Book of Books, which God has given,
The ^^^ Testanic^ts of heaven)
That I have read, and I with care confess,
My self unworthy of such happiness.
And many more good Books I have with care
Looked on their goods, and never stole their ware:
For no book to my hands could ever come,
If it were but the Treatise of Tom Thumb,
Or Scoggins Jests, or any simple play,
Or monstrous nowes came Trundling in my way:
All these, and ten times more, some good, some bad,
I have from them much observation had.
And so with care and study I have writ
These books, the issue of a barren wit.
The most of them are verse, but I suppose,
It is much ease to name them here in prose.
The names of many of the books that I have written
First, the

Sculler.

Upon Coriat three merry books, called

Odcombs complaint,
Coriats resurrection, and
Laugh and be fat.
The nipping or snipping of Abuses.
Two mad things against Fenor.
Tailors Urania.
The marriage of the Princess.
An Elegy on Prince Henry.
Two books of all the Kings of England.
Three weeks, three days, and three hours observations in Germany.
Travels to Scotland.
Travels to Prague in Bohemia.
An Englishmans love to Bohemia.
The Bible in verse.
The Book of Martyrs in verse.
The praise of Hempseed.
A kicksy winsy.
The great O Tool.
Jack a Lent.
The praise of Beggary.
Tailors Goose.
Fair and soul weather.
The life and death of the Virgin Mary.
The Whip of Pride.
And lastly (since the reign of the Emperor I was much beholding to this
Emperors name to make up the meeter.
OTTO)
Was never seen the like of TAILORS MOTTO.
All these and some which I have quite forgot,
With care (as is aforesaid) I have wrote.
I care how to conclude this careful strain:
In care I care how to get out again:
I care for food and lodging, fire and raiment,
And (what I owe) I care to make good payment.
But most of all I care, and will endeuer
To live so careful, that I may live ever.
Thus without wronging any man a jot,
I show I have what every man has not^
My wants are such, that I forgive them free,
That would but steal the most of them from me.
My cares are many, as I here express,
Poor couzin Germans unto carelessness,
I have a knowledge some men will read this,
I want the knowledge how their liking is.
I care in all that I herein have pend,
To please the good, and show the bad to mend.
And those that will not thus be satisfied,
I have a spirit that does them deride.
I flattry want, men's likings to obtain,
I care to love those that love me again.
Thus be men's judgments steady or unsteady
To like my Book, the care is taken already.
The Proverb says, that haste makes (often) waste,
Then what is waste, impute it to my haste:
This Book was written (not that here I bosst)
Put hours together, in three days at most:
And give me but my breakfast, I Will maintain,
To write another ever I eat again,
But well or ill, or howsoe'r it is pend,
Liked as you list, and so I make an
END.
ODCOMBS COMPLAINT OR, CORIATS FUNERAL EPICEDIVM: OR DEATH-SONG, UPON HIS
late-reported drowning. With his Epitaph in the Barmuda, and Vtopian tongues:
And translated into English by JOHN TAILOR.
The Author in his own defense.
IF any where my lines do fall out lame,
I made them so, in merriment and game:
For, be they wide, or side, or long, or short,
All Is one to me, I writ them but in sport;
Yet I would have the Reader thus much know,'
That when I list my simple skill to show
In poesy, I could both read and spell:
I know my Dactils, and my Spondees well;
My true proportion, and my equal measure,
What accent must be short, and what at leisure,
How to transpose my words from place to place,
To give my poesy the greater grace,
Either in Pastoral or Comic strain,
In Tragedy, or any other vain,
In nipping Satyrs, or in Epigrams,
In Odes, in Elegies, or Anagrams,
In eare-bewitching rare Hexameters,
Or in Iambicke, or Pentameters:
I know these like a Sculler, not a Scholar,
And therefore Poet, pray assuage your choler,
If as a these in writing you envy me,
Before you judge me, do your worst and try me.
TO THE MIRROR OF TIME, THE MOST REFVLGENT, SPLENDIDIO US REFLECTING COURT
Animal, Don Archibald Armstrong: Great M. Comptroller, Commander, and
Countermander of mirth, alacrity, sport, and ridiculous confabulations, in this
Septentrionall, ^^^ Western Monarchy of Magna Britania: Your poor and daily
Orator, JOHN TAILOR, wishes increase of your wisdom, in your own person, and
that your eminence and spirit may be infused into the bosoms of most men's
heirs, that esteem more of Wealth, then of Wisdom.
RIght worthy worthless Patron, the days and times being such, wherein wit
goes a wooll-gathering in a thredbare Iacket, and folly is well reputed amongst
those that seem wise, I, considering this, having but little wit, in a mad
humor bade farewell it, and never so much as asked the question, Wit, whither
will thou? Being certainly persuaded that playing the fool, will repair the
^^reaches which my unhappy wit has made in the Bulwark of my reputation (as
it has done to many others) wherefore good sir (with) reverence, I hearing
that so great a member in your esteemed quality, as M. Thomas Coriat of Odcomb,
was drowned in his passage toward Constantinople; and knowing that many good
and worthy writers have graced his living travels: So I have made bold (under
your great Patronage) to write his tragical supposed Death-song, or Funeral
E^legie, not knowing any man of that worthy worth (besides your self) to whom
I might dedicate these sad Epicediums. Thus, not doubting of your acceptance
and protection, I commit my self and my labors to your wonderful wisdoms
cen^ure, always having a poor Muse to travel in your service.

John Tailor.

TO THE GENTLEMEN READERS, THAT understand A.B. from a Battledore.
No Sooner news of Coriats death was com,
But with the same, my Muse was strooke^ dom:
^ whilst he lived, he was my Muses subject,
Her only life, and sense sole pleasing object.
Odeo^bian, Grecian, Latin, Great ThomAsse
He being dead, what life has she alas.
^ yet I hope his death was false Report,
Or else 'twas rumord to beget some sport:
To try how his dear friends would take his death,
And what rare Epicediums they would make,
TO accompany his all-lamented Hearse,
In hobling, iobling, rumbling, tumbling verse,
Some smooth, some harsh, some shorter and some long:
As sweet Melodious as Madge Howlets song:
But, when I saw that no man took in hand
To make the world his worth to understand,
Then up I bussled from Obliuions den,
And of a Ganders quill I made a pen,
With which I wrote this following work of woe,
(Not caring much if he be dead or no^)
For, whilst his body did contain a life,
The rarest wits were at continual strife,
Who should exceed each other in his glory,
But none but I have writ His Tragic story.
If he be dead, then farewell he: if not,
At his return, his thanks shall be thy lot,
Mean time, my Muse does like an humble Plea^^
Entreat acceptance of the gentle Reader.
Remaining yours ever; JOHN TAILOR.

A SAD, IOYFVLL, LAMENTABLE, DELIGHTFVLL, MERRY-GOSORRY ELEGY OR FUNERAL POEM
UPON the supposed death of the famous Cosmographicall Surueior, and
Historiographicall Relator, Mr THOMAS CORIAT of Odcomb.
O For a rope of Onions from Saint Omers,
And for the muse of golden tongued Homers,
That I might write and weep, and weep and write,
Odcombian Coriats timelesse last goodnight,
O were my wit inspired with Scoggins vain,
Or that Will Summers ghost had seaz'd my brain:
Or Tarlton, Lanum, Singer, Kempe, and Pope,
Or she that danc'r and umbled on the rope,
Or Tilting Archy that so bravely ran
Against Don Pheb^^ knight, that wordy man.
O all you crew, in side pi'd colored garments,
Assist me to the height of your preferments:
And with your wits and spirits inspire my pateful,
That I in Coriats praise be not ungrateful.
If ever age lamented loss of folly,
If ever man had cause of Melancholy,
Then now is the time to wail his ruthlesse wrack,
And weep in tears of Clares and of Sack,
ANd now, according to my weak invention,
His wondrous worthles worthiness I Will mention;
Yet to describe him as he is, or was,
The wit of Men or monsters would surpass.
His head was a large poudring tub of phrases,
Whence men would pick delites, as boys pick daises,
O head no head, but blockhouse of fierce wars,
Where wit and earning were at daily lars,
Who should possess the Mansion of his pate:
But at the last, to end this great debate:
Admired learning took his heads possession,
And turned his wit a wandering in progression.
But Miny on Muse, hold, whither will thou go?
Think thou his rare anatomy to show?
None borne a Christian, Turk, nor yet in Tartary,
Can write each vein, each sinew, and each artery.
His eyes and ears like Broakers by extortion,
Ingrost strange foreign manners and proportion.
But what his eyes and ears did see or hear,
His tongue or pen discharged the reckoning clear.
That sure I think, he well could prove by law,
He uttered more then ever he heard or saw.
His tongue and hands have truly paid their score,
And freely spent what they received and more.
But lord to see, how far o'r-shot am I,
To wade thus deep in his Anatomy!
What now he is, I Will lightly ouerpasse,
I Will only write in part, but what he was:
That as Grim Death our pleasures thus has crossed,
It Is good, because he is gone, to know what is lost.
He was the Imp, whilst he on earth suruiu'd,
From whom this west-worlds pastimes were derived,
He was in City, Country, field, and Court,
The Well of dry braind lests, and Pump of sport.
He was the treasure-house of wrinckled laughter,
Where melancholy moods are put to slaughter:
And in a word, he was a man amongst many,
That never yet was paralleld by any:
Who now like him in spite of wind and weather
Will wear one shiftlesse shirt 5. months together?
Who now to do his native country grace,
Will for a Trophee execute his case?
Who now will take the height of every Gallows?
Or who will describe the sign of every Alchou^e?
Whether his Host were big, or short, or tall,
And whether he did knock ever he did call:
The color of his Host and Hostess hair?
What he bought cheap, and what he paid for dear?
For Veale or Mutton what he paid a joint?
Where he sat down? and where he loosed a point?
Each Tower, each Turret, and each lofty steeple,
Who now (like him) will tell the vulgar people?
Who now will set a work so many writers,
As he has done in spite of his back-biters,
With Panegericks, Anagrams, Acrosticks,
^emblazon him the chief among fantasticks?
^las, not one, not one alive does live,
That to the world can such content^ ent give,
Should Poets stretch their Muses on the rack,
And study till their pericranions crack.
Should foot-back trotting Travelers intend
To match his travels, all were to no end.
Let Poets write their best, and trotters run,
They never shall write nor run as he has done.
But Neptune and great AEdus contending,
Against one another all their forces bending,
Which of them soon'st should rob the happy earth
Of this rare man of men, this map of mirth.
And like two envious great ambitious Lords,
They fell at deep and dangerous discords;
The sea-god with his three-tin'd angry Rod com,
And swore by Styx, he would have Tom of Odcomb.
With that, stern Eole blew a boystrous blast,
And in his rage did gusts and tempests cast
^n showring vollyes at fierce Neptunes head:
Who like a valiant Champion scorning dread,
^^ne blow for blow with his commanding Mace,
And spitting storms in spiteful Eols face,
That golden Titan hid his glistring ray.
As fearing to behold this horrid fray.
^^^ darkness curtain'dall the world,
^a Ebon Mantle o'r the Globe was hurld,
The wallowing waves turmoild the restless ships,
Like School-boies shuttlecocks that leaps and skips,
The Topmast seems to play with Phoebus nose,
^trait down toward Erebus, amain she goes;
^ow wind, quoth Neptune, till thy entrails break,
Against my force, thy force shall be too weak.
Then like two sooles at variance for a trisle,
They split the ship, they enter and they risle,
Like cursed Law-wormes, envious and cruel,
Striving to seize the peerless matchless Jewel,
Whilst Eole sought above the skies to crown him;
Blue-bearded Neptune in his arms did drown him.
The Wind-god sees the prize and battle lost,
Blows, storms, and rages to be curbed and crossed;
And vowed to rowze great Neptune in his Court,
And in his teeth his injury retort:
Then he commands retreat to all his forces;
Who riding sundry ways on winged horses,
Big Boreas to the freezing North went puffing,
And slauering Auster, to the South went husling,
Eurus went East, and Zephyrus went West,
And thus the wars of winds and seas did rest.
ANd now dame Thetis in thy vasty womb,
Is odd Odcombians Coriats timelesse Toomb,
Where Nayads, Dryads, and sweet sea-nimphs tend him,
And with their daily service do befriend him,
There al-shap'd Protens and shrill trumping Triton,
And many more, which I can hardly write on,
As if it, were the thing they glory at,
In servile troopes^ they wait on Coriat,
That though like hell, the sea were far more dark, as
Yet these would guard his unregarded carkasle.
You Academick, Latin, Greek Magisters,
You offsprings of the three times treble^ Sisters,
Write, study, teach, until your tou^gs have blisters.
For, now the Haddocks, and the shifting Sharks,
That feed on Coriat, will become great Clarks:
The wri-mouth'd Place, and mumping Whiting-mops,
Will in their mawes keep Greek and Latin shops,
The Pork-like Porpose, Thorn-back, and the State,
Like studious Grecian Latinists will prate,
And men with eating them, by inspiration,
With these two tou^gs, shall fill each barbarous Nation.
Then though the Sea has rudely him berest us;
Yet, midst our woes, this only comfort's left us,
That our posterities by eating fishes,
Shall pick his wisdom out of diverse dishes;
And then (no doubt) but thousands more will be
As learned, or perhaps all as wisemen as he:
But to conclude, affection makes me cry,
Sorrow prouokes me sleep, grief dries mine eye.
EPITAPH in the Barmooda tongue, which must be pronounced with the accent of
the grunting of a hog.
HOugh gruntough we^gh I homough
Cori^ tough Odcough robunguogh
Warawogh hogh Co^^^togh s^gh wogh t^rmonatogrogh,
Callimogh gogh whohogh Rag^ mogh demagorgogh palemogh,
Lomerogh nogh Tattertogh illv^ mortogh ^^gh Allaque^quogh.
Toracominogh Iagogh Ia^erogh mogh Carmogh pelepsogh,
Animogh trogh deradrogh maramogh hogh Flondrogh caleps^gh.
Epitaph in the Vtopian tongue.
NOrtumblum callimu^quash ^mystoliton quasb^^ burashte^
Scribuke ^os^tay solusbay per ambulatushte:
Grekay sons Turkay Paphay ^^^ Ierusalushte^
Neptus esht Ealors Interremoy di^ Delorushte;
Confabuloy Odioumbay ^^^
Omul ^^^shte paraleseus tolition umbroy.
The same in English, translated by Caleb Quishquash, an Vtopian borne, and
principal Secretary to the great Adelentado of Barmoodoes.
HEre lies the wonder of the English Nation,
Inuoln'd in Neptunes brinish valty maw:
For fruitless travel, and for strange relation,
He past and repast all that ever eye saw.
Odcomb produced him; many Nations fed him,
And worlds of Writers, through the world h^e spread him.
FINIS.
CERTAIN SONNETS, IN PRAISE OF Mr. THOMAS THE DECEASED; FASHIONED OF diverse
stuffs, as mockado, fustian, stand-further off, and Motly, all which the Author
dedicates to the immortal memory of the famous Odcombian traveler.
COnglomerating Ajax, in a fogge
Constulted with Ixion for a tripe,
At which Gargantua took an Irish bogge,
And with the same gave Sifipbus a stripe,
That all the bumbast forests 'gan to swell,
With Triple treble trouble and with joy,
That Lucifer kept holiday in hell,
Cause Cupid would no more be called a boy.
Delucitating Flora's painted hide,
Redeemes Arion from the hungry Wolf,
And with conglutinating haughty pride,
Threw Pander in the damb'd Venetian gulf,
The Mediterrane mountains laughed and smiled,
And Libra wandered in the woods so wild.
Bright Cassia Fistula was wondrous sad,
To hear Zarzaparillas great mis-hap,
And Coloquintida was raging mad,
When Saxafrage was set in Rubarbs lap;
Dame Lickorish was in a monstrous fume,
Against the Iushious Reasons of the sun,
And Trinidad smoke auoids the room,
Whilst Gm^^^ swears she is undone;
Vuguentum album is so pale and wan,
That Paracelsus plaster mournes in black^
The Spanish Eliborus strongly can
Make Lignuin vita's hide with neezing crack:
Lo, thus with unguents, plasters, oils, and drugges,
We conjure up the fierce infernal bugges.
The head strong Torchlight of Cimerian waves,
With fiery frozen wonder leaps and vaults:
And on the Altantick Ocean cuts and shaues,
Whilst thunder thwacking, Ossalimps and hales,
Robustious AEtna drownes the Artick Pole,
And forked Vulcan has forsook his forge,
Apollo'es piebald mare has cast her fool,
And Mulley Mahomet has filled his gorge.
Don Beelzebub sits fleaing of his breech,
And Marble Proteus, dances, leaps and skips,
Belerophon has pend an excellent speech,
And big-boand Boreas kissed Auroraes lips;
The Welkin rumbles; Argos lies asleep.
And Tantalus has slain a flock of sheep.
When flounder-flapping Termagant was slain,
The sn^g^-fac'd Cerberus did howl and yell,
And Polyphe^^^ rid in Charles his Waine,
Whilst Gergous head rung great Alcides knell,
The rip-rap-riffe-raffe, thwick thwack stout Baboo^
Gripes in his downy clotoh the spungy Oak,
And young Andromeda at night rings noone,
Whilst Asdrubal at tick tack lost his cloak.
Pr^^erbus covering the Vmbranoes head,
And Ty^bon tumbles through the solid Air:
Proud Pegasus on Cheese and Garlic fed,
And Proserpina went to Sturbidge fair.
Pope Hildebr and bade Pluto home to supper,
And D^ Di^^oes horse has broke his crupper.
Dick Swash drew out his three-pil'd blunted blade,
And flas^t in twain the equinoctial line:
T^^ Thum^ did through the Arabian deserts wade,
Where Caster and his brother Pollux shine,
The threed-bare slap-Iacks of the western Isles,
Exasperate the Marble Sithian Snow,
Dame Ve^^ traueld fifty thousand miles,
To see the bounds of Nilus ebb and flow.
The Gormundizing Quagmires of the East,
In^^rgitate the Eremanthean Bull:
And rude rebounding Sagitarious Ceast
To pipe Leualtoes to Gonzagaes Trull,
The Adriaricke Dolcats fate carousing,
And hidebound Gogmagog his shirt was lowsing,
Sweet Semi-circled Cynthia played at maw,
The whilst Endimion ran the wild-goose chase,
Great Bacchus with his Cros-bow killed a daw,
And sullen Saturn smiled with pleasant face.
The nine-fold Bugbeares of the Caspian lake,
Sat whistling Ebon horne-pipes to their Ducks,
Madge-howlet straight for joy her Girdle brake,
And rugged Satyrs friskd like Stagges and Bucks.
The untamed tumbling fifteen footed Goat,
With promulgation of the Lesbian shores,
Confronted Hydra in a sculler Boat,
At which the mighty mountain Taurus rores,
Mean time great Sultan Soliman was borne,
And Atlas blew his rustic rumbling horn.
IF there be any Gentlemen, or others that are desirous to be practitioners in
the Barmoodo and Vtopian tongues: the Professor (being the Author hereof)
dwells at the Old Swanne near London Bridge, who will teach them (that are
willing) to learn, with a gility and facility.

FINIS.
THE EIGHTH VVONDER OF THE WORLD: OR, CORIATS ESCAPE FROM HIS SVPPOSED
DROWNING.
DEDICATED
To the Mighty, Magnificent, Potent, and Powerful Knight, Sir Thomas Parsons,
( alias) Pheander, ( alias,) Knight of the Sun, Great Champion to Apollo,
Palatine of Phoebus, Sword-hearer to Sol, Tilter, to Tytan, Housekeeper to
Hyperion, and heir apparent to the invisible kingdom of the Fairies: your
devoted Votary, JOHN TAILOR, wishes your Worshits wisdoms Longitude,
Latitude, Altitude, and Crassitude may increase above the Ridiculous multitude
of the most eminent Stultorums of this latter age.

To thee brave knight, who from the Delphia god come
^ consecrate these famous Acts of Odcomb:
To thee alone, and unto none but thee,
For Patronage my toyling Muse does flee,
I gave my drowning Coriat unto Archy,
And with his fair escape to thee now march I,
Not doubting but thou will in kindness take
These lines thus writ, for his, and thy dear sake.
If thou in kindness wilt accept this task,
Hereafter I will better things vn-caske,
And make the world thy worth to glory at,
In greater measure then at Coriat.
I Will mount thee up in verse past Charles his Wain,
I Will make the Moon Endimion to disdain,
I Will write in euer-during lines thy fame,
As far as Phoebus spreads his glorious flame.
I Will make thee pluck stern Saturn by the Chaps,
And brave great Jove amids his thunder-clappes.
I Will cause thy praise t'eclipse the god of Arms,
I Will make Dame Venus yield to loves alarmes.
The nimble Mercury shall be thy footman,
If thou will grace my lines, therefore look too^ man
But if to patronize me thou do scorn,
'Twere better then, thou never had been borne:
For against difdaine my Muses only sport is,
To write with Gall, commixt with Aquafortis:
And Vinegar, and Salt, and Sublimatum,
Which where it falls, will scortch and scald: probatu^,
Then as thou love the Fairy Queen thine, Aunt,
Daine to vouchsafe this poor and triuiall grannt:
Then I thy Poet will with low Subjection,
Proceed to write Tom Coriats Resurrection.
Yours ever, whose endeauoir shall persevere in your service, JOHN TAILOR.

To the knowing Reader.
NOw sir, it is a common customary use in these times, to salute you with
somewhat; as Honest, Kind, Courteous, Loving, Friendly, or Gentle; but all
these Epithites are ouer-worne, and do, as it were, stink of the fusty garb
of Antiquity. Besides, if I should come upon you with any of these claw-backe
terms, I might chance to belie you. But if your kind disposition does merit
to be called kind, I pray let me find it in your favorable censure. Some
will (perhaps) dislike, that I do dedicate my books to Archy, and Sir Thomas,
and such like. To them I answer, that my subject being altogether foolish, I
were very absurd to think that any wise man would be my Patron. And it were
mere folly for me to make a hotch-potch, in seeking to compound wisdom and
folly together. But how, soever thou esteemest it, it thrusts it self into
thy view; wherein (if thou be not too much drowned in Melancholy) thou will
show thy teeth (if thou have any) with laughing. And as ^^ lines are somewhat
defective in their shape, so I pray thee do not hacke them, nor hew them with
thy stammering, to make them worse, nor. Buzzard-blast them with thy
^alumniating mewes, rushes, and scuruies. Thus leaving thee to thy self, and
my self unto thee, I remain thine as thou respect'st me,

JOHN TAILOR.

The cause of the contention betwixt sir Thomas the Scholar, and John the
Sculler.
A Pamphlet printed was, The Sculler named,
Wherein Sir Thomas much my writing blamed;
Because in Epigram therein was written,
In which he said, he was nipt, gald and bitten.
He frets, he fun^^, he rages and exclaimes,
And vows to rouse me from the River Thames.
Well, I to make him some amends for that,
Did write a Book was called, Laugh and be fat:
In which he said I wronged him ten times more,
And made him madder then he was before.
Then did he storm, and chase, and swear, and ban,
And so superior powers amain he ran,
Where he obtained Laugh and be fat's confusion,
Who all were burnt, and made a hot conclusion.
Then after that, when rumor had him drowned,
(The news whereof, my vexed Muse did wound)
I writ a letter to the Elizian coast,
TO appease his angry wrong-incensed Ghost.
The which my poor invention then did call,
Odcombs Complaint, or Coriats Funeral.
But since true news is come, he escaped that danger,
And through hot Sunburned Asia is a ranger:
His raising from the dead I thought to write,
To please my self, and give my friends delight.
The Worlds eighth VVonder: OR, CORIATS REVIVING.
LOI the man whose Muse did lately forage,
Through winds and seas with dreadlesse dantlesse courage,
And to the life, in hodg-podg rhyme expressed,
How Odcomb^ Cor^as was great Neptunes ghest.
How Th^^^ sweedy full'd him in her lap,
And (as her darling) fed the Barn with pappe.
How big mouthed AEol stormed, and pust, and blew:
And how both winds and Sea with all their crew
Were pleased and displeased, tumbled, raged, and tossed,
The Gainers glad, and mad were they that lost.
These tedious taskes my toyling Muse has run,
And what she did, for Coriats sake was dun.
She has transported him to Bossems Inn,
Where in a Basket he has hanged bin:
She has inuolu'd him in the hungry deep,
In hope to leave him in eternal sleep:
Yet having hanged him first, and after drowned him,
My poor laborious Muse again has found him.
For it is her duty still to wait and serve him,
Although the Fates should hang, or drown, or sterue him,
The fatal Sisters serve his turn so pat,
That sure he has more lives then has a Cat.
Alcides never past so many dangers
As he has done, amongst his friends, and strangers.
He runs through all his actions with such ease,
As Hogs eat Acorns, or as Pigeons Pease,
There Is nothing in the world can him disgrace,
Not being beaten in a lowzy case:
Nor Trunks, nor Puncks, nor stocks, nor mocks, nor moes,
Nor being made an Ass in Rhyme and Prose:
Nor hanging, drowning, carting nor the blanket.
These honors all are his, the gods be thanked.
But now me-thinkes, some curious itching care
Does long some sportiue news of him to hear.
For being in the Ocean buried under,
And now alive again, it is more then wonder:
But how these wondrous wooders came to pass,
I (as I can) will tell you how it was.
When first this mirror amongst a world of Nations,
(This great ingroser of strange observations)
Was bound for Constantines brave noble City,
Then he (who is Wit, all, or else all witty)
Whose vigilance lets no advantage slip,
Embarked was in a tall proved Ship
Of London, the Samaritan she hight:
Now note the fore cast of this famous wight:
The Ship he only for her name did choose,
In detestation of the faithless Jews:
For why, the Jews and the Samaritans
Did hate as Christians, Anti-Christians.
Yet I suppose his spite to them did spring.
For I think what, and now I Will name the thing:
In his first five months strange perambulation,
He was in danger of that perverse Nation.
For they by wrongful force would have surpised him,
T'excoriat Coriat, and ^haue Circumciz'd him.
This dreadful terror of his Lady-ware,
I ge^se the cause the Jews he hatred bare.
How ^^er was his intricate intent,
In the Samaritan to Sea he went:
And care-abusing false intelligence
Said, he was drowned in Neptunes residence.
Thus false report did make me much mistake:
For which, a fair recanting mends I Will make.
My grieved Muse has ever since his drowning,
Been vexed with sorrow, and continual swowning:
But now she is all attired with mirth and gladness,
The Lie was good that made her sick with sadness.
KNow therefore, Readers, whatsoever you are:
That this great Britain brave Odcombyan star,
Was tossed on Neptunes rough re^n or celesse wa^es,
Where each man looked for timelesse brinish granes:
For Eolus vnlock'd his vaulted Center,
And against the Sea-god did in Arms aduenter,
With winds vniayled came at unawares,
And greene-fac'd Neptune with defiance dares,
With all his warry Regiments to fight,
Or yield this matchles, worthles, wondrous knight.
The great humidious Monarch tells him plain,
'Twere best he iogd from his commanding Maine:
And with his troops of homelesse, rouing slane^
Go hide him in the earths imprisoned Canes,
And not disturb him in his Regal Thr^^e,
For be would keep Tom Coriat, or else none.
Then Eol 'gan his windy wrath to vent,
And swore by Styn, that Neptune should repent
This hauty high audacious insolence,
Against his powerful great magnificence.
Then Triton founded, the alarm was given,
That from hells bottom, to the skirts of heaven,
The repercussiue echoes of his founding,
With dreadful relapse back again redounding.
Then, then Robustious swollen cheek'd Boreas blasts,
Tear, riue, and shiuer Tacklins, Sails, and Masts:
In tottered fragments all in pieces shattered,
Which here and there confusedly lay scattered.
These hurly burly storms and tempests tumbling,
With dire amazing Thunder-thumping rumbling,
The mounting billows, like great mountains ^^^,
As if they meant to drown the losty skies.
Then down they fall to the Tartarian deep,
As if the infernal Fiends they meant to steep:
That sure (I guess) a greater gust was never,
Since Iun^ did AEnea's ruin endeavor.
The Kingly Sea-god (to anoyd more harms)
Caught Coriat (the cause of these Alarmes)
And so his boystrons windy foe deprived,
And home through worlds of floods a main he dimmed.
But awefull love to his Imperial sphere,
These grievous garboyles chanced for to hear:
And to his brother Neptune down he sends
The wing-heel'd Mercury, with these commends:
To thee, thou watery great commanding Keasar,
I come from heavens Maiesticke mighty Casar;
Commanding thee by thy fraternall love,
That from thy Coasts thou presently remove
The man thou lately look, the worlds sole woder,
Or else he will rouse thee with distracting Thunder:
And therefore, as Jones friendship thou do tender,
To safe arrival see thou do him render:
Whilst May'es son his message thus did tell,
A fury, like a Post-knight, came from hell:
And from the inf^^nall King of black Anernu^,
These words he vtter'd (which do much concern us
From Acherouticke, Phlegetonticke waves,
Thy brother Plato thus much friendship craves:
Thou will send Coriat down with him to ^igne,
And he will send thee as good a thing again.
For Proserpina his illustrious Pheare,
Of him, and his adventures chanced to hear:
Because a Gentleman-usher the does want,
To have him, Pluto begs thy friendly grant.
The Marine Monarch answers, thus it is:
You N^^ti^ from our brothren Ione, and D^^,
Know, such a mortal is within my power,
Imprisoned close, in Thetis silver Bower,
I did surprise him midst a thousand toils
Of wars, of iarres, of bloody banefull broils:
My high-borne brother Jove has hither sent,
Commanding me that I incontinent
Do safely set this newfound man aland.^
And I from Pluto further understand,
That he would have him to Cocitus Coast,
Where he and Cores daughter rules the roast.
First therefore I in wisdom hold it best,
To yield unto the mighty loves request:
And on the Grecian coast I Will safely place him,
Where he may wa^der where his fortunes trace him.
These messengers thus answered, were dismissed,
And Neptune did to land his guest persist:
^^ now all hell was in an expectation
For Coriats coming, making preparation,
The Stigian Ferri-man on Stixes shore,
Did wait with diligence to wast him o'r,
And hels three headed Porter sweetly sung
For joy, that all the Coasts of Limbo rung
With howling Musickes, dambe despightfull notes,
From out his triple Chaps, and treble throats.
^^ from the tortring wheel was eased,
And pining Tantall was with iunkets pleased:
And further, 'twas commanded, and decreed,
The Gripe no more on Titius guts should feed.
The nine and forty wenches, water silling,
In tubs vnbottom'd, which was ever spilling:
They all had leave to leave their endless toils,
To dance, sing, sport, and to keep revel coyles.
Three forked Hecate to mirth was prone,
And Si^^phus gave o'r the restless stone.
All in conclusion, had free leave to play,
And for Tom Coriats sake make holiday.
Thus all black Barathrum is filled with games,
With lasting bone-fires, casting sulphur-flames.
In Vse'rers skuls the molten gold they quaffe,
And skink, and drink, and wink, and stink, and less.
But when the Post was come and told his Tale,
Then all this sport was turned to banefull bale.
Grim Pluto stormed, and Proserpina mournd,
And tortured Ghosts, to torments were returned.
The Sea god (careful of great Jones high hest)
To great Constantinople brought his guest:
Where (nothing that may honor him omitting)
His entertainment to his state was fitting:
There in all pleasure he himself disports,
Conuersing daily with such brave consorts,
As Turks, and Tartars, Englishmen and Greeks,
That he thinks ages years, and years but weeks,
That Is wasted in this rare time stealing chat.
All his delight's in nothing else but that.
But his high honor further to relate,
I Will sing the new advancement of his state.
Some English Gentlemen with him consulted,
And he as nat'rally with them constulted:
Where they perceiving his deserts were great,
They strived to mount him into honors seat:
And being found of an unmatched spright,
He there, was double dubbed a doughty Knight.
Rise up, sir Thomas, worshipped may thoube
Of people all (that are as wise as thee.)
Now raped with joy, my Muse must needs record,
How he was knighted with a royal sword:
But into what a puzzell now got I am?
They say it was the Bilbo of King Priam,
The fatal blade which he in fury drew,
When in revenge the Mirmidons he flew.
Im pell mel vengeance for great Hectors bane,
Who by Achillis fair foule-play was slain.
That sword that mowed the Grecians like a sith:
That sword that made victorious Troyans blithe:
That sword, that through so many dangers rubbed,
That famous sword has Monsier Coriat dubbed.
What though 'twas rusty? spite of cankerd rust,
The memory of honor lives in dust,
'Twas no disgrace it was so rusty shaped,
It had (like Coriat) many a scowring escaped.
But amongst the rest, this must not be forgot,
How he did from Constantinople trot,
And how a solemn counsel there decreed,
That he should travel in a Grecian weed.
To this (for his own safety) they do woo him,
Because the language is so natural to him.
And then bespake a sober sage wise fellow,
(When wine had made them all in general mellow)
Take heed, quoth he, I counsel you, beware
That of your self you have a special care,
You be not taken for a Frenchman, for
The Turks in these parts do the French abhor.
Since Godsries times, that brave bold Bullen Duke,
Who put them all to shame, and rough rebuke,
And made the Sarasins by Millions bleed,
And holy Toombe, from faithless fiends he freed.
Wherefore (quoth he) in friendship I advise you
T'auoid suspect, 'twere best we Circumcise you:
And then you freely may through perils pass,
Despite the Turks, so like a Grecian Ass.
Noman with Linxes eyes will deem you other,
And thus you safely may suspicion smother.
Sir Thomas gave this fellows speech the hearing,
But told him 'twas too heavy for his bearing:
For why, fall back, fall edge, come good, come ill,
He vowed to keep his fore-mans foreskin still.
This resolution was no sooner spoken,
The friendly counsel was dismissed and broken.
Where after leave was taken twixt him and them,
He took his iourny toward Jerusalem:
And what he can observe 'twixt morn and night,
With due observance he does daily write,
That if my judgment be not much mistook,
An Elephant will scarce support his book.
For he in five months built a paper hulke,
And this must be ten times of greater buike.
O Pauls-Church-yard, I only pity thee,
Thou, only thou, shall most encumbred be:
Thou from the Press are pressed to be oppressed,
With many a farfetch'd home-brought Odcomb jest.
But yet I know the Stationers are wise,
And well do know wherein the danger lies:
For to such inconvenience they will not enter,
But suffer Coriat to abide th'aduenter:
Because his Giant volume is so large,
They Will give sir Thomas leave to bear the charge.
That man is mad who changes gold for dross,
And so were they to buy a certain loss:
Let him that got and bore the Barn, still breed it,
And nurse, disburse, and foster, cloth, and feed it.
THus has my Muse (as fortune her allotted)
Both run and rid, and gallopt, ambled, trotted
To skies, and seas, and to black hell below,
In servile duty that my love does owe.
My captive thoughts, like trusty servants to him,
Strive how they any way may service do him.
To serve his turn like Prentices they gree,
Jove send Sir Thomas home to make them free.
Epilogue to Sir Thomas Coriat upon his name.
Why have I spent my time thus, Coriat?
Wherefore on thy lewd lines thus pore I at?
Why like an Idiot fool adore -- I at
Thy works? which wisdom will not glory at.
At no place'euer was before -- I at
Where wonders upon wonder more -- I at
With pen, instead of Lance, now gore -- I at
Thy Odcomb foppery now bore -- I at.
At thy prides altitude, now fore -- I at
Thou art the Theme I write my -- story at.
If ought befell me to be -- story at
Hard-hearted fate, against thee then rore -- I at.
Upon his books name, called his Crudities.
TOm Coriat, I have seen thy Crudities,
And, me-thinkes, very strangely brude it is,
With piece and patch together glude -- it is,
And how (like thee) ill-fauour'd hu'de -- it is,
In many a line I see that lewd -- it is,
And therefore fit to be subdew'd -- it is,
Within thy broyling braine-pan stude -- it is,
And twixt thy grinding jaws well chewd it is,
Within thy stomach closely mude -- it is,
And last, in Court and Country spude -- it is:
But now by wisdoms eye that viewed it is,
They all agree that very rude -- it is,
With foolery so full endude -- it is,
That wondrously by fools pursude -- it is,
As sweet as galls amaritude -- it is,
And seeming full of Pulchritude -- it is,
But more to write, but to intrude -- it is,
And therefore wisdom to conclude -- it is,
A Simile for his Learning.
THe lushious Grape of Bacchus heating Vine,
When it to ripe maturity is sprung,
Is pressed, and so conuerred into wine,
Then closed in Caske most tight at head and bung:
For if by chance, it chances to take vent:
It spils the wine in color, strength, and sent,
Even so thy Latin, and thy Greek was good
Till in thy musty Hogges-head it was put:
And Odly there Commixed with thy blood,
Not wisely kept, nor well; nor tightly shut:
That of the Caske it tastes, so I assure thee,
That few (or none) can (but in sport) endure thee.
My Farewell to him.
NOw Coriat, I with thee have ever done,
My Muse unto her iournies end has won:
My first Inventions highly did displease thee,
And these my last are written to appease thee.
I wrought these great Herculean works to win thee:
Then if they please thee not, the foole's within thee
What next I write, shall better be or none,
Do thou let me, and I Will let thee alone.
But if thou seem to rub a galled sore,
Vindictas vengeance makes all Hell to rore.
FINIS.
Laugh, and be Fat: OR, A COMMENTARY UPON THE ODCOMBYAN BANQUET.
To the Reader.
REader, Idoe not come upon you with the old musty Epithites of Honest, Kind,
Courteous, Loving, Friendly, or Gentle: The reason is; I am not acquainted with
your qualities; and besides, I am loath to belie any man: But if you be
addicted to any of these aforesaid virtues, I pray let me find it in your
favorable Censure, and so I leave you to laugh ^d lie down. Be fat.

LAVGH, AND BE FAT.
Now Monsieur Coriat, let them laugh that wins,
For I assure ye now the game begins.
^ is wondrous strange how your opinions vary,
^^m judgment, sence^ or reason so contrary;
^at with infamous rash timerity,
^m rail at me with such severity,
^be broad-fac'd lefts that other men put on you,
^^take for favors well bestowed upon you.
^sport they give you many a pleasant cuffe,
^^ no man's lines but mine, you take in snuff.
which makes the ancient Proverb be in force,
^at some may with more safety steal a horse,
Then others may look on: for still it falls.
The weakest always must go to the walls.
I need no: use this Etymology,
My plainer meaning to exemplify;
Which does induce me to express the cause,
That my vntutor'd Pen to writing draws.
Be it to all men by these presents known,
That lately to the world was p^ainely shown,
In a huge volume Gogmagoticall,
In Verse and Prose, with speech dogmaticall,
Thy wondrous Travels from thy native home,
How Odly out thou went, and Odly ^ome.
And how, as fitted best thy Works of worth,
The rarest Wits thy Book did usher forth.
But I alas, to make thy fame more fuller,
Did lately write a Pamphlet Called the Sculler;
In which, as unto others of my friends,
I sent to the^ (brave Monsieur) kind commends,
Which thou in double dudgeon take from me,
And vow'st, and swor'st, thou will revenged be.
The cause, I hear, your fury flameth from,
I said, I was no dunce-combe, cox-combe Tom:
What Is that to you (good Sir) that you should fume,
Or rage, or chase, or think I durst presume
To speak, or write, that you are such a one?
I only said, that I my self was none.
Yet Sir, I Will be a Cocks-combe if so please you,
If you are ouer-laden, Sir, I Will ease you,
Your store of witless wisdom in your budget,
To give your friend a little never grudge it.
Nor that from Odcombs town I first began,
Nor that I greek or Latin gabble can.
I am no Odcombe Tom, why, what of that?
Nor nothing but baro English can I chat.
I pray what wrong is this to you good Sur?
Your indignation why should this incur?
Nor that I thought our Land had spent her store,
That I need visit Venice for a whore;
Which (if I would) I could make nearer proofs,
And not (like you) so far to gall my hoofes.
I said, if such a volume I should make,
The rarest wits would scorn such pains to take,
At my return, amidst my skarre-crow totters,
To run before me like so many trotters.
I know, my merits never will be such,
That they should deigne to honor me so much.
I further said, I envied not your state,
For you had nothing worthy of my hate.
In love, your innocence I truly pity,
Your plentious want of wit seems wondrous witty.
Your virtue cannot breed my hateful lothing,
For what an ass were I, to hate just nothing?
Your vice I bare not, neither, I protest,
But love, and laugh, and like it like the rest.
Your vice, nor virtue, manners, nor your form,
Can breed in me fell enuies hateful worm.
I said it was a lodging most unfit,
Within an idle brain to house your wit.
Here, I confess, my fault I cannot hide.
You were not idle, nor well occupide.
Be It fair, or foul, be it early, or be it late,
Your simple witlies in your humble pate.
A King sometimes may in a cottage lie,
And Lions rest in swines contagious stye:
So your rare wit that is ever at the full,
Lies in the cane of your rotundious skull,
Until your wisdoms pleasure send it forth,
From East to West, from South unto the North,
With squib-crack lightning, empty hogshead thundering.
To maze the world with terror and with wondering
I boldly bade you fool it at the Court,
There Is no place else so fit for your resort.
But though I bid you fool it, you may choose,
Though I command, yet Sir you may refuse;
For why, I think it more then foolish pity.
So great a iemme as you, should grace the city,
Whilst I would fool it on the liquid Thames,
Still praying for the Majesty of James.
Good Sir, if this you take in such disgrace,
To give you satisfaction, take my place,
And fool it on the Thames, whilst I at Court
Will try, if I, like you, can make some sport:
Or rather then for fooleship we will brawle,
You shall be fool in Court, on Thames and all,
Thus what to you I writ, lo here is the total,
And you with angry spleen have deigned to note ^^^
And vow from hell to hale stern Nemesis,
To whip me from the bounds of Thamesis;
Yet when I open your paper murdering book,
I see what pains the wisest wits have took,
To give you titles supernodicall,
In orders orderlesse methodicall:
There do I see how every one does strive,
In spite of Death, to make thee still survive.
No guarded gowne-man, dead, nor yet alive,
But they make thee their great superlatiue.
In the beginning Alphabeticall,
With figures, tropes, and words patheticall,
They all successively from A to N,
Describe thee for the only man of Men.
The frontispice of Master Coriats Book very ^^^ nedly descanted upon, by
Master Laurence Whitakers, and Master Benjamin Ionson.

Thy Shipping, and thy Haddocks friendly feeding,
Thy Carting in thy Travels great proceeding:
Thy riding Stirroplesse, thy iadish courser,
Thy Ambling o'r the Alps; and which is worser,
After the Purgatory of thy Legs,
Thy Puncke bepelts thy pate with rotten eggs.
When thou, brave man, assault'st to board a Pinace,
As fits thy state, she welcomes thee to Venice.
Thy running from the mis-beleeuing Jew,
Because thou, thought the Jew sought more then ^^^
For why, the Jew with superstition blind,
Would have thee leave what most thou love, behind,
How with a rusticke Boore thou made a fray,
And manfully broughtst all the blows away.
The Turkish Emperor, or the Persian Sophy,
Can hardly match thy monumentall Trophy.
Thy ancient Ierkin, and thy aged sloppes,
From whose warm confines thy retainers drops.
I stand in fear to do thy greatness wrong,
For it is supposed thou wast a thousand strong;
Who all derived from thee their happy breeding,
And from thy bounty had their clothes and feeding.
Thy lasting shoes, thy stockings, and thy garters,
To thy great fame are drawn and hanged in quarters.
Thy Hat most fitly beautifies thy crest,
Thy wits great cover, couers all the rest.
The letter K does show the brauest fight:
But wherefore K? I Am sure thou art no Knight:
Why might not L, nor M, nor N, or O,
As well as knauish K, thy picture show?
But saucie K, I see will have a place,
When all the Crosse-row shall endure disgrace.
Who at the letter K does truly seek,
Shall see thee hemmed with Latin and with Greek:
Whereas thy name, thy age, and Odcombs town,
Are workemanly ingrau'd to thy renown.
Beleaguerd round with three such female shapes,
Whose features would enforce the gods to rapes,
France, Germany, and smug-fac'd Italy,
Attend thee in a kind triplicity.
France gives thee clusters of the fruitful vine,
And Germany (lays out) t'adorne thy shrine:
And Italy does wittily inuit thee,
And prittily (she says) she will delight thee.
But yet thy entertainment was but bitter,
At Bergamo with horses in their litter:
Whose iadish kindness in thy stomach sticks,
Who for thy welcome flung thee coltish kickes.
Thy begging from the highway Purse-takers,
Describes thee for a learned wiseakers.
^o thus thy single worth is praised double,
For rare invention never counts it trouble,
With timelesse reasons, and with Reasons verse,
Thy great Odcombian glory to rehearse.
But yet, whilst they in pleasures lap do lull thee,
Amidst thy praise egregiously they gull thee:
Thou Art made Tom Table-talke, among gulls and gallants
Thy book, and thee, and such esteemed tallants,
When they are tired with thy travels treading,
Then having naught to do, they fall to reading.
Thy wits false-galloping perambulation,
Which ease the Readers more then a purgation.
But to proceed, I Will recapitulate
The praise that does thy worth accommodate.
Thy Character in learned admired Prose,
The perfect inside of thy humor shows:
Attended with thy copious names Acrosticke,
To show thee wisest being most fantastic.
All these Noblemen and Gentlemen that are named in the following book, did
write merry commendatory verses, which were called the Odcombian banquet, and
were inserted in Mr Coriats book, entitled, Coriats C^udities: Upon which
verses, I have severally and particularly paraphrased.

Next which, in doggrell rhyme is writ, I wot,
Thy name, thy birth, and place where thou wast got:
Thy education, manners, and thy learning,
Thy going outward, and thy home returning.
Yet there I find, the Writer has taken leave,
Midst words that seem thy same aloft to heave,
That for no little fool he does account thee,
But with the greatest up aloft does mount thee.
Thou Art lik'ned to a Ducke, a Drake, a Bear,
A iadish Gelding that was made to bear:
An Owl that sings, no wit, to whit, to who,
That nothing well can sing, nor say, nor do.
Incipit Henricus Neuill de Aberguenie.
Then follows next, a friend that feign would knight thee,
But that he fears he should do more then right thee:
Yet when his verses praise on cock-horse heues thee,
He found thee Thomas, and Thomas he leaves thee.
Johannes Harringtonde B^^
The Goose that guarded Rome with sentles gagling;
Is here implored t'assist the Ganders straggling:
A pen made of her quill would lift thee fooae,
As high as is the thorn-bush in the Moon.
Incipit Ludonicus L^wknor.
Fools past and present and to come, they say,
To thee in general must all give way:
Apuleius ass, nor Mida's lolling cares,
No fellowship with thee (brave Coriat) bears.
For it is concluded amongst the wizards all,
To make thee Master of Gul-finches hall.
Incipit Henricus Goodyer.
Old Odcombs odnesse makes not thee uneven,
Nor carelessly set all at six and seven.
Thy person's odd, unparalleled, vnmatchd,
But yet thy Action's to the person patched.
Thy body and thy mind are twins in sadness,
Which makes thee even in the midst of odnesse.
What-^r thou odly do, is eu'nly meant,
In Idiotisme thou art even an Innocent.
Thy book and thee are shaped to like each other,
That if I look on the one, I see the the other,
Thou Art light, thou art heavy, merry midst thy sadness,
And still art wisest midst of all thy madness.
So odly even thy feet thy journey trod,
That in conclusion thou art euenly odd.
Incipit ^^^nnes Paiton Junior.
Thou saw so many cities, towns, and garrisons,
That Caesar must not make with thee comparisons:
Great Julius Commentaries lies and rots,
As good for nothing but stop mustard pots.
For Coriats book is only in request,
All other volumes now may lie and rest.
Blind Homer in his writings took great pains,
Yet he and thee do differ many grains:
For in my mind I hold it most unfit,
To liken Homers verses to thy Writ.
Incipit Henricus Poole.
Next follows one, whose lines aloft do raise
Don Coriat, chief Diego of our days.
To praise thy book, or thee, he knows not whether,
It makes him study to praise both, or neither.
At last, he learnedly lets fly at large,
Compares thy book unto a Western Barge;
And says, it is pity thy all worthless work,
In dark obscurity at home should lurk;
And then thy blunted courage to encourage,
Courageously he counsels thee to forage
Amongst foreign Regions, and t'obserue their state,
That to thy Countrymen thou might relate
At thy return, their manners, lives, and law,
Belcht from the tumbrell of thy gorged maw.
Incipit Robertus Philips.
This worthy man thy fame on high does heave,
Yet Mounsieur Leg-stretcher, pray give me leave.
He says that men do much mistake thy age,
That think thou art not past the making sage.
It Is hard to make a fool of one that is wise;
For wit does pity folly, not despise:
But for to make a wife man of a fool,
To such a Clarke we both may go to school.
Yet much I fear, to learn it is too late,
Our youthful age, with wit is out of date.
He says, If any one a fool dares call thee,
Let not his thundering big-mouth'd words apall thee;
But in thine own defense draw out thy tool,
Thy Book, he means, which will his courage cool.
For why, thy Book shall like a brazen shield
Defend thy cause, and thee the glory yield.
An ass I Am sure, could never observe so much,
Because an asses business is not such.
Yet if an ass could write as well as run,
He then perhaps, might do as thou have done.
But it is impossible a simple creature
Should do such things (like thee) above his nature.
Thou Ajax of the frothie Whitson Ale,
Let AEolus breathe, with many a friendly gale,
Fill full thy sails, that aftertimes may know,
What thou to these our times do friendly show:
That as of thee the like was never heard,
They crown thee with a Marrot, or a Mard,
Incipit Dudleius Digges.
Here Is one affirms thy book is only thine,
How basely thou did steal nor yet purloyne,
But from the labor of thy legs and brain,
This heir of thine did life and soul obtain.
Thou art no cuckold, men may justly gather:
Because the child is made so like the father,
In natural fashion, and in natural wit:
Despite of Art, it is Natural every whit.
Incipit Rowlandus Cotton.
Columbus, Magelan, nor dreadful Drake,
These three, like thee, did never iourny take.
Thou vntir'd traveling admired iemme,
No man that is wife will liken thee to them.
The Calfe, thy book, may call thee fire and dam,
Thy body is the Dad, thy mind the Mam.
Thy toylesome carcass got this child of worth,
Which thy elaborate wit produced forth.
Now Jove's sweet benison befall the Barn,
How quickly it the fathers wit could learn!
So thou nor male nor female art by right,
But both in one, a true Hermaphrodite.
That man may well be called an idle mome,
That mocks the Cock because he wears a comb:
A man to better use may put his tongue,
Then flowt an Ass because his ears be long.
To thee alone in Tropes sophistical,
These lines are writ in speeches mystical.
The Moons own man that bears the bush of them,
May rue the time, that ever thy self wast borne;
Thou have been, whereas he has never been,
And seen more sights then Luna's man has seen.
Cast lots with him, for why, I think it fit,
Thou had his bush to shroud thy natural wit.
It Is pity Calculations of thy birth,
Should be diuulg'd about this massy earth;
For out of it each fool would matter pike,
By Observation to beget thy like.
Incipit Robertus Taxley.
Now Mounsieur Coriat, envy not the Sculler,
Here Is one would have thy coat of many a culler,
And as befits thy person, he thinks best,
Thou had a cap and Cocks-combe for thy crest
And 'cause a traveler may boldly lie,
A whetstone Embleme-wise must hang thereby.
And at the last he ends in pleasant sort,
And says, Thy book and thee, were made for sport.
Incipit Johannes Strangwaies.
This Gentleman thy travels does advance,
Above Kemps Norwich anticke Morris-dance:
And having graced thy fame with praises meet,
Talks of thy shoes, and of thy galled feet,
And how thou thought the Jews were too too cruel,
And ranst away from them, to save thy jewel.
Thy heels there helped thee nimbly in thy flight,
Since which, thy hands have done much more to wright.
Incipit Gulielmus Clauel.
Here Is one whose Muse was couiur'd from her sleep
And being rapt with admiration deep,
Thy book he titles Gogmogog the huge,
Thy shield of safety, and thy wits refuge.
Johannes Scorie.
Here Is one that mounts thy same beneath the sky,
And makes thee famous for Cosmography.
He says, (but sure he either jests or flouts)
Thou drew'st a Map, when first thou pist thy clouts.
And how it was allotted thee by fate,
As soon as thou wast borne, to talk and prate.
For as a candle's stuffed with cotton week,
So thou art crammed up to the brim with Greek.
As Asia and to Affricke, prithee go,
Let them like Europe thy rare virtues know,
And make thy Book thy Buckler against all evil,
Whose grim aspect will terrify the devil.
Johannes Done.
Another here thy l^ooke does much commend,
That none can study it to any end.
Without or head, or foot, or top or tail;
Yet like a savage monster dares assail
The front of sadness, who with anticke grinning,
Applauds thee without ending or beginning.
Great Lunaticke, I think thou wilt never be full,
Until the world cannot contain thy skull:
And like a football cram the vaulty skies,
Because, earth, air, nor sea cannot suffice
The greatness of thy Fame, thy book, and thee,
All three in one, and one compact of three.
Yet here is a Prophecy concerns thee much,
Which does thy book and thee too nearly tutch;
Both gulls, and gallants, thy poor brat bereaues,
And from thy book, shall rend both lims and leaves,
To wrap up pepper, ginger, cloves, and mace,
And dry Tobacco in each skuruie place:
To fold up drugs, and pills, for Physics use,
And serve for each Mechanical abuse.
But I not minding with thy state to slatter,
Thinke't will be used in many a privy matter.
Thou o'r thy wit do keep such careful watch,
That from thee one can hardly any catch:
And sooth to say, his conscience is but little,
Which in his wants would seek to rob the Spittle
Thy wits exchequer has bin ouer-kinde,
That (much I fear) there is little left behind.
But thou (brave man) bidst freely farewell it,
We'll raise Fifteenes, and Subsidies of wit
Shall fill thy serviceable pate again,
Whose po^drous weight shall tire thy bearing brain.
Then sear not, man, but spend it whilst thou have it,
To do thy Country service it is not wasted.
This Author says, thy book o'r-throwes him quite,
And therefore bids both it and thee good night,
The greatness of it puts him in such fears,
That he will read neither all, nor none, he swears.
Richardus Martin.
This friend of thine, thy wisdom cannot mock,
Yet he intitles thee an Od combed cock:
'T had bin all one, if at thy coming home,
He had but placed the cock before the comb.
To make thy name more learnedly appear,
He calls thee here an Od combed Chanticleere.
I knew not who this should be, but it is the next English to Mr. Laurence
Whitakers Outlandish.

Now here is another like a true Attorney,
Pleades very wisely, and applauds thy journey
And faies, thy travels thou did so decipher.
As well the world may see thou art no cipher.
And how thy book so lively out does show thee,
That whosoe'r does see it, must truly know thee.
Hugo Holland.
This man does praise thy totterd ragged shirt,
Thy shoes and shanks at all he has a flirst:
And like a patient bearing Ass, he says,
Thou bear thy load through fair and foulest ways
And for in carriage thou did prove so able,
At night thou laist with Iades within a stable.
Thou wast not only in thy pace an ass,
But thou all other asses did surpass.
All beasts in knowledge were to thee but weak,
For thou the tongue of Balaam^ ass did speak.
But much I fear, thy book in print will stain,
Because thou art not di'da (^^^)in grain.
The Preamble to the Parallel, and the Epilogue.
Again, this Author thinks it no great, slander,
To say thou fitly may be called a Gander.
Brave trotting traveler, thy fame he hisses,
And makes thy wit inferior to Ulysses,
And if he laugh not at thee, much he fears,
In angry spleen thou wilt have him by the cares.
Therefore he will laugh at thee, and so will I.
In hope to escape thy furious rage thereby.
Next, in the ancient famous Cambrian tongue,
To call thee noddy, he accounts no wrong.
T'interpret this, I need to go to School,
I wot not what he means, except a (^^^).
Robertus Riccomontanus.
A large relation this thy friend did write,
Describing thee a monstrous man of might:
And bids thee venture such another task,
And at thy back return he will have a caske,
Much bigger then the Heidelbergian bumbard,
To keep thy works, that never can be numberd.
Christopherus Brook Eboraconsit.
This Gentleman in some vnmeasur'd measure,
Compares thee unto Homer and to Caesar.
Old Homers Iliads are but idle tales,
Waigh'd with thy works, thy book will turn the cales.
And like great Caesar he does thee commend,
For thou, like him, have all thy travels penned,
But yet, me thinks he plays the merry fox,
And in thy praises writes a Paradoxe.
Johannes Hoskins, Cabalisticall, or Horse verse.
Hold, holla, holla, weehee, stand, I say,
Here Is one with horse-verse does thy praise dissplay:
Without all sense, or reason, form, or hue,
He kicks and stings, and winces thee thy due.
He makes shift in speeches mystical,
To write strange verses Cabalisticall;
Much like thy book and thee, in wit, and shape,
Whilst I in imitation am his Ape.
Mount Maluora swimming on a big-limb'd guat,
And Titan tilting with a flaming Swanne,
Great Atlas flying on a winged Sprat,
Armed with the Hemispheares huge warming pan.
Or like the triple Vrchins of the Ash,
That lie and she through Morpheus sweet-fac'd door,
Does drown the stars with a Poledauies flash,
And make the smooth-heel'd ambling rocks to ro^^
Even so this tall Colombrum Pigmy steeple,
That bores the Butterfly above the sphere;
Pulls AEolus tail, and Neptunes mountains tipple^
Whilst Coloquintida his fame shall rear.
Lo thus my Muse, in stumbling iadish verse,
On horseback and on foot thy praise rehearse.
Pricksong.
Here Is one harmoniously thy same does raise,
With Pricksong verse to give thee prick and praise;
But prick nor spur can make thee mend thy tro^,
For thou by nature art nor cold nor hot:
But a mere natural, neutrall amongst men,
Armed like the bristles of a Porcupen.
If French, or Venice Puncks had fired or scald thee,
This man had never raw-bon'd Coriat called thee:
Thou that so many Climats hotly coasted,
I wonder much thou wast not boild nor roasted.
Yet every man that erst thy carcass saw,
Are much in doubt if thou be roast or raw,
Johannes Pawlet, de George Henton.
Now here is another in thy praises ran,
And would entitle thee the great god Pan.
No warming pan thou art I plainly see,
No fire-pan, nor no drying pan can thou be.
Thou art no creame-pan neither, worthy man,
Although thy wits lie in thy heads braine-pan.
Lionel Cranfield
This Gentleman thy wondrous travels rips,
And nothing that may honor thee, he skips.
Thy iron memory thy book did write,
I prithee keep a wench to keep it bright;
For cankerd rust, I know will iron fret,
And make thee wit and memory forget.
Left rust therefore, thy memory should devour,
I Would have thee hire a Tinker it to scowre.
Johannes Sutclin.
Now here is a friend does to thy fame confess,
Thy wit were greater if thy work were less.
He from thy labor treats thee to give over,
And then thy case and wit will be much more.
Lo thus thy small wit, and thy labor great,
He summons to a peaceable retreat.
Inigo Jones.
What living wight can in thy praise be dum,
Thou crowing Cock, that did from Odcom com.
This Gentleman amongst the rest does flock,
To sing thy fame, thou famous Odcomb'd cock.
And learnedly, to do thee greater grace.
Relates how thou can scrue thy veriuyce face.
He wishes him that scorns thy book to read,
It at the sessions house he chance to plead,
That he may want his book, although he crave;
But yet, thy book will sooner hang then save.
So many gallowses are in thy book,
Which none can read without a hanging look.
Georgius Siddenham.
Now here is a Substantive stands by himself,
And makes thee famous for an anticke else:
But yet, me thinks, he gives thee but a frumpe,
In telling how thou kissed a wenches rumpe:
To spoil her ruff, I think thou stood'st in fear^,
That was the cause that made thee kiss her there.
Robertus Halswell.
Thy praise and worth this man accounts not small,
But 'thad bin greater, writing not at all:
Thy book he calls Dame Admirations brother,
I think the world unworthy such another.
Thy book can make men merry that are sad'
But such another sure will make men mad.
Johannes Gifford.
This friend amongst the rest, takes little pain,
To laud the issue of thy teeming brain:
And to applaud thee with his best endeavor,
He begs his wits to help him now or never.
He bids grave Munster reverence thy renown,
And lay his pen aside, and comb thy crown.
He praises thee, as though he meant to split all:
And says, thou art all wit (but yet no witall)
Except thy head, which like a skonce or fort,
Is barracado'd strong, left wits resort,
Within thy brains should raise an insurrection,
And so captive thy head to wits subjection.
Robertus Corbet.
The luggage of thy wit, thy Book he terms,
The bag and baggage of thy legs and arms,
That never can be understood by none,
But only such as are like thee alone.
Johannes Donnes.
This Gentleman commends thy Travels much,
Because like thee, was never any such.
Decembers thunder, nor hot Iulies snow,
Are nothing like the wonders thou do show.
Johannes Chapman.
Here Is one in kindness learnedly compacts,
Thy natural jests, and thy all natural acts,
And craves the Reader would some pity take,
To buy thy book, even for his own dear sake.
For of thy travels, and thy great designs,
There Is little matter writ in many lines.
Thou in much writing take such great delight,
That if men read, thou car'st not what thou write,
This man could well afford to praise thee more,
But that he is loath to have thee on his score:
For he no longer will thy praise pursue,
Lest he should pay thee more then is his due.
Johannes Owen.
This Author (to thy fame) in friendship says;
How ancient Writers pend the Asses praise:
And wishes some of them alive again,
That they alone might thy high praises pen.
Petrus Alley.
Now here is a friend that loud thy glory rings,
With Cannons, Sakers, Culuerings, and Slings,
Guns, drums, and phifes, and the thrill clang'rous trumpet
Applauds thy courting the Venetian stru^pet
Samuel Page.
This Gentleman accounts it no great wrong,
Amidst thy praise, to say thy cares be long:
His meaning my construction much surpasses,
I wet not what he means, except an (^^^.)
Thomas Momford.
Here Is a strange riddle puts me much in doubt,
Thy head's within thy wit, thy wit's without:
'Twere good some friend of thine would take the pains
To put thy wit in the inside of thy brains.
For pity do not turn it out of door,
Thy head will hold it, if'twere ten times more.
Thomas Bastard.
This Gentleman advises thee take heed,
Lest on thy praise too greedily thou feed:
But though, too much, a surfeit breed he says,
Yet thou shall surfeit, but not die of praise.
Guilielmus Baker.
Here Is one by no means at thy same can wink,
And says, how most men say thou pissest ink:
If it be true, I Would give my gilded raper,
That to thy ink thou could sir-reuerence paper:
Thy gains would be much more, thy charges less,
When any works of thine come to the Press.
'Twere good thy ears were pared from off thy head,
'Twould stand Cosmographers in wondrous stead,
To make a Globe to serve this massy earth,
To be a map of laughter, and of mirth.
All newfound sustian phrases thou do sup,
And' against a dearth of words, do hoard them up.
Yet where thou come, thou spendst thy prating pelse,
Though no man understand thee, nor thy self.
Thou art a jewel to be hanged most fit,
In ears, whose heads are nothing, but all wit.
And thy blown tongue will make great ships to sail
From coast to coast, if wind and weather fail.
Again.
Again his Muse from sudden sleep is waked,
And says, this book of thine is natural naked.
Thou urely art a serviceable waiter,
For when thou made this book, thou did not loyter.
Yet much he doubts, if God or fiend will have thee,
For if thou be'st saved, sure thy book will save thee.
If I to escape the gallows needs must read,
I surely for another book will plead:
The reason that incites me thereunto,
Thy book to save thee has enough to do.
This man has a Greek name.
This Gentleman thy praise does briefly note,
Compares thy wit and senses to a Goare,
And well thy breeding he has here expressed,
A Phoenix hatched from out the Wag-tailes nest.
But let them say, and call thee what they will,
Thou wast, and art, and wilt be Coriat still.
Thomas Farnabie, alias Baiur^fc
Here Is one that like a careful true Collector,
Tells, like a Be, thou fill'st thy comb with Nectar:
Die when thou will, in honor of thy Name,
Ram-headed Bel-weathers shall ring thy fame.
Guilielmus Austin.
I think this Author does equivocate,
In writing of the word ^^^
The word so prittily he seems to curtall,
That I imagine it is done for sportall.
But he persuades thee, travel once again,
And make the world to surfeit with thy pen.
Glareanus Vadeanus.
Thou fatal impe to Glastenburie Abbey,
The Prophecy includes thou art no baby,
That over Odcombs town must one day ferrie,
As Whiting erst did over Glastenberie.
But yet it is pity one of thy rare skill.
Should like the Monk be drowned upon a hill.
If thou can climb to heaven in hempen string,
Thy same for ever then my Muse shall sing:
But yet it is safer in a Trunk to hide,
Then such a dangerous wincing jade to ride.
Johannes Iackeson.
Thou that have trauel'd much from coast to coast,
Come eat this Egg, that is nor raw nor roast:
For like a friend, this man has played the cook,
And potch'd this Ginnie Egg into thy book.
Michael Draiton.
Now here is another follows with a mess,
In haste, before thy Book comes to the Press.
The shortness of the time, is all his fault:
But now he is come, and brings thee spoons and salt
He says that thou have taught the right behauior,
How with great men we all may live in favor.
He bids thee live, and with their loves to join,
Whose worth and virtues are most like to thine.
Nicholas Smith.
This Author lively has thy fame expressed,
But yet his lines are different from the rest:
For all but he that do thy praises pen,
Say thou art far unlike to other men.
But this man to thy honor does relate,
How many Courtiers thee do imitate;
And how for fear thou should be stolen away,
They make themselves as like thee as they may.
For if they lose thee by false theft. or slaughter,
The Court (I fear) will weep for want of laughter,
Thy greatness here the pore-blind world may see,
He says (not I) thy peers have judged thee:
Stand to their censures then, make no denial,
For surely thou have had a noble trial.
Laurentius Emley.
Here Is one commends thy book, and bodies pain,
And counsels thee to travel once again;
Whereas the treasure of thy wit and body,
Shall tire each lumpish ass, and dronish noddie.
A horse that bears thy corpse, more ease shall find,
Then men can have in bearing of thy mind:
For in thy mind is many a pair of gallows,
Waigh's more then thee, or twenty of thy fellows.
Was nothing in thy journey, small or mickle,
But in thy mind thou barrell'dst it in pickle:
So that if men to see thy mind were able.
There Is more confusion then was ere at Babel.
For there is confusion both of tongues and towers,
Of lofty steeples, and of lowly bowers.
Of libbets, racks, and round nor menting wheels,
Of Haddockes, Paddockes, and of slipp'rie Eeles:
Of wit, of sense, of reason, death, and life,
Of love, of hate, of concord, and of strife.
The seven deadly sins, and liberal Arts,
Do in thy mind discord, and have taken parts.
It is a doubt which side the conquest winnes,
Either the liberal Arts, or deadly sins.
Not forty Elephants can bear the load,
Of pondrous things, that have in thee abode.
Thy mind waighs more then I can write or speak,
Which heavy burden Atlas back would break.
Johannes Dauis.
This Gentleman thy travels does relate,
Applauding much the hardness of thy pate:
I think thy head's as hard as steel, or rocks,
How could thy cox-comb else endure such knocks?
The brauest Smithes of Britain have taken pains,
To beat upon the anuill of thy brains.
But let them beat, thou can abide the blows,
Thou countst the^ favors which thy friends bestows,
One with a cocks-combe hits thee o'r the comb,
Another with an Asses ears strikes home:
Another with a fools coat, and a cap,
As hard as he can drive, gives thee a clap:
But let them strike with what they please to strike,
Thy hardened head will not their strokes dislike.
The blows the Boore did give thee in the vineyard,
Thou put'st them up, and never drew'st thy whiniard:
Thou took'st a beating from a boorish foe-man,
I hope that thou will scorn a knock from no man.
Richardus Badley
Here Is one whose lines commend thee with the most,
And says, how that a fool at Pentecost,
(At Whitsontide he means) did overthrow thee,
And at thy own blunt weapon ouer-crow thee.
If it be true, me thinks it is wondrous strange,
That thou so many countries o'r should range:
And have the tongues of Latin and of Greek,
Yet against a fool should have thy wits to seek.
I at the Sessions house the like have seen,
When malefactors at the bar have been,
Being well-read Scholars, for their book would plead,
Yet for their lives have had no power to read.
So thou great Polypragmon wast more graueld
With this wise fool, the^ else-wher as thou traueld.
Henricus Peacham.
Of all rare sights, in city, court, or town,
This Author says, thou bravely put'st them down;
The horrid dark eclipse of Sun or Moon,
The Lion Elephant, or the Baboone:
The huge Whale-bone, that is hanged up at White Hall,
The sight of thee puts down the devil and all.
Tricks, ligges, and motions, are but idle toys,
The sight of thee their glories all destroys.
The sweetness of thy Phisnomy is such,
That many to behold it would give much.
But they are blind, and would give more to see,
And therefore would give much to look on thee.
The Viopian Tongue.
Thoytem Ass Coria Tushrump cod she adirustie,
Mungrellimo whish whap ragge dicete tottrie,
Mangelusquem verminets nipsem barely battimsore
Culliandolt trauellerebumque graiphone trutchmore.
Pusse per mew(Odcomb) gul abelgsk foppery shig shag
Cock a peps Comb settishamp, Idioshte momulus tag rag.
Iacobus Field.
This Author amongst the rest in kindness comes
To grace thy travels with a world of Toms:
Tom Thumb, Tom fool, Tom piper, and Tom-asse,
Thou Tom of Toms do all these Toms surpass.
Tom tell-troth is a foolish gull to thee,
There Is no comparisons twixt thee and he.
If tell-troth Tom were any of thy kin,
I think thy Book not half so big had bin.
Clareanus Videanus.
Not last, nor least, but near thy praises end,
This worthy man thy worthless works commend:
No scuruy idle name he will thee call,
And therefore he will call thee none, but all.
If I on every Epithete should write,
Thy friends bestow on thee, thou wandering wight,
No Reader then durst on my writings look,
They would so far out-swell thy boystrous book.
But shortest writ, the greatest wit affoords,
And greatest wit, consists in fewest words.
Thus Monsieur Coriat, at your kind request,
My recantation here I have expressed,
And in my Commentaries have bin bold
To write of all that have your fame inrol'd,
I mean of such, my wit can understand;
That speak the language of the Britain land.
But for the Latin, French, the Greek, or Spanish,
Italian, or the Welsh, from them I vanish.
I on these tongues by no means can comment,
For they are out of my dull Element.
Consider with your self, good Sir, I pray,
Who has bin bolder with you, I, or they?
If I, I vow to make you satisfaction,
Either in words, or pen, or manly action:
I have bin bold to descant on each jest,
Yet from the Text I nothing wrong did wrest:
My lines may be compared to the Thames,
Whose gliding current, and whose glassie streams,
On which if men do look, as in a glass,
They may perceive an ass to be an ass,
An owl an owl, a man to be a man:
And thou, thou famous great Odcombian,
Shall see thy self descypherd out so plain,
Thou shall have cause to thank me for my pain.
But holla, holla, whither runs my pen?
I yet have descanted what other men
Have wrote before: but now I think it fit
To add additions of mine own to it.
I yet have champ'd what better writers chaw'd,
And now my Muse incites me to applaud
Thy worth, thy fortune, and thy high desert,
That all the world may take thee Ass thou art.
And now to sing thy glory I begin,
Thy worthy welcome unto Bossoms Inn.
M'Coriats entertainment at Bossoms Inn.
IEwes-trumpt and Bag-pipes, music high and low,
Stretch to the height your merry squeking notes
And all you Cockney cocks clap wings and crow,
Here comes an Odcomb cock will eat no oats.
Pipes, tabers, fiddles, trebble, and the base,
Blow, sound, and scrape, fill all the air with mirth:
Blind harpers all your instruments uncase.
And welcome home the wonder of the earth:
Great Coriat, mirror of the fourfold world,
The fountain whence Alacrity does flow,
On whom rich Nature natural gifts has hurld,
Whom all admire, from Palace to the Plow:
The only Aristarck-asse of this age,
The maine Exchequer of all mad-cap glee;
For Fortune thrust him on this earthly stage,
That he the only Thing of Things should be.
He that so many galling steps has traced,
That in so many countries erst has bin,
And to his euiternall same is graced,
To be well welcomed unto Bossoms Inn.
Unto which place, whilst Christians time does last
If any once in progress chance to come,
They of my Lords great bounty needs must taste,
Which oftentimes does prove a pondrous sum
For why, my lusty liberal minded Lord
Is very friendly to all passengers,
And from his bounty freely does afford
Both pounds, and purses to all messengers.
And thither now is Monsieur Odcombe come,
Who on his own backe-side receiu^d his pay;
Not like the entertainment of Jack Drum,
Who was best welcome when he went his way,
But he not taking my Lords coin for current,
Against his Lordship and his followers raues,
Like to a cruel all-deuouring torrent,
These words he vtterd stuffed with thu^dring br^^
Bafe vassals of the black infernal den,
Vntutor'd peasants to the fiends of hell,
Damned Incubusses in the shapes of men,
Whose mind's the sink where impious dealings dwell;
Cursed age, when buzzards, owls, and blinded bats,
Against the princely Eagle rise in swarms,
When weazels, polecats, hungry tau'ning rats,
Against the Lion raise rebellious arms,
When as the offall of the vilest earth,
Rail roguishly' against their superior powers,
And seem to contradict them in their mirth,
And blast with stinking breath their pleasat hours,
When base mechanicke muddy-minded slaves,
Whose choysest food is garlic and green cheese,
The cursed offspring of hells horrid caves,
Rude rugged rascals, clad in pelt and freeze.
And such are you you damned Tartarian whelps,
Vnmanner'd mungrels, sons of Cerberu^,
Whom Pluto keeps for speedy hellish helps,
To Increase the monarchy of Erebus.
But now my Muse with wrinkled laughter filled,
Is like to bursts: O hold my sides, I pray,
For straight my Lord by his command'ment wild,
(Cause Coriat did his Lordship disobay)
That in the Basket presently, they mount him,
And let him see his ancient royal tower:
For he has mazed them all, that they account him
To be some mighty man, of forcelesse power:
And now the matter plainer to disclose,
A little while I Will turn my verse to prose.
2. Oration.
COntaminous, pestiferous, preposterous, stygmaticall, slauonians,
slubberdegullions; since not the external unvalued trappings, caparisons, or
accoutrements, that I wear as outward ornaments or inuellopings of the more
internal beauty of the mind that is ^^is incaged within them; since not the
eye-amazing character of my austere Physiognomy: since not the sword of Ajax,
nor the words of ^vlisses; since no means, nor project, neither of ^force or
policy, could stay the rugged r^busti^ous rage that your innated hereditary
inciuility or inhumanity has made you to inflict ^on me: I vow and swear, by
the burning heard of scorching Sol, and by the bloody cutthroat cuttleaxe of
swaggering Mars, and by the dimple fair Venus chin, and by the armed cornuted
front of sweating Vulcan, that I will execute on you such confounding vengeance
that your offsprings offspring, to the 39. generation, shall ban with
execrations as bitter as coloquintida the day, hour, and bald-pa^^ed Time of
this your audacious insolency. And thou ignoble horse-rubbing peasant, that by
the borrowed title of a Lord (being but a vilipendious mechanical Hostler,
have laid this insulting insupportable command on me: the time shall come, when
thou shall cast thy ^nticke authority, as a snake casts her skin; and then thou
for an example to future posterities shall make an unsavory period of thy
maleuolent days in litter and horse-dongue.

No sooner was this grave Oration ended,
Whereto my Lord, and all his train attended,
Being strooken in an admirable maze,
That they like Ghosts on one another gaze:
Quoth one, This, man does conjure sure I think,
No Quoth another, He is much in drink: ^
Nay quoth a third, I doubt he is raging mad.
Faith, quoth my Lord, he is a most dangerous lad:
For such strange English from his tongue does slide,
As no man (but himself) can speak beside.
If those that with their damnable intent,
Intended to blow up the Parliament,
Had had but him, and half a dozen such,
In gunpowder 'twould sure have saved the^ much,
For why their to^gs with blown co^bustious words,
Had done more scath then gunpowder or swords.
But let him hang until his clamorous tongue
Untwist with smoother garb this saucy wrong.
Yet I imagine some strange secret work,
Did in his hanging in the Basket lurk.
What greater fame could to his glory rise,
Then with a rope to travel t'ward the skies:
And there to do his carcass greatest grace,
Among the gods to give him Momus place:
For Saturn, Jupiter, and Phaetons Dad,
Are all enamored on this lovely lad.
Mars, Venus, and the tel-tale Mercury,
Do all desire Tom Coriats company.
And Luna, sure thee's quite besides her wits,
Still wavering changing, with fantastic fits;
It Is thought she never will come to her self,
Till she possess this worthy worthless else.
For he is the man that Nature makes her casket,
To mount the skies in triumph in a basket.
But out alas my Muse, where have thou bin?
I should have kept my self at Bosoms Inn.
And see how I have scaled the spungie clouds.
But it is his worth my meditations crowds
To this extrauagant impertinence,
As being ravished with his eminence.
But blame me not: for he is the gigge of time,
Who^ sharpest wits have whip^ with sportfull rhyme:
And some would wear their sharp-edg'd Muses blu^t,
If in his praise they longer time should hunt.
But here is my comfort, I am not alone,
That under this most pondrous burden groan.
There Is some like me, have in his laud bin bizzie:
But I have made my pericranion dizzie,
To sing the worth of this all wordy squire,
Whom sea and land, and fish and flesh admire.
And now his contemplation prompts his tongue,
To tune his voice to a more milder song
His tongue that brake the peace, must peace procure.
That (like Achilles lance) can wound and cure.
And once more, Reader, humbly I entreat,
That I in spowting Prose may now repeat
His Oratories smooth-faced Epilogue.
O for some Academicke Pedagogue
TO instruct my brain, and help my art-lesse quill,
To mount his fame past Gads, or Shooters hill.
2. Oration.
THrice valorous followers of a four times thrice treble more valiant Leader,
if I had the tongue of Hermes the Prolocutor to the gods, or as many singers as
hundre^-handed B^iareus; if surging Neptune were converted into ink, or the
rugged ragged face of our ancient mother Tellus were ^aper, yet could not the
verbali volubility, or elocution of my voice, nor the agility, dexterity, or
facility of my hands, nor the spacious, unmeasurable, numberless white
innocent paper; no none of all these could either speak, write, or by any
other means declare, or make a true explanation of the reverence I bear to
your Lordship, and the deep heart-gnawing contrition, that lies congealed or
conglutinated to my heart. Then, since out of the imbecility of my rashness,
and the debility of my capacity, I was so far transported beyond the bounds
of patience: in all humility, with a mind dejected, with hands erected, with
knees genuflected, with a heart affected, and with a whole microcosme
subjected. I beg your Lordships graceless favors, that although my crime is
unmeasurable, yet I hope your Lordship will not forget to become miserable.

No sooner was this last Oration vtterd, b^^ that my Lord and all his counsel
mutterd to vnhang Thomas that had talked so wisely.

Epilogue to Mr Coriat.
Thus to the Ocean of thy boundless fame,
I consecrate these rude vnpolish'd lines,
To thee whose Muse can men and monsters tame,
Whose wit the vault of wisdom undermines.
Whose poudered phrases with combustions flame,
Like Glo-wormes in the darkest dark do shine.
To them in all Sir reverence, I submit,
Thou mir'd admired Capcase, cramd with wit.
FINIS.
MASTER THOMAS CORIAT TO HIS FRIENDS IN ENGLAND SENDS GREETING, From Agra, the
Capital City of the Dominion of the Great MOGOLL in the Eastern India.
Printed according to the true Copy of the Letter written with his own hand
in the Persian paper, and sent home in the good Ship called the Globe,
belonging to the Company of East India Merchants:

With an addition of 200. Verses written by I. T. that like a Gentleman Usher
goes bare before his pragmaticall Prose, in commendation of his Travels.

SOme may perhaps suppose this Prose is mine,
But all that know thee, will be sworn it is thine:
For (as 'twas said b' a learned Cambridge Scholar)
(Who knows the style, may smell it by the Collet
The Prose (I swear) is Coriats, he did make it,
And who dares claim it from him, let him take it.
Certain Verses in commendations of this mirror of footmanship, this
Catholic or universal Traveler, this European, Asian, African Pilgrim,
this well letterd, well litterd discouerer and Cosmographicall describer Master
Thomas Coriat of Odcombe.
O Thou, whose sharp toes cut the Globe in quarters,
Among Jews and Greeks and tyrannizing Tartars:
Whose glory through the vasty Welkin rumbles,
And whose great Acts more then mine Muses mumbles,
Whose rattling Fame Apollo's daughters thunders,
Midst Africa monsters, and among Asian wonders;
Accept these footed Verses I implore thee,
That here (Great Footman) go on foot before thee:
To ^^^g thy praise I would my Muse enforce,
^^^ that (alas) she is both harsh and hoarse:
And therefore pardon this my Loves Epistle,
For though she cannot sing, I Will make her whistle.
IN PRAISE OF THE AVTHOR MASTER THOMAS CORIAT.
THou that the world with pleasures full have pleasur'd,
And out of measure many kingdoms measured.
Whilst men (like swine) do in their vices wallow,
And not one dares for's ears thy steps to follow;
Not one within the Compass of the Cope,
Like thee that dares suruay the Horoscope:
For who is he that dares call it a lie,
That thou have trotted into Italy?
By th'edge of France, and skirts of Spain thou have rambled;
Through Belgia and through Germany thou have ambled.
And Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Austria,
Pruce, Poland Hungary, Musconia,
With Thracia, and the land of merry Greeks,
All these and more applaud thee, that who seeks
Upon the top of Mount Olympus front,
Perhaps may see thy name insculp'd upon it.
And he that durst detract thy worth in Europe,
I wish he may be hanged up in a new rope.
It were a world of business to repeat
Thy walks through both the Asiaes, less and great,
Whereas (no doubt) but thou have taken suruay
Of China and the kingdom of Ca^^y,
The East Indies, Persia, Parthia, Media,
Armenia, and the great Ass-yria,
Caldea, Jury, (if we not mistake us)
Thou have o'r-look'd the Sea called Mortuus Lacus.
And I durst venture somewhat for a wager,
Thou have seen Ionia, Lidia, Misia Mayor,
Old Iliums Ruins, and the wracks of Priam,
But of Invention I (alas) so dry am,
I beat my brains and with outrageous thumping,
My lines fall from my pen with extreme pumping,
Auaunt, dull Morpheus, with thy leaden spirit,
Can matter want of him that wants no merit?
As he through Syria and Arabia's coasting,
My lines from Asia into Afric poasting,
I Will follow him along the River Nilus,
In Egypt, where false Crocodiles beguile us.
Through Mauritania to the town of Dido,
That flew her self by power of god Cupido
The Kingdoms vnsuruaid he will not leave one
From Zona Foride, to the Frozen Zone.
With Prester John in AEthiopia,
And th'ayrie Empire of Eutopia.
A SHORT DESCRIPTION OF THE LONGING desire that AMERICA has to entertain this
unmatchable Perambulator.
AMerica, A merry K, Peru.
Unhappy all in having not thy view:
Virginia of thy worth does only hear,
And longs the weight of thy footsteps to bear:
Return thee, O return thee quickly than,
And see the mighty Court of Powhatan;
Then shall great Volumes with thy Travels swell,
And Fame ring louder then Saint Pulchers Bell.
Then may thou (if thou please) despite the Devil,
End thy good days within the Town of Evil.
And then at Odcombe thou entombed may be,
Where Travelers may come thy shrine to see,
By which the Sexton may more money get,
Then Mecaes Priests do gain by Mahomet.
These Letters following, which thou did subscribe
Unto thy Mother and the Odcombian Tribe,
Declare thy Art, and also whence thou art,
And whence, from thence thy purpose is to part.
Thy learned Oration to the mighty Mogull,
All men thereby may see if thou be no gull,
It Is so compactly and exactly writ,
It shows an extraordinary wit.
For write thou what thou please, ('it is thy good lot)
Men like it, though they understand it not.
A LITTLE REMEMBRANCE OF HIS VARIETY OF TONGVES, AND Politic form of Travel.
A Very Babel of confused Tongues,
Unto thy little Micr^cosms belongs,
That to what place socuer thou do walk,
Thou will lost nothing through the want of talk.
For thou can kiss thy hand, and make a leg,
And wisely can in any language beg:
And sure to beg it is policy (I note)
It sometimes saues the cutting of thy throat:
For the worst thief that ever lived by stealth,
Will never kill a beggar for his wealth.
But who is it but thy wisdom does admire,
That does unto such high conceits aspire?
Thou take the bounty of each bounteous giver,
And drink'st the liquor of the running river:
Each Kitchen where thou come, thou have a Cook,
Thou never runst on score unto the Brook;
For if thou did, the Brook and thou would gree,
Thou runst from it, and it does run from thee.
In thy return from Agra and Assmere,
By thy relation following does appear,
That thou do purpose learnedly to fling
A rare Oration to the Persian King.
Then let the idle world prate this, and that,
The Persian King will give thee (God knows what.)
And furthermore to me it wondrous strange is,
How thou do mean to see the River Ganges,
With Tigris, Euybrates, and Nimrode Babel,
And the unhappy place where Cain slew Abel.
That if thou were in Hebrew circumcised,
The Rabbyes all were wondrous ill advised;
Nay more they were all Coxcombs, all stark mad,
To think thou were of any Tribe but Gad.
Sure, in thy youth thou at'st much running fare,
As Trotters, Neates-feet, and the swift-foot Hare,
And so by inspiration fed it bred
Two going feet to bear one running head.
Thou filst the Printers Press with grief and mourning,
Still gaping, and expecting thy returning:
All Paul's Churchyard is filled with melancholy,
Not for the want of books, or wit; but folly
It is for them, to grieve too much for thee,
For thou will come when thou thy time shall see.
But yet at one thing much my Muse does muse,
Thou do so many commendations use
Unto thy mother, and to diverse friends,
Thou have remembered many kind commends,
And till the last, thou did forget thy Father,
I know not why, but this conceit I gather,
That as men sitting at a seast to eat,
Begin with Beef, Porke, Mutton, and such meat,
And when their stomachs are a little cloyd,
This first course then the Voyder does avoid:
The anger of their hunger being past,
The Pheasant and the Partridge comes at last.
This (I imagine) in thy mind did fall,
To note thy Father last to close up all.
First to thy Mother here thou do commend,
And lastly to thy Father thou do send:
She may command in thee a Filial awe,
But he is but thy Father by the Law.
To hear of thee, mirth every heart does cheer,
But we should laugh outright to have thee here.
For who is it that knows thee but would choose,
Farther to have thy presence then thy news.
Thou show how well thou setst thy wits to work,
In tickling of a misbeleeuing Turk:
He called thee Giaur, but thou so well did answer
(Being hot and fiery, like to crabbed Caucer)
That if he had a Turke' of ten pence bin,
Thou toldst him plain the errors he was in;
His Alkaren, his Moskyes are whim-whams,
False bug-beare bables, fables all that dams,
Slights of the Devil, that bring perpetual woe,
Thou wast not mealy mouthed to tell him so,
And when thy talk with him thou did give ore,
As wise he parted as he was before:
His ignorance had not the power to see
Which way, or how to edify by thee:
But with the Turk (thus much I build upon)
If words could have done go^d, it had been done.
The superscription, Sent from Azmere, the Court of the great and mightiest
Monarch of the East, called the great MOGVLL in the Eastern India: To be
conuaid To my dear and loving Mother, Mrs Garthered Coriat, at her house in
the Town of Evil in Somersetshire. I pray you deliver this letter at Gerards
Hall, to Christopher Guppie, a Carrier, (if he be yet living) or else to some
other honest trusty Messenger, to be conuaid with all convenient speed to the
place aforesaid.
MASTER THOMAS CORIATS COMMENDATIONS TO HIS friends in England. From Agra, the
Capital City of the Dominion of the Great MOGOLL in the Eastern India, the
last of October, 1616.
Most dear and well-beloved Mother,
THough I have superscribed my letter from Azmere, the Court of the greatest
Monarch of the East, called the Great Mogoll in the Eastern India, which I did
to this end, that those that have the charge of conueiance thereof, perceiving
such a title, may be the more careful and diligent to convey it safely to your
hands: yet in truth the place from which I wrote this letter, is Agra, a City
in the said Eastern India, which is the Metropolitan of the whole Dominion of
the foresaid King Mogoll, and ten days iourny from his Court at the said
Azmere. From the same Azmere I departed the 12 day of September, An. 1616,
after my ^^bode there 12 months and 60 days; which though I confess it were
a too long time to remain in one and the selfsame place, yet for two
principal causes it was very requisite for me to remain there some reasonable
time: first, to learn the languages of those Countries, through which I am to
pass betwixt the bounds of the Territories of this Prince and Christendom,
namely these three, the Persian, Turkish, and Arab: which I have in some
competent measure attained unto by my labor and industry at the said Kings
Court, matters as available unto me as money in my purse, as being the chiefest
or rather only mean to get me money, if I should happen to be destitute: a
matter very incidentall to a poor Footman Pilgrim, as my self in these
heathen and Mohammedan Countries through which I travel: Secondly, that by the
help of one of those languages, I mean the Persian, I might both procure unto
my self access unto the King, and be able to express my mind unto him about
the matter for the which I should have occasion to discourse with him. These
were the reasons that moved me so long to tarry at the Mogols Court, during
which time I abode in the house of the English Merchants my dear Countrymen,
not spending one little piece of money either for diet, washing, lodging, or any
other thing. And as for the Persian tongue, which I studied very earnestly, I
attained to that reasonable skill, and that in a few months, that I made an
Oration unto the King before many of his Nobles in that language, and after I
had ended the same, discoursed with his Majesty also in that tongue very
readily and familiarly; the Copy of which speech, though the tongue it self
will seem to an Englishman very strange and uncouth, as having no kind of
affinity with any of our Christian languages, I have for nouelty sake written
out in this letter, together with the translation thereof in English, that you
may show it to some of my learned friends of the Clergy, and also of the
Temporalty in Evil, and elsewhere, who belike, will take some pleasure in
reading so rare and unusual a tongue as this is. The Persian is this that
follows.

The Copy of an Oration that I made in the Persian tongue, to the Great
Mogoll, before diverse of his Nobles.
HAzaret Aallum pennah salamet, fooker Daruces ve tehaungeshta have am kernia
emadam az wellagets door, ganne az mulk Inglizan: ke kessanaion pethee^
mushacas cardand ke wellagets, mazcoor der akers magrub bood, ke mader hamma
iezzaerts dunmast. Sabebbe amadane mari mia boosti char cheez ast au val be
dedane mobarreckdeedars. Hazaret ke seete caramat ba hamma Trankestan
reeseedast ooba tamam mulk Musulmanan der sheenedan awsaffe. Hazaret daueeda
amadam be deedane ast own akdas mushar af geshtans duum bray deedane feelbay
Hazaret, kin chunm ianooar der heech mulk ne dedam seu in bray deedane nauswer
dary ace shu^ma Ganga, ke Serdare hamma daryaba dumiest. Chaharum cen ast,
keyec ferm own alishaion amayet fermoy and, ke betwanam der wellayetts Vzbeck
raftan ba shahre Samarcand, bray Zeerat cardan cabbre mobarrec Saheb crawncab
awsaffe tang oe mosachere oo der tamans aallum meshoor ast belkder wellagette
Vzbec cencader meshoor neest chunan cheder mulc Iuglisan ast digr, bishare
eshteeac darambe deedane mobarrec mesare Saheb crawnca bray ^^n saheb, che own
samanche focheer de shabr st^l^l boodam, ycaiaeb cohua amarat deedam derm^n
yecush bawg nasdec sbaht mascoor coia che pa^^a^, Eezawiawn che namesh Manuel
bood che Sa^^^^ crawnea cush mehmannec aseem cards bood, be^d^^^^^ gristane
Sulten Baiasetra as iange aseem che s^^^ bood nas dec shahre Bursa, coimache
Saheb cra^^ Sultan Baiasetra de Zenicera tell aio bestand, cod^ cafes nahadond
cen char chees meera as mulche m^ium baneed tamia, as mulc Room oo Arrac pee^^
geshta, as door der cen mulc reseedam, che ch^r b^sar pharsang raw dared,
beshare derd co mo^^^ casheedam che heech ches der even dunnia cenc^^^n mohuet
ne casheedast bray deedune mobarrec ded^^s Hasereret own roos che be tacte
shaugh ne shaugh^^ musharaf fermoodand.

The English of it is this.
LOrd This is the ordinary title that is given him by all strangers.
Protector of the world, all hail to you: I am a poor Traveler and
worldseer, which am come hither from a far country, namely England, which
ancient Historians thought to have been situated in the farthe^ bounds of the
West, and which is the Queen of all the Islands in the world. The cause of my
coming hither is for four respects. First, to see the blessed face of your
Majesty, whose wonderful fame has resounded over all Europe and the Mohammedan
Countries. When I heard of the fame of your Majesty, I hastened hither with
speed, and traveled very cheerfully to see your glorious Court. Secondly, to
see your Majesty's Elephants, which kind of beasts I have not seen in any
other country. Thirdly, to see your famous River Ganges, which is the Captain
of all the Rivers of the world. The fourth is this, to entreat your Majesty
that you would vouchsafe to grant me your gracious Pass, that I may travel
into the Country of Tartaria to the City of Samarcand, to visit the blessed
Sepulcher of the Lord of the Corners (this is a title that is given to
Tamberlaine in this Country in that Persian language: and whereas they call him
the Lord of the Corners, by that they mean that he was Lord of the corners of
the world, that is, the highest and supreme Monarch of the Universe:) whose
fame by reason of his wars and victories; is published over the whole world:
perhaps he is not altogether so famous ^n his own Country of Tartaria, as in
England. Moreover, I have a great desire to see the blessed Toombe of the Lord
of the Corners for this cause; for that when I was at Constantinople, I saw a
notable old building in a pleasant garden near the said City, where the
Christian Emperor that was called Emanuel, made a ^umptuous great Banquet to
the Lord of the Corners after he had taken Sultan Bajazet in letters of Gold,
and put him in a cage of Iron. These four causes moved me to come out of by
native. Counrrey thus far, having traveled a foot through Turkey and Persia;
so far have I traced the world into this Country, that my pilgrimage has
accomplished three thousand miles, wherein I have sustained much ^bour and
toil, the like whereof no mortal ^^an in this World did ever perform, to see
^^e blessed face of your Majesty, since the first day that you were inaugurated
in your glorious Monarchall throne.

After I had ended my speech, I had some ^^ort discourse with him in the
Persia^ tongue, ^ho amongst other things told me, that concerning my travel to
the City of Samarcand, ^^ was not able to do me any good, because ^here was no
great amity betwixt the Tarta^^an Princes and himself, so that his
commendatory letters would do me no good ^ Also he added, that the Tartars
did so deadly hate all Christians, that they would certainly kill them when
they came into their Country. So that he earnestly dissuaded me from the
journey, if I loved my life and welfare; at last he concluded his discourse
with me by a sum of money that he threw down from a window through which he
looked out, into a sheet tied up by the four corners, and hanging very near
the ground, a hundred pieces of silver, each worth two shillings sterling,
which counteruailed ten pounds of our English money: this business I carried so
secretly by the help of my Persian, that neither our English Ambassador, nor
any other of my Countrymen (saving one special, private, and intrinsicall
friend) had the least inkling of it, till I had thoroughly accomplished my
design: for I well knew that our Ambassador would have stopped and
Barracadoed all my proceeding therein, if he might have had any notice thereof,
as indeed he signified unto me after I had effected my project, alleging this
forsooth for his reason why he would have hindered me, because it would redound
somewhat to the dishonor of our Nation, that one of our Country should
present himself in that beggarly and poor fashion to the King, out of an
insinuating humor to crave money of him. But I answered our Ambassador in
that stout and resolute manner after I had ended my business, that he was
contented to cease nibbling at me: never had I more need of money in all my
life then at that time: for in truth I had but twenty shillings sterling left
in my purse, by reason of a mischance I had in one of the Turks Cities called
Emert in the country of Mesopotamia, where a miscreant Turk stripped me of
almost all my monyes, according as I wrote unto you in a very large letter the
last year, which I sent from the Court of this mighty Monarch by one of my
Countrymen that went home by Sea in an English ship laden with the
commodities of this India: which letter I hope came to your hands long since.
After I had been with the King, I went to a certain Noble and generous
Christian of the Armenian race, two days journey from the Mogols court, to the
end to observe certain remarkable matters in the same place, to whom, by
means of my Persian tongue, I was so welcome; that he entertained me with
very civil and courteous complement, and at my departure gave me very
bountifully twenty pieces of such kind of money as the King had done before,
counteruayling forty shillings sterling, About ten days after that, I departed
from Azmere the court of the Mogoll Prince, to the end to begin my Pilgrimage
after my long rest of fourteen months back again into Persia, at what time
our Ambassador gave me a piece of Gold of this Kings Coin worth four and
twenty shillings, which I will save (if it be possible) till my ariuall in
England: so that I have received for beneuolences since I came into this
country, twenty marks sterling, saving two shillings eight pence, and by the
way upon the confines of Persia, a little before I came into this country,
three and thirty shillings four pence in Persian money of my Lady Sherly: a^
this present I have in the City of Agra, where-hence I wrote this letter, about
twelve pounds, sterling, which according to my manner of living upon the way at
two pence sterling a day (for with that proportion I can live pretty well, such
is the cheapnesse of all eateable things in Asia; drinkable things costing
nothing, for seldom do I drink in my pilgrimage any other liquor then pure
water) will maintain me very competently three years in my travel with meat,
drink, and clothes. Of these gratuities which have been given me, willingly
would I send you some part, as a demonstration of the filial love and
affection which every child bred in ciuility and humility, ought to perform to
his loving and good mother: but the distance of space betwixt this place and
England, the hazard of men's lives in so long a journey, and also the infidelity
of many men, who though they live to come home, are unwilling to render an
account of the things they have received, do not a little discourage me to
send any precious token unto you; but if I live to come one day to
Constantinople again (for thither I do resolve to go once more by the grace
of Christ, and therehence to take my passage by land into Christendom over
renouned Greece) I will make choice of some substantial and faithful
Countriman, by whom I will send some pretty token, as an expression of my
dutiful and obedient respect unto you, I have not had the opportunity to see
the King of Persia as yet since I came into this country, but I have resolved
to go to him when I come next into his Territories, and to search him out
wheresoever I can find him in his Kingdom; for seeing I can discourse with him
in his Persian tongue, I doubt not but that going unto him in the form of a
Pilgrim, he will not only entertain me with good words, but also bestow
some worthy reward upon me beseeming his dignity and person; for which cause I
am provided beforehand with an excellent thing written in the Persian-tongue,
that I mean to present unto him: and thus I hope to get beneuolences of worthy
persons, to maintain me in a competent manner in my whole pilgrimage till come
into England, which I hold to be as laudable and a more secure course, then if
I did continual carry store of money about me, In the letter which I wrote
unto you by an English ship the last year, I made relation unto you both of my
journey from the once holy Jerusalem hither, and of the state of this Kings
Court, and the Customs of this Country, therefore I hold it superfluous to
repeat the same things again: but what the Countries are, that I mean to see
betwixt this and Christendom, and how long time I will spend in each country,
I am unwilling to advertise you of at this present, desiring rather to signify
that unto you after I have performed my design then before; howbeit in few
words, I will tell you of certain Cities of great renoune in former times, but
now partly ruined, that I resolve (by Gods help) to see in Asia, where I now
am, namely, ancient Babylon and Nimrods Tower, some few miles from Niniue, and
in the same the Sepulcher of the Prophet Jonas, spacious and goodly; C^^ in
Egypt, heretofore Memphis, upon the famous River Nilus, where Moses, Aaron, and
the children of Israel lived with K. Pharaoh, whose ruined Palace is showed
there till this day, and a world of other moveable things as memorable as any
City of the whole world yields, saving only Jerusalem: but in none of these,
or any other Cities of note, do I determine to linger as I have done in other
places, as in Constantinople and Azmere, in this Eastern India, only some few
days will I tarry in a principal city of fame, to observe every principal
matter there, and so be gone. In this city of Agra, where I am now, I am to
remain about 6. weeks longer, to the end to expect an excellent opportunity,
which then will offer it self unto me, to go to the famous river Ganges about
5. days journey from this, to see a memorable meeting of the gentle people of
this country, called Baicans, whereof about four hundred thousand people go
thither of purpose to bathe and shave themselves in the River, and to sacrifice
a world of gold to the same River, partly in stamped money, and partly in
massy great lumpes and wedges, throwing it into the River as a sacrifice, and
doing other strange Ceremonies most worthy the observation: such a notable
spectacle it is, that no part of all Asia, neither this which is called the
great Asia, nor the lesser, which is now called Natolia, the like is to be
seen. This show do they make once every year, coming thither from places
almost a thousand miles off, and honor their River as their God, Creator, and
Savior; superstition and impiety most abominable in the highest degree of
these brutish Ethnicks, that are aliens from Christ and the commonwealth of
Israel. After I have seen this show, I will with all expedition repair to the
city of Lahore, twenty days journey from this, and so into Persia, by the
help of my blessed Christ.

Thus have I imparted unto you some good accidents that happened unto me, since
I wrote a letter unto you the last year from the Kings Court, and some little
part of my resolution for the disposing of a part of my time of abode in Asia.
Therefore now I will ^^a^ to a conclusion; the time I cannot lia^^ when I shall
come home, but as my merciful God and Savior shall dispose of it. A long
rabble or commendations like to that which I wrote in my last letter to you. I
hold not so requisite to make at this present: Therefore with remembrance of
some few friends names, I will, but up my present Epistle. I pray you recommend
me first in Odcombe to Master Gallop, and every good body of his family, if he
lives yet, to Master B^r^b, his wife, and all his family, to all the Knights,
William Chum, John Selly, Hugh Done, and their wives, to Master Atkins, and
his wife at Norton. I pray you commend me in Evil to these, to old Master
Seward, if he lives, his wife and children; the poor widow Darby, old Master
Dyer, and his Son John, Master Ewins old and young, with their wives, Master
Phelpes and his wife, M. Star and his wife, with the rest of my good friends
there, (I had almost forgotten your husband) to him also, to Ned Barbor and his
wife, to William Ienings: commend me also I pray you, and that with respectfull
terms, to the godly and reverent fraternity of Preachers, that every second
Friday meet at a religious exercise at Evil, at the least if that exercise
does continue, pray read this letter to them, for I think they will be well
pleased with it, by reason of the novelties of things. And so finally, I commit
you, and all them, to the blessed protection of Almighty God.

From Agra the Capital City of the Dominion of the great Mogoll, in the
Eastern India the last of October 1616.

Your dutiful, loving and obedient Son, now a desolate Pilgrim in the World,
THOMAS CORIAT.

The Copy of a speech that I made to a Mohammedan in the Italian tongue.
THe Copy of a speech that I made extempore in the Italian tongue to a
Mohammedan at a City called Moltan in the Eastern India, two days iourny beyond
the famous River Indus, which I have passed, against Mahomet and his accursed
Religion, upon the occasion of a discourtesie offered unto me by the said
Mohammedan, in calling me Giaur, that is, infidel, by reason that I was a
Christian: the reason why I spoke to him in Italian, was because he understood
it, having been taken slave for many years since by certain Florentines in a
Gally wherein he passed from Constantinople toward Alexandra, but being by
them interrupted by the way, he was carried to a City called Ligerne in the
Duke of Florences Dominions, where after two years he had learned good
Italian, but he was an Indian borne and brought up in the Mohammedan Religion, I
pronounced the speech before an hundred people, whereof none understood it but
himself, but he afterward told the meaning of some part of it as far as he
could remember it, to some of the others also. If I had spoken thus much in
Turkey, or Persia against Mahomet, they would have roasted me upon a spit; but in
the Mogols Dominions a Christian may speak much more freely then he can in
any other Mohammedan Country in the world. The speech was this, as I afterward
translated it into English.

But I pray thee tell me thou Mohammedan, do thou in sadness call me Giaur?
That I do, quoth he, Then (quoth I) in very sober sadness I retort that
shameful word in thy throat, and tell thee plainly that I am a Musulman, and
thou art a Giaur. For by that Arab word Musulman, thou do understand that
which cannot be properly applied to a Mohammedan, but only to a Christian, so
that I do consequently infer that there are two kinds of Muselmen, the one
^n Orthomusulman, that is, a true Musulman which is a Christian, and the other
a Pseudo-musulman, that is, a false Musulman which is a Mohammedan. What thy
Mahomet was from whom thou do derive thy Religion, assure thy self I know
better then any one of the Mahometans amongst many millions: yea all the
particular circumstances of his life and death, his Nation, his Parentage, his
driving Camels through Egypt, Syria, and Palestina, the marriage of his
Mistress, by whose death he raised himself from a very base and contemptible
estate, to great honor and riches, his manner of coozening the sottish people
of Arabia, partly by a tame Pigeon that did fly to his ear for meat, and
partly by a tame Bull that he fed by hand every day, with the rest of his
actions both in peace and war: I know as well as if I had lived in his time,
or had been one of his neighbors in Mecca, the truth whereof if thou did
know as well, I am persuaded thou would spit in the face of thy Alcaron, and
trample it under thy feet, and bury it under a la^e, a book of that strange
and weak matter, that I my self (as meanly as thou do see me attired now)
have already written two better books (God be thanked) and will here after
this, (by Gods gracious permssion) write another better and truer, yea I would
have thee know (thou Mohammedan) that in that renouned Kingdom of England where
I was borne, learning does so flourish, that there are many thousand boys of
sixteen years of age, that are able to make a more learned book thea^ thy
Alcason, neither was it (as thou and the rest of you Mahometans do generally
believe) composed wholly by Mahomet, for he was of so dull a wit, as he was
not able to make it without the help of another, namely a certain Renegado
Monk of Constantinople, called Sergis. So that his Alcoran was like an arrow
drawn out of quiver of another man. I perceive thou do wonder to see me so
much inflamed with anger, but I would have thee consider, it is not without
great cause I am so moved: for what greater indignity can there be offered to a
Christian which is an Arthomusulman, then to be called Gtaur by a Giaur? for
Christ (whose Religion I profess) is of that incomparable dignity, that as thy
Mahomet is not worthy to be named that year wherein my blessed Christ is, so
neither is his Alcoran worthy to be named that year wherein the This do all
Mahometans cali our Gospel, or the History of our Savior, written by the
four Evangelists.
Iuieel of my Christ is. I have observed among the Mahometans such a foolish:
form of prayer ever since my departure from Spas^an, (which I confess was no
nouelty unto me, for that I had observed the like before both in Constantinople
and diverse other Turkish Cities) that what with your vain repetitions and
diverse other profane fooleries contained therein, I am certain your prayers
do even stink before God, and are of no more force then the cry of thy Camel
when thou do lade or unlade him: But the prayers of Christians have so
prevailed with God, that in time of drought they have obtained convenient
abundance of rain, and in time of pestilence a suddai^e cessation from the
plague, such an effect of holy and seruent prayer as never did the words that
the Mahometans do often repeat in their prayers
Scofferalahs, or the Allernissel allow of any Mohammedan produce: yet must we,
whose prayers like a sweet smelling sacrifice are acceptable to God, be
esteemed Giaurs by those whose prayers are odious unto his Divine Majesty: O
timos! O manners! Now as I have told thee the difference betwixt the effect of
our Christian and your Mohammedan prayers, so I pray thee observe another
difference betwixt you and us, that I will presently intimate unto thee: thou
by the observation of the Law of thy ridiculous Alcaron do hope for Paradise,
wherein thy Master Mahomet has promised Rivers of Rice, and to Virgins the
embracing of Angels under the shaddowe of spacious Trees, though in truth that
Paradise be nothing else then a filthy quagmire so full of stinking dung hills,
that a man cannot walk two paces there, but he shall stumble at a dung hill
and defile himself, but where this Paradise is, not one amongst a thousand of
you knows; therefore I will tell thee, it stands in a Country situate
betwixt Heaven and Earth, called Vtopia, whereof there is mention in the third
book of thy Alcaron and in the seven and thirty Asaria, but expressed with
those mystical and obscure terms, that is very difficult to understand it,
for this Vtopian Paradise I say, as the reward of all your superstitious
mumbling in your prayers, and the often ducking down of your heads when you
kiss the ground, with such a devout humility forsooth, do you Mahometans hope
in another world: But we Christians hope to live with God and his blessed
Angels for ever and eue^ in Heaven, as being a proper and peculiar inheritance
purchased unto us by the precious blood of our Christ, yet must we be reputed
Giaurs by those that are Giaurs? One thing more will I tell thee (O thou
Mohammedan) and so I will conclude this redious speech, whereunto thy
discourtious calling of me Giaur has enforced me, and I prithee observe this
my conclusion.

Learning (which is the most precious Jewel that man has in this life, by
which he attaineth to the knowledge of divine and humane things) comes to
man either by revelation which we otherwise call inspiration, or by industry:
Learning by revelation I call that which God does infuse from above by his
special grace, unto those whom he will use as the instruments of his glory,
who without labor or travel do aspire to a most eminent degree of knowledge.
Learning by industry I call that, which a man does purchase to himself by
continual writing and reading, by practice and meditation: now by neither of
these means have the Mahometans acquired any mean, much less any singular
learning, for as Mahomet himself was a man of a very superficial and mean
learning, so never was there any one of his Disciples in any part of the world
that was endued with any profound knowledge: but we Christians by the one and
the other mean, have attained to the most exquisite science that can be
incident to man: I mean the blessed Apostles of our Savior.
some of our men that never were brought up in Studies, having been so expert
in a general learning (only by Gods special illumination) as those have
spent forty years in the practice thereof, and others by continual practice
of writing and reading, have been so excellent, that they became the very
Lamps and Stars of the Countries wherein they lived. These things being so, it
cannot possibly come to pass, that the omnipotent God should deal so
partially with mankind, as to reveal his will to a people, altogether misled
in ignorance and blindness as you Mahometans are, and conceal it from us
Christians that bestow all our life time in the practice of divine and humane
disciplines, and in the ardent invocation of Gods holy Name, with all sincerity
and purity of heart. Go to then thou Pseudo-musulman, that is, thou
falsebeleeuer, since by thy injurious imputation laid upon me, in that thou
calledst me Giaur, thou have provoked me to speak thus. I pray thee, let
this mine answer be a warning for thee, not to scandalize me in the like
manner any more; for the Christian Religion which I profess, is so dear and
tender unto me, that neither thou nor any other Mohammedan shall scotfree call
me Giaur, but that I will quit you with an answer much to the wonder of those
Mahometans.

Dixi.

I Pray you, Mother, expect no more letters from me after this, till my arriual
in Christendom; because I have resolved to write no more, while I am in the
Mahometans Countries, thinking that it will be a far greater comfort, both
to you, and to all my friends whatsoever, to hear news that I have
accomplished my trauells in Mahometisine, then that I am coming up and down,
to and fro in the same, without any certainty of an issue thereof; therefore I
pray have patience for a time: about two years and a half hence, I hope to
finish these Mohammedan trauells, and then either from the City of Raguzi in
Sclauonia, which is a Christian City, and the first we enter into
Christendom, from those parts of Turkey by land near unto the same, or from
famous Venice, I will very dutifully remember yea again, with lines full of
filial piety and officious respect. I have written two letters to my Uncle
Williams, since I came forth of England, and no more, whereof one from the
Mogols Court the last year, just at the same time that I wrote unto you; and
another now, which I sent jointly by the same Messenger that carried yours out
of India by Sea. Once more I recommend you and all our hearty wel-willers and
friends to the gracious tuition of the Lord of Hosts; I pray you remember my
duty to Master Hancocke that reverend and Apostolical good old man, and his
wife, if they are yet living; to their Sons Thomas and John, and their Wives.

The Author of the Verse, takes leave of the Author of the Prose, desiring
rather to see him, then to bear from him.
THose Rimes before thy meaning does unclose,
Which men perhaps have blu^dred ore in Prose:
And it is a doubt to me, whose pains is more,
Thou that did write, or they that read them over:
My Scullers muse without or Art or Skill,
In humble service (with a Gooses quill)
Has taken this needless, fruitless pains for thee,
Not knowing when thou wilt do as much for me.
But this is not the first, nor shall not be
The last (I hope) that I shall write for thee:
For when news thou wast drowned, did hither come,
I wrote a mournful Epicedium.
And after, when I heard it was a lie,
I wrote of thy suruiuing presently.
Laugh and be fat, the Scullers book, and this
Show how my mind to thee addicted is;
My love thee has evermore been such,
That in thy praise I never can write too much:
And much I long to see thee here again,
That I may welcome thee in such a strain
That shall even crack my pulsiue pia matter,
In warbling thy renown by land and water:
Then shall the Fame which thou have won on foot,
( Among Heathe^s, Jews, Turks, Negroes black as soot)
Ride on my best Invention like an ass,
To the amazement of each Owliglasse.
Till when fare well (if thou can get good fare)
Content's a feast, although the feast be bare.
Let Eolus and Neptune be combinde,
With Sea auspicious, and officious wind;
In thy return with speed to blow thee back,
That we may laugh, lie down, and mourn in Sack.
John Tailor.

A Bawd. A virtuous Bawd, a modest Bawd: As She Deserves, reprove, or else
applaud.
DEDICATED TO THE NEITHER NOBLE OR JGNOBLE, LORD OR LADY, KIND, OR CRVELL,
learned or ignorant, courteous or currish, Christian or Barbarian, Man or Woman,
rich or poor: but to all and every one in general and particular.
MOnsieur, and Madam Hydra, to your many heads and variety of Censures I have
made bold to dedicate, a poor, harmless, modest, honest, and innocent Bawd,
I know great persons of worth and honor, are daily so visited with penurious
shreds of Schollership, fragments of Hexameters and Pentameters, scraps of
Poetry, the Scum and dreggs of wit, and the froth and lees of wisdom: one
salutes my Lords Lordship at Breakefast with a funeral Elegy, lamentably
written, and is most miserably rewarded for his kindness. Another bunts out
his Worships vngentlemanly Knighthood (having most intolerably belabored his
name with an Acrosticke or Anagram, which out of his vacuity of worthiness he
rewards with not a penny. A third has belyed such a Lady or Gentle woman's
beauty and qualities, in most abominable fashion, setting her forth for fair
and virtuous; for the which he is rewarded according to the subject he wrote
of, and his own demerits, with as much as comes to nothing. For these and some
either respects, I thought it not fit to desire the patronage of any one person
in particular, it being a subject that is common to all, for all, or any. As
men are dispersed uniuersally through the world, so a Bawd, being an universal
creature, whose function is publicly scattered, I thought it not pertinent or
accommodating, that she should be privately protected by any. Therefore at
she has been and is for all, so I dedicate her to all, knowing that all are
better able to reward the Poet, then one alone. And this is further to
advertise the Reader, that where I do speak of spiritual Bawds, Bawdry,
Adultery or Fornication, that I have avoided prophanity, obseenity, scurrility,
and all manner of inciuilitie or indecency; not meddling with religion at all,
b^t with a pitiful derision, and merry reprehension explaining the abuses,
soppish and sottish corruptions, that like so many Cankers or Caterpillars have
and do daily eat, consume and putrify both the Purity and Piety of that
Religion which boasts it self to be most Primitive and Catholic. For the
other part of this Book, or Bawd, she is altogether civil or temporal,
being not troubled so much as with one good Ecclesiastical word, but merely
Paradoxicall; setting forth there are and singular virtues of a Bawd; wherein if
any of my Readers can pick any pleasure, it is an apparent sign they have
some wit, and if they reap any profit, let them either thank me in words, or
elsereward me with silence.

Yours so far, and no further then you are mine, JOHN TAILOR.

A Bawd.
MY Verse is honest, seemly, neat, and clean,
Yet is my Theme polluted and obsceane:
He touch foul pitch, yet will not be defilde,
My Muse shall wade through dirt, and not be soild.
The Sun on noisome Dunghils shines as well,
As on fair flowers that do fragrant smell:
The Air by which we live, does every where
Breathe still alike upon the poor and Peer.
The Sea bears many an old despised Witness my paper Boat.
Boat,
Yet on the Sea the best ships do but float,
And Earth allows to all her scatterd brood,
Food, Clothes and lodging, to the bad and good.
Yet Sun, Air, Sea, nor Earth receive disgrace
By any bounty which they give the base.
Even so my Muse, (free from all foul intetnts)
Does take e^^^ple from the Elements,
In laying better studies by a while,
And in clean fashion write a beastly style:
Yet will I not my sense or meaning mar,
With terms obscure, or phrases fetched from far,
Nor will I any way equivocate,
With words sophistical, or intricate,
Vtopian-Fustianisme, poor heathen Greek,
To put my Readers wits to groape and seek.
Small eloquence men must expect from me,
My Schollership will name things as they be.
I think it good, plain English, without fraud,
To call a Spade a Spade, a Bawd a Bawd.
Two little Pamphlets I have wrote before,
Which I was bold to call a Thief, and Whore,
Yet was my Whore so chaste, that she had not,
From end to end, one foul offensive spot,
Nor did my Thief from any man purloyne,
Or lived by filching either goods or coin.
And now by chance it came into my mind,
That with the Bawd my pen was much behind:
^^y Where was honest, and my Thief was true,
And in this sort I Will give the Bawd her due.
^range fruit from my poor barren labors springs,
^^ modestly must use immodest things,
^Tis somewhat hard, but yet it is no riddle,
All Bawdry does not breed below the middle.
^o many several sorts of Bawdes do grow,
That where there is not a Bawd, it is hard to know.
The first with spiritual Bawdes, whose honor high,
^^prings from the whoredom of Idolatry.
^^st but your eyes upon the Man of Rome,
That styles himself the head of Christendom,
^^ists universal Vicar, and Vicegerent,
^^ whom fools think the Truth is so inherent,
That he can souls to Heaven or hell prefer,
And being full of Errors, cannot err:
And though his witchcraft thousands has enticed,
He will be called Lieutenant unto Christ.
How has that false Conuenticle of Trent,
^ade laws, which God, or good men never meant,
Commanding worshipping of stones and stocks,
Of Relics, dead men's bones, and senseless blocks,
From which adultrate painted Adoration,
^en (worse then stocks or blocks) must seek salvation?
The Souls of men are His that dearly bought them,
And he the only way to Heaven has taught them.
And whosoever forces them to false adoring,
^s the maine Bawd, unto this Spiritual Whoring.
Besides, it is apparent, and most clear,
That he is the greatest Bawd the Earth does bear:
For he that tolerates the Stews erection,
Allows them Privileges and protection,
Shares in the profit of their fordid sweat,
R^apes yearly Pensions and Reuennues great,
Permits the Pole-shorne Fry of Friars and Monks,
For Annual stipends to enjoy their Punckes.
When S^^. Smith in his treat. of Herodot. Cap. 38. page 303.
P^^^ the third the Romish miter wore,
He had contributary Truls such store,
To five and forty thousand they amount,
As then Romes Register gave true account.
Besides, it was approved, the gain was clear
^ Full twenty thousand Ducats every year.
Moreover, once a Bishop (boasting) said,
He had Ten Thousand Priests that paid
(Some more, some less) by way of Rent or fines,
Each Corathus Agrippa in his vanity of Sciences.
one of them for keeping Concubines.
And he that keeps none, pays as much as he
As for his use does keep one, two, or three.
All Is one, the Priests must pay t'augme^t the treasure,
Keep or not keep, Whore or not Whore at Pleasure.
Now judge, good Reader, have I said amiss, Idem.

Was ever any Bawdry like to this?
Pope Lucroce was first married to her own brother the son of Pope Alexander
the sixth, she being daughter to the laid Pope, and daughter in low to him by
the marriage with his son. And being concubine to the said Pope, he caused
her after his son her husbands death, to be married to three Princes one
after another: Fist to Duke John Sforza, secondly, to Lewis son to Alphonsus
King of Arragon, thirdly, to Alphonsus D'^st Duke of Ferara.
Alexander, of that name the sixth,
With his own child incestuously commixt.
And Paul the third (affecting the said Game)
With his own Her name was Constancia, she was married to a Duke named
Sforza, but the Pope her father poisoned her, because he could not lawfully
enjoy her. Also for the like, he poisoned his sister.
daughter did commit the same:
And after with his sister took such course,
That he with her did do as bad or worse.
John the thirteenth, and other more, it is plain,
Have with their sisters and their daughters lain,
And when their stomachs have been gone and past,
To Princes they have married them at last.
Here Is Bawdes of state, of high and mighty place,
Our Turnbull street poor Bawdes to these are base.
But these brave Doings better to disclose,
A little while I Will turn my Verse to Prose.
The forenamed Lucrece being dead, had this Epitaph bestowed on her, written by
Pontanus.

Here lies Lucrece by name, but Thais in life,
The Popes child, and Spouse, and yet his own sons wife.
Besides, I found a cursed Catalogue of these veneriall Caterpillars, who were
suppressed with the Monasteries in England, in the time of King Henry the eight,
with the number of trugs which each of them kept in those days, as these;
Christopher James a Monk of the Order of Saint Bennet in Canterbury, had
three Whores, all married women: William Abbot of Bristoll, four: Nicholas
VVhyden Priest kept four in Windsor Castle: in the same place George
Whitthorne five, Nicholas Spoter five, Robert Hunne five, Robert Daueson six,
Richard the Prior of Maidenbeadly five; In Shulbred Monastery in Chichester
Diocesses George Walden the Prior seven; John Standnep seven; Nicholas Duke
five; In Bath Monafterie Richard Lincoombe seven, three of them married: John
Hill in the Cathedral Church at Chichester but thirteen; John White Prior of
Bermonsey had no more but twenty: all this Rabble was found and known in
England; let a man imagine then how many were not known, and what a goodly
brood of barnes were fathered upon those that never begat them: withal, if
England were so stored with them, it is not to be doubted but all the rest of
the Christian world did swarm with these lecherous Locusts.

Moreover, much knavery (Bawdery I should say) may be covered under the veil
of Auricular Confession, for the Priest having a young pretty maid or wife at
shrift, will know her disposition, groape out all her secret conueyances, and
craftily vnderfeele her policies, and for a penance for her faults past, she
is enjoined to commit a sin present. The unloading of her Conscience (many
times) proving the burden of her belly Forty weeks after. And in this manner
the most zealous Catholic, or the most jealous Italian, may be most dououtly
cornuted, under the cloak of Confession and Absolution.

Besides, a most pernicious Bawd is he,
That for poor A flattring hireling preacher, is a Bawd to the vices of his
surly Patron, and an hypocritical conniuer at the crying sins of his
Audience.
scraps, and a bare ten pounds fee,
Dares not his mighty Patron to offend,
Or any way his vices reprehend,
Nor preach against pride, oppression, usury,
Dice, drink or drabbes, vain oaths or simonie,
Nor Venial sin or Mortal, or nothing
That may his Worship in the Withers wring:
But every way must fit his Text and time,
To leave untouched the Impropriators crime.
Thus those whose functions Heaven does dignifie,
(Who should like Trumpets lift their voices high)
Are mute and muzzled, for a hireling price,
And so are Bawdes unto their Patrones vice;
For he is a Bawd who does his Living win
By hiding, or by flattring peoples sin.
The The Devil is the chief Bawd.
Prince of darkness, King of Acheron,
Great Emperor of Styx and Phlegeton,
Cocitus Monarch, high and mighty Dis,
Who of Great Limbe-Lake Commander is,
Of Tartary, of Erebus, and all
Those Kingdoms which men Barathrum do call,
He is the chiefest Bawd, and still he plods
To send us Whoring after godless gods:
And by his sway, and powerful Instigation,
Has made the world stark drunk with fornication.
For since the first Creation, never was
The least degree of Bawdry brought to pass,
But he began it and contrived it still,
He laid the Plot, and did the Act fulfill.
So that of all the Bawdes that ever were,
The Devil himself the bell away does bear:
Yet all his whoring base Idolatry,
Did seem Religious zealous sanctity.
As thus,

He blinded and withdrew people so fa^^ from the service and knowledge of the
tr^^ God, that they prayed to Pomona for the ^^^^ crease of their fruit, to
Ceres for Corn an^^^^^ Grain, to Siluanus for wilde-fowle, to Bac^^ for wine,
to Neptune for fish, to Mars for the success of Wars and Captains, to
Phoebus for Physic and Music, to Saturn for ^^^^ bourers and workmen in
husbandry, to Pall^^ for valor, to Minerua for wisdom, to I^^^^ for men of
state and port, to Juno for Pomp^^ and Jewels, to Vulcan for fire and
lightening to Venus for beauty and lascivious pleasure, to Luna for calmnes and
fair weather, to Pl^^^^ for riches, to Mercury for learning and elo^ quence,
to Flora for flowers, to Proteus for disguises, to Pan for Pypers, to Eolus for
win^^^^ and storms, to Bellona for battles and conquests, to Lucina for women
with child, to Faunus for Goats and Venison, to Cloth^ for spinning out the
thread of life, to Lachesis for wynding or reeling it, and to Atropos for
cutting it off: nay he led them into more indiculous sorts of spiritual
adultery, as to worship with religious adoration, Cats, Dogs, Toades,
Beetles, Serpents, Fools, Madme^, Priuies, Onions, Garlic, and many other
damnable inventions, not to be numbered.

Nevertheless, whosoever will but look into the lying Legend of Golden
Gullery, there they shall find that the poor seduced ignorant Romanists do
imitate all the idolatrous fornication of the Heathen Pagans, and Infidels; and
that they put their He and She Saints, to far more baser and ignominio^s
offices, then these unbelievers of former ages did dare to put upon their
(vain imaginary) gods, as they make Saint Crespin a Shoemaker, and Saint Roch
the Patron Sowters and Cobblers, they put Saint Wendelin to keep sheep, and
they make Saint Pelage a Cowheard or Neatheard, Saint Anthony has the
protection of their Swine, Saint Vitus or Vitellus, alias, Saint Calfe, an
excellent patron or proctor to cure those that are bitten of a Spider called
Tarrantulla, or Phallanx. They acknowledge Saint Gertrude for an excellent
Rat-catcher, and Saint Hubert for a good Dogge-keeper (some say a cunning
H^^^isman:) the Smiths must pray to Saint Eloye, the Painters to Saint Luke,
the Ba^ers must invoke Saint Honor, the Mari^^rs Saint Nicholas, Saint Yue
is for the Lawyers, and Saint Anne to find things that are stolen or lost,
whilst Saint Leonard is the only Saint to set prisoners at liberty, by opening
the doors in the night, and make their Shac^les fall off without any noise or
knocking. Besides, they make Job a Physician to cure the Pox, when as that
foul disease was not known in any part of the world in many hundred years
after Jobs days; for in the year 1496 ( Charles the eight being then the
French King) the Pox was brought from Naples into France, having but a little
before been very thriftily by the Spaniards purchased from the Americans or
West Indians: And therefore they do Job wrong to make a Mountebank of him, in
ascribing cures to him beyond his skill or knowledge: but all is one for that,
he must be content with his office, as Saint Valentine is with the falling
sickness, Saint Roch with ^cabbes and scurfes, Saint Schastian with the Plague
Saint Eu^rope the dropsy, Saint ^^^^, the Gout, Saint Petronella the Ague be
any Fever, Saint Apollonia the Tooth^ch, A Glister of holy water I think would
better drive on the Devil.
Saint Roman, they say, dispossesseth ^ine^s out of the possessed, and Saint
Ma^^^^ is the mad men's Saint to cure the ^^enzie. It is to be doubted that
Physicians and Chirurgians have small takings, where all these skil^full Saints
are so employed, except ^ow and then they get a Patient by chance, when the
good Saint is ouer-bus^ed, or not at ^^^^^ure.

Moreover, there is a great contention amongst them to what^, Saint they shall
commit the keeping of their Ceese: some will have Saint An^och, some Saint
G^ll^^ct, and some Saint Fortall: the business is very weighty, and requires
mature deliberation and ripe judgment: some there are that would deprive Saint
Wendeli^^ (before named) of his keeping Sheep, and bestow the place upon Saint
Wolf, which is a very vnsurable name for a Shepherd.

By this which has been said, the Reader may perceive what a cunning Bawd the
Devil is, to adulterate the true service of the eternal God with these whorish
Inventions. And so though I could amplify this point to a larger extent, in
describing spiritual Bawdes and Bawdry, yet now I think fitting to avoid
rediousnesse, and to treat of this subject in other garbes and fashions.

It is reported by Henry Stephens in his Apology or defense of Herodotes, the
first Book, 21. Chapter, page 182. That a merry disposed Priest got a pretty
less behind the high Altar upon a Good Friday in the morning, where he
thought all the He and She Saints were contented to keep Counsel, but it
was known to the Legate of Auinion (by the intelligence of no Saint) which
Legate after he had wisely considered on what day and time, and in what place
the cleanly conueyance was acted, he out of his charity concluded a Priest to
be mortal, and that flesh was frail, for which respects (upon promise of
amendment) he was absolved and released.

Moreover, great Emperors have been Bawdes.
Emperors and Kings have been Bawdes, as Suelonius Tranquilius writes of
Tyberius Caesar, that he had Cells, Caves, and Vaults in his house, where he
had a nursery of whores, and oftentimes would have the execrable ^^^^ committed
in his presence. The Emperor Domitian followed his admirable example, and
Heliogabolus went so far beyond them in the art of Bawdry, that he made
Punyes of them both. And of later years a A king of Castile or Spain, Bawd to
his own wife.
King of Castile, called Henry the unable, because he could not have a child
by his wife to inherit after him, he kindly entreated one of his Lords to take
the pains to beget an heir for him.

There was a rich Burger of Antwerp, a Mercer by his trade, who was a Bawd to
his own wife (though it was against his will or knowledge) but I blame him
not, for I doubt he has many more fellows as innocent and ignorant as
himself, but this was the case, his wife wearing Cork shoes, was somewhat
light-heel'd, and like a foul player at Irish, sometimes she would bear a
man too many, and now and then make a wrong Entrance: The sum was, that she
loved a Doctor of Physic well, and to attain his company she knew no better
or safer way, then to feign her self sick, that he under the color of
visitation might feel her pulses, and apply such cordial Remedies as might
either case or cure her.

In brief, the Doctor being sent for, comes and finds the Mercer her husband
walking in his shop with a neighbor of his, where after a Leash of Congees,
and a brace of Baeza los manus, the Mercer told him that his Wife is a
languishing sick woman, and withal entreats him to take the pains to walk
up the stairs, and minister some comfort unto her: Master Doctor, who knew her
disease by the Symptoms, ascends up into the Chamber to his longing patient,
staying an hour with her, applying such directions and refections, that her
health was upon the sudden almost half recovered; so taking his leave of her
(with promise of often visitation) he comes down into the shop, where the
guiltless Bawd her husband was, who demanding of the Doctor how all did above,
truly quoth he, much better then when I came, but since I went up, your wife
has had two such strange violent fits upon her, that it would have grieved
your very heart to have seen but part of one of them.

I my self do know two men that lighted by chance into one of these houses of
iniquity in Antwerp, and I dare be sworn that they went to commit no Carnal
act, nor did commit any; but they perceiving a pretty painted piece of punks
flesh, did suspect in what house they were, the one of them taking her by the
hand did ask her some questions (wherein I think was not one word of God) the
other impatient that his fellow had ingrost all the familiarity and talk with
the wench, begins to stamp, knock and call, at which the man of the house
enters, demanding What do ye lack. You base Rascal, quoth the other, have
you no more Whores in your house, must I stand like a Jack an Apes here empty
handed? Good sir, (quoth mine host) be patient, and I will presently send mine
own wife to wait upon you.

Nor is the skill and knowledge of a substantial or Absolute Bawd easily
gotten or learned; no my Masters there is more in the matter then so; First,
she is a young pretty Girl, and passes time away in the instructions, rudiments
and documents of a Whore, till she has attained (with many hazards) to the
years of 30. or 35. in all which space she has not spent her time idly, but
has been a creature of much use, having for the common cause aduentur'd the
blemmish of her Reputation, the rigor of the Laws, as whippings, Penance,
Imprisonments, fines, fees to Justices Clarks, Beadles, and such inferior
Relics of Authority. Besides her valorous combats and conflicts with
diseases, (wherein she often approues her self one of the profitablest
members in a Commonwealth to Physicians and Chyrurgians) having (I say) passed
all these degrees with much peril and i^opardy of her body, No tolleration.
then look higher and think but on the shipwrake of her soul, (an adventure
of a greater price then she is aware of) then toward the declining of her
life, and that her beauty fades, What a deal of charge is she at with
sophisticated Art, White and Red, to emplaster decayed Nature? her humility
being such, that when her own head is bald she will wear the cast hair of
any he or she ^^^ner that made a voyage in a string from Tyburne to either
Heaven or Hell. And lastly, when as Art can no longer hide the furrowed or
wrinkled deformities of her ouer-worne age; then (like a true well-willer to
the old trade she has ever followed,) Whoring having left her very unkindly
before she was willing to leave it: she (as her proper right for her long
service, takes upon her the office and authority of a Bawd, and as she was
brought up her self, so with a motherly care her employment is to bring up
others, wherein her pains is not small, in hyring Country wenches that come
up weekly with Carriers, and putting them in fashion, selling one Maydenhead
three or four hundred times, and sometimes with great labor and difficulty
she is forced to persuade men's wives and daughters; all which considered, a
Bawd does not get her living with so great ease as the world supposes; nor is
her adventure, pains, charge and peril to be inconsiderately slighted.

And as blabbing, babbling, taletelling, and discovering the faults and
frailties of others, is a most common and evil practice amongst too many: so
on the other side, the virtues of a Bawd are much illustrated and confirmed by
countrary effects: For she is the maine storehouse of secrecy, the Maggazin of
taciturnity, the clozet of conniuence, the mumbudget of silence, the
cloathbagge of counsel, and the Capease, fardle, pack, A necessary male for a
man to trusse up his trinkets i^.
male, (or female) of friendly toleration. She is full of intolerable charity,
for her whole trade and course of life is to hide and cover the faults of the
grearest offenders, in which regard she is one of the principal secretariesses
to the great Goddess Venus, and one of her industrious vigilant most horrible
privy counsel, not being ignorant of the liberal Arts and Sciences, and
exceedingly qualified in the seven deadly sins. And (for her further behoof)
she has an insight and can fashion her self to the humors of al Nations,
degrees, conditions, my steries and occupations.

First, for her knowledges in the Arts and Sciences, she has the grounds of A
Bawd a Grammarian.
Grammar, whereby she can speak and write Amorously, fainedly, merrily,
lamentably, crastily, purposely, Bawdily: these words all ending in Lie (do
make her true dealing questionable) yet her aim is to live profitably, though
her fate is to dye miserably. Her skill in An Astronomer.
Astronomy cannot be small, for she has been an often starre-gazer lying on
her back, practiced in eleuations, retrogradations, Conjunctions, and
planetary reuolutions; put indeed she is more addicted to accept the Moon for
her Mistress, then the Sun for her Master, which makes her expert in
nightworkes, ever changing from quarter to quarter, not long abiding in any
place: sometimes shining in Lady-like resplendent brightness with admiration,
and suddenly again eclipsed with the pitchy and tenebrous clouds of contempt
and deserved defamation. Sometimes at the Full at Pickt-hatch, and sometimes in
the Wane at Bridewell.

A Bawd is a A Logician.
Logician, which is perceived by her subtle and circumuenting speeches,
doubtful and ambiguous Apothegmes, double significations, intricate, witty,
and cunning equivocations, (like a skillful Fencer that casts his eye upon a
man's foot, and hits him a knock on the pate) so She, by going the further
about, comes the nearer home, and by casting out the Lure, makes the Tassell
Gentle come to her fist.

For Rhetoric, she must have the Theoricke and Practicke, that though the
subject of her discourse or writing be foul and deformed, yet must she (like a
Mountebanks, Raicatcher or Landloper.
medicine-monger, quacke-saluer that couers his bitter pills in Sugar) with the
Embrodery of her eloquence, flourish over her immodest pretenses, under the
enchanting and various colors of pleasure, profit, estimation, love,
reputation, and many more the like.

But of all the Mrithmetiske.
Arts, I think she be most imperfect in Arithmeticke, for though she has
been brought up to know Divisions and Multiplications, yet she has traded but
by Retaile, altogether in Fractions and broken Numbers, so that her accounts
were seldom or never to number her days, not caring for the past or the
future, her mind (like a Dyall) always fixed upon the present, given much to
over and vnder-reckonings, for at forty years old she would be but twenty one,
and at threescore she will be no less then fourscore: so that the mark being
out of her mouth, we must take the Apocryphal account of her age from her
own Arithmeticke without any further warrant.

Cornelius Agrippa approues a Bawd for an excellent Geometrician for devising
engines to climb into windows, as Ladders of Ropes, or such like, to scale
the Castle of comfort in the night, or the making of Picklockes or false keys,
wherein the Bawds care and providence is great, in greazing and oyling locks,
bolts and hinges to avoid noise, she knows her Angles, Triangles,
Quadrangles, squares, rounds, circles, semicircles and centers, her altitudes,
longitudes, latitudes and demensions, yet for all this skill of hers, she has
much ado to live squarely, according to Geometrical rules, or to live within
any reasonable Compass.

As for Music, It is to be coniectured by her long practice in prickesong,
that there is not any note above Ela, or below Gammoth, but she knows the
Diapason: (a Bawd is old dog at a hornepipe, her chiefest instrument is a
Sackbut, her female minikins do bring in her means, and her trebles, the
tenor of all is that her self is the Base.) Besides, there are many pretty
prouocatory dances, as the kissing dance, the cushin dance, the shaking of the
sheets, and such like, which are important isntrumental causes, whereby the
skillful has both clyents and custom.

Poetry many times (though she understand it not) does her as good service; for
the most of our great Bawds are diligently waited on by scurrilous oily
sonneting, practical, Poetical, Geometry.
Music.
Poetry.
Panegyricall Panders, quaint trencher Epigrammatists, hungry and needy
Anagra^^ mongers, their conceits being either commending or provoking Bawdry:
as one being requested by a Gentleman to invent him a poesy for a Ring which
he meant to give his Love, the conceit was; Have you any Logges to cleave?

Painting and grauing are now and then profitable servants to Bawds as the
naked Pictures of Venus, and Diana and her darlings; Aretine, and diverse other
in that kind can testify; but commonly all she- Bawds are or have been
painters themselves or painters of themselves, by which bold practice they are
bold, aduenturous, impudent, and audacious, fearing no colors.

As for Physic and Surgery, she has been so much practiced upon, that
by long continuance, she is a most excellent Empericke, so that a man need not
doubt but an ancient professed Bawd can play the Mountebanke.

Moreover, many old Bawds are skilled in Palmestry or Chiromancy by looking into
the hand of a man or woman, or Phisiognomy, and Metoposcopi, in viewing of the
face or forehead, by which she professes to tell the parties how many
husbands or wives they shall have, how long they shall live, when they are
near a good or bad turn; but above all, her skill is much credited to help
young women breed and fructify, so that if she be as barren as a Stockfish,
yet the matronly medicines and instructions of this wise cunning woman, will i^
a little time make her increase with a vengeance, and multiply with a mischief.

Besides her skill in these forenamed Arts and sciences, she has an insight
and practice into all Mysteries and manual trades; she ca^ imitate a
deceitful Mercer in setting out her ware, fair to the eye, and false in the
dye, with an outside of glorious gloss, and an inside of rotten decayed
dross, more for pride or pleasure, then for providence, or profit.

Painting.
Physic and Chirurgerie.
Taim^^ and Fortune-telling.
Mercer.
Like a bold Grocer.
Grocer, she cares not a Fig for any man, she knows flesh is frail, yet she
has many Reasons to live by, she runs her race long, and she is able to Pepper
as many as have any dealing with her; tooth Lickorish, tongue Lickorish, etc.
she knows a bribe to a Catchpole is as sufficient as an Almond for a Parrot,
to free her from the heat of the Mace. Master Cloue at the sign of the
Sugar-loafe, is a sweet youth, whose Candied Visitation will keep her estate
Current till age and diseases wear her quite out of date.

Draper.
A young rich heir newly come to his lands or portion, is a Bawds Broadcloth,
whom she measures out in parts, I will not tell you with what yard, but I
think no London measure, till in the end, only a poor remnant remains; her
meaner Merchandise are tradesmen, and poor seruing-men, these serve for course
Kerseyes, Bays, Cottons and Pennistones to line her inside with Sack, hot
waters, and Aqua vitae.

Though she live after the flesh; all is Fishmongers and Fishermen.
Fish that comes to the net with her, she is a cunning Angler and gets her
living by hook or by crook, she has baits for all kind of Frye: A great
Lord is her Groneland Whale, a Country Gentleman is her Gods-head, a rich
Citizens son is her sows'd Gurnet, or her Gudge^n: A Puritan is her
Whitingmop, her Lobster is a scarlet Townsman, and a severe Justice of Peace is
her Crab, her meanest customers are Sprats and Pilchards, whilst the Puncke is
her salt Eele, and the Pander her Sharke and Swordfish; And though she deal
most in Scorpio, yet she holds correspondency with Pisces, for they both are
signs that attend upon Venus: Friday is her day, and a day of doom to more
fish then all the days in the week beside. And fish by nature is prouocatory,
as appears by the chaste lives of fasting fish-eating Friars and Nuns, whose
notorious ( qusia) meritorious continency is touched partly before.

She differs from the Goldsmith.
Goldsmith in the Tutch, the Test, and the weight, yet she puts the best side of
her ware outward, she casts and hammers her wenches into all fashions; thee
has them burnished, pollish'd, punch'd and turned, and if any of them by a
fall, or too much heat be bruised, cracked or broken, she can soder them
together again, and make them marketable.

There is scarce any Art, mystery, trade or manual occupation, but a Bawd has
a reference or allusion to it, or it to her. Therefore to run division
through them all would be long labor to little purpose: In which respects
having spoken of a few, He s^ip over the rest to avoid tediousness; and to
free my self from the imputation of partiality, Fe^at last allude her to a
Water-man; for of all degrees, Languages, Tongues, Nations, ^ge^ Sexes,
Functions and fraternities are welcome and well entertained to the one and the
other (provided they bring money in their purses.) And as the Waterman rows
one way, and looks another, so a Bawds words and meaning do very seldom go
together.

Our five Senses are the Cinque Ports of Bawdry, each one in his office being
the hearts Bawd: The Hearing conueighes Tunes, Tales, Rimes, Ridles, Songs,
Sonnets, and Madrigals. The Sight wanders, searches, seeks, finds and brings
home (into the very bedchamber of the heart) amorous actions, prouocatory
gestures, effeminate glances, alluring looks, pictures of prostitution, and
veneriall vanities. The Taste plays the Bawd with both Art and Nature, and
searches through the Earth, Seas and Skies for variety of temptations; poor
and innocent Lambstones, Potatoes, Eringoes, Crabs, Scallops, Lobsters, Wilkes,
Cockles, Oysters, Anchoues and Caueare, Cock-sparrowes, Coxcome-pyes, and all
manner of feathered soul from the Eagle to the Wren, do wait upon the Taste,
and the Taste attends the appetite. The Smell is the senting Bawd, that huffs
and snufts up and down, and has the game always in the wind, that is a
right smellsmocke sense, who is wonderfully pleased to be led by the nose, can
hunt dry-foot, and smell out Venery nimbler then a pinch-gut Usurer will nose
out a feast.

Touching or Feeling is a very merry Bawd, and though a man or woman can
neither Hear, See, Taste or Smell, yet Feeling may remain: It is the last
sense that keeps us company, and were it not for feeling, all the rest of the
senses were but senseless.

And thus much more in excuse of a Bawd, though she live by one of the Seven
Deadly Sins, which is Lechery; No man can deny Pride to be another of the
said Septarchy, yet the Mercer, the Silkeman, the Embroyderer, the Drawer, the
Cutter, the Tailor and the Feather-maker, the new fashion monger, the Devil
and all thrive by Pride, and might shut up shop, if Pride were not.

Glattonie and Drunkenness is another of the brood, yet were it not for
superfluous, voluptuous gurmandizing, and extraordinary swinish swilling and
drinking; the Wine-Merchant, the Vintner, the Malt-man, the Brewer, the
Tapster; Poulterer, the sellers of Eringoes and Potatoes, and the Cook would
have but very cold takings.

Covetousness is another whelpe of the same kind, yet were it not for
ravenous oppression, devouring Extortion, biting Usury, Bribery, Deceit and
Coozenage, Dives would not or could not fare deliciously and be clad in
Purple, nor the hackney Coach be in such common request.

Envy is a high point of State, and he is no perfect Politician that repines
not at the happiness of all men (but himself:) commonly it gives due
attendance in Princes Courts, and feeds upon the detraction of Noble actions;
It eats into honor, as a Canker does into the best and choysest fruit, yet
does it live, thrive, wear good clothes, is esteemed a talent of high wisdom
and valor.

Wrath is a blood-hound of the aforesaid kennell, yet Armourers, Cutlers,
Fencers, Chirurgians, and Bonesetters would be idle and want employment and
means, if Wrath did not overcome Patience, and madness dispossess discretion
and Reason.

Sloth is the last of the list, (and well may it come last because it is
laziest) yet is it a Gentleman-like quality, and a Lady-like disposition, to be
idle, and live upon the sweat of others; Manual trades or handicrafts are
counted base and mercenarie, and good industry is contemptible; laudable
endeavors Mechanical, and to take pains and labor, is drudgery and mere
slavery.

Thus by Pride a man may come to be one of the Masters of his Parish, by
Gluttony and drunkenness, he may hap mount to a place of reputation and
worship; by Covetousness he may get a damnable deal of wealth and be
accounted a good man; by Envy he may be esteemed conceited, Politic, grave
and wise: by Wrath he may gain the titles of valiant and resolute, and by
Sloth and idleness he may be perfectly known for a Gentleman.

All vices are in high account and great respect, but only a Bawdes
occupation: yet many men have an itching desire in private, to that which he
will condemn in public.
And is it not a wonder, that these six deadly sins, should be so
uncharitable to the seuenth^as to rob it of all earthly reputation, when if a
man do consider them rightly, there is never a barrel better herring, nor does
the Bawd live in a worse estate or condition, then the proudest gluttonous
Drunkard, or the most couctous, envious wretch? The wrathful bloody villain,
or the idle slothful drone, are clogged with vices as vile and abominable as a
Bawd, yet for all this, the purblind partial world does hug, embrace,
cherish and reverence all these enormitie^, only a Bawd, a silly painful,
serviceable Bawd, is held odious and contemptible.

Commonly most of the she- Bawds have a peculiar privilege more then other
women, for generally they are not starueling creaturs, but well larded and
embost with fat, so that a Bawd has her mouth three stories of Chinnes high,
and is a well fed emblem of plenty; and though she be but of small
estimation, yet is she always taken for a great woman amongst her neighbors.

The patience of ^ Bawd.
On former Shroue-tuesdaies, when the unruly rabble did falsely take upon them
the name of London Prentices, then two or three thousand of those boot-haling
pillaging Rascals, would march madly to the habitations of the most famous
Bawdes, where they would robustiously enter, breaking open doors, battring
down walls, tearing down Tyles, pulling down windows, rending Trunkes,
Chests, Cupboords, Tables, and Bedsteads in pieces; ripping and enbowelling
bolsters and featherbeds, rauishing her maids or stale virgins, spoiling all
they stole not, and stealing what they liked, beating the grave Bawd, and all
her female vermin, most unmanly and unmannerly. In all which uncivil civil
hostility, the singular patience of the Bawd is worthy admiration; not giving
any of these landsharkes an ill word, or showing any sign of anger or desire
of revenge, but entreating the most rough-hewd Rogues in the company, with the
styles of honest worthy Gentlemen, with I pray you, I humbly desire you, I
heartily beseech you, to assuage your fury, appease your wrath, mollify your
anger, suppress your ire, mitigate your rage. These and like Phrases, a modest
ancient Bawd would discreetly utter to her greatest enemies, rendering good
words for bad deeds, when they were doing or had done to her all the
mischiefs before named, nor ever after would she offer to take any legal
course, as to cause them to be brought before a Justice, whereby the Law might
in some sort give her satisfaction: In which sufferance the great patience of a
Bawd is remarkable.

We do esteem a Fountain. Well, or Spring to be the more clear from poison,
if a toad, a newt, or a, snake, be in either of them, for we imagine that
those venomous creatures do suck or extract all the contagion of that
Christaline Element into themselves. The necessity of a Bawd.
In the like nature, a Bawd is the snuffers of the Commonwealth, and the most
wholesome or necessary wheelebarrow or Turnbrell, for the close conueyance of
man's luxurious nastinesse and fordid beastialitie. Ravens, Kites, Crows, and
many other birds of Prey, are tolerated to live unhurt, not for any good that
is in themselves, but because they do good offices in devouring and carrying
away our Garbage and noisome excrements, which they live by: and if they were
not our voluntary Scauengers, we should be much annoyed with contagious
sauors of these corrupted offals. These are the right patterns of an
industrious Bawd, for she pickes her living out of the laystall or dunghill of
our vices; if she thrive and grow fat, it is with the Meraurinous draffe of
our imperfections, (for she is seldom beholding to an honest man for so much
as a meals meat) she robs not the virtuous of any part of their virtue, she
lives only by the vicious, and in this sort she is an executioner of sinners,
and in the end gives the most wicked cause to repent, leaving them such aching
remembrance in their joints, that their very bones rattle in their skins.

In other trades, when Apprentices come out of their years, they are allowed
to set up for themselves, and to have other apprentices under them. He that
has been a Grammar Scholar, when he comes to ripeness of learning and
judgment, will think himself able and sufficient to be a Schoolmaster, and
to have other Scholars under him: and why should not The equity of a Bawd.
Whores have a Mistress of their own dealing-trade, that they may have
Apprentices under their nurture and Discipline, who may by their obedience in
their minority be advanced to command others in the same mystery or occupation?
And therefore the Law (in this point) favoring their vocation, why should any
censorious Cato plead the Law for banishing of any Bawdes?

Why should any Ecclesiastical Laws in Foreign Countries, debar Bawdes
and their disciples from the Sacrament; as if they were not in Charity, when as
they are known to be so Catholikely charitable, that they extend their The
charity of a Bawd.
love to all without exception, and are ready enough to forgive all the world,
knowing themselves to be such great offenders, that they much need
forgiveness?

Welfare The Philosophy of a Bawd.
the Commonwealth plotted by Plato, who would have no woman appropriated to any
man (it seems he was a great enemy against enclosures, who would have all
thus lie common) his reason was very Phylosophicall, the like whereof is not to
be found either in Don Quixot, or Sir Thomas Moors Vtopia, namely, that when
no child had any proper father, every man would love every child as his own,
and so the whole City should be happy in a Combination of an universal love
equally extended to all. If so wise a man as Plato, was not a shamed to make
himself the universal Bawd of a whole Commonwealth, why should any of our
unlearned neighbors that have read far fewer Books then he, be ashamed to
be accounted procuring Panders in one house, in the skirts of a City, for the
Platon call Conjunction of their neighbors within a street or two adjoining.

The ciuility of a Bawd.
In Italy and most civil Countries, it is counted a most uncivil curiosity to
ask any man (though after long acquaintance) of what religion he is or whence
he comes, or whither he goes, or whether he be a married man, or intend
to marry. Who then more civil or fairly mannered then the Bawdes: for they
never put any of their customers to the rock to coufesie, nor do they torture
their, guests with the saucy inquiry of Whence come you? how long will you tarry
in Town? have you a wife at home, or are you a loose Bachelor? are you a
Gentleman? a Merchant, or tradesman? are you a Catholic, or Reformed? The Bawd
I say is so civil that she never will ask any of these questions, one thing
only she studies and practices, which is diligently to demand The wisdom of
a Bawd.
whether a man have any money in his purse, which is no impertinent question: for
the Law does authorize a Landlord to demand his Rent upon the ground where it
is due, although sometimes he lets his tenant enjoy his house or land a
quarter, or half a year before he receive any rent: A waterman sweats and
lands his fare before he looks for money. The Host suffers his guest to eat
his meat, before anon, anon with the white Apron comes in with thus much to
pay, and ye are welcome; no man at any game takes up his winnings before the
Game be won; an Usurer takes no forfeit before the day of payment be past;
but the Bawd in her demand is more wise and provident, then all these trades
and functions, for she like a Butcher takes present pay or her flesh, she will
be sure to have her wages before she afford you her peny-worth you shall not
drink at her muddy well before you pay for it, She know; that hope and
desire of that which is to come, is a better paymaster, the^ grudging
remembran^e of fruition of, that which is past. Herein six has good examples
to follow of no mean vocations, the learned Physician and Chirurgies would be
loath to exspect their reward till the cure be performed; the honestest Lawyer
would plead but coldly if he might receive no Fees till his clients cause were
judged. A Fencer will fight but faintly if he should take no money before his
prize were played, and the Players on their public stage would act very poorly
if their audience did not pay at their first coming in.

The greedy haling and pulling of other men's goods, or insatiate appetite to
feed, ingurgi^ ta^e, guzzle and swill, are apparent marks or tokens of
Intemperance; who then more temperate then a Bawd? for The temperance of a Bawd.
she is so full of modesty that she lives only upon what people do give
her. Men do voluntarily bring her reuennues to her, she kindly takes no more
then she can get, nor receives any thing but what is brought her, and as the
Tailor steals not at all, because men do freely (and unconstrained) deliver
their goods to him, even so, the Bawd cannot be taxed with depriving any man of
more then he idly parts withal.

Wise men have said, that virtue has no great praise where there is no
allurement or temptation to vice, and therefore have accounted it but small
mastery for a Judge to be vncorrupt where there are no bribes stirring; for a
poor Clown to be humble that has neither money nor Clothes to be proud
of; for a Drunkard to be sober where is no drink but fair water, for a
notorious thief to refrain from filching, where there is not any thing to
steal; or for one to live chaste in a Monastery or Nunnery: But here is the
eminency of abstinence, and the true praise of virtue, for a man to saft at a
delicious feast; to be clear from bribes or gentle rewards, where oppressions,
extortions, strifes and contentions do continually grow and multiply: To be
sober and thirsty where wines and strong drinks are plenty in variety; to be
true and trusty amongst inestimable Jewels, vncountable Treasure, or untold
Gold. These are superarogating virtues, which though many boast of, yet few
attain to: now the Bawd lives in the storehouse of libidinous confraternity,
in the shop of Venery, in the garden of lascivious pleasure, in the ever
growing and flourishing field of vanity; amongst those that practice the
excess of luxury, none so near within ken of wantonness and dalliance; she
admits into her house men flourishing in years, hot in their desires, and
willing in performance, yet (for ought I know) The chastity of a Bawd.
a Bawd was never accused for committing fomication in her own person, (which
is a rare mark of abstinence) for who can produce out of any record, that a
Bawd was ever carted for playing the Whore?

And this is her comfort when she is carted, that she rides when all her
followers go on foot, that every Dunghill pays her homage, and every Tavern
looking-glass powers bountiful reflection upon her, the streets and windows
are full of spectators of her pomp. Shouts, acclamations and ringing on well
tuned Banbury kettle-drums, and barbarous Basins, proclaim and sound forth her
triumphant progress, whilst she rides embrodered all over like a Lady of the
soil, conducted in state out of the Eastern suburbs, to set up her trade
fresh and new in the West.

As concerning Religion or matters of The conscience and religion of a Bawd.
Conscience, she is a creature that will never run mad with beating her
brains in any point of such high quality. For whereas it is a speech or
proverb, to say, that an extortioner, usurer, or corrupted Magistrate has a
Large Conscience, so on the other part, it is a saying, thasuch a man or woman
has no Conscience: now between these extremes of large and none, the Bawd
does observe the mediocrity or mean: for to say that she has a large
Catholic or universal Conscience, to entertain all comers, or all that
would come to her, is false for her conscience is bounded, caged, and
imprisoned, and limited in any man's purse or pocket, of what estate, condition
or Religion soever. On the contrary, to say that she has no Conscience at
all, it were to do her an open injury, for she does extend her entertainment,
to as many as please to please her, and her charity does always stretch as far
as any man's money will reach: And to speak the truth, she has great reason on
her side; for if a man let his Horse to hire, or Ass to market, he will look
to be paid for the travel or pains of his Beast; and shall a Bawd let her
Soul to the Devil for nothing? A Knight of the Poast will not hazard
damnation (and his ears to the Pillory to boot) but (if he be wise) he will
be well paid for his labor. Will any great man oppress and undo a whole
Country, and (with the loss of the Kingdom of Heaven) purchase an accursed
portion of Earth, but that he will have terrestrial Angels minister to him
here, making no account of the celestial hereafter? And shall the conscience
of a Bawd be pinfolded so straightly, that her soul shall be of less esteem
then a Hackney man makes of his Horse or Ass? or a swearing and for swearing
Rogue does of his ears? no, no my Masters, she is wiser then so, she thinks
it is a long journey to Hell, and therefore she does thriftily provide to save
charges, that other men shall pay for her passage or Coachhire: she will not
travel so far upon her own cost, she is so well beloved, that every one of
her customers will (or must) give her something toward the reckoning, she has
more policy in her then to be damned for nothing; and she scorns to usurp a
place in Hell without just title or desert.

As for her Religion, it is of the same piece as her conscience is, there went
but a pair of sheeres between; with the Papist she will be Ceremonious for
the Cross Of men's money.
, with the Puritan, she will be precise, casting her eyes up, when her
thoughts are down, and accept the Cross and Pyle.
pyle; she has so brought up her scholars, that the name of God is too often
in their mouths, for they will swear either with or without occasion; and as
concerning matters of truth, she has brought them up so, that they will lie
with any man. Most of them are of the sect of the Family of Love, they differ
only in this, the familists do hold opinion, that only when the husband
sleeps; that the wife may take as much liberty as a Cat, to play, etc. but the
Bawd does allow a larger toleration, and admits either man or woman to have
access, and use their exercise both sleeping and waking. She is indeed
addicted to any Religion, or all, or none, no further then her ease and profit
does incite her, for she knows that charity is a good huswife, and will begin
her own work at home first: In which respect a Bawd holds a high point of
doctrine, to love her self better then she does all the world besides: and in
this she differs much from a Roman Catholic, that she builds not upon her
Works, or has any hope to be saved by her merits. And should persecution
come, she will be no Martyr, she will neither hang for one religion, or burn
for another, she knows that she came a raw creature into the world, and her
resolution is, that neither religion or conscience shall send her roasted out
of it.

And thus I would have the Reader to consider, that the pains that I have
taken in this description of a Bawd, is more then I would willingly do for the
honestest woman that dwells between Smithfield bars and Clerkenwell, and I
know that there is not any of the trade so ungrateful, but that if my self or
any friend of mine have occasion to use them, they will do their best for me,
and go as near as they can to take our money. Neither have I discoursed of
any vpstart new fangled babble or toy, but of an ancient solid, real, and
lasting thing, for when all trades are tradefalne and broken, a Bawd may set up
with little worth, or a thing of naught, and many times her luck is so
fortunate, that she will A Bawd is an excellent Chimmist.
extract out of sin and wickedness, good money, good clothes, good meat, and
almost good any thing, but good conscience: but that is but a poor beggarly
virtue, which her contrary nature cannot agree withal, for she knows by old
experience that it has undone many, and that they are accounted none of the
wisest, that make any account or reckoning of it.

I am sorry that I have not dedicated this book to some great Patron or
Patroness: but the world is so hard to please, that I think it an easier
matter to displease all, then every way fully to please one; for I did lately
write a small pamphlet in the praise of clean Linnes, which I did dedicate to
a neat, spruce, prime, principal and superexcellent Landresse, and she, in
stead of protecting my labors, or sheltring my good and painful study, does
not only express her liberality in giving me nothing, but also she depraues
and depriues me of that small talent and portion of wit and Poetry which nature
has given or lent me; most untruly affirming and reporting, that that
Pamphlet was the invention of a grave and learned friend of mine, (whose
employments are so urgent and eminent, and whose judgment and capacity are so
mature and approved) that not one line, word, syllable, or letter is in that
poor toy, but it is so far unlike a wiseman, that they all and every one do
most truly and obediently call John Tailor father.

But belike she has learned some frugall qualities of some who are more
honored and worshipped, then honorable or worshipful, who take it for a point
of thirsty wisdom, to discommend where they do not mean to reward. It is a
kind of policy, under which many better labors then mine have suffered
persecution and Martyrdom; and belike my unkind Patroness is ambitious to
follow the example of her betters. But I would have her to know, that if she
had but gratefully accepted my book of Clean Linen, that then I would have
cudgeld and canuasde my Muse, I would have rowz'd my spirits, belabour'd my
Invention, beaten my brains, thump'd, bumbasted, strapadoed, lambski'nd, and
clapper clawed my wits, to have mounted her praise one and thirty yards (
London measure) beyond the Moon. But ingratitude is the poison of industry,
and detraction is the destruction of good endeavors, for the which sins of
hers, I will allot her no other punishment but this, that she shall remain as
she was and is, the true wife to an honest Cobbler, A cleanly, trusty, chaste,
loving and well-beloved Landresse, whom (when the fates and destinies shall
deprive Chancery Lane of, then many polluted and slouenly Linen soylers shall
lament, in foul bands, black cuffes, and mourning shirts.

The industry and vigilance of a Bawd.
As Sloth and idleness are vices discommended in all Laws and Commonwealths,
being enormities of that high nature and vile condition that they have ruined
whole Kingdoms, Cities, families, and many particular persons; so on the
contrary, diligence, industry and careful vigilance, are qualities that do
not only erect States and Commonwealths, but they do also conserve and
preserve whomsoever shall put them in use and practice: who then is more
vigilant or industrious then a diligent Bawd, she is none of the seven
Sleepers, nay she carefully watch^th whilst others sleep, she takes pains
for the pleasure of many, she is the true Emblem or image of security, her
eyes like careful and trusty scouts or spies do foresee and prevent the
danger of Mr. Busieman the Constable with his ragged, rusty regiment. Moreover,
she is not like a ship bound for Groneland, which must sail but in summer, or
a pot of Ale with a toast, which is only in winter: no let the wind blow
where it will, her care is such, that it brings her prize and purchase all
seasons, her Or Punckes.
pinkes are fraighted, her Pinnaces are manned, her friggots are rig'd (from the
beakhead to the Poope) and if any of her vessels be boorded by Pirates, and shot
betwix wind and water, they are so furnished with engines, that they will send
them packing with a pox, or else blow them quite up with a devils name: there
is not a point in the compass but the skillful A Bawd a skillful Nauigator.
Bawd observes, if the wind be North or North-east, she expects profits out of
the Low Countries, from Germany, Denmark, Norway, and sometimes a Prize from
Scotland, if at South or S. west, then her hopes are from France, but Spain,
and Italy do seldom or never fail her; And let it blow high or low, the
Englishman is near on all occasions. She has not been much accused for
receiving uncustomed goods, for to speak the truth, she will harbor no
ventred commodity in her warehouse, and if the Informer or Constable do light
upon one of her concealed dryfats, Punchions, fardils or (naughty) packs, and
having seized it by his office, and honestly laid it up safe in the storehouse
of Bridewell, yet the Bawd will so compound in the business, that for a small
toye, and a little sufferance, she will redeem the Commodity and have her ware
again in her own hands.

The plain dealing of a Bawd.
A Bawd is no deceiuer of her customers, for what she promises she will
perform, as for example, If she take a see to help a man to a Whore, she
will not cheat him and bring him an honest woman; a bargaine's a bargain, and
she will not fail you in a tittle: she plainly and openly shows her self
what she is, she does not dissemble or hide her function from her clyents,
under the veil of hypocrysie, and for her creatures that live under her, A
Bawd has common sense and reason to take her part or share in her prosession.
she has taught them their Art whereby they may live another day, when she is
dead and rotten, and as they have their maintenance by her instruction and
under her protection, so it is fit that in requital of her pains, she should
pick a revenue out of their commings in, she has good presidents out of
famous Authors for it, an old brave fellow took great pains in teaching of
his Cut horse, and the beast was so thankful for it, that he got his masters
prouender and his own both many years after. If a man teach in Ape to do
tricks, the honest Ape will maintain him for it; I have seen a Hare get her
master and dames living, with playing on a Tabor. The very Baboones are grave
examples in this kind, Tumblers boys, (and sometimes their wives) do teach us
this duty; and the ignorant Puppets do allow their maker and master, meat,
drink, and cloth. For mine own part, if I teach my man to row, I will have
for my pains the greatest part of the profit: If I dig or plow and cast my
Seed into the ground, I will expect the benefit of the Crop: If I plant or
grass, I should think I had but hard measure, if I should not feed upon the
fruit of my labor: By this consequence it, is reason that a Bawd should reap
where she has sown, and eat, and live upon such fruit as she has planted.

To close up all, the sum of all is this,
I Will end my book as Ovid ended his.
So long as on the Poles the spangled firmament shall whirle,
So long as Procreation shall beget a Boy or Girl,
So long as winter shall be cold, or summer shall be hot,
So long as poverty and spite shall be true virtues lot,
When Phoebus in the West shall rise, and in the East shall set,
When children (on their mothers) their own fathers shall beget;
Then shall this book, or Bawd lie dead, and never till that day,
Shall Book or Bawd, or Bawd or Book, be scarce, if men will pay.
Till Sun and Moon shall cease to shine, and all the world lie wast;
So long this Book, or else a Bawd, I Am sure, so long shall last.
FINIS.
A Common Whore with all these graces graced; She Is very honest, beautiful
and chaste. With a comparison between a Whore and a Book.
DEDICATED To no matter who: Lord, Master, Goodman, Gaffer, or Knave; Lady,
Mistress, Good-Readers. wife, Gammer, or Whore,
I Would not have you to take me for a Bawd, or a Pander, for that I send a
Whore amongst you, for though it be my pleasure to call her so, yet you in
perusing of beyond conuersing with her, shall find her honester then some of
your Wives or Mothers. Indeed she has no great Kindred to boast of, for my
poor brain, like love, was father and mother that begat and bare her, like a
new Pallas; and my pe^ the Midwife that first wrapped her in ragged verses in
stead of clouts, where the Printer has ^^'d her as he would be loath to be used
himself; for he has published and proclaimed all ^er faults to the view of
the world, and yet I know the poor Whores pains is not past, for now she is
to be examined a thousand ways, and tortured upon the Rack of Censure, ^and
amongst all that shall view and handle her, the hot Whoremaster will deal most
discourteously with her, for when he perceiues her honesty too hard for his
knavery, he will in ^ger, with three tushes, four pishes, five mewes, six
wry mouths, and seven scur^^ faces, tear her and pull her worse then the
rusticall Rabblement did use to use common Whores on former Shroue-Tuesdayes.
But all is one, let him due his worst, she is confidently armed with Innocence;
and the threats or danger of the bad cannot affright ^^er, but that she will
attempt to recreate the good. In a word, all that is amiss in ^^ir, I pray you
impute it to my bad Tutorship, and her own frailty; all that I hope of ^^er
is, that she is a merry Whore, full of good words, A kind Whore to be bad
for ^^oney or love any where; a true Whore and a constant, for she will never
for sake any man ^that will keep her; and (by reason she is an honest Whore)
she is a poor Whore, and has either money nor Sprats; so take my Whore
amongst you as she is.

Now after this, I Will be exceeding brief
To send another Pamphlet called a Thief;
The Hue and Cry is out, and I protest,
Though he escape hanging, yet he shall be pressed.
JOHN TAILOR.

A WHORE.
MY Book, an honest Whore I fitly call,
Because it treats of whores in general:
Then though this Pamphlet I do name a Whore,
Let no man shun her company therefore.
For if ten thousand with her lodge and lie,
No reputation they shall lose thereby.
No cost A cheap Whore.
for diet she at all requires,
No charge for change of changeable attires,
No Coaches, or Carroaches she does crave,
No base attendance of a Pand'ring Knave,
Perfumes and Paintings she abhorres and hates,
Nor does she borrow hair from other pates.
And this much more I Will boldly say for her,
Whosoever redeemes her from the Stationer,
(With whom she as a Slave is kept in hold,
And at his pleasure daily bought and sold)
I say, that man that does her ransom pay,
She will requite his kindness every way;
Her Inside with such Treasury is stored,
As man become the Pocket of a Lord;
All, from the Cottage, to the Castle high,
From Palatines unto the Peasantry,
(If they will permit their wisdoms rule their will)
May keep this whore, and yet be honest still.
Yet is she A strange Whore, common, and yet honest.
Common unto all that crave her,
For six pence honest man or knave may have her,
To be both turned and tossed, she free affords,
And (like a prating whore) she is full of words;
But all her talk is to no other end,
Then to teach Whoremasters and Whores to mend.
She in plain terms unto the world does tell,
Whores are the Hackneys which men ride to Hell,
And by comparisons she truly makes
A whore worse then a common Shore, or Iakes.
A Succubus, a damned sink of sin,
A mire, where worse then Swine do wallow in.
And with a whore (although thus plain she be)
She shows a Whoremonger as bad as she.
And though I barren am of Eloquence,
Nor never understood my Accidence:
Yet though I have no learning to my share,
A whore to broken Latin ^^e compare:
First, if her mind on whoring she does fix,
She Is all compact of mirth, all Meretrix,
And with small teaching she will soon decline
Mulier into the Gender Masculine,
By her Attire, of which sex she should be,
She seems the doubtful Gender unto me,
To either side her habit seems to leave.
And may be taken for the Epic^^^.
Unto the New^^r I compare her can,
For she is for thee, or me, or any man.
In her Declensions she so far does go,
As to the common of two or three, or more,
And come to horum, harum, Whor^^s, then^
She proves a great proficient amongst men.
Then after she had learned these ^^ssons right,
She forward goes unto hoc leave light:
She paints our pulcher, aided by her glass,
She Is neither bonus, or yet bonit ^^,
Home for all men, is a common name,
And she for all men is a common shame.
Not lapis singularly, her can please,
She loves the plural number lapides.
To construe plainly, she is seldom curious,
The two hard words of durus and of durius,
Though she is not past the Whip, she is past the Rods,
And knows to join her qui's, her qua's, and quod's.
The Active from the Passive she will derive,
Her Mood commands like the Imparatiue;
She knows n^ Concords, yet to all men thus,
She feign would be Iucundus omnibus;
Cla^^ is the Cloak, that couers her offense,
Her goodness all is in the Future tense.
She Is facile fieri, (quickly won)
Or Const'ring truly, Easy to be done.
Parui ducitur probitas, sets forth
Her honesty is reckoned little worth:
And he shall find, that takes her for his choice,
An Imeriection, or Imperfect voice.
Among the rules of Gender, she by heart,
Can without missing daily say her part.
The first among them all she likes best,
Propria quae Maribus, and there she will rest.
Thus may a Whore be made (by this construction)
Unto the Grammar Rules an Introduction.
But yet if Learning might be gotten so,
Fow to the Universities would go.
And all degrees, tagge, ragge, and old, and young,
Would be well grounded in the Latin tongue:
Whilst many learned men would be forced to seek
Their livings from the Hebrew and the Greek:
For mine own part I dare to swear and vow,
I never used Accidence so much as now,
Nor all these Latin words here enterlac'd,
I do not know if they with sense are placed,
I in the Book did find them, and conclude,
At random to a Whore I them allude.
But leaving Latin, every trading wench
Has much more understanding of the French.
If she has learned great P, O Per se O,
She 'le quickly know De morbo Gallico.
If in these rudiments she well does enter,
With any man she never fears to venture:
She Is impudently armed, and shameless too,
And never dreads what man to her can do:
Her nether part to stake she will often lay,
To keep her upper part in fashion gay;
She blushes not to have her Trade well known,
Which is, she lives by using of her own.
Her shop, her ware, her same, her shame, her game,
It Is all her own, which none from her can claim.
And if she be half mad, and curse and swear,
And fight, and bite' and scatch, and domineere:
Yet still she proves her patience to be such,
'Midst all these passions she will bear too much.
She is not covetous for any thing,
For what she has, men do unto her bring,
(Her Temperance is a virtue of much honor)
And all her Commings in are put upon her.
She Is general, she is free, she is liberal
Of hand and purse, she is open unto all,
She is no miserable hide bound wretch,
To please her friend at any time she will stretch;
At once she can speak true, and lie, or either,
And is at home, abroad, and altogether.
She Is nimbler then a Tumbler, as I think,
Lays down, and takes up, whilst a man can wink:
And though she seem vnmeasur'd in her pleasure,
It Is otherwise, a Yard's her only measure.
B^t as most Whores are vicious in their fames,
So many of them have most Virtuous names,
Though bad they be, they will not bate an Ace
To be called Prudence, Temperance, Faith, or Grace,
Or Mercy Charity, or many more,
Good names (too good to give to any Whore.)
Much from the Popes of Rome they do not swerue,
For they have Names which they do ill deserve;
Only betwixt them here is the difference on it,
A Whore receives her Name first at the Font:
The Roman Bishop takes a larger scope,
For he does change his name, when he is a Pope.
As if he were a Persecuting Saul,
If he please he will be called a Preaching Paul.
Is his name Swinesnowt, he can change the Case,
And swap away that name for Boniface:
If he be most ungodly, and envious,
Yet if he please, he will be called Pius:
Be he by Nature to all mischief bent,
He may and will be called Innocent;
And be he never so doggedly inclined,
He Will be named Vrbane, if it be his mind.
If he be much more fearful then a Sheep,
The name of Leo he may have and keep.
And though he be unmerciful, yet still
He may be called Clement if he will.
Thus Popes may have good names, though bad they be,
And so may Whores, though different in degree.
The Anagram of WHORE'S her mortal foe,
Divided into two words, it is HER WOE.
And seriously (to lay all Jesting by)
A Whore is Her own Wo^, and misery.
For though she have all pleasures at the full,
Much more then Thais, that proud Corinthians Trull,
Who suffered none but Kings and Potentates
To have their pleasures, at Excessive rates,
Yet all that Dear bought Lechery would be
The greater brand of lasting Infamy,
And though her Carrion Corpse, rich clad, high fed,
(Half rotten living, and all rotten Dead)
Who with her hellish Courage, stout and hot,
Abides the brunt of many a prick shaft shot:
Yet being dead, and does consumed lie,
Her everlasting shame shall never dye.
Ixion (in his arms) he did suppose
That he the Goddess Juno did enclose:
But in the end his frantic error showed,
That all which he embraced was but a Cloud.
So whosoever do their Lust embrace,
In stead of Love are clouded with disgrace.
The Godless Goddess Venus, honored far,
For conquering of the Conquering God of War,
To hide their shame they no defense could get,
When limping Vulcan took them in a net;
And being past shame, with that foul offense,
She armed her self with shameless Impudence,
And with ungodly articles would prove,
That foul Concupiscence and Lust is Love.
For which each bawdy Knave, and filthy Whore,
Her Deuillish Diety do still adore.
I have read Histories that do repeat
Whores were of old in estimation Great:
Pandemus King of Corinth, he erected
(That he from Perses power might be protected)
A Temple unto Venus, as some say,
Where whores might for his safety safely pray:
And some in Ephesus did Temples rear,
In whom the Paphean Queens adored were,
Where they that were the wickedst whores of all,
Were the chief Priests in robes Pontifical.
And in the I Will of Paphos, 'twas the use
Maids got their Dowries, by their Corpse abuse:
But if that order were allowed here,
So many would not portions want I fear.
The Art of Bawd'ry was in such respect
Amongst the Egyptians, that they did erect
An Altar to Priapus, and their guise
Was, that their Priests on it did Sacrifice.
Wise Arictotle was in wit so poor,
He Sacrificed to Hermia his whore.
Great Julius Caesar, was so free and Common,
And called a husband unto every woman.
Procullus Emperor, (the Story says)
Deflowered one hundred Maids Here, I have for some 60 lines followed the
report of Cornel^us Agrippa, in his Vanity of sciences.
Sermatian Maids.
30. pound weight a piece.
in fifteen days.
If all be true that Poets use to write,
Hercules lay with fifty in one night.
When Heliogabulus Romes Scepter swayed,
And all the world his lawless Laws obay'd;
He in his Court did cause a Stews be made,
Whereas Cum priuilegio, whores did trade:
H'inuited two and twenty of his friends,
And kindly to each one a whore he lends.
To set whores free, that then in bondage lay,
A mighty mass of money he did pay:
He (in one day) gave to each whore in Rome
A Duckat (a large and ill bestowed sum.
He made Orations unto whores, and said
They were his Soldiers, his defense and aid;
And in his speech he showed his wits acute,
Of sundry forms of Bawdr'y to dispute.
And after giving unto every where,
For listening to his tale three Ducats more,
With Pardon unto all and Liberty
That would be whores within his Monarchy.
And yearly Pensions, he freely gave,
To keep a Regiment of whores, most brave.
And often he had (when he in Progress went)
Of whores, Bawds, Panders, such a Rabblement,
Six hundred Wagons, History reports,
Attended only on these brave consorts.
This was a Royal whoremaster indeed,
A special Or rather, Malefactor.
Benefactor at their need:
But now since Heli^gabalm deceast,
I think the world with whores is so increast,
That if it had an Emperor as mad,
He might have twice so many as he had.
For by experience we see every day,
That bad things do increase, good things decay.
And virtue (with much care) from virtue breeds,
Vice freely springs from vice, like stinking weeds.
Sardanapalus King of Babylon,
Was to his whores such a companion,
That he in their attire did fow and sing,
(An exercise unfitting for a King.)
This seruent Lust, (which some call ardent Love)
Did cause the Bastard Hercules.
of the mighty Jove
To please his Iole, he took a Wheel,
And (laying by his Club) did spin and Reele,
Great Jove himself could not this snare escape,
Lust led him on to many a shameless Rape.
Poor Hebe, Hele, Jupiter transformed himself into all these shapes to
attain his desire.
Darna, and Europae,
Alcmena, lo, Sem^^^, and Leada,
Antiopa, Asterie, Gan^^^^^^,
These and a number more his fancy fed.
To compass which, his shifts were manifold,
T'a Bull, a Ram, a Swan, a shower of Gold,
To dreadful Thunder, and consuming fire,
And all to quench his inward flames desire.
Apollo turned fair Daphus into The Bay tree of Laurel.
Bay,
Because she from his Lust did fly away,
He loved his Hiacinct, and his Coronis,
As fervently as Venus and Adonis,
So much he from his Godhead did decline,
That for a wench he kept Admetus Kine.
And many other gods have gone astray,
If all he true which Ouids Book does say.
Thus to fulfill their Lusts and win their Truls,
We see that these ungodly gods were Guls.
The mighty Captain Aebilles, who was flaine (besotted to his death) for the
love of Polixena.
of the Mermidons,
Being captived to these base passions,
Met an untimely unexpected slaughter,
For fair Polixena, King Priams daughter.
Lucrecia's Rape, was Tarquins overthrow,
(Shame often pays the debt that sin does owe.)
What Philomela lost, and Tereus won,
It causde the luft full Farther Tereus King of Thrace ate of his own, Son
It is, made into pyment by his wife Pr^gne.
^ate his Son.
In this vice, Nero took such beastly joy,
He married was to Sporus, a young Boy.
And A Tyrant Prince in Corinth.
Periander was with Lust so led,
He with Mellissa lay when she was dead.
Pigmaliou, Plutarch.
with an Image made of Stone,
Did love and lodge: (I Will rather lie alone.)
Aristophanes, joined in love would be
To a she Ass: but what an Ass was he?
A Roman Appius murdered himself, because V^rginias father had slain her, to
free her from his L^^^.
Appius did in Iale abide,
For love of fair Virginia, where he did.
Our second Henry King Henry the second King of England.
Aged, Childish, fond,
On the fair feature of fair Rosamond:
That it raised most unnatural hateful strife
Betwixt himself, his children, and his wife.
The end of which was, that the jealous Queen
Did poison At (...).
Rosamond in furious spleen.
The fourth King Edward lower did descend,
He to a Goldsmiths wife Mistress Shore.
his love did bend.
This sugared sin has been so general,
That it has made the strongest Champions fall:
For Sichen ravished She was Jacobs daughter, whose Rape was accutsedly revenged
by her brethren, Si^ers ^^^ Leui, Genesis.
Dina, for which deed
A number of the Sichemites did bleed.
And Samson, in the prime of manly strength,
By Dalila was overcome at length.
King David frailely fell, and felt the pain,
And with much sorrow was restored again.
Though Saul his foe he no way would offend,
Yet this sin made him kill his loyal friend.
Ammon with ^ Sam 11.
^ Sam. 13.
Thamar, Incest did commit,
And Absalon deprived his life for it.
And Solomon allowed most Royal means
To keep three hundred Queens, seven hundred queanes,
By whose means to Idolatry he fell,
Almost as low as to the gares of Hell.
At last repeating, he makes declaration,
That all was vanity, and spirits vexation.
Abundance of examples men may find,
Of Kings and Princes to this vice inclined,
Which is no way for meaner men to go,
Because their betters often have wandered so;
For they were plagued of God, and so shall we
Much more, if of their sin we partners be.
To show what Women have been plagued in
The bottomless Abyss of this sweet sin,
There are examples of them infinite,
Which I never mean to read, much less to write,
To please the Reader, though I Will set down some,
As they unto my memory do come.
Flora, a Whore in Rome, great wealth did win,
By her dear trading and her Commings in,
Which wealth she freely gave when she did dye,
Unto the Roman people generally,
For which they all (to show their thanks unto her)
Made her a Goddess, and did Reverence do her.
And L^is of Corinth, asked Demosthenes
One hundred Crowns for one nights business:
For which a crew of Whores did set upon her,
A Whore she was, and whores to death did stone her.
There was a famous Whore She was servant to Exanthus, and fellow to Esop the
Fabulist.
Rhodope named,
Who for her gain at such high price she gam'd,
That she (most liberal) did the charges bear,
A stately high Piramides to rear.
Great Julius Caesar was much ouerseene
With Cleopatra, the Egyptian Queen:
And after, she ensnared Mark Antony,
For which, they both by their own hands did dye.
Queen of Babylon, slain by her Son, whom she would have had to have lain
with her.
Semiramis played the inhumane Trull,
And was enamored with a beastly Bull:
So did Pasipha wife to Minos King of ^^^le.
Pasipha, but me thinks it is strange,
That Queens so far from womenhood should range.
Muba ( Adonis mother) caused her father
The flower of her virginity to gather.
If wife Ulysses had not well been armed,
Enchanting Circe had his honor charmed.
When youthful Paris stole the lustful Punke,
Fair Hellen, had the ship that bore them sunk,
Then thirty Kings in peace at home had staid,
Nor Troy or Trojans in their ruins laid:
Fair Messalina and Faustine, two Empresses.
Messalina, a most royal Whore,
(Wife unto Cla^dius the Emperor)
The sports of Venus in the Stews did play,
Sometimes full five and twenty times a day.
Marcus Aurelius did fair Paustine wed,
And she with Whoring did behorne his head.
And many Princes and great Potentates,
With Vulcans crest have armed their noble pates:
This to the poorest Cuck old seems a bliss,
That he with mighty Monarchs sharer is,
That though to be cornuted be a grief,
Yet to have such brave partners is relief.
These Whores and Whore-masters which I have named,
And thousands more (in histories defamed)
With partial selfe-opinion did approve,
Their sensuality and Lust was Love.
When as the ods is more then day from night,
Or fire from water, black from purest white.
The one with God, one with the Devil does dwell,
Love comes from heaven, and lust does spring from hell.
But the old Proverb, never will be forgot,
A Lechers love is (like Sir Reverence) hot,
And on the sudden cold as any stone,
For when the lust is past, the love is gone.
But Love is such a blessing from on hie,
Who^e zealous feruency can never die;
It out-liues life, and the ascending flame,
Mounts to the God of Love, from whence it came.
Lust made Genesis.
Seths sons, with fornication vain,
Join with the daughters of accursed Cain.
And the world suffered, for their fornication,
Depopulation, by the inundation.
And twenty and four thousand Israelites
Did for this sin amongst the Numbers.
Madi.wites.
For the not punishing this fact (almost)
The Tribe of Judges. 19. 20 and 21. ^5000. were slain of the Israelites, and
there remained of the Heniamites only 600.
Benjamin were slain and lost.
May this be called love? Then call virtue vice,
And every bawdy house a Paradise.
If lust were love, it would not like a Wolf,
Drown Lovers hearts in desperations Gulf.
A Theban, For Aut gona the daughter of Oedipus and Iocasta.
Ha^on, himself madly killed,
On his too dear deers Tomb his heart blood spild.
For Phaon (a poor Watermans sweet sake)
Fair Sapho from a rock, her The more foole-shee, though she were a Poetesse.
neck she brake.
Phea^ra for her Hippoli^us, they say,
Did hang her self, and make a Holli-day.
And She was daughter to Li^urgus King of Thrace.
Phillis for Son to Thesens.
Demophoon did as much:
I Will never love, if Loves effects be such.
To quench the Carthaginian Dido, for Entas, burned her self.
Queens desire,
She burnt her self upon a pile of fire.
If either Pr^amus, or Thisby had
Not been stark fools, or else exceeding mad:
The doting, idle, misconceiuing Elues,
So desperately, had never fore-done themselves.
Thus all the difference betwixt love and lust,
Is, one is just, the other is unjust.
Search but in Histories, and men may find
Examples beyond numbering, of this kind,
How of both Sexes, and each state and sort
Of people from the cottage to the Court,
Have madly run this course; some hanged, some drowned,
Burnt, starved and stabbed themselves with many a wou^d,
Or pined away like Coxcombs, ever craving
To have the thing, that is never worth the having.
In Antwerp many filthy Whores I saw,
That for their Trading were allowde by Law.
And I in Pragus did see a street of Whores,
An English mile in length, who at their doors
Did stand and ply (rich clad, and painted rare)
More hard then ever I plyde for a fare.
The Italian Stews (to make the Pope good cheer)
Paid twenty thousand Ducats in a Almost every year a ducket is more than 8
shillings, which sum is 8000l.
year.
Besides, they give a Priest (t'amend his fee)
The profit of a Whore, or two, or three.
Me thinks it must be bad Divinity,
That with the Stews has such affinity.
It Is a mad Doctrine, Lechery should pay
A Church-mans stipend, that should preach and pray,
And in those stews, where women are so common,
In entertaining all, refusing no man,
Whereas a father with a Whore may lie,
Which done, his son his place may hap supply,
And then an Uncle, or a Brother may
Succeed each other in that damned play:
For no propinquity, or no degree
Of kin, that haut there, that can swear they are free
From this commixion: and, which is worst,
A Whore may have a bastard, borne and nursed,
And grown a woman, and to this trade set her,
May be a Whore to him that did beget her;
Or to her brothers, or to all her kin,
She may be prostituted in this sin.
And therefore to conclude this point, I muse
That Christian Commonwealths allow a Stews.
I think that Thieues as well allowed should be,
As Whores and Whoremasters should thus be free.
They from the Heathen do examples bring,
That Whoring is a rare commodious thing,
There was an ancient use in Babylon,
When as a woman's stock was spent and gone,
Her living it was lawful then to get,
Her carcass out to liuerie to let,
And Venus did allow the Cyprian Dames,
To get their livings by their bodies shames.
Lieurgus did a Law in Sparta make,
That all men might their barren wives forsake:
And by the same Law it ordained was,
Wives might unable husbands turn to grass.
And the wise Solon the Athenian,
Allowed whores to be free for any man.
And though these things the Pagan people did,
Yet Christian governments these things forbid.
But there is no Commonwealth maintains the same,
But where the Not in any place but where Romes supremacy is allowed.
Pope is Landlord of the game.
The Stews in England bore a beastly sway,
Till the eight Anno Regni 37.
Henry banished them away:
And since those common whores were quite put down,
A damned crew of private whores are grown,
So that the devil will be doing still,
Either with public or with private ill.
Thus much for whoring I must say again,
It has produced many valiant men:
Brave Bastards have been famous Conquerours,
And some great Lords, and Kings, and Emperors.
As Hercules Jove's mighty Bastard-sonne,
And So says Cornelius Agrippa, but I ^^^de it otherwise in Quintus Curtius.
Alexander King of Macedon:
Clodouee King of France, from Bastardie,
And William Conqueror, from Normandy.
These, and a number more I could recite,
Besides the unknown numbers infinite.
And sure that wretched man that married is
Unto a wife disposed to this amiss,
Is mad to wrong himself at all thereby,
With heart-griefe and tormenting jealousy.
If he has cause for it, let him then forsake her,
And pray God mend her, or the devil take her:
If she has no cause to be jealous then,
He Is worthy to be made the scorn of men.
Thus cause or no cause, man himself should arm,
That jealousy should never do him harm.
The Nicholaitans, to avoid the pain
Of jealousy, amongst them did ordain,
That all their married wives, of each degree,
To every one a common Whore should be.
And so amongst them one could hardly find,
A Cuckold that did bear a jealous mind.
When I but think what Sciences, and Arts,
What men and women, full of ex'lent parts,
Forget their functions, lay their virtues by,
And wait and live, and thrive by Lechery.
A Poets Art, all other Arts excel,
If he has skill and grace to use it well:
Yet many times it is used most base and vile,
When it descends unto a bawdy style,
To turn good humane studies, and divine,
Into most beastly lines, like Aretine;
To seek to merit everliving Bays,
For sordid stuff (like Ouids lustful Lays.)
With false bewitching verses to entice
Frail creatures from fair virtue to foul vice,
Whose flattry makes a Whore to seem a Saint,
That stinkes like carrion, with her Pox and paint.
Comparing her (with false and odious lies)
To all that is in or underneath the skies,
Her eyes to Suns, that do the Sun Eclips,
Her Cheeks are Roses (Rubies are her lips)
Her white and red Carnation mixed with snow,
Her teeth to oriental pearl, a Row,
Her voice like Music of the heavenly Spheres,
Her hair like thrice refined golden Wires,
Her breath more sweet then Arromaticke drugs,
^ile Mounts of Alabaster are her dugs,
Her Bracelets, Rings, her Scarf, her Fan, her Chain,
Are subjects to inspire a Poets brain:
But above all, her Smock most praise does win,
For it is the Curtain next unto her skin.
Her loose Gown, for her looser body fit,
Shall be adored with a flash of wit,
And from the chin-clowt, to the lowly Slipper,
^^ Hdicorian streams his praise shall dip her.
Leave unnamed what is affected best,
^^ it is most sit, for it maintains the rest;
Her thighs, her knees, her legs, her feet, and all,
^ro^top to toe are supernatural.
Her Iuory hands, with sapphire veins inlaid,
Which cannot be by mortal pen displaid.
Her smile makes cold December Summer like,
Her frown, hot June with shiuering ^rost can strike,
^ed life, and death does in her looks abide,
^r many Knaves and Fools that said so, lyde.
^^ Shapperoones, her Perriwigs and Tires,
^^^^ Relics, which this flattery much admires,
^^^atoes, Mask her Busk and Busk-point too,
^^ things to which mad men must homage do.
^^t Verdingale her Garters, Shoes and Roses;
^^et Girdle that her wastfull waste incloses.
^^ot one of these but's honored with a Sonet,
^^ the said poet be but set upon it.
Another seeks to win his Wenches will,
With oy lie Oratories smoothing skill.
As thus.

MOst inestimable Magazin of beauty, rare Masterpiece of nature, perfections
wonder, and ^^^s Quintessence, in whom the port and majesty ^^ Juno, the
feature of Citherea, the wisdom of ^ues Braine-bred Pallas.
Girl, the chastity of Diana, ^d the constancy of Lucretia, have their
dome^tall habitation, who with the Goddesses art ^ side, with the Graces
graced, with the Virtues ^^llifide, with the Muses honored, and with the ^^ses
admired: vouchsase, dread Empress of my ^^fection, to pardon the intrusiue
boldness of my stunned tongue (which was never tipped with the ^^urtly Gloss of
Adulation) who being the Am^^sadour of my heart, does prostrate my self and ^^
best services to be disposed of at your great com^ands: and as the Refulgent
beams of Titan ^he parity of obscurity, soon glance or glimpse the
translucencie of your eyes sun-dezeling corruscancy, will exile all the cloudie
vapors of hearttormenting moody melancholy; that like an usurping Tyrant,
has captiuated your humble suppliant, thus seruently to implore your Clemency.

Here Is a sweet deal of scimble scamble stuff,
To please my Lady Wagtayle (marry muffe)
Gep with the Grinkcomes is an Vtopian word, which is in English a P. at Paris.
Grinkcomes (but I speak too late)
This kind of flattery makes a whore take state,
Grows pocky pround, and in such port does bear her,
That such poor scabs as I, must not come near her.
Thus may she live, (much honored for her crimes)
And have the Pox some twelve or 13 times,
And she may be so bountiful again;
To sell those Pox to three or fourscore men:
And thus the Surgcons may get more by far,
By Whores and Peace, then by the sword and war.
And thus a Whore (if men consider of it)
Is an increasing gainful piece of profit,
But of all Whores that I have named before,
There Is none so cunning as the City Whore,
She has so many several sorts of Bawds,
To cloak and cover her deceipts and frauds,
That sure the Devil cannot more devise
Then she, to blind her horned husbands eyes.
One offers Purles to sell, and fine Bone-lace,
And whispers that her Friend's in such a place:
A second offers Starch, and tells her how
Her sweetheart tarries for her at the Plow:
A third sels Wafers, and a fourth has Pins,
And with these tricks these Bawds admittance wine
That had her Husband Argos eyes, yet he
By these deceivers should deceived be.
If all these fail, a begger-woman may,
A sweet love letter to her hands convey.
Or a near Laundresse, or a Hearbwife can,
Carry a sleeuelesse message now and then.
Or if this fail, her teeth may ache (for sooth)
And then the Barbar must come draw a Tooth:
Or else she may be sick (upon condition)
That such a Doctor may be her Physician,
He feels her pulses, and applies his trade
With Potions which the Apothecary made;
All Is one for that, her health she quickly gains,
Her Husband pays the Doctor for his pains.
But of all Bawds, Gold is the Bawd indeed,
It seldom speaks but it is sure to speed:
It can blind Watches, open bolts and locks,
Break walls of stone, as hard as Marble rocks:
Make Iron bars give way, and gates fly open,
Gives Lust the reins to run with boundless scope,
Kills Jealousy, appeases Riuals, and
Does what the owners will or can command,
And last of all, it stops the biting jaws
Of the inst rigorous, and seuerest Laws.
I therefore say. He that has golden pelf,
Has a good Bawd, if so he please himself:
Those that have gold, can want no Bawds or Quea^s
Except they use a mean, to guide their means.
To end this point, this consequence I Will grant,
Those that have golden Bawds, no whores can want.
And though the mighty power of gold be such,
Yet Silver (many times) can do as much:
Thus every A scraping miserable: father, that cares not how he get Gold to
leave it to a Whoremaker his Son, in his sons prouide^t Bawd.
wealthy Whoremaster may bear
His Bawd in's purse, or pocket any where.
For mine own part, I live not in such want,
But that I eat and sleep, though coin be scant:
And 'cause I want the Bawd I named before,
By consequence I needs must want the Whore:
And wanting of them both, I hope to be,
From Gowts, Pox, and extortion ever free.
But as there is wondrous difference in men's meat,
So is the ods of Whores exceeding great:
Some Rampant, and some Couchant, and some Passant,
Some Guardant, and some Dormant, and some Cressant.
Some Pendant, some (a Pox on it) but the best on it,
A private Whore, trades safely, there is the jest on it.
Besides, as Whores are of a several cut,
So fitting Titles on them still are put:
For if a Princes love to her decline,
For manners sake she is called a Co^cubine:
If a great Lord, or Knight, affect a Whore,
She must be termed his Honors Paramore:
The rich Gull Gallant call's her Dear and Love,
Ducke, Lamb, Squall, Sweetheart, Cony, and his Dove:
A pretty wench she is with the Countryman,
And a Kind Sister with the Puritan,
She Is a Priests Lemman, and a Tinkers Pad,
Or Dell, or Doxy (though the names be bad)
And amongst Soldiers, this sweet piece of Vice
Is counted for a Captains Cockatrice.
But the mad Rascal, when he is five parts drunk,
Calls her his Drah, his Queen, his Iill, or Punke,
And in his fury'gins to rail and rore, ^
Then with full mouth, he truly call's her Whore:
And so I leave her, to her hot desires,
'^Mongst Pimps, and Panders, and base Applesquires,
To mend or end, when age or Pox will make her
Detested, and Whore-masters all forsake her.
A comparison betwixt a Whore and a Book.
ME thinks I hear some Cauiller object,
That it is a name absurd and indirect,
To give a Book the Title of a Whore:
When sure I think no Name befits it more.
For like a Whore by daylight, or by Candle,
It Is ever free for every knave to handle:
And as a new whore is belon'd and sought,
So is a new Book in request and bought.
When whores wax old and stale, they are out of date,
Old Pamphlets are most subject to such fate,
As Whores have Panders to emblaze their worth,
So these have Stationers to set them forth,
And as an old whore may be painted new
With borrowed beauty, fair unto the view,
Whereby she for a fine fresh whore may pass,
Yet is she but the rotten whore she was.
So Stationers, their old cast Books can grace,
And by new Titles paint a-fresh their face.
Whereby for current they are past away.
As if they had come forth but yesterday.
A Book is dedicated, now and than
To some great worthy, or unworthy man:
Yet for all that, it is common unto me,
Or thee, or he, or all estates that be:
And so a man may have a Whore (forsooth)
Supposing she is only for his tooth:
But if the truth he would seek out and look,
She Is common unto all men, like a Book.
A Book with gaudy coat, and silken strings,
Whose inside's full of obsceane beastly things,
Is like a whore, Caparison'd and trap'd,
Full of infection, to all mischief apt.
As one whore may be common unto any,
So one Book may be dedicate to many.
And sure I say, and hope I speak no slander,
To such a Book, the Poet is the Pander.
He prostitutes his muse to every one,
Which should be constant unto one alone:
This is a kind of Bawd'ry vile and base,
Kills bounty, and is Poetryes disgrace.
And left they should be lost, it is ordained,
That Books within a Library are chained;
So he that to himself will keep a Whore,
Must chain her, or she will trade with forty more.
As Books are lease by lease often turned and tossed,
So are the Garments of a Whore (almost:)
For both of them, with a wet finger may
Be folded or unfolded, night or day.
Moreover, it is not very hard to prove,
That Books and Whores may Riuals be in Love;
(To purchase men's displeasure I am loath)
But sure good Scholars still have loved them both
Some Books have their Errates at the last,
That tell their errors and offenses past.
So many great Whores did in state survive,
But when death did their hateful lives depriu^,
Their faults escaped and their Errates then
Have been made manifest and known to men.
Some Books and Whores to wicked purpose her,
Do, for their faults, receive one punishment.
^^ Bukes are often burnt, and quite forgotten,
^^^^ Whore are ouer-stew'd or roasted rotten.
^^ experience shows that Books much knowledge brings,
and by experience Whores know many things.
^^^ as ^^ed Justice, all men's loss repaires,
^^^ whores do give to all men what is theirs.
^^^ she learnes, yet will she much rebuke us,
^^ I we do play the part of true Eunuchus.
^^^ Books profane, or else Heretical,
^^^ so^^ilous, nonsense, Schismatic,
^^^erts man Judgment, and his soul pollutes,
^^ch are all Whores, and such will be their fruits.
^^ one Slouens soil a Book in little space,
^^nd slauer it, and so the Leaves deface:
^^^nd some again will take a cleanly course
^^o read it daily, yet it is never the worse.
^^^ some man use a Whore, when once they have her,
^They'le touze and tear, and beastly all beslauer,
When forty neat Whoremasters might have played
^^nd used her, and she still be thought a maid.
^^ that does read a Book he likes, would be
^^loue from any Interruption free;
^^nd he that with a Whore would toy or lie,
^^ think desires other Company.
^^ When Books are wet, their beauties gone or soyl'd,
^^, wash a whore, and all her paintings sooyl'd:
^^nd as an old Whore (spite of Paint and clothing)
^^als at the last, the object of men's loathing,
^scorn'd and vnpittied, and to finish all,
^^yes in Ditch, or in an Hospital:
^^ Pamphlets, and some works of writers Grave,
^^re used much worse then Whores by many a Knave:
Who never regard the matter or the price,
^ot tear like Tyrants, to wrap Drugs or Spice,
^^ which is worse, in Privy matters use them,
^^ worst of all, like Roarers they abuse them:
When as they rend good Books to light and dry
^^^ ^^^ (Englands ds bainefull Diety.)
And it is a thing I never thought on before,
A Now a days.
Booke's examined stricter then a Whore:
There Is not a Sheet, a Lease, a Page, a Verse,
A word, or syllable, or letter (scarce)
But that (Authority) with Judgments eye,
Does diligently look, and search, and pry,
And gage the sense, and first will vnderst nd all,
Lest in a Phrase, or word, there lurk a scandal.
And my poor Whore in this has not been spared,
Her skirts were curtaild, and he nails were She would have scratched else.
pared.
All Is one for that, though she such usage had,
She Is not left naked, though not richly clad,
I knew she must be questioned, and I say,
I am right glad she escaped so well away.
And should ail Whores of high and low degree,
(As Books are) to account thus called be,
The whorish number would wax very small,
Or else men never could examine all.
This Book my Whore, or else this Whore my Book,
(She bears both names, so neither is mistook)
Respects not all her enemies a straw,
If she offended, she has had the Law,
She was examined, and she did confess,
And had endured the torture of the Press:
Her faults are printed unto all men's sight,
Impartially declared in black and white:
And last, in Paul's Churchyard, and in the streets,
She suffers Penance up and down in Sheets.
And if all Whores to do the like were made,
A Linen Draper were the richest Trade.
If any Whore be honcster then mine is,
I Will write no more, but stop my mouth with
FINIS.
An arrant Thief, whom every Man may trust: In Word and Deed exceeding true
and just. With a Comparison between a Thief and a Book.
THis Water The Anigram of Rat is Art.
Rat, (or Art) I would commend,
But that I know not to begin or end:
He read his Verses to me, and which more is,
Did move my Muse to write Laudem Authoris,
If for his Land Discoueries I touch not his Travails to Scotland, Iermany, or
Bohemis, or the Paper Boat.
she should praise him,
Whether would then his liquid knowledge raise him?
Read his two Treatises of Thief and Whore,
You Will think it time for him to leave his Oar.
Yet thus much of his worth I cannot smother,
It Is well for us when Thieves peach one another.
This Preface is but poor, it is by a Boy done,
That is a Scholar of the School of Cloydon,
Who when he has more years and learning got,
He Will praise him more or less, or not a is it.
Given upon Shroue Tuesday from our seat, in the second Form of the famous
free School of Croydon.

By RICHARD HATTON.

WHen a fresh Waterman does turn Saltpict,
His Muse must prattle all the world ^^^ know it:
Of Whores and Thieves (he writes two merry B^^^^^
He loves them both, I know it by his looks.
Alas, I wrong him! blame my Muse, not we,
She never spoke before, and rude may be.
Given from the low estated^^ the fifth Form near to the School door at
Croydon beforesaid.

By GEORGE HATTON.

TO THE HOPEFVLL PAIR OF BRETHREN, AND MY WORTHY PATRONES, Master RICHARD, and
GEORGE HATTON, Love, Learning, and true Happiness.
Your Muses, the one a Youth, and one an Infant,
Gave me two Panegericks at one Instant:
The first Pen, the first line it pleased to walk in,
Did make my This Gentleman was pleased Anagrammatically to call me Water Rat,
or water Art, which I do Anagrammatiae Waterrat, to be A true Art.
Art a Rat, and like Grimalkin,
Or a kind needful Vermin-coursing Cat.
By Art I play, but will not care your Rat.
I thank you that you did so soon determine,
To Anagram my Art into a Vermin,
For which I vow, if e're you keeps a Dayrie,
Of (now and then) a Cheese I will impair ye.
Kind Mr. George, your Muse must be exalted,
My Poetry you very well have salted.
Salt keeps things sweet, and makes them relish sau'ry,
And you have powdered well my honest ^na ^^.
I thank you to, nor will I be ungrateful,
Whilst Rhyme or Reason deignes to fill my pare full
You truly say that I love Whores and Thieues well,
And half your speech I think the world belieus well.
For should I hate a Thief, Thieues are so commos,
I well could neither love my self or no man;
But for Whores love, my purse would never hold o^.
They Will Cheat and pick the Silver and the Gold o^.
You both have graced my Thief, he has confessed,
You (like two Shrieues) conuay'd him to be Prised
In mirth you write to me, on small Requesting,
For which I thank you both, in harmless Jesting,
And may your Studies to such goodness raise you,
That God may ever love, and good men praise you.
Yours, when you will, where you will in what you will, as you will with your
will, against your will; at this time, at any time, at all time or sometimes,
in pastimes.

JOHN TAILOR.

To any Reader He or She, It makes no matter what they be.
WHen you open this first leaf, imagine you are come within the door of my
house, where according as you behave your selves, you are courteously welcome,
or you may lay down the Book, and got the same way you came: the flattering
of Readers, or begging their acceptance, is an argument that the ware is scarce
good which the Author means to utter, or that it is a Cheap year of wit, and
his lies upon his hands, which makes him pittifuly, like Suppliant to begin,
Honorably Complains to your Humblenes, ('it is but mistaken the first should be
last.) Some men have demanded of me, why I do write upon such slight subjects,
as the Praise of Hempseed. The Travails of Twelue-pence. Tailors ^^oose. The
Antiquity of Begging. A Cormorant. A Common Whore. And now an an arrant Thief?
To whom I answer here, that many Grave and excellent Writers have employed
their Studies to good purposes in as triuiall matters as my self; and I am
assured that the meaner the subject is, the better the Invention must be, for
(as Tom Nash ^^id) every Fool can fetch Water out of the Sea, or pick Corn
out of full Sheaues, but to ^^ing Oil out of Flint, or make a plentiful
Harvest with little or no Seed, that is the Work^an but that is not I. And
Gentlemen, as I lately sent you a Whore that was honest, so have now sent you a
Thief, that will never Rob you, nor pick your Pockets of more then you are
willing to part withal.

Yours at all good times: JOHN TAILOR.

A THIEF.
Lately to the world did send a A Book I writ called a whore.
whore,
And she was welcome, though she was but poor,
And being so, it did most strange appear
That poverty found any welcome here,
But when I saw that many Rich men sought
My whore, and with their coin her freedom bought,
I mused, but as the cause I out did ferrit
I found some Rich in Purse, some poor in merit,
Some earned Scholars, some that scarce could spell:
Yet all did love an honest whore, right well,
It Was only such as those that entertained her,
Whilst scornful Kuaues, and witless Fools disdained her.
Now to defend her harmless Innocence,
I send this Thief to be her Just defense:
Against all true-men, and I Will undertake
There are not many that dare answer make.
Then rowze my Muse, be valiant, and be brief,
Be confident, my true and constant Thief;
Thy trade is scartred, universally;
Throughout the spacious worlds Rotundity,
For all estates and functions great and small,
Are for the most part Thieues in general,
Excepting Millers, Weauers, Taylers, and
Such true trades as no stealing understand.
Thou art a Thief (my Book) and being so
Thou findst thy fellows wheresoeu'r thou go:
Birds of a feather still will hold together,
And all the world with thee are of a feather:
The ods is, thou art a Thief by nomination,
And most of men are Thieues in their vocation.
Thou neither do cog, cheat, steal, swear orlye,
Or gather'st goods by false dishonesty,
And thou shall live when many of the Crew
Shall in a Halter bid the world Adue.
And now a thought into my mind does fall,
To prove whence Thieues have their original:
I find that Jupiter did watonly
On Maya get a son called Mercury,
To whom the people often did ^acrifice,
Accounting him the God of Merchandise:
Of Eloquence, and rare invention sharp,
And that he first of all devised the Harp.
The God of Tumbless, Iuglers, fools and Iesters,
Of Thieues and fiddlers that the earth bepesters,
Fair Venus was his Sister, and I find
He was to her so much unkindly kind,
That he on her beg at Her(...),
As Ovid very wittily does write:
His wings on head and heels true Emblems be,
How quick he can invent, how quickly flee:
By him are Thieues inspirde, and from his gift
They plot to steal and run away most swift:
In their conceits and fleights, no men are sharper,
Each one as nimble-finger'd as a Harper.
Thus Thieuing is not altogether base,
But is descended from a lofty Race.
Moreover every man, himself does show
To be the Son of Adam, for we know
He stole the Fruit, and ever since his Seed,
To steal from one another have agreed.
Our Infancy is Theft, it is manifest
We cry and Rob our Parents of their Rest:
Our Childe-hood Robs us of our Infancy,
And youth does steal out childe-hood wantonly:
Then Manhood pilfers all our youth away,
And middle-age our Manhood does convey
Unto the Thieuing hands of feeble age:
Thus are we all Thieues, all our Pilgrimage,
In all which progress many times by stealth,
Strange sicknesses do Rob us of our health.
Rage steals our Reason, Envy thinks it fit
To steal our Love, whilst Foliy steals our wit.
Pride filcheth from us our Humility,
And Lechery does steal our honesty,
Base Avarice, our Conscience does purloin,
Whilst sloth to steal our minds from work does ioy^^
Time steals upon us, whilst we take small care,
And makes us old before we be aware:
Sleep and his brother Death conspite our fall.
The one steals half our lives, the other all.
Thus are we Robbed by Morpheus, and by Mu^,
Till in the end, each Corpse is but a Coarse,
Note but the seasons of the year, and see
How they like Thieues to one another be;
From Winters frozen face, through snow and showers
The Spring does steal roots, plants, buds and flowers
Then Summer Robs the Spring of natures suit,
And harvest Robs the Suramer of his fruit,
Then Winter comes again, and he bereaues
The Harvest of the Grain, and Trees of Leaves,
And thus these seasons Rob each other still
Round in their course, like Horses in a mill.
The Elements, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire
To rob each other daily do conspire:
The fiery Sun from the Ocean, and each River
Exhales their Waters, which they all deliver:
This water, into Clouds the Air does steal,
Where it does unto Snow or Hail congeale,
Until at last Earth robs the Air again
Of his stolen Treasure, Hail, Sleete, Snow or Ri^^
Thus be it hot or cold, or dry or wet,
These Thieues, from one another steal and get
Night robs us of the day, and day of night:
Light pilfers darkness, and the darkness light.
Thus life, death, seasons, and the Elements,
And day and night, for Thieues are presidents.
Two arrant Thieues we ever bear about us,
The one within, the other is without us;
All that we get by toil, or industry,
Our Backs and Bellies steal continually:
For though men labor with much care and carke
Lie with the Lamb down, rise up with the Lar^,
Swear and forswear, deceive, and lie and cog,
And have a Conscience worse then any Dog,
Be most ungracious, extreme vile and base,
And (so he gain) not caring for disgrace:
Let such a Man or Woman count their gains,
They have but meat, and raiment for their pains.
No more have they that doeliue honestest,
Those that can say their Cousciences are best,
Their Bellies and their Backs, day, night and hou^^,
The fruits of all their labors do devour:
These Thieues do rob us, with our own good will,
And have dame natures warrant for it still,
^^ crimes these Sharks do: work each others wrack,
^^ reuening Belly, often robs the back:
Will feed like Dives, with Quail, Rail, and Pheasant,
^be^^^ all tarter'd like a Peasant.
Sometimes the gaudy Back man's Belly pines,
^^which he often with Duke Humphrey dines:
^^ whilst the mind defends this hungry stealth,
^^ s^ies a temperate diet maintains health,
^^^^ cry, let guts with famine mourn,
^^ maw's unseen, good outsides must be worn,
^^ these Thieues rob us, and in this pother
^^mind consents, and then they rob each other:
^ ^knowledge and our learning (often by chance)
^^ steal and rob us of our ignorance:
^^ ignorance may sometimes gain promotion
There it is held the mother of devotion)
^^ ^knowledge joined with learning, are poor things,
^at many times a man to begg'ry brings:
^^^ fortune very often does justly fit
^^l to have all the wo^^^, some all the wit.
^^^^ robs some men, into it list,
^eales their coin (as Thieues do) in a mist:
^^ men to rob the pot will never refrain,
Still the pot rob them of all again.
^rodigall can steal exceeding brief,
^ks his own purse, and is his own dear Thief:
And thus within us, and without us we
^^^ Thieues, and by Thieues always pillaged be.
^^ then unto the greatest Thieues of all,
Those Th^^^^^y is most high and capital:
^^ that for pomp, and Titles transitory,
^^your Almighty Maker of his Glory,
^^ give the honor due to him alone,
^to a carved block, a stock or stone,
^^image, a similitude, or feature
Angel Saint, or Man, or any creature,
^^ Altars, Lamps, to Holy-bread, or Waters,
^^^ shrines, or tapers, of such iugling matters,
^^ relics of the dead, or of the living;
^is is the most supremest kind of Thieuing.
^^esides they all commit this felony,
^t break the Sabbath day maliciously,
^^^ gives us six days, and himself has one,
^^herein he would (with thanks) be called upon:
^^ those that steal that day to bad abuses,
^^ God of honor, without all excuses:
Into these Thieues, my Thief does plainly tell,
But though they hang not here, they shall in hell,
Accept repentance, (and unworthy Guerdon
^^rough our Redeemers merits) gain their pardon.
^^ there is a crew of Thieues that pry and lurch,
And steal and share the livings of the Church;
These are hells factors merchants of all evil,
Rob God of souls, and give them to the Devil,
For where the tithe of many a Parish may
Allow a good sufficient Preacher pay,
Yet hellish pride, or lust, or avarice,
Or one or other foul licencious vice,
Robs learning, robs the people of their reaching,
(Who in seven years perhaps do hear no preaching)
When as the Parsonage by account is found
Yearly worth two, three or four hundred pound,
Yet are those Souls served, or else starved, I fear,
With a poor In the 93. page of a Book, called The Spirit of Detraction, the
Author cites 12. parishes in one Hundred in Wales in this predicament.
Reader for eight pounds a year.
A Preacher breaks to us the Heavenly Bread,
Whereby our straying Souls are taught and fed:
And for this heavenly work of his, it is sense
That men allow him earthly recompense.
For shall he give us food that is spiritual,
And not have means to feed him corporal?
No sure: (of all men) it is most manifest,
A painful Churchman earnes his wages best.
Those that keep back the Tithes, I tell them true,
Are arrant Thieues in robbing God of'd due:
For he that robs Gods Church (t'encrease his pelf)
It Is most apparent, he robs God himself.
The Patron often deals with his Minister
As Dionisius with Iupitert Idol in Siracusa in Sicilia.
Jupiter.
He stole his golden Cloak, and put on him
A Coat of cotton, (nothing near so trim)
And to excuse his theft, he said the gold
Was (to be worn) in Winter time, too cold.
But in the Summer, 'twas too hot and heavy,
And so some Patrones use the tribe of Leuy:
That for the Winters cold, or Summers heat,
They are so pold, they scarce have clothes and mout.
Amongst the rest, there may some pastors be.
Who enter in through cursed Simonie:
But all such are notorious Thieues therefore,
They climb the wall, and not come through the The door is Christ.
door:
Thus Meuelaus did the Priest hood win
From Jason, by this simonayck sin,
For he did pay three hundred tallents more
Then Jason would (or could) disburse therefore.
And many a'mitred Pope and Cardinal
This way have got their state Pontifical:
These rob and steal, for which all good men grieves,
And make the house of prayer a den of Thieues.
But though the Hangman, here they can outface,
Yet they shall all hang in a worser place.
Then there are Thieues, who make the Church their gains,
Who can preach well, yet will not take the pains:
Dumb dogs, or rau'ning wolves, whose careless care
Does fat themselves, and keep their flocks most bare.
Besides Churchwardens, with a griping fist,
Like Thieues may rob their Vestry, if they list,
The poores neglector (O I pardon crave)
Collector I should say, may play the knave,
The Thief I would have said, but choose you whether,
He may be both, and so he may be neither.
So leaning Church- Thieues, with their cursed stealth,
I Will now descend unto the Common wealth.
And yet me thinks I should not pass the Court,
But sure Thieues dare not thither to resort.
But of all Thieues in any Kings Dominion.
A flatterer is a curpurse of opinion,
That like a pick-pocket, does lie and wait,
To steal himself into a man's conceit.
This Thief will often dawbe a great man's vice,
Or rate his virtue at too low a price,
Or at too high a pitch his worth will raise,
To fill his ears with flattery any ways.
Surueyors, and Purueyors, now and then
May steal, and yet be counted honest men.
When men do for their living labor true.
He Is a base Thief, that pays them not their due.
They are all Thieues, that live upon the fruits
Of Monopolies, of ungodly suits.
The Judge or Justice that do bribes desire.
Like Thieues, deserve a halter for their hire.
A Reverend Father, worthy of believing.
Said, Taking bribes was Gentleman-like Thieuing.
A Merchant now and then his goods may bring.
And steal the custom, and so rob the King.
Thieues they are all, that scrape and gather treasures,
By wares deceitful, or false weights or measures.
That Landlord is a Thief that rackes his rents.
And mounts the price of rotten tenements,
Almost unto a damned double rate,
And such a Thief as that One that eight years since bought many houses,
where I and many poor men dwelt, and presently raised not rents, from three
pounds to five pounds, but I changed him quickly for a better.
, my self had late.
A pair of lovers, are stark Thieues, for they
Do kindly steal each others heart away.
Extortioners, I Thieues may truly call,
Who take more interest then the principal.
Executors, and ouer-seers Thieuing,
Have often wronged the dead, and robbed the living.
All those within the rank of Thieues must be,
That trust their wares out from three months to three,
And make their debtors thrice the worth to pay,
Because they trust them, these are Thieues I say,
That do fell time, which unto God belongs,
And beggar whom they trust most, with these wrongs.
He is a Thief, and basely does purloyne,
Who borrows of his neighbors goods, or coy^^^
And can, but will no satisfaction give,
These are the most notorious Thieues that lives
Upon such Thieues (if Law the same allowed)
A hanging were exceeding well bestowed,
A Farmer is a Thief, that hoards up grain
In hope of dearth, by either drouth or rain,
He steals Gods treasures, and does quite forget,
That over them he is but a Steward set,
And for this rob'ry he deserves to wear
A riding knot an inch below his ear.
Of drinking, Thieues exceeding, store there are,
That steal themselves drunk e're they be aware:
These are right rob-pots, rob-wits, and rob-purses,
To gain diseases, begg'ry, and Gods curses.
Drawers, and Tapsters too are Thieues I think,
That nick their pots, and cheatmen of their drinks
And when guests have th^^^ liquor in their brain,
Steal pots half full, to fill them up again.
Though this be Thieu'ry, yet I must confess,
It Is honest Thift to punish Drunkenness.
And of small Thieues, the Tapster I prefer,
He is a Drunkards executioner.
For whilst his money lasts, he much affects him,
Then, with the rod of poverty corrects him.
A Chamberlain unto his guests may creep,
And pick their pockets, when they are drunk asleepe^
But amongst Thieues, that are of low repute,
An Hostler is a Thieues, most absolute:
He with a candles end Horse teeth can grease,
They shall eat neither hay, oats, beans, or pe^^,
Besides a hole ith Manger, and a Bag
Hanged underneath, may coozen many a Nag,
And specially, if in a Stable dark,
If one do not the Hostlers knau'ry mark,
He will deceive a man, before his faoe,
On the peck's bottom, some few out's he will pl^^^,
Which seems as if it to the brim were full,
And thus the knave both man and horse will gulf,
If he break horse-bread, he can thus much do,
Amongst five loaves, his codpiece swallows two
The Hostler says the horse has one good trick,
Quick at his meat, he needs must travel quick
If men, at full rack for their horse-meat pay,
So hard into the rack he will tread the Hay,
That out, the poor beasts cannot get a bit,
And th'Hostler's held an honest man for it,
For who would think the horses want their right,
When as the rack is still full, day and night?
With bottles, if men will have horses sed,
^each a groats-worth ere they go to bed,
^^ Thiefs Hostler can rob horse and men,
^^ steal the bottles from the rack again,
^^ put in Hay that is pist upon, I wot,
Which being dried no horse will eat a jot.
And all such Hostlers, wheresoe'r they be,
^^^feme a horses nightcap for their fee.
^^ stole a wife, and married her in poast,
^^ hanging had bin better stolen, almost:
^^ her he might and day was long perplexed,
^^ted scolded at, defamed, and vexed,
That (in comparison of all his pain)
^^ friendly hanging had been mighty gain.
There Is an old speech, a Tailor is a Thief,
And an old speech he has for his relief,
^dlnot equivocate, I Will glue him's due,
^^He (truly) steals not, or he steals not, true. He Cannot steal truly, or
truly he cannot steal.

Those that report so, mighty wrong do do him,
For how can he steal that, that is brought unto him?
And it may be they were false idle speeches,
That one brought Cotton once, to line his Breeches,
And that the Tailor laid the Cotton by,
And with old painted Cloth, the room supply,
Which as the owner (for his use) did wear,
Anayle or seeg, by chance his breech did tear,
At which he saw the linings, and was worth,
For Dives and Lazarus on the painted Cloth,
The Gluttons dogs, and hels fire hotly burning,
With fiends and flesh hooks, whence there is no returning.
He ripped the other breech, and there he spide
The pampered Prodigal on cockhorse ride:
There was his fare, his fiddlers, and his whores,
His being poor, and beaten out of doors,
His keeping hogs, his eating husks for meat,
His lamentation and his home retreat,
His welcome to his father, and the feast,
The farcalfe killed, all these things were expressed.
These transformations filled the man with fear,
That he hellfire within his breech This fellows breeches were not lyn'd with
Apocrypba. I heard of one that had picture of the Devil, in the back linings
of his Dublet witness at the Swan in St. Martins.
should bear,
He mused what strange enchantments he had bin in,
That turned his linings, into painted linen.
His fear was great, but at the last to rid it,
A Wizard told him, 'twas the Tailor did it.
One told me of a This miller ^lept a windmill not many years since, at
Pur^^et in Essex.
miller that had power
Sometimes to steal five bushels out of four:
As once a windmill (out of breath) lacked wind,
A fellow brought four bushels there to grind,
And hearing neither noise of knap or tiller,
Laid down his corn, and went to seek the miller:
Some two flight-shoot to th'Alchouse he did wag,
And left his sack in keeping with his Nag,
The miller came a by-way up the hill,
And saw the sack of corn stand at the mill,
Perceiving none that could his thest gainsay,
For toll took bag and grift, and all away.
And a crosse-way unto the Alchouse hy'd him,
Whereas the man that sought him, quickly spide him.
Kind miller (quoth the man) I left but now
A sack of wheat, and I entreat that thou Will walk up to the mill where it does lie,
And grind it for me now the wind blows hye.
So up the hill they went, and quickly found
The bag and corn, stolen from the ground vngroun'd.
The poor man with his loss was full of grief,
He, and the miller went to seek the Thief,
Or else the corn: at last all tired and sad,
(Seeking both what he had not, and he had)
The miller (to appease or ease his pain)
Sold him one bushel Some say, that he sold him the four bushels again, and
then stole one bushel for ^ll.
of his own again.
Thus out of four the man five bushels lost,
Accounting truly all his corn and cost.
To mend all of this Thieuing millers brood,
One half hours hauging would be very good.
But there is a kind of steaking mystical,
Pick-pocket wits, filch lines Sophistical,
Villains in verse, base runagates in rhyme,
False rob-wits, and contemned slaves of time,
Purloyning Thieues, that pilser from desert
The due of study, and reward of art.
Pot Poets, that have skill to steal translations,
And (into English) filch strange tongues and Nations,
And change the language of good wits unknown,
These Thieuish Rascals print them for their own.
Mistake me not (good Reader) any ways,
Translators do deserve respect and praise,
For were it not for them, we could not have
A Bible, that declares our souls to save,
And many thousands worthy works would lie
Not understood, or in obscurity,
If they by learned men's intelligence,
Were not translated with great diligence:
I honor such, and he that does not so,
May his soul sink to everlasting woe.
I speak of such as steal regard and fame,
Who do translate, and hide the Authors name,
Or such as are so barren of invention,
That cannot write a line worth note, or mention,
Yet upon those that can, will belch their spite,
And with malicious tongues their names backbite.
To this effect I often have wrote before,
And am enforced now this one time more,
To take my pen again into my fist,
And answer a deprauing Emblemist;
I spare to name him, but I tell him plain,
If ever he dare abuse me so again,
I Will whip him with a yerking Satyrs lash,
Fang'd like th'inuectiue muse of famous Nash;
That he shall wish he had not been, or been
Hanged, ever he moved my just incensed spleen,
He has reported most maliciously,
In sundry places amongst company,
That I do neither write, nor yet invent
The things, that (in my name) do pass in print:
But that some Scholar spends his time and brain,
And lets me have the glory and the gain.
Is any Poet in that low degree,
To make his muse work iourney-worke to me?
Or are my lines with eloquence imbellish'd,
As any learning in them may be relished?
Those that think so they either judge in haste,
Or else their judgments pallat's out of taste.
My pen in Helicon I never did dip,
And all my Schollership is Schullership,
I am an Englishman, and have the scope
To write in mine own Countries speech (I hope)
For Homer was a Grecian, and I note
That all his works in the Greek tongue he wrote:
Virgill, and Ovid, neither did contemn
To use that speech, their mothers taught to them.
Du Bartas, Petrarcke, Tassa, all their muses
Did use the language that their country uses.
And though I know but English, I suppose
I have as many tongues as some of those,
Their studies were much better, yet I say,
I use my countries speech, and so did they.
Because my name is Tailor, some do doubt,
My best invention comes by stealing out
From other Writers works, but I reply,
And give their doubtful diffidence the lie.
To cloze this point I must be very brief,
And call them Knaves, that call me Poet Thief.
But yet a Poets theft, I must not smother,
For they do often steal from one another:
They call it borrowing, but I think it true,
To tear me it stealing, were a style more due.
There is a speech, that Poets still are poor,
But never till now I knew the cause wherefore:
Which is, when their inventions are at best,
Then they are daily robbed, it is manifest;
For noble Thieues and poor Thieues all conioyne,
From painful Writers studies to purloyne,
And steal their flashes, and their sparks of wit,
Still vtt'ring them at all occasions fit,
As if they were their own, and these men are
For their stolen stuff esteemed wife and rare.
They call it borrowing, but I tell them plain,
It Is stealing, for they never pay again.
The use of money's eight in the hundred still,
And men in Bonds bound, as the owner will;
But wit and Poetry (more worth then treasure)
Is from the owners borrowed, at men's pleasure,
And to the Poets lot it still does fall,
To lose both interest and principal.
This is the canse that Poets are poor men,
They Are robbed, and lend, and never are paid again.
It Is said that Jacob (counseled by his mother)
Did steal his fathers blessing from his brother,
This was a theft which few will imitate,
Their fathers blessings are of no such rate,
For though some sons might have them for the craving:
Yet they esteem them scarcely worth the having,
Their fathers money they would gladly steal,
But for their blessings they regard no deal.
And by their waters you may guess and gather,
That they were sick and grieved of the Father:
But on such Thieues as those, I plainly say,
A hansome hanging were not cast away.
Some Thieues may through an admirable skill,
An honest Commonwealth both pole and pill:
These fellows steal secure as they were Millers,
And are substantial men, their Countries Pillars:
Purloyning polers, or the Barbers rather,
That shave a Kingdom, cursed wealth to gather:
These Pillars, or these Caterpillars swarms,
Grow rich, and purchase goods by others harms,
And live like Fiends, extremely feared and hated;
And are, and shall be ever execrated.
A King of Britain once Catellus He was the fortyth King after Brute, and he
reigned ^^^ Christ's birth 171. years
named,
Upon Record his Charity is famed:
His justice, and his memory was so ample,
He hanged up all oppressors, for example.
If that Law once again were in request,
Then, of all trades a Hangman were the best.
These are the brood of Barrabas, and these
Can rob, and be let loose again at ease,
Whilst Christ (in his poor members) every day,
Both suffer (through their Theft) and pine away.
And sure all men, of whatsoever degree,
Of Science, Art, or Trade, or Mystery,
Or Occupation, whatsoever they are,
For truth cannot with Watermen compare,
^^ know there is some objections may be made,
How they are rude, uncivil in their trade:
But that is not the question I propound,
^^ say no Theft can in the trade be found;
Our greatest foes by no means can reveal,
Which way we can deceive, or cheat, or steal:
We take men in, and Land them at their pleasure,
And never bate them half an inch of measure;
Still at one price our selves we waste and wear,
Though all things else be mounted double dear:
And in a word, I must conclude and say,
A Waterman can be a Thief no way:
Except one way, which I had half forgot,
He now and then perhaps may rob the pot,
Steal himself drunk, and be his own Purspicker,
And chimically turns his coin to liquor.
This is almost a universal Theft,
A portion Fathers to their Sons have left:
^^en are begot, and do like their begetters,
And Watermen do learn it of their betters.
There Is nothing that does make them poor and bare,
^^ut b'cause they are such true men as they are:
For if they would but steal like other men,
The Gallows would devour them now and then;
Whereby their number quickly would be less,
Which (to their wants) would be a good redress.
Their poverty does from their truth proceed,
Their way to thrive were to be Thieues indeed:
If they would steal, and hang, as others do,
Those that survive it were a help unto;
Truth is their trade, and truth does keep them poor,
But if their truth were less, their wealth were more,
All sorts of men, work all the means they can,
To make a Thief of every Water-man:
And as it were in one consent they join, The Anagram of Water-man is, A
TREW^MAN.

To trot by land in the dirt, and save their coin.
Carroaches, Coaches, Iades and Flanders Mares,
Do rob us of our shares, our wares, our Fares:
Against the ground we stand and knock our heels,
Whilst all our profit runs away on wheels;
And whosoever but observes and notes,
The great increase of Coaches and of Boats,
Shall find their number more then ever they were
By half and more within these thirty years.
Then Watermen at Sea had service still,
And those that staid at home had work at will:
Then vpstart Helcart-Coaches were to seek,
A man could scarce see twenty in a week,
But now I think a man may daily see,
More then the Whirries on the Thames can be.
When Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown,
A Coach in England then was scarcely known,
Then 'twas as rare to see one, as to spy
A Tradesman that had never told a lie:
But now, like plagues of Egypt, they do swarm,
As thick as Frogs, or Lice, unto our harm.
For though the King, the Counsel, and such States
As are of high superior ranks and rates,
For port or pleasure, may their Coaches have,
Yet it is not sit that every Whore or Knave,
And fulsome Madams, and new scuruy Squires,
Should iolt the streets in pomp, at their desires,
Like great triumphant Tamberlaines, each day,
Drawn with the pampered lades of Belgia,
That almost all the streets are choked outright,
Where men can hardly pass, from morn till night. The Wherries were want to
have all the Whores, till the Guaches robbed them of their custom.

Whilst Watermen want work, and are at ease,
To carry one another, if they please,
Or else sit still, and poorly starve and dye;
For all their livings on four Wheels do fly.
Good Reader think it not too long, or much,
That I thus amply on this point do tutch:
Now we are borne, we would our work apply
To labor, and to live until we dye;
And we could live well, but for Coaches thieuing,
That every day do rob us of our living.
If we, by any means, could learn the skill,
To rob the Coachmen, as they rob us still;
Then in the Sessions book it would appear,
They would be hanged five hundred in a year.
Besides, it is too manisfestly known,
They have the Sadlers trade almost o'rthrowne;
And the best Leather in our Kingdom they
Consume and waste; for which poor men do pay:
Our Boots and Shoes to such high price they rear,
That all our profit can buy none to wear.
I in Bohemia saw that all but Lords,
Or men of worth, had Coaches drawn with cords:
And I my neck unto the rope would pawn,
That if our Hackney ratlers were so drawn,
With cords, or ropes, or halters, choose ye whether,
It quickly would bring down the price of Leather.
The Watermen should have more work I hope,
When every hireliug Coach drawn with a rope,
Would make our Gallants stomach at the matter,
And now and then to spend their coin by water.
Without all flattery, here my mind I break,
The Proverb says, Give loosers leave to speak:
They carry all our Fares, and make us poor,
That to our Boats we scarce can get a The Wherries were wont to have all the
Whores, till the Coaches robbed them of their custom.
Whore.
Some honest men and women now and then
Will spend their moneys amongst Watermen:
But we are grown so many, and again,
Our fares so few, that little is our gain.
Yet for all this (to give the Devil his due)
Our honest trade can no ways be untrue.
If some be rude amongst the multitude,
It Is only want of work than makes them rude:
It Is want of money, and of manners too,
That makes them do as too too often they do:
And every good thing that in them is scant,
It still must be imputed to their want.
But leaving true men, I must turn my style
To paltry Thieues, whose glory is their guile:
For thrice three hundred of them from me took,
Some of them ready money, some a Book,
And set their hands to Bills, to pay to me,
When I from Scotland should returned be.
Crowns, pounds, or Angels, what they pleased to write,
I have their filts to show in black and white.
And after that, I to Bohemia went,
And gave out money, and much money spent:
And for these things, those Thieues in general,
Will neither give me gain or Principal.
I lately wrote a It is called a Kicksie winesie, or a Lerry cum twang.
Pamphlet to the Crew,
That spoke their due, for keeping of my due:
Wherein I gave them thanks that had me paid,
And pardoned those that in their graves were laid:
To those that were exceeding poor, or fled,
(Except good words) I very little sed;
I praid for them that only would and could not,
And I inueigh'd at those that could and would not.
And let those shifters their own Judges be,
If they have not bin arrant Thieues to me;
For first and last they took (with their good wills)
Near fifteen hundred Books upon their bills,
And all their hands (if I the truth may utter)
Are worse then obligations sealed with butter:
For I have in my store (not worth a Louse)
As many Bills as well may thatch a House;
And there I have the hands of Knights and Squires:
And Omnium gatherum cheating knaves and liars,
Seven hundred in a Galley mawfrey, Close,
Which I would sell for fifteen pence the Groce:
They Will neither pay with coming, nor with sending,
And are (like old Boots) past all hope of mending.
First they did rob me of my expectation,
And made me walk a long perambulation;
And as my To whom I in all humility must ever acknowledge my obedience and
dutiful thankfulness and service.
Royal Master, when I came,
The good Prince, and my Lord of Buckingham
With many more of honor, worship, and
Men of inferior callings in this Land,
Were bountiful to me at my return;
Yet I like one that does one Candle burn
In seeking of another, spent their gifts
To find out sharkes, and complements, and shifts.
Theft is the best name I can give their crime,
They rob me of my Books, my coin, and time,
Of others bounty, and mine own good hopes;
And for this These I leave them to the Ropes.
I speak to those that can and will not pay,
When in the streets I meet them every day,
They do not much mistake, if they do think
I wish them I have 700. Bills of their hands, which in all comes to ^^^^ 300. ^.
hanged for keeping of my chinke.
Thus have I touched a crew of Thieuing fellows,
That rob beyond the compass of the Gallows:
Whilst many little Thieues are hanged up dead,
That only steal for need, to find them bread:
As Phara^h's fat Kine did the lean devour,
So great Thieues swallow small ones by their power.
And sure I think that common Burglaries,
Pick-pockets, Highway- Thieues, and Pilferies,
And all that thus felloniously do Thieue,
Are Thieues whose labors The trade of Thieuing is very profitable to any men.
many do relieve.
Who but poor Thieues do Iaylors wants supply?
On whom do Vnder-Keepers still rely?
From Thieuing, money still is gotten thus,
For many a Warrant and a Mittimus;
And if men were not apt to filch and Thieue,
'Twere worse for many a high and under Shrieue.
The Halter-maker, and the Smith are getters,
For fatal twist, and pondrous bolts and setters.
The Carman has a share amongst the rest,
Although not voluntary, yet he is pressed.
The Ballad-maker does some profit reap,
And makes a Taburne Dirge exceeding cheap,
The whilst the Printers, and the doleful Singers,
Do in these gainful business dip their fingers,
The very Hangman has the slight and skill,
To extract all his goods from others ill;
He is the Epilogue unto the Law,
And from the jaws of death his life does draw.
And last, the Hangmans Broaker reapes the fruit,
By selling to one Thief another suit.
Besides, Thieues are fit members: for it is known,
They make men careful how to keep their own,
For were it not for them, we still should lie
Rocked in the Cradle of security:
Lulled in base idleness, and sluggish sloth,
Apt to all ill, and to all goodness loath:
Which would infect us, and corrupt the blood,
And therefore for our healths sake Thieves are good.
And some men are so prone to steal, I think,
It is as natural as their meat and drink,
They are borne to it, and cannot do withal,
And must be filching still, what ever befall.
A wispe of rushes, or a clod of land,
Or any wadde of hay that is next to hand
They Will steal, and for it have a good excuse;
They do it to keep their hands in ure, or use:
But not t'excuse a Thief in any case;
I say there are some crimes as void of grace,
On whom men scarce have feeling or a thought,
Nor ever like Thieues are to the Gallows brought.
Those that obey false gods, commit offense
Against the Eternal Gods Omnipotence.
Those that do graven Images adore,
Are worse then Thieues, yet are not hanged therefore;
It Is treason high to take Gods name in vain,
Yet most men do it, through frailty, or for gain.
The Sabbath is profaned continually,
Whilst the offenders pay small Or none at all.
penalty.
And Parents are dishonored, without awe,
The whilst the children do escape the law:
And murder, though it be never so soul and deadly,
Is often times made manslaughter or chance-medley.
Adultery's neighborhood, and fornication,
May be conniu'd at, with a toleration.
A Witness, that false testimony bears,
It Is a great wonder if he lose his ears,
But sure the Proverb is as true as brief,
A Lyer's ever worser then a Thief,
And it is called Thrist, when men their minds do set,
To cover how their Neighbors goods to get.
To be vainglorious, and ambitious proud,
Are Gentleman-like parts, must be allowed.
To bear an Envy, base and secretly,
It Is counted Wisdom, and great Policy.
To be a Drunkard, and the Cat to whip,
Is called the King of all good Fellowship.
But for a Thief, the whole world does consent,
That hanging is the fittest punishment.
But if that Law were put in execution,
I think it would be Man-kindes dissolution:
And then we should have Land and Tenements
For nothing, or for very easy Rents:
Whereby we see that man his wealth esteems,
And better then his God, his soul it deemes:
For let God be abusde, and let his soul
Run greedily into offenses soul,
He scarcely shall be questioned sor't, but if
(Amongst his other sins) he play the Thief,
And steal men's goods, they all will sentence give,
He must be hanged, he is unfit to live.
In the Low Countries, if a wretch do steal
But bread, or meat, to feed himself a meal,
They will unmercifully beat and clowt him,
Hale, pull, and tear, and spurn, and kick and flowt him.
But if a Drunkard be vnpledg'd a Kan,
Draws out his knife and basely stabs a man,
To run away the Rascal shall have scope,
None holds him, but all cry, Run, Thief, Run.
Lope Scellum Lope.
Thus there is a close conniuence for all vice,
Except for Theft, and that is a hanging price.
One man's addicted to blaspheme and swear,
A second to carowse, and domineore:
A third to whoring, and a fourth to fight,
And kill and slay, a fist man to backbite,
A sixth and seventh, with this or that crime caught,
And all in general much worse then naught,
And amongst all these sianers general,
The Thief must win the halter from them all,
When if the matter should examined be,
They do deserve it all, as much as he.
Nor yet is Thieuery any vpstart sin,
But it of long antiquity has bin:
And by this trade great men have not disdained,
To win renown, and have their states maintained.
Grest Alexanders conquests, what were they
But taking others goods and lands away?
(In manners) I must call it Martial dealing,
But truth will term it rob'ry, and flat stealing,
For unto all the world it is well known,
That he by force, took what was not his own.
Some Writers are with Tamberlaine so brief,
To style him with the name of Seythian Thief.
Plutar^b.
Licurgus loved, and granted gifts beside
To Thieues that could steal, and escape vnspide:
But if they taken with the manne were,
They must restore, and buy the bargain dear.
Thieues were at all times ever to be had,
Examples by the good Thief and the bad.
And England still has bin a fruitful Land
Of valiant Thieues, that durst bid true men stand.
One Bellin Dun Hen. I.
, a famous Thief surniu'd,
From whom the cowne of Dunstable's derived:
And Robin Hood Rich. 2.
with little John agreed
To rob the rich men, and the poor to feed.
Edw. 3.
The Priests had here such small means for their living,
That many of them were enforced to Thieuing.
Once the fist Henry could rob ex'lent well,
When he was Prince of Wales, as Storeis tell.
Then Friar Tucke a tall stout Thief indeed,
Could better rob and steal, then preach or read,
Sir Gosselin Deinuill, Edw. 2.
with 200. more,
In Friars weeds, robbed and were hanged therefore,
Thus I in Stories, and by proof do find,
That stealing's very old, time out of mind,
E't I was borne, it through the world was spread,
And will be when I from the world am dead.
But leaving thus, my Muse in hand has took,
To show which way a Thief is like a Book.
A Comparison between a Thief and a Book.
COmparisons are odious, as some say,
But my comparisons are so no way:
I in the Pamphlet which I wrote before,
Compared a Book most fitly to a Whore:
And now, as fitly my poor muse alludes,
A Thief t'a Book in apt similitudes.
A good Book steals the mind from vain pretenses,
From wicked cogitations, and offenses:
It makes us know the worlds deceiving pleasures,
And set our hearts on never ending treasures.
So when Thieues steal our Cattle, Coin or Ware,
It makes us see how mutable they are:
Puts us in mind that we should put our trust,
Where Fellon cannot steal, or Canker rust.
Bad Books through eyes and ears do break and enter,
And takes possession of the hearts frail Center.
Infecting all the little Kingdom Man,
With all the poisonous mischief that they can,
Till they hape robbed and ransacked him of all
Those things which men may justly goodness call.
Robs him of virtue, and of heavenly grace,
And leaves him beggered, in a wretched case.
So of our earthly goods, Thieues steal the best,
And richest jewels, and leave us the rest.
Men know not Thieues from true men by their looks,
Nor by their outsides, no man can know Books.
Both are to be suspected, all can tell,
And wisemen ever they trust, will try them well.
A Book may have a title good and fair,
Though in it one may find small goodness there:
And so a Thief, whose actions are most vile,
Steals good opinion, and a true man's style.
Some Books (profane) the Sacred text abuse,
With common Thieues it is a common use.
Some Books are full of lies, and Thieues are so,
One hardly can believe their yea, or no.
Some Books are scurrilous and too obsceane,
And he is no right Thief that loves not a Queen.
Some Book's not worth the reading for their fruits:
Some Thieues not worth the hanging, for their suits,
Some Books are brief, and in few words declare
Compendious matter, and acuteness rare:
And so some Thieues will break into a house,
Or cut a purse whilst one can crack a Louse.
Some Books are arrogant and impudent,
So are most Thieues in Christendom and Kent.
Some Books are plain and simple, and some Thieues
Are simply hanged, whilst others get reprieues.
Some Books like foolish Thieues, their faults are spide
Some Thieues like witty Books, their faults can hide.
Some Books are quaint and quick in their conceits,
Some Thieues are active, nimble in their sleights,
Some Books with idle stuff the Author fills,
Some Thieues will still be idle by their wills.
Some Books have neither reason, law, or sense,
No more have any Thieues for their offense.
A Booke's but one, when first it comes to th'Presse,
It may increase to numbers numberless:
And so one Thief perhaps may make threescore:
And that threescore may make ten thousand more,
Thus from one Thief, Thieues may at last amount,
Like Books from one Book past all men's account.
And as with industry, and art, and skill,
One Thief does daly rob another still,
So one Book from another (in this age)
Steals many a line, a sentence or a page.
Thus amongst Books, good fellowship I find,
All things are common, Thieues bear no such mind,
And for this Thieuing, Books with hue and cry
Are sought, (as Thieues are) for their Felony.
As Thieues are chasde and sent from place to place,
So Books are always in continual chase.
As Books are strongly boss'd, and clasped and bound,
So Thieues are manacled, when they are found:
As Thieues are often examined for their crimes,
So Books are used, and have bin at all times.
As Thieues have often at their arraignment stood,
So Books are tryde if they be bad or good.
As Iuries and Graund Iuries, with much strife,
Give up (for Thieues) a Verdict, death or life.
So as men's fancies evidence do give,
The shame or fame of Books, to dye or live:
And as the veriest Thief may have some friend,
So the worst Books, some Knave will still defend.
As Thieues their condemnation must abide,
Books are deemed true sometimes, sometimes be'iyd.
As Thieues are judged, so have Books again,
As many censures (almost) as are men.
And as their faults are different in degree,
Some Thieues are hanged, some Books are burnt we see,
Some Thieues are for their small offenses whip't,
All Books are pressed, except a Manuscript.
As Thieues are buried, when the Law is paid,
So some Books in obliuions grave are laid.
The Ialors keep the Thieues, and much regards,
The strength of fetters, locks, bolts, grates and wards.
And will know when and how abroad they go,
And unto Books the Stationers^ are so.
Still Books and Thieues in one conceit do join:
For if you mark them, they are all for coin.
Some Thieues exceeding brave, a man may find
In Satin, and their cloakes with velvet linde:
And some Books have gay coats unto their backs,
When as their insides, goods and goodness lacks.
Same Books are all betattered, torn and rent,
Some Thieues endure a ragged punishment.
Some Thieues may come (their sorrows to increase)
Before a shallow Officer of peace,
One that can cough, call knave, and with nonsense
Commit, before he know for what offense:
A Book sometimes does prove a Thiefes true friend,
And does preserve him from a hanging end:
For let a man at any Sessions look,
And still some Thieues are saved by their Book.
And so some Books to coxcombs hands may come,
Who can cry pish, and mew, and tush, and hum,
Condemn ere they have read, or thoroughly scand,
Abusing what they cannot understand.
Some Thieues are like a Horne-booke, and begin
Their A.B.C. of filching, with a pin;
Their Primmer is a point, and then their Psalter
May pick a pocket, and come near a Halter.
Then with long practice in these rudiments,
To break a house may be his Accidence,
And using of his skill (thus day by day)
By Grammar he may rob upon the way,
Until at last, to wear (it be his hap)
A Tiburne Tippet, or old Stories Cap.
That is the highest degree which they can take,
An end to all their studies there they make:
For amongst Thieues not one amongst a score,
If they be raised so high, they will steal no more.
Thus the comparisons hold still you see,
To Whores and Thieues, Books may compared be.
All are like Actors, in this wavering age,
They enter all upon the worlds great Stage:
Some gain applause, and some do act amiss,
And exit from the scaffold with a hiss.
Now if my Whore or Thief play well their parts,
Give them their due, applaud their good deserts.
If ill, to Newgate hiss them, or Bridewell,
To any place, Hull, Halifax or Hell.
And thus the Thief and Book join both in one;
Both having made an END, they both have DON.
THE PRAISE AND VERTVE OF a IAYLE and IAYLERS: WITH THE MOST EXCELLENT
MYSTERY, and necessary use of all sorts of Hanging. ALSO A TOVCH AT TYBVRNE
FOR A PERIOD, AND THE AVTHORS FREE LEAVE TO LET THEM be hanged, who are offended
at the Book without cause.
DEDICATED To the Reader, you must note, that this Gentleman did send me from
the Fairne Island, a barrel of Gulls and Cormotant eggs, by ^^^ ^^^ing of
which, I have attained to the understanding of many words which our Gulls and
Cormotants do speaks here abou^^^,
Sensible, Reasonable, Affable, Amiable, Acceptable, minded, Honorable, in
Wit, Judgment, and Understanding Able, Robert Rugge Gentleman, Rear
Adelantado of the Holy Island, the Fairne, and the Staples, on the Coast of
Northumbria.
No hanging Tap'strie, Quilt, or Couerlet,
This dedication of my wit could get:
No Mattresse, Blanket, Sheet, or Featherbed,
Could have these labors of my working head:
But (cold by nature) from my Nurses dugge,
My inclination still has loved a Rugge:
Which makes my thankful Muse thus bold to be,
To consecrate this worthless worth to thee:
Thou that within those happy Isles do bide,
Which Neptunes waves do from our Land divide,
Where in the Holy Island stands a Fort
That can defend, and injuries retort:
That does command a goodly Haven nigh,
Wherein a hundred ships may safely lie:
Thou in the The Fairne Island standing 7. miles from the Holy Island into the
Sea, the Holy Island stands seven miles from Barwiske. In the Fairne all sorts
of Sea-fowle breed in such abundance, as you cannot step but upon Eggs or
Foul: They miss not to lay on Saint Marks day, and a fortnight after Lammas
there is none to be seen. The Staple Islands belong to the Fairne, and stand
two miles from it into the Sea, where the Foul upon the rocks (like pinacles)
are so thick both upon the sides, and upon the tops, and with such curiosity
build their nests, as the wit of man cannot lay that egg in his place again
that is once taken up, to abide in the same place. Upon their flight the Sea is
covered for half a mile, and the heavens above head obscured for the present.
Fairne and Staples bearst such sway,
That all the dwellers there do thee obey:
Where Foul are all thy fair inhabitants,
Where thou (Commander of the Cormorants)
Grand Governor of Guls, of Geese and Ganders,
O'r whom thou art none of the leaft Commanders:
Whereas sometimes thou can not stir thy legs,
But thou must tread on tributary eggs:
For they like honest, true, plaine-dealing folks,
Pay thee the custom of their whites and yolks,
Which to thy friends oft-times transported be,
As late thou sentst abarrell-full to me:
And in requit all to so good a friend,
This Prison, and this Hanging here I send.
Because within the There is but one house there, all the dwellers else be^^^
Sea-fowle, who will neither know offenses not punish^^^.
Fairne and Staples teo,
The dwellers do as they do please to do.
Their pride and lust, their stealing and their treas^^,
Is all impouted to their want of reason:
I therefore have made bold to send thee this,
To show them what a Iayle and Hanging is.
Thou have from Hermes sucked the Quintessence
Of quick Invention, and of Eloquence:
And thou so well do love good witty Books,
That makes thee like Apollo in thy looks:
For nature has thy visage so much graced,
That there is the ensign of true friendship placed.
A chaulkie face, that is like a pewter spoone,
Or buttermilke, or green cheese, or the meone,
Are either such as kill themselves with care,
Or hide-bound miserable wretches are.
Give me the man, whose color and prospect,
Like Titan when it does on gold reflect;
And if his purse be equal to his will,
He Will then be frolic, free, and iouiall still:
And such a one (my worthy friend) art thou,
To whom I dedicate this Pamphlet now;
And I implore the Heavens to prove so kind,
To keep thy state according to thy minae.
Yours with my best wishes, JOHN TAILOR.

THE VERTVE OF AIAYLE, AND NECESSITY OF HANGING.
MY freeborn Muse of bondage rudely treats,
And strange vagaries in my Brain-pau beats:
Whilst I unmask, vnuisor, or vnueile
The virtues of a Iaylot and a Iayle:
And then of Hanging, and the Hang-mans art
My line do end, and at the Gallows part:
First, I do find in Histories enrold,
I^^les for antiquity, are very old:
For loseph was in prison (false accused,'
That he his Masters Wife would have abused.)
And all the world does understand, a Prison
Is not an vpstart Fable newly risen.
And lere^^ was under bolts and locks,
By Pasher once imprisoned in the ^^^^^^
stocks:
And after that he twice was put in Chap. 32.
thrall,
For true foretelling Chap.37.
Israel, Iudab's fall.
The Sacred Histories do well declare,
That Prisons for their time most ancient are.
Yet though my lines do speak of layles, I see
That mine invention and my Muse is free:
And I do find the name of Prisone, frames
Significant alluding Anagrams.
As Thus
1. PRISONE. Anagramma. NIP SORE.
There men are Nip'd with mischiefs manifold,
With loss of freedom, hunger, thirst, and cold,
With mourning shirts, and sheets, and lice some store,
And thus a Prison truly does Nip sore.
2. PRISONE. Anagramma. IN ROPES.
Again the very word portends small hopes,
For he that is in a Prisone, is In Ropes.
3. PRISONE. Anagramma. IN PROSE.
To all good verses, Prisons are great foes,
And many Poets they keep fast In Prose.
4. PRISONE. Anagramma. NO PRISE.
IN deed it is no profit, or No Prise,
But woeful purchase of calamities.
The name of Iayles (by letters transposition)
Doch very well discover their condition.
5 IAYLES. Anagramma. I SLAYE.
ANd well it does befit it every way,
The nature of all Iayles is still to slay:
There are men slain most strange torme^ting ways,
In name, fame, state, and life, with long delays.
6. BONDAGE. Anagramma. BANDOGE.
ANd Bondage like a Bandagge still does gnaw,
Fangd with the tushes of the biting law.
7. IAYLER. Anagramma. I RAIL.
THis does befit the Iayler wondrous tr^^^^me,
He at the prisoners railes, and they at him.
8. ARESTING. Anagramma. A STINGER.
A Resting very well with this agrees,
It is A Stinger worse then Wasps or B^^.
OR, 9. ARESTING. Anagramma. IN GRATES.
THis very word includes poor prisoners fates,
Aresting briefly claps em up In Grates.
10. SERIEANT. Anagramma. IN ARESTE.
TO turn this word unto the very best,
A Serieant In Areste does breed unrest.
OR, 11. SERIEANT. Anagramma. IN TEARS.
IN cares and To^ts he leaves men to lament.
When credit, coin, and goods, and all are spent.
12. WARDS. Anagramma. DRAWS.
A Prisoners purse is like a nurse, for why,
His Ward or lodging draws or sucks it dry:
A Jury here of Anagrams, yon see,
Of Serieants and of Iailes empanneld be;
And now my pen intends to walk a station,
And talk of Prisons in some other fashion.
That Iailes should be, there is Law, sense and reason,
To punish bawdry, cheating, theft and treason,
Though some against them have inuectiue bin,
And called a Iaile a magazin of sin,
An University of villainy,
An Academy of fo^e blasphemy,
A sink of drunkenness, a den of Thieues,
A treasury for Serieants and for Shrleues,
A mint for Baylifes, Marshals men and Iailers,
Who live by losses of captived bewailers:
A nurse of Roguery, and an earthly hell,
Where Deu'ls or Iaylers in men's shapes do dwell:
But I am quite contrary to all this,
I think a Iaile a Schools of virtue is,
A house of study end of con^c^^plation,
A place of discipline and reformation,
There men may try their patience and shall know,
If they have any friends aline or no:
There they shall prove if they have fortitude,
By which all crosses stoutly are subdued,
A Prison leads the creditor unto
His coozning debtor, that would him vndoe',
It Is physic that preserues the Commonwealth,
Foul treasons snassle, and the canbe of stealth,
The whip of hellish pride, the scourge of lust,
The good man's help in plaguing the unjust.
Were thieues and villains not in prison put,
A world of throats (past number) would be cut:
For when diseases are grown desperate, then
They must have desperate remedies, and when
Men mend not for repoofe, or ^^^onition,
A Iaile then is the Surgeon or Physician.
The roaring Knave, that like a horse or mule,
His parents, master, or no friends could rule,
But that he daily would be drunk and swear,
And like a demi: devil do^^ineere,
Though to good course he never meant to beed him,
A Excellent reformation.
prison at the last will mend or end him.
The deeds of darkness that do hate the light,
Frays, brawls and bloodshed which start out by might,
The watch like cunning Fowlers lie in wait,
And catch these Woodcocks in their Sprindges ^^,
These Birds are in the Iaile mewed up from not,
Where they may learn more manners and be q^^^
A Iail's a glass wherein old men may see,
The blemish of their youths deformity;
And young men quickly may perceive from thence,
The way to wisdom and experience.
And though the lights of prisons are but dim,
A prisoners candle yet may show to him
At midnight, without light of Son or Moon,
More then he ever could perceive at noone;
It shows the fleeting state of earthly pelse,
It makes him wisely learn to know himself,
The world unto his view it represents,
To be a map or mass of discontents,
It shows his fained friends like butter-flyes,
That dogged his summer of prosperities:
And in a word it truly does set forth
The world, and all that is in it nothing worth,
These things unto a wisemans judgment brings,
A hate to earth, and love to heavenly things.
TO a wise man nothing in a Iaile dothbide,
But it to some good use may be applide:
He hears a Ruffin swear, and so does hear
That he does stand in fear, and hate to swear:
He spies another drunk, and so does spy
That such unmanly beastliness he will fly.
He notes the curtall cannes half filled with froth,
Tobacco piping hot, and from them both,
His judgment does discern, with wisdoms eye,
The world is vapor, froth, and vanity.
His homely There are too few that make this good use of imprisonment.
bed and vermines sundry forms,
Do make him mind his grane, and crawling wo^^^,
The Spiders cobweb, lawne, or tapestry,
Show odds 'twixt idleness and industry.
The churlish keepers, rattling chains and fetters,
The hole or dangeon for condemned debtors,
Blaspheming wretches of all grace bereauen,
Do make him think on hell, and wish for heaven.
And thus though wise men's corpse in prison be,
Their minds are still at liberty and free.
Besides, experience daily teaches this,
The soul a Prisoner in the body is:
Our Reason should the keeper be to guide,
The Heart does lodge within the Masters side,
The Brains the Knights ward may be termed fit,
There lies the understanding and the wit:
^e D(...) where the Prisoners starve and dye,
^^^ the B^^^ where sad despair does lie:
^^e S^^^^ the Manacles, and Bolts, and Gives,
Which f^^^^ us in bondage all our lives:
^^ melancholy sorrow, grief and care,
^^^i^all waiters in those Prisons are,
^^^ partial self-love all our crimes excusing,
^^^ Consciences true evidence accusing,
^^^ fights and tears the Messengers we send
^^ God, that all our sorrows may have end;
^d then through faith and hope we do believe,
Again a pardon, better than repreeue;
^^^ lastly death does free the soul from thrall,
^^^ makes a laile delinery unto all.
^^^ is our flesh the walls, our bones the grates,
^^^ eyes the windows, and our mouths the gates,
^^^ Nose the Chimney, Kitchen is the breast,
^^^ ^r S^^cke.
tongue the taster of the worst and best,
^^^ hands the Caruers, teeth the Cooks to mince,
^^^ diet of a Pea sane or a Prince:
^^^ hunger is best sauce, as I do think,
^^ beli^es cellers where we lay our drink:
^^^ in these corpse of ours deciphered thus,
^^^ are prisoners unto all of us.
^^^race guides us, sow by grace guide them,
^^^ way unto the new Jerusalem.
^^^ne rugged winter, with frosts, storms and gusts,
^^^^^ prisoners yearly in the The earth a Prison.
earth it thrusts,
^^^ roots, flowers, fruits, and worms til sun and rain,
^^^h Summers heat does bail them forth again.
^^^of all men alive, I find A strait suit is a^^ Prison
a Tailor
^^^ appeared artificial Iailor:
^^^ do commit themselves unto his charge,
^^^may, but will by no means go at large.
^^^ stene many in the Tailors Iaies,
^^^ labored till they sweat with tooth and nails,
^^^ whilst a man might ride five miles at least)
^^^their clothes together on the breast,
^^^being then in prison buttoned up,
^^ose that scarcely they could bite or sup,
I have heard their pride how loud it lide,
^^esting that their clothes were made too wide a
^^^ men love bondage more then liberty,
^^^ it is a gailant kind of foolery,
^^^ thus amongst themselves they have a Law,
^^^ke and dawbe the back, and pinch the Maw.
^^^ thanks their souls should be in mighty trouble,
^^^ they are imprisoned double,
^^orps and Clothes and which is true and plain,
^^^ seem to take great pleasure in their pain.
^^^ hoomaker's a kind of Iailor too,
^^^ very strange exploits he dares to do:
^^^ many times he has the power and might,
^^^ into his Sto^ks a Lord or Knight, A Shoomakers Prison.

The Madam and the Maid he cares not whether,
He lays them all fast by the heels in lether.
Plain Truth and honesly prisoners.
Honesty and Truth, both Prisoners are,
Although they seldom come unto the bar,
Yet are they kept so closely day and night,
That in an age they scarsely come in sight.
And but for many of our Countries pillars,
True Tailers, Weauers, and clean fingered Millers,
Good Sericants and kind Brokers did relieve them,
A hard case.
I know not who would any comfort give them.
No doubt but many a Less that feign would wed,
Is her own A maindenhead often times is a Prisoner.
Iailor to her maindenhead,
With much unwillingness she keeps it close,
And with her heart she will gladly let it lose.
But look to it wenches, if you give it scope,
It Is gone past all recovery, past all hope;
Much like old Time which ceaselesse does run on,
But never does return, once being gone.
The The Gowt a prisoner of State.
Gowt's a saucy Prisoner, and will have
His keepers to maintain him fine and brave;
His Iailors shall no needy beggars be,
But men of honor and of high degree,
And over them he bears such great command,
That many times they can nor gor, nor stand;
And if he would break Iaile and fly, it is thought,
He by his keepers never should be sought.
And Money a close Prisoner.
money is close Prisoner I think sure,
Where no man can its liberty procure:
The Devils Stewards, and his Bailifes vow,
That moneys freedom they will not allow,
Unless unto a Miser or a Whore,
But by all mean fa^^ hold it from the poor.
I wish Amen.
Coin were as painful as the Gout.
To those that hoard it; and I make no doubt
But miserable Iailers would agree
To open their Prisons, and let money flee,
And were it not a lamentable thing,
That some great Emperor or some mighty King
Should be imprisoned by a vastall slave,
And lodged alive (as twere within his Grave.)
Such is the case of Silver and of Gold,
The chiefest of all metals fast in hold,
And darkness lies held in the Misers stocks,
Gold and Silver kept in bondage by Iron.
In steel and ironbars, and bolts and locks.
Though gold and silver royal metals be,
Yet are they flanes to iron, at we see.
But leaving Gold and Gowt, I Will turn my pen,
To what I have digrest from Iayles and men:
Let man examine well himself, and he
Shall find himself his Most men are their own enemies.
greatest enemy;
And that his loss of liberty and pelf,
He can accuse non for it, but himself:
How passions, actions, and affections cluster,
And how to ruinate his state they muster,
His frailty arms his members and his senses,
To undertake most dangerous pretenses.
The back often tempts him unto borrowed bravery,
And all his body suffers for it in slavery;
His Belly tempts him to superfluous fare,
For which his cops lies in a Iaylors snare;
His Eyes from beauty to his heart draws lust,
For which he is often into prison thrust;
His Ears give credit to a knave or these,
And's body suffers for his ears belief.
His Tongue much like a Hackney goes all panes,
In City, Country, Court and Camp, all places,
It gallops, and false gallops, trots and ambles,
One pace or other still it runs and rambles:
Of Kings and Princes states it often prattles,
Of Church and Commonwealth it idly cattles,
Of passing of it is word and ^uetiships,
For which at last the Ioyle the carkassenips.
Man's Hands have very often against him warred,
And made him of his liberty debarred:
A stab, a blow, a dashing of a pen,
Has clapped him closely in the Iaylors de^.
The Feet which on the ground men daily tread,
The way to their captivity do lead.
Now for the inward faculties, I find
Some lie in Prison for their haughty mind,
Some for their folly, sone because too wise,
Are mewed up in the Iaylors on bodies;
Some for much gaming, or for recreation,
Do make a Iayle their homely habitation,
And thus it plainly may be proved well,
Man's greatest foes with in himself do dwell.
And now two contraries I will compare,
To show how like, and how unlike they are:
A Iayle, our birth, and death, and getting free,
These four do all agree and disagree;
For all degrees, our birth and life we know
Is natural, We are all borne in one form, and come into the world of one
fashion, but we dye and leave the world infinite ways.
one way, for high and low:
But death has many thousand ways and scares,
To take our lives away all vo(...)es.
And therefore of our lives it is no doubt,
That there is but one way in, and many out;
But to a Ioyle there is many ways to win,
Ten thousand tricks and slight to clap men in:
And there is but one way out as I do know,
Which is by satisfying what we owe.
Owe thou the Law thy life, dispatch and pay,
And from the Prison thou art freed away:
Do thou owe money, quickly pay thy seere,
And farewell, go thy ways man, there is the doe^
As men in all that is ill, are Satan's Apes,
So sundry sins bring death in sundry shapes;
Life from the God of life, which is but one,
To all degrees one way gives life alone.
And so our several frailties, several ways
Our wretched Carcasses in prison lays,
But there is but one way out that ever I saw,
Which is by satisfying of the law.
The faults we do in springtime of our youth,
In Summer of our manhood gather growth:
Then Haruests middle age does make them ripe,
Which winters old age does in prison gripe;
And thus the very seasons of the year,
Fit emblemes of our thraldom do appear.
In London and within a mile, I ween,
There are of Iayles or Prisons full eighteen,
And sixty Whipping-posts, and Stocks and Cage
Where sin with shame and sorrow has due wag^^
For though the The Tower.
Tower be a Castle Royal,
Yet there is a Prison in it for men disloyal:
Though for defense a Camp may there be fitted,
Yet for offense, men thither are committed.
It is a house of fame, and there is in it
A Palace for a Prince, a Royal Mint,
Besides Poleaxes Patutants, Hal^^^ Iauelins, Bartleaxes, Crosbowes, li^ ^^
Pikes, Pistol^^^ ^^^^ tronels.
Great Ordnance, Powder, Shot, Match, Bills Bo^^^^
Shafts, swords, pikes, la^ces, shouels, mattocks, cry
Bright armor, muskets, ready still, I say,
To arm one hundred thousand in a day.
And last, it is a prison unto those
That do their Sovereign or his laws oppose,
The Gatehouse.
The Gatehouse for a prison was ordained,
When in this land the third king Edward reigned
Good lodging ro^mes, and diet it affoords,
But I had rather lie at home on boords.
Since Ricbandii reign the first, The Fleet.
the Fleet has ^^^^
A Prison, as upon records is seen:
For lodgings and for bowling, there is large space
But yet I have no stomach to the place.
Nev^^^ Ludgate.
Old Neugais I perceive a theeuish den,
But yet there is lodging for good honest men.
When second Henry here the Scepter swaid,
Then the foundation of that gate was laid,
But sixty six years ere our ^auiours birth,
By L^nd was Ludgate.
Ludgate founded from the earth;
No Iayle for thieves, though some perhaps is b^^^^
That break in policy, may there be had.
The Poultrey Counter.
Counter in the Powltery is so old,
That it in History is not enrold.
And Woodstreet.
Woodstreet Counters age we may denice
Since Anno fifteen hundred fifty five.
^^^ me the one's too old, and one's too new,
^^^ as they bake, a Gods name let them brew.
^^^ unto my memory comes next;
There idleness and lechery is vexed:
^^^ is a royal house, of state and port,
Which the eighth King Henry built, and there kept Court.
^^ Edward somewhat ere his timelesse fall,
^^ it away to be an Hospital:
Which use the City puts it well unto,
^^^ many pious deeds they there do do:
^^ yet for Vagabonds and Runnagates,
^^ Where Is and idle knaves, and such like mates,
^^^ little better then a Iayle to those,
There they chop chalk, for meat and drink and blows.
^^ this house those that against their wills do dwell,
^^^ Well a Bride (perhaps) but not Bridewell. Bridewell

^ Iayles or Prisons are in Southwarke placed,
^^^ Countor (once S. Margrets Church defaced)
^^ M(...), the Kings Bench, and White Lion, White Lion, King Bench,
Marshalsea, ^^^^ Clinke.

There some like Tantalus, or like lxion,
^^ inching pain of hunger daily feel,
^^ up and down with sickle fortunes wheel:
^^ some do willingly make there abode,
Because they cannot live so well abroad.
^^ there is the Clinke, where handsome lodgings be,
^^ good may it do them all, for me.
^^ but the Thames unto S. Katherins then,
^^^is another The hole as S. Katherines
hole or den for men.
^^tere in East ^^^ prison.
East-Smithfield little better,
^^ to hold a thief or paltry debtor.
Then near three Cranes a Iayle for Heretics,
^^s, Familists, and Schismatics.
^^^worths Iayle within White Chapel stands,
And ^^^y, God bless me from their hands.
^^ eighteen Iayles so near the City bounded,
^^^ founded and maintained by men confounded:
^^ one means meat may be another bane,
^^ Keepers full, springs from the Prisners wane:
^ has been still the use, and ever will,
^^ one man's welfare comes from others ill.
^^ (as I said) man's self is cause of all
^^^ miseries that to him can be fall.
^ but our corpse, how every member lies,
Their several offices, and faculties:
^ our own judgment will inform us than,
^^^ himself twixt a prison and a man:
^ as man has his limbs and linaments,
^^^wes, muscles, nerves, and ligaments:
^ Panicles, his Arteries, his Veins,
^^^ his, membrancs, and his beating brains: New prison.
The Lord Wentworths ^^^^^.

So has a Iayle, Were it not for these, a Iaile would have neither life nor
soul.
Writs, Warrants, and Attachments,
Arestings, Actions, Hues, Cries, and Appeachments:
With Garnish, Sharing fees, and Habeas Corpus,
(Which feed some Iaylors fatter than a Porpus)
And last, for everlasting Executions,
Until the prisoners bodies dissolutions;
And if a man be hurt in leg or arm,
Or head, or heel, it is said the man has harm:
If inward grief do pinch in any part,
The anguish is a terror to the heart;
And should a Iayle want these things named before,
It quickly would be miserable poor:
Like men dismembered or of sense berest,
With scarcely any life or being left.
For in man's corpse (like prisners) always lies
His virtues, and his foul iniquities.
And which of these his fancy likes best;
Shall still be kept in bondage, or releast.
As Wisdom, Bounty, and Humility.
(Despised in these days of vanity)
Some keep so close, not suffering them to walk,
So much as in bare thoughts, or deeds, or talk,
Whilst Folly, and close-fifted Niggardize,
With Barbarism, have ease and liberties,
Faith, Hope and Charity, are pent up close,
And doubt, despair and cruelty let loose.
Lust revels it, rich clad in Robes of Pride:
Friendship and Love, are liberty denide,
Whereby the liberal Arts in number seven,
Are of their liberal liberties bereauen,
The whilst the seven delightful deadly sins,
The game and glory of the whole world wins.
The Cardnall virtues, as unworthy prices,
Are made but vassals to all Carnal vices.
The Muses are mewed up, with woes and wants,
Whilst fortune follows knaves and Ignorants:
And thus within man's little Commonweal,
He like a partial Iaylor often does deal:
Permits his goodness never to appear,
And lets his badnesse ramble any where,
So Rorers, Rascals, Banquerouts politic.
With money, or with friends will find a trick
Their Iaylor to corrupt, and at their will
They walk abroad, and take their pleasure still:
Whilst naked virtue, beggarly, despised,
Beleguerd round, with miseries surprised,
Of hope of any liberty defeated,
For passing of his word is merely cheated:
And dungeond up, may tell the walls his mones,
And make relation to the senseless stones,
Where sighs and groans, and tears may be his feast,
Whilst man to man, is worse than beast to beast.
Till death he there must take his fad abode,
Whilst craft and coozenage walk at will abroad.
Thus these comparisons do well agree,
Man to a Iayle may fitly likened be:
The thought whereof may make him wish with speed
To have his prisoned soul releast and freed.
Thus Iayles and meditations of a Iayle,
May serve a Christian for his great avail.
But now my Muse, thus long in bondage pent,
Begins to think of her infranchizement:
And having of a Prison spoke her part,
She mounts unto the Hangman and his Art.
THE NECESSITY OF HANGING.
OF Hangings there is diversity of fashions,
Almost as many as are sundry Nations:
For in the world all things so hanged are,
That any thing vnhang'd is strange and rare.
Earth hangs in the concauity of Water,
And Water hangs within the Ayeres matter,
The Air hangs in the Fiery continent:
Thus Element does hang in Element,
(Without foundation) all the Massy Globe
Hangs, which the skies encompasse like a Robe,
For as an Simile.
egg, the yolke within the white,
The white within the skin's enuellop'd quite,
The skin within the shell does outmost lie:
Even so these Elements hang midst the side.
First, all the world where mortals live, we see
Within the Orb of Luna hanged be;
Above her, Mercury his course does steer,
And next above him is bright V^^^s Sphere.
And in the fourth, and middle firmament,
Sol keeps his hot and fiery Regiment.
Next above that rans Mars, that star of war:
Beyond him Jupiter, that Iouiall star;
Then last is fullen Saturnes ample bounds,
Who once in thirty years the world surrounds;
This earthly Globe (for which men fight and brawle)
Compared to Heaven, is like an All the world is in comparison for greatness
to the eauens, as a hand-worme of a Nit may be compared to the world.
Attom small,
Or as a Needles point compared to it,
So it to Heaven may be compared fit;
And it does Hang, and has its residence
In The center of the skies circumference.
Thus to prove Hanging natural, I prove,
We live in a hanging world.
We in a Hanging world do live and move.
Man is a little world, wherein we see,
The great worlds abstract or epitomie,
And if we note each linament and lim,
There are not many parts vnhang'd of him;
His hair which to his head and beard belongs,
Hangs, if not turned up with the Barbers tongs,
His arms, his hands, his legs and feet we know
Do all hang pendant down wards as they grow
There Is nothing of him that does hanging skip,
Except his ears, his nether teeth and lip,
And when he is crossed or sullen any way,
He mumps, and lowres, and hangs the lip, they say
That I a wise man's sayings must approve,
Man is a tree, whose root does grow above,
Within his brains, whose sprigs and branches roo^
From head to foot grow downward to the ground
Thus world to world, and man to man dothcall,
And tells him, Hanging is most natural:
The word Dependant does inform our reason,
That Hanging will be never out of season.
All that depends does hang, which does express,
That Rich men are poor men's Gallowses.
Great men are like Iybbets for the less,
It is an old phrase, many years past gone,
That such a Lord has many hangers on;
Thereby describing, that all men's Attendants
As it were hangers on, were called All dependants are hangers on.
Dependence
And sure of all men, they are best indeed,
Who have most hangers on to cloth and feed;
For he that has the means, and not the grace,
To help the needy, is a Miser base.
He Is no good Steward, but a hateful Thief,
That keeps from good Dependants their relief:
And of all Thieves, he hanging does deserve,
Who All dependants are hangers on.
has the power to feed, and lets men ste^
To end this point, this consequence I Will grant,
He that has wealth, no hangers on can want;
For since the time that mankind first began,
It is a destiny ordained to man,
The mean upon the mighty should depend,
And all upon the Mightiest should attend.
Thus through all ages, Countries and Dominions
We each on other hang like ropes of Onions.
Some wealthy slaves, whose consciences condem,
Will hang themselves, left others hang on them;
And some spend all on Hangers on so fast,
That they are forced to steal, and hang at last.
If they from these Extremes themselves could we^^
There is betwixt them both a Golden mean,
Which would direct their superfluities,
They would not hang themselves for niggardine,
Nor wastefully or prodigally spend,
Till want bring them to hanging in the end,
And they and many others, by their purse,
Might escape that hanging which is called a curse. That Is a Rogue.

There Is many a That Is an Ass.
Gallant made of fool and feather,
Of Gold and Velvet, Silk, and Spanish leather,
Whose lagged Hangers on have moved my mind,
^osce prids go go before, and shame behind,
With scarce a button, or an elboe whole,
^^ch, or any shoe that is worth a sole:
These that like golden Iybbets, and their trains
^^ like poor tattered Thieves hanged up in chains.
^^^ that does suffer Whores, or Thieves, or Knaves,
^^^ flattering Villains, or such kind of slaves,
To hang upon him, and knows what they are,
That man into a Gallowse I compare.
That Vintner I account no friend of mine,
Who for good money draws me scuruie wine,
^^^ by the rule of Conscience (not of Law)
That he is fitter made to hang, then draw.
The Lawyer that at length does spin men's causes,
With false, delays, and dilatory clauses,
Who makes a trade to broach and draw contention,
For him a hanging were a good prevention.
^^ hols, Muse, come back, you bear my Rhyme,
To hanging in good carnest ere the time.
There are a many sorts of hangings yet
Behind, which I by no means must forget:
The hanging is a necessary thing,
Which is a pretty gamball, called a A Swing or stretch for exercise and^
Swing,
And men of good repute I often have seen
To hang, and stretch, and totter, for the spleen:
This hanging is a military course,
Not by, the Law, but strength of arms, and force:
Th^s every morning for a little spurt,
^^^man may hang himself, and do no hurt.
This hanging often (like Tyburne) has a trick,
^^^ charge of physic, or of being sick.
Besides, the word Hang is so much in use,
That few or none will take it as an abuse;
^^^ does a great man's kindness much approve,
When he shall bid a man Behang'd in love:
And with some men it is common courtesy,
To say, Farewell, be hanged, that is twice God bwy.
The pictures the dearest friends we have,
Although their corpse are rotten in the grave;
We hang them for a reverend memory
To us, and unto our posterity.
^^ hang their wives in picture, which have cause
To hang their persons, were not for the laws:
^^^ hang their heirs in pictures, who would feign
With their good fathers hanged, their lands to gain.
^^^ often have seen good garments for men's wearing,
Have very thrifily been hanged to ayring;
And I have seen those garments (like good fellows)
Hang kindly with their master at the Gallowse,
^^^ then in to the Hangmans Wardrobe drop,
Have been again hanged in a Broakers shop,
Which after by a Cut purse bought might be;
And make another journey to the Tree;
Twixt which, and twixt the Broaker, it might go
Or ride, some twelve or thirteen times, or more.
Thus th'hangmans harvest, and the Brokers grow,
They reap the crop, which sin and shame does sow.
There are rich Hangings made of Tapestrie,
Of Arras, and of brave embrodery;
Those are for Princes, and for men of worth,
T'adorne their rooms, and set their greatness forth.
But as dead bones in painted Tombs do bide,
These If all traitors, hypocrites, flatterers, extortioners, oppressors,
bribetakers, cheaters, panders, bawds, etc. were hanged up in the woods on
several trees, there is no Arras. or Tapestry can grace and adorn a Princes
Court, as those Hangings could become a Commonwealth.
Hangings, filthy rotten walls do hide.
A Harts-horne to a post fast nailed on,
Serves well for men to hang their hats upon:
But if they knew their heads would serve the turn,
They would not shift their hats from horn to horn.
Men's swords in Hangers Hang, fast by their side,
Their Stirrops Hang, when as they use to ride:
Our Conies and our Dear are Hanged in toiles,
Our meat hangs o'r the fire when as it boiles;
Our light Hangs in the Lantern, all men fees
Our fruit we eat was hanged upon the trees,
Signs hang on posts, show whereas tradsmen dwells,
In steeples all men know are Hanged the Bells,
The scales or balance hangs where things are weighed
Goods Hanged in Craines, that is in or out conuei'd;
Yards, fails, sheets, tacks, lists, caskets, bolins, braces,
Are fitly hanged in their convenient places.
The compass that directs where winds do blow,
Is Hanged upon the Needles point we know:
In stately buildings, Timbet, Lead and Stone,
Are Hanged and hoist, or Buildings would be none.
Here is an army of Hangings.
Our Maps where in the world described be,
Are all Hanged up against the walls we see:
Our Cazements Hang as they do open and shut,
Our Curtains Hang, which bout our beds we put;
Our Hogs are Hanged, else Bacon we might look,
Doors Hang on hinges, or I am mistook;
And many a trusty Padlocke Hangs no doubt,
To let in honest men, and keep knaves out.
Sea-Cabins Hang, where poor men sleep and rest,
Our Clokes Hang on our backs it is manifest:
The Vial, Citterne, the Bandore and Lute,
Are cased or vncas'd, all Hanged up and mute:
Our Linen (being washed) must Hang to dry,
Or else Lice will Hang on and multiply:
Thus Hanging's beneficial to all States,
Whilst Gods dread curse Hangs o'r the reprobates.
And as for those that take my lines amiss,
And will be pleased to be displeased with this,
For groats a piece, nay less, for three pence either,
I Will give them all leave to be Hanged together;
Since Hanging then is proved so natural,
So beneficial, so general,
So apt, so necessary, and so fit,
Our reason tells us we should honor it.
It is a good man's life, and it is their death,
That rob and rifle men of goods and breath:
This kind of Hanging all offenses ends,
From which God ever bless me and my friends.
I from the Hangman this conclusion draw,
He is the fatal period of the Law:
If thieues or traitors into mischief run,
If he have done with them, then they hane done.
It Is often seen that many hapless men
Have been condemned and judged, reprieu'd again,
And pardoned, have committed new transgressions,
And in again often many a Size and Sessions:
When many warnings mend them not therefore,
The Hangman warnes them, they offend no more.
He Is the Catastrophe and Epilogue
Of many of the desperate Catalogue;
And he is one that cannot wanted be,
But still God keep him far enough from me.
THE DESCRIPTION OF TYBVRNE.
I Have heard sundry men often times dispute
Of trees, that in one year will twice bear fruit.
But if a man note Tyburne, will appear,
That that is a tree that bears twelve times a year.
I muse it should so fruitful be, for why
I understand the root of it is dry,
It bears no leaf, no blossom, or no bud,
The rain that makes it fructify is blood.
I further note, the fruit which it produces,
Does seldom serve for profitable uses:
Except the skillful Surgions industry
Do make Defection or Anatomy.
It blossoms, buds, and bears, all three together,
And in one hour, does live and die, and wither.
Like Sodom Apples, they are in conceit,
For touched, they turn to dust and ashes straight.
Besides I find this tree has never bin
Like other fruit trees, walled or hedged in,
But in the highway standing many a year,
It never yet was robbed, as I could heart,
The reason is apparent to our eyes,
That what it bears, are dead commodities:
And yet sometimes (such grace to it is given)
The dying fruit is well prepared for heaven,
And many times a man may gather thence
Remorse, devotion, and true penitence.
And from that tree, I think more souls ascend
To that Celestial joy, which never shall end:
I say, more souls from thence to heaven do come,
Than from all Except Paul's Churchyard and Saint Gregory's, where ^^ny
inhabitants are dwelling, as Drapers, Stationers, ^^^ Trunk and ^ragic all
black Bottle-makers, who now and th^^ do dye there; whom I do verily believe
have souls, ^^^ except the Close at Salisbury, with all Cathedral Churchyards
and others, where any body dwells, if it be but a Summer, ^^^ Sexton.
Churchyards throughout Christendom
The reason is, the bodies all are dead,
And all the souls to joy or woe are fled.
Perhaps a week, a day, or two, or three,
Before they in the Churchyards buried be.
But at this Tree, in twinkling of an eye,
The soul and body part immediately,
There death the fatal parting blow does strike,
And in Churchyards is seldom seen the like.
Besides, they are assisted with the alms
Of peoples charitable prayers, and Psalms,
Which are the wings that lift the hou'ring spirit,
By faith, through grace, true glory to inherit.
Concerning this dead fruit, I noted it,
In stead of paste it is put into a pit,
And laid up carefully in any place,
Yet worme-^^^ it grows in little space.
My understanding canby no means frame,
To give this Tyburne fruit a fitter name,
Than Medlers, for I find that great and small,
(To my capacity) are Medlers all.
Some say they are Choked pears, and some again.
Do call them H^rtie Choakes, but it is most plain,
It is a kind of Medler it does bear,
Or else I think it never would come there.
Moreover where it grows, I find it true,
It often turns the Herb of grace to Rue.
Amongst all Pot-herbes growing on the ground,
Time is the least respected, I have found,
And most abused, and therefore one shall see
No branch or bud of it grow near this Tree:
For it is occasion of man's greatest crime,
To turn the use, into abuse, of Time.
When passions are let loose without a bridle,
Then precious Time is turned to Love and Idle:
And that is the chiefest reason, I can show,
Why fruit so often does on Tyburne grow.
There are inferior Gallowses which bear
(According to the season) twice a year:
And there is a kind of watrish Tree at Wapping,
Whereas Sea-theeue or Pirates are caught napping
But Tyburne does deserve before them all
The title and addition capital,
^^^ ^^^^ or great Grand Gallowse of our Land,
^^^ all therest like ragged Laqueyes stand;
^^^ has (like Luna) full, and change, and quarters,
^^^ (like a Merchant) monthly trucks and barters;
^^^ all the other Gallowses are fit,
^^^ Chapmen, or poor Pedlers unto it.
Thus Iayles and Iaylors being here explained,
How both are good, and for good use ordained:
All sorts of Hanging which I could surmise,
I likewise have described before your eyes;
And further having showed what Tyburne is,
With many more inferior Gallowsis,
My pen from paper with this Prayer does part,
God bless all people from their sins desert.
FINIS.
The Unnatural Father: OR, The cruel Murder committed by one JOHN ROVVSE of
the Town of Ewell, ten miles from London, in the County of Surry, upon two of
his own Children.
AS a Chain consists of diverse linkes, and every link depends and is inyoak'd
upon one another: Even so our sins, being the Chain wherewith Satan does
bind and manacle us, are so knit, twisted, and sode^^ together, that without
our firm faith ascending, and Gods grace descending, we can never be freed
from those infernal fetters; for Sloth is linked with drunkenness,
Drunkenness with Fornication and Adultery, and Adultery with Murder, and so of
all the rest of the temptations, suggestions, and actions, wherewith miserable
men and women are ensnared, and led captive into perpetual perdition, except
the mercy of our gracious God be our defense and safeguard.

For a lamentable example of the Devils malice, and man's misery; this party, of
whom I treat at this time, was a wretch, not to be matched, a fellow not to be
fellowed, and one that scarce has an equal, for matchless misery, and
unnatural Murder. But to the ^^^.

This John Rowse being a Fishmonger in London, gave over his trade, and lived
altogether in the Town of Ewell, near Nonesuch, in the County of Surry, ten
miles from London, where he had Land of his own for himself and his heirs
for ever to the value of fifty pounds a year, with which he lived in good and
honest fashion, being well reputed of all his neighbors, and in good
estimation with Gentlemen and others that dwelt in the adjoining Villages.

Until at the last he married a very honest and comely woman, with whom he
lived quietly and in good fashion some six months, til the Devil sent an
instrument of his, to disturb their Matrimonial happiness: for they wanting
a Maidseruant, did entertain into their house a Wench, whose name was Jane
Blundell, who in short time was better acquainted with her Masters bed then
honesty required, which in time was found out and known by her Mistress, and
brake the peace, in such sort, between the said Rowse and his Wife, that in
the end, after two years continuance, it brake the poor woman's heart, that
she dyed and left her husband a widdower, where he and his whore were the more
free to use their cursed contentments, and ungodly embracements.

Yet that estate of being unmarried, was displeasing to him, so that he took
to wise another woman, who for her outward feature, and inward qualities was
every way fit for a very honest man, although it were her hard fortune to match
otherwise.

With this last Wife of his he lived much discontented, by reason of his
keeping his lewd Trull in his house, so that by his daily Riot, excessive
drinking, and unproportionable spending, his estate began to be much
impouerished, much of his Land morgag'd and forfeited, himself above two
hundred pounds indebted, and in process of time to be (as a lewd liver) of all
his honest neighbors rejected and contemned.

His estate and credit being almost past recovery wasted and impaired, he
forsook his Wife, came up to London with his Wench, where he fell in new
league with a corrupted friend; who (as he said) did most courteously coozen
him of all that ever he had, and whom at this time I forbear to name, because
it was John Rowse his request before his execution, that he should not be named
in any Book or Ballad, but yet upon a Dye his name may he picked out betwixt
a Sink and a Trey. This false friend of his (as he said) did persuade him to
leave his Wife for altogether, and did lodge and board him and his paramore
certain weeks in his house, and afterward caused him and her to be lodged
(having changed his name) as Man and Wife in an honest man's house near
Bishops-gare, at Beuis Marks, where they continued so long, till his money was
gone, (as indeed he never had much, but now and then small petty sums from
his secret friend aforesaid) and he being fearful to be smoked out by his
Creditors, was counseled to leave his Country, and depart for Ireland; and
before his going ouer-Sea, his friend wrought so, that all his Land was made
over in trust to him, and Bonds, Gouenants, and Leases made, as fully bought
and sold for a sum of two hundred and threescore pounds; of all which money
the said Rowse did take the Sacrament and his death, that he never did receive
one penny but he said that now and then he had five or ten shillings at a time
from his said friend, and never above twenty shillings; and that all that ever
he had of him, being summed together, was not above three and twenty pounds,
the which moneys his friend did pay himself out of his Rents. But some more
friend to him, then he was to himself, did doubt that he was cheated of his
Land: whereupon (to make all sure) he said that his false friend did so far
prevail, with him, that he the said Rowse took an Oath in the open Court at
Westminster Hall, that he had lawfully sold his Land, and had received the
sum above said, in full satisfaction and payment, and his said friend did vow
and protest many times unto him, with such oaths and vehement curses, that he
never would deceive his trust, but that at any time when he would command all
those forged Bonds and Leafes, that he would surrender them unto him, and that
he should never be damnifide by them or him, to the value of one halfe-penny.
Upon which protestations (he said) he was enticed to undo himself out of all
his earthly possessions, and by a false oath to make hazard of his inheritance
in Heaven.

In Ireland he staid not long, but came over again, and was by his friend
persuaded to go into the Low Countries: which he did, never minding his Wife
and two small Children which he had by her, having likewise a brace of bastards
by his Whore (as some say) but he said that but one of them was of his
begetting. But he, after some stay in Holland, saw that he could not fadge
there, according to his desire, and withal, suspecting that he was cheated of
his Land, and above all, much perplexed in his Conscience for the false oath
that he had taken, pondering his miserable estate, and ruing his unkindness
to his Wife, and unnatural dealing to his Children, thinking with himself
what course were best to take to help himself out of so many miseries which
did incompasse him, he ^^^ over again into England to his too dare friend,
demanding of him his Bonds and ^^^ of his Land which he had put him in ^^^
with all. But then his friend did manifest ^^^ self what he was, and told him
plainly, that he had no writings, nor any Land of his, ^^^ what he had dearly
bought and paid for. All which ( Rowse replied unto him) was false, ^^ his own
Conscience knew. Then said the other, Have I not here in my custody your land
and Seal to confirm my lawful possession of your Land? and moreover have I
not a Record of an Oath in open Court, which you took concerning the truth of
all our bargain? And seeing that I have all these especial points of the Law,
as an Oath, Inden^^^ and a sure possession, take what course you will, for I am
resolved to hold what I ^^^.

These (or the like) words, in effect passed betwixt Rowse and his friend
(Trusty Roger) which entering at his ears, pierced his heart like Daggers; and
being out of money, and credit, a man much infamous for his bad life, indebted
beyond all possible means of payment; a perjured wretch to coozen himself,
^^^ no place or means to feed or lodge, and fearful of being arrested,
having so much ^^^ his Wife, and so little regarded his Children, being now
brought to the pits ^^^ of disperation, not knowing amongst these ^^^ which way
to turn himself, he resolved at last to go home to Ewell again to his much
wronged Wife, for his last ^^^ in extremity.

The poor Woman received him with joy, and his Children with all gladness
welcomed home ^^ prodigal Father, with whom he re^^^ ^^^ much coffeehouse
and perplex^^^ of mind the Devil still tempting him to ^^^ and despair,
putting him in mind of his former better estate, comparing plea^^^ ^^^ with
present miseries: and he reuol^^^ ^^^ he had been a man in that Town, ^^^ a
Gentleman's companion, of good reputation and calling, that he had Friends, ^^^
Money Apparel, and Credit, with means sufficient to have left for the
maintenance of his Family, and that now he had nothing left him but poverty and
beggary, and that his two Children were like to be left to go from door to
door for their living.

B^eing thus tormented and tossed with restless imaginations; he seeing daily to
his further grief, the poor case of his Children, and fearing that worse
would befall them hereafter, he resolved to work some means to take away
their languishing lives, by a speedy and untimely death, the which practice of
his (by the Devils instigation and assistance) he effected as follows.

To be sure that no body should stop or prevent his devilish enterprise; he
sent his Wife to London in a frivolous errand, for a riding Coat: and she
being gone somewhat timely, and too soon in the morning, both her children
being in bed and fast asleep, being two very pretty Girls, one of the age of
six years, and the other four years old, none being in the house but
themselves, their unfortunate Father, and his ghostly Counselor, the doors
being fast locked, he having an excellent Spring of water in the Celler of his
house (which, to a good mind that would have employed it well, would have been
a blessing: for the water is of that Christaline purity, and cleernesse, that
Queen Elizabeth of famous memory would daily send for it for her own use.) in
which he purposed to drown his poor innocent children sleeping: for he
going into the Chamber where they lay, took the youngest of them named
Elizabeth, forth of her bed, and carried her down the Stayres into his Celler,
and there put her in the Spring of Water, holding down her head under that
pure Element with his hands, till at last the poor harmless soul and body
parted one from another.

Which first Act of this his inhumane Tragedy being ended, he carried the dead
corpse up three pair of stayres, and laying it down on the floor, left it,
and went down into the Chamber where his other Daughter, named Mary, was in
bed; being newly awaked, and seeing her father, demanded of him where her
Sister was? To whom he made answer that he would bring her where she was. So
taking her in his arms, he carried her down toward the Celler: and as he
was on the Celler stayres, she asked him what he would do, and whither he
would carry her? Fear nothing, my Child (quoth he) I will bring thee up
again presently: and being come to the Spring, as before he had done with the
other, so he performed his last vnfatherly deed upon her, and to be as good as
his word, carried her up the stayres and laid her by her sister; that done, he
laid them out, and covered them both with a sheet, walking up and down his
house, weeping and lamenting his own misery, and his friends treachery, that
was the maine ground of all his misfortunes, and the death of his Children: and
though there was time and opportunity enough for him to fly, and to seek for
safety; yet the burden and guilt of his conscience was so heavy to him, and
his desperate case was so extreme, that he never offered to depart; but as a
man weary of his life, would, and did stay till such time as he was
apprehended and sent to Prison, where he lay till he was rewarded with a just
deserved death.

What his other intents were, after he had drowned his Children, is
uncertain; for he drew his sword and laid it naked on a Table, and after, he
gat a poor woman down into the Celler, and in the same place where the two
Infants lost their lives, he did help the woman to wring a Bucke of his
clothes, and then he requested her to help to convey his goods out of his
house; for he said that he feared, that the Sheriff of Surry would come and
seize upon all. But the woman not thinking of any of the harm that was done,
imagined that he had meant that his goods, would be seized for debt, and not
for murder.

But to return to the miserable Mother of the murdered Children, she said
that her heart throbbed all the day, as fore-boading some heavy mischance to
come: and having done her business that she came about to London, as soon as
she came home, she asked for her Children; to whom her Husband answered that
they were at a neighbors house in the Town. Then said she, I will go thither
to fetch them home. No, quoth he, I will go my self presently for them. Then
said his Wife, Let the poor woman that is here, go and bring them home. But
at last she saw such delay was used, she was going her self; then her
Husband told her that he had sent them to a Kinsmans of his at a Village
called Sutton, four miles from Ewell, and that he had provided well for them,
and pr^^id her to be contented and fear nothing, for they were well. These
double tales of his, made her to doubt somewhat was amiss: therefore she
entreated him for Gods sake to tell her truly where they were. Whereupon he
said, If you will needs know where they are, go but up the stayres into such a
Chamber, and there you shall find them. But in what a lamentable perplexity of
mind the poor woman was, when she perceived how and which way they lost their
lives, any Christian that has an heart of flesh may imagine. Presently the
Constable was sent for, who took him into his custody, who amongst other
talk, demanded of him why and how he could commit so unnatural a fact, as to
murder his Children? To whom he answered, that he did it, because he was not
able to keep them, and that he was loath they should go about the Town a
begging: and moreover, that they were his own, and being so, that he might
do what he would with them, and that they had their lives from him, and
therefore he had taken their lives from them, and was contented to lose his
life for them: for he was sure that their miseries were past, and for his
part, he had an assured hope to go to them, though they could not come to him.

So being had before a Justice, his Examination was very brief; for he
confessed all the whole circumstances of the matter freely; so that he was sent
to the common Prison of Surry, called the White Lion, where he remained
fourteen or fifteen weeks a wonderful penitent Prisoner, never, or very
seldom, being without a Bible or some other good boo^e meditating upon; and
when any one did but mention his Children, he would fetch a deep ^^^ and weep,
desiring every one to pray for ^^^: and upon his own carenest request, he ^^
^aide for at Paul's Cross, and at most of ^^^ Churches in London, and at many
in the Country, and at the Sessions holden at Croy^^^, the latter end of Juno
last, he made such confesslion at the Bar, declaring the ^^^ of his life,
his odious Drinking, his ^^minable Whoring, his cruel Murder, ^^^ the false
dealing of his deceitful friend, ^^^ was the cause of his final wrack: with
^^^ Relations of his pronounced, with vehemencey and protestations, he mo^^^
all that heard him to commiseration and ^^^.

So according to Law and Justice, he was ^^^ condemned and judged (for the
mur^ering of his two Children) to be hanged; ^^^ Judgment was executed on him
at ^^^ Gallows at Croydon, on Monday the second day of June, 1621. where he
^^^ with great penirency and remorce of (...).

This was the lamentable end of John Rowse, ^^^ of the age of fifty years, and
one that ^^^ right have lived and dyed in better fashion, ^^^ had laid hold on
the grace of heaven, ^^^ Gods protection and fatherly as^^^ ^^^; but of all
that herein is declared, this ^^^ which I now declare, is most lamen^^^ and
remarkable; which is, that Ewell ^^^ a Market Town, not much above ten ^^^
from London, in a Christian Kingdom, ^^^ such a Kingdom, where the all-sauing
World of the ever living God is most dili^^^^ sincerely, and plentifully
preached, ^^^ this diligence, as it were in ^^^ or Center of this sincerity,
and in ^^^ of this plenty, the Town of Ewell ^^^ neither Preacher not Pastor:
for al^^^ ^^^son age be able to maintain on ^^^ Preacher, yet the living
being in a ^^^ hand, is rented out to another for ^^^ and yet no Preacher
main^^^ ^^^ Now the chief Landlord out of ^^^ does allow but seven pounds ^^^
Reader, and the other that does hyre the Parsonage at a great Rent, does give
the said Reader four pound the year more out of his means and courtesy, and
by this means the Town is served with a poor old man that is half blind,
and by reason of his age can scarcely read: for all the world knows, that so
small a stipend cannot find a good Preacher Books, and very hardly bread to
live on; so that the poor souls, dwelling there, are in danger of famishing,
for want of a good Preacher to break the Bread of life unto them: for a Sermon
amongst them, is as rare as warm weather in December, or Ice in July: both
which I have seen in England, though but seldom.

And as the Wolf is most bold with the Sheep, when there is either no
Shepherd, or an impotent insufficient one, so the Devil (perhaps) took his
advantage of this wretched man, seeing he was so badly guarded, and so weakly
guided to withstand his force and malice: for where God is least known and
called upon, there Satan has most power and domination. But howsoever, I wish
with all my heart, that that Town and many more were better provided then they
are, and then such numbers of souls would not be in hazard to perish; nor so
many sufficient scholars that can preach and teach well, live in penuryo
through want of maintenance. I could run further upon this point, but that I
do shortly purpose to touch it more to the quick in another Book!

By this man's fall, we may see an example of Gods Justice against Drunkenness,
Whoredom, and Murder; the Devil being the first Author, who was a Murderer
from the beginning: when ^l'd Cat^ with Envy, that he murdered his brother
Abel: who tempted David first to Adultery, and afterward to Murder; who
provoked Herod to cause the blessed Servant of God John Baptist to lose his
head, because he told him it was not lawful for him to marry his brother
Philips Wife; and who was the prounker of the aforesaid Herod to marther all
the innocent male children in his Kingdom. And let us but mark and consider
the plagues and punishments that God has inflicted upon Murderers, Adulterers,
and incestuous persons: First Cain, although by his birth he was the first man
that ever was borne, a Prince by his birth, and heir apparent to all the
world; yet for the Murder by him committed on his brother, he was the first
Vagabond and Runnagate on the face of the earth, almost fearful of his own
shadow: and after he had lived a long time terrifide in Conscience, was
himself slain (as is supposed) by Lamech, Simeon and Leui the sons of Jacob
were accursed of their Father for the slaughter of the Sichemites; Ioab the
Captain of David's Host, was slain for the murdering of Abner; David
himself, for the death of Vrlas, and the Adultery committed with Bethsheba,
was continually plagued and vexed with the Sword of War, with the Rebellion
of his own sons, and with the untimely deaths of A^non, and Absolen. Baanah
and Rechab, for the slaying of Ishbesheth the son of Saul, they were both by
David's commandment put to death, who had both their hands and feet cut off,
and were afterward hanged over the Poole in Hebron: Samuel 2. 4. The examples
are infinite out of divine and humane Histories, that God did never suffer
Murder to go unrewarded: and this miserable man, of whom I have here related,
is a most mainfest spectacle of Gods revenging vengeance, for that crying and
heinous sin.

As concerning Lust and Incontinency, it is a short pleasure, bought with long
pain, a hunnied poison, a Gulf of shame, a Pickpurse, a breeder of Diseases,
a gall to the Conscience, a corrofide to the heart, turning man's wit into
foolish madness, the bodies bane, and the souls perdition to it is excessive
in youth, and odious in age, besides, God himself does denounce most fearful
threats against Fornicators and Adulterers, as the Apostle says, that
Whormongers and Adulterers shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, 1. Cer. 6.
9. And God himself says, that he will be a swift witness against
Adulterers, Mal. 3.5. And the Wise man says, that because of the whorish
woman, a man is brought to a ^^^ ^^^ of bread, and a woman will hunt for the
precious lif^ of a man: For, faith he, can a man take fire in ^^^ bosom, and
his clothes not be burnt? or can ^^^ man go upon hot Coals, and his feet
not be burnt. So he that goesh in to his neighbors Wife, ^^^ not be innocent,
Prou. 6. 27, 28, 29. Abimelech one of the sons of Gedeon, murdered three
score and ten of his Brethren; and in reward thereof (by the just Judgment of
God) a woman with a piece of a Millstone beat out his brains, after he had
usurped the Kingdom three years, Judges the 9. Our English Chronicles make
mention, that Roger Mortimer Lord Baron of Wallingford, merdered his Master
King Edward the second, and caused the Kings Uncle, Edmund Earl of Kent,
causelessly to be beheaded: but Gods Justice ouertooke him at last, so that for
the said Murders he was shamefully executed. Humph^^^ Duke of Gloucester was
murdered in the Abbey of Bary by William de la Poole Duke of Suffo^^^ who
afterward was beheaded himself on the Sea by a Pyrat. Arden of Feuersham, and
P^^^ of Plimmouth, both their Murders are fresh ^^^ memory, and the fearful
ends of their Wiue and their Ayders in those bloody actions will never be
forgotten.

It is too manifestly known, what a number of Stepmothers, and Strumpets have
most in humanely murdered their Children, and so the same have most deservedly
been executed. But in the memory of man (nor scarcely in any History) it is
not to be found, that a Father did ever take two Innocent Children ^^^ of their
beds, and with weeping tears of p^^ilesse pity, and unmerciful meroy, to
drown them, showing such compassionate cruelty and sorrowful sighing,
remorcelesse remo^^^ in that most vnfatherly and unnatural deed.

All which may be attributed to the malice of the Devil, whose will and
endeavor that none should be saved, who lays out his traps and snares,
intangling some with Lu^^^ some with Covetousness, some with Ambition,
Drunkenness, Envy, Murder, Sloth, or any Vice whereto he sees a man or a woman
mo^^^ inclined unto, as he did by this wretched ma^^^lulling him, as it were,
in the cradle of sens^^^, and ungodly delight, until such time as ^^^ his
means, reputation, and credit was ^^^ and nothing left him but misery and ^^^.
Then he leads him along through ^^^ and fears, to have no hope in Gods ^^^,
persuading his Conscience that ^^^ sins were unpardonable, and his estate ^^^
credit unrecoverable.

With these suggestions, he led him on to despair, and in desperation to kill
his Children, and make shipwreck of his own soul in which the diligence of
the Devil ^^^, that he labors and travels vn^^^ and as Saint Bernard says,
in the ^^^ day shall rise in condemnation against us, because he has ever
been more diligent to destroy souls, the^ we have been to save them. And for
a Conclusion, let us beseech God of ^^^ infinite mercy to defend us from all
the ^^^ temptations of Satan.

JOHN ROVVSE his Prayer for pardon of his lewd life, which be used to pray in
the time of his imprisonment.
GOD of my Soul and Body, have mercy upon me; the one I have cast away by my
Folly, and the other is likely to perish in thy Funy unless in thy great
mercy thou ^^^. My Sins are deep Seas to drown me; I am swallowed up in
^^^ bottomless gulf of my own ^^^gressions. With Cain I have been
Murderer, and with Judas a Betrayer me Innocent. My body is a slave to ^^^,
and my wretched Soul is deuou^^^ up by Hell Black have been my ^^^, and
blacker are my deeds. I have been the Devils instrument, and am now become the
scorn of men; a a Serpent upon earth, and an Outcast from Heaven. What
therefore can become of me (miserable Caitifle? If I look up to my Redeemer,
to him I am an Arch Traitor, if upon Earth, it is drowned with Blood of my
shedding, if into Hell, there I see my Conscience burning in the Brimstone
Lake. God of my Soul and Body have mercy therefore upon me; Save me, O save
me, or else I perish for ever; I dye for ever in the world to come, unless
(sweet Lord) thou catchest my repe^tant Soul in thine Arms; O save me, save
me, save me.

JOHN ROVVSE of Ewell his own Arraignment, Confession, Condemnation, and
Judgment of himself, whilst he lay Prisoner in the White Lion, for drowning
of his two Children.
I Am arraigned at the black dreadful Bar,
Where Sins (sored as Scarlet) Judges are:
All my Inditements are my horrid Crimes,
Whose Story will affright succeeding Times,
As (now) they drive the present into wonder,
Making Men tremble, as trees struck with Thunder.
If any asks what evidence comes in?
O It Is my Conscience, which has ever bin
A thousand witnesses: and now it tells
A Tale, to cast me to ten thousand Hels.
The Jury are my Thoughts (upright in this,)
They sentence me to death for doing amiss:
Examinations more there need not then,
Than what is confessed here both to God and Men.
The Crier of she Court is my black Shame,
Which when it calls my Jury, does proclaim,
Unless (as they are summoned) they appear,
To give true Verdict of the Prisoner,
They shall have heavy Fines upon them set,
Such, as may make them dye deep in Heavens debt:
About me round sit Innocence and Truth,
As Clerks to this high Court; and little Ruth
From Peoples eyes is cast upon my face:
Because my facts are barbarous, damned, and base.
The Officers that 'bout me (thick) are placed,
To guard me to my death, (when I am cast)
Are the black stings my speckled soul now feels,
Which like to Furies dog me, close at heels.
The Hangman that attends me, is Despair,
And g^owing worms my Fellow Prisoners are.
His Indictment for murder of his Children.
THe first who (at this Sessions) ^^^ does call me
Is Murder, whose grim visage does appall me;
His eyes are fires, his voice rough winds out-rores,
And on my bead the Divine vengeance scares:
So fast and fearfully I sink to ground,
And with ^ were in twenty Oceans drowned.
He says, I have a bloody Villain bin,
And (to prove this) ripe Evidence steps in,
Brewed like my self: Justice so brings about,
That black sins still hunt one another out:
It Is like a rotten frame ready to fall;
For one maine Post being shaken, pulls down all.
To this Indictment, (holding up my hand,)
Fattered with Terrors more then Irons stand,
And being asked what to the Bill I say,
Guilty, I cry. O dreadful Sessions day^
His Judgment.
FOr these thick Stigian streams in which the ast ^^^
Thy guilt has on thee la^d this bitter doom;
Thy loathed life on a Tree of shame must take
A leave compeld by Law, ever old age make
Her signed Pass port ready. Thy offense
No longer can for days on earth dispense.
Time blot thy name out of this bloody roll,
And so the Lord have mercy on my Soul.
His speech what he could say for himself.
O Wretched Caitiffe! what perswasiue breath,
Can call back this just Sentence of quick death
I beg no been, but mercy at Gods hands,
(The King of Kings, the Sovereign that co^ma^^
Both Soul and Body) O let him forgive
My Treason to his Throne, and whilst I live,
Iebbits and Racks shall torture limme by limme,
Through worlds of Deaths I Will break to fly to him.
My Birthday gave not to my Mothers womb,
More ease, then this shall joys, when ever it come.
My body mould to earth, sins sink to Hell,
My penitent Soul win Heaven, vain world farewell.
FINIS.
TAILORS REVENGE: OR, The Rimer WILLIAM FENNOR, firkt, ferrited, and finely
fetched over the Coals.
To any that can read.
BE thou either Friend or Foe or indifferent, all is one, Read, Laugh, like or
dislike all the care is taken: The chiefest cause why I wrote this, was on set
purpose to please myself. Yet to show thee the meaning of this little
building, imagine the Epistle to be the door, and if thou please come in and
see what stuff the wh^^^ Frame is made off. Be it therefore knownne unto all
men that I, John Tailor Waterman^ ^^^agree with William Fennor, (who arrogantly
and falsely entitles himself the Kings Mas^ ^^^Riming Poet) to answer me at a
trial of Wit, on the seventh of October last 1614 ^^^ the Hope stage on the
Bank-side, and the said Fennor received of me ten shillings in ^^^ of his
coming to meet me, whereupon I caused 1000 bills to be Printed, and diuulg'd
^^^1000 ways and more, giving my Friends and diverse of my acquaintance notice
of ^^^ Bear-garden banquet of dainty Conceits; and when the day came that the
Play should ^^^haue been performed, the house being filled with a great
Audience, who had all spent their mo^^^ extraordinarily: then this Companion
for an Ass, ran away and left me for a Fool, amongst thousands of critical
Censurers, where I was ill thought of by my friends, scorned by ^^^, and in
conclusion, in a greater puzzell then the blind Bear in the midst of all her
^^^broth. Besides the sum of twenty pounds in money, I lost my Reputation
amongst ^^^, and gaind disgrace in stead of my better expectations. In Revenge
of which wrongs done ^^^ me by the said Riming Rascal, I have written this
Inuectiue against him, chiefly because ill-looking Hound does not confess he
has intur'd me, nor has not so much honestly ^^^ bring or send me my money
that he took for earnest of me; but on the contrary parts ^^^ and abuses me
with his calumnious tongue, and scandalizeth me in all Companies ^^^ bears me
nominated. But in a word, Reader, when thou have read this that follows, I
think thou will judge me clear of the many false Imputations that are laid
upon me. So I ^^^thee to thy Considerations, and I proceed to my Exclamations.

Thine as thou art mine, JOHN TAILOR.

WILLIAM FENNOR. Anagramma. NV VILLAINY For me; OR, Form NV VILLAINY.
NV VILLAINY Form, Nue, fresh and New,
Or Form NV VILLAINY, Come Turk, come Jew,
^^^ who dares come, for I have found a Theme,
That ouerflowes with matter like a stream.
And now stand clear, my masters, 'ware your shins,
For now to kick and fling my Muse begins.
How fit his name is Anagrammatiz'd,
And how his Name is Anatomized,
'Twould make a horse with laughing break his bridle,
But to the purpose, long delays are idle.
TO WILLIAM FENNOR.
COME Sirrah, Rascal, off your clothes Sr, strip,
For my Satyrrick whip shall make you skip:
Thou Had better to have dealt with all the Devils,
They could not plague thee with so many evils.
Nay come man, never whine, or crooch, or kneel,
My heart cannot one lot of pity feel,
I have squeezed the Gall from out the Lernean snake.
With which, Reuengefull Ink I mean to make,
Which I with Aquafortis will commix,
Yblended with the loathsome Lake of Stix,
And with that Marrow-eating hateful Ink
I Will make thee (more then any Ajax) stink,
A Scritch-owles quill shall be my fatal pen,
That shall emblaze thee basest slave of men.
So that when as the pur-blind world shall see
How vildly thou have played the Rogue with me,
They shall perceive I wrong them not for pelse,
And thou shall (like a Rascal) hang thy self.
What damned Villain would forswear and swear
At thou did, against my challenge to appear,
To answer me at Hope, upon the stage,
And thereupon, my word I did engage,
And to the world did publish printed Bills,
With promise that we both would show our skills.
And then your Rogue-ship durst not show your face,
But ran away, and left me in disgrace.
To thee, ten shillings I for earnest gane
To bind thee, that thou should not play the Knave.
Curre, had thou no man's Credit to betray
But mine, or could thou find no other way,
To Sharke, or Shift, or Cony-catch for money,
But to make me thy Ass, thy Fool, thy Cony?
Could not thy Squire and thee, (a brace of Varlots)
Rim'd, Fooled, and Pip'd, amongst pocky Wh^res and Harlots,
For twopence in some drunken Bawdy-booth
To please thy Dexy-dells sweet stinking tooth,
Whereas thou might (as thou have often done)
Some scraps and broken beer, for wages wone,
Which to maintain thy state had been some means
Amongst thy fellows, Rascals, Rogues, and Queanes.
Thou scuruy squint-eyd brazen-faced Iaboon,
Thou damned Stigmaticall foul Pantaloone,
Thou Tausrne, Alchouse, Whorehouse, Gig of time,
That for a groat wilt amongst Tinkers rhyme.
I Will hale from Hell grim visag'd Nemesis,
Whom I will Scull o'r silver Thamesis,
Which to and fro, shall still tormant and towze thee,
And none but Runnagates (like thee) shall howze thee.
Thine own tongue (trumpet like) each where proclaims
Thy self a servant to my Sovereign James,
When as thy service to the King is such
As Athiests unto God, and scarce so much.
It may be (graclesse) thou have graced bin,
And in the Presence did admittaince win,
Where some stolen rimes, and some things of thine own
To please the ears of Greatness thou have shown.
Which (at the first has won thee some applawse,
Although perhaps not worth three barley strawes.
And you for sooth, must presently give out
Amongst your kitching stuff whor-hedge bird rout,
What Nobleman your scuruinesse did bring
Into the Court, and how our Gracious King,
(As on a man most worthy to bestow it)
Entitled yon his Highness Riming Poet.
How dares thy ouerweening fancy tongue,
Presume to do a Poets name that wrong?
How dare thou (being altogether vile)
Attribute to thy self that Sacred style?
Shall that rare Art (which gods and men admire,
Polluted beby such a scur^le Squire?
Shall Heau'n-bred Po^sie that so long has lasted,
With thy contagious breath be Bussard-blasted?
Then Homer from thy Toomb, with speed return,
And M^rre round thee from thy peaceful Vine.
Brave Naso to the world again retire,
And repossesse that rare Promothean fire,
Which erst inspired you, here you may behold,
The face of Impudency ouer-bold,
That dares put on that sweet Poetique name,
Which has eternized your Immortal fame.
Revenge yon Musas, up, awake, awake,
Or ever sink to the Letb^an Like,
And you brave Modern Poets, whose sweet lines,
All Heavenly, earthly, Harmony combines,
Can you, O can your son^^^ be stupidious,
And see your selves abused thus persidious!
Oh, if the ease were mine, as it is yours,
I would rain vengeance in rengefull showers,
Which furious storm for ever should disperse,
And dath to pieces these base Grooms in verse.
An Ass in cloth of gold^ is but an Ass,
And Riming-Rascalls may for Poo^s pass,
Amongst mis-iudging, and illiterate hynds,
But judgment knows to use them in their kinds.
My self knows how (sometimes) a verse to frame,
Yet dare I not put on a Poets name,
And I dare write with thee at any time
For what thou dare, in either Prose or Rhyme,
For thou of Poesic art the very scum
Of Riff-raff-Rubish wit, the total sum,
The loathsome Glaunders of all base abuse,
The only Filch-line of each lab^ing A^use,
The Knave, the Ass, the Coxcomb and the Fool,
The scorn of Poets, and true wits Close-stoole.
But all your Tavern and your Alehouse prate,
Is how your entertainment was in State,
With this great Lord, and that embrodered Knight,
With that fair Countess, and that Lady bright,
Though where thou come thou shift, and Iye, and ^^^,
As welcome as a Dog into a Church.
Do think the King and's Courtiers does not see
And know that nothing good can come from thee?
Can Swine yield sweet perfumes,
Can Swans breed Crows?
Can flattering Rogues have but dissembling shows?
Can health be hidden in the plague or po^^?
Can men take pride in fetters, bonds or stocks?
And more impossible then are all these,
It is that thou should any wise man please,
Except it be a flash, a spark, a spurt,
Soon in, soon out, and then as sweet as dirt,
Or like a candle's snuff, for pleasing scent,
Thou leau'st them deeply pleased with discontent,
^^^ thou like stinking Fish) art grown so stale,
^^ whole ^^^^^ Rhyme not worth a pot of Ale.
^^^ shortly do hope to see brave sport,
To have thee soundly whipped from out the Court:
For well I know my King will not allow
^^^ house to harbor such a Rague as thou.
^^^ to God, my Ink-horne I Will not shut,
^^^ steep shall not mine eyes together put,
Before each night I write some scourging verse,
That in revenge thy Iadish heart shall pierce.
For I, whose credit never before was tainted,
^ot ever was with cheating tricks acquainted,
To be by thee thus basely used and crossed,
And in the world my reputation lost,
And ^ll by thee, that merit'st naught but banging,
^^^ sure I think, thou wilt never be worth the hanging.
^^^ rather then thou should a hanging want,
^^^ trusse thee up for naught, were Hangmen scant,
^^, I would do it freely, and for nothing,
And give thy Wife again my fee and clothing:
Which courtesy of mine, no doubt, would move
The creatures kindness to requite my love.
^^ her thou laid'st the fault: thou said that she
Did force thee basely run away from me.
Thou Dolt, thou Dunce, more blockish then a Mule,
None but a Wittall gives his wife the rule.
No, 'twas thy Coward heart, full fraught with fear,
'Twas nothing else that made thee not appear.
Had thou the conquest got, I had not cared,
So thou unto thy word had had regard,
Then sure the Players had not played a play,
But thou or I had borne away the day.
And now to give the world a little taste
Of the strange brunts and puzzles that I past,
I will not write a word shall be untrue,
That men may know, thou used me like a Jew,
And that I do not rail on thee so sore,
But that my wrongs do urge me to do more.
The house was filled with Newters, Foes, and Friends,
And every one their money frankly spends.
But when I saw the day away did fade,
And thy looked for appearance was not made,
I then stepped out, their angers to appease,
But they all raging, like tempestuous Seas:
Cried ou^ their expectations were defeated,
And how they all were cony-catch'd and cheated
^ome laughed some swore, some star'd and stamped and cursed;
And in confused humors all out burst.
I(as I could) did stand the desperate shock,
And bid the brunt of many dangerous knock.
For now the stinkards, in their irefull wraths
^^epelted me with Lome, with Stones, and Laths,
One madly fits like bottle- Al, and hisses,
Another throws a stone, and cause he misses,
He yawnes and bawles, and cries Away, away:
Another cries out, John, begin the Play.
I think this Babel of confused action
Would sure have made thee stink with fears distraction,
One swears and storms, another laughs and smiles,
Another madly would pluck off the tiles.
Some run to the door to get again their coin,
And some do shift, and some again purloine.
One valiantly stepped out upon the Stage,
And would tear down the hangings in his rage.
(God grant he may have hanging at his end,
That with me for the hangings did contend.)
Such clapping, hissing, swearing, stamping, smiling,
Applauding, scorning, liking, and reuiling,
Did more torment me then a Purgatory:
Yet I (in scorn of windy pomp stage glory)
Did stand it out, unconquered, vnsubdude,
Despite the Hydra-headed multitude.
Now goodman Dog, a halter catch your muzzell,
Your not appearance brought me in this puzzell,
But I (to give the Audience some content)
Began to act what I before had meant:
And first I played a maundering Roguish creature,
(A part thou could have acted well by nature)
Which act did pass, and please, and filled their jaws
With wrinkled laughter, and with good applause.
Then came the players, and they played an act,
Which greatly from my action did detract.
For it is not possible for any one
To play against a company alone,
And such a company (I Will boldly say)
That better (nor the like) ever played a Play.
In brief, the Play my action did cclips,
And in a manner sealed up both my lips.
Suppose it were a black Cimmerian night,
And that some 12 or 16 Torches light
Should make night seem an artificial day,
And then suppose, these Torches past away,
Whilst dismal darkness straight resumes the place,
Then after all comes in with glimmering pace
A silly Taper. How would that alone
Show when the flaming Torches all were gone?
Even so seemed I, amidst the guarded troop
Of gold-lac'd Actors, yet all could not droope
My fixed mind, for where true courage roots,
The Proverb says, Once over shoes, o'r boots.
'Twere easier to subdude wild Bears or Bores,
Or row to High-gate with a pair of Oars,
Or to make thee an upright honest man,
(Which sure God will not, nor the Devil can)
'Twere lesser labor to blow down Pauls-steeple,
Then to appease, or please the raging people.
The Play made me as sweet in their opinions,
As Tripes well fried in Tarr, or Eggs with Onions,
I, like a Bear unto the stake was tide,
And what they said, or did, I must abide.
A pox upon him for a Ro^ue, says one,
And with that word he throws at me a stone,
A second my estate does seem to pity,
And says my action's good, my speeches witty.
A third does screw his chaps awry, and mew,
His self conceited wisdom so to show.
Thus does the Third, the Fourth, the Fifth and Six
Most Galliemaufrey-like their humors mix.
Such Motley, Medley, Linsey-Woolsey speeches
Would sure have made thee vilify thy breeches.
What I endured upon that earthly hell,
My tongue or pen cannot describe it well.
And rather then ^^^ do the like once more,
I would be married to an arrant Whore.
And that is a plague I could wish well to thee,
For it would worser then a hanging be.
And let me say my best in my excuse,
The Audience all were wronged with great abuse,
Great cause they had to take it in offense,
To come from their affairs with such expense
By Land and Water, and then it the play
So extraordinarily to pay,
And when the thing should be that they expected,
Then nothing to their likings was effected.
Their mirth to madness, liking turned to lothing,
For when all came to all, all came to nothing.
Thus have thou had a little slender taste
Of my designs, and how I was disgraced,
For which I am beholding to you, Sir,
For had you come, there had been no such stir,
Not 'cause the people longed thy self to see,
But that they looked thou should disgraced be.
To see us two the people did repair,
And not to see or hear or play or Player.
Why what a faithless Rascal art thou then?
Dare thou to look upon me once again?
Which if thou do, were it not for fear of Laws,
I Would stab my Dagger through both thy jaws.
But much I scorn my fingers should be foul
With beating such a durty dunghill-Owle.
But I Will rib-roast thee, and burn-bast thee still
With my enraged Muse, and angry Quill.
And so I leave thy carkas and apparel
Unto the Hangman, who shall end our quarrel.
My full opinion of thee sure is this,
In no Church-booke thy name recorded is,
But that thou wast begotten in some ditch,
Betwixt a Tinker and a Maundring Witch,
And sure thy birth did equal thy begetting,
I think thy Mother in the Sunshine fitting,
Basking her self close to some hedge of Thorn,
And so without a Midwife thou wast borne.
And there the Sun with his illustrous light
Screwd quite awry the Windows of thy sight.
Then afterward the Matron^ thought it meet
To wrap thee up within some hedge-stolne sheet,
And making thee her sweet unchristian pack,
Some six or seven year bare thee on her back,
Instructing thee in the brave Canting tongue,
And how in Pedler's French to sing a song,
And Rhyme for Butter-milke, for Curds and Whay,
And in a Barn at night thy bones to lay.
This I do think of thee, I Will not say so,
Thou know it best if it be so or no.
This (by thine own report) some few years since
Thou Rim'st at Grauesend for some fourteen pence
In The street, from seventeen people unrespected,
This Graund Collection, justly was collected.
As I do hope for bliss, I hate thee not
For any goods or credit thou have got
In court or City. But thy praise I Will sing,
If any way thou did delight the King.
So many tedious cares are daily thrown
Upon the Royall-head that wears a Crown,
That into action I would melt my spright,
Thereby to give my Sovereign some delight.
For such things I do love and wish thee well,
But that I think no such in thee do dwell.
Therefore I hate thee, as thou do behave
Thy self like to a cooz'ning paltry Knave.
What here I write, upon thee I Will make good,
And in the hazard I Will engage my blood.
But as I said before, again I Will say,
I scorn on such a Rascal, hands to lay,
For the old proverb is Authentical,
(Who touches pitch shall be defilde withal.)
Thou have a pate can forge a Mint of lies,
Else how is it possible thou could devise
At once to flap me and the world in the mouth,
That thou wast rid, East, West, and North, and South?
That day thou should have met me on the Stage
Thou wentst three ways at once on pilgrimage,
Thou sent'st me word though wast sent for to the Court,
Thy wife said, thou with speed must make resort
To fetch her portion out of Warwickshire,
And the day after 'twas my chance to hear,
How thou for begging of a Fellons pardon,
Wast rid down into Kent to fetch thy guerdon.
So that the portion that thou wentst to fet,
Thou from the Gallows (thy best friend) did get,
But though thou rob the Gallows of his fee,
It will (at last) for principal catch thee.
Where (for thou guld'st me at the Hope) I hope
Thou will conclude thy rogu'ry in a Rope,
Three Trees, two Rampant, and the other Cross ^^^)
One halter Pendant, and a ladder Passant,
In a field Azure, (clouded like the Sky)
Because 'twixt Earth and Air I hope thou wilt dye.
These Arms for thee, my muse has Heraldiz'd,
And to exalt thee, them she has deuisde.
Then when thou bidst the world thy last goodnight
Squint upward, and cry, Gallows, claim thy right.
To whose protection, thy estate I render,
And all thy Rights and Titles I surrender,
^^^ Carkas and thy Manners (that are evil)
^^^ ^^^, Hangman, and (thy fire) the Devil.
Thi^e as thou have deserved

JOHN TAILOR.

To the Reader
NOw honest Reader (if thou be so) tell,
Have I not Canuas'd this same Rascal well?
^^^ thinks I hear some say I am too bitter,
And if I were more mild, they hold it fitter.
^^^ such men truly but conceive my wrong,
And think the case did to themselves belong:
When such a fellow with me shall agree,
And take my money for an earnest fee:
And make me print a thousand Bills and moto,
And daily on the Posts to clap up store,
For thousand Readers as they pass the way,
To see my name engaged to play a Play
^^^ Against William Fennor, my Antagonist;
And then, for me each hour to persist,
(Upon his word) to study and to write,
And scarce in six weeks rest or day, or night;
And when the time is come the play should be,
My opposite should run away from me,
And leave me to be made a wondering stock,
^^^ aby-word, for the world to mock:
To make me lose my credit, and my name.
To be o'rtlouded with perpetual shame.
Judge, if this would not move a man to spleen,
To be this basely used as I have been.
This to the censure of the World I send
This sharp Inuectiue, which my Anger pend.
And as my wrong was public, so will I
Revenged be upon him publicly.
And for him I have worse^ Rods in piss,
^^^ be but dare to write and answer this.
But if he durst no better play the Knave
Then answer me, he would not go so brave.
But yet here is one thing was almost forgot,
Which till this time my Muse remembered not,
And sure it must his Fooleship needs molest,
This has been read and laughed at by the Best,
That when he dares but to the Court to come,
His entertainment will be like Jack Drum.
To my Friends.
ANd now, kind Friends, a word or two to you,
Before I bid your Judgments all adieu.
Full well I know you all were angered much,
That my unfortunate events were such:
And well I know, you do believe and know,
I meant no shuffling-shifting trick to show.
To you my mind does need no more revealing,
You all do know I meant plain upright dealing;
And sure I hope your informations will
Defend me against the force of scandal still.
There were some Lords, some Knights, Esquires, and some
Good Merchants, Tradesmen, to the Play did come,
On purpose only for my only sake,
The most of which I know will undertake,
To do me any good in word or deed,
If my occasions did require their need:
Though my deserts can no such favor win,
Yet well they know I still have honest bin:
I speak not this in any terms of boast,
For why, my faults are equal with the most:
But this is written, that it may appear,
That I from cony-catching tricks am clear:
And unto all the world I dare appeal,
Who dares accuse me that I did misdeale.
So craving pardon where I have transgrest,
I wish my Friends all earthly, heavenly rest.
To my despightfull Foes.
TO you that screwd your Jaws awry, and mewd,
And so your worthless, witless wisdom showed,
And now and then bestowed a hiss or twain,
(To give more vent to your fantastic brain)
You might have kept away, I sent not for you.
If you hate me, I do as much abhor you:
Like Guests vnbid, you might have brought your stools,
For as you came, you went away like Fools.
The purpose which my study did intend,
Was by no means any one to offend;
And therefore whatsoever that they be,
That enuiously do rail and snarle at me,
I can no less do, but with word and pen,
Inform them that they are malicious men.
Against no man in particular I write,
But generally to all that bear me spite:
I pray for them (to make their fury madder)
God turn their hearts, or Hangman turn the ladder,
Which turning sure will either mend or end them,
To one of which my daily Prayers commend them.
FINIS.
FENNORS DEFENSE: OR, I AM YOUR FIRST MAN. Wherein the Water-man, JOHN TAILOR,
is dashed, sowst, and finally fallen into the Thames: With his slanderous
Taxations, base Imputations, scandalous Accusations, and foul Abominations,
against his Majesty's Ryming Poet: who has answered him without Vexations or
trembling Recantations.
DEDICATED To all that can judge, of what degree soever.
IVdiciall Reader, after a Supper of Slanders, give me leave to bestow a
Banquet of Defense; which, I hope, shall relish with more delight in thy
generous opinion. I am sorry that my Pen is plucked back from better
Occasions, to answer an Opposite so ignoble. But seeing my Reputation is shot
at by such a poisoned Pistol, I thought it meet to serve out the Ballet of
his Infamy with my approved Honesty, before it grew rank, or festered too
far i^ the Worlds Apprehension. But to the purpose: Master Tailor, the
Gentleman-like Sculler at the Hope on the Banke-side, at a friends house of
mine, acquainted me with his Project; which was as follows: That he the said
Tailor had studied such several Humors in Prose, as never were th^^ like
before: (which indeed fell out true, to his shame) wherein he would have me
join; he to play a Sc^^^ in Pr^se, and I to answer him in Verse: Whereto I
condiscended, on these Conditions; viz. That I might have half the Commodity
thereof, Or Security for five pounds; Or else twenty shillings in hand, and the
rest as the Day affoorded. Next, That I might hear his Book read (which was
fit) to know on wh^^ ground I might build my Invention. And last, That I should
see the Manner of his Challenge bes^^^ it was published, and set my Answer to
it with my own hand. To all which he granted, and delivered me five
Shillings upon the same: Whereupon I promised faithfully, That if all this were
on his part performed, I would (God willing) meet him, and with my best
endeavor strive to give the Audience content. Now, here I must en^reat you,
before you condemn me, note but the Occasions of my Breach of Promise: This
Water-Taylor, with his Confederates, presuming he had bound me with his
Earnest-money, printed his Challenge-Bill, and my Answer annexed thereunto,
without my Hand, Knowledge, or Consent: Nay more: My Answer was by him set up
so mean and insufficient to so brauing a Challenge, that I altogether disliked
thereof (as I had reason) and thereupon sent my Man with the Money five days
before the Play, to certify them, That I was otherwise employed, and would not
come, in regard of the Wrong done unto me, in setting up my Answer without my
Consent: My Man delivered the Message, b^^ lost the Money at Play, emboldening
himself upon the Wrongs I had received; which I have since paid. And the same
day I received a Letter out of Warwickeshire from my Father, That he was not
well; wishing me and my wife to repair unto him with all possible speed. Now,
you that are Parents of Children, or children to Parents, Judge, whether I
ought rather to disobay my Father; or displease John Tailor; Pur^^se my Fathers
hate, or lose a Scullers love; and I hope yo^ will say. I had sufficient cause
to keep me ^^^ the Hope. But fearing my homely Truth (though it be sufficient
to plead my Honestly) is not answer ^^^ to your expectation of my Practice in
Poesy; I will, as near as I can, fit my Muse to your liking, which is my
content: And ever rest honester by Land, then Tailor by Water,

WILL. FENNOR.

Although I cannot Rogue it, as he can,
Yet will I show my self on honest man.
An Apology to the Anagram of my Name, made by no Scholar, but a Sculler.
IT were a simple Tree thy breath could shake;
But see (mere Malice) how thou do mistake:
For what thy Title would bestow on me,
Thy self art Author of, New Villainy,
But since thou vrgest me, mark how I Will blase
That name, which thou with villainy would gluse:
^^^ I will open the Casement, and clear Light
Shall chase thy black verse to eternal Night.
When the first William, Duke of Normandy,
^^yl'd from the Coasts of France to Britany,
Amongst his best Ranks came a Chiualiere,
Whose name in French was called le Fognier^,
Which then our English Tongue so well did tender,
^^^ him the Name and Title of Defender,
On the Seacoasts he did defend so well,
That for his Chrest he bears the Scallop shell.
Since, briefer Language gives us Fennors dame,
Not can thy impudence impair the same:
And for a Token of wronged Innocence,
I do be resume my first name for Defense.
My Anagram if thou but rightly scan,
Then thou will find, it is I will fear no man.
How can I then fear thee that art a Tailor;
A^^^ of Fustian, and a ragged raylor;
A dish that is worth the feeding on,
When thou art best in Lent, thou art but Poor John.
An Anagram upon the Scullers Name. JOHN TAILOR, Anagramma. O Hate, rail on.
O Hate rail on; or this. Rail on, O Hate:
For spite of Railing, I must dedicate
An answer to thy Theme, though ne't so large,
Will sink thy Scullers Boat, though 'twere a Barge.
To halter up your Muse, my Muse begins;
I Will trusse the ^^de for breaking peoples shinnes.
Then Monster do thy worst, yerke out thy fill,
Thou can not touch my goodness with thy ill:
Though Horse break their Bridles, and escape,
My Lines shall lo^d an Ass, or whippe ^n Ape.
To his approved Foe John Tailor.
I Have look over with my best Prospectiues,
And viewed the tenor of thy base Inuectiues:
But if thou know how slenderly I weigh them,
Thou would not make such labor to display them
All that my Lyntia in thy vain discernes,
Is Roguish Language, such as Newgate learnes.
I think thou have been tutored in the Stews,
For thine's the perfect speech they only use:
Base Roguish Wishes, Cursing and Reuiling.
Tempestuous Raylings, and good names defiling.
Yet maugre Malice John, I pity thee,
For all the pa^^^ thou have bestowed on me;
And were my purse but of ability,
I Would recompense thy labors horriblle:
But since my means unable is to right thee,
Mark how my Pen in kindness shall requite thee.
A will bestow a sheet or two of Paper,
Ind fit the burning of a Tallow Taper,
To tell thee thou art monstrous insolent,
Although thy Verse is lame and impotent;
And at the highest, thou art but partaker
With Libell spreaders, or some Ballad-maker.
But do not think thou dea^st with Coriat,
Whose bosom thou did bolt a Story at;
Nor look not for such battery at my walls,
As against the Knight o'th Sun, or Archibals;
Expect not Captain Ottooles understanding:
No, no; against a Bulwark thou art banding
Of better temper, and a nobler spirit,
Then ever thy base bosom could inherit.
Against Cynthia, like a Wolf, thou wilt bark and howl,
Whereby thou shewst thy judgment dark and foul.
Thou grieu'st, my muse with her reflecting rays
Has quite eclipst a famous Scullers praise:
Thou would have Poesy in none to flourish
But in thy self; O thou art too too curtish:
Banish this self-conceit; false shadie dreams
Hang in thy heart, and drive thee to extremes.
But why do I presume to counsel thee,
That hat'st good counsel, as thou hate me?
Wherefore I leave thy brazen impudence,
To answer thy Revenge with my Defense.
Defense.
HOw Rascall-like thou dealst with me at first;
Thou shewst from what antiquity thou art nursed:
How dare thou of thy Satyre-musicke boast,
That now standst bound unto the whipping post?
But I will spare thee, thou intemperate Ass,
Until in Bride, well thou shall current pass.
Thou say, I had better with the Devil deal;
By which thou do thy wickedness reveal:
But I have naught to do with him, or thee;
If thou be his companion, God bless me.
To crouch, or whyne, thou give me no occassion;
But I must laugh at thy absurd persuasion:
Thou art that Lernean Snake, squeeze thine own gall,
But it is too bad to make thee Ink withal.
Thou Have gone so long to Styx for mingled Ink,
That all thy verses in men's nosthrils stink.
For pens, the Scritch-Owles feathers are too tough;
A Gooses wing for thee is good enough.
Thou have emblaz'd me Basest slave of men;
That name I freely send thee back again,
Until the world has better eyes to see,
Which is the basest lack, my self, or thee.
Thou call'st me Rogue so artificial,
That I must judge thee for one natural:
The injury proceeded from thy tongue,
And yet thou would make me thy cloak for wrong.
But do thou think the matter is no more,
But hand my self? thy counsel I abhore:
And take thou heed of this enchanted spell,
John Tailor ended like Achitophel.
What foolish Ass, like thee, would take in hand
To play a Play, that could not understand,
What thine own folly is, thou art so blind;
Only to baseness thou art well inclined.
Do think I had no business, but to wait
On thy detested Popperies conceit?
Yet I protest, had thou but sent the Bill,
For me to answer, I Would have showed my skill:
Which would have been so much to thy disgrace,
That thou again durst never have showed thy face.
Can thou imagine, that I went away,
For fear of thee, or thy contemned Play?
Know, fool, when on the Stage I purchased worth,
I scorned so send for thee to help me forth.
And put the case that I should challenge thee,
Thy railing spirit could not answer me:
For thou art nothing without three months fludie;
I Would beat my brains out, if they were so muddie.
Five shillings I confess I had of thee;
Which I protest my servant had from me,
For to repay thee: but since he did fail,
Thou might have sent to me; not write, and ray^
On him, that holds his honesty more dear
Then all the Thames revenues in a year.
But here thou driu'st me to a short demurre,
To know why thou should call a Cristian, Curre:
Oh, I have found it; to my grief I see,
That Curres and Christians are alike to thee.
But was thy credit by my treason slain?
Faith I know none thou had to lo'e or stain.
I wonder much at thy simplicity,
That thou should challenge me for sharking thee
When of my troth I had rather give thee gifts,
Then see thee driven to such paltrie shifts,
Thou and thy Squire often have ferried me,
More often then I and mine have, timed to thee.
If ever I have sung to nastie Whores,
Thou, or some Pander, like thee, kept the doors:
For I am sure, that for as little means,
As two pence, thou will carry knaves and queanes;
I know not what thou meanst by Doxie Dell,
If seems with them thou art acquainted well.
For scrappes and broken beer it is so rate
For me to rhyme, that thou shall have my share:
For though much wealth I want to maintain me,
I Will never trouble Whores, nor Rogues, nor thee.
Allow I am squint-eyde, yet with those eyes,
I can thy Baboones tricks anatomize.
But prithee, which of all the Devils cramb'd
That word of judgment in thee, Thou art damb'd?
I Would rather wish thee talk of thy salvation,
Left hate should hurtie thee into damnation.
Had thou begun with Brothell, then transcended
Unto a Tavern, thou my state had mended:
But thou do all thou can to cut my throat,
And cheat me of the Tinker and his groat:
Thou have so many voyages to hell,
That Nemesis will like thy visage well;
And for to make hels number one the fuller,
Charon will take thee for his under Sculler:
And from those tossing torments which torment thee,
I Will find a shelter, though it discontent thee.
Why do thou blame my tongue, 'cause it proclaims
^^^ self servant to my Sovereign James?
^^^ all hearts and tongues with mine would sing,
^^eir loyal duty to my Lord the King.
^^^ Royal favor makes thy envy swell,
Why thy words all may discern it well.
^^^ base comparison I hate and curse,
^^^ heaven thy service to him prove no worse:
^^^ then my Rhyme shall tell thee this in Reason,
^^^ never be hanged for felony nor treason.
^^^ for the rest, thou poor Beare-garden sport,
^^^^rne to tell thee how I live in Court:
^^^ for to certify thee, thou shall know it,
^^^ has pleased the King to call me his Ryming Poet.
^^^ though too far unworthy, I confess,
^^^ merit it, the Title I possess:
^^^, without boasting, let me boldly say,
^^^ryme with any man that breaths this day,
Upon subject in extempore,
Or else be blotted from all memory,
For any wager dare engaged be.
Then think what cause I had to run from thee?
^^cept it were, because I would not hear,
How thou absurdly did abuse each ear.
^^^ thou do task me with my sauciness,
That I my self a Poet dare profess:
Would thou have me rob Nature of her gifts;
Why, that were baser then thy basest shifts:
Yet my esteem of course extempory,
^^^ but as servile to sweet Poesy.
Why would thou trouble Homer from his rest,
To view the slanders belcht from thy base breast.
Were Ovid living, he would discommend thee:
^^^, in steed of wine would water send thee:
And famous Virgill, in his lofty style,
At this thy railing humor would but smile.
Last, all that have deserved a Laurel wreath,
Unto thy Muse a pair of sculls bequeath.
Alas poor Spong, thou suckst up naught but spite,
And do me open wrong thy faults to right.
What coxcomb-foole would proffer such abuses,
As thou have done to Poets, and the Muses?
But dear Talia in her ryming fit,
Song, Thou will die a fool for want of wit.
Thou faist thy judgment can compose a verse;
What my opinion's of thee, I Will rehearse,
Thou are no better then a Poets Whelpe,
That fauning up and down seeks after help:
I could be like thy self, unmannerly,
But that I scorn thy style should tutor me.
No, burn thy self out, like a candle-snuffe,
It Is vain to make thee worse, thou art bad enuffe.
Thou taxest me, that I abroad do vaunt,
What Lords and Knights to me their favors grant;
It also seems that thou from me would know,
What Countesses and Ladies countenance show.
I Will tell thee plainly; such do entertain me,
That for thy railing baseness will disdain thee.
Had they thy hungry chapps once foddered,
Thou would not title them embrodered.
But, Syrra, though you meddle with your mates,
Thou should learn manners to forbear the states:
And not to descant upon Court and King,
'Twere fitter thou should of a Sculler sing.
Presumptuous fool, how dare thou be so bold,
To speak of Kings, whom men with fear behold.
You say, you know his royal Majesty
Will not allow his Court to harbor me:
Nay more, your Scullership does know right well,
That I no longer in his house shall dwell.
Is then his wisdom think thou such mean treasure,
That Watermen must know his royal pleasure?
Yet I confess so far his will they know,
When he directs them whither they shall go.
It may be thou wast put in office lately,
Which makes thee rogue me so, and rail so stately.
But when thy head peepes through the pillory,
I doubt these terms thy cares must justify.
For thy base words are of such hard digestion,
They Will cause some stomach call thy name in question,
Thou hopst to see me whipped; stand fast blind Hodge,
For fear thou stumble into th'Porters Lodge:
Rave, rail, do what thou can; I Will never cease,
To serve my sovereign master King of peace.
VVatch till thy eyes fall out; V Vrite, do thy worst;
I have a Pen and Inkhorne is as cursed,
To answer all thy Railing, Satyrizing,
In three days, what thou three months art devising:
And when thy quarter-Cockatrice sees light,
In troth it is not worthy of man's sight.
But I am sorry that thy credit's tainted,
To make thee and thy Chaundler unacquainted:
Will he not score no more for Eggs and Cheose,
Because he saw thy Hope upon her knees?
Rather then thou should lay that fault on me,
Come where I dwell, I Will pass my word for thee:
For Reputation thou can have no more,
Then in a Bakers debt, or Ale-wifes score:
And if thou be denied both Bread and Drink,
Thy Writing and thy Rowing's like to shrink.
Leave these Inuectiues, trust unto thy Scull,
For that is the way to fill thy belly full
Of Meat and Drink; besides this Consolation,
Thou labor'st truly in thine own Vocation.
Why should thou stagger after Poesy,
That is attended on by Poverty?
I wish thee as my friend, never go about it;
For, as I guess, thou art poor enough without it.
I see thou art so bare and desperate,
Thou would turn Hangmanto advance thy state;
And hang up me: but (Sculler) I Will o'r-match you,
And stand to see a Hempen halter catch you:
For the old proverb never failed yet,
Who spreads nets for his friends, snares his own feet:
But yet I wonder since thou hat'st my life,
Thou should profess such kindness to my wife,
If thy hot love without deceit be seruent,
My kitchen Maid shall take thee for her servant:
For all the love that from my wife proceeds,
Is scorning of thy person and thy deeds:
Thou calst them wittols that lead quiet lives,
But none but Rascals will abuse their wives.
But now to the disasters of the day,
How thou miscarridst with thy Hopeful play.
Of thy mishaps no long discourse I Will tell,
How thou amongst them made a beastly smell.
Thou do commend the Players for their action,
But they were all ashamed of thy distraction:
For them, as much as thine, my praise allow,
For none amongst them played the fool but thou:
Thou would feign find a fault, yet know not where,
When in thy bosom it appears clear.
Thy chiefest railing and thy strongst evasion,
Is against me, yet thou art the occasion.
Another while thou blam'st the Audience,
When thou wast cause of their impatience:
'The better sort said I was wise enuffe,
To keep me out of that black whirlwind puff,
Which almost blew the hangings from the Stage,
Was ever such folly known in any age?
Thou say, the Maundering Beggar credit got,
For that, thou know I know a Poet wrote:
For all the rest, that was deuisde by thee,
Was nothing but a heap of Fopperie.
I heard, thou letst the Wine run tumbling down
Thy rotten windpipe, like a drunken Clown:
But yet thy Lion drunk could not defend thee,
For 'twas thy Ape drunk made some men commend thee:
For that days censure thou can not escape,
Which says, That all thy actions played the Ape.
But thy Tobacco was such stinking stuff,
That all the people cried, Enough, enough.
Thy third Act showed the humors of men frantic,
Wherein, most like an Ass, thou stoodst for Anticke:
I saw it not, whether it were good or bad;
But wise men judge thee either fool, or mad.
Thy last Act shows thy skill upon the Seas,
To be so rare, it did them all displease:
And in conclusion, such a tempest rose,
That blew thee off, and made thy friends thy foes.
And would thou load my back with all this blame?
Nay, as thou got'st the coin, so take the shame:
And let me tell thee this, to calm thy rage,
I chaleng'd Kendall on the Fortune Stage;
And he did promise before an Audience,
For to oppose me, note the accidence:
I set up Bills, the people thronged apace,
With full intention to disgrace, or grace;
The house was full, the trumpets twice had sound
And though he came not, I was not confounded,
But stepped upon the Stage, and told them this;
My adverse would not come: not one did hiss;
But flung me Theames: I then extempore
Did blot his name from out their memory,
And pleased them all, in spite of one to brave me,
Witness the ringing Plaudits that they gave me.
Was not this just the case 'twixt me and thee?
And yet thy eyes, thine own faults cannot see,
I Will touch thee nearer: Had thou been away,
As I was, and my self supplied the day,
I would have rows dimy Muse incontinent,
With Mirths best quaint devise, for their content
And in extempore I would have gained
The favor of them all, which thee disdained,
But thou art hatched from Saturnes frozen brain,
Poor drowsy groom of sleepy Morpheus train:
If there be any spark of Muse in thee,
It is the tayle-gut of Melpomenie,
Which does instruct thee in thy filthy terms;
There Is nothing else in thee my Pen affirms.
Had thou done well, the credit had been thine;
But doing ill, thoud'st have the shame be mine,
The Money pleased thy humor passing well;
But thy discredit made thy anger swell
Above the verge of Patience and thy Sail,
Blown full of Envy, bursts it self to Rail,
Not publicly, but in a private Hole.
Kindle thy Malice at the Devils coal:
But I with water of true Honestly
Will quench the raging heat of Villainy.
How bravely thou can brag it out, and swagger
And talk of stabbes (God bless us) and thy dagger
I would not see thy spightfull spit-Frog drawn,
'Twill serve thee better for an Alehouse pawn.
Thou scornst to foul thy fingers upon men,
Because thou know they will shake hands again:
But thou art excellent at these windy puffes,
And dare encounter boys at fisticuffes;
But Sirrah, look to your green Wastcot well,
For fear the boys do tear it off piece mell.
All the kind favor that I will implore,
Is, that thou would threaten me no more:
And yet, now I remember, it is no wrong;
For Threatened folk (the Proverb says) live long:
But with thy Pen write, and revenge thy spleen,
I Will have an Answer that shall cut as keen:
But now base Slanderer, I must term thee so;
Why medlest thou with them thou do not know,
Thus long I have but spent my Ink in jest,
But now I Will dart my anger at thy breast:
I would I had the humor of some Scold,
That I, like thee, my venom might unfold.
Thou never knewst my birth, nor my begetting,
So well as I thy Rescall Play, and Cheating:
^^^ whatsoever my birth or breeding be,
^^^ I live to toss and torture thee,
^^^ thee like Stock Fish, gill thee like a Sprat,
^^^ thee i^h Towne-ditch, like a Water-Rat,
^^^le ligges and Ballads of thy apish toys,
^^^ to be sung by threadbare Fiddlers boys:
^^^ to do this, I shall but prove a babie,
^^^ have disgraced thy self as much as may be.
^^^ Barabus of all humanity,
^^^ slanderer of Christianity,
^^^ ^now that I am a Christian, and am borne
^^^ etter then ^hy best Kindred, I Will be sworn:
^ow thy own tongue thy breeding does display,
^^^ Pedlers French, and Canting, Curds and Whay;
^^^ I Will approve it to thy foul disgrace,
^^^ sprung from baseness; I, from Gentries race,
^^^ which to make good, my Parents yet do live,
^^^ each day at their Table, food do give
^^^ better men then thou, misshapen slave:
^^ bea^e thy slanders with thee to thy grave.
^^^ at Grausend rim'd for fourteen pence,
^^^ pence thou have rowed that voyage since:
^^^ it were no more, I b^r't away
^^^^^^ ^^^, then thou did thy Play.
^hy envy is not worth the speaking of;
The more thou rail'st at me, the more I laugh:
^^^ some to beg (as thou do) Poets phrases,
To raise my name; let merit sing my praises:
^^^ were the meaner then thy own desert,
They were the worse where thou should sing a part:
Thou do but think there is nothing good in me,
^^^ I am sure there is much less in thee.
That ^^^ thou bear me, prithee bear me still,
^^^^ good with envy all thy veins shall fill,
^^^ they swell and burst thy angry gall:
Then if ^rue, I will lament thy fall,
And on thy grave this Epitaph bestow,
For to be read for either friend or foe.
Epitaph.
HEre lies a Carcass in this Grave,
Who while he lined; would rail and rave,
Borrow his wit from others worth,
And in his own name ^^ ^t forth:
He rowed from Tyber to the Thames,
And there his tongue himself proclaims,
The luster of all Watermen,
To row with Scull, or write with Pen.
O, had he still kept on the Water,
And never come upon Theater,
He might have lived full merrily,
And not have di'd so lowsily.
O, 'twas that foolish scuruie Play
^^t Hope, that took his sense away:
^et he to blot out all his shame,
^^^ the fault on Fennor^s name;
And rayl'd at him like a mad body,
Lived a bare Fool, di'd a base Noddie.
But if you will know what was his name,
I willingly will show the same:
No Land-Poet, nor Sea-Saylor,
But a poor Sculler, called John Tailor:
And had not hate this wonder slain,
He would have lived a Knave in grain.
Thus Jack thou feast what friendship I would do,
Garnish thy Grave out with a verse or two;
But yet thou art alive, and I surmise,
Thou will not dye till Crows peck out thy eyes.
I Would wish thee sail unto some foreign Places,
Where they have never heard of thy disgraces:
The Baramoodes Tongue thou do profess,
The name of Poet there thou may possess:
There spread thy Pamphlets, make them understand
Thou art the chiefest Poet in that Land.
Thou say my pate a mint of lies can forge,
Indeed t'hast wit enough thy lies to scourge:
For I was neither rid South, North, nor East,
But into Warwickshire, direct North-west:
Nor did I thither ride, to shun thy Play,
But 'twas my Fathers will called me away;
And for the obedience that he in me found,
He gave me his blessing, with a hundred pound.
Then Sculler know, that was no Tinkers gift,
Nor had I need for thy poor Crown to shift:
But he that told thee I was gone in it Kent,
Spoke half as true as thou do, lies invent.
But see how envy in thy heart does trot,
Thou grieuest that I a poor man's pardon got;
Is thy eye evil then, cause mine is good?
Or would thou stop my Fountain with thy mud?
No, spigh; of thee, thou Canniball to man,
I will not cease to do what good I can:
Nor do I look for Silver for my meed,
When poor men want, if I can help their need:
For though thou rayld'st on me at the Bear garden,
Rather then see thee hanged, I Would beg thy pardon:
Although it cost me more the suing forth,
In ready money then thy Boat is worth
So much tender man, though bred by Nature,
As being image of his high Creator:
But thou that of man's li^e art no esteemer,
What mercy can thou hope from thy Redeemer.
Say I had wronged thee, thou good-names betrayer,
Thou call'st for vengeance in toy Saviors prayer:
I will not say so, but it does appear,
Thou scarce do say thy prayers once a year.
Thou must forgive, if thou would be forgiven;
For if thou fear not hell, never hope for heaven.
Thou do cause the King as well ^or Graunts,
As men for Suits: but leave these bitter taunts,
And learn intime, black tail of insolence,
To arm thy heart with Christian patience.
Thus have I answered all thy false alarmes:
Now it remains for me to blaze thy Arms;
For thou have falsely set up mine in blue,
Wherefore I mean to have a bowt with you.
Thy Heraldrie shall not outstrip my brain,
But I Will devise as good for thee again:
And first, because all Sculls thou do excel.
A silver Oar will for thy Crest do well,
A pair of Armer bound in a Sable Scarffe,
In a sad field, as large as Wapping Wharffe;
Out of the water shall appear one dead,
A halter and a crosse-barre o't his head:
And on his Shield this Motto shall be found,
Tailor the Sculler was both hanged and drowned.
In all this blazing thee, no hurt I mean,
But hang thee till the Tide has wash: thee cleaner:
And when the billows o'r thy head are flowing,
And AEolus against Neptunes brow is blowing,
And Oars and Sculls above thy crosse-barre failing,
There is great hope thou will forget thy railing.
Thus have I answered thee in three days space,
And yet my Pen ran but an ambling pace:
Thus much I mildly write, in hope 'twill mend thee;
If not, the Thames or Wapping shore will end thee.
And last, to show what course I would direct thee,
Use honesty, from Tiburne to protect thee.
Thi^e more then thou desire, Will. Fennor, his Majesty's Ri^^^g Poet.

To my kind Friends in general.
NOw you have read, and understand my mind,
I hope your wonted favors I shall find,
In spite of railing baseness, whose loud tongues,
Are Sa^hans instruments for stand'rous wrongs.
Sure I have satisfied your expectation,
And used the Sculler in his own vocation:
But if you think my answer ouer-milde,
Know this, I would not have my tongue defilde,
With such uncivil terms, much less my pen,
Which now gives satisfaction to all men.
Of truth; I will avouch, in spite of ill,
My answer was set up in Tailors Bill,
Falsely, without my knowledge or consent:
Then was not that a cause sufficient,
To give my purpose sudden alteration,
When I was played the knave with in that fashion.
But though we could not then meet face to face,
I hope my pen has followed him space:
If I be not deceived, it has out-stript him,
And spite of all his rods in piss, 'tath whipped him,
And made his howling hollow voice to rore:
Yet for your loves, I Will give him one lash more.
FENNORS final Fare^ill to TAILOR, with his blue Bitch and Cods belly.
BLadder of envy, one word more with you,
I must hunt out your Bitch, of Azure hue:
You that at Roterdam have Spies to honer,
And in Cods bellies transport Slanders over,
And without License helcheth them abroad,
'T were fit she should be seartcht to see her Load:
For in her head, her belly, and her crookes,
I doubt there will be found some dangerous Books
For he that undertook this Work for thee,
Perhaps prints Romish Doctrine for a fee;
Or matters prei^diciall to the State;
Or things Schismatic, to breed debate.
If it be found so, spite of your Revenge,
You and your Bitch may in a halter swinge,
And your Cods belly starve for want of water:
To you all three I do commend this Satyr,
And to my Country all my love and skill,
To root out all such instruments of ill.
FINIS.
A CAST OVER THE WATER, BY JOHN TAILOR. Given Gratis to WILLIAM FENNOR, the
Rimer, From London to the Kings Bench.
DEDICATED To all that understand English. By your leave a little in Prose, and
to the purpose.
GEntlemen, I pray you take me not for a common Ferriman to Conicatchers: I
transport this fellow this once, not out of confederacy, but out of
commiseration. For I confess ingenuously, at first sight of his pitiful
Preface, he turned all my malice into compassion. For I had thought, having
given himself the Title of his Majesty's Poet, and by his own confession
poor enough to be one, that necessity (at least) would have begot that which a
beggar calls Phrase ^him. Whereas this Cadworme, having only got Rhyme, which is
but the buttons and ^^^ to couple Verse together; or as the wings of a
Butter-flye now turned out of his Sum^^ weeds, he appears to be the same
which I ever held him to be; A most naked and ^^ched Mungrell, not able to pen
a letter in true English, though it were to borrow mo^^^. But you will say, it
was the badnesse of the matter, and being the absolute and only professed ly^^^
of our age, it behou'd him to build upon his memory, which Artists say, is an
enemy to wit: ^^^ hereon his memory is so short, that as we speak of the
Italians, they tell lies so long till ^^^ believe themselves for truths; so
this Hydra-tong'd Proteus-prater in his own and ^^^ self same pestiferous
Preface auer's, and confutes, and then auer's again the same contradictions
which he denies, that he was tied to perform the Challenge at the Hope: Yet
^^^, he confesses he sent his man back with the earnest, which he says was
five shillings; say ten but we will not contend for the sum, had it been ten
pounds he will as soon pay as five shillings. Did I give him five shillings
earnest? then no question but it was to tie him ^^^ bargain, was the money
certain, and the conditions at his own choice? Indeed, he ^^es to have money
for a Song, but I have more wit then to be one of his Patrons. But his ^^^
played the knave (as how could he do other, having such a Master) and ran away
with ^^^ money; was ever poor Rat driven to more extremity to free her self
from the trap by ^^ning off his own tail, is Monsieur le Foggnieurs service
so cheap, that it will be sold for five shillings. He will say his Annagram
is, I will fear no man. It is a dear Anagram Monsi^^ ^^, it cost you five
shillings: For had you feared your Man, you would never have trusted him: but
you may see the scald Squire will have his Jade, though it be but a scabbed
one; ^^^his Man has been found in three or four tales about the unfortunate
five shillings. First, he confessed that he paid it to a Broker for the loan of
a Cloak for his Master to go twi^ to the Court in: Secondly, that he paid it
for the hyre of two Shirts for his Master, which he had to ride into the
Country withal: Thirdly, that he gave it to a Punke for her dividend, which
Punke was to have a share in their Riming and whistling, and they were to sha^^
with her in her commings in: Fourthly, that he paid it to a Broome-man, for
four pair ^^^ Boots for his Master, at fifteen pence a pair. Was ever
Poor crown so martyred and qua^ter'd, amongst Brokers, Knaves, and Whores?
But were this all the dust that stuck on ^^^ Coat, his man might beat it out
of it; you shall find he has a Father to father his ly^ on, which Sire of his
(as he says, sent for him into the Country) I say it was the Thief who^^^
pardon he was to get. Now says he, whether should I obey my parents, or John
Tailor Surely thy Father, Mounsieur, for he has much need of a son that will
Father thee. Nay^^^ such a father that gave him a hundred pound at parting, (I
hold my life he meant with a^pu^^ for a parting blow.) This lie, a man would
think, carries some color with it, did not th^^ witless Ass himself
discover it to be but a Vizard. For a little before, he writes, Might he^^^
have had five pound, he would have staid his journey. Does not Esops plucked
Crow look like a Rooke now? Ungracious Child, would thou prefer five pound
to thy fathers blessing? came the hundred pound so unlooked for, that the hope
of it was not worth five Surely Gentlemen, (I hope) to avoid this tax, he will
in his next edition confess himself the child of the people: and the hundred
pound was one of his poetical fictions, for as yet one penny of it was never
extant. And believe it, his faith, his father, and the money are alo^^
Implicit, never made manifest.

Imagine, his Father had been able to give him 100. pounds, would he have
bound hi^ Prentice to a blind Harper, whose boy he cannot deny but he was,
whom the hungry saw^^ scroyle almost famisht with beguiling him of his
victuals? so that the poor musician was feign to shift him off, for his guts
were clung in his belly, and Fennor meant to make Ha^^ strings of them. But
think you if his Father had been of that worth, that he would have suffered
him to run over the earth like one of Caines Imps, that had a Plough tail of
his own to tie him to? But you will object a reconcilement upon better
fortunes, he is now married and has a stayed head. He has called the King
master, and the black Guard fellows: heonors change manners, I confess, and
that he is adorned, I will not deny; the hundred pound well laid out, shall
speak his Fathers bounty. At thy return, Mounsier Le Fognier, what became of
the money? did thou pay the Hackney man for horse-hire? he pleads not guilty,
because h^ received no gilt? thou have but one only part of a Gentleman in
thee, and that is, thou will p^^ no debts: did thou buy household stuff? Let
the Thief speak, who is most familiarly gu^^ under color of a pardon: but
thou holdst it lawful to punish Sinners. Did thou buy appare^ with it? No
verily, he pawn^d his Cloak the next morning of his return. Oh invisible
summ^^^ what is become of thee? This was a hidden blessing, whose effects are
not yet to be seen. T^^ one of Erra Paters predictions, it is intailed upon his
Issue. But to conclude, if it were lawful for me to examine thee at Staffords
Law, I would make thee confess the receipt of ten shillings, the
acknowledgement of my bill, the acceptance of thy answer, and thy word and
promise for thy meeting me, and that I never received money or message to the
contrary. A^^ which thou did confess to me before five Witnesses since thy
book was written, when th^^^ paidst me my Money: and this and more I could make
thee say and swear, or else I would beat thee to mash, and make a Gally-mawfry
for Dogs of thee. But I think it time to lea^^ Prose, and fall into Verse,
for the satisfaction of the Reader, thy shame, and my Fame.

JOHN TAILOR

He gives himself an honest good report,
And to himself he is beholden for it:
Tet 'twixt the greatest knave and him, I ween,
There Is thus much ods, A pair of sheers between
Master PENNORS taking Boat.
COme fellow Bull-beefe, quick, thrust in the boat,
Here comes a brave fare in a horsemans coat;
^^d in man: Sir, lend me your worships hand.
^^ the ^eed, t'hath rained, it is slippery Sir to stand.
^^^ sit you down, we have the wind and tide,
^^^ sir, a little on the Star-boord side.
^^^ off now: I am glad I have you here,
^^^ Master Fennor (ali^s) Le Fognier:
^^^ ^^^ are a fare fallen to my lot divinely,
^^^ you my Boat, and I will trim you finely:
^^^ as I Row, I Will tell you whom I am;
^^^ John Tailor, made your Annagram.
In defense of the true Annagram I made of William Fennor. Nv Villainy for me.
THat I thy Annagram did truly finish,
No letter did I add, or none diminish:
^^^ which Nu Villainy for me's the same,
^^ Annagram of William Fennors name.
^^^ think to make thy Reputation stretch,
^^^ out of Normandy thy name wilt fetch:
^^^ ^^^^ men may see thy folly plain appear,
^^^ wilt (forsooth) be called Le Fognier.
^^^ Fognier, out alas thy wits are fogg'd;
^^^ but laugh to see thee mir'd and bogg'd,
^^^ holla, holla, hobby, hold my fist,
^^^ thee out of this black foggy mist.
Le Foggnier.
Annagramma.
Flieng Roge.
HOw like thou this brave Annagram, it is true,
^^^ And every letter in his place, is due:
^^^ for thy further grace shal't have another,
^^ hardly do so much for mine own Brother.
Le Foggnier.
Annagramma.
Forge Lieng.
^^^^^^ how I have helped thee at a pinch,
And Annagramatiz'd thee to an inch:
The sunshine of my Muse the Fog has broke,
And cleared thy Name from out the misty smoke.
Thou show thy plenteous beggary of wir,
That make thy Annagram so much unfit;
Thy Name's but thirteen letters (as I ween)
And in thy Annagram thou have fifteen.
Then William Fennor's Annagram's not such,
I will fear no man, 'sE and A to much:
I guess (at first) thy Ancestors did keep
Within some fenny ground, Hoge, Kine, or sheep;
And living Hogheards, or poor labring men,
They took their Names of Fennor; from the Fen.
And now to write a jest, my Muse does smile,
I think thou wast begotten on a style:
Thy father looking one way, and thy mother,
For fear of being spide, she looked another;
And leering sundry ways, kept careful watch,
Lest any at their business should them catch.
And that is the reason why thine eyes do roll,
And squint so in thy, doltish iobbernowle.
I cry thee mercy, in my other book,
Thy Coat of Arms I very much mistook.
As from the Fen at first thou did survive,
Thy Scutchion from the Fen I will derive.
Mark how I will emblaze thee, I'lbe brief,
Within a Quagmire-field, two Toades in Chief,
^ A Lope. staff for the Bend, I hold it best,
A pair of Ox horns Rampant, for the Crest,
Well Mantled with an old Raw tough Cow-hide,
Thus I my arms divide, and subdiuide.
For calling me a Tailor and a shred,
A dish not worthy whereon to be fed;
Could I but Cut, and sow, and steal and stitch
As well as thou can lie, I would be rich.
The Time has bin a Poor- John's scraps would fill
The hungr^ Maw of thredbare Lowzy Will.
Thou have forgot thou rim'st to me of late
For sixteen Oysters once at Billingsgate,
Thou have forgot I gave thee my old breeches,
Because thou sung'st and spok'st extrump'ry speeches
When barley bread and Lamp oil thou did eat,
A Poor- John then with thee had bin good meat.
Upon his false Annagram on my name.
ARt not ashamed to be so false in print,
Thy Muse is like thine Eyes (sure) all a squint,
The world may see my name no ^ affords,
And thou have thrust in two, to make up words;
O hate rail on, and then rail on O hate,
Thy wit, I see, is in a desperate state,
Else thou would never (unto all men's view)
Declare thy folly, printing things untrue;
For thine own sake let Annagrams aloue,
Thou can not make a true one, then make none.
To him I hold too unworthy to be my foe: William Fenner.
THou have looked over, I perceive and seen,
Th'inuectiue Scourge of my revenging spleen,
And wisely (as thou dem'st) thou weighest it lightly,
Thou Graceless, disgrace thou esteemest slightly:
There Is not a bad word in it that is writ,
But well thou know thou have deserved it;
And if I thought I owed thee any more,
I would rail on, till I had paid the score:
For though my just incensed anger sleep,
Yet do I keep my Satyrs whip in weep,
In salt and brine, that to the quick shall scourge
Thee, or who dares my angry Muse to urge.
And by your leave Sir, I Will a little ^irke ye,
And with a milder lash I Will gently ierke ye.
I will not rail, or rogue thee, or be^slaue thee,
But I will finely baffle, beard, and brave thee:
I Will squeeze, and crush, and unto poulder pounce thee,
I Will make thy wits for ever to renounce thee.
I Will lay thee open, and I will attaint thee,
And for a pitiful poor scab I Will paint thee.
I Will nip, and strip, and whip thee out of breath,
Like Bubenax, I Will rhyme thee unto death.
Thou say my verse is impotent and hault,
Thou do accuse me for thy only fault;
Alack in Rhyme thou can do naught but cobble,
Thy cripled Verses up and down do hobble.
And do so lamely run, and rise, and fall,
Like maimed Beggars in an Hospital.
Thou have no judging, understanding ear,
Thy Accents and thy Sillables to rear
Or let them fall: thou botchest many a line,
That I would shame to father such for mine.
When a tressillable a verse does end,
It Is harsh, it is palty, and it does offend;
In a translation I with it would bear,
But in Invention it offends the ear:
Thou often end'st thy lines with Memory,
And then thou answer'st that with Pillory,
And then thou comst upon me Horribly,
And in conclusion writ'st solowsily,
That when thou gett'st'a Poets dignity,
I Will hang thee of mine own benignity.
There Is many a fault thou make which I would show
But that I fear 'twould make thee half a Poet,
And well I know thou would unthankful be,
And would deny thou learndst thy skill of me^.
I Will therefore leave thee as a plague to time,
A selfe-conceited witless Ass in Rhyme.
I know thy ouer-daring mind does dare
With me and my invention to compare,
Indeed (by fortune) I some things have done,
Which many says from better wits did run.
But let their envious misconceit belie me,
Nor thee, or they, or any dares to try me.
But to the purpose, dare thou thus much do,
Let one man give one Theme betwixt us two,
And on that Theme let both of us go write,
And he that best and soonest does indite,
Give him the praise; and he that is out-strip'd
(For his reward) let him be soundly whipped,
To this I dare thee, thou poor Poet Ape
And I Will behang'd if thou a whipping escape.
Thy Muse (or Mule) can frame some Riming not^^
To borrow shillings, six-pences or Groates
Of Vintners boys, and that is the highest strain
Thy borrowed stolen invention can attain.
For thine own credit some rare work devise,
Turn into Verse the Chimney-sweepers cries,
Or work for Tinker, Couers for close stools,
Then shall thou be disputed on in Schools,
And held a brave man, and thy famous Verse
About the Town thy Patrons will rehearse.
Besides, I wish thee beg the Monopolly,
That to thy self thou may ingrose it wholly,
That none but thee may write the Elegies,
And Epitaphs of Tiburne Tragedies.
And so the Hangmans Poet thou shall be,
And sometimes have as good a Fee as he:
No course to thrive is to be counted base,
And I Will speak for thee thou may have the place.
I muse how Ladies dares to hear thy style,
It Is so abominable harsh and vile,
How can thou from them any favor win,
Me thinks thy Rimes should fret their tender ski^
For it is more rougher then a Russian Bear,
And rubs and frets, and gauls each gentle ear.
Thou art the rarest fellow above ground,
To serve some Costiue Lord, that is hard bound,
Thy riming would procure an easy stool,
That service has some savor, Goodman fool.
The Doctors and Apothecaries swears,
How they will lugge thee by the Asses cares,
Because thy riming now does purge men more,
Then all their Art in many years before.
Thou nam'st here, for a rabblement of fools,
Tom Coriat, Archy, and the great Otooles.
Ass for thy self, a fool I never did take thee,
Dame Nature at the first (I think) did make the^,
One compound of two simples, Fool and Knave,
Who striving in thee which should maistry have
The crafty knauish part got all the sway,
And turned the silly harmless Fool away,
And in thy making Natures care was chief,
To fashion thee on purpose for a Thief;
^^ee turned thine eyes keele upwards, for the nonce,
That thou might see five or six ways at once.
For why, thou have an admirable look,
T^forme a Thief, from windows how to hook
Apparel, Cushions, Carpet, Rugge, or Sheet,
That they withal by hook, or crook, can meet.
I do not say thou do this trading use;
^^ therein thou they making do abuse,
Is that thou closely follow'st not the trade,
For which thee and thy thiefe-like eyes were made.
When as a great man's house, men flock about thee,
It Is not to hear thee time, but cause they doubt thee,
And therefore every one keeps careful watch
For fear thou should the plate, or so^what catch:
Thou think they do applaud when thou have rim'd,
And they are fearful that thy fists are lim'd.
The Butlers sweat for fear, whilst thou do prate,
And double diligently guard their plate.
Thy beauteous Phisnomy does this, for which
Most women fear thee, that thou art a Witch,
And therefore snatch their children up, and run,
Toy ominous ill-looking look to shun.
For if before a Judge, thou ever speak,
Thy very countenance thy neck will break.
More I could say, and more I could devise,
But that I think I should rhyme out thine eyes:
It all trades fail, I Would have thee pull them out,
And I Will procure thee living do not doubt,
^^^ thy nose will put an Iron ring,
And lead thee up and down the Town to sing,
To Feasts, and Markets, Wakes, and Sturbridge fair,
And then to every place with me repair,
I would advance a fair engrossed bill,
That in these words should promise wondrous skill.
Then I, or else my Boy, will beat a Drum,
If any be desirous for to come,
At two a clock within the after noone,
There shall you see an old blind brave Baboone,
That can put on the humor of an Ass,
Can come aloft Jack, heigh pass and repasse;
That for ingenuous study down can put,
Old Holdens Camel, or fine Banks his Cut,
And for his action he eclipseth quite,
The ^igge of Garlic, or the Punks delight.
King Ninus motion, or the great tall Dutchman,
O^th'Elke, or man-Beare baiting was no such man.
To all your costs he will his wis wits employ,
To play the second part of Englands Joy.
Hee' rhyme, and sing well, and if need require,
Cantell more lies then you would all desire.
Our Lady Fair, nor yet Saint Bartholomew,
A motion like to this did never show.
These things I hope for to employ thee in,
By which we needs must store of money win.
I neither hate good counsel, or yet thee,
But why should thou presume to counsel me.
I prithee then leave off thy fruitless task,
No godnesse comes from such a mustie Caske.
My Defense against thy Offense.
HOw proudly thou thy Ancestors do praise,
Above the Pleyades, their Fame to raise:
Was ever seen so vile a paltry Nag,
So much of his Antiquity to brag.
As if his Grandam had some Burgess been,
In Parliament unto the Diamond Queen:
If I should answer all thy base contention,
I then should have no room for my invention:
And therefore famous Monsier Le Foggnier.
I will but only nip thee here and there:
According as I see the time and place,
I will my biting phrases enterlace.
And first ( Don Bussard) unto you it is known,
The writing of my play was all mine own:
And though thou tearm'st it fopp'ry, like a ^op,
Into the Hangmans Budget thou will drop,
Before thy muddie Muse (Dame ignorance)
On a conceit so good, as it shall glance.
Thou brag'st what fame thou got'st upon the stage,
Indeed, thou set'st the people in a rage,
In playing Englands Joy, that every man
Did judge it worse then that was done at Swan.
I never saw poor fellow so behist,
T'applaud thee, few or none lent half a fist:
Some stinkards hands, perhaps went pit to pat,
Who ignorantly liked they knew not what;
Besides, thou know, thou promised in thy Bill,
In rare extempory to show thy skill.
When all thou spok'st, thou studiedst had before,
Thou know I know, above a month and more.
Besides, the best conceits that were in it,
(Poor Fool) thou had them from a better wir,
Then is thine own, thy beggarly conceit
Could never have mounted to so high a height.
Good wine is spild, in stinking vessels leaking,
And so good words were marred with thy ill speaking:
Where like a Scar-crow) or a Jack of lent
Thou stoodst, and gave the people small content:
And yet thy impudence would raise thy fame,
From out the loathsome Garbage of thy shame.
Thy little honesty so high thou deem'st,
And more then Thames reuennew it esteem'st:
Make much on it, thou art worthy to have more,
Thou make such reckoning of so little store.
Thy honesty is bred within the bone,
Out of the flesh, I think came never none:
Thou sai'st I called a Christian, Cur, O fie!
'Will Fennor, will thou never leave to lie?
'T was thee I called so, ponder well upon it,
For I think thou wast never at a Font;
I wish thee yet thy Baptism to procure,
Thou can not be an Anabaptist sure:
If I should answer every lie and line,
My book would then be bigger far, then thine.
Besides, it with my mind does not agree,
To paraphrase on thy poor stuff and thee.
Thou put'st one trick upon me, and a rare one,
Thou Wilt make me under Sculler unto Charon;
When thou come to the Devil on a message,
Then I Will take nothing of thee for thy passage:
And for my love (then thine) shall not be shorter,
Thou shall be Plutees ugly under Porter.
For Cerberus and thee must needs agree,
Thy one good face, accommodates his three.
Thou bid'st me watch and write, and do my worst,
And sai'st, thy Pen and Inkehorne is as cursed.
I think it is cursed indeed, for I protest,
That neither thee, or them, was never blessed:
Perhaps thou have good Paper, Pens and Ink,
But thy invention ( Fogh) how it does stink.
Thou bid'st me fall unto my Scull again,
And hold'st my calling in thy high disdain.
Know Peasant, if I were a Baron borne,
Yet I my honest trade would never scorn:
A Water-man does get his bread more true,
Then fifty thousand idle Knaves, like you;
They cannot rhyme, and cony-catch, and cheat,
For what they have, they must be sure to sweat.
And I esteem my labor far more dear,
Then all thy riming's worth in twenty year:
I Will carry Whores and Knaves too, for my fee;
For money, I Will transport thy wife and thee:
I Will carry any body for my fare,
We have no power to question what they are.
My Boat is like unto a Barbers Chair,
To which both honest men, and Knaves repair:
No Tradesmen, whatsoever that they be,
Can get their lining honester then we.
We labor truly, and we take great pain,
With hands and feet, we stretch out every vain:
Thy hands did never work, thou art so nice^^
Except 'twere in thy Doublet cracking li^^.
And not to brag, but to our trades great fame,
The learned Sapho, that admired Dame,
Who could the Saphicke Verse so rarely write,
Did wed a Water-man, who Ph^^^ hight:
Besides, eight Kings, in famous Edgars reign,
To row with Oars did hold it no disdain:
But as Records and Chronicles relate,
They rowed unto the Parliament in State.
Thou may infer these Kings, were captives all:
Why? are not all men so by Adams fall.
Nay more, when water the first world did end,
The second world did presently descend,
From the High Admiral of Heaven and Earth,
The Patriarch Noah, we had second birth:
He ferri'd mankind to this worlds Lee shore,
From the bar'd-hauen of the world, before
Such Landsharkes as thy self, their way did take,
Down through the Deluge to Cocstus Lake,
Where all the comfort the poor Caitiffes found,
Was this, that all the Gallowses were drowned:
No Authors write, no not the Poets tales,
That they loved Cheatry, Porposes, or Whales.
One note this History does more afford,
That all were damb'd that scorned to lie aboard,
No part of this world we inherit can,
But by our Title from a Waterman.
Then wrong not us with thy calumnious tongue,
For from a Waterman we all are Sprung:
From Iaphets Ioynes I well descended am,
And thou (my cursed Couzin) came from Cham,
Besides thus much, thy Ignorance may note,
That all the world may well be called a Boat,
Tossed on the troublous waves of discontent,
All subject unto change, vnpermanent.
Our life's the tide, which ever ebbes and flows,
And to their iournies end all Creatures rows:
The Soldier with his sword rows up and down,
And floats in blood sometimes to gain a Crown.
The Lawyer rows, and makes his tongue his oar,
And sometimes sets his Clyent poor ashoare.
But the Divine (of all men) he rows best,
He brings us safely to the Port of rest:
He lands us at our everlasting Inn,
And the tenth penny for his pains does win.
Thus Fenner thou mai'st see, that Watermen
Are far beyond the limits of thy Pen
To do them wrong; I could speak more of this,
But that I think enough sufficient is.
Thou sai'st that Poetry descended is
From poverty, thou take thy marks a miss.
In spite of weal or woe, or want of pelse,
It is a Kingdom of content it self.
A Poet's here or there, or where he please,
In Heaven, in Air, in Earth, in Hell, or Seas,
Gods, men, fish, foul, beasts, and infernal fiends,
All tributary homage to him sends;
They Are called makers, for they will undertake
By Art, of nothing something for to make,
And though in making, little skill I have,
Yet could I easily make thee a Knave.
But there in I should be but thy partaker,
A Knave thou art, and so art thine own maker.
In which thou do most makers much excel,
For having made thy self so ill, so well.
And now at thee, once more I Will have a fling,
Thou faist thou had thy title from the King
Of rising Poet: I beleene it true.
What name would best befit thee, well he knew,
He called thee not a Poet, for deuisin
Or that thou could make ought worth memorizing,
He called thee riming Poet, note why 'twas,
And I will show thy picture in a Glass:
He gave thy Poetry not Reasons Name;
^r Rhyme, for he knew well his words to frame.
Now what a Rimer is, unto a Poet,
Because thou know it not, I Will make thee know it:
They Are like Bell-ringers to Musicians,
Or base Quack-saluers to Phisicians;
Or as a Za^y to a Tumbler is,
A Rimer's to a Poet such as this;
And such art thou, or in a worse degree:
For if a poet should examine thee
Of Numbers, Figures, Trimeters, Alchaicks,
^^^ meters, Pentameters, Trochaicks,
^^bicks, Allegorios, and Allusions;
With Tropes, Similitudes, Types and Conclusions:
And whosoever chances but to look
^^ ^^^ or the Arcadi (well writ Book)
^all find these Rules which I before have named,
Which makes a Poets Art for ever famed:
And in these things, thy knowledge is no more
Then has an Ass, a Horse, a Bear, or Bore.
^hou art the Rump, the tail, or basest part
Of Poetry thou art the dung of Art.
Thou art all Rhyme, and void of reason, thou
^oft doze and shut up lines, no matter how.
Some men will say, I must a Scholar be,
^^^ these words could never come from me:
To them I answer; I can English read,
But further I could never write or plead:
Those words of Art, I know them every one,
and knowing them, I Will let them all alone;
Because I do not know well how to use them,
And by misplacing them, I may abuse them.
When I a learned word in Verse do plant,
^^^ will be sure to write significant.
^o much to them, whose hearts will not believe
^^t that in Poetry I ^^^ and theeue.
^^^ dare them all to try me, and lea^^^ threatening,
The proof of pudding's always in the eating:
Th^^ I have told thee, why, wherefore, and how
^^ Majesty did thee that name allow;
The name of Rimer carry to thy grave,
^^ile of Poet, thou shall never have.
^^ch well in Turn-bull street, or in Pickt-hatch,
^ere Shorditch, or Long, alloy prithee watch,
And among the trading females, choose out nine
To be thy ^^^ they will sit thee fine,
Thy ^ make thy rimes and thee of more account,
And mount thy same above Parnassus Mount:
Thou writst a hotch-potch of some forty lines
About my Play at Hope, and my designs;
Where men may see thy stock of wit is poor,
To write of that which I had writ before.
Thou fill'st thy Book with my invention full,
And show thy self an idle shallow Gull:
And then thou talk and prat'st, and keep'st a Rut,
And tearm'st my Muse Melpomenes Tail Gut;
I wonder where thou did that phrase procure,
Thou art beholden to some Tripe-wife sure.
When hunger does provoke thee rhyme and sing,
That Gut will make thy Muse a Chitterling:
For thou from tripes, and tayl-guts, and hogs mawes,
Have won thy greatest credit and applause,
There Is none that eats a Partridge or a Pheasant,
But takes thee for a soole to make them pleasant,
I know not if thy wife be he or she,
If she be honest, she is too good for thee.
Thou partly offrest me to hold the door,
If I will make thy Kitchin-maid my whore:
But prithee hold thy prating, witless Gander,
Shall never have honor to become my Pander.
Thou say, I rail, it is true, I had decreed
To give my wronged Muse a purge with speed,
And (as the fittest vessel) 'twas thy lot,
To be her foul unworthy Chamber Pot:
She Is well recouer'd, and the world does see
Her filthy excrements remain in thee.
No black contagious mist her pure light suffers,
But strait she makes of thee a pair of Snuffers,
To make her glorious greatness shine more clear,
And this shall be your office Le Fognicre.
And now a thought into my mind does creep,
How thou a Kitchen or a Maid can keep:
I know the time thou would have licked thy chaps
From out an Almes-basket to get some scraps,
And have thou now a Kitchen and large rooms,
To entritaine fair Lasses, and brave Grooms?
I see thou art the frugal'st Lad alive,
And car'st not greatly what thou do to thrive.
I wrongly called thy Kitchin-seruant, maid;
No maid can dwell with thee, I am afraid:
And now a pretty tale I mean to tell;
Mark it, I pr^thee, for it fits thee well.
There was a fellow once some faults had done,
Which fearing hanging did his Country run,
And coming to the City, full of fear,
(Nay note my tale, good Mounsier Le Fognier)
In hope to get his pardon, 'twas his chance
Upon a man, (as might be thee) to glance,
The poor distressed fellow told his mind,
And said, If any man would be so kind
To get his pardon, and to set him f^re,
He should have threescore angels for his Fee:
Now he that this man's pardon should procure,
(To save his own stake, and to make all sure)
He leaves the Thief in London, and strait went
And brought a Hoy full of his goods from Kent,
Then out of hand, this man like thee, called Momus
Did hire a goodly building called Donius,
Which this thiefs household stuff did furnish well,
And there this Gentleman (like thee) does dwell.
Now to proceed, the poor unhappy thief
Is ready still to hang himself with grief:
For he is cheated of his goods, I wot,
And knowes^ ^t when his pardon will be got.
And it is much feared, the Cheater his own self,
Will work some means to hang him for his pelf.
How like thou this, is it not a pretty trick?
But wherefore do thou chafe, and spurn and kick:
A guilty conscience feels continual scare,
And this discourse does seem to touch thee near:
Nay, then I will relate another thing,
Which I suppose will make you wince and fling.
Upon S. Georges day last, Sir, you gave,
To eight Knights of the Garter (like a Knave)
Eight Manuscripts (or Books) all fairly writ,
Informing them they were your Mother wit,
And you compild them; then were you regarded,
And for another wit was well rewarded.
All this is true, and this I dare maintain,
The matter came from out a learned brain:
And poor old Vennor, that plain dealing man,
Who acted Englands Joy first at the Swan,
Paid eight crowns for the writing of these things,
Besides the couers, and the silken strings:
Which money back he never yet received,
So the deceiuer is by thee deceived.
First, by those Books thou stol'st a good report,
And wast accounted a rare man in Court:
Next, thou did much abuse those Noblemen,
And kild^st their bounty, from a Poets Pen.
And thirdly, thou a Poet did beguile,
To make thy self the Author of his style.
And last, thou shewst thy cheating good and evil,
Beguiling him, that could beguile the Devil.
Thou highly have prouo^'d the Muses fury,
Twelne Poets are empaneld for thy Jury;
Then William Fennor, stand unto the Bar,
Hold up thy hand, herd thy accuser^ are:
Art guilty or not guilty of those crimes
Thou art accused, thou have stole five thousand rimes,
From But ends of old Ballads, and whole books,
What say thou for thy self; hold up thy looks?
He falters, and his words are all unsteady,
Poor fellow looks as he were hanged already,
His silence does affirm these things are true,
And therefore let the Bench in order due
Give sentence, that within a hempen string
He at S. Thomas Wat'rings may go swing;
And for heliu'd the wonder of our time,
Do him this honor, hang him up in rhyme.
A Sirrah, is the matter fallen out so,
Must thou Extemp'ry to the Gallows go,
For old atquaintance, ever thou breathe thy last,
I o'r the Water will give thee A Cast.
And till the halter give thy neck a wrench,
Thou shall have time and space in the Kings Bench,
To Con and fesse, and to repent thy fill,
And to dispose thy goods, and make thy will:
Which being done, and thou well hanged and dead,
This Epitaph upon thy grave I Will spread,
That passers by may read, and reading see
How much thou art beholden unto me.
Epitaph.
HE that could always lie, does lie
Six foot below thy feet:
Of any colors he could dye
His lies, to make them meet.
In lies untrue he spent his youth,
And truly dead, lies here in truth.
HOw say thou Fennor, is not all this worth
Thy hearty thanks, which I have here set forth
If not, thou show thy self the more ungrateful,
Which vice, is to the very Devil hateful.
Thou did belie me when thou said I threat thee,
For rather then I would do so, I Would beat thee:
And 'twere the easier task of both by half,
But who will foul his fists on such a Calfe;
A Calfe said I, for age thou do appear
To be a Bull, of Ox, thou art past a Steer.
Thou lie again, accusing me of Griese,
Because thou go^st a pardon for a Thief.
Why should I grieve at that was never done,
The pardon yet I Am sure thou have not won,
The poor man he has cause to grieve enuffe,
For being Cheated of his household stuff,
Thou bragg^st and prat'st how charity and love.
Of mankind, only did thy pity move,
And not desire of silver for thy pain
Did make thee seek his pardon to attain.
And then (as if thou were de^our'd with zeal)
Thy false hypocrise thou do reveal.
In our Contentious writing it is unfit
That any word of Scripture should be writ,
The name of God is to be feared with trembling,
And thou make it a Cloak for thy dissembling;
Shall Rascal Rimes, profane unhallowed things,
B^^^xt with flaming the great King of Kings.
The only one in three, and three in one;
Let him and all his Attributes alone.
Thou say before that I should hanged be,
How thou a pardon woudst procure for me.
^^^ it come to that, I Will end the strife,
^^^ before I Will thank thee for my life:
^^^ thy gilt of conscience wondrcus great ^s;
^^^ thou would never write thy repenting treatis,
^^ing me to patience and forgive,
^^^ shows thou some abuse to me did give,
^^^ make me cry Vindicta, and requite
^^^ wrongs, before all misconceiuers fight.
^^^ for my Arth's thou have given me quit for que.
^^ou must to Tyburn, I to Wapping go,
^^^ I have gotten a Reprieue, and can
^^^ myself to be an honest man.
^^ Muse for thee a Habeus Corpus brings,
^^ Tyburne to Saint Thomus Waterings.
An Epilogue.
^To'd thee I had worser rods in piss,
Thou findst it true, and I have worse then this,
^^c on occasion I will freely utter,
^^ thou but dare against me for to mutter:
^^^ three days thou did write that book of thine,
Thou say, and I in fourteen hours did mine.
^or I would have thee well to understand,
^^^ have by water and by land,
^^ service and occasions me incites
To write by snatches, and by spurts a nights.
That if my business were but ouer-past,
The writing such another, I durst fast
^^m sleep or sustenance of meat or drink,
And such a task would famish thee I think,
^^for a wager will be locked up,
And no relief will either bite or sup,
Until as much as this my muse devise,
And scarcely be an hungered when I rise.
Then for thine own sake (Poet Peddler) cease,
Or bind my sharp fang'd Muse unto the peace:
For thou may swear, and keep thy conscience clear
That of thy life thou live in mighty fear.
^^^ I make thee desperate, thine own breath bereave,
^y which, the Hangman thou will much deceive.
Thus do I leave my lines to all men's view,
To judge if I have paid thee not thy due.
To write of thee again, my Muse has ceast,
^^^ is enough, enough's a feast.
I know thy lying Chaps are stopped for ever,
That all thy study and thy best endeavor,
Nor fifty more such shallow brains as thine,
Can answer this one little book of mine.
But if thou do, I know 'twill be so lame,
A wise man will not read it o'r for shame,
And therefore Fennor gnaw upon this bone,
What next I write, shall better be or none.
Tailors defense of the honesty of his Blew-Bitch.
NOw Fennor once more I Will give thee a twitch
For hunting hotly after my Blue Bitch:
Beware she does not tear thee by the throat.
She Is neither Salt nor hot, I Would hau^ thee know ^^.
Thou (like a Hound) perhaps may lick her tail,
But further all thy wits cannot prevail:
I wish thee from thy Kennell ^^^ to roame,
But for thine own tooth keep thy Brache at home.
My Bitch will bite thee sorely, I am sure.
And where she fangs, it is commonly past enre,
At honest men shee' I never cry ^^^,
But she will snarle, and snap such knaves as thou.
As for my Cod let her be up'd and ripped,
Let her be searched to see what she has shipped,
And nothing in her all the world can see,
But sharp Satyricke whips to torture thee.
His Landing.
NOw here I land th^^^ S. Mary ^^^^^,
I think not for your worships wo^ted bawdries
I know your business is not for a wench,
The Tipstaffe tells me you are for the Bench,
Where you may feed your Muse on Carrat rootea,
And lie a bed, borrow no shoes or boots,
And live within the ruses, a good thing truly,
For such a man as you that live unruly:
Farewell, and yet I Will visit you again,
When in a Rugg you Clanior at the Chain.
And once again when it falls to your lot,
Below your ear to wear the pendant ^^not.
Mean space because you are a merry Greek,
I Will send thee bread and pottage thrice a week.
The praise of clean Linen. WITH THE COMMENDABLE USE OF THE LAVNDRES.
DEDICATED TO THE MOST MONDIFYING, CLARIFYING, PVRIFYING, AND REPVRIFYING,
CLEANSER, Clearer, and Reformer of deformed and polluted Linen, Martha Leg
Esquiresse, transparent, unspotted, Snow Lilly-white Laundresse to the Right
worshipful and generous the Innes of Court, of the middle Temple, with diverse
others in the rank of Nobility, Gentility, and tranquillity: your poor and
unknown Poetical Orator JOHN TAILOR, in humility and ^^^, cranes your
Patronages ability, in defense of his imbecility.
MOst cleanely and professed Antagonist to vermin, dirt, and filth, ^^^
Dragmatus the Diagotian Stigmatist very worthily wrote in hi^^ Treatise of the
Antiquity of Shapparoones and careless Band^ Rushtoy ton tumeron smolensco
whish wherlibumque. Which is in English, That to conserve and keep clean, is
as much or more then to make clean: and I know by long experience that your
pains and industry not only makes our polluted Linen clean, but also to
conserve and preserve ^^ in that neatness and purity as is correspondent for
our health and wholesomenesse: upon these grateful confiderations. I have
presumed to consecrate these vnpolish'd lines to your unspotted Cleanliness)
not doubting but the lathering suds of vour lennitie, will wash away all such
faults as are not herein committe^^ through want of ignorance; and with the
white Starch of your firm constancy, you will stiffen the weakness of my
feeble and limber, labors, that it may be able to stand like a stout, Mastiffe
Dog, against the opposition of all detracting Nungerels; I have in this
ensuing volume, set forth the praise and commendations of Clean Linen, with
the honorable pains of the Laundresse; which word Laundres I find to be both
unfitting and derogatory to your comely, commendable, laudable, neat, sweet and
seemly calling; for the Anagram of Laundre.

SLAVVNDER, which name or Epithet is half a slawnder to your suri^^^ for to
be a Laundres, imports only to wash or dress Lawne, which is as ^^^^
impeachment as to call a lustice of the Peace, a Beadle; a Dyer, a Scaldragge;
or ^^^^^nger, a seller of Gubbins. No, my most laborious and purifying Patro^^^
your glory shall no longer be Ecclipsed, to be termed a bare Lawndres, or a
^^^^ of Lawne, but a Hollandresse, Tiffanie-dresse, Lawndresse, Lockrumdresse,
^^wlesdresse, Callicute and Canuas-dresse, which in the total is a
Linnendresse, ^^^^ you are the only Linen Armouresse, Cap a pea from the
declination of the ^^^ to the exaltation of the Nightcap, and from the lofty
Quoyse, to the lowly ^eloued Smockeskirt; and herein I am struck into
admiration, at the vn^^^^ alour, that champion-like does accompany and
constantly defend ^our cha^titie; For you dare in a morning to enter a
Gentleman's chamber, to ^^ppe him out of his foul shirt in his bed, to have him
at your bare and naked ^^^^ and then like a virtuous victor, in pity and
commiseration, you put a ^^^^ shirt on his back, leaving him in a clearer and
far sweeter case then you ^ound him; no doubt but such objects are
prouocatory temptations to frail ^^^ and blood: but as I said before, your
courage and constancy always brings ^^^ fairly off and on, though thousands
weaker vessels of ^^^alitie would be ^^'d in these unbloody bickerings. As
for your good Husband, who is Leg ^^^ name, my poor Muse makes a leg in
courtesy to him and you both. Some ^^^ Coxcombes in Wit and judgment will
term him a Cobbler, whilst ^ood manors entitles him a Translator. When I
think upon the simpathie and ^^^ pondancie of both your qualities, I approve
Fortune for a wise cunning woman in clapping such a coniuriction together; for
he is a mender, and you ^^^ a mundifier or to speak truth, you are both
menders, and God knows how ^^any will be hanged before they will mend: your
Ar^ is to keep our bodies ^^weet and clean, and his Trade is to set our
wicked and crooked soales right and ^right; he is a firm and stableman, and
waxes much oftener then he wanes; ^^^ workers sildome above the leg, which
shows the true love that he bears ^^^his Name and ^^^ Legs are of much more
antiquity then Linen, in ^gard ^whereof^^ ^^^^^^ being of the younger ^^^ does
good service many ^^^^ between the Legs and you and your husband may by name
and na^^re, very Poe^^^ly make an Herameter; Legs are the supporters and
por^^^ that uphold and carry man, foul, and beast. A good Leg is a great
grace ^^^^ dis^^^^^y ess^^^ in the ^^^^e, and not too much spindled in the
small, ^^^my noble Translator knows that a Boot is an armor for a good Leg,
and ^^^ or ^^^ for a bad; to which acknowledgement many a Gentleman V^^^ will
say Probatumest: of all parts of the Body the Leg bears the prick ^^^ ^^^^
It is embrodred with Veins, inlaid with Arteries, enchased with Nerves,
interlac'd with Muscles, ennamel'd with Sinews, interwouen with Membranes,
intermixed with Tenons, embost with Ankles, having a Neat Fo^^ for a man, and
five Toes for Pages to attend it. More for the honor of Legs ^^^ what is
better meat then the Legs of Beife, Mutton, Lamb, Porke, Capon ^^^ Turkey,
Goose or Woodcocke? Nay, there is such virtue in them, that any reasonable
Cook with a Stools Leg (and something else) will make good broth^ To finish
my prolixious short, brief, and tedious dedication, I wish that yo^ and your
Husband in conjugal combination, in the way of Procreation, ma^^ multiply and
make Legs, which is a part of good Manners and Courtesie^^ whereof these
unmannerly times is almost barren. Thus referring my self and my labors to
be accepted and censured according to the purity and integ^^^ of both your
reforming functions, with my prayers for the clean amendmen^ of all foulers of
Linen, and the reforming of all bad Legs, for the better supportation of
Washers, Starchers and Translator: I remain,

He whose sinful shirt lies humbly at the mercy of your washing Bowl^
JOHN TAILOR.

The praise of Clean Linen.
MY Muse no tidings brings from Prester John,
Not from the ^^^ or the Torrid Zon^:
She has not searched ^^^^^ ^^^^^
Nor forag'd over Affrisks-scorched grounds^
For this here under wr^t I trauel'd not
Unto the Welsh the Irish, or the Soo^:
To Town nor City did I make re^^ine
Nor did I buy in Market or in Fair
This Linen treasure, but is B^^^ ^^^^
Where (cares except) ^^^ fellow had I none.
My drowzy Muse awaked, and straight she meets
This wel-beloued subject, twixt ^^heet^.
Yet though not far my Mnse for it did rome,
I did accept it when she brought it home,
And taking pen in hand, ^^gan to write,
What you may read, and reading take delight.
And O sweet Linen, humbly I implore,
(Though of thee I have no (...) store)
Yet for I am thy servant ^^ this time,
And with my Muse attend thee with my rhyme,
Ass^^^ thy Poet, never let him lack
A comely, cleanly shirt unto his back.
Clean Linen it my Mist ^^^ and my Theame^
Flower, like an ouer-flowing plenceous stream,
But first I will discover what I mean,
By this same seemly word, which men call Clean^^
As Titans light's offenciue to the Owl^^,
So, Clean^ is opposite to what is s^^^
Yet (in the air) some flying Foul there are,
Which taken, and cleanly drest^are Foul clean ^^^
But ^^^ly dressed, when it is fairly took:
Foul is that Foul, a foul ill take that Cook.
But to the word called Clean, it is allotted,
The admirable Epithet Unspotted,
From whence all soyl'd pollutions is exiled,
And therefore Cleans is called undefiled:
It Is ^^^ clari^^t it is mundsfi'd,
And from impurity is purisi'd.
But to be truly Clean is such a state,
As ^^^ the Noble name imm^ealate:
And I wish all mankind the grace might win,
To be (as here I mean) all Clean within.
As it is ^^ grace ^ man ^ man to be,
If ^^^ard for ^^d wan^ inward honesty:
So Linnes if with ( Clean) it be not graced,
It Is noy some, ^^^^^, and it gives distaste.
As ^^^ than or woman does adorn,
So ( Clean) is Linnen^ virtue; and is worn
For pleasure, profit, and for ornament,
Throughout the Wo^^^s most spacious continent.
Much more of this word ( Clean) might here be
But tediousness is enemy to wit,
Clean ^^^men now my verse deseends to thee,
Thou that preordinsted were to be,
Our Corpse first Cover, at our naked birth:
And our last garment when we turn to Earth.
^^^ all men Clean Linen should epsy,
^ M^ments of mortality:
^^^ a Sheet unto the greatest State,
^^ Alp^^ and Omega of his fate.
^^ our birth's Clean Linen does attend us,
^^h it all our whole lives race befriend us;
^^^, at home, in Church or Commonwealth,
^^^, or board, in sickness and in health.
^^^ forth the Churches purity,
^^ ^potlesse Doctrine, and integrity:
^^ State Angelical, white innocence,
^^^ ^^^sing love, and bright magnificence.
^^e for Linen do the Church forsake,
^^doe a Surplice for a Bug-bear^ take.
^^alwayes to the Church I bring mine ears,
^^^eyes to hot what roabes Churchmen wears:
^^^ from the Church, let us return but home.
^^^ ^^^^^ there the cloth is said against you come:
^^^ ^^ging hunger make the Stomach wroth,
^^ half asswag'd by laying of the Cloth.
^^^ in the wars of eating it is the use,
^^^ Table of cloth is hungers flagge of Truce:
^^^ in the fight the Napkins are your friends,
^^^ wait upon you, at your fingers ends.
^^^ Dinner and your Supper ouer-past,
^^^ linen in your beds, you are embraced,
^^^ ^, 'twixt the sheets refreshing rest you take,
^^turne from side to side, and sleep and wake:
^^re the sheets in every Christian Nation
^^ walls or limits of our generation,
^^^ where desire, and love, combined meets,
^^^ there is brave doings 'twixt a pair of sheets:
^^^ where a Harlots lust does entertain,
^^here one sheets penance, bides the shames of twain:
^^^ all degrees my counsel here is such
^^^ of the lower sheet, take not too much.
^^^ from our beds we do often cast our eyes,
^^Linnen yields a shirt before we rise,
Which is a garment shisting in condition,
^^nd in the Canting tongue is a Commission:
^^^ ^eale, or woe, in joy or dangerous drifts,
^^^ will put a man unto his shifts.
^^vnto it belongs this fatal lot,
^^^ makes him shift that has, or has it not.
^^he man that has a shirt does shift and change,
^^he that, has no shirt does shift and raunge,
^^^ the conclusion of this point must fall,
^^^ shifteth most that does not shift at all.
^^, a shirt most magically can
^^ if it is owner be an honest man:
^^he washing will his honesty bewray,
^^^ the less soape will wash his shirt they say.
^^^ men Cleans shirts at such esteem do prize,
^^^ the poor'st thief, who at the gallows dies,
^^^ but his shirt is clean, his mind is eased,
^^^ hangs the hansomer, and better pleased.
Next at the smock I needs must have a s^irt,
(Which is indeed the sister to a shirt)
It Is many a females Linen tenement,
Whilst twixt the quarters she receives her rent.
A Smock's her storehouse, or her warehouse rather,
Where she her commings in does take and gather.
Her gains by it are more then can be told,
It Is her reuennue, and her copyhold,
Her own fee simple, she alone has power,
To let and set at pleasure every hour,
It Is a commodity that gives no day,
It Is taken up, and yet yields ready pay.
But for most other wares, a man shall be
Allowed for payment days three months and three.
Yet has a Smock this great pre-eminence,
(Where honor's mixed with modest innocence)
It is the Roabe of married chastity,
The veil of Heauen-belou'd Virginity,
The chaste concealeme^t of those fruits close hidden,
Which to unchaste affections are forbidden;
It is the Casket or the Cabinet,
Where Nature has her chiefest Jewels set:
For whatsoever men toil for, far and nere,
By sea or land, with danger, cost, and fear,
Wars wrinkled brow, and the smooth face of peace
Are both to serve the smock, and it is increase.
The greatest Kings, and wisest Counselors,
Stout Soldiers, and most sage Philosophers,
The welthieft Merchants, and Artificers,
Pleibeians, and Plow-toyling laborers,
All these degrees, and more have wooed and praid,
And always to the smock their tributes paid.
Besides, it is taken for a favor great,
(When one his mistress kindly does entreat)
He holds these words as Jewels dropped from her.
You first shall do as does my Smock sweet Sir.
This Theme of smock is very large and wide,
And might (in verse) be further amplifide:
But I think best a speedy end to make,
Lest for a smel-smocke some should me mistake:
I first began it with a flirt or flout,
And ending, with a mock, I will go out.
The Anagram of SMOCK I find is MOCKES,
And I conclude a pox of all strait smockes.
Now up aloft I mount unto the Russe,
Which into foolish mortals pride does pusse:
Yet Ruffes antiquity is here but small,
Within this eighty years, not one at all,
For the eighth Henry, (as I understand)
Was the first King that ever wore a Band,
And but a falling Band, plain with a hem,
All other people knew no use of them,
Yet imitation in small time began,
To grow, that it the Kingdom ouer-ran:
The little falling-bands encreac'd to Ruffes,
Ruffes (growing great) were waited on by Cuffes,
And though our frailties should awake our care,
We make our Ruffes as careless as we are:
Our Ruffes unto our faults compare I may,
Both careless, and grown greater every day.
A Spaniards Ruff in follio, large and wide,
Is th'abstract of ambitions boundless pride.
For roundnesse it is the Emblem, as you see,
Of the terrestrial Globes rotunditie,
And all the world is like a Ruff to Spain,
Which does encircle his aspiring brain,
And his unbounded pride does still persist,
To have it set, and poaked as he list.
The sets to Organ-pipes, compare I can,
Becausethey do offend the Paritan,
Whose zeal does call it superstition,
And Badges of the Beast of Babylon.
Ruffes only at the first were in request,
With such as of ability were best:
But now the plain, the stich'd, the laced, and shagge,
Are at all prices worn by tagge, and Ragge.
So Spain (who all the world would wear) shall see,
Like Ruffes, the world from him shall seat'red be.
As for the Cuffe it is pretily encreac'd,
(Since it began, two hand fulls at the leaft)
At first 'twas but a girdle foe the wrist,
Or a small circle to enclose the fist.
Which has by little and by little crept,
And from the wrist unto the elboe leap't,
Which does resemble sawey persons well:
For give a Knave an inch, he will take an ell.
Ruffes are to Cuffes, as 'twere the breading mothers,
And Cuffes are twins in pride, or two proud brothers.
So to conclude, Pride wears them for abuse,
Humalitie, for ornament and use,
A Nightcap is a garment of high state,
Which in captivity does captines ^
The brain, the reason, wit, and sense and all,
And every night does bear sway capital.
And as the horn above the head is worn,
So is the Nightcap worn above the horn,
And is a Sconce or Block-house for the head,
Wherein much matter is considered,
And therefore (when too much we suck the tap)
It Is truly called a considering Cap.
By day it waits on Agues, Plurisies,
Consumptions and all other malladies,
A day worn Nightcap, in our Commonwealth,
Does show the wearer is not well in health:
Yet some men's folly makes my muse so smile,
When for a kib'd heel, broken shin, or bile,
Seab'd hams, cut fingers, or a little s^ar^
A^ royne Bumpe, or a Goose from Winchester,
When I see Night-caps worn for these poor uses,
It makes my worship laugh at their abuses.
Thus is a Nightcap most officious,
A Captain, Captrous, and Capritious,
And though unmarried young men may forbear ^^^
Yet age, and wedlock makes a man to wear it.
A Handkerchiefe may well be called in brief,
Both a perpetual leacher, and a thief,
About the lips it is kissing, good and ill,
Or else it is diuing in the pocket still,
As far as from the pocket to the mouth,
So is it is pilgrimage with age or youth.
At Christining-banquets and at funerals,
At weddings (Comfit-makers festiuals)
A Handkerchiefe does filch most manifold,
And sharke and steal as much as it can hold.
It Is soft, and gentle, yet this I admire at,
At sweet meats it is a tyrant, and a pyrat.
Moreover it is a Handkerchiefes high place,
To be a Scauenger unto the face,
To cleanse it clean from sweat and excrements,
Which (not avoided) were unsavory scents;
And in our griefs it is a trusty friend,
For in our sorrow it does comfort lend:
It does partake our sighs, our plaints and fears,
Receives our sobs, and wipes away our tears.
Thus of our good and bad it bears a share,
A friend in mirth a comforter in care.
Yet I have often known unto my cost,
A Handkerchiefe is quickly found, and lost.
Like love where true affection has no ground,
So is it slightly lost, and lightly found;
But be it ten times lost, this right I Will do it,
The fault is his or hers that should look to it.
Should I of every sort of Linen write,
That serves us at our need, both day and night,
Days, months and years, I in this Theme might spend
And in my life time scarcely make an end.
Let it suffice that when it is fretted out,
And that a cloth is worn into a clout,
Which though it be but thin and poor in shape,
A Surgeon into lint the same will scrape,
Or rolls, or bolsters, or with plaster spread,
To dress and cure, all hurts from heel to head,
For gangrens, ulcers, or for wounds new hacked,
For cuts, and flashes, and for Coxcombs cracked.
Thus many a Gallant that dares stab and swagges,
And against a Justice lift his fist or dagger:
And being mad perhaps, and hot pot-shot,
A crazed Crown or broken-pate hoth got;
Then over him old Linen dominceres,
And (spite of steeth) it clouts him 'bout the cares,
Thus new or old, it has these good effects,
To cure our hurts, or cover our defects:
And when it selfe's past help, with age and rending,
Quite past self mending, it is our means of me^ding.
The flint and steel will strike bright sparkling fite.
But how can we have fire at our desire,
Except old Linen be to tinder burned,
Which by the steel and flint to fire is turned?
^^^ all clean Linen that a Laundresse washes,
^^^ Muse has worn to clowts, or turned to ashes.
and there is the end on it. Now I must pursue,
The old consumed) how to purchase new.
^ow of the lovely Laundresse, whose clean trade,
^^th' only cause that Linnen's cleanely made:
^^ing is on two extremes relying,
^^^ ever wetting, or she is ever drying.
^^^ all men dye to live, and live to dye,
^^^ does she dry to wash, and wash to dry.
^^^ runs like Luna in her circled sphere,
^^^ perpetual motion she does steare.
^^^ course in compass round and endless still,
Such like a horse that labors in a mill:
^o show more plain how she her work does, frame,
^^^ Lianen's foul ever she does wash the same:
^^^ washing further in her course she marches,
^^^ wrings, she folds she pleits, she smoothes, she starches
^^^ stiffens, poakes, and sets and dryes again,
and foldes: thus end of pain begins her pain.
^^d like a whirligigge or lenten Top,
^^a most plenteous spring, that still does drop.
^^^ Soddes unto the Sea I may compare,
The Reake or smock, the wind; the fishes Linen are,
^he Laundresse fishes, foaming froth does lighten,
^he whilst her tongue does thunder and affrighten,
The total is a tempest full of chiding,
That no man in the house has quiet by ding.
^^^ L^ndresses are resty and full of wroth,
^hen they are lathering in their bumble broth,
^^^ can I blame them, though they brawle and talk,
^en there have naught to do, they may go walk:
^^^ commonly their work this profit brings,
The good-wife washes, and her husband wrings.
^^^ though my verse thus merrily does stray,
^^^ give the Laundresse still her due I pray:
What were the painful Spinner, or the Weauer,
^^^ for her labor, and her good endeavor,
What were the function of the Linen Draperye,
^^^ Sempsters admirable skill in Naperye?
They all might turn and wind, and live by loss,
^^^ that the Laundresse gives their work a gloss,
^^^ that we use to wear, it is plain,
The Laundresse labor gives it grace and gain,
Without her it is most loathsome in distaste,
and only by her pains and toil it is graced,
^^^ is the ornamentall Instrument,
That makes it tastefull to the sight and scent:
^^^ you man-monsters, monstrous Linen soylers,
^^^ Shirt polluting tyrants, you sheets spoylers,
^^tious rude Ruffe-rending raggamentoyes
^^^ tragma Troynouantoyes
Remember that your Lanndresse pains is great,
Whose labors only keep you sweet and neat:
Consider this, that here is writ, or said,
And pay her, (not as was the Sculler paid)
Call not your Laundresse flut or slabb'ring queen,
It is her slabb'ring that does keep thee clean,
Nor call her not Drye-washer in disgrace,
For fear she cast the suddes into thy face:
By her thy Linnen's sweet and cleanely dressed,
Else thou would stink above ground like a beast.
There is a bird which men Kings fisher call,
Which in foul weather has no joy at all,
Or scarce abroad into the air does peep,
But in her melancholy nest does keep:
Till Tyians glory from the burnished East,
Rich Bridegroome-like in gold and purple dressed,
Guilds, and enamels mountains, woods, and hills,
And the rotundious Globe with splendour fills,
In these brave Buksome merry Halcion days,
Then this most bewtcou^ bird her plumes displaies:
So does a Laundresse, when the Sun does hide
His head, when skies weep rain and thunder chide,
When powting, lowering, slauering sleete and snow,
From foggy Austers blustering jaws does blow,
Then she in moody melancholy sittes,
And sighing, vents her grief by girds and sittes:
Her liquid Linen piteous pickled lies,
For which she lowres and powts as does the skies,
But when bright Phoebus makes Aurora blush,
And roabes the welkin with a purple flush,
When mourning clouds have wasted all their tears,
And welcome weather fair and dry appears,
Then to the hedge amain the Laundresse ambles,
In weeds of penance clothing briars and brambles,
Like a Commaundresse, using martial Laws,
She strikes, she poakes and thrusts, she hangs and draws,
She stiffens stiffly, she both opes and shuts,
She sets, and out she pulles, and in she puts.
Not caring much if wind blow low or hye,
Whilst drunkards thirst for drink, she thirsts to dry.
Thus having showed the Laundresse praise and pain,
How end of work begins her work again:
I hope amongst them they will all conclude,
Not to requite me with ingratitude:
But as an Act they will friendly have decreed,
I never shall want Clean Linen at my need.
Whilst to their own contentments I commend them,
And wish fair drying weather may attend them.
If thankefully you take this work of mine,
Hereafter I will cause the muses nine,
To help me add, to what seems here diminished,
So Vale Tot^, here my Book is FINISHED.
The principal occasions why this merry Poem was written.
IT was at that time that the worlds terror, and wars Thunderbolt Allaricke
King of the Goths wasted Italy, sacked Rome, and stooke all the Kingdoms of
the earth into a Feuertertian, when there was inhabiting in the Dukedom of
Tuscanye a valiant Captain named Catso, descended from the Royal house of
Frigus the first King of the Fridgians. This Catso being driven to his shifts
in these robustuous bickerings of the Goths, fled for safety to the I Will of
Sardinia, where for his good parts and free behavior, he was entertained by
the most beautiful Madam Meretricia, the delightful daughter and sole heir
of Baloclitus King of Sardis, yet although his place was chief Gentleman of
the Bid-Chamber, his high pitched resolution was elevated and erected, for
travel and hotter services: So (with much grief to the Lady) he took his
leave, and sailing through the straits of Gibralter, and the gulphe of Madye
Lane, he past the Cape Bona Esperance, as far as China, where he staid
certain days at Iappan: then he determined to progress it by land, and
passing by the great City of Tarsus in Idumea, by long iourneys he came to
Gallicia, where nere to Greyne he was in hot service, and came off somewhat
scortch'd, with fire works in a mine: passing from thence he came into France
where he was well wel-com'd at Breast, and at the Town of Deipe, was made
great provision for his coming; but for some reasons he would never come
there: In brief, after he had approved himself a hot, valiant, and
aduenturous Soldier abroad, and a peacemaker a^^^ home, he came into
Ireland, where at Dubbl^ he was struck lame; but recovering ne^ strength and
courage, he snip'd himself for England, landed at West-Chester, whence taking
pofte toward London, he lodged at ^^^ ley in the hole, in his way, at last
being come to the City, he made many merry and mad vageries betwixt
Turnebull-street and Burnt-wood spending freely, and faring deliciously; having
a stiff stomach to digest all dishes, except Winchester Geese, and Newmarket
Turkies ^^^ thus with much danger and difficulty having traveled farther then
ever man saw, and passed his time with much love amongst Ladies and
Gentlewomen, having been a great with stander of many desperate oppositions,
and ^^^ rare Musician for his long practice in Prickesong. He again past the
Sea in a Frigget to Constantinople, where he fell into a moody melancholy
(like Tymon of Athens) and scorned to stand at any time, although he was
charged in the name of the Graund Signior. This Gallant having been all his
time a great vser, wearer, and taker up of Napery, did most bountifully
bequeath to any Poet that would write a Poem in the praise of Clean Linen,
as many shirts of the purest Holland as might be washed in Hellicon, and dried
on the two topt hill of Parnassus. To perform whose command, and receive the
bequeathed Legacy, I undertook this great task, and performed it accordingly.

FINIS.
THE TRVE CAUSE OF THE WATERMENS Suit concerning Players, and the reasons that
their Playing on London side is their extreme hindrances. With a Relation how
far that suit was proceeded in, and the occasions that it was not effected.
THe occasions that has moved me to write this Pamphlet are many, and
forcible, and the Attempt in wriring it aduenturous and full of danger, for as
on the one side I doubt not but with truth to stop the mouths of Ignorance and
Malice that have and do daily scandalize me (and withal I know I shall
purchase a general thanks from all honest men of my Company) so I am assured
to gain the hatred of some that love me well, and I affect them no worse,
only for my plain truth and discharging my conscience: But fall back, fall
edge, come what can come, I am resolved and without fear or flattery, thus I
begin.

In the month of January last 1613. there was a motion made by some of the
better sort of the company of Watermen, that it were necessary for the relief
of such a decayed multitude to petition to his Majesty, that the Players might
not have a playhouse in London or in Middlesex, within four miles of the City
on that side of the Thames. Now this request may seem harsh and not well to
be disgested by the Players and their Apendixes. But the reasons that moved us
unto it, being claritably considered, makes the suite not only seem
reasonable, but past seeming most necessary to be sued for, and tolerable to
be granted.

Out petition being written to purpose aforesaid, I was selected by my company
to deliver it to his Majesty and follow the business, which I did with that
care and integrity, that I am assured none can justly tax me with the
contrary. I did ride twice to Theobalds, once to Newmarket, and twice to
Roystone, before I could get a reference upon my petition. I had to bear my
charge, of my company first and last, seven pound two shillings, which
horshire, horse meat, and man's meat brought to a consumption; besides I wrote
several petitions to most of the Right Honorable Lords of his Majesty's Privy
Counsel, and I found them all compassionately affected to the necessity of our
cause.

First, I did briefly declare part of the services that Watermen had done in
Queen Elizabeth's reign, of famous memory, in the voyage to Portingale, with
the Right Honorable and never to be forgotten Earl of Essex; then after that,
how it pleased God (in that great deliverance in the year 1588.) to make
Watermen good serviceable instruments, with their loss of lives and limbs to
defend their Prince and Country. Moreover, many of them served with Sir Francis
Drake, Sir John Hawkins, Sir Martin Frobusher, and others: besides in Cales
action, the Island voyage, in Ireland, in the Lowcuntryes, and in the narrow
Seas they have been, (as in duty they are bound) at continual command, so
that every Summer 1500. or 2000. of them were employed to the places asoresaid,
having but nine shillings four pence the month a piece for their pay, and yet
were they ab^e then to set themselves out like men, with shift of Apparel,
linen and woollen, and forbear charging of their Prince for their pay
sometimes six months, nine months, twelve months, sometimes more, for then
there were so few Watermen and the one half of them being at Sea, those that
staid at home had as much work as they would do.

Afterward the Players began to play on the Bank-side and to leave playing in
London and Middlesex (for the most part) then there went such great concourse
of people by water, that the small number of watermen remaining at home were not
able to carry them, by reason of the Court, the Terms, the Players, and other
employments, so that we were enforced and encouraged (hoping that this golden
stirring world would have lasted ever) to take and entertain men and boys:
which boys are grown men, and keepers of houses, many of them being
ouer-charged with families of Wife and Children, so that the number of
Watermen, and those that live and are maintained by them, and by the only
labor of the Oar and the Scull, betwixt the Bridge of Windsor and Grauesend,
cannot be fewer then forty thousand; the cause of the greater half of which
multitude, has been the Players playing on the Banke-side, for I have known
three Companies besides the Beare-bayting, at once there; to wit, the Globe,
the Rose, and the Swan. And it is an infallible truth, that had they never
played there it had been better for Watermen by the one half of their
living, for the Company is increased more then half by their means of playing
there in former times.

And now it has pleased God in this peaceful time, that there is no imployme^t
at the sea, as it has been accustomed, so that all those great numbers of men
remains at home; and the Players have all (except the Kings men) left their
usual residency on the Banke-side, and do play in Middlesex far remote from
the Thames, so that every day in the week they do draw unto them three or
four thousand people, that were used to spend their moneys by water, (to the
relief of so many thousands of poor people, which by Players former playing
on the Banke-side) are increased, so that oft-times a poor man that has five
or six children, does give good attendance to his labor all day, and at night
(perhaps) ath^ not gotten a Groat to relieve himself, his wife and family.

This was the effect and scope of our petition, though here I have declared it
more at large, to which his Majesty graciously granted me a^reference to his
commissioners for suites, who then were the Right honorable Sir Julius Caesar,
Sir Thomas Parray, Knights, the Right Worshipful Sir Francis Bacon then the
Kings Atturny general, Sir Henry Mountague his Majesty's Sergant at Law, Sir
Walter Cope, Master George Caluert, one of the Clerks of his Majesty's privy
Counsel, and Baron Southerton, one of the Barons of the Kings Exchequer: these
Honorable and Worshipful persons I did often folicite, by petitions, by friends,
and by mine own industrious importunity, so that in the end when our cause was
heard, we found them generally affected to the suit we prosecuted.

His Maiestes Players did exhibit a petition against us, in which they said,
that our suit was unreasonable, and that we might as justly remove the
Exchange, the walks in Paul's, or Moorefields to the Bank-side for our profits,
as to confine them; but our extremities and cause being iudiciously pondered by
the Honorable and Worshipful Commissioners, Sir Francis Bacon very worthily
said that so far forth as the Public weal was to be regarded before
pastimes, or a serviceable decaying multitude before a handful of particular
men, or profit before pleasure, so far was our suite to be preferred before
theirs. Whereupon the Players did appeal to the Lord Chamberlain, which was
then the Earl of Sommerset who stood well affected to us, having been moved
before in the business by Master Samuel Goldsmith an especial friend of mine,
and a Gentleman that my self and all the rest of my poor company in general,
are generally beholden, and deeply engaged unto; for of his own free will to
his cost and charge, we must with thankfulness acknowledge he has been and
is continually our worthy friend. Who seeing the wants of such numbers of us,
^^hath often neglected his own urgent and profitable affairs, spending his
time and coyn^^ any honest occasion that might profit us. Th^s much I thought
good to insert in the ^ay of thankfulness, because of all vices, ingratitude
is most hateful.

The Commissioners did appoint me to ^^me on the next day that they sat
again, and that then the Players and we should know their determinations
concerning our businesses: but before the day came, Sir Walter Cipe died, and
Sir Julius Caesar being chief Commissioner was made master of the Rolls, by
which means the Commission was dissol'd, and we never yet had further hearing.
Thus f^^re did I proceed in this thanklesse suite; and because it was not
effected, some of my com^^^y partly through malice or ignorance, or ^oth, have
reported that I took bribes of the Players to let the suit fall, and that to
that purpose I had a supper with them at the Cardinals Hat on the Banke-side,
and that if I ^^d dealt well with my Company, and done as I might have done,
then all had been as they would have had it.

These and more the like such pretty aspersions, the outcast rubbish of my
Company has very liberally, unmannerly and ingratefully bestowed upon me,
whereby my credit ^^^ been blemished the good opinion which many held of me
lost, my name abused, and I ^ common reproach, a scorn, and bye-word, and
bayting-stocke to the poisonous teeth of en^^^y and slander.

But I doubt not but what is before said will satisfy any well disposed or
honest mind, and for the rest (if there be any such) as I found them ignorant
knaves, so I leave them unthankful villanes. And I will regard such Vipers and
their slander so little, that their malice shall not make me give over to do
service to my Company, by any honest lawful means, my Trade (under God) is my
best friend, and though it be poor, I am sure the calling is honest,
therefore I will be an assistant in this suite, or any other that may be
available unto it; and howsoever we are slightly esteemed by some Giddy-headed
Corkbrains or Mushrom Painted Puckfoysts; yet the estate of this Kingdom
knows, that many of the meanest Scullers that Rows on the Thames, was, is, or
shall be if occasion serve, at command to do their Prince and Country more
service, then any of the Players shall be joined unto.

I must confess that there are many rude uncivil Fellows in our company, and
I would some Doctor would purge the Thames of them: the reason whereof is, that
all men being Vicious, by consequence most Vice must be in the greatest
Companies, but Watermen are the greatest Company, therefore most abuses must
reign amongst Watermen; yet, (not to excuse them in any degree) let a man but
consider other trades and faculties of of higher account, and I am sure they
will come short in honesty, perhaps not of Watermen, but of the honest Vocation
of a Waterman.

For if he use his labor no otherwise then he ought, which is to carry the
Kings Leidge people carefully, and to land them safely, to take his due
thankfully without murmuring or doing injury, then I say, that that Waterman
may feed upon the labors of his hands with a better Conscience, and sleep
with a quieter spirit then many of our furre-gownd mony-mongers that are
accounted good commonwealths men: but if a railing knave do chance to abuse
his Fare, either in words or deeds, (as indeed we have too many such) what
reason is it, that for the wrong that one, two, or more does commit, that all
the rest of the whole Company shall be scandalized for it. If a Mercer, a
Grocer, a Gold smith, or any other of the best Trades, be a Traitor, a Thief,
or a Debosht Drunkard, it were impudent ignorance for the Vices of a few, that
all the rest of the function should be reproch'd: I will make no odious
comparisons, but I am persuaded that there are as many honest men of our
company as of any other, such as do make a conscience of what they do such as
will not wrong others though it might be gainful to themselves: Such who are
both Religious and Charitable, and whose greatest care is to live in Gods
fear, that they may die in his favor: And for those that are unruly,
ignorant, and brutish, there is no company has sharper Laws, or more severely
executed, as the Counters can testify once a week: Little ease can witness
often: The whip, and the Whipper, like a roaring devil does many times affirm
the naked truth, and banishment from the River of Thames for ever, now and then
cuts off a bad member. Besides, Fines and Forfeitures are laid upon the heads
of petty offenders, that few or none escapes unpunished if their faults be
known: If the gout be in a man's toe, all the body is grieved; if a finger ache,
the rest of the members has a share in the pain; but if many of the Joints
and members be putrifide, then the heart cannot choose but be crazed with ear,
if not wounded; so is it with our company, that the Abuses and Vices of the
worst inferior members as Graceless, Godless, Reprobates, are sometimes like
a Plague, infectious to their betters, and a daily heart-griefe to all honest
men, who are scandalized by their damnable demeanors. But all they do or can
do, is nothing to the defaming of the Company, for it were very absurd because
one in his drink has killed a man, to impute the fault to the wine or the
drink that he drank, when the blame lies in the drunkard that abused Gods
good Creatures in taking too much; so a Watermans trade is honest, necessary,
and not to be wanted, howsoever it is abused by misgouern'd uncivil
companions. If a Water-man would be false in his trade, I muse what falsehood he
could use, he has no false weights or measures to curtoll a man's passage, but
he will land a man for his money, and not bate him an inch of the place he is
appointed: His shop is not dark like a Wollen-Drapers on purpose, because the
buyer shall not see the coursnesse of the Cloth, or the falsenesse of the
Color: no, his work and ware is seen and known, and he vtters it with the
sweat of hi^ brows, the worst fault is, that like a Lawyer he will take more
then his see (if anybody will give it him) very thankfully, his bare fare he
will take willingly (upon necessity) but less then his fare, or many times
nothing, me thinks goes against stomach.

I have seen a Usurer (who has been ^^^ only for the grave these seven
years being more then half rotten with the Gowt, the Cough, and the Murre)
who has lost his conscience to get money, and perhaps, win damnation, who is
not able to go by land, and yet will not pay his Fare by water, but like the
picture of misery, will either beg his passage of some seruing-man, or bargain
with a Waterman to give him two pence for six penni, worth of labor, such I
have seen, and such there are too many, who if they were once buried, the
wheel of Time, would turn, and what they got unjustly by extortion,
oppression, and grinding the faces of the poor, what they have uncharitably
pinched in keeping back the laborers hyre, their Sons or heirs perhaps will
consume in Law who shall possess most of that ill gotten goods, or else Drink
it, Dice it, Drab it, Revel and ruffle it, till al is gone; and as their
fathers before them made others to rot in prison, so their prodigal Sons are
holed in some loathsome Iayle, being lowzy, lodging on the boords, and live
upon the Box and the Almes-basket.

Moreover, too many there are that pass the bounds of liberality, and spend
most prodigally on a Whore, on (the devil of India) Tobacco; on the
superfluous Quarts and Pintes of the blood of Bacchus (Sack and Claret) Spanish
and French, on unlawful Games, and in a word, on a thousand vanities, they will
carelessly and beyond expectation cast away their cash: but upon a Water-man,
that has rowed till his heart ache, and sweats till he has not a dry thread
about him, the Gentlemen's bounty is asleep, and he will pay him by the
Statute, or if he give him two pence more, he has done a huge work beyond
the merit of Suttons Hospital.

I my self have often met with a Roaring boy (or one of the cursed crew) that
has had nothing about him but a Satin outside to cover ^^^ his knavery, and
that none of his own ^^ther witness his Mercer and his Tailor: ^^^ this
Gallant must be shipped in a pair of ^^^ at least: but his gay slop has no
soo^ ^^^ the Cushions, but with a volley of ^^^ coynd outlies) newly brought
from hell ^^^ Bermoodoes by the Ghost of a Knight ^^^ the poft) he has never
left Roaring, row, ^^^, row, a pox on you row, (as if his punke ^^ld stay too
long for his pestiferous per^ ^^^ and when his scuruinesse is landed where ^^^
leases, he has told me^ I must wait on ^^^ and he, will return to me
presently, ^^^ I shall carry him back again, and be ^^d all together: then
have I attended five ^^ six hours (like John and Noakes) for nothing, ^^^ my
cheating sharke having neither money ^^^ honesty, has never come at me, but
^^^ some other pair of stayres, and in the ^^^ fashion coozened another
Water-man ^^^ his Boat-hire.

We must, and do with thankfulness con^^^ ^^^ that the Nobility, Gentry, and
all others ^^^ ^^^ ^^ of this Kingdom, have ho^^^ ^^^ worthy and charitable
considerations of ^^^ want of means, and multitude of men; ^^^ they do know
that house rent and victu^^^ ^^^ are at four times the rate which it was ^^^
when the Statute was made in Queen Ma^^^ ^^^ ^^ for our fares, and as the
price of ^^ thing is raised (except to ^^^^^mens labors) ^^^ do they in
conscience very liberally raise ^^^ hires accordingly.

And as before I have written out grade is^^^ ^^^ ^^ useful and necessary,
both for the Kings ^ruice and the Commons commodity, that it ^^^ not to be (or
cannot be wanted and by how ^^^ the more a, Water-man is near to his ^^esty,
to the Queens Majesty, to the Prin^es ^^ Highness, to the Nobility; the
Gentry, ^^^ the best of the Commonaity of this King^ome, ^^^ and sometimes of
foreign Nations, so ^^ch the ^^^^^ ^ight Watermen to behave ^^emselues
honestly, and soberly in their ^^^ ^^^ ^here are many better trades and
qua^ties ^^^ that scarce the best of their Companies ^^^^ their ^^ues ^^^^ do
come so often and so ^^^ ^^^ presence of Mai^^^ and Nobility as we do. (I
write not to disparrage any, nor with boasting to puff up our selves) none
comes nearer, except the Barber, and long and often may he come) or the
Physicion and Surgeon, (which God grant they may be ever needless:) but a
Water-man many times has his Sovereign by the hand, to stay him in and out
the Barge, where there is not above half an inch betwixt life and death, the
Barge being then the royal Court and being but a door betwixt the King and
them, they are at that time Gentlemen of the privy Chamber, or Yeomen of the
Guard at least.

And thus much I am bold to insert for my self, and many more of my company
that I know, that we never exacted money wrongfully, or contended with any of
the Kings Leidge people for more then they themselves would give with any
reason, or gave any one abusiue or irreverent speeches if they would not go
with us: for we know that men are free to buy their cloth at what Drapers they
please, or their stuffes at which Mercers they will, what Tailor they list make
their garments, and what Cook they l^ke may dress their meat: and so forth of
all f^^^^ions every man is free to make his choy^e; and so amongst Watermen,
men may take whom they please, because they are s^ound to none, he that goes
with me shall have my labor, and I am in hope to have his money^ he that will
not go^ with me goes with another, and I have the more ease the while, he does
me no wrong in not going with me, and I will do ^^^^ injury for going from ^^^
this is my resolution, and a number more of my Company, and those that are
otherwise minded ^^^ all my heart that God will be pleased to ^^^ them or else
that the Hangman may have authority to end them.

But to return to the purpose (from which I have too long digrest) The Players
are men that I generally love, and wish well unto and to their quality, and I
do not know any of them but are my friends, and wish as much to me: and
howsoever the matter falls out, whether they play or not play I thank God, I
am able to live as well as another, either with them or without them: But my
love is such unto them that whereas they do play but once a day, I could be
content they should play twice or thrice a day, so it were not in such places
as does undo so many thousands of poor people; for as it is, it were much
better for us that they played no where. And seeing so triuiall a cause as this
would be scar^e incommodious to any, and more commodious to us then the four
Terms in the year, seeing our necessities so great, and our relief
harmless to any, seeing the use of us expedient, if occasions serve abroad or
at home, and our unableness to set our selves to sea, by reason of ou^ want;
our hope is that we shall be as much ^eckoned of as horses, for horses have
meat, drink, and lodging, though they be but seldom ridden; and many of them
have a warm footcloth, when thousand of serviceable men are like to famish and
star^^ through want and nakedness.

As concerning our endeauours to ^^moue the shelues and sands in the Thames
(which are a great ^^noyance to the River, and hu^^^ full to the City,) As his
Majesty has com^manded, and the Right Honorable the Lo^^ Mayor and the rest
of his worshipful brethren shall direct, we shall with all willingness do^
our duties we doubt not both to the King Majesty's contentment; the good of the
City and the good report of our selves.

Thus (becuase the truth shows best being naked) I have plainly set down how
far proceeded in my suite, how it was broken of^ what thanks I have for my
pains. The necessity of the cause that made me go about ^^^ it. The abuses I
had because it took no effect (which is the chief cause why I wrote thi^
Pamphlet to justify my self.) At these thing I hope the Judicious
Understander will judge accordingly, always esteeming me a Loyal over of my
Country; and my Company.

FINIS.
Wit and Mirth: CHARGEABLY COLLECTED OVT OF TAVERNS, ORDINARIES, Innes, Bowling
Greenes and Allies, Alehouses, Tobacco Shops, Highwayes, and Water passages.
Made vp^ and ^^^ ^^ Clinohes, ^ulls, Quirkes, Yerkes ^garbled at the requ^^ of
old ^^^n GA^^^^ Gh^^
DEDICATED To the truly Loyal hearted, learned, well-accomplished Gentleman,
M^^ter ^^^
SIR,
BEing enjoined by the Ghost or ^^^ beloved) to collect, gleant, or gather a
bundle or trusse of Mirth, and for his ^^^ bestrow the stage of the melancholy
world with it; and withal to present it to some ^^ generous spirit, who was
old John's friend; I thought upon many to whom I might have ^^^ my Dedication,
who were both Royal, Honorable, Worshipful, and all well-affected to^^rds
him. As to mention one for all, that Jewel of the world, and richest Iem of
her sex, that Magazine of the two inestimable Jewels, Patience and Fortitude;
to that illustrious, ^^relesse Princess I might have recommended it, to whose
service, and for whose happiness, his life and best endeauours, with his
prayers and implorations at his death, were vnfainealy ^^^^rated. But my
manners conceiving the subject of this Book, of altogether to triuiall a ^^^
to be sheltred under the shadow of the wings of transcendent and admired
Majesty; ^^^ so many steps down the stairs with my invention, where by good
fortune I met with ^^^ whom I knew did love that old honest mirror of mirth,
deceased; and whom the world ^^^ter knows, are, a true deunted friend to honest
harmless mirth, and laudable recreation.

^^ therefore entreat you, that (when your more serious affairs will permit)
you would be^^ ^^^ the looking upon these my poor and beggarly wardrobe of
witty Jests, whom I dare not ^^^ Apothegmes.

And because I had many of them by relation and hearsay, I am in doubt that
some of them ^^^ be in print in some other Authors, which I do assure you is
more then I do know; which ^^ ^^ be so, I pray you but to conniue or
tolerate, and let the Authors make twice as bold with ^^ at any time.

Thus wishing every one to mend one, whereby the rent and torn garments of
Threadbare ^^^ may be well and merrily patched and repaired, craving your
pardon, with my best wishes, ^^^aine

Yours ever in the best of my best studies hereof, JOHN TAILOR.

JOHN GARRETS GHOST.
^He doors and windows
of the Heavens were barred,
And Nights black Curtain,
like an E^on, Robe,
From Earth did all Celestial light discard,
And in sad darkness clad the ample Globe;
Dead midnight came, the Cats' began catterwaule,
The time when Ghosts and Goblings walk about;
^^^ Owls shrick, and dismal Dogs do bawle,
While^ conscience clear securely sleeps it out.
At such a time I sleeping in my bed,
A ^^^^ strange appeared unto my ^ight,
^^^zement all my senses over spread,
And filled me full with terror and afright.
A merry grave aspect me thought he had,
And one he seemed that I had often seen:
Yet was he in such uncouth shape yclad,
That what he was, I could not wistly ween.
His cloak was Sack, but not the Sack of Spain,
Canara, Mallago, or sprightfull Shery,
But made of Sackcloth, such as bears the grain,
Good salt, and coals, which makes the Porters weary;
Laced round about with platted wheaten straw,
For which he nothing to the Silke-man owed;
A wearing never mentioned in the Law,
And yet far off, like good gold lace it showed.
Lined was his mantle with good Essex plush,
Pyde Calves skins, or Veale satin, which you will
It never was worn threedbare with a brush,
I (naturally) saved the labor still.
A h^t like Grantham steeple, for the crown
Or Piramide was large in altitude:
With frugallbrim, whereby he still was known
From other men amongst a multitude.
A Princes shoe, he for a jewel wore,
Two ribbonds, and a feather in his beauer,
Which shape me thought I often had seen before,
Yet out of knowledge where, as't had bin never.
He in his hand a flaming torch did hold,
(And as he nearer did approach to me)
My hayre' began stand on end, fear struck me cold;
Fear not, I am John Garrets ghost, quoth he,
I come to rowze thy dull and lazy Muse
From idleness, from Lethe's hateful lake:
And therefore stand upon no vain excuse,
But rise, and to thy tools thy self betake.
Remember me, although my carcass rot,
Write of me, to me, call me Fool or Iester.
But yet I pray thee ( Tailor) rank me not,
Among those knaves that do the world bepester,
Thou wrot'st of great O tool and Coriat,
Of brave Sir Thomas Parsons, Knight o'th Sun,
And Archy has thy verse to glory at,
And yet for me thou naught ha^t ever done.
Write that in Ireland, I in Mars his train,
Long time did under noble Norris serve:
Where (as I could) I stood'gainst Pope and Spain,
Whilst some were slain, and some with want did starve
Where shot, and wounds, and knocks, I gave and took,
Until at last half maimed as I was,
A man decrepit, I those wars forsook,
And (with my Pass) did to my Country pass.
Where getting health, I then shook hands with death,
And to the Court I often made resort.
Where Englands mighty Queen Elizabeth
Allowed me entertainment for disport.
Then by the foretop did I take old time:
Then were not half so many fools as now;
Then was my harvest, and my only prime,
My purse receiving what my wit did plow.
Then in such compass I my jests would hold,
That though I gave a man a gird or twain,
All his revenge would be to give me gold,
With commendations of my nimble ^raine.
Thus lived I till that gracious Queen deceast,
Who was succeeded by a famous King:
In whose blessed Sons reign (I with years oppressed)
Me to my grave, sickness and death did bring.
And now (kind Jack) thou see my ayrie form,
Has shaken off her Iayle of flesh, and bone,
Whilst they remain the feast of many a worm,
My better part does visit thee alone.
And as between us still, our good requests,
Thou never me, I never thee denied:
So for my sake collect some merry jests,
Whereby sad time may be with mirth supplied.
And when it is written, find some good man forth,
One (as thou think) was when I lived my friend:
And though thy lines may be but little worth,
Yet unto him my duty recommend.
So farewell Jack, dame Luna' gins to rise,
The twinkling stars begin to borrow light:
Remember this my suit, I thee advise,
And so once more good honest Jack good night.
With that more swifter then a shaft from bow,
He cut and curried through the empty air,
Whilst I amazed with fear, as could as snow,
Straight felt my spirits quickly to repair.
And though I found it but a dream indeed,
Yet for his sake of whom I dreamed then,
I left my bed, and clothed my self with speed,
And presently betook me to my pen:
Clear was the morn, and Phoebus lent me light,
And (as it follows) I began to write.
WIT AND MIRTH.
(1)
MY self carried an old fellow by water, that had wealth enough to be Deputy of
the Ward, and wit sufficient for a Scauenger; the water being somewhat rough,
hoe was much afraid, and (in stead of saying his prayers,) he threatened me,
that if I did drown him, he would spend a hundred pound, but he would see me
hanged for it; I desired him to be quiet and fear nothing, and so in little
space I landed him at the Beans College on the Bank-side ^^^^s Paris Garden.)
Well (said he) I am glad I am off the water, for if the Boat had miscariad, I
could have swum no more then a Goose.

(2)
AN old Painter (at the repairing of a Church) was writing sentences of
Scripture upon the walls, by chance a friend of mine came into the Church, and
reading them, perceived much false English: Old man, said my friend, Why do
you not write true English? Alas Si^^ (quoth the Painter) they are poor sample
people in this Parish, and they will not go to the cost of it.

(3)
TWo men being sat at a Table, one against the other: the one of them having a
cup in has hand drank to the other, saying, Here Op^^^ I will drink to you:
Opposite, said the other (being angry) what is that, I would not have thee put
any of thy nicknames upon me; for thou shall well know that I am no more
opposite then thy self, or the skin between thy brows?

(4)
A Wealthy Monsieur in France (having profound revenues, and a shallow brain)
was told by his man that he did continually gape in his sleep: at which he was
angry with his man saying, he would not believe it: his man varified it to be
true; his Master said that he would never, believe any that told him so except
(quoth he) I chance to see it ^^^^ mine own eyes: and therefore I will ^^^ a
great Looking-glass hanged at my ^^^^ ^eet for the purpose, to try whether
thou art a lying knave or not.

(5)
THe said Monsieur commanded his man to buy him a great Hat with a button in
the ^rim to button it up behind: his man bought him one and brought him, he put
it on his head with the button before, which when he looked ^^ the glass and
saw, he was very angry, say^^^. ^^^ crossed untoward knave, did I not bid thee
buy a hat with the button to hold it up behind, and thou have brought me one
that turns up before: I command thee once more go thy ways, and buy me such
a one as I would have, whatsoever it cost me.

(6)
THe same Gallant, as he traveled, would have a Goose to his supper; which
when she was roasted and brought to the Table, he said she stunke: not so, I
hope, said the Host, it cannot be, for I am suit she was alive since you came
into the house: That may be, quoth the Monsieur, but then I am sure that you
killed her when she was shiting, she would never stunke so else.

(7)
AN exceeding tall Gentlewoman was riding behind a very short little man, so
that the man's head reached no higher then her breast; which the aforesaid
Monsieur perceiving, said, Madam, you will ride a great deal better, if you
put your leg over that same pummell of your ^^^.

Another time he chanced to meet a Lady of his acquaintance, and asked her how
she did, and how her good husband fared; at which word she wept, saying, that
her Husband was in heaven; in heaven, quoth he, it is the first time that I
heard of it, and I am sorry for it with all my heart.

(8)
ONce the said Monsieur saw a fellow that had a Iack-Daw to sell: Sir, quoth
he, what will thou take for thy Daw? Monsieur (said the fellow) the price of my
Daw is two French Crowns. Wherefore, said the other, do thou ask so much
for him? the fellow replied, that the Daw could speak French, Italian,
Spanish, Dutch and Latin: all which tongues he will speak after he is a
little acquainted in your Lordships house: Well, quoth he, bring thy Daw in,
and there is thy money. In conclusion, Iack-Daw (after a month or five weeks
time) never spoke otherwise then his fathers speech Kaw, Kaw, whereat the
Monsieur said, that the Knave had cozened him of his money: but it is no great
matter there is no loss in it: for, quoth he, though my Daw do not speak, yet
I am in good hope that he thinks the more.

(9)
ANother time he commanded his man to buy some sweet thing to burn in his
Chamber, for (quoth he) my Chamber stinkes most odoriferously. His man brought
Frankincense in a paper; and as he was going for fire, his Master t^sted of
it, and finding it stick in his teeth, and relish very bitter, he called his
man cozening knave, that would bring him such bitter trash for his money; and
straightwayes commanded him to buy a pound of the best Sugar, and burn it
straight to sweeten and persume his Chamber.

(10)
THis Gallant in his youth was much addicted to dicing, and many times when he
had lost all his money, then he would pawn his cloak, and so go home
without either cloak or coin, which grieved the Lady his mother very much: for
remedy whereof, she caused all his doublets (of what stuff soever) to be made
with canuasse painted backs, whereon was fashioned two fools, which caused
the Gentleman ever after to keep his cloak on his back, for fear two of the
three should be discovered.

(11)
Will Backstead the Plaier cast his Chamber-lye out of his window in the
night, which chanced to light upon the heads of the watch passing by; who
angerly said, Who is that offers us this abuse? Why, quoth Will, who is there?
Who is here, said one of the pickled watchmen, we are the Watch. The Watch,
quoth William, why my friends you know, Harm watch, harm catch.

(12)
A Cardinal of Rome had a goodly fair house new built, but the broken
brickes, tiles, sand, lime, stones, and such rubbish as are commonly the
remnants of such buildings lay confusedly in heaps and scattered here and
there: The Cardinal demanded of his Suruayor wherefore the rubbish was not
conveyed away: The S^uruayor said, that he purposed to hyre an hundred Carts
for the purpose. The Cardinal replied, that the charge of Carts might be
saved, for a pit might be dug in the ground and bury it. My Lord, said the
Suruayor, I pray you what shall we do with the earth which we dig out of
the said pit? Why you horseson Coxcombe, said the Cardinal, can thou not dig
the pit deep enough, and bury all together.

(13)
A Poor Country may praying devoutly Superstitious before an old Image of S.
Loy, the Image suddenly fell down upon the poor man, and bruised his bones
sorely, that he could not stir abroad in a month after; in which space the
cheating Priests had set up a new Image: the Country man came to the Church
again, and kneeled a far off, to the new Image, saying, Although thou
smilest and look fair upon me, yet thy father played me such a knauish
pranke lately, that i will beware how I come too near thee, lest thou should
have any of thy Fathers unhappy qualities.

(14)
A Lady having been ten years in suite of Law, had a trial at last, where
the Judgment went on her side; whereupon she would presently express her joy
by inuiting some of her nearest tenants and neighbors to supper; amongst whom
was a plain downright country Yeoman, to whom the Lady said; Tenant, I
think I have tickled my Adversary now, though it were long first, I ^row he
will make no brags of his meddling with me. The honest Yeoman replied, Truly
Madam I did ever think what it would come to at last, for I knew when he first
meddled with your Ladyship, that he had a wrong Sow by the ear.

(15)
ONe asked a fellow what WestminsterHall was like; marry, quoth the other, it
is like a Butl^rs Box at Christmas among^^ gamesters, for whosoever loses, the
Box will be sure to be a winner.

(16)
A Proper Gentlewoman went to speak with a rich Mizer that had more Gowt then
good manners, at her taking leave he requested her to taste a cup of Cana^a:
She (contrary to his expectation) took him at his word, and thanked him. He
commanded ^^^^ Starueling his man to wash a glass, and still it to the
Gentlewoman. Honest Ieffrey filled a great glass about the bigness of two
Tay^^^^ thimbles, and gave it to his master, who list it to save cost, and gave
it to the Gentlewomen, saying that it was good Canara of six years old at the
least, to whom she answered, (seeing the quantity so small) sir, as you
requested me, I have tasted your wine, but I wonder that it should be so
little, being of such a great age.

(17)
A Soldier upon his march found a horseshooe, and stuck it at his girdle,
where passing through a wood, some of the enemy lay in ambush, and one of them
discharged his musket, and the shot by fortune light against the fellows
horse-shooe. A ha, quoth. he I perceive that little armor will serve a ^^^^
turn, if it be put on in the right place.

(18)
ONe being in a Chamber with his friend, looking out at a window, he saw one
riding on a horse in the street, said he, do you see that horse? yea quoth. then
other: then said he, you may swear you have seen the best horse in England:
how do you know that said the other? I know it well, said he, for it is my
horse, and I am sure that he is the best, and yet I dare swear that I have
one in my ^^^ble worth ten of him.

(19)
AN unhappy boy that kept his fathes sheep in the Country, did use to carry a
pair of Cards in his pocket, and meeting with boys a good as himselfe^, would
fall to Cards at the Cambrian game of whip-her-ginny, or English one and
thirty; at which sport, he would some days lose a sheep or two: for which if
his father corrected him, he (in revenge) would drive the sheep home at night
over a narrow bridge, where some of them falling besides the bridge, were
drowned in the swift brook. The old man being wearied with his ungracious
dealing, complained to a Justice, thinking to affright him from doing any more
the like. In brief, before the Justice the youth was brought, where (using
small reverence, and less manners) the Justice said to him, Sirrah, you are a
notable villain, you play at Cards, and lose your fathers theepe at one and
thirty. The Boy replied, that it was a lie. A lie quoth the Justice, you saucy
knave, do thou give me the lie? No, quoth. the boy I gave not you the lie, but
you told me the lie, for I never lost sheep at one and thirty; for when my
game was one and thirty I always won. Indeed, said the Justice, thou say
true, but I have another accusation against thee, which is, that you drive your
fathers sheep over a narrow bride, where some of them are oftentimes drowned:
That Is a lie too, quoth the boy, for those that go over the bridge are well
enough, it is only those that fall beside, which are drowned: Whereto the
Justice said to the boys father, Old man, thou have brought in two false
accusations against thy son, for he never lost sheep at one and thirty, nor
were there ever any drowned that went over the bridge.

(20) A Quiblet.
A Captain passing through a room where a woman was driving a buck of
clothes, but he thinking she had been brewing, saw a dish, and dipped some
small quantity of the Lie, which he supposing to be mault-wort, drank up, and
presently began to swear, spit, spatter, and spaule: the woman asked him what
he ayled, he told her, and called her some scuruy names, saying, he had
swallowed Lie; Nay, then I cannot blame you to be angry, for you being a
Souidier and a Captain, it must needs trouble your stomach to swallow the Lie.

(21)
A Country fellow (that had not walked much in streets that were paued) came to
London, where a dog came suddenly out of a house, and furiously ran at him the
fellow stooped to take up a stone to cast at the Dog, and finding them all fast
rammed or paued in the ground; quoth he, what strange Country am I in, where
the people tie up the stones, and let the dogs loose.

(22)
AN honest Mayor of a Town, being all Mercy and no Justice, loving ease and
quietness, and unwilling to commit any offense or offender; one said of him
that he was like the herb John in a pottage por, for that herb did not give
any taste at all either good or bad, but an excellent color: so the Mayor did
neither good nor harm, but (as an image of a Mayors authority) filled up the
room.

(23)
A Justice of the Peace, being angry with a pilsering Knave, said, Sirrah, if
thou do not mend thy manners, thou wist be shortly hanged, or else I will
be hanged for thee. The bold knave replied, I thank your worship for that
kind offer, and I besee^h your worship not to be out of the way when I shall
have occasion to use you.

(24)
Certain Justices of the Peace being informed of the odious abuses daily
committed by drunkenness in their Jurisdictions, did according to their places
and duties, meet at a market town, and sat two days, hearing informations,
and working reformations: at last, they concluded that the Ale and Beer were
too strong, and therefore commanded that from thence forth smaller drink
should be brewed, whereby these unruly people might sometimes go to bed
sober. But one mad to spot fellow being much grieved at this order, having made
himself half pot-shaken, without fear or wit came to the Justices, and asked
them if they had sat two days about the brewing of small drink: to whom one
of the Justices replied, yes: Why then quoth the drunkard, I pray you sit three
days more to know who shall drink it, for I will none of it.

(25)
THere was a Scottish Gentleman that had sore eyes, who was counseled by his
Physicians to forbear drinking of wine: but he said he neither could nor
would forbear it, maintaining it for the lesser evil, to shut up the windows
of his body, then to suffer the house to fall down, through want to
reparations.

(26)
Upon the death of Queen Elizabeth, there was a Mayor of a Country Town
sitting in consultation with his Brethren: to whom he gravely said, My
Brethren and Neighbors, I do hear that the Queen is dead, wherefore I
thought it exceeding fit we should despair to this place, that being
dissembled together, we might consult of our estates, for I doubt me we
shall have another Queen or a King, and I stand in great fear that the people
will be vnrude, so that we shall be in danger of strange Resurrection.

(27)
ANother Mayor that was on hunting, (by chance) one asked him how he liked the
Cry: a pox take the Dogs, says he, they make such a bawling that I cannot
hear the Cry.

(28)
AN old Justice was fast asleep on the Bench when a poor Malefactor was
judged to be hanged; at which word the Justice suddenly awaked, and said to
the Thief, My friend, I pray let this be a warning to you, look you do so
no more, for we do not show every man the like favor.

(29)
AN old Recorder of a City in this Land was busy with a Country Mayor, in the
^^^ space they were interrupted by a fellow that was brought before him for
killing of a man: my Lord asked the fellows name, who answered, his name was
Gilman. Said my Lord, take away G, and thy name is Il^^^ put K to it, thy name
is Kilman, and put ^ ^^ and thy name is Spilman, thou art halse log'd already
(as the proverb says:) for thou have an ill name, let a man vary it how ^^^
can.

The Mayor all this while stood by musing ^^ my Lords canuasing the man's name,
and ^^ward being at home among his own good people, he had an offender brought
before him for getting a Wench with child: Master Mayor asked him his name: the
fellow said, if it please your worship my name is ^^^. Then Master Mayor
(striving to imi^^^ my Lord) said, take away G and thy name ^^ put K to it, it
is Kilman, put Sp to ^^^ and thy name is Spilman, thou art a knave, thou have
an ill name, and thou shall be hanged, etc.

(30) c. A Quiblet.
MAster Field the Player riding up Fleetstrees a great pace, a Gentleman called
him, and asked him what Play was played that day: he (being angry to be stayed
upon so fri^lous a demand) answered, that he might see what Play was to be
played upon every Post. l^y you mercy (said the Gentleman) I took you for a
Post, you road so fast.

(31)
ONe being long vexed with the spirit of jealousy, came suddenly into his
house, and found a man (whom he suspected) somewhat too busy with his wife; to
whom he said, Now good fellow I thank thee, for thou ^^^ me of a strange
hellish torment; my susp^^ion is cleared, and apparent knowledge has given me
such ease of heart, that I will be jealous no more.

(32)
A Skillful Painter was requested to paint out a fair Courtezan (in plain
English, a Whore) I pray you spare that cost, said the Painter, for if she be
a right whore the daily paints her self.

(33)
SEigneur Valdrino (play master to the Camp of Alphonsus King of Aragon) a man
exquisite in Courtship and complement; as two or three were at strife laying
wagers what Countryman he was; a blunt bold Captain asked what was the matter:
why Captain, said one, we are laying a wager what Countriman my Lord Treasurer
Valdrino is: Oh said the Captain, I can tell you that, I am sure he was borne
in the land of Promise, for I have served the King in his wars these seven
years without pay, and ever when I petition to my Lord, he pays me with no
coin but promises, which makes me half assured that he is that Countryman.

(34)
A Nobleman of France (as he was riding) met with a yeoman of the Country, to
whom he said, My friend I should know thee, I do remember I have often seen
thee: My good Lord, said the Countriman, I am one of your Honors poor tenants,
and my name is T.I. I remember thee better now (said my Lord) there were two
brothers of you, but one is dead, I pray which of you does remain alive?

(35)
THe aforesaid Noble man having had a Harper that was blind, playing to him
after supper somewhat late, at last he arose, and commanded one of his
servants to light the Harper down the stairs: to whom the Seruing-man said,
my Lord, the Harper is blind: thou ignorant knave, quoth my Lord, he has the
more need of light.

(36)
A Young fellow wished himself the richest Cuckold in England: to whom his
mother said very angerly, you foolish covetous boy, why do thou desire such a
wish, has not thine own Father enough in store for thee?

(37)
A Whore Rampant, made her husband a Cuckold Dormant, with a front Cressant,
surprised by the watch Guardant, brought to the Justice Passant, with her
play-fellow Pendant, after a coursie Couchant; the Justice told her that her
offense was heinous, in breaking the bonds of matrimony in that adulterate
manner, and that she should consider that her husband was her Head: Good sir,
quoth she, I did ever acknowledge him so; and I hope it is no such great fault
in me, for I was but trimming, dressing, or ad-horning my Head.

(38)
A Man being very sickly, one said to his wife, I marvel your husband does not
wear a nightcap: Truly (quoth she) within this six months that my husband
has bin sick, although his legs be shrunk, yet he has outgrowne all his
night-caps.

(39)
A Boy whose mother was noted to be one not ouerloden with honesty, went to
seek his Godfather, and enquiring for him, quoth one to him, Who is thy
Godfather? the boy replied, his name is goodman Digland the Gardener: Oh said
the man, if he be thy Godfather he is at the next Alehouse, but I fear thou
take Gods name in vain.

(40)
A Scholar riding from Cambridge toward London, his horse being tired (a
lazy disease often befalling such hacknies) met a Post on the way, who
notwithstanding he did what he could to make his horse give him place, by
spur, switch, and bridle, yet the Post was feign to give him the way: to
whom (in anger) he said, Thou paltry fellow, do thou not see I am a Post?
The Scholar straight replied, And thou ignorant fellow, do thou not see that
I ride upon a Post.

(41)
A Fellow having more drink then wit, in ^^^ winter evening made a foolish
vow, ^^^ take the wall of as many as he met betwix^^^ the Temple Bar and
Charing-crosse; and co^^^ ming near the Sau^y, where stood a Post ali^^ tle
distance from the wall: the drunkard took^ it for a man, and^ would have the
wall, be^^^ ginning to quarrel and give the Post fou^ words: at which a man
came by, and asked^ the matter, and whom he spoke to: he answered, he would
have the wall of that fellow^^^ that stood so stiffly there: my friend, said the
other, that is a Post, you must give him the way: Is it so, said the fellow, a
pox upon him why did he not blow his horn?

(42)
A Saylor being on a tired horse, riding from D^uer to London, his company
prayed him to ride faster: to whom he answered, I can com^^ no faster, do you
not see that I am be calmed?

(43)
TWo Gentlemen were jesting, and one o^ them cast away the others hat; but the
other caught his hat off, and put it on his own head: now fie, fie, quoth the
other, thou spoy^^^ lest my hat: wherewith, said the other? Marry (said he
that was bareheaded) the^ spoyle^^ my hat with putting a Calves head into it.

(44) The figure Conversion.
IF a Vintner does draw me good wine vpon^ money or credit, then he is fitter
to draw ^^^ hang: but if he draw me bad wine for good ^^^ money, then he is
much fitter to hang then ^^ draw.

(45)
A Man having been with a Doctor of Physic to have his advise about some
grief he had; when he came home, his wife asked him what news? Marry, said
he, my Physician does counsel me to drink Asses milk every morning fasting:
Why husband, quoth the Woman, I pray you tell me, does Master Doctor give suck?

(46)
^^^^^ and valiant Captain, whom I could ^^^ ^^^ had a scarf given him here
in England, and he sailing over into the Low-Coun^^^ an old Roman Catholic
Lady of his acquaintance, was very importunate to beg ^^^ scarf of him: the
Captain asked her what ^^^ would do with it, and said, it was not ^^^ for her
wearing. She answered him, that ^^^ would give it her, that Jesus Christ
should ^^^ it in the Church upon holy days, meaning the Image: Madam, said the
Captain, ^^^ you will bring me word that ever his father ^^^ such a scarf,
then I will give you this for him.

(47)
Between the hours of twelve and one at noone, one asked me what it was a
clock: ^nswered him, it was little or nothing. He demanded of me what I meant
by my answer? I replied that it being not one of the ^^^ it was to be reckned
or counted for ^^ought, for that which is lesser then one, is ^^^ or nothing.

(48)
A Gentlewoman cheapned a Close-stoole in Pa^ls Churchyard, and the
shopkeeper ^^^ ask her too much money for it, as she thought. Why mistress,
said he, I pray you ^^^der what a good lock and key it has: he replied,
that she had small use for either ^^^ lock or key, for she purposed to put
nothing into it, but what she cared not who ^^^ out.

(49)
A Country woman at an Assize was to take her oath against a party; the said
party en^^ted the Judge that her oath might not be ^^^ the Judge demanded why
he excepted against her: my Lord (quoth he) she is ^Recusant or Roman
Catholic, and they ^^^ old it no matter of Conscience to swear any thing
against us. Come hither woman, said ^^^ Judge, I do not think thou art a
Recusant, I am persuaded that for forty shillings thou will swear the Pope is
a knave: Good my Lord, said she, the Pope is a stranger to me, but if I knew
him as well as I know your Lordship, I would swear for half the money.

(50)
A Cardinal kept a knauish fool for his recreation, to whom he said, Sirrah
fool, suppose that all the world were dead but thou and I, and that one of us
should be turned to a Horse, and the other of us to an Ass, say which of these
two would thou choose to be? The fool answered, Sir, you are my Master,
and for that respect it is fit that your worship should choose first, and I
will be contented to take that which you leave. Why then said the Cardinal, I
would be a horse; no said the fool, let me entreat your worship to be an
Ass, for I would be an Ass to choose of all things: why, quoth the Cardinal?
marry, said the fool, because that I have known many Asses come to be
Justices, but I never knew any horse come to the like preferment.

(51)
A Grave discreet Gentleman having a comely wife, whose beauty and free
behavior did draw her honesty into suspicion, by whom he had a son almost
at man's estate, of very dissolute and wanton carriage. I muse, said one, that a
man of such stayed and moderate gravity should have a son of such a contrary
and froward disposition. Sir, replied another, the reason is that his pate is
stuffed with his Mothers wit, that there is no room for any of his fathers
wisdom: besides, the lightness of her heels is gotten into her sons
brains.

(52)
A Rich Grasier dwelling 150 miles from Oxford, having a son that had seven
years been a student there, at last sent for him home, to whom he said;
Son, I do hear that you are well practiced in the rudiments of learning,
but that withal you are addicted to an idle vein of the poor and thredbare
art of Poetry: which I charge thee to leave and avoid, as thou tendrest my
favor, for my mind is not to have thee live beggarly, and dye poorly; yet I
will ask thee one Poetical question, which is, Wherefore think thou that
so beautiful a creature as Venus, was so besotted to match her self with so
ill favored a knave as Vulcan? In truth father, quoth the young man, I can
yield you no reason for it, but I wonder at it; and yet I do admire as much
wherefore my mother married with you.

(53)
A Man going with his Wife by a deep river side, began to talk of Cuckolds,
and withal he wished that every Cuckold were cast into the river: to whom his
wife replies, husband I pray you learn to swim.

(54)
A Man riding through a village with his dog running by him, which dogs name
was called Cuckold, leaping and frisking into every house he past by where the
door was open: whereupon the man being afraid his dog would be lost, calls
and whistles, here, here, Cuckold; to whom an old woman said, whom do thou
miscall? I would have thee know that no Cuckold does dwell in this house. Good
woman, said the man, you mistake me, I do call no body but my dog; Now out
upon thee thou misbeleeuing knave, said she, where learned thou that manners
to call a dog by a christen bodies name.

(55)
A Lusty Miller that in his younger days had been much given to the flesh and
the devil; so that not one pretty maid or female servant did or could bring
grist to his Mill to be grownd, but the knave Miller would do his best to
undermine and blow up their chastity, and withal he would bargain with as
many as his temptations overcame, that at his day of marriage, every one of
them should give him a Cake. In process of time the Miller was married, and
those aforesaid free-hearted Wenches sent each one their Cakes, to the number
of 99. His wife the Bride, who also went for a maid, did muse and ask what was
the meaning of so many Cakes? The Miller told her the truth of all without any
dissembling: to whom his wife answered, If I have been so wise in bargaining
as you have been in your time, the young men of my acquaintance would have
sent me 100 cheeses to ^^^ with your cakes.

This bawdy Miller in a trap was catch,
Not only married, but most f^^ly match:
In this the proverb is approved plain,
What bread men break is broke to them again.
(56)
THere was a fair ship of two hundred ^^^ lying at the Tower-wharse at London
where a Countryman passing by most ^^^ nestly looked on the said ship, and
demande^^ how old she was: one made answer that she^ was a year old. Good
Lord bless me, sai^ the Countryman, is she so big grown in^ one year,
what a greatness will she bee^ that time she comes to my age.

This man's blind ignorance I may compare
To Aquavitae given to a Mare:
Let each man his own calling then apply,
No suitor vltra crepidam, Say l.
(57)
Twelve Scholars riding together, one ^^^ them said, my masters let us ride
faster ^^ Why, quoth another, me thinks we ride ^^^ good pace, I Will warrant it
is four mile ^^^ hour. Alas said the first, what is four mile ^^^ hour
amongst all us.

Let not man boast of wit or learning deep,
For ignorance may out of knowledge creep
Amongst 12 men 4 mile an hour to ride;
He that has wit, to each his share divide.
(58)
AN Apprentice in the market did ask the price of an hundred Oysters: his
friend persuaded him not to buy them, for they were small; to small replied the
Prentice, there ^^^ not much loss in that, for I shall have the ^^^ to the
hundred.

^^^ the bill a measured mile it be,
^^^ the bill's another mile, I see:
^^^ to pay, 4 pence will quit the cost:
^^^ hundred, in the shire is lost.
(59)
S^e Gentlemen riding together, were in doubt that they were out of their way,
therefore they rode a flight shot to an old ^^pheard, one of them enquiring of
him if ^^^ were the way to such a town, and how far ^^^ was thither. Sir, quoth
the Shepherd, that ^^^ the right way, and you have six miles thither. Quoth
one of the Gentlemen, what a ^^^ old knave art thou, it cannot be above ^^^
miles: the Shepherd replied, Sir, you ^^^ like a chapman, and you shall have
it for ^^^ miles, but I Will assure you it shall cost every one of these Gentlemen
six miles before They come thither:

^^^^rashnesse did the Gallants tongue o'rship,
^^^ the Shepherd gave a pleasing nip:
^^^ softest fire does make the sweetest Malt,
^^^^ild repr^^^fes makes rashness see his fauls.
(60)
A Man was very angry with his maid, because his eggs were boiled too hard;
truly, said she, I have made them boil a long ^^^ but the next you have
shall boil two ^^^ but they shall be tender enough.

The boiling of this wenches eggs I find,
Much like unto a greedy mi^ers mind:
^^^ eggs, the more they boil are harder still;
The ^^^ full, too sull, yet wants his fill.
(61)
TWo learned good-fellowes drinking a pipe of Tobacco; it being almost out,
that ^^ that drunk last did partly feel the ashes to ^^^ hot to his lips;
giving the pipe to his friend, said, Ashes to Ashes: the other taking the pipe
and (being of a quick apprehension, threw it out to the dunghill, saying,
Earth to earth.

Thus wit with wit agrees like cake and cheese;
Both sides are gainers, neither side does leese:
Conceit begets conceit, jest, jest does father,
And butter fallen to ground, does something gather.
(62)
ONe said, a Citizen was a man all in earnest, and in no part like a jest;
because the Citizen was never bad, or the jest never good till they were both
broke.

What Is one man's yea, may be another nay;
The Sun does sosten wax, and harden clay:
Some Citizens are like to jests, for why,
They Will break in jest, or bankrupt policy.
(63)
A Gallant with a galloping wit, was mounted upon a running horse toward a town
named Tame, within ten miles of Oxford, and riding at full speed, he met an old
man, and asked him, Sirrah is this the way to Tame? yes sir, he replyde, your
Horse I Will warrant you, if he were as wild as the devil.

This is a ridle to a fool, me thinks,
And seems to want an Oedipus or Sphinx.
But Reader, in my book I hold it fit,
To find you lines, you self must find you wit.
(64)
A Complementall Courtier that in his French, Italian, and Spanish cringes,
conges, and courtesies, would bend his body, and bow every way like a tumbler,
a Mercers servant espying his marmositicall Apishnesse, said, Oh if my master
could have bowed but half so much, I am certainly persuaded that he had never
broke.

Too much of one thing often proves good for nothing,
And dainties in satiety, breed lothing:
Th'ones flattery mingled with the others pride,
Had served them both, both might live long vnspide.
(65)
I My self gave a book to King James once in the great Chamber at Whitehall
as his Majesty came from the Chapel, the Duke of Richmond said merrily unto
me, Tailor where did you learn the manners to give the King a book and not
kneel? My Lord, said I, if it please your Grace, I do give now, but when I
beg any thing then I will kneel.

Be it to all men by these presents known,
Men need not kneel to give away their own:
I Will stand upon my feet when as I give,
And kneel when as I beg more means to live:
But some by this may under stand,
That Courtiers ofiner kneel then stand.
(66)
THe trained Soldiers of a certain Shire which I could name, to the number of
6000 as they were mustring and drilling under their several Captains, a
yeomans, son being there as a raw soldier in his corslet, his father
standing by, said, I vaith it does me much good at heart to ^^^ how trim a
vellow my zonne is in his hardness. The young fellow bearing his fathers
commendations of him, began very desperately to shake his pike, and looking
exceeding grim, with a fearful, horrible, terrible countenance, said, O
vatber, chad lather nor a groat that all we bad but one Spaniard here.

One Spaniard among 6000, pirty it were,
Better ten thousand Britains bold were there,
Led by brave Leaders, that might make Spain quake
Like Vere, or Morgan, Essex, Blunt, or Drake.
(67)
ONe said that he could never have his health in Cambridge, and that if he
had lived there till this time, he thought in his conscience that he had dyed
seven years ago.

I will not say the man that spoke so ly'd,
Seven years ago, no doubt he might have died:
He by his trade perhaps might be a dyer,
And daily died to live, and bin no liar.
(68)
A Country fellow was much grieved that he^^^ had not gone seven miles to a
marked town to have seen the Baboones: Why, sai^^^ his wife, it is too far
to go and come in^^^ day to see such bables, especially it is too great^^ a
journey on foot. O, quoth he, I could h^^^ gone thither with my neighbor
Hobson ^^^ foot, like a fool as I was, and I might hau^^^ rid back upon my
neighbor Iobsons mare^^^ like an ass as I am.

Thus in the preter tense a fool he was,
And in the present tense he is an Ass;
And in the future, fool and ass shall be,
That goes or rides so far such fights to see.
(69)
THere was a lusty young Scholar preserre^^^ to a Benefice in the Country, and
common^^ ly on Sundays and holy days after evening prayer he would have a
dozen bouts at cud^^^ gels with the sturdiest youths in his parish^^^ The
Bishop of the Diocese hearing of it, ^^^ for the parson, telling him that this
beseem^^^ not his profession and gravity, and if that ^^^ did not desist from
that unmeet kind of exercise, he would vnbenefice him: Good my Lord, (said the
Parson) I beseech you to conceive rightly of me, and I doubt not but my^^^
playing at cudgels will be counted tolerable for I do it of purpose to edify
the ruder for^^^ of my people: How so, said the Bishop; Ma^^ry my Lord (quoth
the Parson) whatsoever do reach them at morning and evening prayer^^ I do bear
foundly into their heads at cudg^^^ afterward, for their better remembrance.

I wish that all the Fencers in our Nation,
Were only of this Parsons Congregation:
That he his life and doctrine should explain:
By beating them, whilst they beat him again.
(70)
A Judge upon the Bench did ask as old man^^^ how old he was: My Lord, said
he, I am^^^ eight and fourscore: And why not fourscore and eight, said the
Judge; the other replid, be^^^ cause I was eight before I was fourscore. Eight

^all men may desery,
^eight first contrarily.
^if my Boots and Spures, I you beseech,
^spures and Boots is rather proper speech.
(71)
^Fellow made his boast that he rode ^^miles with one horse and never ^bit:
that may be (quoth another) per^^^ you rid him with a halter.

Says, he that will swear will lie,
^^^ that will lie will S^eale by consequency.
^wearers are liars, liars most are thieues,
^God help Tailors, and true Vndershrieues.
(72)
ONe saw a decayed Gentleman in a very ^^^^ bare cloak, said to him, Sir you
^very watchful cloak on: Why, said ^^^ Gentleman? the other answered, I
^^^thinke it had a good nap this seven ^the Gentleman replied, and truly sir
^thinkes you want a nap as well as my ^^^ for you talk idly for want of
sleep.

^^all at Poncrty does scoff,
^^^his back the begger's not sarre off.
^with flont, and bob with bob is quitted,
^^^^ folly finely fitted.
(73)
^A Diligent and learned Preacher on a Sunday ^in the afternoon was preaching,
whi^^^ ^most of the zealous Vestry men, (for their ^^^^er edification) were
fast asleep in their ^in the mean space a young child cried ^^^ aloud at the
lower end of the Church which the Preacher hearing, called ^the Nurse and said,
Nurse, I pray thee still ^childe, or else it may chance to awaken ^^^me of the
best men in our parish.

^^^it Sermons, sure their brains are adle,
^them, and does rock the cradle:
^^iu, it is understood,
^binders them from doing good.
(74)
A Chorister or singing man at service in a Cathedral Church, was asleep when
all his fellows were singing, which the Deane espying, sent a boy to him to
waken him, and asked him why he did not sing? he being suddenly awaked,
prayed the boy to thank master Deane for his kind remembrance, and to toll
him, that he was as merry as those that did sing.

There say he is wise that can himself keep warm,
And that the man that sleeps well thinks no barme'
He sung not, yet was in a merry mood,
Like John Indifferent, did not harm nor good.
(75)
A Kind of clownish Gentleman had half a Brawne sent him against Christimas,
he very liberally gave the seruing-man half a shilling that brought it: the
Seruing-man gave the Porter that carried it eight pence before the Gentleman's
face. Sirrah, said he, are you so prodigal to reward the Porter with eight
pence, when I give you but six pence? thou bear the mind of a prodigal
Gallant, although by thy foot thou seem a lubberly clown: Good sir, said
the fellow, I confess I have a very clownish lubberly pair of feet, but yet I
am persuaded that a pair of your worships shoes would fit them well.

Here Is Bore and Brawne together are well met,
He knew that giving was no way to get.
The world gets somewhat by the prodigal,
When as the Mizer gets the devil and all.
(76)
A Griping Extortioner that had been a maker of beggars for the space of forty
years, and by raising rents and oppression, had undone many families, faics on
a time in anger to a poor fellow that had stolen a sheep of his, Ah villain,
dare thou rob me, I vow and swear there is not so damned a rogue in the
world as thou: to whom the fellow answered, I beseech your good worship
remember your self, and be good to me for Gods sake, and for your own sake.

This Rascals eye is with a beam so blind,
That in the poor man's he a moat can find:
The Wolf himself, a temperate feeder deemes;
And every man too much himself esteems.
(77)
A Seruingman and his mistress was landing at the Whitesryars stayers, the
stayers being very bad, a waterman offered to help the woman, saying, Give me
your hand Gentlewoman I Will help you: to whom her man replayed, you saucy fellow
place your words right, my mistress is no Gentlewoman, she is a Lady.

All is not gold (they say) that glisters bright,
Snow is not sugar, though it look as white:
And' it is approved to be true and common,
That every Lady's not a Gentlewoman.
(78)
A Seruingman going in haste in London, (minding his business more then his
way) a Gallant iustled him from the wall almost into the kennell: the fellow
turned about, and asked the Gentleman why he did iustle him so? the Gentleman
said, Because he would not give the wall to a sancy knave. The Seruingman
replied, your worship is not of my mind, for I will.

Here Pride that takes Humility in snuff,
It well encountered with a counterbuffe:
One would not give the wall unto a knave,
The other would, and him the wall he gave.
(79)
A Justice of the Peace was very angry with a country yeoman, because he came
not to him at his first sending for him; and after he had ^^^ ^^^ntifully
bestowed two or three dozen of knaves upon him, he said to him, Sirrah, I will
make you know that the proudest saucy knave that dwells under my command shall
come before me when I send for him. I beseech your worship said the man, to
pardon me, for I was afraid: afraid of what said the Justice? of your worship
answered the fellow Of me said the Justice? why wast thou afra^^^ of me?
Because your worship looks soli^^^ a Lion, said the man: a Lion quoth the
Justice? when did thou see a Lion? may please your worship (the fellow
replyde) saw a Butcher bring one but yesterday to ^^^ brook market, with a
white face, and his four legs bound.

This fellow was a knave, or fool, or both,
Or else his wit was of but slender growth:
He gave the white-fac'd Calfe the Lions style,
The Justice was a proper man she while.
(80)
Diverse Gentlemen being merry together^ at last one of their acquaintance came
^^^ them (whose name was Sampson) A ha, ^^^ one of them, now we may be
securely me^^^ ^^^ry, no Sergeant or Bailiffe dare touch us, ^^^ if a thousand
Philistims come, here is Sampson who is able to brain them all: to whoe^^
Sampson replyde, Sir I may boldly venture ^^^ against so many as you speak of,
provided that you will lend me one of your law bones.^^^

(81)
TWo Playsterers being at work for me^^^ at my house in Southwarke, did ma^^^
times patch and dawbe out part of their day^^ labor with prating, which I
being digg^^^ in my garden did ouer-heare that their ^^^ was of their wives,
and how that if I were ab^ (quoth one) my wife should ride in pomp^^^ through
London as I saw a Countess ride) yesterday: why quoth the other, how did she
ride I pray? Marry, said he, in state, in ^^^ Horslitter: O base, quoth the
other, Hor slitter I protest as poor a man as I am, I would ^^^ allowed my
wife a three-peny trusse of clean straw.

(82)
SIr Edward Dyer came to the town on so^^^ business, just at the time as the
Gate way newly shut, and the Warders going away^^ with the keys, he looking
through the ga^^ called to one of them, saying, Hoe fellow,^^^ ^^^ way thee
open the gate and let me in: None ^^^ your fellow Sir, but a poor knave: Why
^^^ said Sir Edward, I pray thee poor knave ^^^ me in: nay, no knave neither,
quoth the ^^^ Warder. Why then said the Knight, he was ^^^ that told me so.

(83)
ONe met his friend in the street, and told him he was very sorroy to see him
look still, asking him what he ailed: he replied, that he was now well
amended, but he had ^eene lately sick of the Pox: What Pox, the small pox,
said his friend? Nay, 'quoth the other my mind was not so base; for I had the
^gest pox that I could get for my money.

(84)
AN honest Hostess of mine at Oxford roasted an old shoulder of a Ram, which in
the ea^ing was as tough as a Buffe Ierkin: I did ask ^^^ what the reason was
that the mutton was ^^^ tough: She said she knew not, except the ^^cher
deceived her in the age of it, and she would tell him on both sides of his
eats, like a ^eane as he was: Nay, quoth I, I think there is another fault in
it which will excuse the ^cher for perhaps you roasted it with old ^^^ in troth
(quoth the hostess) it is like ^^gh; and my husband never does other^^^ but
buy old stumps and knots which ^^^ all the meat we either roast or boil, ^^^
exceeding tough that no body can eat it.

(85)
ONe hearing a clock strike three when he thought it was not two, said, this
Clock is like an hypocritical Puritan; for though he will not swear, yet he
will lie abhominably

(86)
DIcks Tarleton said that he could compare Queen Elizabeth to nothing more
fitly then to a Sculler; for said he, Neither the Queen, nor the Sculler has
a fellow.

(87)
TWo obstinate rich fellows in Law (that had each of them more money then wit)
by chance one of them coming out of Westminster Hall, met with his aduersarid
wite, to whom he said, in troth good woman I do much pity your case, in that
it is your hard fortune that such a fool as your husband should have so
discreet and modest wife. The woman replide, In truth Sir, I do grieve more,
that so honest a wife as you have, should have such a wrangling knave to her
husband.

(88)
A Poor laboring man was married and matched to a creature that so much used
to scold waking, that she had much ado to refrain it sleeping, so that the
poor man was so batterfang'd and belabour'd with tongue mettle, that he was
weary of his life: at last, four or five women that were his neighbors
(pitying his case) came in his absence to his house, to admonish and counsel
his wife to a quiet behavior toward her husband; telling her that she was a
shame to all good women, in her bad usage of so honest a painful man: the
woman replied to her neighbors, that she thought her husband did not love
her, which was partly the cause that she was so froward toward him: why (said
an old woman) I will show thee how thou shall prove that he loves thee dearly;
do thou counterfeit thy self dead, and lie under the table, and one of us
will fetch thy husband, and he shall find us heavy and grieuing for thee? by
which mean^ thou shall perceive by his lamentation for thee, how much he loves
thee; this counsel was allowed and effected; when the poor man came home, he
hearing the matter (being much oppressed with grief) ran under the table
bemoning the happy losle of his most kind vexation, and making as though he
would kiss her, with a most loving embra^^^ to make all sure, he brake her
neck. The neighbors pitying the man's extreme passion, in compassion told
him that his wife was not dead, and that all this was done but to make trial
of his love toward her: whereupon they called her by her name, bidding her to
rise, and that she had fooled it enough with her husband: but for all their
calling, she lay still, which made one of the women to shake and iogge her, at
which the woman cried, alas she is dead indeed: why this it is, quoth her
husband, to dissemble and counterfeit with God and the world.

(90)
A Planter of a College in Oxford possessing some crumbs of Logic and
chippings of Sophistry, making distribution of bread at the Scholars table,
one of the Scholars complained unto him that the bread were dough baked: Why,
quoth he, so it should be, what else is the definition of bread, but dough
baked?

(91)
A Miserable fellow in the country, did once a year use to inuit his
neighbors to dinner, and as they were one time sat, he bade them welcome,
saying, that there was a surloyne of beef, that the Ox it came from cost 20.
pound, and that there was a Capon that he paid 3. shillings 6. pence for, in
the market: at which, a country yeoman sitting against the Capon, fell to and
cut off a leg of it, (the rest of the guests being not yet past their roast
beef) to whom the man of the house said, My friend, I pray thee eat some of
this same surloyne: Oh sir, God forbid, quoth the fellow, I am but a poor man,
an ox of 20. pound price is too dear meat, a Capon of half a crown will
serve my turn well enough, I thank you.

(92)
A Rich man told his nephew, that he had read a book called Lucius Apulcius,
of the golden ass, and that he found there how Apulcius after he had been an
ass many years, by eating of Roses he did recover his manly shape again, and
was no more an ass: the young man replied to his uncle, Sir if I were worthy
to advise you, I would give you counsel to eat a falled of Roses once a week
your self.

(93)
A Fellow having been married but fiu^^^ weeks, perceived his wife to be
great with child, wherefore she desired him to buy ^^^ cradle: shortly after
he went to a Fair and bought ten cradles, and being demanded why he bought so
many, he answered, that his wife would have use for them all in one year.

(94)
A Gentleman untrust and vnbuttoned in ^^^ cold winter morning, a friend of his
told him that it was not for his health to go foo^^ pen in the raw weather,
and that he mused it did not kill him to go so often untrust: to whom the other
replied, Sir, you are of the mind of my Silkeman, Mercer, or Tailor, for they
find fault as you do, because I go so much on trust, but it is a fault I
have naturally from my parents and kindred, and my creditors tell me that I do
imitate my betters.

(95)
A Justice of the Peace committed a fellow to prison, and commanded him away
three or four times, but still the fellow entreated him. Sirrah (said the
Justice) must I bid you be gone so many times, and will you not go? The
fellow answered, Sir, if your worship had bidden me to dinner or supper, I
should in my poor manners not to have taken your offer under two or three
biddings, therefore I pray you blame me not if I look for four biddings to
prison.

(96)
A Great man kept a miserable house, so that his servants did always rise from
the table with empty panches, though clean licked platters: truly, said one
of his men, I think my Lord will work miracles shortly, for though he
practice not to raise the dead, or dispossess the devil; yet he goes about to
feed his great family with nothing.

(97)
ONe said that Bias the Philosopher was the first Bowler; and that ever since
the most part of Bowls do in memory of their original, wear his badge of
remembrance, and very dutifully hold Bias. Now to tell you, this Bias was one
of the 7. Sages or Wisemen of Gaeue My authors to prove him the inuenter of
Bowling, are Shamrooke, a famous Scithian Gimnosophist in his ninth book of
Rubbing and Running; of which opinion Balductus the Theban Orator seems to
be in his third Treatise of Court performances: the likeliest ^iecture is,
that it was devised as an emblem to figure out the worlds folly and
inconstancy; for though a child will ride a stick or staff with an
imagination that he iron horseback; or make pyes of dirt, or houses of cards,
feed with two spoones, and cry for three pieces of bread and butter, which
childish actions are ridiculous to a man: yet this wise game of Bowling does
make the fathers surpass their children in apish toys and most delicate
dogtrickes. As first for the pollures, first, handle your Bowl: secondly,
advance your Bowl: thirdly, charge your Bowl: fourthly, aim your Bowl:
fifthly, discharge your Bowl: sixthly, plye your Bowl: in which last posture of
plying your Bowl, you shall perceive many varieties and ^^^inns as wringing of
the neck, lifting up of the shoulders, clapping of the hands, lying dowae of
one side, running after the Bowl, making long dutiful scrapes and legs,
(sometimes bareheaded) entreating him to flee, flee, ^^^ (with pox on it when
it is too short:) and though the Bowler be a Gentleman, yet there he may meet
with attendant rookes, that sometimes will be his betters six to four, or two
to one I do not know any thing fitter to be compared to bowling then wooing,
or ^^^ for if they do not see one another in two days, they will say, Good
Lord it is seven years since we saw each other, for Lovers do think that in
absence time sleeps, and in their presence that he is in a wild gallop: So a
Bowler, although the Allye or mark be but thirty or forty paces, yet
sometimes I have heard the Bowler cry rub, rub, rub, and swear and lie that
he was gone an hundred miles, when the bowl has been short of the block
two yards, or that he was too short a thousand foot, when he is upon the head
of the Jack, or ten or twelve foot beyond. In a word, there are many more
several postures at bowls, then there are ridiculous idle tales or jests in
my book. Yet are the bowlers very weak stomackt, for they are ever casting:
sometimes they give the stab, at the alley head, but God be thanked no blood
shed, and sometimes they bestow a Pippin one upon the other, but no good Apple
I Will assure you. The mark which they aim at has sundry names and epithites,
as a Block, a Jack, and a Mistress: a Block, because of his birth and
breeding, showing by his mettle of what house he came; a Jack, because he
being smoothed and gotten into some handsome shape, forgets the house he came
of, suffering his betters to give him the often salute whilst he like Jack
sauce neither knows himself, nor will know his superiors. But I hold a
Mistress to be the fittest name for it, for there are some that are commonly
termed Mistresses, which are not much better then mine Aunts: and a Mistress is
oftentimes a mark for every knave to have a fling at, every one strives to
come so near her that he would kiss her: and yet some are short, some wide,
and some over, and who so does kiss, it may perhaps sweeten his lips, but I
assure him it shall never fill his belly, but rather empty his purse. So much
for bowling: that I fear me I have bowled beyond the mark.

(98)
A Minister riding into the west parts of England, happened to stay at a
village on a Sunday, where he offered kindly to bestow a Sermon upon them:
which the Constable hearing did ask the Minister if he were lice^ced to preach,
yes quoth he that I am, and with that he drew out of a box his License, which
was in Latin; truly said the Constable I understand no Latin, yet I pray you
let me see it, I perhaps shall pick out here and there a word: No good sir,
quoth the Minister, I will have no words picked out of it, for spoiling my
License.

(99) A Clinch.
A Country man being demanded how such a River was called, that ran through
their Country: he answered, that they never had need to call the River, for it
always came without calling.

(100)
A Fellow having his book at the Sessions, was burnt in the hand, and was
commanded to say, God save the King: the King, said he, God save my Grandam,
that taught me to read, I am sure I had bin hanged else.

(101) Atoy to mock an Ape.
IN Queen Elizabeth's days there was a fellow that wore a brooch in his hat,
like a tooth drawer, with a Rose and Crow and two letters: this fellow had a
warrant from the Lord Chamberlain at that time to travel with an exceeding
brave Ape which he had; whereby he gat his living from time to time at
markets and fayres; his Ape did always ride upon a mastiffe dog and a man with
a drum to attend him. It happened that these four travelers came to a town
called L^^e in Cornwall, where the Inn being taken, the drum went about to
signify to the people, that at such an Inn was an Ape of singular virtue and
quality, if they pleased to bestow their time and money to see him: now the
townsmen being honest laboring Fishers, and other painful functions, had no
leisure to waste either time or coin in Ape-tricks, so that no audience came
to the Inn, to the great grief of Jack an Apes his master: who collecting his
wits together, resolved to adventure to put a trick upon the town, whatsoever
came of it; whereupon he took pen, ink, and paper, and wrote a warrant to
the Mayor of the town, as follows.

These are to will and require you, and every of you with your wives and
familes, that upon the sight hereof, you make your personal appearance before
the Queens Ape, for it is an Ape of rank and quality, who is to be practiced
through her Maiestics dominions, that by his long experience amongst her loving
subjects, he may be the better enabled to do her Majesty service hereafter;
and hereof fail you not, as you will answer the contrary. etc.

This warrant being brought to the Mayor, he sent for a shoemaker at the
furthest end of the town to read it: which when he heard, he sent for all his
brethren, who went with him to the town Hall to constult upon this weighty
bustnesse. Where after they had sat a quarter of an hour, no man saying
anything, nor any man knowing what to say: at last a young man that never had
borne any office, said, Gentlemen, if I were fit to speak, I think (without
offense, under correction of the worshipful) that I should soon decide this
business; to whom the Mayor said, I pray good neighbor speak, for though you
never did bear any office here, yet you may speak as wisely as some of us.
Then sir, said the young man, my opinion is that this Ape carrier is a gybing
scossing Knave, and one that does purpose to make this town a jesting mocking
stock throughout the whole Kingdom: for was it ever known that a fellow
should be so impudent audacious as to send a Warrant without either name or
date, to a Mayor of a town, to the Queens Lieutenant, and that he with his
brethren, their wives and families, should be all commanded to come before a
Iack-an-Apes? My counsel is that you take him and his Ape, with his man, and
his dog, and whip the whole mess or murrinall of them out of the town, which
I think will be much for your credit if you do.

At which words a grave man of the town being much moved, said, My friend you
have spoken little better then treason, for it is the Queens Ape, and
therefore beware what you say; you say true, said ruaster Mayor, I muse who bad
that ^aucy fellow come into our company, I pray thee my friend depart, I think
you long to have us all hanged. So in brief he was put out of the doors, for
they were no company for him. Well now what is to be done in this matter?
Marry (said another Senior) we see by the Brooch in the man's hat that he is
the Queens man, and who knows what power a knave may have in the Court, to
do poor men wrong in the Country let us go and see the Ape, it is but two
pence a piece, and no doubt but it will be well taken, and if it come to the
Queens, ear, ^hee will think us kind people that would sew so much duty to
to her Ape, what may she think we would do to her Bears if they come
hither? besides, it is above 200. miles to London, and if we should be
complained on and fetched up with Pursinants, whereas now every man may escape
for his two pence, ^e warrant it would cost us ten groats a piece at the least.
This counsel passed current, and all the whole drove of the townsmen, with
wives and children, went to see the Ape, who was sitting on a table with a
chain about his neck, to whom master Mayor (because it was the Queens Ape)
put off his hat, and made a leg, but Jack let him pass unregarded, ^^t
mistress Mayoresse coming next in her deane linen held her hands before her
belly, and like a woman of good breeding made a low curtsie, whilst Jack
(still Court-like) although respected not the man, yet to express his
courtesy to his wife, he put forth his now toward her and made a mouth,
which the women perceiving, said, Husband I do think in my conscience that
the Queens Ape does mock me: whereat Jack made another mouth at her, which
master Mayor espying, was very angry, saying, Sirrah, thou Ape, I do see thy
sauciness, and if the rest of the courtiers have no more manners then thou
have, then they have all bin better fed then taught: and I will make thee know
before thou goeft from hence that this woman is my wife, an ancient woman, and
a midwife, and one that may be thy mother for age.

In this rage master Mayor went to the Inn door, where Iack-an-apes tutor was
gathering of money, to whom he said, Sir, do you allow your Ape to abuse my
wife? No sir, quoth the other not by any means: truly said the Mayor, there is
witness enough within that have seen him make mops and mowes at her, as if
she were not worthy to wipe his shoes, and I will not so put it up, Iacks
tutor replied, Sir, I will presently give him condign punishment: and straight
he took his Flanders blade, his Whip, and holding his Ape by the chain, he
gave him half a dozen ierks, which made his teeth dance in his head like so
many Virginal Iackes. Which master Mayor perceiving, ran to him, and held
his hands, saying, enough, enough, good sir, you have done like a Gentleman,
let me entreat, you not to give correction in your wrath: and I pray you and
your Ape after the Play is done, to come to my house and sup with me and my
wife.

(102)
This Tale I writ on purpose to stick in the teeth of my proud, sqeamish,
nice, critical header.

A Country man brought his wives water to a Physician, saying, Good morrow to
your worship master, Confusion; Physician thou would say, said the other
truly, said the fellow, I am no scholar, but altogether vnrude, and very
ingrum, and I have here my wives water in a potle pot, beseeching your
mastership to cast it: So the Physician took the water, which having put into
an vrinall and viewed it, he said, My friend, thy wife is very weak: truly,
quoth he, I think she be in a presumption: a consumption thou would say,
said the Physician: I told you before (the fellow replied) that I do not
understand your allegant speeches. Well, quoth the Doctor, does thy wife keep
her bed? No, truly sir, said he, she sold her bed a fortnight since: verily
quoth the Doctor she is very costiue: Costly said the man, your worship says
true, for I have spent all that I have upon her almost. Said the Doctor, I do
not say costly but costiue: and I pray thee tell me, is she loose or bound?
Indeed sir, said the man, she is bound to me during her life, and I am bound
to her: yea but I pray thee, said the Doctor, tell me in plain terms how
she goes to stool? truly, said the fellow, in plain terms she goes to
stool very strangely, for in the morning it is so hard that your Worship can
scarce bite it with your teeth, and at night it is so thin that you might eat
it with a spoone.

(103)
GOod fellows having well washed their wits in wine at a tavern, one of them
was importunate to be gone; to whom another of them said, I pray thee be
patient, talk no more of going, for if thou will sit still but a little, thou
shall find that we shall all be gone, though we stay here.

(104)
AN Idiot who dwelt with a rich uncle he had, was by a Courtier begged for a
fool, which the fool perceiving ran home to his uncles Parlour which was
fairly hung with Tapestry hangings, and in every one of the hangings was the
figure of a fool wrought. So the fool watching his opportunity, that no body
was in the Parlour, he took a knife and cut the fools pictures out of every
hanging and went and hid them in a hay mow, which when his uncle came in and
saw, he was very angry, demanded who had spoiled his hangings? Ah nunckle,
said the Idiot, I did cut out all the fools, for there is a great man at Court
that has begged me for a fool, and he would have all the rich fools he can
hear of, therefore did I cut them all out of your hangings, and I have hid
them where I think he will not find them in have.

(105)
A Fellow being scoulded at by his Wife, would make her believe he would drown
himself; and as he went toward the river, his Wife followed him desiring him
to forbear, or at the least to let her speak with him; well, quoth he,
speak briefly, for I am in haste; then husband said she, seeing you will
drown your self let me entreat you to take my counsel, which is, that you
cast not your self into this shallow place here, for it will grieve my heart
to see how long you will be a dying: but go with me a little way^ and I will
show you a deep place, where you shall be dispatched presently.

(106)
A Woman in Scotland lay dying, to whom her husband said, Wife now thou art
about to leave me alone, I pray thee tell me with whom shall I marry. She
replied, are you in haste to marry before the breath be out of my body, then
marry the devils dam: not so^ wife, said he, I have had his daughter already,
and if I should match with his mother too, then I should be guilty of incest.

(107)
THere was a Gentleman that was of a very hasty disposition, so that he would
fre^ and chase almost at all things, and be seldom pleased with any thing, and
withal was a great Tobacco taker: and as one time he beat and kicked his man,
the fellow ran from him, and told one of his fellows that he thought his
master was transformed into Brawne, for he was all Choler, and that he
thought the reason of his kicking was, because he drank Coltsfoot among his
Tobacco.

(108)
A Doctor of Physic in Italy asked a waterman if he might go well by water
over the River Po, the fellow told him, yea: but the Doctor when he came to
the water side, and saw it was a little rough weather, was very angry, and
said, You Watermen are the veriest knaves in the world, for to gain six pence
you care not to cast a man away: to whom the Waterman replied, Sir it appears
we are men of a cheaper function and better conscience then you; for you
sometimes will not cast a man away under forty, fifty, or one hundred crowns.

(109)
ONe borrowed a cloak of a Gentleman, and met one that knew him, who said, I
think I know that cloak: it may be so, said the other, I borrowed it of such
a Gentleman: the other told him that it was too short: yea, but quoth ^^ that
had the cloak, I will have it long enough before I bring it home again.

(110)
A Poor woman's husband was to be hanged at the town of Lancaster, and on the
execu^^^ ^ay she entreated the Shrieue to be good ^^ her and stand her friend:
the Shrieue said that he could do her no hurt, for her husband was condemned
and judged by the Law, and therefore hee^ must suffer, Ah good master Shrieue,
said the woman, it is not his life that ^^^^ but because I have far home, and
my ^^^e is old and stiff, therefore I would entreat you to do me the favor
to let my husband be hanged first.

(111)
ONe came into a College in a University, and asked how many Fellows belonged
to the house ^^ another replied, that there were more good fellows then good
^^^^llers two to one.

(112)
A Fellow being drunk, was brought before a Justice, who committed him to
prison: and the next day when he was to be discharged he was come to the
Justice again, who ^^^ to him, Sirrah, you were not drunk the last night:
your Worship says true, said the know. Yea, but you were drunk, said the
Justice, and you did abuse me, and said I was ^wise Justice: the fellow
replied, If I said so, I think I was drunk indeed, and I cry your Worship
mercy, for I will never do you that wrong when I am sober.

(113)
A Spaniard having but one eye chanced to meet a man in the field, where
drawing both their Rapiers, the other man with an unfortunate thrust struck
out the other eye of the Spaniard, whereat the blind man suddenly castdowne his
Rapiers, saying, Buonas noches, which in the Spanish tongue is good night.

(114)
A Reverend Preacher once reproved his Au^^ors for sleeping at his Sermons, but
^^^ said he I pray you do not refrain coming to Church though you do sleep,
for God Almighty may chance to take some of you napping.

(115)
A Saylor was absent on a voyage three years, in the mean space his wife had a
boy of 20. months old to entertain him withal at his return: the Saylor
fa^d, Wife, whose child is this? marry husband (quoth she) it is mine, and God
sent, it me in your absence. To which the man replied, I will keep this child
because God sent him, but if God send me any more on that fashion, he shall
keep them himself.

(116)
A Young fellow being newly married, having bin from home, came suddenly into
his house, and found his wife at foul play with another man: the poor young
Cuckold ran presently and told his wives father all the business, who replied
thus; Son I married her mother, and I tell thee plain that thy wife seems
to be her daughter in conditions as well as feature, for I have taken her
mother many times in that manner, and no warning would serve her, till in the
end age made her leave it, and so will thy wife do when she is old and past
it.

(117)
THree Gossips in a Tavern, chatting over a pint of Sherry, said one of them,
I muse whereabouts a Cuckolds horns do grow; quoth the second, I think they
do grow in the pole or nape of the neck; verily, quoth the third, I do
think it to be true, for my husbands bands are always worn out behind.

(118)
ONe called a Whore lazy jade, content your self, quoth another, as lazy as
she seems, she is able to carry a man quick to the devil.

(119)
A Company of Neighbors that dwelt all in one row in one side of a street,
one of them said, Let us be merry, for it is reported that we are all Cuckolds
that dwell on our side of the street (except one) one of the women sat musing,
to whom her husband said (wife) what all a mort, Why art thou so sad? no, quoth
she. I am not sad, but I am studying which of our neighbors it is that is not
a Cuckold.

(120)
A Gentleman being in a house of iniquity, or Couzen-German to a Bawdy House,
the room being very dark, he called a loud for a light Huswife; to whom a
wench made answer, I come Incontinent.

He calls for light, she understood him right,
For she was vanity which made her light:
She said, she would, Inconcinent attend,
To make her continent, she needs to mend.
(121)
TWo Mayds (or servants) dwelling in a house together, the one of them having
occasion to use a steel, smoothing Iron, or some such kind of Laundry
instrument, and having sought it, and not finding it, said to her fellow, thou
do mislay euerything in the house, and art so busy a baggage that thou can
let nothing stand; to which the other answered, and you are so wayward and
teasty, that a little thing troubles you, and puts you in a great anger.

(122)
IN a time of peace, a Captain being in company, where after dinner there was
dancing, with whom a Gentlewoman was desirous to dance, the Captain said, he
was made to fight, and not to dance: to whom she answered, that it were good
that he were oiled and hanged up in an Armoury till there were occasion to use
him.

(123)
ONe asked a huffing Gallant why he had not a Looking-glass in his Chamber;
he answered, he durst not, because he was often angry, and then he looked so
terribly that he was fearful to look upon himself.

(124)
THere was a fellow that (not for his goodness) was whipped at a Carts tail,
and in his execution he draw backward, to whom a Gentleman (in pity) said,
Fellow, do not draw back, but press forward, and thy execution and pains
will be the sooner past and done; to whom the Rogue answered, It is my turn
now, when thou art whipped, do thou go as thou will, and now I will go as I
please.

(125)
ONe said, that he had trauaild so far that he had laid his hand upon the
hole where the wind came forth: a second said, that he had been at the
farthest edge of the world, and driven a nail quite through it: the third
replide, that he had been further, for he was then on the other side of the
world, and clencht that nail.

(126)
THere was a Pope, who being dead, it is said that he came to heaven gate and
knocked, Saint Peter (being within the gate) asked who was there? The Pope
answered, brother it is I, I am the last Pope deceased; Saint Peter said, if
thou be the Pope, why do thou knock, thou having the keys may unlock the
gate and enter? The Pope replied, saying, that his predecessors had the keys,
but since their time the wards were altered.

(127)
A Rich Miser, being reviled by a poor man, whom he had oppressed, the rich
man said, Thou dog, leave thy barking: the poor man answered, that he had
one quality of a good dog, which was, to bark when he saw a thief.

(128)
A Man being deeply in play at dice, having lost much money, his son (a
little lad) being by him, wept, quoth the father, Boy, why do thou weep? the
boy answered, that he had read that Alexander the Great wept when he heard
that his father (King Philip) had conquered many Cities, Towns and
Territories, fearing that he would leave him ^^hing to win; and I weep the
contrary ^ay (quoth the boy) for I fear that my father will leave me nothing
to loose.

(129)
AN Oppressor having feld all the trees in a Forest, which for a long time had
been ^^e relief of many poor people, said, that it was as good as a Commedy
to him to see the trees fall, to whom a poor man said, I ^^pe as thou make a
Commedy of our miseries, that three of those trees may be reserved ^^^ ^^ish a
Tragedy for thee and thy Children.

(130)
ONe lamented his friends hard fortune, that being raised to a place of honor,
his grown senseless, forgetting all his old ^^milar acquaintance, and so
far from knowing any man, that he knew not himself.

(131)
THe Plough surpasses the Pike, the Harrow excels the Halbert, the Culter
ex^^deth the Cuttleaxe, the Goad is better ^^ the Gunne; for the one sort are
the instruments of life and profit, and the other are the engines of death, and
all kinds of cala^^ries.

(132)
A Poor man is in two extremes: first, if he ^^^ he dies with shame; secondly,
if he ^^^ not, he dies with hunger.

(133)
ONe being in office, was reproved for negligence; his excuse was, that it was
his best policy to be idle; for if he should do ^^^, he should displease God,
and if he should ^^e well should offend men: to whom one answered, you ought to
do your duty, for ^^ well doing you shall please God, and in ill ^^^ing you
shall please men.

(134)
Women take great pleasure to be sued to, though they never mean to grant.

(135)
ONe said that Suitors in Law were mortal, and their suite immortal, and that
there is more profit in a quick denial, then in a long dispatch.

(136)
A Trauailer was talking what a goodly City Rome was, to whom one of the
company said, that all Rome was not in Italy, for we had too much Rome in
England.

(137)
A Country fellow came into Westminster Hall, where one told him that the
roof of it was made of Irish wood, and that the nature of it was such, that no
Spider would come near it, and he said (further) that in Ireland no Toad,
Snake, or Caterpiller can live, but that the earth or the trees will destroy
them: Ah (quoth the Country man) I wish with all my heart that the Benches,
Bars and Flooring were all made of such earth and wood, and that all Coaches,
Barges, and Wherries were made of Irish Oak that all our English Caterpillars
might be destroyed.

(138)
MAster Thomas Coriat (on a time) complained against me to King James,
desiring his Majesty that he would cause some heavy punishment to be
inflicted upon me, for abusing him in writing (as he said I had) to whom the
King replide, that when the Lords of his honorable Privy Council had leisure,
and nothing else to do, then they should hear and determine the differences
betwixt Master Coriat the Scholar, and John Tailor the Sculler: which answer
of the King, was very acceptable to Master Coriat. Whereupon I made this
following petition to the King.

TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.
The humble petition of John Tailor your
^
^
I beg thou will be graciously inclined
To read these lines my rusticke pen compile:
Know (Royal Sir) Tom Coriate works the wile,
Your high displeasure on my head to bring
^
Did hear the cause of two offending Harlots.
So, I beseech thee (Great) great Britains King,
To do the like for two contending Varlots
^
A Ribble ^^bble of Gossips.
THe space of a ^orting he from the Bearbaiting ^ stulted by the right reverend
Matron, madam Isabel that Katherin should go no more a maying ^ spoones; now
old Sibill all this while sat mumping like a gib Cat, and on the sudden: she
starts up and thrusts Charity out of doors to take up her lodging where she
could get it well being much offended to see Marget in^^ ^ it, and bade her
tell Alice that unless she tool^^ heed the pot would run over and the fat lie
in the fire; at this ^^^ ^ Now in the heat of all this business Bar^^^ tells
Frances how there is good ale at the labo^ in vain: the matter being brought to
this pass Winisrit says that her god-daughter ^^^^^ newly brought, ^^^ (God
bless the child) and ^^^ Constance the Comfit maker wife, at the ^^^ of the
Spiders leg must be ^ dress to have taken measure of a pair of Cuffes for her
maid Darcas: Now to conclude the ^^^ ^ ^^ry kindly batled her penny with her at
^^^ pig. Well quoth Sara all this wind shakes ^^^ corn, and I should have in a
starching mistress ^ toward so good a conclusion, let us ^en have th^^ the other
pint before we go, truly says laue the motion is not to be misliked, what
say, ^^^^ ^^^ I would go ^^^^^ ^^^

ADOGGE OF WAR, OR, The Travels of Drunkard, the famous Curre of the Round
Woollstaple in Westminster. His services in the Netherlands, and lately in
FRANCE, with his home return.
The Argument.
AN honest, well-knowing and well-knowne Soldier, (whose name for some Reasons
I conceal) dwelt lately in Westminster, in the round Woolstaple, he was a man
only for Action, but such Action as Loyalty did always justify, either for
his Prince, Coun^^^y ^ ^^ their Dear and near Friends or Alltes, in such
noble designs he would and did often ^ ^^ch courage, and good Approuement
employ himself in the Low Countries, having always ^^th him a little black
Dog, whom he called Drunkard; which Curre would (by no ^^^es) ever for sake
or leave him. But lately in these French Wars, the Dog being in the ^^^ i^
RHEA, where his, Master (valiantly fighting) was unfortunately slain, whose
^^^ was grieved for by as many as knew him; and as the Corpse lay dead, the
poor loving ^^lesse Dog would not forsake it, until an English Soldier
pulled off his Masters Coat, ^^ the Dog followed to a Boat, by which means
became back to Westminster, where be ^^^ remains. Upon whose side ^^^ (for
the love Iowed his deceased Master) I have writ these ^^^ing lines, to express
my A^^ction to the Proverb, Love me and love my Hound; ^^^e a little rubbed our
Gull^gallrnt Roarers over the Coxcombes, and withal I have not ^^^ our
nose-wise Pr^eisiant^ ^^^ Dog Drunkard do a little snap at them, I hold it ^^^
wisest way to be silent and put it up, but if they will be maundring, let them
expect what ^^^ ^^^ ^^^^

To the Reader.
REader if you expect from hence,
For overplus of wit or Sense,
I deal with no such Traffic:
Heroicks and Iambicks I,
My Buskinde Muse has laid them by,
Pray be content, with Saphicke.
Drunkard the Dog my Patron is,
And he does love me well for this,
Whose love I take for Guerdon;
And he is a Dog of Mars, his Train.
Who has seen men and Harses slain,
The like was never heard on.
A Dog of War:
STand clear, my masters ware your shins,
For now to bark my Muse begins,
It Is of a Dog, I write now:
Yet let me tell you for excuse,
That Muse or Dog, or Dog or Muse,
Have no intent to bite now.
In dogg^ ^^^ Rimes my Lines are writ,
As for a Dog I thought it fit,
And fitting best his Carkas.
Had I been silent as a Stoicke,
Or had I writ in Verse Heroicke,
Then had I been a Stark A^^^.
Old Homer wrote of Frogs and Mice,
And Rablaies wrote of Nittes and Lice.
And Virgill of A Fly.
One wrote the Treatise of the Fox,
Another praisd the Frenchmans Pox,
Whose praise was but a Lie.
Great Alexander had a Horse,
A famous Beast of mighty force
Y cleap'd Bucophatel:
He was a stone and flurdi^ Steed.
And of an ex'lent Race and Breed.
But that concerns not us.
I lift not write the babble praise
Of Apes, or Owls, or Popinjaies,
Or of the Cat Gr^^^
^^^ of a true and trusty Dog,
Who well could faune, ^^^ never cogge,
His praise my Pen must walk in.
^^d Drunkard he is falsely named,
For which that Vice he never was blamed,
For he loves not god Ba^^bus,
The Kitchen he esteems norre dear,
Then Cellers full of Wine or Bear,
Which oftentimes does wrack us.
^ee is no Mastiffe, huge of him
Or Water-spaniell, that can swim,
For bloud-hound or no Setter:
No Bob-taile ^yke, or Trandle-taile,
Nor can the Partridge spring or Quail
^^^ yet he is much better.
^^ Dainty Ladies filling-Hound,
That liue's upon our ^^^ Ground,
For Mungrell Cur or Shog:
should Litters, or whole Kennells dare,
^ith honest Drunkard to compare,
My^, pen writes marry fough.
The Otter Hound, the Fox Hound, nor
The swift foot Greyhound cared he for,
Nor Cerberus Hells Bandogge;
His service proves them
Curs and Tikes,
^^d his renown a terror strikes,
In Water dog and Land dog.
Against brave Buquoy, or stout Dampiere,
He durst have barked withouten fear,
Or against the hot Count Tilly:
At Bergen Leaguer and Bredha,
Against the Noble Spinola,
He showed himself not silly.
He served his Master at commands,
In the most warlike Netherlands,
In Holand, Zealand, Brabant,
He to him still was true and just,
And if his fare were but a Crust,
He patiently would knab on it.
He durst to have stood stern A^ax frown,
When wise Ulysses talked him down
In grave Dubus illis,
When he by cunning prating won
The Armor, from fierce Tellamon,
That longed to Achilles:
Brave Drunkard, often on Gods dear ground,
Took such poor lodging as he found,
In Town, Field, Camp or cortage
His Bed but cold, his diet thin,
He often in that poor case was in,
To want both Meat and Portage.
Two rows of Teeth for
Arms be bore,
Which in his mouth he always wore,
Which served to fight and feed too:
His grumbling for his Drum did pass,
And barking (loud) his Ordnance was,
Which helped in time of need too.
His Tail his Ensign he did make,
Which he would often display, and shake,
Fast in his Poope vpreared:
His Powder hoc, but somewhat danke,
His Shot in (sent) most dangerous rank,
Which sometimes made him feared:
Thus has he long served near and far,
Well known to be A Dog of War,
Though he never shot with Musket;
Yet Cannons roar, or Culuerings,
That whizzing through the welkin sings,
He slighted as a Pusse-Cat.
For Guns, nor Drums, nor Trumpets clang,
Nor hunger, cold, nor many a pang,
Could make him leave his Master:
In joy, and in adversity,
In plenty, and in poverty,
He often was a Taster.
Thus soru'd he on the Belgia Coast,
Yet never was heard to to brag or boast,
Or services done by him:
He is no Pharisey to blow
A Trumpet, his good deeds to show,
It Is pity to be^ie him.
At last he home returned in peace,
Till wars, and iarres, and scarres increase
Twixt us, and France, in malice:
Away went he and crossed the Sea,
With His Master, to the Isle of Rhea,
A good way beyond Callice.
He was so true, so good, so kind,
He scornd to stay at home behind,
And leave his Master frustrate;
For which, could I like Ovid write,
Or else like Virgill could endite,
I would his praise illustrate.
I wish my hands could never stir,
But I do love a thankful Curre,
More than a Man ungrateful:
And this poor dogs fidelity,
May make a thanklesse Knave discry,
How much that vice is hateful.
For why, of all the faults of Men,
Which they have got from Hels black den,
Ingratitude the worst is:
For treasons, murders, incests, rapes,
Nor any sin in any shapes,
^^^ nor so accursed is.
^ope I shall no ^ger gain,
^^^doe write a word, or twain,
^ow this dog was distressed:
^^^ master being wounded dead,
^^^, cut and slashed, from heel to head,
^ke how he was oppressed,
^ o lose him that he loved most,
^^^ be upon a foreign Coast,
Where no man would relieve him:
He licked his Masters wounds in love,
^^d from his Carkas would not move,
Although the sight did grieve him.
By chance a Soudier passing by,
That did his masters Coat espy,
^^d quick away he took it;
^^t Drunkard followed to a Boat,
To have again his Masters Coat.
^^ch theft he could not brook it.
^o after all his woe and wrack,
To Vistminster he was brought back,
^^^ poor half starued Creature;
And in remembrance of his cares,
Upon his back he dosely wears,
A Mourning Coat by nature.
Live Drunkard, sober,
Drunkard live,
I know thou no offense wlt give,
Thou art a harmles dumb thing;
And for thy love I Will freely grant,
Rather then thou should ever want,
Each day to give thee something.
For thou have got a good report,
Of which there is many a Dog comes short,
And very few Men, gain it;
Though they all dangers bravely bide,
And watch, fast, fight, run, go and rde,
Yet hardly they attain it.
Some like Dominicall Letters go,
In Scarlet from the top to toe.
Whose valors talk and smoke all.
Who make (God sink'em) their discourse.
Refuse, Renounce, or Dam, that is worse,
I wish a halter choke all.
Yet all their talk is Bastinado,
Strong Armado Hot Scalado,
Smoking Trinidado
Of Canuasado, Pallizado
Of the secret Ambuscado,
Boasting with Brauado.
If Swearing could but make a Man,
Then each of these is one that can
With oaths, an Army scatter:
If Oaths could conquer Fort, or Hold,
Then I presume these Gallants could
With Braggs, a Castle batter.
Let such but think on Drunkards fame,
And note therewith their merits blame,
How both are universal;
Then would such Coxcombs blush to see
They by a dog outstrip'd should be,
Whose praise is worth rehearsal.
The times now full of danger are,
And we are round ingadg'd in war,
Our foes would feign distress us:
Yet may a stubborn mizer knave,
Will give no Coin his
Throat to save,
If he were stored like Craesus.
These hide-bound Varlets, worse then Turks,
Top full with Faith, but no Good works,
A crew of fond Precise-men;
In factions, and in emulation,
Caterpillars of a Nation,
Whom few esteem. for wise men.
But leaving such to mend, or end:
Back to the Dog my Verse does bend,
Whose worth, the subject mine is:
Though thou a dogs life here do lead,
Let not a dogs death strike thee dead:
And make thy fatal Finis.
Thou shall be Stelliside by me,
I Will make the Dog Star wait on thee,
And in his toome I Will seat thee:
When Soll does in his Progress swinge,
And in the Dogge-dayes hotly singe,
He shall not over heat thee.
So honest Drunkard now adue,
Thy praise no longer I Will pursue,
But still my love is to thee:
And when thy life is gone and spent,
These Lines shall be thy Monument,
And shall much service do thee.
I loved thy master, so did all
That knew him, great and small,
And he did well deserve it:
For he was honest, valiant, good,
And one that manhood understood,
And did till death preserve it:
For wose sake, I Will his Dog prefer,
And at the Dog at Westminster,
Shall Drunkard be a Bencher;
Where I will set a work his chaps,
Not with bare bones, or broken scraps,
But Victuals from my Trencher.
All those my Lines that Illdigast,
Or madly do my meaning wrest,
In malice, or derision:
Kind Drunkard, prithee bite them all,
And make them reele from wall to wall,
With Wine, or Maults incision.
I know when foes did fight or parle,
Thou valiantly would grin and snarle,
Against an Army adverse;
Which made me bold, with rusticke Pen,
Stray here and there, and back again,
To blaze thy fame in mad Verse.
It was no Auaritious scope,
Or flattrie, or than windy hope
Of any fee, or stipend:
For none, nor yet for all of these,
But only my poor self to please,
This mighty Volume I Penned
ANNO.
This Series writ the day and year,
That Seacoales were exceeding dear.
THus the old Proverb is fulfilled, A Dog shall have his day: And this Dog
has not out lived his Reputation, but (to the perpetual renown of himself,
and good example of his own begotten Puppies) he has his bright day of Fame
perspicuously shining.

I read in Anthony Gueuaroa his Golden Epistles, that the Great Alexander
buried his Horse; that the Emperor Augustus made a stately Monument for his
Parrot: and that Heliogabalus did embaulme and intombe his Sparrow. Happy were
those Creatures in dying before their Masters: I could with all my heart have
been glad that Drunkards fortune had been the like, upon the condition that I
had paid for his Burial.

But to speak a little of the nature of Beasts, and of the service and
fidelity of Dogs toward their Masters: Quintus Curtius writes, that the
Elephant whereon Porus the Indian King road in the Battle against Alexander,
when the King was beaten down to the ground, that the Elephant drew his Master
with his Trunk out of the danger of the Fight, and so saved him

A Groom of the Chamber to French King Francis the first, was murdered in the
Forest of Fountein Bellcau, but the said Groom had a Dog, who afterward (in
the presence of the King and all the Court) did tear the Murderer in pieces.

Amongst the Wattermen at the Blackfriars, there lately was a little Bitch
that Whelped or Litter'd in the Lane under a bench, the Men perceived that she
had more Puppies then she could sustain, did take three of them and cast them
into the Thames, (the water being high) but the next day, when the water was
ebd away, the Bitch went down the stairs, and found her three drouned
Puppies, when presently she dig'd a deep pit in the ground, and drew them into
it one after an other, and then scraped the gravel upon them and so hid them.

I could produce and relate many of these examples and accidents, but they are
so frequent and familiar, that almost every man has either known or hard of
the like. But chiefly for the Dog, he is in repuest above all Beasts, and by
and from Dogs our Separatists and Amsterdamians, and our Precise despisers of
all honest and laudable Recreations may see their errors: For of all the
Creatures, there are most diversity in the shapes and forms of Dogs; of all
which, there are but two sorts that are useful for Man's profit, which two are
the Mastiffe, and the little Curre, Whippet, or Housedogge; all the rest are
for pleasure and recreation; so likewise is the Mastiffe for Bear and Bull:
But the Water-spaniell, Land-spaniell, Greyhound, Fox-hound, Buck-hound,
Bloodhound, Otter-hound, Setter, Tumbler, with Shough and Dainty, my Ladies
delicate Fisting hound; all these are for pleasure: by which we may perceive
that Man is allowed lawful and honest recreation, or else these Dogs had
never bin made for such uses.

But many pretty ridiculous aspersions are cast upon Dogs, so that it would
make a Dog laugh to hear and understand them As I have heard a Man say, I am
as hot as a Dog, or, as cold as a Dog; I sweat like a Dog, (when indeed a
Dog never sweates,) as drunk as a Dog, he swore like a Dog: and one told
a Man once, That his Wife was not to be believed, for she would lie like a
Dog; marry (quoth the other) I would give twelve pence to see that trick, for
I have seen a Dog to lie with his Nose in his Tail.

FINIS.
The World runs on wheels: OR, Odds betwixt Carts and Coaches.
The meaning of the Emblem.


THe Devil, the Flesh, the World does Man oppose,
And are his mighty and his mortal foes:
The Devil and the whorish Flesh draws still.
The World on wheels runs after with good will.
For that which we the World may justly call,
(I mean the lower Globe Terrestrial)
Is (as the Devil, and a Whore does please)
Drawn here and there, and every where, with ease.
Those that their Lives to virtue here do frame,
Are in the World, but yet not of the same.
Some such there are, whom neither Flesh or Devil
Can wilfully draw on to any evil:
But for the World, as it is the World, you see,
It^^^ on wheels, and who the Palfreys be.
Which Emblem to the Reader does display,
The Devil and Flesh run swift away.
The Chained ensnared World does follow fast,
Till All into Perditions pit be cast.
The Picture topsie-turuie stands h^wwaw:
The World turned vpside down, as all men know
TO The Noble Company of Cordwainers, the worshipful Company of Sadlers and
Woodmongers: To the worthy, honest and laudable Company of Watermen; And to the
Sacred Society of Hackney-men; And finally, to as many as are grieved and
unjustly impouerished, and molested with the Worlds running on Wheels.
GEntlemen and Yeomen, marvel not that I write this Pamphlet in Prose now,
having beforetimes set forth so many Books in Verse: The first reason that
moved me to write thus, was because I was Lame, and durst not write Verses, for
sear they should be infected with my Grief, and be lame too. The Second
Reason is, because that I find no good rhyme for a Coach, but Broach, Roach,
Encroach, or such like. And you know that the Coach has ouer-throwne the good
use of the Broach and Broach-turner, turning the one to Rackes, and the other
to Iackes, quite through the Kingdom. The Roach is a dry bish, much like the
unprofitable profit of a Coach; it will cost more the dressing and
appurtenances then it is worth. For the word Encroach, I think that best befits
it, for I think never such an impudent proud, sa^cie Intruder or Encroacher
came into the world as a Coach is; for it has driven many honest Families out
of their Houses, many Knights to Beggars, Corporations to poverty, Almesd^sd^s
^^^ to all misdeedes, Hospitality to extortion, Plenty to famine, Humility to
pride, Compassion to oppression, and all Earthly goodness almost to an utter
confusion.

These have been the causes why I writ this Book in Prose, and Dedicated it
to all your good Companies, knowing that you have borne a heavy share in the
Calamity which these hired Hackney bell-Carts have put this Commonwealth
unto; For in all my whole Discourse, I do not enueigh against any Coaches that
belong to persons of worth or quality, but only against the Carter pillar
swarm of hyrelings; they have undone my poor Trade, whereof I am in Member,
and though I look for no reformation yet I expect the benefit of an old
proverb, (Give the losers leave to speak.) I have imbroadered it with mirth,
Quilted it with material stuff, Laced it with similitudes; Sowed it with
comparisons, and in a word, so played the Tailor with it, that I think it will
fit the wearing of any honest man's Reading, attention, and liking; But
howsoever, I leave both it and my self to remain.

Yours as you are mine, John Tailor.

The World runs on Wheels.
WHat a Murraine, what piece of work have we here? The World runs a wheels?
On my Conscience my Dungcart will be most vnsauorly offended with it: I have
heard the words often, The World runs on Wheels; what like Pompeies Bridge at
Ostend? The great Gridyron in Christ-church, The Landskips of China, or the new
found Instrument that goes by winding up like a Jack, that a Gentleman
entreated a Musician to Roast him Seliengers Round upon it? Ha! how can you make
this good Master Poet? I have heard that the World stands stock still, and
never stirs, but at an Earthquake; and then it trembles at the wickedness of
the Inhabitants, and like an old Mother, groans under the misery of her
ungracious Children: well, I will buy this volume of invention for my Boys to
read at home in an Evening when they come from School, there may be some
goodness in it: I promise you truly I have found in some of these Books very
shrewd Items; yea, and by your leave, somewhat is found in them now and then,
which the wisest of us all may be the better for: though you call them
Pamphlets, to tell you true, I like em better that are plain and merrily
written to a good intent, then those who are purposely stuffed and studied, to
deceive the world, and undo and Country, That tells us of Proiects beyond the
Moon, of Golden Mines, of Devices to make the Thames run on the North side of
London (which may very easily be done, by removing London to the Banke-side) of
planting the I Will of Dogs with Whiblins, Corwhichets, Mushromes and Tobacco. Tut
I like none of these, Let me see, as I take it, it is an inuectiue against
Coaches, or a proof or trial of the Antiquity of Carts and Coaches: It Is so,
and Gods blessing light on his heart that wrote it, for I think never since
Pheton brake his neck, never Land has endured more trouble and molestation
then this has, by the continual rumbling of these vpstart 4. wheeled
To^toyses, as you may perhaps find anon: For as concerning the Antiquity of
the Cart, I think it beyond the limmits of Record or writing. Besides, it has
a Reference or allusion to the Motion of the Heavens, which turns upon the
Equinoctial Axeltree, the two wheels being the Articke and Antarticke Poles.
Moreover, though it be poetically feined, that the Sun (whom I could have
called Phoebus, Tytan, Apollo, Sok, or Hiperion) is drawn by his four ho^ and
headstrong Horses (whose names as I take it are) AEolus, AEthon, Phlegon, and
Pyrois: Yet do I not find that Triumphant, Refulgent extinguisher of darkness
is Coach'd, but that he is continully carted through the twelve signs of the
Zodiaque.

And of Copernicus his opinion were to be allowed, that the Firmament with the
Orbs and Planets did stand immovable, and that only the Terrestrial Globe
turns round daily, according to the motion of Time, yet could the World have
no resemblance of a fourewheel'd Coach; but in all reason it must whir^^ round
but upon one Axeltree, like a twowheelde Cart.

Nor can the searching eye, or most admirable Art of Astronomy, ever yet
find, that a Coach could attain to that high exaltation of honor, as to be
placed in the Firmament: It is apparently seen, that Charles his Cart (which we
by custom call Charles his Waine) is most gloriously stellifide, where in the
large Circumference of Heaven, it is a most useful and beneficial Sea-marke
(and sometimes a Land-marke too) guiding and directing in the right way, such as
travail on Neptunos waylesse Bosom, and many which are often benighted in
wild and desert passages, as my self can witness upon New market heath,
where if that good ^^^ had not Carted me to my Lodging, I and my Horse might
have wandered, I know not whither.

Moreover, as Man is the most noblest of all Creatures; and all foure-footed
Beasts are ordained for his use and service; so a Cart is the Emblem of a Man,
and a Coach is the Figure of a Beast; For as Man has two legs, a Cart h^^h
two wheels: The Coach being (in the like ^^^) the true resemblance of a Beast,
by which is parabolically demonstrated unto us, that as much as Men are
superior to Beasts, so much are honest and needful Carts more nobly to be
regarded esteemed, above needless, vpstart, ^^^sticall, and Time troubling
Coaches.

And as necessities and things, whose commodious uses cannot be wanted, are to
be respected before Toys and trifles (whose beginning is Folly, continuance
Pride, and whose end is Ruin) I say as necessity is to be preferred before
superfluity, so is the Cart before the Coach; For Stones, Timber, Corn, Wine,
^eete or any thing that wants life, there is a ^^^ they should be carried,
because they are dead things and cannot go on foot, which necessity the honest
Cart does supply: But the coach, like a superfluous babble, or uncharitable
^^^er does seldom or never carry or help any ^ead or helpless thing, but on
the contrary, it helps those that can help themselves (like Scog^^^ when he
greazd the fat Sow on the Butt^^^ and carries men and women, who are a^^^ go
or run^ Ergo the Cart is necessary, and the Coach superfluous.

Besides I am verily persuaded, that the ^^^est Coxcombe that ever was iolted
in a ^^^^, will not ^e so impudent but will con^^^ that humility is to be
preferred before ^^^^ which being granted, note the affa^ility ^^ low lines of
the Cart, and the pride and in^^lency of the Coach; For the carman humbly ^^^^^
it on foot as his Beast does, whilst the ^^^^^^ is mounted (his fellow-horses
and himself being all in a Livery) with as many ^^^^ieties of Laces facings,
Cloth and Colors ^^ ^^^ in the R^^nebowe like a Motion or Pa^^^ rides in state
and loades the pour Beast, which the carman does not, and if the Carmans horse
be melancholy or dull with hard and heavy labor, then will he like a kind
Piper, whistle him a fit of mirth, to any tune from above Eela, to below
Gammoth, of which generositie and courtesy your coachman is altogether
ignorant: for he never whistles, but all his music is to rappe out an oath,
or blurt out a curse against his Teeme.

The word carmen (as I find it in the Dictionary, does signify a Verse, or a
Song, and betwixt Carmen and Carmen, there is some good correspondency, for
Versing, Singing, and Whistling, are all three Musical: besides, the Carthorse
is a more learned beast then the Coachhorse: for scarce any Coachhorse in the
world does know any letter in the Book, when as every Carthorse does know the
letter G, very understandingly.

If Adultery or Fornication be committed in a Coach, it may be gravely and
discreetly punished in a Cart, for as by this means the coach may be a running
Bawdy House of abomination, so the Cart may, and often is the sober, modest,
and civil paced Instrument of Reformation: so as the Coach may be vices
infection, the Cart often is vices correction.

It was a time of famous memorable misery, when the Danes had tyrannical
insulting domination in this land: for the slavery of the English was so
insupportable, that he must Plow, Sow, Reap, Thrash, Winnow, Grind, Sift,
Leaven, Knead, and Bake, and the domineering Dane would do nothing but sleep,
play, and eat the fruit of the Englishmans labor, which well may be alluded
to the careful Cars; for let it plough, carry and re-carry, early or late, all
times and weathers, yet the hungry Coach gnawes him to the very bones. Oh
beware of a Coach, as you would do of a Tiger, a Wolf, or a Leuiathan: I Will
assure you, it eats more (though it drinks less) then the Coachman and his
whole Teeme; it has a mouth gaping on each side, like a monster, with which
they have swallowed all the good housekeeping in England. It lately (like a
most insatiable devouring Beast) did eat up a Knight, a neighbor of mine, in
the County of N. a Wood of above 400. Akers, as if it had been but a bunch of
Radish: of another, it devoured a whole Castle, as it had been a Marchpane,
scarcely allowing the Knight and his Lady half a cold shoulder of Mutton to
their suppers on a Thursday night; out of which reuersion the Coachman and the
Footeman could pick but hungry Vailes: in another place (passing through a
Park) it could not be content to eat up all the Dear, and other grazing
Cat^ell, but it bitvp all the Oaks that stood bareheaded, there to do homage
to their Lord and Master ever since the conquest, crushing their old sides,
as easily as one of our fine Daines (with a poisoned breath) will snap a
Cinnamon stick; or with as much facility, as a Bewde will eat a Pipin Tart, or
swallow a ^^ewed Pruine.

For (what call you the Town) where the great Oysters come from? there it has
eaten up a Church, Chauncell, Steeple, Bells and all, and it threatens a great
Common that lies near, which in diebus illis has relieved thousands of poor
people; may, so hungry it is, that it will scarcely endure, in a Gentleman's
house a poor neighbors child so much as to turn a Spit; nor a Yeomans son
to enter the house, though but in good will to the Chamber maid, who anciently
from 16. to 36. was wont to have his breeding either in the Burtry, or Celler,
Stable, or Larder, and to bid good man Hobs good wife Grub, or the youth of the
parish welcome at a Christmas time; but those dates are gone, and their
fellows are never like to be seen about any of our to gallime houses. There
was a Knight (an acquain^^ce of mine) whoseh wole means in the world was but
three score pounds a year, and above 20. of the same went for his Wives
coach-^^^^; now (perhaps) you shall have an Irish footman with a ^acket eudgeld
down the shoulders and skirs, with yellow or orange t^wny Lace may ^^^t from
London 3. or 4. score miles to one of there decayed Mansions, when the sim^ring
scornful Pass, the supposed ^^^ of the house (with a mischief) who is
indeed, a kind of creature retired for a while into the Country to escape the
whip in the City, ^hee demands out of the window scarce ready, and dressing
herself, in a glass at noone: Fellow; what is thine Errand, have thou letters
to me? And if it be about dinner, a man may sooner blow up the gates of Bergen
^p Zome with a Charm, then get entrance, within the bounds of their Barred,
Bolted, and Barracadoed Wicket: About two of Clock, it may be walking an
house or twain, Sir Sella^^ comes down untrust, with a Pipe of Tobacco in his
fist, to know your business, having first peeped through a broken pane of
Glass, to see whether you come to demand any money, or old debt, or not, when
after a few hollow dry complements (without drink he turns you out at the
gate, his worship, returning to his Stoue? What Towns are laid waste? what
fields lie untilled? what goodly houses are turned to the habitations of
Howlets, Daives, and Hobg^^? what numbers of poor are increased? yea, examine
this last year but the Register books or buria^^ of our gred ^est Towns and
Pari^^^ of the land, as Winondham in Norfolk; W^^ Chapel near Ev^don, and
many other, and see how many have been buried weekly that have merely
perished for want of brea^; wh^^^ Pride and Luxury dam up our streetes^
Barracado our high ways, and are ready even to drive over their Graves, whom
their unmerciful Pride has fami^hed.

Whence come Leather to be so dear, but by reason (or as I should say against
reason) ^^^ the multitude of Coaches, and Cor^o^^^ who consume and take up the
best Hides ^^^ can be gotten in our Kingdom, ^^^ that I cannot buy a pair of
Boots for my ^^^ under an Angel, nor my Wife a pa^^^ of Shoes (though her
foot be under the ^^^ under eight roates of three ^^^ by which means, many
honest shoo^^^ are either undone, or undoing and ^^^ numbers of poor
Christians are enforced ^^ got ^are footed in the cold Winters, till ^^^ very
be^^mme^nesse, some their to^^, ^^^ ^^^ their fee^^ ^^^^ rotted off, to the ^^^
less increases of crooked Cripples, ^^^ wooden ^^^ beggars, of which sort of
^^^ ^^^ wretches, every stre^^^^ ple^^ifully stored with, to the scorn of
other ^^^ions, and the shame and obloquy of our ^^ne.

The Saddlers (being an ancient, a worthy and a useful Company) they have
almost overthrown the whole Trade, to the undoing of ^^ny honest families; For
whereas within our memories, our Nobility and Gentry would ^ide^ well mounted
(and sometimes walk on ^^^) gallantly attended with three or foure^^ore brave
fellows in blue coats, which was a glory to our Nation; and gave more ^^^^ to
the beholders, then forty of your Leather tumbrels: Then men preserved their
bodies strong and able by walking, riding, and other manly exercises: Then
Saddle^s were a good Trade, and the name of a Coach was Heathen Greek. Who ever
saw (but upon ^^traordinary occasions) Sir Philip Sidney, Sir ^^^is Drake, Sir
John Norris, Sir William ^^^ Sir Roger Williams, or (whom I should ^^^e named
first) the famous Lord Gray, and ^^^^^^ghby, with the renowned George Earl of
Camberland, or Robert Earl of Essex? These so^^es of Mars, who in their times
were the glorious Brooches of our Nation, and admirable terror to our Enemies:
these I say, did ^^^e small uses of Coaches, and there were ^^o main reasons
for it, the one was, that there were but few Coaches in most of their ^^nes^
and the second reason is, they were ^^lly foes to all sloth and effeminacy: The
^^^ was Sir Francis Vere, with thousands others: but what should I talk
further? This is the tarrling, rolling, rumbling age, and The World runs on
Wheels. The hackney-men, who were wont to have furnished Travelers ^^ all
places, with fitting and serviceable horses for any journey, (by the multitude
of Coa^^^ ^^^ undone by the dozens, and the whole Commonwealth most abominably
iaded, ^^in many places a man had as good to ride upon a wooden post, as to
poast it upon one of ^^^ hunger-staru'd hirelings: which enormi^^^ can be
imputed to nothing, but the Coa^^^ ^^^^^sion, is the Hackneymans confusion. Nor
have we poor Watermen the least ^^^ to complain against this infernal swarm
of Trade-spillers, who like the Grasshoppers, or Caterpiller's of Egypt, have so
ouerrun the land, that we can get no living upon the water; for I dare truly
affirm, that every day in any Term (especially if the Court be at
VVhitchall) they do rob us of our livings, and carry Five hundred sixty fares
daily from us; which numbers of passengers were wont to supply our necessities,
and enable us sufficiently with means to do our Prince and Country service:
and all the whole fry of our famous whores, whose ancient Lodgings were near
S. Katherines, the Bankeside, La^nbethMarsh, Westminster, White Friars,
Coleharbor, or any other place near the Thames, who were wont after they had
any good Trading, or reasonable commings in, to take a Boat and air
themselves upon the water, (yea, and by your leave) be very liberal too, and I
say, as a Mercer said once, A whores money is as good as a Ladies, and a bawdes
as current as a Midwiues. Tush, those times are past, and our Hackney Coaches
have hurried al our hackney customers quite out of our ^each, toward the North
parts of the City, where they are daily practiced in the Coach, that by often
iolting they may the better endure the Cart upon any occasion, and indeed, many
times a hired Coachman with a basket-hilted blade hanged or executed about his
shoulders in a belt, (with a cloak of some pide color, with two or three
change of Laces about) may manne a brace or a Leash of these curuetting
Cockatrices to their places of recreation, and so save them the charge of
maintaining as Sir Pandarus or an Apple-squire; which service indeed, to speak
the truth, a Waterman is altogether unfit for; and the worst is, most of them
are such Loggerheads, that they either will not learn, but as I think would
scorn to be taught: so that if the Sculler had not been paid when he was
paid, it is to be doubted that he should never have b^^paid^ for the coachman
has gotten all the custom from the Scullers paymistris.

This is one apparent reason, why all the whores have forsaken us, and spend
their cash so free and frequent upon those ingenious, wellpractiz'd and
serviceable hired coachmen: but (a Pox take em all) whither do my wits run
after whores and knaves? I pray you but note the streets, and the chambers or
lodgings in Fleetstreet or the Strand, how they are pestered with them,
especially after a Mask or a Play at the Court, where even the very earth
quakes and trembles, the casements shatter, tatter and clatter, and such a
confused noise is made, as if all the devils in hell were at Barly-breake; so
that a man can neither sleep, speak, hear, write, or eat his dinner or
supper quiet for them: besides, their tumbling din (like a counterset thunder)
does sour Wine, Ale and Beer most abominably, to the impairing of their
healths that drink it, and the making of many a Victualer and Tapster
Tradefalne.

A Wheele-wright or a maker of Carts, is an ancient, a profitable, and a Trade,
which by no means can be wanted: yet so poor it is, that scarce the best
amongst them can hardly ever attain to better then a Calves skin suit, or a
piece of neck beef and Carret roots to dinner on a Sunday; nor scarcely any
of them is ever mounted to any Office above the degree of a Scauenger, or a
Tything-man at the most. On the contrary, your Coach-makers trade is the most
gainefullest about the Town, they are apparelled in Sattens and Veluets, are
Masters of their Parish, Vestry-men, who fare like the Emperors Heliogabalus or
Sardanapulus, seldom without their Mackroones, Parmisants, Iellyes and
Kickshawes, with baked Swannes, Pasties hot, or cold red Dear Pyes, which they
have from their Debtors worships in the Country neither are these Coaches only
thus cumbersome by their Rumbling and Rutting, as they are by their standing
still, and damming up the streets and lanes, as the Black Vriers, and diverse
other places can witness, and against Coach-makers doors the streets are so
pestered and clogged with them, that neither man, horse or cart can pass for
them; in so much as my Lord Mayor is highly to be commended for his care in
this restraint, sending in February last, many of them to the Counter for their
carelessness herein.

They have been the universal decay of almost all the best Ash Trees in the
Kingdom for a young plant can no sooner peep up to any perfection, but
presently it is felled for the Coach: Nor a young Horse bred of any beauty or
goodness: but he is ordaind from his foaling for the service of the Coach, so
that whereas in former ages, both in peace and wars, we might compare with any
Nation in the world for the multitude and goodness of our horses; we now think
of no other employment for them, the^ to draw in a Coach, and when they are
either lamed by the negligence of the coachman, o^ worn out after many years
with trotting to Plays and Baywdy-houses, then are they (like old maimed
Soldiers) after their wounds and scarres, preferred to Wood-mongers, (whe^^
they are well Billited) or to Draymen, when they turn Tapsters, and draw Beer
by whole Barrels and Hogsheads at once; and the^ they wear out the remainder
of their days till new harnis for others are made of their ^^^ skins.

The last Proclamations concerning the retiring of the Gentry out of the City
into their Countries, although my self, with many thousands more were much
impouerished and hindered of our livings by their departure; yet ^^^ the other
side, how it cleared the Streets o^^ these way-stopping Whirligigges! for a
man now might walk without bidding Stand up ^^^ by a fellow that scarcely can
either go or stan^ himself. Prince, Nobility, and Gentlemen o^^ worth, Offices
and Quality, have herein the^^ Pri^iledge, and are exempt, may ride as the^^
occasions or pleasures shall inuit them, as mos^ meet they should; but when
every G^ll T^^^^^ tripe, Mistress Fumkins, Madame Polecat, and my Lady Trash,
Froth the Tapster, Bill the Tailor ^^ Lauender the Broker, Whisse the Tobacco
seller with their companion Trugs, must be coach ^^^ to Saint Albanes,
Burntwood, Hockley in the Hole, Craydon, Windsor, Vxbridge, and many other
places, like wild Haggards prancing up and down, that what they get by
cheating sweating, and lying at home, they spend in riot whoring, and
drunkenness abroad, I say by my hallidome, it is a burning shame; I did lately
write a Pamphet called a Thief, wherein did a little touch upon this point;
that seeing the Heard of hyreling Coaches are more ^^^ the Whirries on the
Thames, and that they make Leather so excessive dear, that it ^^^ good the
order in Bohemia were obser^ed here, which is, that every hired Coach should
be drawn with ropes, and that all their Harness should be Hemp and Cordage:
besides, if the cover and boots of them were of good rosind or pitched canuas,
it would bring ^^ne the price of leather, and by that means ^hyred Coach would
be known from a Princes a Noble man's, Ladies, or people of note, account,
respect and quality.

And if it be but considred in the right Kue, a Coach or Caroach are mere
Engines of Pride, (which no man can deny to be one of the seven deadly sins)
for two leash of Oyster-wiues hired a Coach on a Thursday after Whitsontide, to
carry them to the GreeneGoose fair at Strat^ord the Bow, and as they were
hurried betwixt Algate and Myle-end, they were so be-madam'd, be-mistrist, and
Ladified by the beggars that the foolish women began to swell with a proud
supposition or Imaginary greatness, and gave all their money to the mendicanting
Canters; insomuch that they were faigne to pawn their gowns and smocks the
next day to buy Oysters, or else their pride had made them cry, for want of
what to cry withal.

Thus much I can speak by experience; I do partly know some of mine own
qualities, and I do know that I do hate pride, as I hate famine or
surfeiting; and moreover, I know my self to be (at the best) but John Tailor,
and a mechanical waterman, yet it was but my chance once to be brought from
Whitchall to the Tower in my Master Sir William VVaades Coach, and before I had
bin drawn twenty, yardes, such a Timpany of pride pust me up, that I was ready
to burst with the wind chollicke of vainglory. In what state I would lean
over the boot, and look, and pry if I saw any of my acquaintance, and then I
would stand up, vailing my Bonnet, kissing my right claw, extending my arms as
I had been swimming, with God save your Lordship, worship, or How do thou
honest neighbor or good fellow? In a word, the Coach made me think my self
better then my betters that went on foot, and that I was but little inferior
to Tamberlaine, being iolted thus in state by those pampred Iades of Belgia:
all men of indifferent judgment will confess, that a Cart is an instrument
conformable to law, order, and discipline; for it rests on the Sabbath days,
and commonly all other Holy days, and if it should by any means break or
transgress against any of these good Injunctions, there are Informers t^^ at
lie in ambush (like careful Scowtes) to inform against the poor Cart, that
in conclusion my Lady Pecunia must become surety and take up the matter, or
else there will be more stir about the flesh, then the broth is worth; whereas
(on the contrary) a Coach like a Pagan, an Heathen, an Insid^ll, or Atheist,
observes neither Sabbath, or holiday, time or season, robustiously breaking
through the toil or net of divine and humane law, order and authority, and as
it were, contemning all Christian conformity; like a dog that lies on a heap
of Hay, who will eat none of it himself, nor suffer any other beast to eat
any: even so the Coach is not capable of hearing what a Preacher says, nor
will it suffer men or women to hear that would hear: for it makes such a
hideous rumbling in the streets by many Church doors, that peoples ears are
stopped with the noise, whereby they are debard of their edifying, which makes
faith so fruitless, good works so barren, and charity as cold at Midsummer, as
if it were a great Frost, and by this means, souls are robbed and starued of
their heavenly Manna, and the kingdom of darkness replenished: to avoid
which, they have let up a cross post in Cheapside on Sundaies near Woodstreet
end, which makes the Coaches rattle and rumble on the other side of the way,
further from the Church, and from hindering of their hearing.

The Nagaians, Iughonians, and the ungodly barbarous Tartarians, who knew no
God or devil, Heaven nor hell, and who indeed are Nations that have neither
Towns, Cities, Villages, or houses; Their habitations are nothing but Coaches:
in their Coaches they eat, sleep, beget children, who are also there borne,
and from place to place: with them, The World runs on Wheels continually,
for they are drawn in droues or herds, 20, 30. or 40000. together to any
fruitful place or Champion plain, where they and their beasts do stay till
they have devoured all manner of sustenance that may maintain life, and then
they romoue to a fresh place, doing the like; thus wearing out their accursed
lives like the brood of Cain, they and their houses being perpetual
vagabonds, and continual ruunagates upon the face of the earth. They are so
practiced and inured in all kind of Barbarism, that they will milk one Mare,
and let another blood, and the blood and the milk they will Charne together in
their Hats or Caps, till they have made fresh cheese and cream (which the
Devil will scarce eat) from these people, our Coaches had first original,
and I do wish with all my heart, that the superfluous number of all our
hyreling hackney Carryknaues, and Hurry-whores, with their makers and
maintainers were there, where they might never want continual employment.

For their Antiquity in England, I think it is in the memory of many men, when
in the whole Kingdom there was not one; and there was another principal
virtue as good as themselves came with them: for the Proverb says, That
michiefe or mischances seldom come alone: and it is a doubtful question,
whether the devil brought Tobacco into England in a Coach, or else brought a
Coach in a fogge or mist of Tobacco.

For in the year 1564. one William Boonen a Dutchman brought first the use of
Coaches hither, and the said Boonen was Queen Elizabeth's Coachman, for
indeed a Coach was a strange monster in those days, and the sight of them put
both horse and man into amazement: some said it was a great Crab-shell brought
out of China, and some imagined it to be one of the Pagan Temples, in which the
Canibals adored the devil: but at last those doubts were cleared, and
Coach-making became a substantial Trade: So that now all the world may see,
they are as common as whore^ and may be hired as easy as Knights of the po^^^.

The Cart is an open transparant Engine, th^^ any man may perceive the plain
honesty ^^^ it; there is no part of it within or without, b^^ it is in the
continual view of all men: On the contrary, the Coach is a close hypocrite,
for i^^ has a cover for any knavery, and curtains t^^ veil or shadow any
wickedness: besides, like ^^^ perpetual cheater, it wears two Boots ^^^ no
Spurs, sometimes having two pair of leg^^^ in one boot, and oftentimes
(against nature) most preposterously it makes fair Ladies^^ wear the boore;
and if you note, they are carried back to back like people surpised b^^
Pirates to be tied in that miserable manner, ^^^ and thrown ouerboord into the
Sea. Moreover, it makes people imitate Sea-crabs, in being drawn: side-wayes,
as they are when they sit in the boot of the Coach, and it is a dangerous
kind of carriage for the commonwealth, if it be rightly considered; for when a
man shall be ^ justice of the peace, a Serieant, or a Councellor at law; who
hope is it, that all or many of them should use upright dealing, that have
been so often in their youth, and daily in their maturer or riper age, drawn
aside continually in a Coach, some to the right hand, and some to the left? for
use makes perfectness, and often going aside willingly, makes men forget to go
upright naturally.

The order of Knighthood is both of great Antiquity and very honorable, yet
within these latter times there is a strange mystery crept into it; for I have
noted i^^^ that when a Gentleman has the sword laid upon his shoulder, either
by his Prince, or his deputy, or General in the field, although the blow with
the sword be an honor to the man, yet (by a kind of inspiration) it cripples
his wife, though she be at that time 300. miles from her husband: for if you
note her, you shall see her lamed for ever, so that she can by no means go
without leading under the arm, or else she must be carried in a Coach all her
life time after; forgetting in a manner to go on her feet so much as to
Church, though it be but two Quoytes cast: for I have heard of a Gentleman that
was lamed in this manner, who ^^^ her man to Smithfield from Charing^^^ ^^^to
hyre a Coach to carry her to White^^^; another did the like from Ludgate Hill,
^he carried to see a Play at the black Friars: ^^^ in former times when they
used to walk ^^ foot, and recreate themselves, they were ^^^ strong and
healthful, now all their ex^^cise is privately to saw Billets, to hang in a
^^^nge, or to roll the great rowler in the al^^^ of their garden, but to go
without leading ^^^ Riding in a Coach, is such an impeachment ^^d derogation to
their Calling, which ^^sh and blood can by no means endure.

Every man knows, that were it not for the Cart, the Hay would rot in the
meadows, the Corn perish in the field, the markets be emptily furnished, at
the Courts remove, the King would be vnseru'd, and many a Gallant would ^^^
enforced to be his own Sumpter-horse to carry his luggage, bag and baggage
himself; and finally, were it not for the mannerly and ^^^rteous, service of
the Cart, many a well, deserving ill conditioned brave fellow, might go on
foot to the Gallows.

A Cart (by the judgment of an honorable and grave Lawyer) is elder, brother
to a Coach for and quity; and for vtility and profit, all the world knows,
which is which: yet so vnna^^^^^ll and so unmannerly a brother the Coach is,
that it will give no way to the Cart, but with pride, contempt, bitter curses,
and exe^^tions, the Coachman wishes all the Carts ^^ fire, or at the devil,
and that Carmen were all hanged, when they cannot pass at their pleasures,
quite forgetting themselves to be sawey unprofitable intruders, vpstarts, and
I^^cator^.

When I see a Coach put up into a house (me thinks the pole standing stiffely
erected, it looks like the Image of Priapus, whom the libidinous and lecherous
whores and knaves of Egypt were wont to fall down and worship; and I pray you
what hinderance has it, but it may use the Paphean or Priapean game? (for it
is never unfurnished of a bed and curtains, with shop windows of leather to
buckle Bawdry up as close in the midst of the street, as it were in the Stews,
or a Nunnerie of Venus Votaries.

What excessive waste do they make of our best broadcloth of all colors? and
many times a young heir will put his old Fathers old Coach in a mourning Cowne
of Cloth or Cotton, when many of the poor distressed members of Christ go
naked, staruing with cold, not having any thing to hide their wretched
carcasses; and what spoil of our Veluets, Damaskes, Taffataes, Silver and Gold
Lace, with Fringes of all sorts, and how much consumed in guilding, wherein is
spent no small quantity of our best and finest gold? not is the charge little
of maintaining a Coach in reparation: for the very mending of the Harness, a
Knights Coachman brought in a bill to his Master of 25. pounds: besides, there
is used more care and diligence in matching the Horses and Mares, then many
fathers and mothers do in the marriage of their sons and daughters: for many
times a rich lubberly Clown, the son of some gowty extortioner, or
rentracking Rascal, (for his accursed mucks sake) may be matched with a
beautiful or proper well qualified and nobly descended Gentlewoman; and a
well-fac'd handsome Esquire or Knights son and heir may be joined with a
Ioiners puppet, or the daughter of a Sexton; but for the choice of your
Coach-horses there is another manner of providence to be used, for they must
be all of a color, longitude, latitude, cressitude, height, length,
thickness, breadth, (I muse they do not weigh them in a pair of Balance) and
being once matched with a great deal of care and cost, if one of them chance
to dye (as by experience I know a horse to be a mortal beast) then is the
Coach like a maimed cripple, not able to travel, till after much diligent
search, a meet mate be found, whose correspondency may be as equivalent to the
suruiuing Palfrey, and in all respects, as like as a broom to a besome, barme
to yeast, or quodlings to boyld Apples.

The mischiefs that have bin done by them, are not to be numbered; as breaking
of legs and arms, overthrowing down hills, over bridges, running over
children, lame and old people, as Henry the fourth of France (the father to the
King that now reigns) he and his Queen were once like to have been drowned,
the Coach over throwing besides a bridge: and to prove that a Coach owed him an
unfortunate trick, he was some few years after his first escape, most
inhumanely and traitrously murdered in one, by Raniliacke, in the streets at
Paris: but what need I run my invention out of breath into foreign
countries for examples, when many of the chief Nobility and Gentry of our
own Nation have some trial and sad experience of the truth of what I write?
sometimes the Coachman (it may be, has been drunk, or to speak more
mannerly, stolen a Manchet out of the Brewers Basket) has tumbled besides his
Box of state, and the Coach running over him has killed him, the whilst the
horses (having the reins loose) have run away with their Rattle at their
heels (like dogs that had bladders of dried Beans, or empty bottles at their
tails) as if the Devil had bin in them: and sometimes in the full speed of
their course, a wheel breaks, or the Naue slips off from the Axletree, down
leapes the Coachman, and away run the horses, throwing their carriage into
bushes, hedges, and ditches, never leaving their mad pace, till they tore to
tatters their tumbling Tumbrell, to the manifest peril, danger, and
unrecoverable hurt to those whom they carry, and to all men, women, children,
and cattle; as hogs, sheep, of whatsoever chances to be in their way:
besides the great cost and charge of mending and reparations of the Coach.

There is almost nothing, but when it is worn out, it will serve for some use,
either for profit or pleasure (except a Coach:) of the bottom of an old Cart,
one may make a fence to stop a gap, of the Raues one may make a Ladder for
^ennes to go to ^oost: of an old Bores Frank, a new Dog-kennell may be
founded, of adecayed Whirry or Boat, a backe-part of a house of office may be
framed (as you may see every where on the Bank-side:) of an old Barrel, a
Bolting Hutch: an ouer-worne old whore will make a spick and span new Bawd;
and a rotten Bawd may make a new witch. ^^^ knew a neighbor of mine (an old
Justice) that of the bald velvet lyning of his Cloal^^ made him a pair of new
Breeches, and those Breeches being worn past the best, with the best of them
he made his wife a French Hoo^ and when that was bare, and past her wearing if
made him facing for his new boot tops: But an old Coach is good for nothing
but to co^^^^^^^ and deceive people, as of the old ro^^^ Leather they make
vampies for high Shooe^ for honest country plowmen, or belts for Soldiers, or
inner lynings for girdles, Dog-collers for Mastiffes: indeed the Box, if it
were bored through, would be fittest for a close stool, and the body would
(perhaps) serve for a Sow to pigge in.

If the curses of people that are wronged by them, might have prevailed, sure I
think the most part of them had been at the Devil many years ago. Butchers
cannot pass with their cattle for them, Market folks which bring provision of
victuals to the City, are slop'd ^^aid, and bindred. Carts or waines with
th^^^ necessary ladings, are debard and let: the Milke-maides ware is often
spilt in the dirt^^^ and peoples guts like to be crushed out, being crowded and
shrouded up against stalls, and stoopes: whilst Mistress Siluerpin with her
P^der and a Pair of cramd pu^letrs ride grinning and deriding in their
Helcart, at their miseri^^ who go on foot: I my self have been so served when
I have wished them all in the gr^^^ Breach, or on a light fire upon Hownslow
he^^ or Salisbury plain: and their damming up the streets in this manner,
where people are wedged together, that they can hardly s^^^^, i^ maine and
great advantage to the most ve^^ous Mystery of purse-cutting, and for
any^thing I know, the hired or hackney Coach^man may join in confederacy and
share with the Curpurse, one to stop up the way, and the other to shift in the
crowd.

The superfluous use of Coaches has been the occasions of many vile and odious
crimes, as murder, theft, cheating, hangings, whippings, Pillories, stocks
and cages; for house keeping never decayed till Coaches came in England, till
which time those were accounted ^be^^ men, who had most followers and re^^^
then land about or near London, was ^^^ dear enough at a noble the Acre ^^,
and a ten-pound house-rent now, was ^^^ twenty shillings then: but the witch^^^
of the Coach, quickly mounted the price ^^things (except poor men's labor) and
^^^ transformed, in some places, 10. 20, ^^^40, 50, 60, or 100. proper
seruingmen, into ^^^ or three. Animals ( videlices) a Butterfly ^^^ge, a
trotting foote-man, a stifle-drinking ^^^man, a Cook, a Clarke, a Steward, and
^^^ ^^^, which has enforced many a discar^^^ tall fellow (through want of
means to ^^^, and grace to guide him in his poverty) to ^^^ into such
mischievous actions beforena^^d, for which I think the Gallowses in England
have devoured as many lusty valiant men within these thirty or forty years, as
would have been a sufficient army to beat the foes ^^^ Chirst out of
Christendom, and marching ^^^le, have plucked the great Turk ^^ the Beard:
but as is aforesaid, this is the age wherein The World runs on wheels.

It is a most uneasy kind of passage in Coaches on the paued streets in
London, wherein men and women are so tossed, tumbled, iumbled, ^^^bled, and
crossing of kennels, dunghils, and ^^euen ways, which is enough to put all the
^^^^ in their bellies out of joint, to make them ^^^ ^^^^ or Megrum, or to cast
their ^^^^ with continual rocking and wallow^^^ to prevent which, there was a
Gentleman or great note, found fault with his Coachhorses because his Coach
iolted him, commending his man to sell away those hard trotting lad^^, and to
buy him a pair of Amblers; that might draw him with more ease: another when
he saw one of his horses more lusty and free then his fellow, he commanded his
Coachman to feed him only with Hay and water till he were as tame and quiet
as the other, which wise command was dutifully observed.

The best use that ever was made of Coaches, was in the old wars betwixt the
Hungarians and the Turks, (for like so many land Galleys) they carried
Soldiers on each side with crosbowes, and other warrelike engines, and they
served for good use, eing many thousands of them, to disrowte their enemies,
breaking their ranks and order, making free and open passage for their horse
and foot amongst the scattered squadrons and regiments, and upon occasion,
they served as a wall to embarricado and fortify their camp: this was a
military employment for Coaches: and in this sort only I could wish all our
hyrelings to be used. It is to be supposed, that Pharaohs Charriots which were
drowned in the red Sea, were no other things in shape and fashion, then our
Coaches are at this time: and what great pity was it, that the makers and
memories of them had not been obliuiously swallowed in that Egyptian downfall?

Mountaigne, a learned and a noble French Writer, does relate in his book of
Essays, that the ancient Kings of Asia, and the Eastern part of Europe, were
wont to be drawn in their Coaches with four Oxen, and that Mark Anthony with
a whore with him, was drawn with Lions. Heliogabalus the Emperor was drawn
with 4 naked whores, (himself being the Coachman:) and the Coaches in these
late times (to show some spark of gratitude or thankfulness) in remembrance
that naked Whores once drew one of them, they do in requital very often carry
whores half naked to the belly, and gallantly apparelled; besides only but
four whores drew one Coach, and 500. Coaches have carried ten thousand of
them for it: but sometimes they were drawn with Stagges, as it is the use in
Lapland at this day. The Emperor Firmus was drawn with four Este idges, and
to requite those favors, they do now often carry men as ravenous as Lions, as
well headed as Oxen or Stags, and as the Estridges did once draw, so the
feathers of them do daily ride in Plumes and Fannes.

In the City of Antwerp in Brabans I have seen little Coaches, which men send
their children to School in, each of them drawn by a Mastiffe dog, not having
any guide: for the dog himself does exercise three offices at one time, being
as the horse to draw, the coachman to direct, and an honest laboring dog
besides.

I remember that in one place aforesaid, I have written, that Coaches do
seldom carry any dead things, as Stones, Timber, Wine, Beer, Corn, etc. But
in so writing, I find that I have done many of them great wrong; for I perceive
that they carry oftentimes diverse sorts of Rye, as Knaue-ry, Foole-ry,
Leach-ry, Rogue-ry, Vse-ry, Bawde-ry, Braue-ry, Slavery, and Begge-ry.
Sometimes (by chance) they may hap to carry good Husband-ry, and Housewife-ry,
but such burdens are as scarce, as money or charity: and one thing more comes
into my mind about their multitude; for though a Coach do seem to be a dead
or senseless thing, yet when I see and consider how they do multiply and
increase, I am doubtful but that they are male and female, and use the act of
generation or begetting, or else their procreation could never so have
ouer-spred our Nation.

To conclude, a Coach may be fitly compared to a whore, for a Coach is painted,
so is a whore: a Coach is common, so is a whore: a Coach is costly, so is a
Whore; a Coach is drawn with beasts, a whore is drawn away with beastly
Knaves. A Coach has loose curtains, a whore has a loose Gown: a Coach is
laced and fringed, so^'s a whore: A Coach may be turned any way, so may a
Whore: A Coach has bosses, studs, and gilded nail to adorn it: a whore has
Owches, Brooches Bracelets, Chains, and Jewels, to set he forth: a Coach is
always out of reparations so is a whore: a Coach has need of mendi^^ still,
so has a whore: a Coach is unprofitable so is a whore: a Coach is superfluous,
so is whore: a Coach is insatiate, so is a whore: A Coach breaks men's necks: a
Whore breaks men's backs: This odds is betwixt a Coach and a Whore, a man will
lend his Coach to h^^ friend, so will he not his whore: but any man's whore
will save him the labor of leading her; for she will lend her self to whom
she pleases. And thus my Book and comparisons end together; for thus much I
know that I have but all this while barked at the Moon, thrown feathers
against the wind built upon the sands, washed a Blackmore, an^ labored in
vain: for where a vice or euormity has pleasure in it, with a show of profit
and power to defend it, losers may speak, a^^ weakness may babble of
Reformation, thoug^ to no end and so I end.

FINIS.
The Nipping or Snipping of ABUSES: OR, The Wooll-gathe^ring of Wit.
A Skeltonicall salutation to those that know how to read, and not merre the
sense with hacking or mis-construction.
THou true understander, my invention does wander with the quill of a Gander,
to shield me from slander, to thy good protection, I yield in subjection, my
poor imperfection, with friendly correction, and as thou do ^^e, or stroke
me or strike me, reprove me or prove me, or move me, ^^ love me, or
quiteme, or spite me, friend me, or mend me, or else not offend ^^^^: If in
ought that is written, thy humors are bitten, seem not to espy it, and ^one
will descry it. But if thou do kick, the spur sure will prick; and if thou
^^^^ing, the waspe then will sting. My verses are made, to ride every Jade, but
^^are forbidden, of Iades to be ridden, they shall not be snaffled, nor braued
^or baffled, were thou George with thy Naggon, that foughtst with Draggon, or
^^re you Great Pompey, my verse should bethumpe ye, if you like a Iauel against
^^^ dare cavil. I do not intend it as now to commend it, or yet to defend it.
But ^^ me I do send it, to like it, or mend it, and when thou have end it,
applaud it ^^ rent it; my wits I could bristle, for a better Epistle, but yet
at this time, this ^^^ Rhyme, I send to thy view, because it is new. So Reader,
adue.

I thine, if thou mine, JOHN TAILOR.

To the Castalian Water-writer, Splende and dignoscar.
^ Dial set upon an eminent place,
^ i^ clouds do interuall Apolloes face,
^ ^^^ a flgur'd shape, whereby we know
^^le of Time, which it does owe
^^ expectations, yet we see
^^^ctes by which Times should distinguished be:
^^^alelled punctual, ciphered lines,
^^ by a shadow, when the fair sun shines,
Explaines the hours: So if the Son of men
Thy Glorious Patron, deem to bless thy pen
With his fair light, Thy Muse so young, so fair,
So well proportioned, in conceits so rare:
And Natural streams, and style, and every part,
That Nature therein does exceed all Art,
Will then as with Enthusiasme inspired,
Print Legends by the world to be admired.
Thine James Ratray.

To my friend by land and by water, John Tailor.
THese leaves, kind John, are not to wrap up drams,
That do contain thy witty Epigrams,
Let worser Poems serve for such abuse,
Whilst thine shall be reserved for better use.
And let each Critic cavil what he can,
It Is rarely written of a Water-man.
Thy friend assured Rob: Branthwaite.
To his dear friend Master John Tailor.
ME thinks I see the Sculler in his boat,
With goodly motion glide along fair Thames,
And with a charming and bewitching noate,
So sweet delightful tunes and ditties frames:
As greatest Lording^ and the nicest Dames,
That with attentive ear did hear thy lays,
Of force should yield due merit to thy praise.
Worth to all Watermen, strain forth thy voice,
To prove so pleasing in the worlds proud eye,
As eyes, and ears, and hearts may all rejoice,
To see, hear, muse upon the melody,
In contemplation of thy harmony,
Let Thames fair banks thy worth and praises ring,
While I thy worth, and praise, beyond sea sing.
Tho: Gent.
To the Water-Poet, John Tailor.
Honest John Tailor, though I know it no grace,
To thee, or me, for writing in this place,
Yet know I that the multitudes of friends
Will thee protect, from vile malignant minds:
The rather cause what ever thou have snowne,
Is no one man's invention, but thine own.
Malicious minded men will thee dispraise;
Envy debases all, her self to raise.
Then rest content, whilst to thy greater fame,
Both Art, and Nature strive to raise thy name.
Thine ever as thou know, R: Cudner.
To my friend John Tailor.
IF Homers verse (in Greek) did merit praise,
If Naso in the Latin won the Bays,
If Maro amongst the Romans did excel,
If Tasso in the Tuscan tongue wrote well,
Then Tailor, I conclude that thou have don
In English, what immortal Baies have won.
Thy friend John Tailor.
To my honest friend John Tailor.
THy Tailors shears, foul vices wings ^^ ^^^
The scames of impious dealings are vnript:
So Art-like thou these captious times have quipt,
As if in Helicon thy pen were dipped,
All those who' against thy worth are envious lipt,
Thy sharp Satyrick Muse has nipt and s^ip^^
And to conclude, thy nuention is not chipt,
Or stolen or borrowd, begd, or basely gript.
Then Tailor, thy conceits are truly sowde,
And, Sculler, (on my word) it was well roude.
Thine to mybest pow^^ Enoch Ly^
In Laudem Authoris.
MOst commonly one Tailor will dispraise
Another workmanship, envying alwai^s
At him that's better then himself reputed,
Though he himself be but a botcher bruted:
So might it well be said of me (my friend)
Should I not to thy work some few lines lend,
Which to make probable, this sentence tends,
Who not commends, he surely discommendeth:
In my illiterate censure, these thy rimes,
Deserve applause, even in these worst of times:
When wit is only worthy held in those,
On whom smooth flattery vain praise besto^es;
But I not minding with thy worth to flatter,
Do know thy wit too good to toil by water.
Rob. Tailor

To my friend JOHN TAILOR.
THis work of thine, thou have compiled so^^^
It merits better wits thy worth to tell.
Thine Maximilian W^^
The Authors description of a Poet and Poesy, with an Apology in defense of
Natural English Poetry.
SHall beggars dine into the Acts of Kings?
Shall Nature speak of supernat' rall things,
^^^^ Eagles flights attempted be by Gnats?
^^^^ mighty Whales be portraied out by Sprats?
These things I know impossible to be,
^^^d it is as impossible for me,
That am a beggar in these Kingly acts,
Which from the heavens true Poetry extracts.
^^^ fool by Nature I
^^^ never knew this high-bome mystery,
^^^ worthless gnat I know my self more weak,
^^^ the Princely Eagle dare to speak:
^^^y sprat the Ocean seeks so sound,
^^ seek this Whale, though seeking he be drowned:
^^^ to proceed: a Poets Art, I know,
^^^ compact of earthly things below:
^^^ is of any base substantial, mettle,
That in the worlds rotundity does settle:
^^^tis Immortal, and it has proceeding,
from whe^^e diuinest souls have all their breeding.
^^ is a blessing ^^^u'n has sent to men,
^y men it is di^^lged with their pen:
And by that propagation it is known,
And over all the world dispersed and thrown:
^^^ verbal elocution so refinde,
That it to Virtue animates man's mind:
The blessed Singer of blessed Israel,
^^ this rare Art, he rarely did excel,
He sweetly Poetiz'd in heavenly verses,
^^^ lines which aye eternity rehearses:
^^^ and glorious great esteem
^^^ C^^^^ did a Poet deem:
^^mired Virgils life does plainly show,
^^t all the world a Poets worth may know:
^^^ leaving Isreal's King, and Roman Caesar,
^^seeke in England English Poets treasure,
Sir Philip Sid^^y, histimes Mars and Muse,
That word and sword, so worthily could use,
That spite of death, his glory lin's, ^^wai^^
For Conquelts, and for Poesy crowned with bays:
What famous nien live in this age of ours,
As if the^ Sister's nine had left the^ bowres,
With more post h^^^e then expeditious wings
They ^eere have found the Heliconian springs
We of our mighty Monarch JAMES may boast,
Who in this heavenly Art exceeds the most?
Where men may see the Muses wisdom well:
When such a glorious house they chose to dwell.
The Preacher whose instructions, do afford
The souls dear food, the everliving Word:
If Poets skill be banished from his brain,
His preaching (sometimes) will be but too plain:
Twixt Poetry and best divinity
There is such near and dear affinity,
As'twere propinquity of brothers blood,
That without tone, the other's not so good:
The man that takes in hand brave verse to write,
And in Divinity has no insight,
He may perhaps make smooth, and Art-like Rimes,
To please the humors of these idle times:
But name of Poet he shall never merit,
Though writing them, he waste his very spirit:
They therefore much mistake that seem to say,
How every one that writes a paltrie play:
A sottish Sonnet in the praise of love,
A song or jigge, that fools to laughter move,
In praise or dispraise, in defame or fame,
Deserves the honor of a Poets name:
I further say, and further will maintain,
That he that has true Poesy in his brain,
Will not profane so high and heavenly skill,
To glory or be proud of writing ill:
But if his Muse do stoop to such deiection,
It Is but to show the world her sins infection:
A Poets ire sometimes may be inflamed:
To make foul Vices brazen face ashamed.
And then his Epigrams and Satyrs whip,
Will make base gald unruly Iades to skip:
In frost they say it is good, bad blood be nipt,
And I have seen Abuses whipped and stripped
In such rare fashion, that the wincing age,
Has kicked and flung, with uncontrolled rage.
Oh worthy Withers, I shall love thee ever,
And often may thou do thy best indeuer,
That still thy works and thee may live together,
Contending with thy name and never wither.
But further to proceed in my pretense
Of natural English Poetries defense:
For Lawreat Sidney, and our gracious James,
Have plunged been in Arts admired streams:
And all the learned Poets of our days,
Have Arts great aid to win still living Bays:
All whom I do confess such worthy men,
That I unworthy am with ink and pen
To carry after them. But since my haps
Have been so happy as to get some scraps,
By Nature given me from the Muses table,
I Will put them to the best use I am able:
I have read Tasso, Virgill, Homer, Ovid,
Iosophus, Plutark, whence I have approved,
And found such observations as are fit,
With plenitude to fraught a barren wit.
And let a man of any nation be,
These Authors reading, makes his judgment fee
Some rules that may his ignorance refine,
And such predominance it has with mine.
No bladder-blowne ambition puff's my Muse,
An English Poets writings to excuse:
Nor that I any rule of art condem,
Which is Dame Natures ornamentall Iem:
But these poor lines I wrote (my wits best pelse)
Defending that which can defend it self.
Know them vnnat'ral English Mungril Monster,
Thy wandering judgment does too much misconster:
When thou affirm'st thy Native Countryman,
To make true verse no art or knowledge can:
Cease, cease to do this glorious Kingdom wrong,
To make her speech inferior to each tongue:
Show not thy self more brutish then abeast,
Base is that bird that files her homeborne neast.
In what strange tongue did Virgils Muse commerce?
What language wast that Ovid wrote his verse?
Thou s^yst 't was Latin: why I say so too.
In no tongue else they any thing could do:
They Naturally did learn it from their mother.
And must speak Latin, that could speak no other:
The Grecian blinded Bard did much compile,
And never used no foreigne far-fetcht style:
But as he was a Greek his verse was Greek,
In other tongues (alas) he was to seek.
Du Bartas heavenly all admired Muse,
No unknown Language ever vs'de to use:
But as he was a Frenchman, so his lines
In native French with fame most glorious shines,
And in the English tongue it is fitly stated,
By siluer-tongued Siluester translated.
So well, so wisely, and so rarely done,
That he by it immortal same has won.
Then as great Mars and renowned Nas^,
Brave Homer, Petrarke, sweet Italian Tasse:
And numbers more, past numbering to be numberd,
Whose rare inventions never were incumberd,
With our outlandish chip chop gibrish gabblings:
To fill men's ears with vnacqu^iated babbling:
Why may not then an English man, I pray;
In his own language write as crst did they?
Yet must we suit our phrases to their shapes,
And in their imitations be their Apes.
Whilst Muses haunt the fruitful forked hill,
The world shall reverence their unmatched skill.
And for invention, fiction, methood, measure,
From them must Poets seek to seek that treasure,
But yet I think a man may use that tongue
His Country uses, and do them no wrong.
Then I whose Artlesse studies are but weak.
Who never could, nor will but English speak.
Do here maintain, if words be rightly placed,
A Poets skill, with no tongue more is graced.
It runs so smooth, so sweetly it does flow,
From it such heavenly harmony does grow,
That it the understanders senses moves
With admiration, to express their loves.
No music under heaven is more divine,
Then is a well-writ, and a well-read line.
But when a witless selfe-conceited Rooke,
A good invention dares to ouerlooke;
How pitteous then man's best of wit is martyred,
In barbrous manner tottered, torn and quarter'd^
So mingle mangled, and so hack't and hewd,
So scuruily bescuruide and be me wde?
Then this detracting durty dunghill Drudge,
Although he understand not, yet will judge.
Thus famous Poesy must abide the doom
Of every muddy-minded rascal Groom.
Thus rarest Artists are continual stung
By every prating, stinking lump of dung.
For what cause then should I so much repine,
When best of writers that ere wrote a line,
Are subject to the censure of the worst,
Who will their follies vent, or eise they burst?
I have at idle times some Pamphlets writ,
(The fruitless issue of a natural wit)
And cause I am no Scholar, some envy me,
With soul and false calumnious words belie me:
With brazen fronts, and flinty hard belief,
Affirming or suspecting me a thief:
And that my sterrile Muse so dry is milch'd,
That what I write, is borrowed, begged, or filch'd,
Because my name is Tailor, they suppose
My best inventions all from stealing grows:
As though there were no difference to be made
Betwixt the name of Tailor, and the Trade.
Of all strange weapons, I have least of skill
To manage or to wield a Tailors bill.
I cannot Item it for silk and facing,
For cutting, edging, stiffning, and for lacing:
For bumbast, stitching, binding and for buckram,
For cotton, bays, for canuas and for lockram.
All these I know, but know not how to use them,
Let trading Tailors therefore still abuse them,
My skil's as good to write, to sweat, or row,
As any Tailors is to steal or sow.
In end my pulsiue brain no Art affoords,
To mine or stamp, or forge new coined words.
But all my tongue can speak or pen can write,
Was spoke and writ, before I could indite,
Yet let me be of my best hopes berest,
If what I ever writ, I got by theft:
Or by base symony, or bribes, or gifts,
Or begged, or borrowd it by sharking shifts,
I know, I never any thing have done,
But what may from a weak invention run,
Give me the man whose wit will undertake
A substance of a shadow for to make:
Of nothing something, (with Arts greatest aid)
With Na^^^ only all his Muse arraide,
The solid matter from his brain can squeez,
^^^^ some lame Artists wits are drawn to the leez.
^^^^aching Parrots prate and prattle can,
(...)ght an Ape will imitate a man:
And ^^^ his horse showed tricks, taught with much labor,
^^^ did the hare that played upon the tabor.
^^^ll man I pray, so witless be besotted?
^^^ll men (like beasts) no wisdom be allotted?
(Without great study) with instinct of Nature,
Why then work man the worst and basest creature?
^^^^ are made the other creatures Kings,
^^^^ superior wisdom from them springs:
^^^ therefore M^^^ unto thee again,
^^^ do suspect, the issues of my brain,
^^ but my bastards, now my Muse does fly,
and in thy throat gives thy suspect the lie.
and to the trial dares thee when thou dare,
Accounting thee a coward, if thou spar'st.
^^ ^ little wit, and brain, and spleen,
And gall memory, and mirth and teene,
^^d passions, and affections of the mind,
^ other Mortals use to be enclinde.
A^^ having all this, wherefore should men doubt,
^^^ wit should be so crippled with the Gowt,
^^^ it must have assistance to compile,
^^^a l^^e dog, that is limping or a style?
^^^o, no, thou Z^yl^^, thou detracting else,
^^^gh thou art insufficient in thy self,
and have thy wit and studies in reuersion,
^^^ ^^^ on me that scandalous aspersion.
^^^ such ballad-mongring timing slaves,
^^^^ ^ygging rascals, such audacious knaves,
^^e bane of learning, the abuse of Arts,
^^^me of Natures worst defective parts:
The scorn of scholars, poison of rewards,
^^ dlesse vassalls of true worths regards,
The shame of time, the canker of deserts,
The death of liberal and heroicke hearts,
^^^ like so many bandogs snarle and snatch,
^^^ all is their own they can from others catch:
^^^ lick the scraps of Scholars wits (like dogs)
(^^ ^^^ old) draffs good enough for hogs.
^^yning line by line, and piece by piece,
^^^ from each place they read, will filch a sleece.
^^^ thinks my Muse should piecemeale tear these rogues
^^^ base and vile the^ tattered Irish brogues.
^^^ kissing raskals, flattering parasites,
^^^ne vices vassalls, virtues opposites.
^^^ you da^^bde curs have murderd liberal minds,
^^^ made best Poets worse esteemed then hindes:
^^^ wherefore do I take a Scholars part,
^^^ have no ground or Axioms of Art,
^^^ in Poesy an artlesse creature,
^^^ have no learning but the book of Nature;
No Academicall Poeticke strains.
But home^^pu^ medley of my mottley brains?
Th^^ ^^^ on ^ a Sch^^^r's wants bewail;
And why against ^^fe litter'd whelps I rail,
I^ this, that they long time should time beftow.
In paint fall study, secret Arts to know,
^^d after live in want, contempt and scorn,
By every d^^g-hill p^asant ouer-borne,
Ab^^d, rejected, doggedly disgraced,
De'p^ed, ragged, Iowzie, and out-fac'd,
Whilst Bag-pipe-poets stuffed with others wind,
Are g^^c'd for wit, they have from them purloind.
Now in my owned fence once more I Will say,
Their too rash judgments too much run astray,
That, 'c^^se my name is Tailor, I do theeue it,
I hope their wisdoms will no more believe it:
Nor let my want of learning be the cause,
I should be bitten with black, envies jaws:
For whose'r by nature is not a Poet,
By rules of Art he never well can show it.
There Is many a wealthy heir long time at School,
Does spend much study, and comes home a fool.
A Poet needs must be a Poet borne,
Or else his Art precures his greater scorn,
For why? if Art alone made men excel,
Me thinks Tom Coriat should write ex'lent well:
But he was borne belike in some cross year,
When learning was good cheap, but wit was dear.
Then to conclude, as I before began,
Though naught by Schollership or Art I can,
Yet (if my stock by nature were more bare)
I scorn to utter stolen or borrowed ware:
And therefore Reader, now I tell thee plain,
If thou incredulous do still remain;
If yea or nay these reasons do persuade thee,
I leave thee and thy faith to him that made thee.
To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
Anagramma. James Stuart. MVSKS TARI AT.
GReat Sovereign, as thy sacred Royal breast
Is by the Muses whole and sole possessed:
So do I know, Rich, Precious, Peereleffe Iem,
In writing unto Thee, I write to them.
The Muses tarry at thy name: why so?
Because they have no further for to go.
To the high and mighty Prince, CHARLES STVART.
Anagramma, Calls true hearts.
Brave Prince, thy name, thy fame, thy self and all,
With lone and service all true hearts does call:
So royally indude with Princely parts,
Thy Real virtues always, calls true hearts.
To Anna Queen of Great Britain.
THese back-ward and these forward lines I fend,
To your right Royal high Maiesticke hand:
And like the guilty prisoner I attend
Your censure, wherein bliss or bale does stand.
If I condemned be, I cannot grudge,
For never Poet had a iuster Judge.
These lines are to be read the same backward as they are forward.
Deer Madam Reed:
Deem if I meed.
Loves Iabyrinth, with the description of the seven Planets.
I Trauel'd through a wilderness of late,
Ashady, dark, unhaunted desert grove:
Whereas a wretch explained his piteous state.
Whose mones the Tigers unto ruthe would move;
Yet though he was a man cast down by Fate,
Full manly with his miseries he strove:
And dared false Fortune to her utmost worst,
And ever he meant to bend, would bravely burst.
Yet swelling grief so much o'r-charg'd his heart,
In scalding sighs, he needs must vent his woe,
Where groans, and tears, and sighs, all bear a part,
As partners in their masters overthrow:
Yet spite of grief, he laughed to scorn his smart,
And midst his depth of care demeaned him so,
As if sweet concord bore the greatest sway,
And snarling discord was enforced to obey.
Thou Saint (quoth he) I whilome did adore,
Think not thy youthful feature still can last,
In winters age, thou shall in vain implore,
That thou on me, such coy disdain did cast:
Then, then remember old said fawes of yore.
Time was, Time is, but then thy Times is past:
And in the end, thy bitter torments be;
Because that causeless, thou tormentedst me.
Oh you immortal, high Imperious powers,
Have you in your resistlesse doomes decreed,
To blast with spite, and scorns my pleasant hours,
To starve my hopes, and my despair to feed?
Once more let me attain those sunshine showers:
Whereby my withered joys again may breed.
If gods no comfort to my cares apply,
My comfort is, I know the way to dye.
1 To Saturn.
With wits distracted here I make my will,
I do bequeath to Saturn, all my sadness,
When Melancholy first my heart did fill,
My senses turn from soberness to madness:
Since Saturn, thou wast Author of my ill,
To give me grief, and take away my gladness:
Malignant Planet, what thou gave to me,
I give again, as good a gift to thee.
2 To Jove.
I do surrender back to thundering Jove,
All state, which erst my glory did adorn:
My frothy pomp, and my ambitious love,
To thee, false Iupster, I back return
All Iouiall thoughts, that first my heart did move,
In thy Maiesticke brain was bred and borne;
Which by thy inspiration caused my wrack,
And therefore unto thee, I give it back.
3 To Mars.
To Mars I give my rough robustious rage,
My anger, fury, and my scarlet wrath:
Man-slaughtring murder, is thy only page,
Which to thy bloody guidance I bequeath,
Thy servants all, from death should have their ^^^^
For they are executioners for death:
Great Mars, all fury, wrath, and rage of mine,
I freely offer to thy Goary shrine.
4 To Sol.
All-seeing Sol, thy bright reflecting eye
Did first with Poets Art inspire my brains:
It Is thou that me so much did dignifie,
To wrap my soul with sweet Poetike strains,
And unto thee, again before I dye,
I give again, a Poets gainelesse gains,
Though wit and art are blessings most divine,
Yet here, their iems, amongst a heard of sw^^^.
5 To Venus.
To thee, false Goddess, loves adultrous Queen,
My most inconstant thoughts I do surrender:
For thou alone, alone have ever been
True lovers bane, yet seem loves defender,
And were thy Bastard blind, as fools do wee^^^
So right he had not spilt my heart so tender:
Fond Vulcans pride, thou turn'st my joy to p^^^^
Which unto thee, I render back again,
6 To Mercury.
To Mercury, I give my sharking shifts,
My twofold false equiuocating tricks:
All cunning sleights, and close deceiving drifts,
Which to deceitful wrong my humor pricks:
^^y Bo^eaka's, my Decoyes and Lifts:
^^birdlime henceforth to my fingers sticks.
My thoughts, my words, my actions that are bad,
To thee I give, for them from thee I had.
7 To Luna.
^^d^ast and low'st of all these Planets seven,
^y wau'ring thoughts, I give to Lunac's guiding:
^y senseless brains, of wit and sense bereauen,
^y strdfast change, and my most certain sliding,
^^ various alterations under heaven,
^^ that is mine, ore moving or abiding,
My woes, my joys, my mourning and my mirth,
I give to thee, from whence they had their birth.
^hus he against the higher powers contends,
^^ threats, and bans, and beats his care crazd breast,
^he birds harmonious music to him lends,
which adds no rest unto his restless rest:
^^^ ^^'ry thing in loving sort attends:
^^^aceable, and senseless do their best.
With helpless helps do help to moan his moan,
And her he loves, remains unkind alone.
^^ last he rose from out the place he lay,
^^^ frantickly ran woodly through the wood:
^he scratching brambes in the wailesse way,
^^^eate his stay, but in a hare-braind mood;
^e fled, till weary he at last did stay,
^o rest him, where a ragged rock there ood
With reso'ution to despair and dye,
Whilst Echo to his moan did thus reply.
Echo.
^ay humane mischiefs be compared with mine? mine.
Thine, babbling Echo, would thy tongue told true: true.
^^^ that I alone must weep and pine: pine.
^^pine for her, from whom my cares ensue, sue.
^^^ I serve a marble-hearted fair, air.
And air is all the fruit of fruitless love: love
^ou's hope is past, then welcome black despair despair.
^^^ there despair my causeles curse remove? move.
^^^ whither shall I move, to joy or pain? pain.
^^^ pain be my reward for pain for aye? aye.
^ye must my torment seed her scornful vain? vain.
^o ease me grief, will she say yea or nay? nay.
^ay, then from love and all his laws I fly. fly.
^^^ I search, I seek the way to die. die.
Thus brabbling against all things he hears or sees,
^^^patient at his froward fortunes wrongs:
^o sensu'all object with his sense agrees.
^ll pleasures his dispeasure more prolongs:
^^ length he carues upon the thick-bark'd trees
These under written sad lamenting songs.
And as my weak invention understood,
His farewell thus, was grau'd upon the wood.
Sonnet.
LIke a decrepit wretch, deformed and lame
My verse approaches to my dearest Dame
Whose dire disdain, makes my laments her game
Whose scornful eyes add fuel to my flame.
But whether she, or I are most too blame
I for attempting to exalt her fame
With fruitless Sonnets; which my wit did frame:
Or she whose piercing looks my heart o'r- came.
Her feature can both men and monsters tame
The gods, and fiends adore and dread her name
Whose matchless form does Citherea shame,
Whose cruel heart remains still the same
And in a word, I strive against the stream
My state's too low, and hers is too supreme.
Then since so scornful is her high dis- daine,
Since all my love is but bestowed in vain
Curb fancy then, with true discretions Reine,
Let reason cure my tor-tormenting pain,
Suppose I should at last, my suit at- taine,
And then sit down and count my losing gain:
My harvest would be tares in stead of grain.
Then I Will no longer vex my vexed brain
To seek her love, who joys when I com- plain
No longer I, loves vassal will re- maine,
I Will be no more of Cupids witless train,
Whose partial blindness has so many slain.
Proud Dame, whose breast my love did erst refrain
Despite loves, laws, I Will be no more thy swain.
Thus like a man, whose wits were quite bereft him,
I found him mad with love, and so I left him.
Plutoes Proclamation concerning his Infernal pleasure for the Propagation of
Tobacco.
TRue News and strange my Muse intends to write,
From horrid concaues of eternal night:
Whereas a damned Parliament of Devils,
Enacted laws to fill the world with evils.
Black Pluto sundry proclamations sends
Through Barathrum, and summons all the fiends,
To know how they on earth had spent their times,
And how they had beclog'd the world with crimes.
First spoke an ancient Devil yeleaped Pride,
Who said he wandered had, both far and wide,
Dispersing his Ambitious poisnous bane,
As far as Luna does both wax or wane.
Next summond was a rake-hell surgownd curre,
Called Avarice, (whose rotten haulking murre)
Was like to choke him, ere he could declare
How he had souls possessed with moneys care.
That so they fill their Coffers to the brim,
Ali's one, let sweet salvation sink or swim.
The third that to the Parliament came in,
Was murder, all inroab'd in scarlet sin,
Who told great Limboes monarch he had done
Such deeds, as thousand souls to hell have won.
The fourth that entered to this damned lurie,
Was sweet sin Lechery, a smugfac'd fury:
Said that the world should his great pains approve,
Where universal lust is counted love.
The fist was an ilshaped decrepit Crone
Called Envy, all consumed to skin and bone:
And she declared what labor he had spent
To Honors, and to Virtues detriment.
Then sixth, did Burst-gut Gluttony appear,
Whose sole delight is all in ^elly-cheere:
Who told how he men's greedy minds did serve
To cram their bodies, whilst their souls did sterue.
The seventh was Sloth, an ugly loathsome wretch,
Who being called, did gape, and yawne, and stretch:
I have (quoth he) done as your highness wil'd,
I all the world with Idleness have filled,
In lazy Creatures members I do lurk,
That thousands will be hanged, before the 'ile work.
Then Pluto said, These ills, you have done well,
In propagation of our Kingdom, Hell:
But yet there is one thing which I will effect,
Which too long has been buried with neglect;
And this it is, in Rich America,
In India, and black Barbaria.
Whereas the peoples superstitions show
Their mind, because no other God they know,
In those misguided lands I caused to breed
A foul contagious, stinking Manbane weed:
Which they (poor fools) with diligence do gather
To sacrifice to me that am their Father:
Where every one a Furies shape assumes,
Befog'd and clouded with my hel-hatch'd fumes.
But these black Nations that adore my name,
I Will leave in pleasure: and my mischiefs frame
Against those who by the name of Christian go,
Whose Author was my final overthrow.
And therefore straight diuulge our great commands,
That presently throughout all Christian lands,
Tobacco be dispersed, that they may be
As Moors and Pagans are, all like to me:
That from the Palace to the paltry nooke,
Like hell in imitation all may look.
In vice let Christians pass both jews and Turke^
And let them outpasse Christians in good works.
Let every Cobbler with his dirty fist,
Take pride to be a black Tobacconist.
Let Idiot Coxcombs swear, it is excellent gear,
And with a whiffe their reputations rear.
Let every idle addle-pated gull
With stinking sweet Tobacco stuff his skull.
Let Don Fantastic smoke his vasty gorge,
Let rich and poor, let honest men and knaves,
Be smoked and stunke unto their timelesse graves.
Thus is our last irreuocable will,
Which though it dam not man, I know twill kill:
And therefore strait to every Christian Nation,
Diuulge and publish this our Proclamation.
A Proclamation or approbation from the King of execration, to every Nation,
for Tobaccoes propagation.
WHereas we have been credibly informed (by our true and neuer-failing
Intelligeneers, ^^^ the souls of Usurers, Brokers, Knights of the Pu^^^
Panders, Bawdes, and such like, our well-beloved sea^^^ and daughters, by
graceless adoption) that the ^^^^^ ( alias weed) ycleped Tobacco, (alias)
Trinidado alias, Petun, alias, Necocianum, a long time ha^^^ been in continual
use and motion amongst the Se^^^ burnt, tanskind Indians, Barbarians, and the
^^^ of our black guard inhabiting in America, which has bin greatly to our
contentme^t to see our execr^ble servants on the earth, to come so near our
infernal Tartarian sulphurous contagious stink, with their terrestrial
imitations: we therefore with the full consent of our three Estates, namely
our Lord spiritual of our own synagogue, as twelve Turb^^^ Mufiyes, 66.
Popes, and sundry other Cardinel^ etc. Prelates our four trusty friends:
Besides ^^^ Temporal Lords, as Heliogabalus, Nero, Sanlanapalus, with many
more, and our Comminalty ^^^ vassals, whereof the chief, we hold to be
Guido^^^ Faux, Francis Rauillac, and all such as ^^^^ Naturalized into the line
of Judas or Achitophel. We with these estates aforesaid ^^^ (by the Authority
of this present Parliament) straightly charge and command, that all di^els,
demy-diuels, fiends, furies, hagges, witches, ghosts, goblins, spirits, elues,
fayries, or any ^^^^ subjects or subjects, to our infernal monarchy, ^ywh^^
name or title soever they be called, that they ^ad ^a^cry of them do
forthwith upon the sight here^^, disperse themselves amongst the Christians
(the ^er enemies of our mightic Monarchy) and there, ^^ ^^^^^ of witcherafts,
spells, exorcismes, con^^^, ^^^ antations, or any other of our Ma^^^) devices,
do their best endeavors to possess ^^^ with the love of Tobacco, make old men
^o ate ^^ it, and young men admire it, make the rich ^^^ ^^ their ^ealth in it,
make the laborer in ^^ hour in the Evening puff away his whole days ^^^ be
decayed banquerupt be always my tru^^ factor to diuulge it, be they never so
base, let ^^ be accounted Noble that use it, and be they ^^ so Noble, let them
be thought base that re^^ ^^^ Play Houses, Drinking-schooles, Tauorus, ^^^ses,
Bawdy houses, be continually haunted with the contaminous vapors of it, nay
(if it be ^^^ble^) bring it into their Churches, and there ^^^ up their
Preachers, (my only and my hate^^ s^^mics.)

And whereas the Indians, and other far remoted ^^barous Nations were the
first that used it, we do ^^oghtly further charge and command, that you and
every of you, do dis^wade them from the exc^s^^^ use of it, and let those
Nations that are our con^^^^^ opposites in manners and Religion, be fully ^^^
with an immoderate desire of it like Hors^^ ^^^, the more they drink, the more
let them ^^^st let it be a trade to practice the whiffe, the ^^^, the gulpe,
the euaporating or retention. Do ^^^ with all expedition, as you expect the
fruition of ^^ f^therly execrable Maleuolent Malediction.

Given at our Palace at Gehemn^, etc.
THis Proclamation was no sooner done,
But thousand furies to and fro did run,
^^^ accomplish what their Master Pluto spoke,
And fully fill the world with stink and smoke:
And now the man that se'ne of feeling reft,
By reason of his age, whose teeth have left
The vasty Ca^urne of his mumping cud,
Most have Tobacco to reuine his blood:
The glistring Gallant, or the Gallant Gull,
The icering Pander, and the hackney Trull,
The Roysting Rascal, and the swearing Slave,
The Hostler, Tapster, all in general crave
To be a foggy, misty, smoaky Jury
Upon this vpstart newfound ^^^^ien fury,
Great Captain Graceles^e storms, pro^^^s, and swearers,
He ^^^ have the rascal Poet by the cares,
And beat him, as a man would beat a dog,
That dares once speak against this precious fogge.
It is the jewel that he most respects,
It is the gemme of joy his heart affects:
It is the thing his soul does most adore,
To live and love Tobacco, and a whore:
He Will cram his brains with fumes of Indian grass,
And grow as fat with it as an English Ass.
Some say Tobacco will men's days prolong.
To whom I answer, they are in the wrong.
And sure my conscience gives me not the i will,
I think 'twill make men rotten ^re they die.
Old Adam lived nine hundred thirty year,
Yet never drank none, as I could read or hear:
And some men now live ninety years and past,
Who never drank Tobacco first nor last.
Then since at first it came from faithless Moors,
(And since it is now more common far then whores ^
I see no reason any Christian Nation
Should follow then in devilish im^^ation:
So farewell pipe, and pudding, stuff and smoke,
My Muse thinks fit to leave, before the choke.
Certain verses written in the Barbarian tongue, dropped out of a Negroes
pocket, which I thought good to insert, because they tend to ^^ honor of
Tobacco.

VAprosh fogh stinkguash slauorumques fie fominoshte Spitterspaw^smon, loather
so hem halk^sh spewrsb^shte Mistrum for smoakrash, choakerumques olifa ^rish
trash. Dam durt^cun belehum, contagio^^te vem^^troshe: Whifferum, puff gulpum,
allisnuff huff fleaminon odish, Rewmito contaminosh disbo^^^^ dungish odorish:

To the Right Honorable, Lord, William Earl of Pembroke, WILLIAM HERBERT.
Anagramma. My heart will bear.
RIght Noble Lord, whose breast does bear a heart
Which is a Patron unto Arms and Art:
Inspight of Envy, still thy fame shines clear:
For none but honored thoughts thy heart will bear.
WHen I but think, the days we wander in,
How most part of the world do live by sin:
How finely Satan shows his cunning s^ill,
That one man gets his goods, from others ill,
Do not the Lawyers live like mighty Lords;
On brawles, on iar^res, contentions and discords,
When if men (as they should) would but agree,
A Term would scarcely yield a Lawyers fee?
Let usurers brag of conscience what they can,
They live like devils, upon the bane of man:
The racking Landlord gets his ill got store,
By raising rents, which make his tenants poor:
Clap-shoulder Serieants get the devil and all,
By begg'ring and by bringing men in thrall.
Like Gentlemen, the Iaylors spend their lives
By keeping men in fetters, bonds and gyues:
The vintner and the vict'lar get most gains
From daily drunkards, and distemperd brains:
From whence do Justice Clerks get most they have,
But from the whore, the thief, the bawd, the knave?
In what consists the hangmans greatest hope,
But hope of great employment for the rope?
The very blue-coate Beadles get their trash,
By whips and rods, and the fine firking lash.
But leaving these, note but how Corporations
From others vices, get their reputations:
The vpstart velvet silken satin gull,
His own purse empts, to fill the Mercers full:
When for his birth, or wit more fit agrees,
A breech of leather, and a coat of freese.
The Tailor is a Gentleman transformed
For his inuenting fashions new deformed,
And those that make the Verdingales and bodies,
Get most they have, from idle witless nodies.
The Tires, the Periwigs, and the Rebatoes,
Are made t'adome ilshap'd Inamoratoes.
Yea all the world is falue to such a madness,
That each man gets his goods from others badnesse.
The Chirurgian and Physician get their stocks,
From Gowts, from Feauers, Botches, Piles, and Pocks:
With others pain, they most of all are pleased,
And best are eased, when others are diseasd.
As Sextons live by dead, and not by quick,
So they live with the sound, but by the sick.
Thus each man lives by other men's amiss,
And one man's meat, another poison is.
To the Right honorable John Lord Viscount Haddington, Earl of Holdernes,
John Ramsey.
Angaramma I aim Honors.
THrice worthy Lord, whose virtues do proclaim,
How Honors noble mark is still thy Aim,
TO attain the which, thou holdst thy hand so steady,
That thy deserts have wo^ne the prize already.
To the Honorable Knight Sir Thomas Bludder.
Anagramma Armed, Thus bold.
GOd is my Captain, my defense and hold,
Through faith in him, I am thus armed thus bold^
Upon the Powder Treason the fifth of November 1605.
THis day old D^mon, and the damned Crew,
Our King and Kingdom in the air had tossed:
But that our God their devilish practice crossed,
And on their treacherous heads the mischief threw
No Pagan, Tartar, Turk or faithless Jew,
Or hels black Monarch with his hateful host,
Since first amongst them Treason was ingrost,
No plot like that from their invention flew.
But when they thought a powder blast, a breath
Should all this Island into totters tear:
The Almighties mercy freed us from that fear,
And paid the Traitors with infamous death.
For which, let King, and all true Subjects sing
Continual praise unto Heavens gracious King.
To the Right Honorable Iob^ Moray, Lord Viscount Annan, Earl of Annandale,
Gentleman of his Majesty's Honorable Bedchamber.
Anagramma I aim Honor.
INdustrious Loyalty does daily tell,
You Aim at honor, and you level well,
And with your trusty service shoot so right,
That in the end you sure will hit the white.
Twelve Sonnets upon the Sons entering into the twelve Caelestiall Signs.
The 10. of March, the Sun enters into Aries, or the sign of the Raw.

March 10. Aries.
DIurnall Titans all reviving Carre,
Through all the heavens his progress now he ^^^^^
And now his glistering Rays he does vnbarre:
And what his absence mard, his presence makes:
Now he begins dame Tellus face to parch,
With blustering Boreas and with Eurus breath,
Thick clouds of dust in March, through air does march,
And Plants dead seeming Re-reuines from death.
Now at the heauy-headed horned Ram,
AEo^^^ AErbon, Phlogon, and Pyrois,
^^ sweet Ambrosya sweetly feed and cram,
And drinking Nector's gods carowsing juice,
Thus yearly, one and thirty days at least,
In Aries Titan daines to be a guest.
To the Right Honorable Christopher Villers, Earl of Anglesey.
Anagramma, Christ is our helper.
TO me and mine, our only comfort's this,
In all good Actions, Christ our helper is.
The 11. of April he comes into Taurus, or the
Sign of the Bull.
Taurus.
HIpericon now is removed unto the Bull,
And seems all hid in Mists and watery bowres:
Till wollsacke seeming clouds are bursting full,
And then he glides the Air with golden showers.
He shines, he hides, he smiles, and then he lowres,
Now glorious glowing, and straight darkened dim:
He Is now obscured, and now his beams out powers,
Asskies are clear, or thick twixt us and him.
Thus all the April, at bo-peepe he plays.
^^circling daily the Rotundious sphere.
And at the Bull he hides his glistring rays,
Til^ air is purgde of clouds, and skies are clear.
Then he the headstrong Taurus. soon forsakes,
And to his Summer progress haste he makes.
To the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, Lord privy Seal to the Kings
Matestie, HENRY MONTAGVE.
Anagramma Governs many.
AMongst a Million, there is hardly Any,
That (like your self) so well does govern Many.
The 12. of May the Sun enters into Gemini, or the Twins.
Gemini, May.
NOw bright faced Sminthus, with fair Flora meet
Adorning her with Natures best attire:
Trees, plants, herbs, flowers, and odoriferous sweet
With Birds all chaunting in their feathered quire.
Now country Tom and Tyb have their desire,
And roll and tumble freely on the grass,
The Milke-maide gets a green gown for her her
And all in sport the time away do pass,
The bird, the beast, the lusty lad, the lafle:
Do sing, do friske, do clip, do coll, do kiss,
Not thinking how the time must be, or was,
But making pleasant vso of time as it is,
Till Sminthus leaves his lodging at the twins.
And to a hotter race his course begins.
To my approved good friend, Mr Robert Branthwayte.
Anagramma. You bear a heart true bent.
LEt fortune smile or frown, you are content,
At all Assares you bear a heart true bent.
The 12. of June the Sun enters into Cancer or the Crabbe.

Cancer. June.
OF all the Innes where Sol does use to lie,
With crabbed Cancer none may make compare:
It is the highest in the lofty sk^e,
All other signs to it inferior are.
When Sol is once ascended and come there:
He scalds and scorches with his heavenly heat:
Makes fields of grass, and flowrie meadows bare,
And though the idle work not, yet they sweat,
Thus like an all-commanding lord he swaies,
High mounted in his chiese So^stician pride:
For when the Cancer he immures his rays,
Unto the height his glorie's amplifide.
And when he goes from thence, he does begin
By shorter Iourneyes to attain his Inn.
The thirteenth of July the Sun enters into
Leo, or the Lion.
Leo. July.
THe worlds eye daz'ler in his fiery race,
Does at the Lion lodge his untamed Steeds:
And now the ripening year begins apace
To show Dame T^llu^, procreatiue seeds.
For as from man, man's generation breeds,
So by manuring of our Grandam Earth,
Are brought forth fruits, and flowers, and herbs, and weeds,
To shield ungrateful man from pining dearth.
The dogged dog days now with heat do swelt,
And now is the season, of th'vnseasn'd air:
When burning seauers make the patient melt,
Whose heat the Doctors hardly can repair:
For why, these cur^ish days are fatal still,
And where they chance to bite, they use to kill.
The foureteenth of August, the Sun enters into Virgo, Or the Virgin.

Virgo. August.
Unhappy phaetons Splendidious Sire,
Left amorous bussing beauteous Climens lips,
And all inspired with Loves celestial fire:
His Globe surrounding Steed amain he whips:
And to the Virgur Virgo down does glide,
Where for she entertained him to his pleasure,
He his exchequer coffers opens wide,
And fills the world with haruests wished for treasure,
Now country Hindes unto their tools betake,
The forke, the rake, the sith, the hook, the cart,
And all a general expedition make,
Till Nature be left naked by their art.
At last the Virgin, when these things are don,
Till that time twelue-month leaves her Love the sun.
The thirteenth of September, the Sun enters into Libra, Or the Balance.

Libra. September.
THe Great all-seeing burning eye of day,
In Libra^s Balance restless comes to rest,
Where equally his way he seems to wey:
And day and night with equal hours are dressed:
By these just scales, true justice is expressed,
Which does to times and places render right,
Where wealth insults not, nor the poor oppressed,
But all is even poyzed, like the day and night.
And now this lamp of light does here alight,
Making this Sign, his Equinoctial Inn,
Whilst fruitful trees are ouer-laden quite:
(Too great a gracious guerdon for man's sin)
And as in March he 'gan to do us grace,
So to the Antipodes he now 'gins show his face.
The foureteenth of October, the Sun enters into Scorpio.

Scorpio. October.
ILlustrious Phoebus now declines amain,
His golden head within the Scorpion dwells.
Now boystrous blasts of wind, and showers of rain,
Of raging winters nigh approach foretells,
From trees sharp Autu^^ne, all the leaves expells,
For Phoebus now has left his pleasant Innes,
Now Merchants Bacchus blood both buy and sell,
And Michaels Term, laws harvest now begins,
Where many losers are, and few that wins:
For law may well be called contentions whip,
When for a scratch, a cuffe, for points or pins,
Will witless gets his neighbor on the hip.
Then tone the the other unto law will urge,
And up they come to give their purse a purge.
The eleventh of November, the Sun enters into Sagitarius, Or the Archer.

Sagitarius. November.
THus Luna's brother lower does descend,
And at the Archer rests his radient Waine,
Now winters bitter blasting storms contend.
T'assault our hemespheare, with might and maine,
The fields and trees disrobed all again,
Stark naked stripped of herbs, of hours, of fruits
And now the Lord, the Lowne, the Sir, the Swai^e,
Against the freeze, of Freeze make winter suites.
Now ch^rping birds are all turned tounglesse mutes,
And Shepherds swains to sheephouse d^^ue their sheep
Not controversies now are in disputes
At Westminster where such a coil they keep;
Where man does man within the Law betosse,
Till some go croslesse home by Woodcocks Crosse^
The eleventh of December, the Sun enters into Capricorn, Or the Goat.

Capricornus. December.
A Pollo has attained his lowest seat,
And now the shortness of his race is such,
That though his Glory for a time be great,
He gives his Sister Cynthia twice as much.
Now is the welcom'st time of all the year,
Now dye the oxen, and the fatted hogs:
Now merry Chirstmas fills the world with cheer,
And chimnies smoke with burning logge on logs.
He that is a mizer all the year beside,
Will revel now, and for no cost will spare,
A pox hang sorrow, let the world go slide,
Let Us eat and drink, and cast away all care.
Thus when Apollo's at the horned Goat,
He makes all Christendom with mirth to ^or^^^.
The tenth of January, the Sun enters into Aquarius, Or the sign of the
Waterbearer.

Aquarius, January.
THe Glorious Great Extinguisher of Night,
Immures his bright translucent golden head,
And from his radiant teeme he does alight,
To rest his Steeds in cold Aquarius bed.
Now hory frost, has Tellus face o'rspred,
And chilling numnesse whets the shauing air,
All vegitable creatures now seem dead.
Like curelesse cures, past and repast repair:
^^igidious Ianus twofold frozen face,
T^mes moist Aquar^us into congealed ye:
Though by the fires warm side the pot have place,
Of winters wrath it needs must know the price.
At last, days burning toarch, again takes horse,
And into wetter weather makes his course.
The ninth of February, the Sun enters into Pisces, Or the sign of the two
fishes.

Pisces. February.
Now snow, and rain, and hail and slauering sleet,
(The Delphean god has sucked from sea and land,
With exhalations) now the earth they greet:
Powered down by Iris liberal hand,
If soulefac'd February keep true touch,
He makes the toyling Plowmans proverb right;
By night, by day, by little and by much,
It fills the ditch, with either black or white:
And as the hard cornuted butting Ram,
At setting forth was Tytans daintiest dish:
So to conclude his race, right glad I am,
To leave him feasting with a mess of fish.
And long in Pisces he does not remain,
But leaves the fish, and falls to flesh again.
To the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Ridgewaye, Treasurer.
THOMAS RIDGEWAYE. Anagramma. God Arms thy way.
Again,

Age is made worthy.
THough sin and hell work mortals to betray,
Yet against their malice still, God Arms thsway.
When life and lands, and all away must fade,
By Noble actions, Age is worthy made.
Certain Sonnets made in the form of AEquiuoques; on the destruction of Troy.
When Hellen was for Priams son a mate,
From Greece berest by Parto and his Band:
Which caused the Greeks, the Trojan m^rds ama^e,
Some curled the boy; and other some they band:
The strum pet Queen which brought the burning brand,
That Illion fired and wracked old I'^am^ Race:
And on their Names long living shame d^d brand,
(For headstrong lust runs an unbounded ^ace.)
This beauteous piece, whose feature radiant b^aze,
Made Menelaus horne-mad war to wage:
And set all Troy in a combustious blaze,
Whose ten years triumphs scarce was worth^^^ wage,
For all their conquests, and their battring Rams,
Their leaders most returned, with heads like Rams.
To the Right Honorable, the Lord Viscount Grandison.
Anagramma. Hearts Join in love.
THy loyal service to thy King, does prove,
That to thy Country, thy Heart Ioyns in love.
With raging madness and with fury fell,
Great Diemed, and Atax left their Tents.
And in the throat of death, to blows they fell,
To make more work for plasters, and for tents.
With blood imbruing all the Phrygian Clime,
Whilst men like Autumn leaves drop dying down:
Where some the row blood and wounds to honor clime,
And some their mangled hims bestrows the down:
Whilst Par^s with his Hellen in his Arms
Embraces her about the wastfull wast:
Saw many a Gallant Knight in burnisht Arms,
Who from their Teuts made haste to make more waste:
Who to their Teuts did never return again.
Thus wars makes gain a loss, and loss a gain.
HAd Priams Queen in Cradle slain her Son,
The lustful Paris (hoplesse boy) I mean:
Then Illions Towers might still have brau'd the Sun:
His death to save their lives had been the mean.
Unlucky luck, when Juno, Venus, Prllas
Did crave his censure upon Ida Mount:
Whence sprung the cause that Troy and Priams Palace
Were burnt, which erst the skies did seem to mount.
Had he been drowned or strangled with a cord,
He had not robbed Oenon of her heart:
Or had he died, ere Hellen did accord
With him, to head her husband like a Heart.
But Troy, it is thy fate, this knave and Baggage
Confounds thy state, and fire thy bag and baggage.
TRoyes fruitful Queen did many children bear,
So brave, heroicke, and so stout a Crew:
Who all in noble actions did accrue,
When age had made their Parents bald and bare,
They made their daintlesse courage to appear,
Amidst the throngs of danger and debate:
Where wars remorselesse stroke killed many a Peer,
Whilst swords, not words, their counsels did debate:
But blood on blood, their fury could not sat,
For fierce Achilles did brave Hector gore:
To guerdon which, the Grecian in his gore,
Did wallow, whilst the Trojans laughing sat.
Thus did Achilles bid the world adieu
For Hectors death, Revenge did claim a due.
TEn weary years these bloody broils did last,
Until the Greeks had formed a wooden Steed:
Which they on Priam would bestow at last,
(When force preuailes not, falsehood stands in stead.)
False Sinon (who so well could forge a lie,
Whose traitrous eyes shed many a trech'rous tear)
Knew well that in the horses womb did lie,
The wolves that Troy did all in pieces tear.
Polyxena, Achilles deare-bought dear,
Was hewed in gobbets on her lovers grave,
King, Queen, and Troy, for Hellen paid too dear,
All felt the Grecian rage, both young and grave.
To Kings and Commons, death's alike, all one,
Except AEneas, who escaped alone.
LO thus the burden of Adultrous guilt,
I showring vengeance, Troy and Troi^nes saw:
No age, no sex, no beauty, Gold or guilt,
Withstood foretold Cassandraes sacred saw.
She often said false Hellens beauteous blast
Should be the cause the mighty Grecian power,
Their names, and fames, with infamy should blast,
And how the gods on the^ would vengeance power.
But poor Cassandra prophesied in vain,
She clamorous cries (as 'twere) to senseless Rocks.
The youths of Troy, in merry scornful vein,
Securelesse slept, whilst lust the cradle rocks:
Till bloody burning Indignation came,
And all their mirth with mourning overcame.
Certain Sonnets: variously composed upon diverse subjects.
Sonnet. 1
True Nobility.
GReat is the glory of the Noble mind,
Where life and death are equal in respect:
If fates be good or bad, unkind or kind,
Not proud in freedom, nor in thrall deiect;
With courage scorning fortunes worst effect,
And spitting in foul Enuies cankred face.
True honor thus does baser thoughts subject,
Esteeming life a slave, that serves disgrace.
Foul abject thoughts, become the mind that is base,
That deemes there is no better life then this,
Or after death does fear a worser place,
Where guilt is paid the guerdon of Amiss.
But let swollen envy swell until she burst,
The Noble mind defies her to her worst.
Sonnet. 2.
Envy and Honor.
COuld Envy dye, if Honor were deceast?
She could not live, for Honor's Enuie's food:
She lives by sucking of the Noble blood,
And scales the lofty top of Fames high Crest.
Base thoughts compacted in the abject breast,
The Meager Monster does nor harm, nor good:
But like the wane, or wax, of ebb or flood,
She shunnes as what her gorge does most detest,
Where heau'n-bred honor in the Noble mind,
From out the Cauerns of the breast proceeds:
There hell-borne Envy shows her hellish kind,
And Vultur like upon their actions feeds.
But here is the ods, that Honor's tree shall grow,
When Enuie's rotten stump shall burn in woe.
Sonnet. 3.
Beauties luster.
DEw drinking Phoebus hid his golden head,
Balm-breathing Zephyrus lay close immured:
The silly Lambs and Kyds lay all as dead,
Skies, earth, and seas, all solace had abiur'd.
Poor men and beasts, to toylesome tasks inured,
In dropping manner spent the drowzy day:
All but the Owl, whose safety night assured,
She gladly cuts the air with whooting lay.
When lo, the blossom of blooming May,
From out her Coach maiestickly does rise:
Then Tytan does his radiant beams display,
And clouds are vanished from the vaulty skies.
Sweet Zephyris gales reuiueth beasts and men,
Madge- Howlet scuds unto her nest again.
Sonnet. 4.
Hope and Despair.
Domestic broils my tortured heart inuades
Twixt wau'ring Hope, and desperate black Despair:
To prosecute my suit the one persuades,
The other frustrates all my hopes with cares.
Hope sets me on, infer's she is fairest fair,
^dire disdain does dwell in foulest Cells,
And fell despair calls beauty Enuies heir:
which torments me more then ten thousand hels.
^ thus my former hope despair expels:
^^st which extremes what is best for me to do:
^ open arms, despair against me rebels,
^ope traytor-like gives free consent thereto.
And till these traitors twain consume my city,
^ restless rest, to rest upon her pity.
Sonnet. 5.
Three blind Commanders.
Blind fortune, sightlesse love, and eyelesse death,
Like Great Triumue'rs swayes this earthly room,
^^^ actions, affections, and very breathe
Are in subjection to their fatal doom.
There Is nothing past, or present, or to come,
That in their purblinde power is not comprizde:
from Crown, to cart, from cradle to the toome,
^ll are by them defamde, or eternizde:
Why should we then esteem this doting life
^ That's in the guideance of such blindfold rule)
Whose chiefest peace, is a continual strife,
Whose gaudy pompes the pack, and man the Mule,
Which lives long day, he bears, as he is able,
Til deaths black night, does make the grave his stable?
Sonnet. 6.
In the praise of music.
^TWas Music fetched Euridice from hell,
And raped grim Pluto with harmonious strains:
Renowned Orphens did with Music quell
The fiends, and ease the tortured of their pains.
The Dolphin did account it wondrous gains,
To hear Arion play as he did ride:
Gods, fiends, fish, fowls, and shepherds on the plains
Melodious Music still has! magnifide:
And ancient records plainly do decide,
How brave Orlands, Palatine of France,
When he was raging mad for Meadors bride,
Sweet Music cured his crazed wits mischance.
For Musick's only fit for heavens high quire,
Which though men cannot praise enough, adutire.
Sonnet. 7.
The Map of misery.
LIke to the stone that's cast in deepest wane,
That rests not till the bottom it has found,
So I (a wretch) inthrald in sorrows cave,
With woe and desperations fetters bound:
The captive slave imprisoned under ground
Doomed, there by fates to expire his woeful days,
With care o'rwhelmd, with grief and sorrow drowned
Makes mournful moanings and lamenting lays,
Accusing, and accursing fortunes plays,
Whose withered Autumn leauelesse leaves his tree,
And banning death for his too long delays, ^
Remains the only poor despised he.
If such a one as this, the world confine,
His mischiefs are his his sport compared with mine.
Sonnet. 8.
Another in praise of music.
NO Poet crowned with everliving bays
(Tho art like floods should from his knowledge flow)
He could not write enough in Musicks praise:
To which, both man and Angels love do owe,
If my bare knowledge ten times more did know,
And had ingrost all art from Pernas hill:
If all the Muses should their skils bestow
On me, to amplify my barren skill:
I might attempt in show of my good will,
In Musicks praise, some idle lines to write:
But wanting judgment, and my accent ill,
I still should be unworthy to indite,
And run my wit on ground like ship on shelfe:
For musicks praise consists in it self.
A Cataplasmicall Satyr, composed and compacted of sundry simples, as salt,
vinegar, wormwood, and a little gall, very profitable to cure the impostumes
of vice.
A Savage rough-hair'd Satyr needs no guide,
Where Is no way, from the way he cannot ^lide:
Then have amongst you, through the brakes and briers,
From those who to the Cedars top aspires,
Unto the lowest shrub, or branch of broom,
That has his breeding from earths teeming womb.
And now I talk of broom, of shrubs and Cedars,
Me thinks a world of trees are now my leaders:
To prosecute this travel of my pen,
And make comparison twixt trees and men,
The Cedars and the high cloud kissing Pynes:
Fecundious Olives, and the crooked Vines:
The Elm, the Ash, the Oak, the Masty Beeche,
The Pear, the Apple, and the rug-gowned Peache,
And many more, for it would tedious be,
To name each fruitful and unfruitful tree.
But to proceed, to show how men, and trees
In birth, in breed, in life, and death agrees:
In their beginnings they have all one birth,
Both have their natural being from the earth,
And heavens high hand, (where he does please to bless,
Makes trees, or men, or fruitful, or fruitless.
In sundry uses trees do serve man's turn,
To build, to adorn, to feed, or else to burn.
Thus is man's state in all degrees like theirs,
Some are got up to the top of honors stayres,
Securely sleeping on opinions pillow,
Yet as unfruitful, as the fruitless willow,
And fill up rooms, (like worthless trees in woods)
Whose goodness all consists in ill got goods:
He like the Cedar makes a goodly show,
But no good fruit will from his greatness grow,
Until he die, and from his goods depart,
And then gives all away, despite his heart.
Then must his friends with mourning cloth be clad,
With insides merry, and with outsides sad.
What though by daily grinding of the poor
By bribry and extortion got his store:
Yet at his death he gowns some foure-score men,
And it is no doubt he was a good man then?
Though in his life he thousands has undone,
To make wealth to his cursed coffers run^
If at his burial groats a piece be given,
I Will warrant you, his soul's in hell, or heaven:
And for this doale perhaps the beggars strives,
That in the throng seventeen do lose their lives:
Let no man tax me here, with writing lies:
For what is writ, I saw with mine own eyes:
Thus men like barren trees are feld and lopt,
And in the fire to burn are quickly popt:
Some man perhaps whilst he on earth does live,
Part of his vain superfluous wealth will give:
To build of Almshouses some twelve or ten,
Or more or less, to harbor aged men:
Yet this may nothing be to that proportion,
Of wealth which he has gotten by extortion.
What is it for man (his greedy mind to serve)
To be the cause that thousands die and sterue:
And in the end, like a vainglorious thief,
Will give some ten or twelve a poor relief?
Like robbers on the way, that take a purse,
And give the poor a mite to escape Gods curse.
But know this thou, whose goods are badly gotten,
When thou art in thy grave consumed and rotten,
Thine heir (perhaps) will feast with his sweet punk,
And Dice, and Drabb, and every day be drunk,
Carowsing Indian Trinidado smoke,
Whilst thou with Sulfurous flames are like to choke.
See, see yond gallant in the Cloke-bag breech,
He Is nothing but a Trunk crammed full of speech:
He Will swear as if against heaven he wars would wage,
And meant to pluck down Phoebus in his rage:
When let a man but try him, he is all oaths,
And odious lies, wrapped in unpaid for clothes.
And this Lad is a Roaring boy forsooth,
An exlent morsel for the hangmans tooth.
He carelessly consumes his golden pelf,
In getting which his Father damned himself:
Whose soul (perhaps) in que^chlesse fire does broile,
Whilst on the earth his son keeps level coile.
It Is strange to Church what numbers daily flock,
To drink the Spring of the eternal Rock:
The great ^ou^^-sauing, Satan slaying Word,
Against sin, death, hell, the alco^ quering sacred sword
Where high lehonahs Trump^ters sound forth
From East to West, from Sou^^ unto the North:
(For through all lands their Embasseyes are borne,
And never do again in vain return:)
Which either is of life to life the savor,
Or death to death exilde from Gods sweet fauoor:
Which bliss or bane there is many daily hears,
Who leave their hearts at home, and bring their eases^
And lest their reck less heads, the Word should smother,
As soon as'tenters the one, it is out at the other.
For let a Preacher preach until he sweats,
Denouncing heavens great wrath in thundering threat^^^
Against sin and sinners, against high hearted pride,
Against murder which has often for vengeance cride,
Or envy, Lechery, Avarice, or Swearing,
Or any other vice, they will give the hearing,
And say the Preacher wondrous pains did take,
And did a very learned Sermon make:
But what good Reformation hence proceeds,
Are Mountain words, and little Mo^e-hill deeds.
Tell Vs'rers they are banished from Gods hill,
Yet they will continue in extortion still.
Tell the proud Courtier, that he is but earth,
He Will over the poor insult and brag of birth.
Expostulate the great Almighties Ire,
And tell the murdrer, hell shall be his hire,
Yet e're he will pocket up the least disgrace,
His enemies guts shall be his Rapiers case.
Tell daily drunkards hell shall be their lot,
Thei'l knock and call to have the the other pot.
Tell Panders, Bawds, knaves, and adultrous whoors,
How they in hell must pay their cursed scores:
Tell Mizer chuffes who charity do banish,
How they from heaven, eternally must vanish:
Tell all in general of their lives amiss,
And tell them that hels bottomless abyss,
Must be their portions if they not repent,
Till true repentance heavens just wrath preuent^
Yet when the Preacher all he can has told,
Souls unto firm are daily bought and sold.
The Mizer with his lechery of Chinke,
On earth will give his dropsy soul to drink,
And though the Word beat on his Anuile heart,
From Vs'ry and extortion he will not part,
The picbald Gallant to the Church will come
To hear his souls saluations total sum:
Yet his high pride is in such hauty dotage,
Fogets he is sprung from a poor country Cotage.
The murdrer hears how reprobated Caine
Was cursed of God, that had his brother slain,
Yet when he is from the Church, forgets it all,
And stabs a man for taking of the wall.
Should I through all men's seu'rall actions run,
I know my business never would be done.
The rich man hates the poor man, and the poor
Does envy against the rich man for his store.
This is the blessed souls everliving Bread,
In bounteous measure all the earth or'espread:
Some on the high way falls and takes no root,
But is of no esteem, trod under foot;
Some falls on stones, and some alights on thorns,
Deuor'd with fowls, or choked with scoffs or scorns,
Some little portion falls in fruitful ground,
The increase of which is to be seldom found.
For let men weigh their good deeds with their bad,
For thousand ils, one good will scarce be had.
And yet no doubt but God in store does keep
His near dear children, his best stock of sheep.
For though unto the world they are not known,
Yet it is sufficient God does know his own.
For though Elius thought himself was all
That had not offered sacrifice to Ball:
Lebonah answered him, seven thousand more,
In Israel did this Idol not adore.
But who so much in this vile life are hated,
As those which to salvation are created?
For let a men refrain to drab or dice,
Out he upon him then, he is too precise.
Let him forbear to lie, to swear, or banne,
O hang him rascal, he is a Puritan.
And sure I think the Devil by that false name
Has added thousands souls unto his flame.
Some man ere he will be called a Puritan,
Will turn a damned Machiauilian,
A Libertine, Papist, or else what not?
To keep his name from so impure a blot.
I speak not this regarding their estate,
Who from our Church themselves do separate,
For good indifferent Ceremonious rites,
And against our Churches government backbites.
Nor do I praise the loving Sisters love,
Who often makes the Brethren's spirits move,
And if 'twere lawful (they would gladly kno)
To dress their meat the Sabbath day or no.
And wherefore now the Churchmen of these days,
Ride to and fro, to preach so many ways,
When Christ to his Apostles gave in charge,
That they should seek and teach all nations large,
The way, that in his Laws they might abide,
Christ bade them go, he bade them not to ride,
These idle questionists, these schismatickes,
I hold no bettter then rank heretics:
But this I think not well, when honest hearts
Shall have this impure name without deserts,
How then can my comparing be gain stood?
For men are like to trees, some bad, some good.
But tatry, Satyr, thou too fast do trot,
There Is one thing more I had almost forgot,
And this is it, of Alehouses, and Innes,
Wine-Marchants, Vintners, Brewers, who much wins
By others losing, I say more or less
Whose sale of hufcap liquor do profess,
Should never be to any office called,
Or in no place of Justice be instal'd:
The reason is, they gain by men's excess
Of devilish quassing, and damned drunkenness.
For why, should men be moderate in their drink,
Much Beer, and bottle-Ale should stand and stink:
And Mounsieur Claret, and sweet Signior Sack.
Would lowre and turn unto the Merchants wrack;
The Vintners then within their cellers deep,
Such coniuring at midnight would not keep.
This swynish sin has man of sense bereauen,
To bandy balls of blasphemy against heaven,
It is the way, the door, the porch, the gate,
All other vices entor in thereat.
A drunken man in rage will stabbe his brother,
He Will Cuckold his own father, whore his mother,
Revile and curse, swear and speak dangerous treason,
And when he is sober, hangs forn 't by the weason.
How then should men a reformation give,
To mend those crimes, that by those crimes do live?
The Patriarch Noah did first plant the Vine,
And first did feel the powerful force of wine,
And righteous Lot, by wine deprived of wit,
Foul Incest with his daughters did commit.
And Holophernes drunken lay in bed,
Whilst strong-faith'd, weake-arm'd Indith cut offs head.
Great Alexander out his Fauchion drew,
And being drunk, his best friend Cl^tus slew.
If every hair upon the heads of men
Were quils, and every quill were made a pen:
Were Earth to paper turned, and Seas to ink,
And all the world were writers, yet I think,
They could not write the mischiefs done by drink.
And such a custom men have taken therein,
That to be drunk, is scarce accounted sin,
But honest recreatiue merriment
The time is termed that is in tippling spent.
A Merchants ship is richly fraught, ariues,
And for thanksgiving that so well he thriues,
He makes a feast, and store of money spends,
Inuites his kinsfolk, creditors, and friends:
Where storms, and Rocks and Pirates are forgot,
And triumphs made to Bacchus and the Pot.
A rich man's wife's delivered of of a boy.
And all the household must be drunk for joy.
The prisoner that is condemned to die and hang,
And by reprieue has escaped that bitter pang,
Will presently his old acquaintance call,
And ere he gives God thanks, to drinking fall.
Why drunkards common are, as lies, or stealing,
And sober men are scarce, like honest dealing.
When men do meet, the second word that is spoke,
Is, Where Is good liquour, and a pipe of smoke?
The laboring man that for his hire does serve,
Let Landlord tarry, wife and children sterue,
With not a bit of bread within the house,
Yet he will sit on the Ale-bench and carowse.
Thus like an Inundation drink does drown
The Rich, the Poor, the Courtier and the Clown.
Since then to be a drunkard, is to be
The sincke of Incest, and Sodomitry,
Of Treason, swearing, fighting, beg'ry, murder,
And diverse more, I then will go no further:
But here my Satyrs stinging whip I Will waste
In lashing dropsy drunkards out of taste.
How then can it be possible that such,
Who sell Wine, Beer, or Ale, do gain so much,
Should punish drunkards, as the Law commands,
In whose vain spending, their most gaining stands?
It were all one as if a Mercer did
To wear Silk, Velvet, Cloth of Gold forbid.
And Victlers may as wisely punish those;
I rom, whom their daily drinks, great gettings grows.
I would have all old drunkards to consent
To put a Bill up to the Parliament:
That those by quaffing that have spent their wealth,
Consumed their times, their memory, their health,
And by excessive spending now are bare,
That Merchants, Brewers, Vintners, should prepare
Some Hospitals to keep them in their age,
And cloth, and feed them, from fierce famines rage:
For every one whose hard unlucky lots,
Have been to be undone by empting pots,
I hold it fit that those the pots that filde,
Should contribute those Alms houses to build.
Yet one objection would this bill debar,
Too many drunkards there already are;
And rather then this law would bate their store,
I fear 'twould make them twice as many more.
For why, to drink most men would be too bold,
Because they would have pensions being old,
And men (of purpose to this vice would fall,
To be true beads-men to this hospital.
Then let it be as it already is.
But yet I hold it not to be amiss)
Those Drinke-sellers, from office to exclude.
And so for that my Satyr does conclude,
I could rippe up a Catalogue of things,
Which thousand thousands to damnation flings,
But all my pains at last would be but idle.
It is not man can men's Affections bridle.
Sin cannot be put down with ink and paper,
No more then Sol is lightened with a Taper.
To Mistress Rose.
Anagramma. SORE.
SOund Rose, though Sore thy Anagram does mean,
Mistake it not, it means no sore unclean:
But it alludes unto the lofty sky,
To which thy virtue shall both Sore and fly.
To my approved good friend Mr. ROBARTE CVDDNER.
Anagramma. Record and be true.
MY thoughts Record, and their account is true,
I scarce have better friends alive then you.
A nest of Epigrams.
Fortune. 1.
It Is Fortunos glory to keep Poets poor,
And crau^ weak witted Idiots with her store;
And it is concluded in the wisest schools,
The blinded drab shall ever favor fools.
Epigram 2.
Love.
Love is a dying life, a living death,
A vapor, shadow, bubble, and a breath:
An idle babble, and a paltry toy,
Whose greatest Patron is a blinded boy:
But pardon love, my judgment is unjust,
For what I spoke of love, I meant of lust.
Epigram 3.
Death.
THose that escape fortune, and th'extremes of love,
Unto their longest homes, by death are drove:
Where Caesar's, Kaesars, Subjects, Abiects must
Be all alike, consumed to dirt and dust:
Death ends all our cares or cares increase,
It sends us unto lasting pain, or peace.
Epigram 4.
Fame.
When Fortune, Love and Death their tasks have done,
Fame makes our lives through many ages run:
For be our living actions good or ill,
Fame keeps a record of our doings still:
By Fame Great Julius Caesar ever lives;
And Fame, infamous life to Nero gives.
Epigram 5.
Time.
ALL making, marring, never turning Time
To all that is, is period, and is prime:
Time wears out Fortune, Love, and Death and Fame,
And makes the world forget her proper name.
Th^^'s nothing that so long on earth can last,
But in conclusion, Time will lay it wast.
Epigram 6.
Ka me, kae thee.
MY Muse has vowed, revenge shall have her swindge
To catch a Parrat in the Woodcocks sprindge.
Epigram 7.
Solus.
THe land yields many Poets, were I gone,
The water sure (I durst besworne) had none.
Epigram 8.
Self-conceit.
SOme Poets are, whose high pitched lofty strains
Are past the reach of every vulgar wight:
To understand; which, twill amaze weak brains,
So mystical, sophistical they write:
No marvel others understand them not,
For they scarce understand themselves, I wot.
Epigram 9.
A couple.
ONe read my book, and said it wanted wit,
I wonder if he meant himself, or it:
Of both: if both, two fools were met I troe,
That wanted wit, and every fool does so.
Epigram 10.
Bacchus and Apollo.
THe thigh-borne bastard of the thundering Jove,
(When men's inuentio^s are of wit most hollow)
He with his spiteful juice their sprites does move.
Unto the harmonious music of Apollo:
And in a word, I would have all men know it,
He must drink wine, that means to be a Poet.
Epigram 11.
Of translation.
I Understand or know no foreign tongue,
But their translations I do much admire:
Much art, much pains, much study does belong,
And (at the least) regard should be their hyre.
But yet I would the French had held together,
And kept their pox, and not translate them hither.
Epigram 12.
Natures counterfeite.
WHen Adam was in Paradise first placed,
An dwth the rule of mortal things was graced,
Then roses, pinkes and fragrant gilliflowres,
Adornd and deckd forth Edens blessed bow^es:
But now each Gill wears flowers, each Punk has pinks,
And roses garnish Gallants shoes, me thinks:
When rugged Winter, robs fairy Floraes treasure,
Puncks can have pinks and roses at their pleasure.
Epigram 13.
The devil take bribery.
A Man attach't for murdering of a man,
Unto the for-man of his Jury sent
Two score angels, begging what he can,
He would his conscience strain, law to prevent:
That his offenses Judge, might judge no further,
But make manslaughter of his wilful murder:
The verdict was manslaughter to the Judge.
The Judge demanded how it could be so?
The for-man said his conscience much did grudge:
But forty angels did persuade him no.
Well (quoth the Judge) this case shall murder be,
If half those angels not appear to me.
Thus when the law men to confusion drives,
The godless angels will preserve their lives.
Epigram 14.
The devil is a knave.
I Shell dislikes the surplusse and the cope,
And calls them idle vestments of the Pope:
And mistress Mande would go to Church full feign,
But that the corner cap makes her refrain:
And Madam Idle is offended deep,
The Preacher speaks, so loud, she cannot sleep:
Lo, thus the devil sowes contentious seed,
Whence sects, and schisms, and heresies do breed.
Epigram 15.
Kissing goes by favor.
BEmbus the Burgomaster lives in pain,
With the Sciatica, and the Cathar.
Rich Grundo of the dropsy does complain,
And with the Gowt these mizers troubled are.
If Tinkers, Cobblers, Botchers, be infected
With Bembus Lamenesse or with Grundoes Gowt:
Like pocky fellows they must be rejected,
And as infectious rascals be kept out,
And not come near where wholesome people flocks:
Thus rich men's sicknesses, are poor men's pocks.
Epigram 16.
Dear no Venison.
PRocilla always calls her husband Dear,
Belike she bought him at too dear a rate,
Or else to make the case more plain appear,
Like to a Dear she has adorned his pate:
If it be so, god Vulcan send her luck;
That she may live to make her Dear a Bucke.
Epigram 17.
Every thing is pretty when it is little.
THere is a saying old; (but not so witty)
That when a thing is little, it is pretty:
This doting age of ours it finely fits;
Where many men thought wise, have pretty wits.
Epigram 18.
I meant somewhat.
ONe asked me what my Melancholy means?
I answered, 'Twas because I wanted means.
He asked what I did by my answer mean?
I told him still, my means were too too mean.
He offered me to lend me pounds a score.
I answered him, I was too much in score.
He finding me in this cross answ'ring vein,
Left me in want to wish for wealth in vain.
Epigram 19.
Faith without works.
A Among the pure reformed Amsterdammers,
(Those faithful Friday feasting capon cra^mers)
Only in them (they say) true faith does lurk:
But it is a lazy faith, 'twill do no work.
O should it work, there is many thousand fears,
'Twould set the world together by the ears.
Epigram 20.
Partiality.
STrato the Gallant recles along the street,
His addle head's too heavy for his feet:
What though he swear and swagger, spurn and kick,
Yet men will say the Gentleman is sick?
And that 'twere good to learn where he does dwell,
And help him home, because he is not well.
Strait staggers by a Porter, or a Carman,
As bumsie as a fox'd flapdragon German:
And though the Gentleman's disease and theirs,
Are parted only with a pair of sheares:
Yet they are Drunken knaves; and must to the stocks,
And there endure a world of flouts and mocks.
Thus when brave Strato's wits with wine are shrunk,
The same disease will make a beggar drunk.
Epigram 21.
A keeper of honesty.
DEliro should of honesty be full,
And store of wisdom surely is within him.
What though he dally with a painted Trull,
And she to folly daily seems to win him?
Yet in him sure is honesty good store,
He vtters but his knauerie with a whore.
For he that spends too free, shall surely want,
Whilst he that spares, will live in wealthy state:
So wit and honesty, with such are scant,
Who part with it at every idle rate:
But men must needs have honesty and wit,
That like Deliro never utter it.
Epigram 22.
All Is one, but one's not all.
TO wonder and admire, is all one thing,
If as Synonimies the words be took:
But if a double meaning from them spring,
For double sense your Judgment then must look
As once a man all soild with dirt and mire,
Fell down, and wondered not, but did admire.
Epigram 23.
Mistress fine bones.
FIne Parnell wonderfully likes her choice,
In having got a husband so complete,
Whose shape and mind does wholly her rejoice:
At bed, board, and abroad, he is always neat:
Neat can he talk, and feed and neatly tread,
Neat are his feet, but most neat is his head.
Epigram 34.
A supposed Constructions.
MAry and Mare, Anagrammatiz'd,
The one is Army, and the other Arm,
^^^ both their names is danger Moraliz'd,
^^ both alike, do sometimes good or harm,
Mare's the sea, and Mare's Arme's a river,
And Mary's Armie's all for whatl' ye give her.
Epigram 25.
Death is a Inggler.
A Rich man sick, would needs go make his will,
And in the same, he does command and will
The hundred pound unto his man called Will,
Because he always served him with good will:
But all these wills did prove to Will but vain,
His master lives and has his health again.
Epigram 26.
Mistress Grace only by name.
GRace graceless, why art thou ungracious Grace?
Why do thou run so lewdly in the race?
The cause wherefore thy goodness is so scant,
^^ose what most thou have, thou most do want.
Epigram 27.
Prudence.
It Is strange that Prudence should be wild and rude,
Whose very name does Modesty include:
^^e reason is, for ought that I can see,
Her name and nature do not well agree.
Epigram 28.
Mercy^.
MY Mercy hates me, what is the cause I pray,
Tis' cause I have no money, thee does say.
^mell Mercy, now I plainly see,
Without a see no mercy comes from thee.
^et in conclusion, every idle gull
^^ceines thy Mercy is unmerciful.
Epigram 29.
Faith.
O Faith, thou always unbelieving art,
Faith in thy name, and faithless in thy heart.
^^^credidst all, but what is true and good,
^vertue rude, in vice well understood.
Epigram 30.
Upon my self.
MY self I like to an untuned Vial,
For like a Vial I am in a Case:
And whosoever of my fortunes makes a trial,
Shall (like to me) be strung and tuned base.
And Trebles Troubles he shall never want:
But heeres the Period of my mischiefs All,
Though Base and Trebles, fortune did me grant,
And Means, but yet alas, they are too small.
Yet to make up the Music, I must look
The Tenor in the cursed Counter book.
Epigram 31.
A Rope for Parrat.
WHy does the Parrat cry a Rope, a Rope?
Because he is cag'd in prison out of hope.
Why does the Parrat call a Boat, a Boat?
It is the humor of his idle note.
O pretty Pall, take heed, beware the Cat.
(Let watermen alone, no more of that)
Since I so idly heard the Parrat talk,
In his own language, I say, Walk, knave, walk.
Epigram 32.
Constants.
INconstant Constants all-bewitching feature,
Has made fair Constance an inconstant Creature:
Her Godmother was very much to blame,
To give Inconstancy a constant name.
But 'twas a woman named her so contrary,
And women's tongues and hearts do ever vary.
Epigram 33.
Upon the burning of the Globe.
A Spiring Phaeton with pride inspired,
Misguiding Phoebus Carre, the world he fired:
But Ovid did with fiction serve his turn,
And I in action saw the Globe to burn.
Epigram 34.
Late Repentance.
A Greedy wretch did on the Scriptures look,
And found recorded in that Sacred book,
How such a man with God should sure prevail,
Who^clad the naked, and visit those in Iaile,
And then he found how he had long mistak'd,
And oftentimes had made the clothed naked:
In stead of visiting the oppressed in mones,
He had consumed them to the very bones.
Yet one day he at leisure would repent,
But sudden death Repentance did prevent.
Epigram 35.
Not so strange as true.
THe stately Stag when he his horns has shed,
In sullen sadness he deplores his loss:
But when a wife cornutes her husbands head,
His gains in horns he holds an extreme Cross:
The Stag by losing does his loss complain,
The man by gaining does lament his gain.
Thus whether horns be either lost or found,
They both the loser and the winner wound.
Epigram 36.
A Wordmonger.
Man's vnderstanding's so obnubilate,
That when thereon I do excogitate,
Intrinsicall and querimonious pains
Do puluerise the concaue of my brains,
That I could wish man were vnfabricate,
His faults he does so much exaggerate.
Epigram 37.
Plain dunstable.
YOur words pass my capatchity good zur,
But ich to prove need never to go vur:
Cha known men live in honest exclamation,
Who now God woe live in a worker fashion.
The poor man grambles at the rich man's store,
And rich men daily do express the poor.
Epigram 38.
Reason.
Know thou a Traitor plotting damned Treason?
Reveal him, it is both loialty and Reason.
Know thou a thief will steal at any season?
To shun his company thou have good reason.
See thou a villain hang up by the weason?
He hangs by reason that he wanted reason.
Good men are scarce, and honest men are geason.
To love them therefore, it is both right and reason,
More I could say, but all is not worth two peason:
And therefore to conclude, I hold it reason.
Epigram 39.
Out of the ^^^ into the fire.
TOm senseless to the death does hate a play:
But yet he will play the drunkard every day.
He railes at plays and yet does ten times worse,
He Will dice, he will bowl, he will whore, he will swear, he will curs,
When for one two pence (if his humor please)
He might go see a play, and escape all these,
But it is man's use in these pestiferous times;
To hate the least, and love the greatest crimes.
Epigram 40.
A Poets similitude.
A Poet rightly may be termed fit
An abstract, or Epitome of wit:
Or like a Lute that others pleasures breed,
Is fret and strung, their curious cares to seed,
That scornfully distaste it, yet it is known,
It makes the hearers sport, but it self none.
A Poet's like a taper, burnt by night,
That wastes it self, in giving others light.
A Poet's the most fool beneath the skies,
He spends his wits in making Idiots wise,
Who when they should their thankfulness return,
They pay him with disdain, contempt and scorn.
A Puritan is like a Poets purse,
For both do hate the cross (what cross is worse?)
Epigram 41.
Mecan^s Epitaph.
HEre lies the Steward of the Poets god,
Who whilst on earth his loved life abod,
Apollo's Daughters, and the heirs of Jove,
His memorable bounty did approve:
His life, was life to Poets, and his death
Bereaved the Muses of celestial breath.
Had Phoebus fired him from the lofty skies,
That Phoenix like another might arise,
From out his odoris^rus sacred embers,
Whose loved lives loss, poor Poetry remembers.
This line is the same backward, as it is forward, and I will give any man five
shillings apiece for as many as they can make in English.

Lewd did I live, and evil did I dwell.

An Apology for Watermen ^^ Dedicated to Nowell, and Robert Clarke Esquires,
Masters of his Majesty's Barges; and to the rest of the Masters, the Assistants
of the Company of Watermen.
SVch imputations, and such daily wrongs,
Are laid on Watermen, by envious tong^^
To clear the which, if I should silent be
'Twere baseness, and stupidity in me.
Nor do I purpose now with ink and pen,
To write of them as they are Watermen:
But this I speak, defending their vocation,
From slanders false, and idle imputation.
Yet should I only of the men but speak,
I could the top of Enuies Coxcombe break.
For I would have all men to understand,
A Waterman's a man by Sea or Land,
And on the land and sea, can service do,
To serve his King, as well as other too:
He Will guard his Country both on seas and shore,
And what (a Gods name) can a man do more?
Like double men they well can play indeed
The Soldiers, and the Sailors for a need.
If they did yearly use to scowre the Maine,
As erst they did, in wars twixt us and Spain,
I then to speak, would boldly seem to dare,
One Sailer with two Soldiers should compare.
But now sweet peace their skill at Sea soduls,
That many are more fit to use their sculs,
Then for the sea, for why? the want of use,
Is Arts confusion, and best skils abuse.
And not to be too partial in my words,
I think no Company more knaves affords:
And this must be the reason, because far
Above all Companies their numbers are:
And where the multitude of men most is,
By consequence there must be most amiss.
And sure of honest men it has as many,
As any other Company has any.
Though not of wealth they have superfluous store:
Content's a Kingdom, and they seek no more.
Of Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, men shall find.
Men that to loose behavior are inclinde.
Of Goldsmiths, Silkmen, Clothworkers, and Skinners,
When they are at the best, they all are sinners.
And drunken rascals are of every Trade,
Should I name all, I o'r the boots should wade?
If Watermen be only knaves alone,
Let all that is senseless cast at them a stone.
Some may reply to my Apology:
How they in plying are unmannerly,
And one from the other, hale, and pull, and tear,
And reile, and brawle, and curfe, and ban, and swear.
Is this I Will not defend them with excuses,
I alwaits did, and do hate those abuses.
The honest use of this true trade I sing,
And not the abuses that from thence do spring.
And sure no Company has Laws more strict,
Then Watermen, which weekly they inflict
Upon offenders, who are made pay duly
Their fines or imprisoned, 'cause they plide unruly.
They keep no shops, nor sell deceitful wares,
But like to Pilgrims, travel for their fares,
And they must ask the question where they go,
If men will go by water yea or no?
Which being spoke a right, the fault's not such,
But any Tradesman (sure) will do as much.
The Mercer, as you pass along the way,
Will ask you what do you lack? come near I pray.
The Draper, whose warm waredoth clad the back,
Will be so bold as ask ye, What do you lack?
The Goldsmith with his silver and his gold,
To ask you, What do you lack? he will be bold.
This being granted as none can deny,
Most Trades as well as Watermen do ply:
If in their plying they do chance to jar,
They do but like the Lawyers at the Bar,
Who plead as if they meant by the ears to fall,
And when the Court does rise, to friendship fall.
So Watermen, that for a fare contends,
The fare once gone, the Watermen are friends.
And this I know, and therefore dare maintain,
That he that truly labors and takes pain,
May with a better Conscience sleep in bed,
Then he that is with ill got thousands sped.
So well I like it, and such love I owe
Unto it, that I Will fall again to Row:
'Twill keep my health from falling to decay,
Get money, and chase Idleness away.
I Am sure it for Antiquity has stood,
Since the worlds drowning universal Flood,
And howsoever now it rise or fall,
The Boat in Noah's Deluge carried all.
And though our wits be like our purses, bare,
With any Company we will make compare
To write a Verse, provided that they be
No better skild in Schollership then we.
And then come one, come thousands, nay, come all,
And for a wager we will to Versing fall.
Epilogue to those that know what they have read, and how to censure.
TO you whose ears and eyes have heard and seen
This little pamphlet, and can judge between
That which is good, or tol'rable, or ill,
If I with Artlesse Nature wanting skill,
Have writ but ought, that may your thoughts content,
My Muse has then accomplished her intent.
Your favors can preserve me, but your frowns
My poor inventions in oblivion drownes.
With tolerable friendship let me crave
You will not seek to spill, what you may save.
But for the wrymouth'd Critic that has read,
That mewes and puh's, and shakes his brainlesse head
And says my education or my state;
Does make my verse esteemed at lower rate,
To such a one this answer I do send,
And bid him mend, before he discommend.
His Envy unto me, will favors prove,
The hatred of a fool breeds wise-mens love.
My Muse is iocund that her labors merits
To be malign'd and scornd by Envious spirits:
Thus humbly I crave pardon of the best,
Which being gaind, Sir reverence for the rest.
FINIS.
A MEMORIAL OF ALL THE ENGLISH MONARCHS, being in number 151. from Brute to
King CHARLES.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, LIONEL Lord Viscount Cranefield, Earl of Middlesex,
etc.
MY humble Muse, in lofty manner sings
The y. Kingdoms were, 1. Kent. 2 ^^^ Sussx and Surry. 3 ^^^^, ^^^ Norfolk,
and Cambridge-shire. 4 ^^^ ^^^, ^^^, Somersetshire, and Corne^^^. 5 Mertia,
Glostershire, Hertfordshire, Worcester, Shra^^^, Staffordshire, Cheshire,
Warwike, Leycester, North, Oxford, Buckingham Bedford, and half Hartfordshire.
6 East-Saxon, Essex, Middlesex, and half Hartfordshire. 7 Northumberland
divided to two Kingdoms, Deyrs and all brought to one Monarchy by Eghert King
of sae^^^, and called England, 1968. years after Brute.

A Catalogue of Englands mighty Kings:
At first I do begin with Trojan BRVTE,
And following Chronicles I do dispute,
Proceeding briefly with their Reigns and Names,
Till these blessed days of our best Monarch JAMES,
It Is but an Argument that's written here,
That in such time such and such Princes were:
But he that means their Actions were to know,
May read Boethius, Hollinshed, or Stow,
Or our true laboring Modern Master How,
Which Authors, Learned Judgment do allow:
Or if you will see how former times do run,
Read the laborious pains of Middleton.
We have had Kings since Brute of royal Blood,
One hundred forty six, some bad, some good,
Four Queens in all, this time did only Reign,
Whose Memories in Histories remain.
So in two thousand and seven hundred years,
We had thrice 50 Princes it appears.
This Kingdom here was five times won and lost,
And Kings (as God decreed) often changed and tossed.
Sometimes one swaid the Scepter, sometime twain,
And sometime seven at once did rule and reign,
Till six (by bloody wars) lost life and throne,
And valiant Egbert joined them all in one.
But since (through Heavens high providence) I see,
It Is grown more great, and greater like to be.
Long may He live, by whom in one it is guided,
And may they sink that wished again divided.
^^^e (Noble Lord) with good acceptance take
^ Poem, for the Royal Subjects sake,
^^though it be not complete as it should,
^^with it, and accept of what I could,
^^^^^ matter's worthy, though the manner's poor,
Which makes me here your Patronage implore,
And may you be external and internal,
Blessed and advanced to happiness eternal.
Your Honors in all observance to be commanded, John Tailor.

BRVTE, THE FIRST KING OF BRITAIN, began his Reign,
1. BRVTE.
^^^^^^munds, 2858.
Before Christ, 1108.


AENE AS from subverted Troy exilde,
In Tuscais wedded King Latinus child:
By whom the Realm of Italy he gained,
And after he had 3. years fully reigned
He died, and left Ascanius in his stead:
To whom Siluius Posthumus did succeed.
From which Posthumus Royal loins did spring,
^^^ Great Brutus, Britains first commanding King:
The people then were (here) all void of pride,
Borne Naked, Naked lived, and Naked died.
Three Sons Brute left, Locrinus was his Heir
To England, Cambria (Wales) was Cambers share,
To Albanact (the youngest) 'twas his lot,
To sway the Scepter of the valiant Scot.
Thus amongst his Sons this I Will he did divide,
And after twenty four years Reign he died.
Brute being of the age of 15 years, as he shot at a wild beast the arrow
glanced unfortunately and slew his Father Sinius AEneas, for the which he was
exiled, and came on this ^^^^^ then called Albion.

I follow the common opinion: for many Writers do neither write or allow of
Brutes being here, accounting it a dishonor for our Nation, to have original
from a Pa^^^ide, and one that derived his descent from the Goddess (alias
strumpet) Venus. Howsoever, Histories are obseured and clouded with
ambiguities, some burnt, left, defaced by antiquity; and some abused by the
malice, ignorance, or partiality of Writers so that truth is hard to be found.
Amongst all which variations of Times and Writers, I must conclude there was a
BRVTE.

Locrine 20. years, 1034.


LOcrinus, Eldest of old Brutus Sons,
By Valor vanquished the inuading Hunnes:
He chased them, and their power did quite confound,
And their King Humber was in The River of Humber took the name from the
drowned King of the Huns, now Hungarians.
Humber, drowned:
This Locrine had a Queen, fair Guendoline was daughter unto Corineus, Duke
of Cornwall. Estrild was a beauteous Lady of King Humbers, whom Locrinus took
prisoner.
Guendolin,
Yet folly led him to the Paphaean sin,
Besotted sense, and blood with lust inflamed,
He loved a beauty, Beauteous Estrild named,
By whom he had a Daughter, Sabrin hight,
In whom the King had whole and sole delight:
For which the Queen made war upon her Lord:
And in the Fight she put him to the Sword;
And after a reuengefull bloody slaughter,
Queen Guendoline took Estrild and her daughter,
And drowned them both (to quech her ielous flame)
And so from Sabrine, Seauerne got the name.
Years before Christ.

Q. Guendoline, 1064.
About this time Saul was King of Israel.



When 15. years this Queen'had wisely reigned,
She died, and then her Son the kingdom gained.
Queen Guendoline was allowed the government in her Son Madans minority,
whose prudent reign is applausefully recorded in histories.

Madan, 1009.


When forty years this King had ruled this I Will,
(As Stories say) he died a death most vile:
The wide-mouthed Wolf, and keene-tusk'd brutish Bore,
Did eat his Kingly flesh, and drink his gore.
Madan was a vicious and wicked Prince, the Son of Locrine and Guendoline.
He was a great Tyrant. He built the Town of Doncaster. He had two Sons,
Mempricius and Manlius.

Mempricius reigned 20. years, 991.


MEmpricius base, his brother Manlius slew,
And got the Crown, by murder, not as due:
Maids, wives, and widows, he by force destowr'd:
He lived a Beast, and died, by a Beast, devoured.
He killed his elder brother trecherously as he was parlying with him. He
was eaten of Wolves at he was hunting. He was so beastly, that he was taxed
in histories to be a Sodomite with Beasts in his time.

Years before Christ.

Ebranke, 989.
King D^^uid ^^^ ^^^



At Edinburgh the Castle he did found,
Alcluid and Tork, he built new from the ground
He builded Bambrough, and reigned sixty years,
Beloved, as it in Chronicles appears.
Ebranke had 21. wives, by whom he had 20. Sons; and 30. Daughters; he
invaded Gallia, now Fr^^^ He was the Son of Mempricius. In his Reigne^ ^^^
King Solomon. Alcluid is Dumbreton in Scotland.

Brute the second, 929.


IF any noble act Brute Greeneeshield did,
He Is wronged, because from Histories they are hi^^^
Twelve years he ruled, that is all I of him read,
And how at York, he lies buried.
This Brute was the Son of Ebranke: and some histories write doubtfully, that
he conquered France, and the after he received a great soil in field by
Brinchild, Brinchillus, Prince of Henoway, or Henault.

Leil. 917.


LEil Carleile built, and reigned years twenty five
And as Fame still keeps dead men's acts alive:
So Leil (though dead) shall ever live by Fame,
He lies at Carleile, which himself did frame.
Leil was the Son of Brute Greeneshield. It is ^^^ written that he built the
City of Chester. Lud, or Rud hudibras was the Son of Leil, a religious
Prince ^^^ way of Paganis^^ for in those 3. Towns ^^ built he erected 3.
Temples, and placed 3. ^ Pagan Bishops in them.

Years before Christ.

Rudbudibrasse, 892.


His King built Canterbury, Winchester,
And Shastbury he from the ground did rear:
^^ after twenty nine years reign was past,
^^ bester sore sick, he breathed his last.
Bladud reigned 20. 863.


BLathe was by Bladud to perfection brought,
By Necromanticke Arts, to fly he sought:
^ from a Tower he thought to scale the Sky,
^ brake his neck, because he soared too high.
This Bladud had been a Student in Athens, from ^^ he brought many learned
men: be built Stam^^ a College I think, the first in England; striving to
^^^ the foul or the fool, he brake his neck on the Tem^^^ of Apollo in
Troynouant.

Leire, 844.


LEire (as the Story says) three daughters had,
The youngest good, the other two too bad:
^et the old King loved the^ that wronged him most,
^e that loved him, he banished from his Coast.
^^ ^^^ and Ragan, he between
^^^ the Kingdom, making each a Queen,
But young Cordeilla wedded was by chance,
To Aganippus, King of fertile France:
The eldest Daughters did reject their Sire,
For succor to the young'st he did retire,
By whose just aid the Crown again he gained;
And dyed when he full forty years had reigned.
Leire built Leicester and was a good Prince. At Leycester he built a Temple to
James Bifrons, or James with two faces.

Years before Christ.

Qu. Cordeilla, 805.


MAd Morgan, an vnmanner'd Cunedagus,
Their Au^t Cordeilla with fierce war did plagues
They vanquished her, and her in Prison threw.
And having reigned five years, her self she flew.
She reigned with her Husband Aganippus till he dyed, and then in her widowhead
her cruel kinsmen oppressed her. She stabbed her self in prison, being
tyrannously used, in despair of her liberty.

Morgan Cunedagus, 800.


THen Morgan did against Cunedagus contend,
And at Glamorgan, Morgan had his end,
Then Cunedagus sole King did abide,
Full three and thirty years, and then he dyed.
Morgan was the Son of Gonorel, Leires eldest Daughter, and Cunedagus his
kinsman, was the Son of Ragan.

The Prophet Esaias prophefied about this time.

Years before Christ.

Riuallo, before Christ, 766.


THree days it rained blood, when Riuallo reigned,
And great mortality the Land sustained;
He forty six years ruled in Kingly State,
And then surrendered to all humane Fate.
This Land in this Kings reign was almost unpeopled with dearth, death and
desolation. In his time Rome was builded, 356. years after Brute: Innumerable
multitudes of Horse-flyes or Hornets spring out of the blood, thus raind, which
flies strong many people to death. Riuallo was buried as York.

Gurgustus, 721.
Scicillius, 684.


A Common Drunkard was this wicked King,
Which vice did many other vices bring,
Years thirty eight, the Diadem he wore,
Scicillius next raignd nine and forty more.
Gurgustus and Scicillius were bretbr^n. I find little mentioned of any good
they did, though they rsigned long: They were both the Sons of Riuallo.

Iago, 636.
Kimma^m, 612.


OF these two Kings, small mention I do find,
They left bare Names (for memory) behind;
One twenty five years: the other fifty four,
Had in this Land Commanding Regal power.
Iugo was a kinsman to Gurgustus, and by his vicious life, he got asleepy
disease called the Lethargy, ^^^^ dyed. These two Kings were both buried at
York.

Years before Christ.

Gorbodug, 559.


GOrbodug next did in the Throne succeed,
Was sixty three years King, and last dec^^^^^
'Twixt his two Sons this Kingdom to divide ^
At York he is buried, where in peace he died.
Some write that he reigned but 42. years and ^^^^ he was buried at Troynouant.

Ferex, and Porex, 496.


POrex, in Fight his brother Ferex killed,
For which their mother, Porex heart bl^d s^^
These murders merciless, did quite de^ace,
These Princes, last of Royal Brutus Race.
Ferex and Porex were the sons of Cor^od^^ Their mother and her maids
chopped Porex in ^^^^^ revenge of her son Ferex: they reigned five years:
^^^ whose death the Land was a long time divided ^^^ Kingdoms.

Mulmutius Donwallo, 441.


THe Land unguided, Kinglesse did remain,
Till great Mulmutius did the Wreathe ^^^^^
Years before Christ.

He builded Temples, made Laws, Ploughs, highwaies,
And 40. years he lived infame and praise.
Mulmutius ^lew Pinnar, Slater, and Rudack, three Kings of several parts of
this I Will, and at last brought the ^^ Kingdom to his sole obedience. He was the
Son of ^^^^ten Duke of Cornwall: He was the first of all the Kings of this
Land that wore a crown of Gold.

Bellinus and Brennus reigned 26. years. 401.


THese brethren did divide the Realm in twain,
But Kings can brook no partnership in reign;
They fell at odds, and Brenn^s fled, subdude
With slaughter of his warlike multitude.
To France he escaped, and was received in State,
In London, Belline builded Bellinsgate,
^^^ane Brennus conquered Italy and Rome,
Bellinus lies here in an honored Tomb.
Brennus slew himself with the sword, at the siedge of ^elphos in Greece,
Bochas. They were the sons of Mulmutius Donwallo. Belinus brought Denmark to
^butary to Britain: they were a pair of worthy bro^^^^.

G^rguintus, 373.


GVrguintus was Belinus firstborn son,
Victoriously he Denmark^ overrun:
^^e the unpeopled Ireland did supply,
^eign'd nineteen: years a King, and then did dye.
This King gave leave to a company of straggling ^^^^ssed Spaniards to possess
themselves in Ireland: he ^^^ buried at Caerlion.

Years before Christ.

Guinthelinus, 456.


HE married Merci^ a renowned Dame,
From whom the just, ^ wise, Mer^^^an Statutes came:
He six and twenty years the Scepter swaide,
And then with honor in his Tomb was laid.
He was the son of Gurguintus, he builed Warwick, and ly^th buried at London.

Cecilius, 330.
Kimarus, 223.


Seven years Cecilius kept the Regal Cha^re,
Three years Kimarus ruled as his ^ole Heir;
The Sire with love did well and ^ustly reign,
His son Kimarus was a hunting slain.
About this time, a savage people called the Picts, begged habitation of the
King of Scots, and lived in the Mar^^es between England and Scotland. Kimarus
was a vicious Prince, and killed by wild Beasts as he was hunting: he was the
son of Cecilius. Cecilius. was buried at Caerlion.

Elanius, 321.


ELanius (as most Histories agree)
Was King of Britain years just three times three:
What Acts he did, or what Laws he decreed,
They are vnwrit, and therefore are unread.
Elanius was the son of Kimarus.

Years before Christ.

Morindus reigned 8 years, 311.


THis King Morindus, valiant more then wise,
A rau'ning Monster from the Sea did ^ise:
Which many people to destruction brought,
Who killed this brave King as he bravely fought.
He killed the Monster, after the Monster had de^^^red him, for he was in the
belly of it living, and found dead with his dagger in his hand.

Gorbomanus 303.


THis King eleven years wore the Britain crown,
He founded Cambridge, and built Grantham Town;
His subjects peace, past Kingdoms he preferred,
Loved and bewai^'d, at London was interred.
He built the Towns of Cambridge and Grantham.
Archigalo, and Elidurus. 392.


THese brothers were not Kings both at one time,
But for extortion (an unkingly crime,
The Eldest having gaind his Subjects hate)
Deposed, and Elidurus got the State.
But he (not greedy after worldly reign)
To Archigalo gave it up again.
Ruled ten years more: thus twenty years in all,
His State Maiesticke, did twice rise and fall.
Archigalo put away from him and rejected the true and ancient Nobility and
Gentry: and in their rooms was supplyde with the counsels of flatterers and
parasites, which was his downfall.

Years before Christ.

Elidurus, 272. Vigenius, Peredurus, 270.


THen A^chigale being dead and gone,
Good Elidure two years kept Britains Throne.
Vigenius, Peredurus two years more.
Thrust Elidure from all the sway he bore,
But they both died the third time he was crowned,
Elidurus, 261.


And reigned four years more, beloved renowned
Once subject, twice a slave, and thrice a King:
Thus Fortunes favors up and down did sling.
Here because Hystories make little or ^o mention of any the doings of the
Kings, from the reign of Elidurus to King L^^, I think it fit, only to
insert their names, and the times of their reigns, with their years before
Christ.

258. Gerbonian reigned ten years.


248. Morgan fourteen years.


224. Emeria^^s seven years.


This King was deposed from al^^^ gall government for his tyranny.

227. Iuall twenty years.


This King was a just and ^^^ Prince.

Years before Christ.

207. Rimo sixteen years.


His reign was blessed with abundance of Peace and Plenty.

191. Geruncius twenty years.


171. Catillus ten years.


Catillus caused all the oppressors of the poor to be hanged up: but since his
time they are doubly increased.

161. Coylus twenty years.


A peaceable King, and a quiet reign.

141. Porrex five years.


A good Prince.

136. Chirimus one year.


Chirimus through excessive drinking got his death.

135. Tulgon two years.


133. EL^red one year.


Years before Christ.

132. Androgius one year.


131. Varianus one year.


Varianus given all to lust, purchsed himself a short reign: and it may be
perceived, that all these Princes either by treason, or their own bad lives,
were soon brought to their ends, for 25 of them did not reign above 62 years.

12^. Eliud five years.


120. Dedamius five years.


118. Gurginius three years.


115. Merianus two years.


113. Blodunus two years.


110. Capenus three years.


Years after Christ.

108. Quinus two years.


106. Silius two years.


94. Bledgabredus ten years.


A great lover of Music, and a good Patron to Musicians.

92. Archemalus two years.


90. Eldolus two years.


88. Rodianus two years.


86. Redargius three years.


Years after Christ.

84. Samullius two years.


81. Penisellus three years.


78. Pirrhus two years.


76. Caporus two years.


74. Diuellus four years.


A Noble and ver^nous Prince.

70. Hellius one year.


The I Will of Ely took the n^m^^^tion from this Prince. There he ^^^^ a Palace,
and there he dying was buried.

Lud reigned 11. years, 66.


A Long time after Troynouant was framed,
It was by Lud, Kair-Lud, or Lud-sto^s named
Years before Christ.

^^e made it strong with Battlements and Towers,
^^^ against foes inuasiue powers.
^^^free Stone for Freemen Ludgate he founded,
^^ here freemen (wanting freedom) are confounded.
^^dy'd and left two Sons, too young for reign,
Therefore his brother did the Crown obtain.
Some Writers do affirm, that this King builded London from Ludgate to
London-stone, and that the stone ^^^^ thereof was called Luds stone.

Cassibelan, 17. years. 58.


V^ dead the nobles crowned Cassibelan,
^^^ whose reign here the Romans conquest wan,
^^ Julius Caesar sailed out of France,
^in this Land his Eagle did advance,
^^^^^ bold scorned base at first to stoop,
^^^ Caesar fled, before their warlike troop.
^ Civil wars, this Kingdom ouer-runnes,
^twixt Cassibelan, and Luds two Sons,
^^^ they (unnatural) sought each others fall,
^^^ Romans took advantage, conquered all:
T^^^ Caesar, by his high Imperial doom,
^^^ Britain Tributary unto Rome.
Nemias a valiant Duke of this Kingdom, received deaths wound of Caesar: Yet
after that he took Caesar's ^^^nd from him, and with the same killed Labianus a
Roman Tribune, and lastly, was she field and dyed. Caesar ^the Castles of
Dover, Canterbury, and the Tower ^^ London.

Theomantius, 37.


THen Theomantius (of the royal blood)
The sole Son living of his Father Lud;
^^ign'd three and twenty years, a King in State,
those Picture stands on Luds unlucky gate.
Years before Christ.

Cimbilinus.


IN this Kings reign, (the glorious King of Kings
In person came, and man's salvation brings)
When through the world all bloody wars did cease,
(For our souls peace) then came the Prince of peace.
Our Savior Jesus Christ was borne his reign, in the 42. year of Augustus
Caesar, then being Emperor of Rome: Cimbelinus was the Son of Theomantins.

Guiderius, anno Christi, 21.


THis King and Subjects, bravely, nobly join,
To hold from Rome the tributary Coin:
But Claudius Caesar with an Army came,
The Britains bold rebellious hearts to tame;
One Hamen there (a Roman) did devise,
Himself like to a Britain to disguise,
Guiderin^ bravely cha^de his foes amain,
Was by disguised Hamon falsely slain.
When Guiderius was King of Britain, our R^^^^mer suffered under Claudius
Tiberius Caesar, being the Roman Emperor. Guiderius was a valiant Prince.

Aruiragus, 44


STout Aruiragus being in the fight,
The Kings death added fury to his might:
Perceived the Britain Host, almost dismaide,
In's brothers Armor he himself atray'd,
Years after Christ.

The Soldiers thought the King again suruiu'd,
With courage new through every vein derived,
Brave Aruiragus, like a Tempest goes,
And pell mell topsieturuy throws his foes.
Great Caesar with his Roman army fled,
The King took Hamon, and cut off his head,
And more, with sharp revenge his wrath to appease,
Hewed him piece-meale, and cast him in the Seas,
The place long time, this name did then allow,
Of Hamons hau^n, or Southampton now.
The Emperor would quite the tribute free,
If Britains King his Son in law would be.
Then Aruarigue did fair Genisse marry,
And Claudius Caesar here a while did tarry,
He builded Glost^r, whilst he here remained:
The King dyed having twenty eight years reigned.
Marius, 73.


IN this Kings reign the lawless proling Pict,
(A Nation strange) did the North part afflict:
But Marius, in a battle slew their King,
And all their power did to subjection bring.
The Picts from Scythia, into Scotland came,
Rude, barbarous, ungrateful, hard to tame:
For by the Scotis^ Kings favor having got
Possession, they often warred upon the Scot.
And more and more that Kingdom they annoyed,
Till Kennith Scotland^ King them all destroyed:
Years fifty three reigned Marius just and wise,
Dyed: and at Carl^^^ his Corpse royal lies.
Much about this time, Joseph of Arimathea, after he had buried Christ (being
hated for it of the mis-beleeuing Jews) came into this Land, and first planted
Christianity here, built a Chapel at Ghastenburgh: Some writers say, that he
repaired Chester, and was buried there.

Coylus, 124.


IN Rome, this King was fostred all his youth,
He loved Peace, Justice, Fortiude and Truth:
Years after Christ.

He builded Colchest^r, and did survive,
Till he had reigned a Kings years, fifty five.
Coylus was the Son of Marius, he was buried ^^ York.

Lucius, 179.


THe first of Kings that was a Christian named,
Was Lucius (with the spirit of God inflamed)
The Bread of life he did receive with joy,
The Pagan Idols he did all destro^,
The Flamines and Arch ^^mines he down cost,
And Bishops and Archbishops here he plac^d,
He loved and feared the eternal Three in one,
And dyed when he had 12. years kept the Throne
This was the first Christian King of Britain, ^^ee^^ ^ed twenty eight
Idolatrous Temples of thy Pagan god ^^ he made Cathedral Churches, for the
service of the ^^^ God; Elutherius was then Bishop of Rome, King ^uc^^^ was
buried at Gloucester: he dyed leaving no ^^^^ ^^ that this Land was in a
hurly-burly 15.years, t^^^^^ want of a King.

Seuerus, 194.


THis was a Roman Emperor, and was slain
At York the eighteenth year of his proud reign
He was an Alien and a stranger here,
And therefore bought his usurpation dear.
Seuerus was 60. years old when he took the ^^^^^^ and caused a wall of
Turse to be made betwixt Engla^^ and Scotland to keep this Land from the
incursions of t^^ Scots and Picts: the wall reached from Time to ^^^ Scottish
Seas, 112. miles.

Years after Christ.

Bassianus, 212.


SE^^rus here did wed a British Dame,
By whom this King (their Son) the Crown did claim.
^ after six years time, he left this Land.
^ad had the Roman Empire at's command.
Bassianus was brought from Rome by his Father ^^^^rcus.

Carausius, 290.
Alectus, 291.


^^^ Carausi^ ^^^^, Dio^^^^ was ^^^^^

THis king (of mean birth) did the Crown attain
After seven years, was by Alectus slain:
Three years Alectus did in state recide.
^ur Protomartyr then Saint Alban did.
Dio^esian and Maximilian ruled the Roman Em^^^^ when saint Albane suffered;
Alectus was sent from Rome against Carausius: this Alectus was a cruel ^^^^^
and was also slain by Asclepiodatus.

Asclepiodatus, 299.


ASclepiodatus, (in a mortal Fight)
Sabdude the Roman General Gallus might;
Killed him, and cast him headlong in a Brook,
Whence Gallus or Wallbrooke, for name it took,
And as Alectus did Carausius kill,
So did this King Alectus life blood spill,
And a free two years reign in mortal strife,
Asclepiodatus slain lost Crown and life.
Glallus brook or Wallbrooke took the name from Glallus ^^ Rome to Captain,
slain by Asclepiodatus, and thrown into that Brook. Asclepiodatus was after
slain by Coil Duke of Colchester. Some write that Asclepiodatus reigned 30.
years.

Years after Christ.

Coil reigned 14. years. 301.


COlchesters Duke Coil in the Throne invested,
Was by Constantius Caesar much molested:
Till Coil gaue's Daughter to him for his Bride,
And paid Romes tribute, that was long denide.
The Lady was of beauty most divine,
Fair Hellen, Mother to great Constantine.
The King at Colchester, dead, laid in's Tomb,
His Son Constantius did supply his room.
This Hellen r^^defied Jerusalem, and adorned it with goodly Churches. She also
wa^e^ Ladon and Colchester.

Constantius, 305.


Spain, Italy, France, Britains Emperor,
Four years he reigned here, with Maiesticke power.
True Honor was the aim at which he sho^,
Just, Valiant, these reports his Actions got.
This Constantius was Grandfather to Constantine the Great: he came from Rome
to this I Will and was buried at York.

Constantine, 306.


GReat Emp'ror Constantine, surnamed the Great:
In all respects a worthy Prince complete,
Years after Christ.

The glorious Gospel, he adored, and feared,
Constantinople famously he reared,
Maxentius, Romes great Tyrant, (most abhorred)
He made him fly from his Imperial sword.
Beloved, bewailed, high honored and admired,
In grace with God and men, his days expired.
This worthy Prince Constantine was borne in this Land, the Son of
Constantius and Hellen. After Constantius decease, our Land was molested by
Octauius Maximus and others for many years. These times are so diversely written
of in Histories, that a man knows not which to believe most.

84. Constantinus, 337.
85. Constans, 340.


THese two were Brothers of the Royal line,
And Sons unto the Emperor Constantine:
Ambition and debate for Kingly Reign,
Was the unnatural cause they both were slain.
Kings and Lovers can brook no partners: for these two brothers were each
others destruction.

86. Octauius, 345.
87. Traherus, 349.


OCtauius Duke of Windsore took the Crown,
Traherus came from Rome and put him down:
The Land was full with hurly-burlies filled,
Traherus by Octtauius last was killed.
Theodosius was Emperor of the East, and Macrinus of the West: Some write that
Octauius reigned 54. years. Non credo.

Years after Christ.

88. Constantius the third. 353.


The Roman Empire he did closely sway,
And as a King this Land did him obey:
Th'Apostate Julian was the Emperor next,
By whom the Christians all were slain, or vexed.
Constantius was a victorious Prince, and triumphed in Rome: yet ^^^^uell
oppressor, and an Arian heretic.

89 Maximinianus. 375.


NExt Julian, reigned Valenti^ia^,
And after him, succeeded Grasi^^;
Maximianus was of life deprived,
'Cause he with Gratian for the Empire strived.
How like Bauius these tyrants consumed on^ another these were all Emperors of
Rome, and Kings of Britain.

90. Gratian. 376.


THen Gratian claimed this Kingdom as his right:
But having gained it, he was slain in fight:
Fierce wars the Roman Empire did divide,
And Caesar's and their Viceroyes fought and did.
Honorius Romes Tribunal did obtain,
Next after him did Theodosius reign,
Then did the Scot join with the barbarous pict
This headless, Kinglesse Kingdom to afflict.
The Roman Scepter we had long obayd,
Four hundred eightythree years Tribute paid;
And now this land shook off their wronged command
When Civil discord had near spoiled this Land.
In one ^^^^^ the whole nation of the Picts were ^^

Years after Christ.

^^^^ ^^shed: about this time the Romans government ^^here. Gratian was a
Britain Emperor but some^^

91 Vortiger. 447.


THis King through murder did the Throne ascend,
And had a troublous Reign, and murdrous end:
^^^^^^ ( Constantines) lawful Heir and Son,
By vortigers false means to death was done.
For which (to keep the Crown unjustly gained)
The Saxons for his aid he entertained.
Then Heng^st, with his Brother Horlus crew,
^^ Britains best blood did their blades embrew.
King Vortiger with doting love inthral'd,
^atch't Hengists daughter, beauteous Rowan called:
^^^ Saxons troops, on troops came in so fast,
That Britains did deprive the King at last.
He murdered his lawful Prince, and usurping the Throne was enforced to have
aid of the Saxons, who at the ^^ almost ouer-ran this Kingdom, but the
Britains ^^^^ed, Vortiger, and crowned his Son Vortimer.

92. Vortimer. 454.


THen On the Plain of Salisbury at Stonching (where the Stones are to be seen
as this day.)
Vortimer, the Son of Vortiger,
Upon the Saxons made successful war:
Till he by Rowan was by craft o'r-tane,
From whose false hands, he died by poisonous bane.
Deposed Vortiger (his Son once slain)
His ill gained ill kept Crown he gained again:
Hengistus with his Saxon fresh supplies,
The Plains of Salisbury did all surprise.
The King took counsel of his Britain Lords,
And all in general to a Peace accords.
The Saxons and the Britains did agree,
That at this meeting all unarmed should be:
^^xt traitrous Hengist did a watchword speak,
Which did the Law of Arms, and Honor break,
Years after Christ.

The Saxons unsuspected drew forth Knives,
Four hundred, threescore Lords, all lost their lives,
All Britain Nobles, then the Saxons there,
Surprised the King, constraining him through fear
To give Kent, Sussex, Suffolk, Norfolk, and
That Hengist, King should in those Lands command,
But after nineteen years were quite expired,
The King and Queen burnt to death.
Revenging Fire, the King in's Castle fired.
And thus the Saxons, and Great Hengists Heirs,
Won Shire to Shire, till Britain all was theirs.
Vortiger married his own daughter to his third wife.

93. Aurelius Ambrose. 466.


IN honor of the Nobles basely slain,
This King set up the Stones on Sarum plain^:
The Gospel with great zeal he dignified,
Reigned thirty two years, and by poison died.
This King was a Roman, and brother to Vter Pendragon that succeeded him.

94. Vter Pendragon reigned 18 years. 498.


THis King (by Merlins means, a skillful man)
Igrene, the Duke of Cornewals Duchess wan:
On her he got, (though illegittimate)
The Christian Worthy, Arthur, stilde the Great.
Vter Pendragon poisoned by the Saxons, after he had reigned 18.years.

Years after Christ.

95. Arthur. 516.


OF the nine Worthies was this Worthy one,
Denmark, and Norway, did obey his Throne:
In twelve set Battles he the Saxons beat,
Great, and to make his Victories more great,
The Faithless Sarazens he overcame,
And made them honor high Ichonah's Name,
The Noble order of the Table round,
At Winchester, his first invention found.
Whilst he beyond Sea fought to win Renown,
His Nephew Mordred did usurp his Crown,
But he returned, and Mordred did confound,
And in the fight great Arthur got a wound,
That proved so mortal, that immortally
It made him live, although it made him dye.
Full sixteen years the Diadem he wore,
And every day gaind Honor more and more.
Arthur the great was buried at Glastenbury.
96 Constantine, the fourth. 542.
97 Aurelius Conanus. 545.


COnstantine was by King Aurelius killed:
Aurelius ('Britain) thirty three years held,
Seven Kingdoms here at once the Saxons held,
And slaughter launc'd, when proud ambition sweld.
This Constantine was kinsman to King Arthur, and was slain by Conanus.
Constantine was a wicked Prince, and slain in battle by his kinsman Conanus,
when he had reigned near 3. years. Of the time of this Aurelius Conanus his
reign, there is much variation in Histories.

Years after Christ.

Here began the Heptarchy, or 7 Kingdoms i^ this Land, namely, Kent,
South Saxons, West Saxons, East Saxons, Northumberland, Mercia, and
East Angles: which division continued more then 600. years, be fore it was all
united into one Monarchy ^^e names of the Kings, and times of their reigns,
and limits of their Kingdoms, are hereunder expressed.

1 KEnt was only a kingdom which had 17 Kings, namely, 1 Hengist, 2 E^^^^s^ 3
Octa, 4 Ymerick, 5 Ethelbert, who was the first Christian King of Kent, he was
an ayde^ and helper of Sebert, King of the East Saxons, in the famous and
memorable buildings of St Paul's Church in London, and Saint Peter's at
Westminster. 6 Eabald, 7 Ercombert, 8 Egl^^^ 9 Lother, 10 Edrick, 11 Withred,
12 Eaber^ 13 Edelbert, 14 Alick, 15 Ethilbert, 16 Cuthred 17 Baldred. These
Kings reigned in Kent 372 years, from the year of Grace 455. till the year
827.

2 The kingdom of the South Saxons contained the Counties of Suffex and
Surrit, ^^ continued from the year 488. until the year 601. being 113
years: they had three Kings^ namely, 1 Ella, 2 Cissa, 3 Ethelwolse a Christian
King, 4 Berthrum, 5 Authum.

3 The West Saxons kingdom, whose beginning was in the year 519. and ended,
Anno^ 166. lasted 561 years, having 17 Kings namely, 1 Cherdick, 2 Kenrick, 3
Chequilen, 4 Cealick, 5 Chelwold, 6 Kingils, a Christian, 7 Kenwald, 8 Eskwin,
9 Kentwin, 10 Ceadwald 11 Inas, 12 Ethelarc, 13 Cuthred, 14 Sigebat 15
Kenwolse, 16 Brightrik, 17 Egbert,: These Kings had under their governments,
the Counties of Cornwall, Devonshire, Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire and
Barkshire.

4 The East Saxons reigned 281 years, beginning Anno. 527. and ending in the
year 827. Their bounds were Essex and Middle-Sex, and their Kings were in
number^ 14, namely, 1 Erchenwin, 2 Sledda, 3 S^^^^^ a Christian King, that
assisted Ethelbert

Years after Christ.

King of Kent it, in the building of the ^hurches of saint Paul and Saint Peter
afore^^^ 4 Seward, 5 Sigebert, 6 Sigibert, 7 Swithe^^^ 8 Sighere, 9 S^bba, 10
Sigherd, 11 Seo^^l 12 Offa, 13 S^lred, 14 Suthred.

5 Northumberland was sometimes divided into two kingdoms. It contained the
^^ies of Yorkshire, Durham, Lancashire, West^land, Cumberland and
Northumberland: this Kingdom began in the year of our Lord, ^7. and expired
in 926. continuing 379. ^eeres under 23 Kings, whose names were, 1 ^^, 2 Ad^^a,
3 Theodwald, 4 Frethulfe, 5 The^^^ ^^^ick, 6 Ethelrick, 7 Ethel^rid, 8 Edwin, 9
Os^^^, 10 Oswy 11 Egfrid, 12 Alkfrid, 13 Ofred, 14 ^^red, 15 Oswolfe, 16
Ceolnuph, 17 Egbert, 18 Oswicke, 19 Edilwald, 20 Alured, 21 Ethel^^^ 22,
Alswald, 23 Osred. Amongst these, ^dwin was their first Christian King.

6 The East Angles under 15 several Kings, continued 353 years, beginning in
Anno, 575. ^^d ended in 914. their Territories were ^^lolke, Norfolk,
Cambridgeshire and the ^^ of Ely, their Kings names were, 1 Vffa, 2 ^^^lus 3
Redwald their first Christian King, ^^^wold, 5 Sigebert, 6 Egrik, 7 Anna, 8
^^^bert, 9 Ethwald, 10 Aldwol^e, 11 Aswald, 12 Beorn, 13 Ethelred, 14
Ethelbert, 15 Edmund. ^^^ The seventh Kingdom were the Mer^^^ ^^^, who had 20
Kings and 17 shires under their command: their Kings were^ ^ Creda, 2 Wibba, 3
Cheorle, 4 Penda, 5 Peada their first Christian King, 6 Wolfere, 7 ^^helred, 8
Kenred, 9 Chelred, 10 Ethebald, 11 Offa, 12 Egfrid, 13 Kenwolfe, 14 Kenelme, 15
Chelwolfe 16 Bernulfe, 17 Ludecan, 18 ^^itlafe, 19 Bertwolfe, 20 Burdred. Their
^ounds and dominions were 17 Counties, as of Northampton Leister, Darby,
Lincoln, Huntington, Rutland, Notingham, Cheshire, Oxfordshire, Staffordshire,
Worcestershire, Glostershire, Shropshire, Warwickeshire, Bedfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, and ^artfordshire.

Years after Christ.

98 Vortiporus. 578.
99 Malgo 581.


THis Vortipore from good Kings did decline,
Kept his wives Daughter as his Concubine:
And Malgo p^t his Wi^^e to broady slaughter,
To live in ^ncest with his brothers Daughter.
About this time Augustine the Monk, Mellitus, Iustus and John all ^^^ men
came from Rome, and preached the Gospel to the English m^n. Vortipore reigned
4. years. Malgo, his raign^^ was short and wicked.

100. Careticus. 586.


GVrmundus hither out of Ireland came,
And with the Saxons joined with sword and flame:
The King to Wales did fly. his ife^t^ save.
Whereas he changed his Kingdom for a Grave.
He reigned 3. years: and now the Saxons had all England, the Britains and
their Kings being expulsed and chased to the West sides of the Rivers Seauerne,
and D^^.

Cadwane. 613.


THis Cadwane did the Saxon ^orce withstand,
Of Ethelfridus of Northumberland:
And made him to entreat and sue for peace:
Reigned two and twenty years, then did decease.
Years before Christ.

102. Cadwallin. 635.


CAdwallin slew King Edwin, Egfrids Son,
He Penda Merciaes King did overrun:
He never fought but Conquest home did bring,
And eight and forty years did reign a King.
Cadwallin was buried at London in Saint Martins Church near Ludgate.

103. Cadwallader. 685.


THis King renowned was both near and far,
The last of Britains Kings, Cadwallader,
The name of Britain was quite alterd then,
The Kings of England, subjects, Englishmen.
Then in this Land, of Kings there reigned so many,
That Subjects knew not to obey all, or any:
Their names and times of reign I mean to tell,
Should I write more, my Book too big would swell.
Here the inhabitants lost the name of Britains, the land being called
Anglia, or England, and the people Englishmen.

687. Cadwallader left his Crown, went to Rome, and dyed there.


These Kings following were of the West Saxons.
726 Ethelard was King of the West Saxons.


Years before Christ.

740. Cuthred succeeded him.


757. Sigebert next him, was slain^ by a Swineheard.


758. Kenulphus was slain by Kinsman of Sigebert.


786. Brithricus. In his time i^ rained blood.


IN the 800. year of Christ, the Danes landed at Po^^land, but Brithricus beat
them back, and after^^^^ was poisoned by his wife Ethelburga.

Egbri^us, King of West Saxons. 839. ^^^


839. Adelnulphus overcame ^^ Danes, that came to inua^e the Kingdom with 350.
ships.


857. Athelbald.


Years after Christ.

860. Athelbrict.


866. Etheldrid.


872. AElfred.


900. Edward surnamed Se^ior.
Here end the Kings of the West Saxons: now follow the Kings of Britain.

104. Athelstane reigned 15. years. 905.


THis King did tame the Welsh, the Danes subdued,
He conquered Scotland and the Marches rude:
The Danish Giant Colebrand in Hyde-meads
^y G^y the Earl of Warwick was struck dead.
King Athelstane was crowned at Kingstone, he fought this Land again to one
sole Monarchy, he was buried at M^l^^^bury

Years after Christ.

105. Edmund. 940.
106. Eldred. 640.


EDmund, reigned next his brother Athelstane,
And after five years was untimely slain:
Nine years was Eldrid Englands King instil'd,
The insulting Danes, he from this Realm exilde.
Edmund was buried at Glastenbury. Eldred was brother to Edmund, he was
crowned as Kingstone, he expelled the Danes, and was buried at Winchester.

107. Edwin. 955.
108 Edgar. 959.


THen Edwin (as his right) obtained the Crown,
For Rape, and brutish Lust he was put down.
His brother Edger a man just and wi^e,
By Edwins fall, unto the Throne did rise.
The Church and Commonwe^le (long time deformed)
He by his Justice and good Laws reformed.
Reigned sixteen years, and then by death assailed,
As he had lived beloved, he died bewailed.
Edwin was Eldreds kinsman crowned a Kingstone: he deftowred his own
kinswoman, and slew her husband, for which ^^^ acts he was deposed of all
Kingly dignity, and his brother Edgar was in his stead crowned at Bath^. Edgar
had 3600 skips to withstand the invasion of his enemies: he founded and
repaired 47. religious houses, he was buried at Glastenbury.

109 Edward. 975.
110 Etheldred. 978.


EDward was slain by his accursed Stepmother,
Aided by Etheldred his cruel brother.
This Etheldred caused all the Danes be slain:
And dyed the thirty eightth year of his reign.
He was crowned at Kingstone: be reigned 3. years, and was buried at
Shaftsbury.

Etheldred was buried in St. Paul's Church in London.

111 Edmond Ironside. 1016.


THe Danes came to revenge with sword and fire,
Both Kings to Combat single did desire:
On equal tormes, their valors both were tried,
In love the Realm betwixt them they divide.
Edricus a traitor murdered King Edmond Ironside, for the which Canutus the
Dane caused him to be tormented to death gri^^uously as he deserved.

112 Canutus 1018.


THis mighty Danish King four Kingdoms held,
Danes, Norway, England, Scotland he compeld,
Taxes and toles he raised in England here,
And dyed when he had governed twenty year.
In Canutus his reign the Danes possessed all England: he ^^^^ buried at
Winchester.

113 Harold. 1038.
114 Hardianutus. 1041.


HArold from England did exile his Mother,
And killed Allured his King and his Brother:
Hardianutus then the Crown obtained,
Who qua^^ing died, when he 3. years had reigned.
Harold was a Tyrant: he was called Hartfoott. ^^ h^^ ^^^^^ running: be
murdered Prince Allured he reigned three years, and was buried at Westminster.

He caused the body of Harold to be dug out of the grave, and cast into the
Thames, in revenge of his brother Allureds death: he was buried at Winchester.

115. Saint Edward, 1043.
116. Harold the second. 1066.


SAint Edward from the Danes this Kingdom freed^
And for he had no Heir, he here decreed,
That William Duke of Normandy should be
Next King, but Harold seem ^^^ to agree,
As soon as Edward was laid in his Toombe,
This hasty Harold mounted in his room,
But William came from Normanay amain,
By whom King Harold was vnking'd and slain.
The end of the first part.
The second part.
William Conqueror. An. Dom. 1066.


When Britains, Romans, Saxons, Danes had done,
The Normans (fifthly) England^ glory won^
New Lords brought in new Laws incontinent,
And all were Conquered but the County Kent.
King William (after he had all surpised)
Insulted, domineered, and tyrannized,
All Englishmen (like slaves) their doors must lock,
On pain of death, each night at eight of clock.
The English from all Offic^ were disgraced,
And in their places the proud French were placed.
^^ill beating down the right, with wrong on wrong,
Disdaining men should speak the English tongue.
And so to bring our memory to naught,
The Grammar and the Laws in French were taught.
King Swanus Sons, with Danes a mighty band,
Arrived in Humber to invade the Land,
Then York was burnt, the wealth away was borne,
And Danes on Composition home did turn.
A dearth in England was so great, that here
Cats, Dogs, and man's flesh, was our woeful cheer.
The Mercians and Northumbers they rebel'd,
Strong wars the Scott within our Country held:
The I Will of Ely did the King surprise,
He caused the Rebels lose hands, feet, and eyes.
The Normans did rebel and were subdued,
Danes came and fled, with all their multitude.
The Kings son ( Robert) by the French Kings aid,
Did diverse parts of Normandy invade.
The Scots spoild England, with all might and maine,
And Durbans Bishop in a broyle was slain,
Here every Acre of men's Lands were measured.
And by a heavy tax the King was treasured:
Slain by a Dear the Kings son lost his life,
And Glassenbury Monks were killed in strife.
The English Nobles almost were decayed,
And every place of rule the Normans swai'd.
And all men's goods and lands, and coin were rated
Through England, and unto the King related.
The French men's pride did England ouerwhelme,
And grievous tributes did oppress the Realm.
Churches and Chapels were thrown down with speed,
^o make New Forest as the King decreed:
Who having ruled in trouble, toil and care,
And tryannously pol'd this Kingdom bare,
Near twenty one years, death was then his bane:
He lies in Normandy, enterr'd at Cane.
William Conqueror was crowned on Christmasday 1067, the year then beginning
on that day. In the ^^^^ Forest in Hampshire called New Forest, ^^ere this
King had defaced many Churches (wherein the ^^^ of God was called upon) and
placed wild Beasts for His disportun the same Forest two of his own sons
were ^^^^, Prince Robert killed by a Dear, and William Rufus by a Knight
shooting at a Dear.

William Rufus, An. Dom. 1087.


WIlliam the cruel Conquerours second Son,
With ease, got what his Fathers pains had won,
Oppressed England he oppressed and pressed,
And great Exactions wrongfully did wrest.
For Symony, and base corrupting gold,
The King most Churches and Church-liuings sold,
And more, (his Subjects vilely to abuse)
Against them he in arms did arm the Jews,
And swore if they the victory did gain.
That he their faithless faith would entertain.
Upon his eldest brother he raysd wars,
His youngest brother troubled him with iarres.
At London, such a furious wind did blow,
Which did six hundred houses overthrow.
The City Gloucester was by Welshmen sacked.
Northumberland was by King William wracked.
William de Oue, and William de Aluery.
In cruel torments dyed at Salisbury.
Duke Robert laid all Normandy to gage
Unto the King, wars with the Turks to wage.
Westminster Hall was built, the Danes came in,
And the Orchades, and the I Will of Man did win.
But as the King was hunting in Hampshire,
Sir Walter T^rr^ll shooting at a Dear,
The Arrow glauncing'gainst a Tree by chance,
The Unhappy King killed, by the ha^lesse Glaunce.
A Comers Cart to Winchester did bring
The Corpse, where vnbemoand they laid the King.
Rufus. In the 8. year of his reign, the Christian Army went to Jerusalem,
under the conduct of Godfry Duke of Bulleine, in which wars served Robert
Duke of Normandy the Kings eldest brother, who pawned his Dukedom for 16666.
pounds weight of silver. In the 11. year the Lands of the late Earl Godwine
sunk in the sea, and are to this day called Godwine ^ands. This King died the
2. of August 1100. He reigned 12. years, 11. Months, and was buried at
Winchester.

Henry the first. An. Dom. 1100.


THis Henry (for his wisdom Beuclarke named)
Th'vnlawfull Laws and measures he reclaimed.
The Norman Duke, eld'st Brother to the King.
To claim the Crown a mighty Host did bring.
Saint Barthol^mewes was founded and Saint Gyles,
And Henry stopped Duke Roberts mouth with wiles.
Then peace was made; but after, wars did rise,
The King tooke's brother, and put out his eyes.
Here Windsor Church and Castle were erected,
And Wales (rebeld) most sharply was corrected.
All the King's Sons and eight score persons more,
Were drowned by tempest near the Norman shore.
Thus all his Joy in Childrens loss bereft,
Save only Maud, the Widow Empress left,
Whom Geffrey Anioy's Earl to wife did get,
From whom did spring the name Plantagenet.
The King proclaimed his Daughter, or her seed,
After his death should in the Realm succeed,
And after thirty five years time was past,
King Henry by a surfeit breathed his last.
Much trouble in his days this Kingdom wearied,
He dyed, and dead, at Redding he lies buried.
Thus God that lifts the low, casts down the high,
Caused all the Conquerors sons untimely dye.
Henry the ^. He held the Crown wrongfully from his elder brother Robert Duke
of Normandy, and ouercomming him in battle, most unnaturally put out his e^es:
he reigned 35. years, his brains, eyes and bowels were buried at Roane in
France, and the rest of his body at Redding: his Physician that opened his
head, was killed suddenly with the stench of his brai^er.

King Stephen. An. Dom. 1135.


STephen Earl of B^loig^, (the Earl of Bloy^ his son)
From the Empress M^nd this famous Kingdom won.
Domestike, foreign, dangerous discords,
'Twixt factions factions, of the King and's Lords,
Wars 'twixt the King and the Empress for the crown,
Both tasted Fortunes favors, and her frown,
Now up, now down, like balls at Tennis tossed,
Till Stephen gained the goal, and th 'Empresse lost.
And after eighteen years were come and gone,
The King not having any lawful Son,
He dyed, and changed his Kingdom and his strength,
For a small Sepulcher of six foot length.
King Stephen. He was noble, valiant, liberal, and politic, and almost in
continual trouble. In the 1. year of his reign a fire burnt all the street,
from London-stone East, to Paul's, and West, to Algate, and within 2. years
after, the cities of York, Rochester, and Bathe, were burnt, He reigned 18.
years, 10 months and was buried at Feuersham.

Henry the second. An Dom. 1154.


THis King unto the Empress Maud was Heir,
And lawfully obtained the Regal Chair,
He was courageous, and yet most unchaste,
Which Vice, his other Virtues all defaced.
He loved fair Rosamond, the worlds fair Ros^,
For which his wife and children turned his foes.
He made his son Copartner in his Crown,
Who raised strong wars to put his Father down
Fair Rosamond at Woodstock by the Queen
Was poisoned, in reuengefull jealous spleen
In toil, and trouble, with his Sons and Peere^,
The King reigned almost five and thirty years
He near his death did curse his day of birth,
He cursed his Sons, and sadly le^t the earth,
He at Founteuerard in his Tomb was laid.
And his Son Richard next the Scepter swa^d.
Henry the 2. In the 12. year of this King an earthqu^^^ in Norfolk, Suffolk,
and Eiye, that made ^^^ ^^^ shaking the sleeples, and overthrew men that stood
on this feet. Nicholas Breakespeare, an English man was ^^ope of Rome, and was
named Adrian the fourth, he gave ^^^ Lord-shippe of Ireland to King Henry.

Richard Cordelion. An. Dom. 1189.


THis brave victorious Lyon-hearted Prince,
The foes of Christ, in ^^^y did convince:
Whilst at Jerusalem he wan Renown,
His Brother John at home usurped his Crown.
And as he home returned, (his own to gain)
By Austria's Duke, the King was Prisoner ^ane.
His ransom was an hundred thousand pound,
Which paid, in England he again was crowned.
Yet after nine full years, and 9. months reign,
He with a Shot was killed in Aquit^ne,
His burial at Founteuerard was thought meet,
At his dead Fathers, second Henry's feet.
Richard the 1. he conquered the kingdom of Cypress, and he took from the
Infidels the Cities of Acon, and Ioppa, and delivered them to Christians. In
his 2. year, the ^^s of the renowned King Arthur were found at Glastenbury.
King Richards bowels were buried at Chalne Castle in Aquitane, his heart at
Roane, and his body at Founteuerard.

King John. An. Dom. 1199.


John Earl of Morton took the regal Seat,
His state, his toil, his pomp, his cares, all great:
The French, the Welsh, the Scotsh, all proved his foes,
The Pope King John did from his Crown depose.
His Lords rebel'd, from France the Dolphin came,
And Wasted England much with sword and flame.
And after seventeen years were full expired,
King John being poisoned, to his grave retired.
King John. In the 8. year many men, Women, and cattle ^ slain^ with thunder,
and many houses burnt, and the ^^^^ was beaten down with hail as big as
goose eggs.

Some say, the King was poisoned by a monk, and others ^rite that he died of a
surfeit at Newark, but his life was full of troubles, and after his death he
was by base villains ^^^d and l^^t naked without any thing to cover the
corpse, he was buried at Worcester.

Henry the third. An. Dom. 1216.


Wars, bloody wars, the French in England made,
Strong holds, Towns, Towers and Castles they invade.
^^t afterward it was K. Henry's chance,
By force perforce to force them back to France.
Great discord 'twixt the King and Barons were,
and factions did the Realm in pieces tear,
A world of mischiefs did this Land abide,
And fifty six years reigned the King and died.
Henry the 3. This King was born at Winchester, crowned at Gloucester, and
buried at Westminster. In the 17. of his reign on the 8. of April, 1233.
there were 5 Sons in the firmament, and the natural Sun was as red as blood.

Edward Long-^hanks. An. Dom. 1271.


THis was a hardy, wise, Victorious King,
The Welshmen he did to subjection bring:
He Scotland wan and brought from thence (by fate)
Their Crown, their Scepter, Chair, and Cloth of state,
That Kingdom with oppression sore he brusde,
Much tyranny and bloodshed there he used.
When thirty five years he the Crown had kept,
At Westminster, he with his Father slept.
Edward the 1. In the 13. year his son Edward was borne at Carnaruan, who
was the first son of any King of England that was Prince of Wales.

An. 17. Wheat at 3. pence the Bushel. Edward of Carnaruan. An. Dom. 1307.


THe hard mis-haps that did this King attend,
The wretched life, and lamentable end,
Which he endured the like has never bin seen,
Deposed, and poisoned by his cruel Queen.
Which when the poison had no force to kill,
Another way she wrought her wicked will.
Into his Fundament a red hot Spit
Was thrust, which made his Royal heart to split.
In his 8. year such a death; that dogs and horses were good food, many ate
their own children, and old prisoners tore such as were newly committed in
pieces, and devoured them half living. The King reigned 19. years 6. months.

Edward the third, An. Dom. 1326.


IN Peace, and war, this King was right, and good,
He did revenge his murdered Fathers blood:
He, and the black Prince, his most valiant Son,
The Field at Cressle, and at Poytiers won,
At first and last in his victorious reign,
Of French and Scots, were six score thousand slain.
And more, (his glory further to advance)
He took the Kings of Scotland and of France.
The noble order of the Garter, he
At Windsor, instituted caused to be.
When fifty years this Land had him obaid,
At Westminster he in his tomb was laid.
In his 12. year he quartered the Arms of England and France, as they are at
this day. Henry Pichard Vintuer, in his Moral^y, feasted at once. Edward King
of England, David King of Scotland, John King of France, the King of Cypres,
the Prince of Wales, the Dolphin of France, with many other great Personages of
Honor and Worship.

Richard the second. An. Dom. 1377.


Young King, rash co^sell, laws and right neglected,
The good put down, the bad in State erected:
The Court with knaves and flat'rers here did swarm,
The Kingdom, (like a Farm) was let to Farm.
The Commons tossed in Armies, Routes and throngs,
And by soul treason, would redress soul wrongs.
In this Kings reign, began the Civil war,
(Unnaturally) 'twixt York and Lancaster.
Oppression on oppression, breeds Confusion,
Bad Prologue, bad Proceeding, bad Conclusion:
King Richard, twenty two years reigned, misse-led,
Deposed and at Po^^r^s knocked ith'head.
This King was Grandchild to Edward the 3. and son to the black Prince, he
was borne at Burdeux in France, and was but 11. years old when he was crowned,
so that all his miserable Calamity may be imputed to him not having or not
regarding good counsel.

Henry the fourth. An. Dom. 1399.


THe Crown wrong got from the wrong'doing king,
More grief then joy did to King Henry bring:
France, England, Scotland, Wales, arose in Arms,
And menaced Henry, with most fierce Alarmes:
Hot Percy, Douglas, Mortimer, Glendowre,
At Shrewsbury, the King orethrew their power,
He fourteen years did reign, and then did dye,
At Canterbury buried, he does lie.
Henry the 4. He began his reign the 29. of September, 1399. and the 14. of
February following, king Richard the 2. being in prison at Po^^fret-Castle, ^^^
murdered. The reign of King Henry was acc^^^^^ war and trouble.

Henry the fifth. An. Dom. 1412.


THis was a King Renowned near and far,
A Mars of men, a Thunderbolt of war:
At Agencourt the French were overthrown,
And Henry heir proclaimed unto that Crown.
In nine years reign this valiant Prince wan more,
Then all the Kings did after or before.
Entombed at Westminster his Carkas lies,
His soul did (like his Acts) ascend the skies.
Henry the 5. In his 3. year he past the sea with 1000. sail of Ships and
Ve^^els into France. His tomb or ^^^^ was covered with silver, but this yr^n
age ^^th ^^^^^^

Henry the sixth. An. Dom. 1422.


THis Infant Prince scarce being nine months old,
The Realms of France and England he did hold:
But he incapable through want of years,
Was ouer-gouern'd by mis-gouern'd Peers.
Now York and Lancaster, with bloody wars,
Both wound this kingdom, with deep deadly scars.
Whilst this good King by Yorks opposed, deposed,
Exposed to dangers, is captived, enclosed,
His Queen exilde, his son and many friends,
Fled, murdered, slaughtred; lastly, Fate contends
To crown him once again, who then at last
Was murdered, thirty nine years being past.
King Edward the sixth, being 10. years old, was crowned King of France in
Paris, but with the strife betwixt the Nobility, and the Commons in England,
the most part of France was lost again, which was never recovered ^^^^^

Edward the fourth. An. Dom. 1460.


EDward, the 4. the house of Yorks great heir,
By bloody wars attained the Regal Chair,
The poor King Henry into Scotland fled,
And four years there was royally clothed and fed,
Still good success with him was in the wane,
^^e by King Edward^^ power at last was taken.
Yet yet before the tenth year of his reign,
Hence Edward fled, and Henry crowned again.
By Warwicks means six months he held the same:
Till Ed^ward back in arms to England came,
And fighting stoutly, made this kingdom yield,
And slew great Warwicks Earl at Barnot field.
Thus Civil wars on wars, and broils on broils,
And England against England spils and spoils,
Now York, then Lancaster, then York again,
^uels Lancaster; thus joy, grief, pleasure, pain,
^^oth like inconstant waters ^bbe and flow:
Ones rising is the others overthrow.
King Edward, twenty two years ruled this Land,
And lies at Windsor where his Tomb does stand.
Edward the 4. In the first year on Palme-sunday. 1460. there was a battle
fought betwixt King Edward and King Henry, near Todcaster, wherein were s^aine
of Englishmen on both sides 53000, 700, and 11. persons: The bloody victory
fell to King Edward. In the 10. year of his reign, he was forced to forsake
this Land, whereby King Henry was restored again to the Crown. But shortly
after, Edward returned, and Henry was murdered.

Edward the fifth. An. Dom. 1483.


HIgh birth, blood, state, and innocent in years,
Eclipsed, and murdered by insulting Peers.
This King was never crowned, short was his reign:
For to be short, he in short space was slain.
Edward the 5. Within 3. months after the death of his father, he and his
brother Richard Duke of York, were deprived both of their lives, and he of the
Crown, by their tyrannous Uncle Richard, Duke of Gloucester.

Richard the third. An. Dom. 1483.


BY Treason, mischief, murder and debate.
Usurping Richard won the royal state:
Unnaturally the children of his brother
The King, and Duke of York he caused to smother.
For Sir James Tirrell, Dighton and Black ^ill,
Did in the Tower these harmless Princes kill,
Buckinghams Duke did raise King Richard high,
And for reward he lost his head thereby.
A fellow to this King I scarce can find.
His shape deformed, and crooked like his mind.
Most cruel, tyrannous, inconstant, stout,
Courageous, hardy, to abide all dangers out,
Yet when his sins were mellow, ripe and full,
The Almighty's justice then his plumes did pull:
By bloody means he did the kingdom gain,
And lost it so, at Bosworth being slain.
This Richard was never a good subject: but when he had got the Crown, be
striued by all means to be a good King, for in his Short reign of two years,
two months, he made very profitable Laws. which are yet in force: by which it
may be perceived how willing he was to redeem his misspent time.

Henry the seventh. An. Dom. 1485.


When Civil wars, full fourscore years and more,
Had made this kingdom welter in her Gore:
When eighty of the royal blood were killed,
That York and Lancasters cross faction held,
Then God in mercy, looking on this Land,
Brought in this Prince, with a triumphant band,
The only Heir of the Lancastrian line,
Who graciously consented to combine,
To ease poor England of a world of moan,
And make the red Rose and the white but one,
By Marriage with Elizabeth the fair,
Fourth Edwards daughter, and Yorks only heir.
But Margret Burgunds duchess stormed and frowned,
That th'heire of Lancaster in state was crowned.
A counterfeit, one Lambert she suborned,
(Being with Princely ornaments adorned)
To claim the State in name of Clarence son,
Who in the Tower before to death was done.
Wars'gainst the French King Henry did maintain,
And Edward brave Lord Wooduile there was slain.
Northumberlands great Earl (for the Kings right)
Was slain by Northern rebels in sharp fight.
The King besiedged Boloigne, but a Peace
The French king fought, and so the siedge did cease.
Still Burgunds Duchess, (with inueterate hate)
Did seek to ruin Henry's Royal state:
She caused one Perkin Warbacke, to put on
The name of, Richard, Edwards murdered son,
Which Richard, was the youngest of the twain
Of Edwards sons that in the Tower was slain.
The King at last these traitors did confound,
And Perkin for a counterfeit was found.
Sir William Stanley, (once the Kings best friend)
At Tower hill, on a Scaffold had his end.
On Black Heath Cornish rebels were o'rthrowne,
A Shoemaker did claim King Henry's Crown.
The Earl of Warwick lost his hapless head,
And Lady Katherine did Prince Arthur wed.
But ere six months were fully gone and past,
In Ludlow Castle, Arthur breathed his last.
King Henry built his Chapel from the ground,
At Westminster, whose like can scarce be found.
Fair Margret eldest daughter to our King,
King James the fourth of Scotland home did bring,
Where those two Princes, with great pomp and cheer,
In State at Edenborough married were.
But as all Mortal things are transitory,
So to an end came Henry's earthly glory.
Twenty three years, and 8. months here he swaid
And then at Westminster, in's Tomb was laid.
He all his Life had variable share,
Of Peace, War, Joy, Grief, Royalty and Care.
In his I. year in 7. weeks space, there dyed in London 2. Majors, and 6.
Aldermen, besides many hundred others of a strange sweating sickness, 1485.

Anno Reg. 12. at Saint Need^ in Beafordshire, there fell hailstones 18.
inches about.

King James the 4. of Scotland, married Margret, eldest daughter to Henry the
7. from whom our graci^^^ sovereign is ^ineally descended.

Henry the eight. An. Dom. 1509.


FRom both the Lines, and both the Ioynes did spring
Of York and Lancaster, this mighty King:
Katherine that was his brothers wife of late,
He took to wife, and crowned her Queen in state,
Empson and Dudley lost their heads at Tower,
For racking the poor Commons by their power.
Wars, dreadful wars, arose 'twixt us and French,
Lord Edward Howard, drowned by mis-chance
At Breast, he was high Admiral in fight,
Cast ouerboord, died like a valiant Knight.
In England Suffolks Duke did lose his head,
The King to Turwin did an army lead,
Turney he won with his victorious blade,
King James of Scotland, England did invade:
But Surries Earle^ the Scotsh King overcame,
Who lost life there, but won immortal fame.
Now Cardinal Wolsey, in the Kings high Grace,
Was raised to honors, from great place to place,
Lordship on Lordship laid upon his back,
Until the burden was the bearers wrack.
The Duke of Buckingham, his head did lose,
And La^ber stoutly did the Pope oppose,
^^finde ignorance that long had looked awry,
Began, to see Truth with a clearer eye,
And then the King (inspired with seruent Zeal)
Reformed both the Church and Common weal,
^^^^^ with his power Omnipotent,
Did make this King his gracious Instrument,
^^T'vnmaske his Truth from Antichristian fables,
And purge this woeful Land from Babels bables.
This king at Boloigne was victorious;
^^ peace and war, Magnifique, Glorious;
^^ his rage bounty he did often express,
His Liberality to be excess,
^^^ Revels, Iusts, and Turnies he spent more,
Then five of his Forefathers did before,
His Avarice was all for Noble fame,
Amongst the Worthies to inrole his Name,
A valiant Champion for the Faiths defense,
Was the great Title of this mighty Prince.
^^^^ wives he had, 3 Kates, 2. Aunes, one Jane,
Two were diuorc'd, two at the block were slain:
One son and two fair daughters he did leave,
Who each from other did the Crown receive:
The first was Edward; Mary next, whose death
Left State, and Realm, to Queen Elizabeth.
He thirty eight years kept this Royal Room,
At windsor he is entered without a Tomb.
L^^th, Edenbourgh, and diverse other parts of Scotland were spoiled by Sir John
Dudley, Lord Viscount ^sle, Lord high Admiral of England, with a Navy of 200,
tall Ships.

Anno 1544. King Henry went to Boloigne, he ^^^^ France the 13. of July, and
into Boloigne the 25. of September in which year were taken 300. French ^hips
for prices.

Edward the sixth. An. Dom. 1546.


HAd this Kings reign bin long, as it was good,
Religion in a peaceable state had stood,
What might have his age bin, when his blessed youth,
^o valiantly advanced Gods sacred truth?
At nine years age, the Crown on him he took,
And ere sixteen, he Crown and life for sooke.
Too good for earth, The Almighty took his spirit,
And Westminster his Carkas does inherit.
In his 5. year a strange Earthquake did much harm^ in diverse places of
Surry, and a sweating sickness generally over England, that dispatched those
that were in good health, in 12. hours, or 24. at the most. In one week there
dyed of it in London 806. the most of them being men of best strength.

Queen Mary. An. Dom. 1553.


AFter a while this Queen had worn the Crown,
Idolatry was raised, and Truth put down,
The Mass, the Images, the Beads and Altars,
By tyranny, by fire, and sword and Halters,
Th'vngodly bloody Antichristian sway,
Men were force, perforce forced to obey.
Now burning Bonner, London, Bishop, he
Was from the Ma^s^al-sea again ^^ free:
John Dudley, great Duke of Northumberland,
And Sir John Gates dyed by the Headsmans hand.
With them Sir Thomas Palmer likewise died,
Hoping for heaven, through ^^^^^ Crucified.
In Latin Service must be sung and said,
Because men should not know for what they pra^'d.
The Emp'rors son, great Philip King of Spain,
A marriage with Queen Mary did obtain:
Against which match, Sir Thomas Wyat rose,
With powers of Kent the Spaniards to oppose.
But Wyat was or'throwne, his army fled,
And on the Tower hill after lost his head.
Lord Gray the Duke of Suffolk also died,
An Axe his Corpse did from his head divide.
A little after, the Lord Thomas Gray,
The Dukes own brother went that headless way.
A Millers son assumed King Edward^ name,
And falsely in that name the Crown did claim,
But he was taken and justly whipped and tortured,
And claiming it once more, was hanged and quarterd.
King Philip won Saint Quintins with great cost.
But after to our shame was Callice lost,
Callice was lost, which threescore years and ten,
Had been a Garrison for Englishmen.
Thus by Gods mercy Englands Queen did dye,
And England gained much ease and rest thereby.
Five years and 4. months was her bloody reign,
And all her glory does one grave contain.
Though of her self this Queen was well inclined,
Bad-minded counsel altered much her mind.
She married Philip King of Spain, on Saint James his day, 1554. at Winchester.

Callice was won by Edward the 3. in the 21. of his reign, 1347. and it was
lost the I. of January 1557. after the Englishmen had possessed it 210. years.

August 7. 1558. a tempest near Nottingham, beat down 2. Towns and Churches,
and cast the Bells to the further side of the Churchyard, threw whole sheets
of Lead 400. foot into the fields, where they were crumpled together like burns
parchment: the stream and mud of the River of Trent was blown a-land a
quarter of a mile: a child blown out of a man's hand 100. foot and killed: there
fell hayle 15. Inches about.

Queen Elizabeth. An. Dom. 1558.


A Debora, a Judith, a Susanna,
A Virgin, a Virago, a Diana:
Courageous, Zealous, Learned, Wise and Chasle,
With heavenly, earthly gifts, adorned and graced,
Victorious, glorious, bountious, gracious, good,
And one, whose virtues dignified her blood,
That Muses, Graces, Arms, and liberal Arts,
Amongst all Queens, proclaimed her Queen of hearts,
She did repurifie this Land once more,
From the infection of the Romish whore.
Now Abbeys, Abbots, Fri'rs, Monks, Nuns and Stews,
Masses, and Mass Priests, that men's souls abuse,
Were all cast down, Lamps, Tapers, Relikes, Beads,
And Superstitions that man's soul misse-leads,
All Popish pardons, Bulls. Consessions,
With Crossings, Cristening bells, Saints, Intercessions,
The Altars, Idols, Images down cast,
All Pilgrimage, and Superstitious Fast,
Th'acknowledging the Pope for supreme head,
The holy water, and the god of bread,
The mumbling Mattins, and the pickpurse Mass,
These bables this good Queen did turn to grass.
She caused Gods service to be said and sung,
In our own understanding English tongue.
In Scotland and in France, fierce wars she held,
The Irish she subdued when they rebeld,
The Netherlands her name do still admire,
And Spain her like again does not desire.
When forty four years reign was past and gone,
She changed her earthly for a heavenly Throne,
At Greenwich she was borne, at Richmond died,
At Westminster she buried does abide;
And as the fame of this Imperial Ma^de,
Is through the world, (by the four winds) displaid,
So shall her memory for ever grace
Her famous birth, her death, and burial place.
At Teuxbury Anno 1574. the 24. of February, being. a hard frost, the River of
Seuerne was covered with Fl^ and Beetles, so that it was thought, within the
length of a pair of Bu^^, to be 100. quarters of them, the m^^^^en stopped
with them, but from whence they came, is unknown.

1582. A piece of Land of three Acres in Dorsotshire i^ the Parish of Armitage,
was suddenly remoo^ed 600. f^^t from the place where formerly it stood.

King James. An. Dom. 1601.


When as Elizaes woeful death was acted:
When this lamenting land was half distracted^
When tears each loyal heart with grief had drowned,
Then came this King and made our joys abound,
Ordained for us by heavenly power divine,
Then from the North this glorious star did shine,
The Roall Image of the Prince of Peace,
The blessed Concorder that made wars to cease;
By Name a STEWARD, and by Nature one,
Appointed from I^houahs sacred Throne,
And by the almighty's hand supported ever,
That Treason or the Devil should hurt him ne^^^
And as his Zeal unto his God was great,
Gods blessings on him were each way complete,
Rich in his Subjects love (a Kings best treasure)
Rich in content, (a Riches above measure)
Rich in his Princely Issue, and in them,
Rich in his hopeful Branches of his stem;
Rich in Munition, and a Navy Royal,
And richer then all Kings in servants Loyal.
When Hell and Rome together did conspire,
To blow him and his kingdom up with fire,
Then did the King of King^ preserve our King,
And all the Traitors to confusion bring.
And who so reckons up from first to last,
The many hel-hatch'd dangers he has past
Through all his days, he will believe (no doubt)
That he with heavenly powers was walled about.
All Christian Princes held his friendship dear,
Was feared for love, and not beloved for fear:
And P^^gan Monarchs were in League combined
With him, as far as is the Eastern Inde.
^^^ like a st^^^ amidst a River fixed,
^^ was his ^^flic^ with his mercy mixed:
He ^riu'd to imitate his Maker still,
^ed clemency preserved where Law would kill.
He has cured England, and healed Scotlands wounds,
And made them both great (ancient) Britains bounds:
^^^ bloody deadly ^eud the caused ^^ cease,
And ^^^^^'d hate he turned to Christian peace,
The mouth of war he muzzled mute and dum,
He filled the roaring Cannon and the Drum:
^^ure in peace, his people si^^ and dine,
With their own fig trees shaded and their vine,
Whilst in an uproar most of Christendom,
^^e nation does another overcome.
Unto the King of Kings let us pratles sing.
For giving us this happy peaceful King.
^^^one know so well how they should peace prefer,
^^s those that know the miseries of war:
^Tis true (though old) and must not be forgot.
The wars are sweet to such as know them not.
Peace (happy peace) does spread tranquillity,
Through all the bounds of Britains Monarchy;
And may we all our actions still address,
For peace with God, and war against wickedness.
Unto which peace of God this King's ascended,
^o reign in glory that shall never be ended.
His mortal part at Westminster entered,
His soul and Fame immortally preser'd.
God did wonderfully preserve him (upon two seueral^^ Tue^daies) from 2 most
dangerous treasons, the one at the Town of Saint Iohnston in Scotland, on
Tuesday the 5. of August, 1600. where the Earl of Gowry attemptea to kill his
Majesty. The other was in England, in that fearful treason and deliucrance
from the Powder Plot, on Tuesday the 5. of November. 1606.

King CHARLES.


TWo Williams, Henry's 8. I. Steven, I. John,
Six Edwards, Richards 3. and I. Queen Mary:
Elizabeth, and James, all dead and gone,
Our gracious Charles does now the Scepter carry;
And may they live and dye of God accursed,
Who wish the prejudice of Charles the first.
^ust 25. Kings and Queens of England since the Norman Conquest.

A BRIEF REMEMBRANCE OF ALL THE ENGLISH MOnarchs, from the Normans Conquest,
until this present.
TO THE HONORABLE AND TRVLY Noble, Sir ROBERT CARR, Knight, one of the
Gentlemen of his Majesty's Royal Bedchamber, etc.
It Is not in expectation of reward,
That I this book unto your hands do tender;
But in my humble duty, in regard
That I am bound my daily thanks to render.
And though my style be harsh my learning slender,
My Verse defective, and my Accent rude;
Yet if your Patronage be my Defender,
Iam defended'gainst a multitude.
Thus (to avoid Hell-hatch'd ingratitude,
My dutious Love) my Lives, and Life shall be,
To you devoted ever to conclude,
May you and your most virtuous Lady see
Long happy days, in Honor still increasing;
And after death, true Glory never ceasing.
Your Honors in all service, John Tailor,

WILLIAM THE FIRST, Surnamed the CONQVEROVR; KING OF ENGLAND, And DVKE OF
NORMANDY.
BY bloody Battles, Conquest, and by Fate,
Fair Englands Crown and kingdom l surprised:
Itopsie-tutuy turned elie Eng'ish State,
And Laws and Customs new and strange devised.
And where ^ vanquished there I tyrannaiz'd,
Instead of peoples love enforcing fear:
Extorting Ioils I daily exercised,
And Tributes, greater then the Land could bear,
Besides, (the Normans fame the more to rear)
The English I forbad the English tongue,
French Schools of Grammar I ordained here,
And against this Nation added wrong to wrong.
At last my Crown, Sword, scepter, Conquest brave
I left, I lost, scarce found an earthly Grave.
Anno 1066, October 14, Saturday.
William Conqueror, the son of Robert the 6. Duke of Normandy, Ianded with a
1000. ships furnished with men, horse and all warlike provision, at Hastings
in Sussex, and after a bloody battle with King Harold, with the slaughter of
nere 70000. men on both parts, Hareld being slain, Duke William came in
Triumph to London, and was crowned at Westminster on Christmas day following,
by, Aldred Archbisbop of York: he used his victory; and conquest here
tyrannically; dispossesing most part of the English of their lands, giving them
to the Normans, for which appressions he was continually molested; sometimes
with the Danes,then with the Welsh, with the Scots out of Ireland, and at home
amongst his own people: besides, many miseries did at once afflict this Land,
as I. an universal fever amongst people, 2 Barrenness of the ground, 3
Dearth and famine, 4 Moraine of Cattle, and the Church of St Paul's in London
burnt, and all that was in it; The Country extremely ruined and spoiled for 60
miles space betwixt York and Durham. The king pulled down 36 Churches, Towns
and Villages, laying the Country waste and open for 30 miles space from the
City of Salisbury Southward, which is now called Newforrest, and was by him
made a wilderness or place for beasts for his game of hunting. In which place,
(by Gods just Judgment) his second son Richard was killed by a Dear, his son
K. William Rusus killed for a Deer, and Henry his grandchilde struck into the
jaws with a bough, and hanged so, till he was found dead. Neuerthlesse, he
built many Abbeys, Priories, Garrisons, Houses, and Caslles; amongst the which,
the Tower of London was one: He died at Roane 1087 September 9. he was not
only robbed and risted of all his goods and Kingly ornaments and riches, but
barbarously stripped and left naked on the floor, not having any one to attend
his carcass, but for saken of all. Such is the frailty and misery of earthly
greatness. Lastly, he had much ado to get a grave, which in the end (with
great difficulty) was purchased for him at Cane in Normandy.

WILLIAM THE IJ, Surnamed RUFUS, KING OF ENGLAND And DVKE OF NORMANDY.
What my triumphant Father wan, I held,
I pill'd and poll'd this Kingdom more then he,
Great Tributes from my people I compeld:
No place in Church or Commonwealth was freee,
But always those that would give most to me,
Obtained their purpose being wrong or right.
The Clergy I enforced to agree,
To sell Church-plate and Chalices outright.
Until at last (by the Almighties might)
My Kingly power and force was forcelesse made,
My glorious pomp that seemed t'eclips men's sight,
Did vanish by a glance, by chance, and fade:
For hunting in new-forrest (void of fear)
A Subject flew me shooting at Decre.
Anno 1087. September 26. being Sunday.
William the second, surnamed Rufus (by ^^ son of his ruddy or red color) was
crowned at Westminster, by Lanfrank, Archbishop of Can^^terbury his elder
brother Robert being Duke ^^ Normandy, who likewise claimed the Crown, ^^ he
was pacified with the mediation of the friends ^^ William, and the promise of
3000 marks a year ^ Robert departed this Land, after is had been ^^ wasted
with their contentions. Then, after little breathing time, the Welsh arose in
Arms, and Malcolme King of Scots Invaded England burning and spolying as far
as Chester. ^^ soon as the peace was made betwixt the King William and
Malcolme, the two brothers William and Robert sell at odds again, and again
are appeased. After that, Malcolme King of Sco^^^ made an inroad into England
again, whom Ro^bert Moubray Earl of Northumberland (ly^^ in ambush) suddenly
slew; in which action, Edw^^ King Malcolms son, likewise was slain. Af^^
which, the third time, the 2 brothers, Robert ^^ William, sell again at
variance, and after ^^ trouble, are again reconciled. Then Duke Robert^^ goes
to Jerusalem and conquers it. In the year 1099. the Schism began, there
being 2 Popes, ^ at Rome, the other at Auigniou in France. The K. William was
as valiant a prince as the war^ yielded, and a great opposer of the indirect
cours^^ the sea of Rome. Many fearful things happened in his reign; as
earthquakes, dreadful lightning and Apparitions, Blazing Commets in strange^
gures, Inundations, and Deluges to the destruction is people, and much land
overwhelmed with the^neuer to be recovered: amongst the which, ^^ Goodwins
lands were drowned, and are now c^^^ Goodwin sands. At Finchamsted in Barkin^
there was a Well of blood, which flowed 15 days When this King had reigned
near 13 years, he was unfortunately slain by a French Knight, St Water
Tirrell, and brought to Winchester in a C^liers cart, and there buried, Anno
1100, Ang^^^.

HENRY THE FIRST, Surnamed BEAVCLARKE, KING OF ENGLAND, And DVKE OF NORMANDY.
MY Father and my Brother Kings, both gone,
With acclamations Royal I was crowned:
Had having gained the Scepter and the Throne,
I with the name of Beauclarke was renowned:
The English Laws long lost, I did refound,
False waights and measures I corrected true,
The power of Wales in fight I did confound,
And Normandy my valor did subdue.
Yet I unmindful whence these glories grew,
My eldest Brother Robert did surprise,
Detained him, and usurped his Royal due,
And most, vnnat' rally plucked out his eyes,
Kings live like Gods, but yet like men they dye,
All must pay Natures due, and to did I.
Anno 1100. August I, Wednesday.
Henry the I, a Prince of incomparable wisdom and learning, for which
indowments he was surnamed Beauclark, he mollified the seuentty of his Father
and brother laws, he cashierd and punished all flatrers and parasites from his
Court; but his elder brother Robert, Duke of Normandy, hearing of the death of
his brother Rufus, makes haste from is Conquest and Kingdom of Jerusalem, (if
he had pleased) and coming into England, landed at Portsmouth, claiming the
Crown; but by advice of the Nobles on either part it was agreed, that King
Henry should pay unto Duke Robert 3000 marks yearly; but by the instigation
of some discontented persons, the two brothers disagree again: and in the fifth
year of King Henry, Duke Robert landed in England again; then there was a
^ayned peace made between them, which in the 7 year of this king was broken,
and in the 8 year, King Henry took his brother, Duke Robert, and caused his
eyes to be put out, Thus, just the same day forty years, that the Duke of
Normandy conquered England, that very day did this Henry the first King of
England conquerNormandy. Henry the fourth Emperor of Germany married Maude the
Daughter of king Henry. This King was the first thai ordained the High court of
Parliament. In the year 1020. Prince William, the son of king Henry, of the
age of 17, crossing the Seas from France toward England, with his wife, the
Duke of Anious daughter, and his sister Maud, the Lady Lucy a Niece of the
Kings, the Earl of Chester, with diverse other Noblemen, Ladies and others, to
the number of 160, were all most miserably drowned, not any of them saved but a
poor Butcher. The king having no children left, but his daughter Maude the
Empress. The Emperor her Husband being dead, she came into England, (to whom
the king her father) caused his Nobles to swear allegiance as to his lawful
heir after his decease, which Empress after was married to Ieffrie
Plantagenet Earl of Aniou. The King after many troubles with the French,
Welsh, Scots and Englsih, with foreign and Civil wars, unfortunate and
untimely loss of children and friends, after 35 years reigns, he dyed at
Saint Dennis in Normandy, whose corpse were brought into England and buried at
Reding, 1135.

STEPHEN, KING OF ENGLAND, AND DVKE OF NORMANDY,
BY wrested Titles and usurping claim,
Through storms and tempests of tumultuous wars,
The Crown (my fairest mark and foulest aim)
I won and wore, beleaguerd round with iars.
The English, Scots and Normans all prepares
Their powers, exposing to oppose my powers,
Whilst this land ladeo and o'rwhelm'd with cares,
Fndures, whilst war, woe, want and death deuoures.
But as years, months, weeks, days decline by hours,
Hours into minutes, minutes into naught:
My painful pomp decai'd like fading flowers,
And unto naught was my Ambition brought.
Thus is the state of transitory things:
There Is nothing can be permanent with Kings.
Anno 1135. December 26. Monday.
On Saint Stephens day, Stephen Earl of Mortaigue and Bulloyne, the Son of
Stephen E^^^ Bloys and Champaine, was crowned at Westminster by William Corbell
Archbishop of Canterbury, tak^ Government upon him usurpingly, compare to his
^^ made to King Henry the I, in the behalf of Maudth' Empress, for the which
his whole reign was full of common all troubles. For the Empress claiming her
right, great parties weere taken on each side: the King had on his part his
brother Henry. Bishop of Winchester, William Archbishop of Canterbury, Roger,
Bishop of Salisbury, Hugh Bigott late Lord Steward to King Henry the first. On
the Empress part were Robert, Earl of Gloucester her half brother, David,
King of Scotland, Owen and Cadwallader, sent to Griffith ap Co^^, Prince of Wa
es; and in Normandy, Geffry, the Empress Husband made havoc in the right of
his ^^^^ in which space the King was dangerously sicks, recovered, and went
into Normandy, appeasing the tumults, and leaving his Son Eustace Duke there,
makes league with France, buys his peace with the Empress for 5000 marks
yearly, and returns into England: after which David King of Scotland, with
his valiant Son Pre^^ Henry, wasted and spoiled call the North parts of
England, till by Thurstane, Archbishop of York, and Ralp^ Bishop of Durham, He
was ^^^^ and discomfited: In ^ me and space, K. Stephen in diverse parts of this
Kingdom was victortous, chasing and killing many of those but a^^^^ posed him,
enforcing Robert, Earl of Gloucester, to ^^^ into France, ^^whilst Stephen in
England ^^^^ ^^^^^ and Castles. After in a great ^^^^ the King was ^^^^ at
Lincoln by the Empress and committed ^^^^ Bristow Castle: but the Nobility
distastins the ^^^^ s^rict government, fell off from her to King Stephens ^^
again. In these broils more the ^^^^ Char^^^^ burnt in Winchester with almost
the wha^ ^^^^ med to ashes. In the end Robert, Eearle of Gloucester was taken
prisoner, and ex^hanged for King Stephen^ the wars more and more increasing;
till at last, ^^^^ mercy looking on this miserable Land, was pleased ^^^^
Stephen should ordain Henry the Empress form Sonne^^ Hetre, after him, upon
which conditions peace ^^^^ blished. The King aged at Dover, and was buried at
Feuersham, October 25, 1154. having reigned ^^^^ all vexation near 19 years.

HENRY THE SECOND, KING OF ENGLAND, DVKE OF NORMANDY, Guyen and Aquitaine, etc.
TO th'Empresse Maud I was undoubted Heir,
And in her Right, my Title being just,
By justice I obtained the Regal Chair.
Fair Rosamond I soyled with soul lust,
For which Heavens lustice (hating deeds unjust)
Stirred up my Wife and Sons to be my foes:
Who sought to lay my Glory in the dust
And he m'd me round with cruel wars and woes.
They poys'ned my sweet beauteous tainted ^^
By Isabels device my furious Queen;
My very bowels against me did oppose:
Such fruit has lust, such force has iealons spleen.
My cursed cross^s made me curse my birth,
With her I lived, raignd, died, and armed to earth.
Anno ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^
^

RICHARD THE FIRST, Surnamed CVER DE LION, KING OF ENGLAND, DVKE OF NORMANDY,
Guyen and Aquitaine, etc.
THrough my Creators mercy and his might,
Jerusalem! conquered and set free,
False mis-beleeuing Jews, and Turkish spite,
From Jury force perforce I forced to flee.
The Realm of Cypress was subdude by me.
Su^ha trembled at my prowess bold.
King Tanered bought his peace, and did agree,
And paid me threescore ounces of fine gold:
Whilst I abroad won Honor manifold,
Aspiring John (my brother) vexed my Realm.
In Austria I was taken, and laid in hold:
Thus noods of grief each way me over whelme.
At last I home returned, my ransom paid,
My earthly glory in a Grave was laid.
Anoo 1189 July, 6, Thursday.
Richard the first, (surnamed Cuer De Lion, or Lions Heart, was crowned at
Westminster by Baldwin, Archbishop of Canterbury; Shortly after his Co^^^tion,
he sold and pawned lands, and gathering a great sum of 1100000^. he left
England in the guidance of William Longchamp Bishop of Ely, (the Popes Legate,
and Lord Chancellor of England) William king of Scotla'd being in amity with
King Richard: this king sailed in France, with whom the French K. Philip went
with their armies toward the holy Land in their voyage, they touched the
kingdom of Sicilia, where Tancred the usurping King of that Country gave king
Richard 6000. ounces of ^ (I know not whether it was for love or fear) He
saild from thence, and in a Tempest his Navy was dispersed, and for wracked
near the lle of Cyprus, whom lsakius the by courteous King of that kingdom
would not harbor vnlieue; but contrarily pillaged and abused. king Richard and
enraged, landed, conquered Cyprus, carrying the king and his daughter away
prisoners, leaving the kingdoms vds ^^ two trusty Viceryes; he put again to
Sea, bit ^^^^^ number more then 300, he met with a great Arg^^^^ ^ ^^ the
Sarazens with 1500 men in her, and fur^^^ munition, and victuals, for their
friends at Acon, ^ Argosey the King took, after he sailed to Acon, ^ ciently
called Ptol omais) which City he likewise conquered (Philip king of France
being with him) and ^^^med 1500 Christians that were there in bondage. The king
of France (weary, or ennious of King Richards ^^ ries) returned home; In the
mean time, Earl John Kings brother, drives the proud governing Bishop of E^
out of his government, and this kingdom. T^^^ ^^^^ King Richard fortified
Ascalon, marched before Ien^^ lem, fought with the Salladine, and took 7000
C^^^^^ other beasts, killing the Infidels in heaps. At last, ^^^ Duke of
Burgundy forsakes the wars, whereby th^^^ was enforced to come to truce with
the Saladine, for ^^^^ years. He returning in disguise like a March^^, ^^
discovered and taken by Leopoldus Duke of Austria, ^ the Emperor took him from
him. In the meant space, ^^^ the Kings brother uses all the foul play he
c(...) Crown. After 15 months imprisonment, the king ^ released, paying a
great Ransom: be landed in England was crowned again at Winchester, for gave
his brother John, sailed into Normandy against his mortal e^^^^ the King of
France, who fled from the siege of Vernoy^^ so soene as he heard of Richards
coming; yet new^ ^^^ arose between them, wherein King Richard was^^^
Victorius. Lastly, at the battle of Gisors 1192 after ^^^^ sion, he was most
infortunately slain, at the siege of ^^^^ named Chaluz, with an Arrow the 6 of
April, 119^^ having reigned nobly and prosperously near 10 year.

JOHN, KING OF ENGLAND, DVKE OF NORMANDY, Guyen and Aquitaine, LORD OF IRELAND,
etc.
ROmes mighty miter'd Metropolitan
I did oppose, and was by him deposed:
He turned this cursed blessings to his ban,
And caused me round to be with cares enclosed,
The English and the Normans me opposed,
And Lewis of France my Kingdom did molest,
Whilst I to all these miseries exposed,
Consumed my Kingly days in restless rest.
At last the Pope was pleased, and I reblest:
Peace was obtained, proclaimed, I re-inthroan'd.
This was my reign with woes oppressed and pressed,
Blessed cursed, friends, foes, divided and aron'd.
And after seventeen years were gone and past,
At Swinsted poys'ned, there I drank my last.
Anno 1199, April 6, Tuesday.
John ^^^^stly intruded the Crown, it being by right his nephew Arthurs, who
was son to Ieffry Duke of Britain, John's eldest brother) howsoever John was
crowned on the 6 of May at Westminster by Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury; but
after a false reconciliation betwixt Philip King of France, John, king of
England, and Arthur, 'Duke of Britain, the said Duke Arthur was murdered:
some Authors (in malice) taxing king John with the murder, and some Writers
altogether clearing him. Hoasoeuer he had not one quiet day in his
whole-Reigne; his Principalities in France seized only the French, Wales in
combustion, Ireland in vproare, Scotland preparing against him, England all in
confusion, defender and hurliburly, the King, the Peers, the Prelates and
Commons at perpetual diuisioen. The Pope of Rome thunders out his
Excommunications against the King and all that obeyed him, and interacts the
whole Realm: So that for three years no Church was opened either for Gods
Service to be exercised, or Sacraments administered. There was no Christian
burial allowed to any, but the Carcasses of the dead were barbarously laid in
unhallowed places, or cast like dogs into ditches: yet all this time many of
the English Nobility loyally served their Sovereign, mangre the Papal
Anathemizing. The King went into Ireland, and finding it shattered into
contentions, fractures; ioynes, and unites it again, and returns into
England: When suddenly Lewilyn Prince of Northwales (who had married King John's
daughter) inuades the Marches of England; but Lewilyn was soyled, and Wales
conquered. But in the year 1211, the Popes set all curse began to fall heavy
upon king John, which curse also made many great: Lords and other to far from
the King; nevertheless, (Scotland being in contention by a Traitor that
claimed the Crown there, ^^^ Gothred) King John went thither, and aided his
friend K. William, and in that expedition set all in good peace, and taking the
Traitor Gothred, caused him to be hanged; The Pope very liberally gave the
kingdom of England to Phil. of France, An. 1112. More then 3000 people were
burned and drowned on and under London bridge in the space of 4 years, King
John made his peace with the Pope, surrendered his Crown to Pandulphus the
Legate, and for money and good words was blessed, and had his Crown again.
Philip of France attempts Englands invasion, his Fleet is beaten, discontented,
sunk, scattered, taken by king John. Lewis the Dolphin of France landed at
Sarawich with 650 ships, came to London, and took oaths of Allegiance of the
Barons and Citizens in Paul's: yet at last, Lewis it forsaken of the English
Lords, yet holds possessions here. King John being thus freed from Invasion
and Foreign assaults, was assaulted with poison by a Monk in Swinsted Abbey;
having reigned more powerful then fortunate 17 years, 5 months and odd
days, was interred at Worcester.

HENRY THE THIRD, KING OF ENGLAND, LORD OF JRELAND, DVKE OF NORMANDY, G^^en and
Aquitaine, etc.
IN toil and trouble midst contentions broils,
^^ z'd the Scepter of this famous land,
Then being gready wasted with the spoils
Which ^^^^ I made with his French furious band:
But I with Peers and people bravely mand,
Repald, repulst, expa^st insulting foes.
My ^^^ons did my Sovereignty withstand,
And wrap them^^ and me in wars and woes:
But in each Battle none but I did lose,
I lost my Subjects lines on every side:
(From Civil wars no better gaining grows)
Friends, foes, my people all, that fought or died.
My gains was loss, my pleasure was my pain,
These were the triumphs of my troublous reign.
Anno 1216, October 19, Wednesday.
Henry the third, the eldest son of King Ioha, and Isabel, which was the
daughter of Aym^r Earl of A^golesme; Thus Henry was borne at Winchester, ^^
first crowned at Gloucester, by Peter, Bishop of Winchester, and Iosseline
Bishop of Bath and after ag^^man with his Lords, he was again crowns at
Westminster by Stephen Langton, Archbishop of Conterbury, ^^ Whitsanday, God
(in mercy) looks gentle (...) calamities that this woeful Land pressed by
foreign wars and civil discord. It all turned to a happy ^^^^ betwixt the
King and his Lords, which continued a long time. Gualo the Popes Legate, the
Bishop of Winchester, William Marshall Earl of Pombroke being the protector of
the Kings Realm (the King ^^^^^^ ^^^^ old) by whose good government. Lewts the
^^^^^^ of France, with all his French Armies were exp^^ed out of the kingdom.
The King forg^^e all of the La^^^^ the had taken part with Lewis but he made
the Clerg^^^ great sines. Alexander the King of Scotland, was married to the
Leaytane sister to King Henry, at which misiery Dragons were^^^^^ ^^^^^^ ^^^
the ^^^^^^ coun^^^^^ fellow said he ^^^ Jesus Christ, sheuing the marks ^^^
were of Nails in his hands and feet, ^er the which bla^^^^ my bewa^ Crucified
at a place called Atterbury near the Town of Banbury. Some say he was (...)
two walls and started at Cathnes in Scotland. The Bishop did excem(...) the
people, because they would ^^ pay their Tithes, for the which they burned the
Bishop alive for reward of which wicked act, their King caused 400. of the
chife offenders to be ^arged, golded ^^^ ^^^^ dr^^ and put the Earl from his
Earledoms, John, King of Ierusclem, came into England to ^raue ^^ de^^f King
Henry, But the King was so busied here, that he co^al^^ aid him. K. Henry with
a great Arm: went into Britain against Lewis, King of France, and spoiled the
C^^^^ mighty; till at last, a Peace was co^^l^ded. The Emperor Fred^rick
married the Lady Isabell the King ^^^^. Eig^^^^ Jews were hanged for cru^^ring
a ^^^^dre Lincoln. Richard Earl of Cornwall (the Kings^^^ there) was made King
of the Romans. The King l^^^^^ ^^^ lands in France, except the Duchy of
Aquitaine; Wales was in insurrection, Ireland in rebellion, England in a
hurty-burly, ^^stoy all Division betwixt the King and his ^^^ Lords, Anno 1233.
5 Suns were ^e^u (...) ^^^ ^^^ in the East, one in the West, one in the
South, ^^ in the North ^^^^^ the fifth in the m^^st of the firmament, The King
entertaines Poictouines out of France, and gives them places of great honor in
Court and ^^^ ^^^^ which made the English Barons raise At^^^ agan^^^^ King. The
Earl of Leicester and Gloucester ^^^^the King of England in the battle at
Jews. The Lord Chief iustue^^^'d in Westminster-^^^; ^^^^^, after all these
ones, the King dyed in peace, having reigned 56 years, ^^^ burried at
Westminster. 127^.

EDWARD THE FIRST, KING OF ENGLAND, LORD OF IRELAND, DVKE OF AQVITAINE, etc.
MY Victories, my Valor, and my strength,
My actions, and my neuer-conquer'd name,
^ere spread throughout the world in breadth and length
^^ mortal deeds, I want immortal Fame.
^^ebellious Wales I finally did tame,
^^ made them Vassalls to my princely Son:
^^red Scotland fierce with Sword and Flame,
^^d almost all that Kingdom ouer-run.
^^ll where I fought, triumphantly I won,
through Blood and Death my glory I obtained:
^^ in the end, when all my Acts were done,
^^ Sepulcher was all the game I gained.
For though great Kings contend for earthly sway,
Death binds them to the peace and parts the fray.
An. Dom. 1272. November, Wednesday.
Edward the first was 35 years old when he began to reign, but at the death
of his Father, he was in wars in the Holy L^^d against the Saracens: So that
he returned not home till the next year, a ^time he was crowned the 14 day of
December: in the second year of his reign, the ^^^^mins^ty of ^^^ Coro^^^^^
^^^ performed by Robert K^lwarby Ar^^^^^^ of Canterbury) at Westminster. Thus
King brought Wales wholly unto subsection to the crown of England, he effect
^^^^ peace, be caused all co^^^^tred Judges and Officers of Note to be must
exemplertly p^^n^^ea, with sines, ^^ pri^^men: and bantshment. A Navy of 60
English, s^^ps ou^^^ams and took 800 ships of France, An. 1293. Sir William
Wallace A Noble va^^^ant Sco^) and warr^ upon King Edward, and in the service
of his Country, did much ^^^^^^ to England. The King ca^^^ this Son Edward
being an in^^rt) to be the first Prince of Wales that was of to^ English blood.
Since when all the Kings of Englands elaest Sons are by right Princes of
Wales. 284 Jews were executed for ^^^ptes, of the Kings coin. An 1280. King
Edward caused Bay^trds Castle to be buils in London, (now the mansion house of
the Right Honorable Earl of Pemb^^^^.) In the 15 years of this kings reign,
Wheat was sold for 3d the B^she^ and the next year, being 1288, it was sold
for 18d the Bush^^ which in those d^^ies was accounted a great price; but
after; as long as The King lived, the price came to 5^ the Bashell. King
Edwards Armi^^^ew 70000 of the Scots, in one day as the ^^tt^k of Fau^^rke. Sir
William Wallace was betrayed, taken and brought out of Scotland, and executed
in Smithfield, has head being set on London Bridge, and his quarters sent into
Scotland: yes be is by ^^^^^ men had in Honorable remembrance. The wars ^^^
so set in this Kings reign, betwixt him and the Scots, that (as ^enerall
times) there were more then 130000 men slain on both parts: yet amongst all
our English Kings that past before him, Edward was not inferior today, he was
religious, valiant, victorious, wise, affable, of a comely Ma^estmall Aspect
and proportion: he had two wives, the first was Eleanor, daughter to Ferdinand
the third King of Castile, the second was Margaret, daughter to Philip surnamed
Hardy) King of France, by them he had 4 Sons, and 10 Daughters, be reigned
near 35 years, and was burried at Westminster, 1307. July, 7.

EDWARD, THE II, KING OF ENGLAND, LORD OF IRELAND, DVKE OF AQVITAINE, etc.
Soon after was my fathers corpse interred
Whilst Fate and Fortune did on me attend:
And to the Royal Throne I was preferred,
With A^e Ceaser, every knee did bend,
But all these fickle joys did fading end,
Pierce Gaueston to thee my love combind:
My friendship to thee scarce left me a friend,
But made my Queen, Peers, People, all unkind,
I tortured, both in body and in mind,
Was vanquished by the Scots at Bannocki Rourne,
And I enfor'cd b flight some safety find,
Yet taken by my Wife at my return,
A red-hot Spit my Bowels through did gore,
Such misery, no slave endured more.
Anno Dom. 1307, July 8.
Edward the second, surnamed Carnaruan,^ cause he was born at Carnaruan Castle
is Wales was crowned at Westminster by the hands of William Bishop of
Winchester, (deputy for Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, then absent in exile)
^^ 24 of February next following. He was much ^^^^cted to follow the advice and
counsel of light ^^^^ which caused the Nobility to rebel against him ^^^ at
the first he overcame them, and took. Thomas Earl of Lancaster (a Peers of
the blood) their chief Leader, and fate in judgment himself on him at Pomfret,
where the Earl had judgment given against him to be drawn, for is Treason,
for his murder spoil, burning and robberies to be hanged, and for his shameful
flying away, to be beheaded; but because ^^^ was of the Kings kindred, he was
only beheaded, ^^^ the last such of the Barons as had escaped (and ^^^ the
Mortimers) with the help of the Queen ^^^ the young Prince, (then come out of
France newly) took the King and imprisoned him; never ^^^ kingdom in more
^^sery then this Kings ^^^ for his immoderate love to Pierce Gau^^^^ (a mean
Gentleman of France) was the cause of the Kings and has own destruction, with
the ^^^ calamity of the ^^^^^ kingdom. This Gaueston ^^^ banished hence by the
Kings father, and was in ^^^ times exiled but at his third ^^^rne, Guy ^^^
Watwick, took him, and in Warwick Castle ^^^ his head to be snore off; which so
enraged the ^^^ ^^^^^ing King that be vowed revenge upon all ^^^ Lords and
others who were the causers of Gauest^ death: in the mean space Robert Bruce,
King Scots, gave King Edward a mighty ouer^^^ place called Bannocksbourne, where
the English ^^^ their confederates, Hollanders, Brabanders, ^^^ landers,
Flemings, Picards, Gascognes, ^^^ man's, Poloiners, were in number; ooooo ^^^
foot; yet were discomfited with the loss of 5000 ^^^ the King in great danger
to be taken; famine foul and pestilence at once afflicted England, so that ^^^
ple did eat one another halfe-aliue, and the ^^^ scarce able to bury the deed.
The King prepares for revenge against his Lords for Gaueston, ^^^ Hugh
Dispencer, from mean estate, to be ^^^ Chamberlain. The King caused 2^ of his
^^^ suffer death diverse ^^^^^^. He makes a second ^^^ against Scotland, and
^^^^ again with great ^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^. This was the miserable ^^^ this
King, who was deposed, the Spencers ^^^ Edward reigned 19 years 7 months and 17
days.

EDWARD THE IIJ, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND,
IN Peace and War, my Stars auspicious stood,
False Fortune steadfast held her wavering wheel;
I did revenge my Fathers butchered blood,
I forced France my furious force to feel:
I warred on Scotland with triumphing Steel,
Afflicting them with slaughtering Sword and Fire:
That Kingdom then divided needs must reele:
Betwixt the Bruces and the Balliols ire:
Thus daily still my glory mounted higher,
With black Prince Edward my victorious Son,
Unto the top of honor we alpire,
By manly Princely, worthy actions done.
But all my Triumphs, fortunes, strength and force,
Age brought to death, and death turned to a Coarse.
Anno 1327, January 25, Saturday.
Edward the 3 being borne at Windsor, being 15 years old, was crowned by Walter
Reignolds, Arcbishop of Canterbury ^ in his 2 year, Edward his Father was
murthred; The Court in those days, was seldom without a vipe^, for as
Gaueston was the foreru^ner of the Spencers in ambition, rapine, pride, and
confusion. So the Spencers were the vshers of the Mortimers intollarable
aspiring conetousnesse and destruction, and which was most insupportable, there
were for all most 20 years space, the plagues and desolation of the King and
kingdoms. After great coutentions were betwixt the 2 Realms of England and
Scotland, a peace was concluded, and Dauid-le Bruce the young Prince of
Scotland, was married to Jane, King Edward the 3 sister. K. Edward married with
the Lady Philip, daughter to the Earl of Henault at York, with whom she lived
42 years. She sounded Queens College in Oxford: She was mother to that mirror
of manhood, and st^^^^ of Chiu^^ it, Edward, surnamed the black Prince. There
was a dreadful batell sought at Hallidon hill, in which were slain, 8 Earls,
80 Knights and Baroness, and 35000 Common soldiers on the Scots side, the
losses on the English side through the parciality of Writers were not set
down. About the 12 years of this Kings reign, a quarter of Wheat was sold
for 28, an Ox 6d a Geose 2d, a fat Sheep 6d, fix Pigeons and a fat Pigge
for 2d. The King claimed the Crown of France, and with 200 ships sought with
300 French ships, and flew 33000 of the French. This King first instituted the
Honorable Order of the Garter at Windsor, there being always 26 in number.)
The King sought the battle of Cressie in France, wherein was slain the King of
Bohemia, with 10 Princes, 80 Knights Baroness and 1200 Knights, with 330000
Common Soldiers. The King made 4 inroades into Scotland with great armies, and
was still victorious. Anno 1338, the arms of France were quartered with the
arms of England: the King prepared a great army against France, and on the
Sea, near Sluice in Flanders, he vanquished 400 French ships, with the loss of
30000 of their men. Then was France taken or half a year:the wars again
renewing, King Edward besieged Callice, and ^ocke it An. 1347: David, King of
Scotland was taken prisoner by one John Copland, an Esquire of the North. At
the battle of Potiers, Edward the black Prince of Wales had a glorious
victory, for there he ^ocke, King John of France, with his Son Phillip the
Dolphin prisoners. There were slain of the French. 52 Neblemen, 1700 Knights
and Esquires, and 600 Common men. 100 Ensigns and many men of note taken
prisoners, David, King of Scots was set at liberty, having bin a prisoner 11
years, paying 100000 marks st^^^ing. John K. of France, after 4 years
imprisonment, set free, paying 1000000 ^. for his ransom. Finally, never was
English King more triumphant and fortunate, in war, in the fruition of a
virtuous Queen, 7 sons and daughters, a glorious and lang reign of 50 years,
buried at Sheene, Anno Domini, 1378.

RICHARD THE IJ, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, etc.
A Sunshine Morn, precedes a showry day,
A Calm at Sea ofttimes foreruns a storm:
All is not gold that seems so glistring gay;
Foul Vice is fairest features Canker-worme,
So I that was of blood, descent and form,
The perfect image of a Royal Stock,
Vnseason'd young advice did me deforme,
Split all my hopes against despaires black rock,
My Regal name and power was made a mock,
My Subjects madly in rebellion rose,
Mischief on mischief all in troops did flock,
Opposed, deposed, exposed, enclosed in woes,
With wavering fortunes troublously I raing'd,
Slain by soul mur there, peace and rest I gained.
Anno Dom. 1377 June 21 Sunday.
Richard the second borne as Burdeux, the ^^^^^ nate Grandebilde, and son of
the two (...) and Paragons of Arms and all Noble virtues, Edward the third,
and his euer-famous son Edward the ^^^^^ Prince, was crowned at Westminster
by the (...) mond Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury, the K^^^ being but 11
years old. The glory of the English N^^^ was in a continual Eclips the most
part of this K^^g^^^ his youth with all the frailties incident vn^^^^, with
^^^^ governors both of his Kingdom and person, (...) main Ruins of the King
and almost the Realm The (...) of his fortunes after his Coronation was, that
50 French ships landed at Rye in Suffex, who burnt and spoiled the Town, and
diverse other parts of the kingdom; and ^^^ Alexander Ramsey, (a valiant
Scottish Gentlemen) with but 40 men withhim, took the Castle of Barwicke,
which the Earl of Northumberland man from him ^^^^ with a great number. The
French did so far prevail ^^^^^ they came to Granesend, and burnt and rifled
it: T^^^ Comment arose in rebellion in diverse places, as Kent, ^^^^ sex,
Surrie, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, the K^^^^ men (being 50000) came to
London, where the ^^^^ cammitted many outrages, under the cemman^^ of ^^^^^
solent rebels, Wat Tyler, and Jack Sraw, who ^^^^^ mated to that mischief by
one John Ball: an^^^^^^ priest) but Tyler was killed by the famous Sir William
Walworth Lord Mayor of London, the rebele dispe^^^^, Jack Staw and Ball the
Priest extented, the Com^^^^ pardoned, and all at peace for a short time: These
Bascalls had beheaded Sinon Tibald Archbishop of Canterbury^^ and Sir Robert
Hales Lord Treasurer of England ^^^ burnt and spoylea the Sahoy, the like they
had ^^^ Lanibeth, destroying all the Rowles and Record of ^^^^^ Chancerie. John
of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, the King uncle, was accused for Treason by a
Carmilite Friar ^^^^ the Friar was cruelly murdered and the Duke (suspici^^^^
cleared. Barwick was won again by the Scots, ^^^^ again recovered by the
Earl of Northumberland. The French prepare a great Navy and Army, purpa ^^^^
invade England; King Richard raises a ^^^^^ intending to conquer Scotland, all
which desig^^^^^ neither good or profitable events. 1386 mischief and ^^ serie
(having sat long abroad) began to batch, the ^^^^^ insulting on the one side,
and the people rebellious ^^^ other, did Bandy the regal power in to hazard.
The Scott enter England under the command of the valiant Sir William Dowglasse,
and are met and ^^^^ tred by the Right Noble Lord, Henry Hotspurre: Dowglasle
was stain, and Hotspur taking Ireland: rebel'd the King went thither in
person, and lest England, the whilst he bring forced to surrender himself,
but Crow^^^ and kingdom to his kinsman. Henry Bullingbrooke, Son to John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, 1400.

HENRY THE IV, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, etc.
FRom right (wrong-doing) Richard I did wrest
His Crown mis-guided, but on me mis-plac'd:
Uncivil Civil wars my Realm molest,
And English men did England spoil and wast.
The Sire, the Son, the Son the Father chased,
Undutiful, unkind, unnatural,
Both York and Lancaster were raised and rac'd,
As Conquest did to either Faction fall.
But still I gripped the Scepter and the Ball,
And what by wrong I won, by might I wore:
For Prince of Wales I did my Son install,
But as my Martial Fame grew more and more,
By fatal Fate my vital thread was cut:
And all my Greatness in a grave was put.
Anno Dom. 1399, September 19, Monday.
Crowns misplaced on unrightful heads, are commonly lined with perdurable
cares and vexation, as appeared in the lines and reigns of Rusus, Henry the
first, Stehpen, John; and now this King Henry the fourth, who (though he were
minion of Fortune, the Darling of the peolpe, and every way a complete Noble
Prince; yet was his usurpation still attended with dangerous molestations; he
was crowned at Westminster by Thomas Arundell Arbhishop of Canterbury; he was
scarce warm in his seat, before the Dukes of Exeter, Aumerie and Surry, with
the Earls of Gloucester and Salisbury conspired to kill him, and to raise King
Richard again; but their plot was discovered and satisfied with the loss of
there heads. shortly after, king Richard the 2 was starued to death some say
murdered) at Pomfret castle. in short time after the Princes of English poets,
Ieffry Chaucer and John Cower dyed; all those Noble men, who either fouored
king Richard, or were raised by him, were degraded, disinherited, or out of
King or courrtly favor. The French in Aquitaine, intend rebellion against K.
Henry, but are pacified by Tho: Percy, Earl of Worcester. The Welsh rebel
(under the command of their captine, Own Glendowre, and the king went thither
in person, and with loss and danger quieted them, An. 1403 the terrible battle
of Shrewsbury was fought betwixt the King and the Earl of Worcester, the Earl
Dowglasse, the Lord Henry Percy (alias) Hotspur, and others, where after a
bloody trial, Percy was slain, buried, taken up again and quartered: the
Earl of Worcester was beheaded, the Dowglasse taken, and the King victorious.
Owen Glendowere again raises wars in Wales, and inuades the Marches of
England: and although king Richard the 2 be dead and buried, yet is he still
sained to be alive, and by counterfeit impostures, King Henry was much molested
140 ships came out of France, arrived at Milford haven, to the aid of Owen
Glendowre; the Earl of Northumberland rebelled with the Lord Bardolph, and
were both taken and beheaded. Thus was king Henry's reign, a Maiesticall
missery, a sovereignty of sorrow, and a regal power always attended with
perplexity; so that having reigned 13 years 6 months wanting 5 days, he dyed
the 20 of March 1413, and leaving 4 sons, 2 daughters, he was with all
funeral and Royal solemnity interred at Canterbury.

HENRY THE FIFTH, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND.
FRom my Iancastrian Sire successively,
I Englands glorious golden Garland gots
I tempered Justice with mild clemency,
Much blood I shed, yet bloodshed loved not,
Time my Sepulcher and my bones may not,
But Time can never end my endless fame.
Oblinion cannot my brave acts out blot,
Or make Forgetfulness forget my name.
I played all France at Tennise such a game,
With roaring Rackets, bandied Balls and Foyles:
And what I played for, still I won te same,.
Triumphantly transporting home the spoils.
But in the end grim death my life assailed,
And as I lined, I died, belon'd, bewailed.
Anno Dom. 1413. March 20, Sunday.
Henry the 5, borne at Monmouth in Wales, about 28 years old when he began to
reign, he was crowned at Westminster by the hands of Thomas Arundell
Archbishop of Canterbury: and howsoever some Writers have imputed wildness and
irregular courses so youth unto him; yet when he attained the Scepter, he
proved the mirror of Princes, and Paragon of the world (in that age:) He
banished from his Court and presence all profane and lewd companions, and
exiled from his ears, all flattring Parasites and Sicophants. In the 1 year of
his reign, he prepared a great Army against France, an^^^ Southampton (very
happily) escaped murdering by the Treason of Richard, Earl of Cambridge,
Henry, Lord Scroope, and Sir Thomas Gray Knight. Soon after, the King past
with 1500 sail into France, where he wanne the strong Tow^^^^ Hatflew, and
intending to march back with his ^^ my toward Callice, he was near a place
called Agincourt, encountrea by the whole power of France, where King Henry had
a triumphant victories in which battle were slain many of the French Nobility,
with 10000 common soldiers, and as many of them taken prisoners. The whole
English Army (at that time) being not 10000, being wasted with the flux,
famine, and other sicknesses, yet did they ^^^^^^ more prisoners then they were
themselves in number, and in all the battle lost not above 28 me^. After which
the King returned into England, and ^^^^ was met with 400 Citizens, and
magnificantly ^^^ tertained into London. King Henry attributing all his
conquests and victories to God. The E^^^^^ Sigismond came into England, and
entered leag^^^ with King Henry; the Emperors intent was to ^^^ made a peace
betwixt England, and France; but he could not accomplish it. The king passed
into I ra^^^ again, and won many Cities, Towns, C^^^^^^ strong holds: in
the end he married the Lady Katherin daughter to K. Charles of France, with
when he came into England, and having crowned ^^^^ Queen, be returned into I
rance the third ^^^ was in Paris proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown.
Finally, he sickened and dyed at Boyses^ Vincennois in France from whence his
corpse ^^ brought and buried at Westminster, I September, 1422.

HENRY THE VI, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE, LORD OF JRELAND.
GReat England Mars (my Father being dead)
I, not of years, or year; but eight months old:
The Diadem was placed upon my head,
In Royal Robes the Scepter I did hold:
But as the Almighties works are manifold,
Too high for man's conceit to comprehend:
In his eternal Register eurold
My Birth, my troublous Life and tragic End.
^ Against me the house of York their force did bend,
And Peers and People weltred in their gore:
My Crown and Kingdom they from me did rend,
Which I, my Sire, and Grandire kept and wore.
Twice was I crowned vncrown'd often blessed, often crossed,
And lastly, murdered, life and Kingdom lost.
Anno Dom. 1422, August 31, Monday.
Henry the 6 born at Windsor, (the son of Henry the 5) was but 8 months old at
the death of his father; so that by reason of his infancy, himself and
kingdom were governed by his uncles, the Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester, An.
1419 November 6, the King was crowned first at Westminster by the hands of
Henry Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury: he was again the second time crowned
at Paris, the 7 of December 1431, by the Cardinals, of York and Winchesters
and returns into England the 11 day of February following. In these times
France was in miserable perplexity, divided betwixt French and English in
continual bloody wars, for the Dolphin Charles, made wars in sundry places;
claiming the Crown; and the English won and lost towns and territories, as
fortune found or fround, till at last, by reason of the King: childhood in the
beginning of his reign, his soft, mild, and gentle inclination in his ripe
years, and his indisposition to marshall affairs (he being more sit for the
Church the^ for chinalry, for prayer the^ for prowess, a man in all his actions
more like a Saint, then to one that should weild a warlike sword or Royal
Scepter; being a most unfortunate Prince in all his worldly attempts: the Peers
(in England) bandied factions against each other: the Duke of York claimed the
Crown, the commons of Kent (under the leading of their captiain) lack Cade,
being in number 50000, came to London: the Rebels murdered the Bishop of Sali
bury, and beheaded the Lord Say at the standard in Cheap the King was taken
prisoner by the Duke of York at the bartell of Saint Albans. the French with
15000 men landed at Sandwich, spoiled the Town and fierd it stew the Mayor
with all in authority there, and likewise having burnt and pillaged many other
places in De^on^^^^shire and the West, they departed, Queen Margaret the wife
to King Henry the 6, met the Duke of York with an Army, near Wakefield, where
the victory, fell to the Queen, the Duke being slain with his son the Earl of
Rutland, and many others. Thus for the space of 60 years, the three Kings
Henry's, the 4,5, and 6, kept the Crown in the Lancastrian line: the house of
York got the sovereignty: King Henry having reigned 38 years, ^ months and 4
days he was overcome by King Edward, at a place called Mortimers Cross near
Ludlow, more of this unfortunate Prince shall be spoken in the reign of the
next King Edward.

EDWARD THE IIIJ, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, etc.
I Yorkes great heir (by fell domesticke War)
Inthroaned was, vn-King'd, and re-inthroan'd:
Subiecting quite the house of Lancaster,
Whilst woeful England ouer-burthen'd, groaned:
Old Sonlesse Sires, and Childlesse Mothers moan'd,
These bloody broils had lasted three score years,
And till the time we were in peace attoan'd,
It walked fourscore of the Royale Peers:
But age and time all earthly things out-weares,
Through terrors, horrors, mischief and debate,
By trult, by treason, by hopes, doubts and fears,
I got, I kept, I left and Lost the State.
Thus as disposing heavens do smile or frown,
So Cares or Comforts wait upon a Crown.
Edward the fourth was Earl of March, some and heir to Richard, Duke of
York, son to Richard Earl of Cambridge, s^nto Edmund of langley; ^^^ of
York, 4 sento Edward the 3, King of England. This King (Edward the fourth) Was
borne at Roane is Normandy: and in the year 1461, the 29 of June, hee^^
crowned at Westminister, by the hands of Thomas Bourgchier, Arcbishop of
Canterbury. Henry the fixed, having a great power in the Nor^^, was ^^^ and
encountered by King Edward near Towton on Palmssunday, where bet^^^xt the two
Kings was fought a^^^^ battle which continued ten houers, in which cruel
conflict, the English ground drank the sangkired ^^^^ of ^^^ 37000 of her
natural englishmen: after, ^^^^ ^^^ ^^^ as Hexam by the Lord Montracute, King
Henry was again put to fight with great less be was afterward^^^ disquid'd and
^^^^^isoned ^^ the Tower of London. Edward new supposed all was well, his mind
was on m^^ruj^, wherefore he sent Richard Neuill, (The great King ^^ ker Ex^le
of Warwich) into France, so treat forth Lady Bona (sister to the French Queen)
but with mean space King Edward prou^ed himself man home, and was married to
the Lady Elizabeth Gray ^^^ match was so deslatefull to Warwick that he ^^^^^^
falls aff from King Edward; after which, he took the King Prisoner, but he
escaping again, fled beyend the Saw. The Earl of Warwick took King Henry out
of the T^^nt, and caused him again to be crowned: King Edward landed agains in
England at Bornet s^ld (tra(...) London) his Army was met by the Earls of
Warwick and Oxford,(King Henry being them again ^^^ ^^^^ s^^er) where was
fought a fierce battle, where Edward was Vector: the Earl of Warwick with
^^^^ N^^^^ men were slaint^ and comment on eath sides 10000 King Henry was
again committed to the Tonre: Edward Prince of Wales, the son of Henry the
first was^^^ the battle of Tewxbury, and murdered by Richard, ^^^ of Gloecether:
Soon after the bastard Lord ^^^ vaised an Army of 17000 men against King Edward
but the bastard was soons suppressed and the most ^^^^^ King Edward the fixed
freed from his long^^^ being murdered by the bloody hands of Richard, ^^^ of
Gloucester. The King b^^ing (through must ^^^) ^^^ peacs, ^^^ himself ^^^ ^^^
Jane Shore, (his Combine ^^^ pleasures were mixed with grief for his ^^^
George, Duke of Clarence, who was ^^^ of Malmsey the Tower of London 1475. ^^^
of Scotland, threatened was against England; Richard, Duke of Gloucester was some
against the Scots, ^^^ ^^^ king Edward ^^^, haning ^^^ April 9, 1483, ^^^ at
Windsor

EDWARD THE V, KING OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND
IF birth, if beauty, innocence and youth,
Could make a Tyrant feel one spark of grace,
My crooked Uncle had been moved to ruth,
Beholding of my pitty-pleading face.
But what auailes to spring from roy all Race?
What suerty is in beauty, strength, or wit?
What is command, might, eminence and place,
When Treason lurkes where Majesty does sit?
My hapless self had true false proof of it:
Nipt in my bud, and blasted in my bloome:
Depr^'d of life by murder, most unfit
And for three Kingdoms could not have one tomb:
Thus Treason all my glory ouer-topt,
And ^^^ the Fruit could spring, the Tree was lop't.
Edward the fifth, borne in the Sanctuary at Westminster, Son of King Edward
the fourth, began his short reign over the Real^^^ of England, at the age of
^3 years; but ^^y the cunning dealing of Richard, 'Duke of Gloucester (his
unnatural Uncle.) he was never crowned. ^^^ young King, with his younger
brother Richard Duke of York, was at London with his mother, and in the
guidance of his Uncle by the mothers side, named Sir Anthony Wooduill Lord
Rivers; but by the ^^^ and crafty dealing of the Duke of Glouster, all the
Queen kindred were removed from the King, and the Lord, Rivers sent from
Northampton to Pomfret with others, whence they were imprisoned and beheaded.
The protector (Richard) having the King in his keeping and power, his only
^yn^^ was next, how to get into his hands ^^^ person of Richard Duke of York
(the Kings brother) whom the Queen their mother kept close in the Sanctuary
at Westminster, which Prince was gotten from the said Sanctuary by the ^^ till
plots and perswation of the Lord protector, and the Duke of Buckingham. The
poor innocent Lambs being as it were put into the greedy Jaws of the Wolf
(their ravenous Uncle) for safeguard and protection, and at the first approach
of Richard, Duke of York, into his Uncles presence, he was entertained in all
seeming reverence with a Judas kiss by his Uncle. The Duke of Buckingham was
promised (by the Protector) for his trusty services to him, in helo^^^ him (to
the person of this Prince, and for his future services to aid him in his
vnlawsfull attaining the Crown of England) that Gloucesters Son should be
married to Buckinghams daughter, and netball, that Buckingham should have the
Earldom of Hertford, with many other golden promises, which were never
performed, but with the taking of Buckinghams head, (at sha^^^^^ after
specified) Now mischief began to (...); the Queen was accused of sorcery by
the Potector; Hastings Lord Chamberlain was beheaded suddenly without either
crime or ^^^ in the Tower. Poor Jane Shore, was also taken and carried to the
Tower, her goods to the vallue of 3000 man kes were seazedon, and confiscate to
the use of the Protector. She was a woman having many good parts, and
howsoever, by the command of King Edward the fourth, and her own fra^^^, she
fell into ^^^ with the King, ^^^ she was ever inclined and did much good, and
cannot be taxed in Histories for doing any man hurt. The King and his brother
were both standred with bastard Duke of Gloucester was proclaimed King, which
^^^ much modelly he refused, though he meant with all his ^^^^^ to take it,
Anno 1483.

RICHARD THE IIJ, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND, etc.
AMbition's like unto quenchlesse thirst:
Ambition Angels threw from Heaven to Hell,
Ambition (that infernal Hag) accursed,
Ambitiously made me aspire, rebel:
Ambition, that damned Necromanticke Spell,
Made me clime proud, with shame to tumble down.
By bloody murder I did all expel,
Whose right, or might, debard me from the Crown.
My smiles, my gifts, my favors, or my frown,
Were feigned, corrupt, vile flattry, death and spite,
By cruel Tyranny I gat renown,
Till Heaven just Judge me justly did require.
By blood I won, by blood I lost the throne.
Detested lived;died; loved, bewailed of none.
Anno 1483, June 22.
Richard Duke of Gloucester, the 3 some of Richard Duke of York, the 3 Duke of
Gloucester, and third of that name King of England, Is tyranny and usurpation,
griped the Scepter of the kingdom; after he he had proclaimed his Nephews
Bastardy, his brother (the deceased) King Edward the fourths scandal, and
accused his own mother of adultry, making his way to the Regality, by the
murder of his two innocent Nephews: which murder was committed by the bands
of Sir James Tirrell Knight, and one Miles Forest, and John Dighton, which
villains murdered then in their bed, and buried them beneath a pair of
stairs under an heap of stones, in the Town, and in that ledging which (in
memory of that blanke deed) is first named the bloody Tower; their bodies were
taken:^ and again buried obscurely, no man knoweswhere. By these means having
gotten the Goal, God ^^^^red his reign to be his perpetual sormens, ^^^^^
without, and continual horrory within; the murderers had part of their
payment in this world for Miles Fo^rest ^otted above ground piece meal in St
Martins; Str James Tirrell was executed for treason on the Towre-hill; Dighton
lived a hatted miscreant both of God and man: the Duke of Buckingham (though
innocent of dthe murder) yet he suppress the young Princes, and raised the
Tyrant, and his end was the loss of his head at Salisbury. Shortly after, the
Divine justice began to fall heavy upon King Richard, many of the Nobility and
Gentry for sooke him, and fled into Britain in France to Henry, Earl of
Richmond, who was the only heir to the English crown (of the Line of the
house of Lancaster.) king Richard, in the dangers would have procured a most
wicked safety by marr^ing the Lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter is his deceased
brother, King Edward the fourth, the only inheritix of the house of York, and
lawful heir to the Crown; but Gods providence and the Ladies virtue with
stood that incestuous match; shortly after Henry of Richmond arrived at Milford
haven in Wales, where his Army increasing, met Richard at Redmere field, near
Posworth, seven miles from Leicester, where Richard vahautly fighting was
slain, 1485, August 23, and was buried at Leycester.

HENRY THE VIJ, KING OF ENGLAND And FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND.
^Was the man (by Gods high grace assigned)
^That for this restless Kingdom purchased rest:
^ork and Lancaster in one combined,
^^ sundred had each other long oppressed,
^^ strength and policy The Almighty blessed.
^^ good success from first unto the last:
^^ high ^houab turned to the best,
^ orld of perils which my youth over past.
^^ white and red Rose I conjoined fast,
^sacred Marriages conjugal band:
^^ytors tamed, and treason stood aghast
^^ strong guarded by my Makers hand.
^nglory and magnificence I reigned,
And, fame, love, and a tomb was all I gained.
Anno Dom. 1485, August 22, Monday.
Henry (of that name the seventh) King of England, was Earl of Richmond, borne
in Pembroke-Castle in Wales, son of Edmund of Hadham Earl of Richmond, Son
of Owen Theodore, and Queen Katherin, the French King daughter, late wife to
King Henry the sist; was crowned at Westminster, the 30 day of October by the
bands of Thomas, Bourghchier Archbishop of Conterbury; this Prince was wise,
valsant, and fortunate. Through many perals and hazards he had past his life,
and attained the Royalty of Englands throne, and with much prudence and
mu^^^ble fortitude be governed this Land, Maugre many dangerous attempts and
treacherom consp^acses plott^^ against hun; and his designs had such
ausptcsous events, thus still he was victori^^^ over surre^gne, cuall, and
(...) troubles. One Lambest Simnei (a Bakers son) claimed the crowns,
countersetting in^^^else to be Edward, Earl of Warwick, son of George Duke
of Clarence. Some write that. ^^e assumed to be one of king Edward, the
fourthes son, which was murdered in the Toure: (howsoever) Hambert gat into
Ireland, and in Christ Church: in Dublin, was crowned King of England and
Ireland; he with an Army landed at Fowdrey in Lancashire, but King Henry met
him, and at the battle of Stoke, he took him prisoner, pardoned him his life,
and gave him a turnspits place in his kitchen, and after maue him one of his
saulkners. Lambert was net long suppressed, but another of his stamp supphes his
room of a rebellious imposture; Peter, or Perkin Warbecke, (the son of a
Jew) borne in Torney, claimed the Crown, by the counterfest style of Richard,
Second son to King Edward the fourth, Perkin gat into England, and after into
Scotland, where ^^^ prevailed, that he was married to the Lady Katherin Gordon,
(the Earl of Huntleys daughters) K. James, the fourths kinsnman; the rebels in
Kent were oven thwone, and their Captante the Lord Audley taken and beheaded.
Perkin came out of Scotland, and moves the ^^^ men to ayae him. King Henry net,
overcame and ^^^, and pardon' him another counterfest, a shoemakers son, named
Ralph Milford, ^^^ the Crown, and purchast'd a balter. Perkin Warback Sica
from the King, and again was taken and executed as Tyburnc. King Henry gave
his daughter the Lady Margaret in ^^^ to James ^^e fourth King of Scotland;
Arthur (Prince of Wales) the eldest Son of Henry Married with the Lady
Katherin, daughter to the King of Spain; but the Prince dyed ^^^ after. The
King gathered a ^^^ mass of money, to the general grieuance of the subjects;
he had three font, Arthur Henry, and Edmund, and four daughters, Margaret,
Elizabeth, Mary, and Katherin: reigned 23 years 8 months, dyed at Richmond,
buried at Westminster in the most ^^^ Chapel of his own building, 1508.

HENRY THE VIIJ, KING OF ENGLAND, And FRANCE, LORD OF IRELAND
TO both the Royal Houses I was Heir;
I made but one, of long contending, twain:
This realm divided drooping in despair,
I did rebind in my auspicious Reign.
I banished Romish Usurpation vain.
In France I Bullen, Turwin, Turney Wan:
The Style of Faiths Defender I did gain.
Six wives I had, three An's, two Kates, one lane,
In my expenses Royal, beyond measure,
Striving in Noble Actions to exceed;
Accounting Honor as my greatest Treasure:
Yet various fancies did my frailty feed,
I made and marred, I did, and I undid,
Till all my Greatness in Grave was hid.
Anno Dom. 1509, April 22, Sunday.
Henry the eight, with his beautcous queen (^^^dy Catherin) who had bin before
the wife of his ^^^ borhter, Prince Arthur, on Sunday the 25 of June were both
crowned King and Queen of England ^^^ minster, by the bvnds of William Warham,
^^^ bishop of Canterbury: He enter France wish as and was the strong Towns of
Terwin and Tumay^ valiant King, lames the sourth of scotland, ^^^ land with a
great Host, and was met and sought ^^^ by the Noble Lord, Thomas Howard,
Earle^^^ and at a place called Flodden in Northumber king lames vailiantly
fighting, was ^^^ Bishops, 2 Abbots, 12 Earls, 17 Lords and ^ common Soldiers:
Thomas Wolsey (from mea^^) some say the son of a Butcher in Ipswich, by ^
mounted to the tope Fortunes wheel ^^^ to be a scholem after next a servant to
the Treas^ Callis, 3 to be one of the Kings chaplainer, 4 the ^^ Almoner, 5 he
was made Deane of Linco^^e, 6 ^^^ chosen for privy Counselor, 7 be was ^^^
shop of Tornay. 8 after that, Archbishops of York, ^^ ated Cardinal, 10 ne
was Lord Chancellor, 11 ^^^ all these boneurs at once, with the Bishopric of
^^^ ster, Worcester, Bathe, Heresord, ^^^ Saint Albans: Lastly, all these ^^^
which in many years he attained, were in a^^^ the kings displeasure, and his
own: ^^^ lost. The King had the Title of Defender of the ^^^ from Rome: never
was any King of England ^^^ nificent, he was visited three times by the ^^^
and one of them (Maximillian) served ^^^ ^^^ wars in France: the other,
Charles, ^^^ England; so likewise did the King of Denmarke^ Queen who all were
most Royalty entertained: King Henry, wa^^he first of the English King ^^tuled
^^^ himself, King of Ireland. In the ^^^ City of Rome was taken by the
French, Clement with 23 cardinak^ imprisoned ^ months: King Henry and thepope
fell at^^^ that the King caused^ all ^^^^ obedience to ^^ den, and in the
tempest of histurie seized ^^^^ power in These his Dominiens (^^^^) to him ^^^
Land having too long borne the ^^ of Antichristian Tyramny: for the which ^^^
King caused to be suppressed in England and 283 ^^^ 215 Pr^ries, 108 ^^^ ^^^
84 colleages, 9 cells, and 103 Hospitals Henry reigned 37 years, 9 months and
^^^ 28 of January 1546, buried at Windsor.

EDWARD THE VI KING OF ENGLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND, Desender of the Faith, etc.
^^^ Seemed in wisdom aged in my youth,
^^^ A Princly pattern, I reformed the time:
^^^ With zeal and courage I maintained Gods truth,
^^d Christian faith against Antichristian crime.
^^^ Father did begin; l^in my prime,
^^h Baal and Beltall from this Kingdom drove,
With concords true harmonious heavenly chime,
^^^'d be said and sung Gods truth and love.
^^^ virtue unto virtue still I strove,
^^^'d beloved both of God and men:
^^y soul unto her Maker soared above,
^^^y earthly part returned to earth again.
Thus Death, my fair proceedings did prevent,
And Peers and People did my loffe lament.
Anno Dom. 1546, January 28, Thursday:
Edward the 6, borne at Hampton Court, the only son and Heir to King Henry the
8, at 9 years of age began his reign over this kingdom: he was crowned the
27 day of February 1547 at Westminster, by the hands of Thomas Cranmer
Arcbishop of Canterbury: his uncle by the mother side, Edward Earl of
Hestford, and Duke of Somerset, was gouernomy of his person and kingdom. This
King was a second losias, inreforming many errors on the Church; he was
contracted to the Lady Mary (this young Queen of Scotland) daughter and sole
beyre to King James the fi^^t, mother to our late King James deceased, and
Grandmother to our gracious Someraigne King Charles, now reigning: but some ^^^
spirits brake of the match, which caused much blood shed: for the Duke of
Somerset entered Scotland with a strong Army; whom the Scottish Nobit^^^ with
their powers met at a place near Musklebrough, where was sought a fierce and
sharp battle, where many men at ^^^ on both sides; but in the end, the
victory tell to be English: us the mean space, the young Queen was conveyed
into France, where afterward she ^^^ the Dolphin. Rebellion in Cornwall,
commotion in: Norfolk descention in many places: and lastly, in the Northren
parts of England; some striu^ng to bold up the rotten fragments of Romish
Religion; some seeking lawless liberty to have all things in command, to lay
open all enclosures, so that much mischief was done, and at last ended with
executions of the slaughter, and executions of many of the Rebels, in diverse
places of this Las^^i. Malice and mischief had no sooner done amongst the
Commons, but they thrust themselves amongst the Nobilsty. The Lord Protector
procured or tolerated his brother, the Lord Thomas Seimer, to be beheaded; and
shortly after himself followed the same way, whose death was much bewailed by
the poor Commons: and the King never ha^ he heath or joy after the deaths of
both his Uncles. This hopeful France was endued with wisdom, far about his
years, he was tearned and a lover of learning, he was exceedingly delighted in
reading the Scriptures: he was just, merestull, ^^^ing, and beloved: he ended
his late at Greenwich fifth day of July, Anno 1552, in the fix entbyeere at his
age. when he had reigned six years, nine months, eight days, He was buried
at westminster.

MARY, QVEENE OF ENGLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND, Desender of the Faith, etc.
NO sooner I possessed the Royal Throne,
But true Religion straight was dispossessed:
Bad Council caused Rome, Spain and I, as one,
To persecute, to martyr, and molest
All that the unstained truth of God professed:
All such as dared oppugn the powerful Pope,
With grievous tortures were oppressed and pressed,
With Axes, Pire, and Faggot, and the Rope.
Scarce any Land beneath the Heavenly Cope,
Afflicted was, as I caused this to be:
And when my Fortunes were in highest hope,
Death at the five years end arrested me.
No Bale would serve, I could command no aid,
But I in prison in my grave was laid.
Anno. Dom. 1553, July 6, Thursday.
Queen Mary was borne at Creenwich, elder daughter to King Henry the eight,
and sister and ^^^ to King Edward the sixth. She was crowned at Westminster the
first of October, 1553, by the hands of Stephen Gardner, Bishop of Winchester.
King Edward being dead, his death was concealed two days, by reason of the
fear of Queen Mary's alteration of the religion which King Edward had
established, for which cause the Lady Jane was by many of the Lords and the
Londoners proclaimed Queen. This Lady Jane was eldest daughter to Henry Duke
of Suffolk; she was then married to the Lord Guiford Dudlty fourth son to
John, Duke of, Northumberland; her mother was the Lady Francis, the daughter of
Mary the French Queen. and the younger sister of King Henry the 8. Queen Mary
( bearing that Jane was proclaimed Queen) begain to rowse, and raised an Army,
and was first proclaimed in the City of Norwich, her powers still increasing,
she made toward London, where all supplies forsocke the Lady Jane; so that she
with her husband and father, and the Lord Thomas Gray, with others, were
beheaded. The Queen ceases all the protestant Bishops and Clergy to be
degraded suspended, or imprisoned. She raised again the Mase, and with it
mass of misery to this kingdom. King Philip of Spain was contracted to
Queen Mary, but Sir Thomas Wiat with an Army opposed it, and after much
bickering was taken and executed on the Towre^^^: The Lady Elizabeth ( the
Queens sister) was wrong^^ly imprisoned, and in danger to be put to death:
Philip King of Spain was married to Queen Mary with^^ Royal solemnity at
Winchester the 25 of July, Anno 1454. This woeful Land was in those days a
very Achetdima, or field of blood, the Popes M^reban^s ^^^ Church and
Commonwealth with holy Water, Pax, Censors, Oil, Spittle Cream, Altars,
Pictures, Images ^ Crosses, Crucifixes, Beads, Lights, Tapers, Cand^^^ the
Breaden god: these Romish wars did cost the li^es near 6000 people that
refused them, some hanged, ^^^ burn, and diverse others suffering other deaths
and ^^ties. K. Philip and Queen Mary send defiance into France Philip went
thither in person, and besieged the strong ^^^ of St. Quintins and man it; but
shortly after, the English men lost Callice, which had been the King of
English Town 21 years. Wherefore Queen Mary took ^^^ grief, that she^
never enjoyed her life-long after; ^^^ Callice was lost the 17 of January, and
the Queen ^^^ at Saint James house the 7 of November following, ^^^ 1558, when
she had reigned 5 years, 4 moneth^ ^^^ days: she lies buried as Westminster.

ELIZABETH, QVEENE OF ENGLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith, etc.
THe griefs, the fears, the terrors and the toiles,
The sleights, tricks snares, that for my life were laid
^pes prisons, poisons, pistois, bloody broils,
^^ these incompast me (poor harmless Maid)
^^ I still trusting in my Makers aid,
Was still defended by his power divine:
^y glory and my greatness was displayed
^^ far as Sun and Moon did ever shine.
Gods mingled Service I did re-refine,
From Romish rubbish, and from humane dross.
^ yearly made the pride of Spain decline:
^^^ and all Belgia I saved from loss:
I was Arts pattern, to Arms I was a Patron;
I lived and dyed a Queen, a Maid, a Matron.
Anno Dom. 1558, November 17, Thursday.
Lady Elizabeth, borne at Greenwich, second daughter to King Henry the eight,
sister and heir to the late Queen Mary, after she had (by Gods gracious
prouience past through many afflictions, as scandals, calumnations, sundry
imprisonns ^^^, and hazard of her life; she was at the age of 25 years and od
days, crowned Queen of England, France and Ireland, at Westminster, by the
hand of Owen Oglethorpe Bishop of Carlielc, the 13 of January. The first good
work of hers (after her coronation) was to reform and restore and Service of
God to the Primitive sincerity, and prayer: and preaching to be used in the
English tongue: she caused all the bables of Babek, and all the Romish rubbish
to be cast out of the Church, she dismissed those Bishops and others of the
Clergy as would not be reformed. She caused all base momes and coyneste to be
suppressed, and to be no vallue, and in their stead she ordained that no coin
but Gold and Silver shou^ pass for current in her Dominions. The French King
Henry at a ^l^ng was unfortunately slain by a Lord named Mountgomery, ^^inter
of the l^^^nce running into his eye, An. 1559. Sorne after the French molest
Scotland, but by Queen Elizabeth's ^yde they were expulsed. The Noble Earl of
Arraw in Scotland, and Ericus King of Sweaden were suuer^^ to marry ^^^ the
Queen, which her Majesty with all princely modesty refused. She was after sued
to by Henry Duke of Aniou, brother to the French King Charles the 9. Anno 1514.
The bloody massaker was in France, where in the City of Paris, (only) 10000
Protestarts were m^n thered by the Pepists; The Irish fell to rebellian under
the Earl of Tirone, which rebellion put England to much cost and trouble.
Henry, Lord Darneley, King of Scots most inhumanely murdered, Anno 1568, and his
Queen. (Mary) assaulted by the oppression of her rebellicus Subjects came into
England, and was royally welcomed. One Thomas Appletree discharging his ^^ce
the Queen was in her Barge upon the Thames, the bullet ran through both the
Arms of one of her Watermen; but the Queen understanding that the shot was by
casualtie, pardoned the offender. Her mercy, justice, temperance, fortitude,
magnanimity, prudence, learning, and incomparable wisdom would each of them
fill a volume; So that neither ^^^ unableness of me the writer, nor the
briefnesse which I am ^^^ to in thus abstract, can no ways touch the ^em of
her virtues: wherefore I refer the reader to the great volumes of Hollinsheds
story, the Reverend learned Cambden, Master speed, and others, who have written
more largely of her (though all of them are much short of her vnimmitable
merits) she ayed the 24 of March 1602 aged 69 y^eeres, 6 months and 7 days,
she reigned 44 years, ^4 months and 7 days. On the 28 of April after, she
was buried at Westminster.

JAMES, Of that Name THE FIRST, And I. Monarch of the whole Island of GREAT
BRITAIN etc.
WEre all the flattery of the world in me,
Great King of hearts and Arts, great Britains King
Yet all that flattery could not flatter thee:
Or add to thy renown the smallest thing.
My Muse (with truth and freedom) dares to sing,
Thou were a Monarch loved of God and Men.
Two famous Kingdoms thou to one did bring,
And gave lost Britains name her name again.
Thou cansedst Doctors with their learned pen,
The sacred Bible newly to translate.
Thy wisdom found the damned powdered Den,
That hell had hatched to overthrow thy state.
And all the world thv Motto must allow,
The peace makers are blast; and so art thou.
Anno Dom. 1602, March 24, Thursday,
James the first of that name, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland
(the first King that was ^^^ in England since the Norman conquest) at the age
36 years, 9 monethe, and 5 days, he was crowned Westminster (with his wife
Queen Anne) by the ^^^ of John Whitguist, Archbishop of Canterbury. The^^ was
a conspiracy to surprise the King and insorce him to grant a tolleration of
Religion, but the plot was discoue^^ and the offenders were some executed, and
some otherwise (by the King elemency) banished, and imprisoned with good
competency of means allowed them. This king was a King of Peace, and with all
victorious; for he did ^^^ then his predecesser King Henry the 7th, (who joined
^^ Roses of Lancaster and York.) But King James ^^^ happily) joined kingdoms,
uniting England and Scotland into one glorious Monarchy, by the name and ^^^
Great Britain. Anno 1605, November 5, the ^^^ de-plot of perdition was; but by
the mercy of the Almighty ^^ (a mis-taken delivery of a Letter, and the deep
wisdom of the King), the horrid Treason was ^^^ prevented, and the Traitors
confounded in their ^^^ ^^^ked devices. King James was so crowned, and ^^^ that
Germany, Polland, Sweaueland, Russia, France, Spain, Holland, Zealand, the
Archduke of Austria the estate and S^^gmory of Venice: The great Duke of
Florence, all these Princes and Potentates did ^^^ Ambassadors into England, to
hold Amity and ^^^ with King James. Amongst Kings he was the ^^^ mirror of
Learning, the Pattern and Patron of piety ^^ pity, such a sweet and well
composed mixture of Justice and mercy was inuated in his Royal breast: that ^^^
^^^ truth did meet, kiss and combine together, all the ^^^ his most auspicious
reign: like a second Sallomon government was blessed with peace and plenty; so
that be ^^^ justly be styled (under God) The Peacemaker of ^^^ Christendom,
and the loving father and preserver of ^^^ own people, Realms and Dominions:
his life was generally beloved, and his death as much lamented which was ^^^ of
March, being Sunday, there being but 2 days differ^^^ or ods betwixt the
account of the beginning and ending of his reign; for he began the 24 of March
1602, ^^^ the 27 of March 1625. Two Tuesdaies were ^^nate to him: for on a
Tuesday the 5 of August 1602,^^ escaped a dangerous conspiracy of the Earl
Cowries, and on Tuesday the 5 of November, 1605, he (wis^h of that could be
called his) was preferred from that Great master piece of Satan, the Powder
Treason, and as ^^ Sat^rday ^^^ the 8 of May, 1603, he was received within joy
^^^ London, so on Saturday the 8 of May 1625, ^^^ with grise buried at
Westminster.

CHARLES Of that Name THE FIRST, And II. Monarch of the whole Island of GREAT
BRITAIN. KING OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND, Gods immediate
VICEGERENT., Supreme HEAD, etc.
^^^^strious Offspring of most glorious Stems,
Our happy hope, our Royal CHARLES the great,
^^^ Heir to four Rich Diadems,
With gifts of Grace, and Learning high ^epleat.
^^^ thee The Almighty's aid I do entreat,
^^^ guide and prosper thy proceedings still,
^^^^^ long thou may survive a Prince complete,
^^^ guard the good and to subvert the ill.
^^^ when thy ^^^ determined boundless will)
Thy mortal part shall made immortal be,
^^^^ let thy living Fame the world full fill,
^^^ bles^ed famous memory of thee,
And all true Britains pray to God above,
To match thy life and fortune with their love.
STEWART^ CHARLES MARIE Anagramma. Christ Arm us E^^ AT AL,
Though fe^^ds and men, to ^^^^ should endeuer, (Against their force) AT AL
CHRIST ARM US EVER

Anno. Dom. 1625-March 27. Sunday.
The ^^ sall ^^^ ^^^ ^^^ ^^^^ kingdoms having ^^^ ^^^ ^^^ ^^^ ^^^ ^^^ full
James ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ eternal; Our Royal Charles the ^^^
heir of his blessed Fathers Crown and virtues, ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^
^^^ Westminster by the hands of the Right Reue^^nd fahter in God, ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^
John Williams, ^^^ new present Lord Bishop of Lincoln and Deane of
Westminister. He is Charles (the first of that name) and second Monarch of
great Britain, ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^ Vicegerent, and God is his ^^^^ Seueraigne,
he is Defender of the True, ^^^^ Apotlolicasll and Christian I ^^^^; and that
faith is his shield against all his bedily and ghostly enemies; in the first
year of his reign, he married with the illustrious and virtuous Princess
Henneretta Maria, daughter to that admired Mirrer and Mars of martiallilis of
Henry the 4th the French King (last of that name) vopn the 22 day of June 1625,
she safely arrived ^^ ^^^^ in Kent, where the King stayed till ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^
^^^^ and to both their joys, and the ^^^^ of this kingdom he enjoyed, and
enioyes her. This Noble P^^^ce was borne the 19th of November, Ano 1602 he was
second and youngest Son to king James the ^^^ of Scotland, and first of that
name of England. (Our last ^^^ Sovereign) In the year 1623 ^^^ into Spain
privately and (by Gods gracious assistance) came back safely from thence the
26 or October, in the some year, whose safe return all true hearted Britains
did and do esteem ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^ and happy
blessing his elemency, ^^^^ is manifest, his Royal end princely en^^^ are
ample, ^^^ his same and Magnificenceis ^^^^ sall; The graces and cardinal
virtues have ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ taken ^^^ their habitatiens in his Heroic and
Mag^^^^^^ breast. ^^^ may he with his gracious Queen reign our these his
Dominions, to the glo^^ ^^^ of God, and the good of this famous Island, with the
rest of his Territories, and to the joy and comfort of his ^^^ Amen,

ALIVING SADNESS INDVTY CONSECRATED TO THE Immortal memory of our late Deceased
all-beloued Sovereign LORD the Peerless Paragon of Princes, JAMES, King of
great Britain, France and Ireland; who departed this Life at his Manor of
Theobalds, on Sunday the 27. of March 1625.
TO THE MOST HIGH AND PVISSENT Prince CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, the first of
that name, and second Monarch of the whole Island of Great BRITAIN. HIS
VNDOVBTED ROYALTIES BEING UNITED UNDER one and the same his most glorious
Crown, the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland; Gods Immediate
Vicegerent; Supreme head of all Persons, and Defender of the true, ancient
Christian Faith, in these his Empires and Dominions.
MOst Mighty Monarch of this mourning Land,
Upon the knees of my submissiue mind:
I beg acceptance at your Royal hand,
That my lamenting Muse may favor find.
My Gracious Master was so good so kind,
So just, so much beloved near and sarre:
Which generally did Love, and Duiy bind
From all, and from me in particular.
But as your Majesty undoubted are,
The Heir unto his Virtues and his Crown:
I pray, that whether Heaven send Peace or War,
You likewise may inherit his Renown.
And as Death struck his Earthly Glory down,
Left you in Majesty, and mourning Chief:
Yet through the World apparently it is known,
Your Sorrow is an universal Grief.
Let this recomfort then your Princely heart,
That in this Duty all men bears a part.
Your Majesty's most humble and obedient Subject and Servant: JOHN TAILOR.

A Funeral Elegy upon King JAMES.
YOu gushing Torrents of my Tearedrown'd eyes,
Sad Partners of my hearts Calamities,
Tempestuous sighs, like winds in prison pent,
(Which wanting vent) my grieved soul has rent,
Deep wounding groans (companions of unrest)
Throngs from the bottom of my care-craz'd breast,
You three, continual fellows of my mones,
(My brinish tears, sad sighs and pondrous groans)
^^ do entreat you never to depart,
But be the true assistants of my heart,
In this great at sorrow (that my trembling Quill
Describes) which does our La^d with moarning fill,
Ah Death I could naught thy hunger satisfy,
But thou must glut thy self with Majesty?
Could nothing thy insatiate thirst restrain,
But Royal blood of our Dread Sovereign?
In this, thy spite exceeds beyond all bounds,
And at one blow, 3. kingdoms fildst with wounds,
When thou that fatal deadly stroke did strike,
Tha^ ( Death) thou playd'st the tyrant- Catholic.
Our griefs are Universal sall, and the Sum
Cast up, the blow does wound all Christendom.
But wherefore, Death, do I on thee exclaim?
Thou came in the Eternal Kings great name,
For as no mortal power can thee prevent,
So thou do never come, but thou art sent.
And now thou came upon unwelcome wings,
To our best King, from the blessed King of Kings,
To summon him to change his earthly throne,
For an Immortal, and a Heanenly one.
(When men unthankful for a good received,
^Ti^ least that of that good they be bereaved)
His government both God and men did please,
Except such spirits, as might complain of Ease,
Repining Passions wearied with much Rest,
The want to be molesled, might molest.
Such men think peace a torment, and no trouble
^^ worse then trouble, though it should come double.
^^^ speak of such as with our peace were cloyd,
Though w^^ I think might well have bin employed.
True Britains wish just wars to entertain,
(I mean no aid for Spinola or Spain)
But time and troubles would not suffer it,
Nor Gods appointment would the same permit.
He is inserutable in all his ways,
And at his pleasure humbles and will raise,
For patience is a virtue he regards,
And in the end with victory rewards.
^^t whither has my mournful Muse digrest?
From my beloved Sovereign Lord decast:
Who was to us, and we to him, even thus,
Too bad for him, and he, too good tor us.
For good men in their deaths, it is understood,
They leave the bad, and go unto the good.
This was the cause, why God did take from hence,
This most Religious, Learned, Gracious Prince.
This Paragon of Kings, this matchless Mirror,
This Faiths desending Antichristian terror;
This Royal all-beloued King of Hearts,
This Pattern, and this Patron of good Arts,
This cabinet of mercy, Temperance,
Prudence, and Justice, that does man advance.
This Magazine of Pious Clemency,
This fountain of true Libera^t^.
This mind, where virtue daily did increase,
This Peaceful Servant to the^ odo Peace,
This second great Apollo, from who^e Rays,
Poor Poetry did win Immortal Ba^es,
From whence the sacred S^^^, Treb^ Trine,
Had life and motion, Influence divine,
These virtues did adorn his Dia^^m,
And God in taking him, has taken them.
Of all which Blessings: (we must needs confess)
We are deprived for our unworthiness.
A good man's never mist till he be gone,
And then most vain and fruitless is our moan,
But as Heavens favors down to us descended:
So if our thankfulness had but ascended.
Had we made Conscience of our ways to sin,
So soon of him we not deprived had bin.
Then let us not lament his loss so much,
But for our own unworthiness was such.
So from th'vnthankefull Jews, God in his wrath,
Took^ good Josias, by unlooked for death.
And for our sins, our ignorance must know,
We have procured and felt this curelesse blow,
And Christendom, I fear, in losing him,
Is much dismembered, and has lost ^ limme.
As by the fruit the tree may be expressed,
His works declared his learning manifest,
Whereby his wisdom wan this great renown,
That second Solomon wore Britains crown,
His pen restrained the strong, relieved the weak,
And graciously he could write, do and speak.
He had more force and vigor in his words.
The^ neigh'^ring Princes could have in their swords.
France, Denmark, Poland, Sweden, Germany,
Spain, Sa^oy, Italy, and Musco^^^
Bohemia, and the fruitful Palatine,
The Swisses, Grisons, and the ^eltoline,
As far as ever Sol or Luna shined
Beyond the Westerns, or the Eastern Inde.
His counsel, and his favors were required,
Approved, beloved, applauded and admired:
When round about the Nations far and near,
With cruel bloody wars infested were;
When Mars with sword and fire, in furious rage,
Spoiled and consumed, not sparing lex or age;
Whilst mothers (with great griese) were childlesse made,
And Son against Sire opposed with trenchant blade:
When brother against brother, kin ' against kin,
Through death and danger did destruction win.
When murders merciless, and beastly Rapes
These, famine (miseries in sundry Shapes)
While mischiefs thus great kingdoms ouerwhelm,
Our prudent Steeresman held great Britains helm,
Conducting so this mighty Ship of state,
That Strangers enui'd, and admired thereat,
When blessed Peace, with terror and affright,
Was in a mazed and distracted flight,
By bloody War, and in continual Chase,
Cours'd like a fearful Hare, from place to place:
Not daring any where to show her head,
She (happily) into this kingdom fled,
Whom Royal James did freely entertain,
And graciously did keep her all his reign.
Whilst other Lands (that for her absence mourn)
With sighs and tears do with her back return.
They find in losing Her they lost a bless,
A hundred Towns in France can witness this,
Where Wars compulsion, or else composition,
Did force Obedience, Bondage or Submission.
Fields lay untilled, and fruitful Land lay waste,
And this was scarcely yet full three years past,
Where these uncivil civil wars destroyed
Princes, Lords, Captains, men of Note employed,
One hundred sixty seven, in number all,
And Common people did past number fall.
These wretches (wearied with these homebred Iars)
Love Peace, forbeing beaten sore with wars.
Nor do I here inueigh against just Arms,
But' against unjust, vunaturall Alarmes:
Just wars are made, to make unjust wars cease,
And in this sort wars are the means of Peace.
In all which turmoyles, Britain was at rest,
No thundering Cannons did our Peace molest.
No churlish Drum, no Rapes, no flattring wounds;
No Trumpets clangor to the Battle sounds,
But every Subject here enjoyed his own,
And did securely reap what they had sown.
Each man beneath his Fig Tree and his Vine,
In Peace with plenty did both suppe and dine.
O God, how much thy goodness does o'rflow,
Thou have not dealt with other Nations so!
And all these blessings which from heaven did Spring,
Were by our Sovereigns wisdoms managing:
Gods Steward, both in Office, and in name,
And his account was evermore his aim:
The thought from out his mind did seldom slip,
That once he must give up his Steward-ship.
His anger written on weak water was,
His Patience and his Love were grau'd in Brass.
His Fury like a wandering Star soon gone,
His Clemency was like a fixed one.
So that as many loved him whilst he lived,
More then so many by his Death are grieved.
The hand of Heaven was only his support,
And blessed him in the Nobles of his Court,
To whom his Bounty was expressed so Royal,
That he these twenty years found none disloyal;
But as bright Jewels of his Diadem,
They faithfully soru'd him, he honored them.
And as in life they were on him relying,
So many of them vshered him in dying.
Richmonds and Linox Duke fiirst led the way,
Next Dorsets spirit forsook her house of Clay.
Then Linox Duke again, Duke Lodwicks brother
Was third, and good Southampton fourth and her.
Lord wriothsly next Southamptons Noble son,
The race of his mortality did run.
Next died old Charles, true honored Nottingham,
(The Brooch and honor of his house and name)
Brave Belsast next, his vital thread was spun,
And last, the Noble Marquess Hambleto^.
These in the compass of one year went hence,
And led the way to their beloved Prince.
And our deceased Sovereign quickly went,
To change earths Pomp, for glory permanent.
Like Phoebus in his Course h'arose and ran,
His reign in March both ended and began.
And as if he had bin a Star that is fixed,
His Rise and Set were but two days betwixt,
And once in two and twenty years it is proved,
That the most fixed Stars are something moved.
But in his end, his Constancy we find,
He had no mutable or wavering mind:
For that Religion, which his tongue and pen
Did still defend with God, maintain with men:
That faith which in his Life he did express,
He in his Death did constantly prosesse;
His Treasure and his Jewels, they were such,
As I think Englands Kings had never so much,
And still to men of honor and desert,
His Coffers were as open as his heart.
Peace, Patience, Justice, Mercy, Pity;
These were his Jewels in variety;
His Treasure always was his Subjects Love,
Which they still gave him as the effects did pro^^^
Which like to Earths contributary streams,
Paid homage to their Sovereign Ocean, l^^^^
He knew, that Princes Treasure to be best,
That Is laid up in the loyal Subjects breast;
And only 'twas the riches of the mind,
To which he couerously was inclinde.
Thus was he blessed in Person, blessed in State,
Blessed in his first, and his in latter date;
Blessed in his education, blessed in's learning,
Blessed in his wisdom, good and ill discerning,
Blessed in his marriage, and in his royal Race,
But blessed most of all in Gods high grace.
He did his God devoutly serve and fear.
He loved him, and he held his love most dear:
He honored and obeyde him faithfully;
He is his favor lived, and so did dye:
His duty unto God he knew the way
And means, to make his Subjects him obey:
He knew that if he served his God, that then
He should be served, and feared, and loved of men:
And that if he Gods Statutes did respect,
That men would fear his Statutes to neglect.
That his Obedience upward, did bring down
Obedience to his Person and his Crown.
He did advance the good, suppressed the bad,
Relieved the poor, and comforted the sad:
The Widow, and the orphant fatherless,
He often has suppll'd in their distress,
^or why, to rich and poor, to great and small,
He was a common Father unto all.
His affability and Princely parts,
Made him a mighty Conqueror of Hearts:
Offenders whom the law of life depriues,
His mercy pardoned and preserved their lives:
To prisoners, and poor captives misery,
He was a Magazine of charity:
For losses that by sea, or fire did come,
He has bestowed many a liberal sum.
Besides for Churches, it most plain appears,
That more has bin repaired in twenty years,
(Is honor of our God and Saviors name)
Then in an hundred years before he came.
Our ancient famous Universities,
Divine, and Humane learnings Nurseries:
Such dewes of orace, as the Almighties will,
Was pleased (through those Limbecks) to distiil.
Which (spite of Romish rage, or Satan's hate)
H^^ caul'd the glorious Gospel propogate:
Our (light of learning) James, did still protect them,
And as a nursirg Father did affect them.
Thus was He, for our soutes, and bodies health,
Defender of both Church, and Commonwealth.
For Ireland, he has much reduced that nation,
Churches with land endowed caused much plantation.
Whereby Ciuility is planted there,
The Kings obedience, and the Almighties fear,
These deeds this worthy godly Prince has done,
For which he has perpetual praises won.
Ah! what a gracious Man of God was this?
Mercy and Justice did each other kiss;
His Affability whilst he did live,
Did make all men themselves to him to give.
Thus lived Great James, and thus great James did dye,
And dying thus, does li^e Eternally.
With Honor he did live, and Life forsook,
With Patience like a Lamb his death he took,
And leaving Kingly cares, and Princely pain,
He now inherits an Immortal Reign:
For royal grieved, perplexed Majesty,
He has a Crown of perpetuity:
For miserable Pomp that is transitory,
He is advanced to everlasting glory.
And as he loved, and lived, and dy' din Peace,
So he in Peace did quietly decease:
So let him rest in that most blessed condition,
That Is subject to no change or intermission;
Whilst we his servants, of him thus berest,
With grieved and perplexed hearts are lest;
But God in mercy looking on our grife,
Before he gave the wound, ordained relief:
Though duteous Sorrow bids us not forget
This cloud of death, I wherein our Sun did set,
His Sons resplendent Majesty did rise,
Load stone, and Load star to our hearts and eyes:
He cleares our drooping spirits, he frees our scares,
And (like the Sun) dries up our dewey tears.
All those his servants that lamenting grieve,
King Charles his Grace and favor does relieve:
But as they served his Father, so he will
Be their most loving Lord and Sovereign still,
As they were first to their Master living (being dead)
They are relieved, and re-comforted.
Thus Charity does in succession run,
A Pious Father leaves a godly Son:
Which Son his Kingly Government shall pass,
His Kingdoms Father, as his Father was.
For though great James interred in earth does lie,
Great Charles his breast intombes his memory,
And here is our comforts midst our discontents,
He Is seasoned with his Fathers Documents,
And as the Almighty was his shield and spear,
Protecting him from danger every where:
From most unnatural foul Conspiracy,
From Powder-plots, and hellish Treachery,
Whilst he both lived and died, beloved, renound,
And Treason did it self it self confound,
So I inuoke the Eternal Providence,
To be to Charles a buckler and defense,
Supported only by the Power Divine,
As long as Sun or Moon or Stars shall shine.
To all that have Read this Poem.
I Boast not, but his Majesty that is dead
Was many times well pleased my lines to read:
And every line, word, Syllable and letter,
Were (by his reading) graced and made better;
And howsoever they were good, or ill,
His bourty showed, he did accept them still;
He was so good and gracious vate me,
That ^ the vilest wretch on earth should be,
If, for his sake, I had not writ this Verse,
My last poor duty, to his Royal Hearse.
Two causes made me this sad Poems wrue,
The first my humble duty did inurte
The last, to shun that vice which does include
All other vices, foul Ingratitude.
FINIS.
FOR The sacred memorial of the great, Noble, and ancient Example of Virtue
and Honor, the Illustrious and well-beloved Lord, CHARLES HOWARD, Earl of
Nottingham, Justice in Air of all his Majesty's Forests, Parks, and Chases on
this side Trent; Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter, and one of the
Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable P^iuie Council; Who departed this Life
at his Manor of Hal^ing in Surrey, on Thurseday the 14. of December, 1624.
and was buried at Rigate, amongst his Honorable Ancestors, the 20. of December
last, 1624.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Right Worshipful, of both Sexes, who had either
alliance by Marriage, Consanguinity by Birth, or bore love to the Right Noble
and truly virtuous deceased.
I Humbly crave your Worthinesset^ excuse
This boldness of my poor unlearned Muse,
That has presumed so high a pitch to fly,
In praise of Virtue and Nobility.
I know this task most fit for Learned men,
For Homer, Ovid, or for Virgils pen:
But for I with him have both served and sailed,
My grateful duty has so far prevailed,
Boldly to write true Honors late decease,
Whilst better Muses please to hold their peace.
And thus much to the world my Verse proclaims,
That neither gain nor flattery are my aims:
But love and duty to the Noble dead,
Has caused me cause these Lines be published.
And therefore I entreat your generous Hearts,
T^ accept my duty, pardon my deserts,
Bear with my weakness, wink at my defects:
Good purposes do merit good effects;
Poor earthen Vessels may hold precious Wint,
And I presume that in this book of mine,
In many places you shall something find,
To please each Noble will affected mind.
And for excuse my Muse does humbly plead,
That you will forbear to judge before you read.
He that is ever a true wel-wisher, and ^^^sequious Servant to your Honors,
Worships, and Noble Personages, John Tailor.

SOme few years since, I rode to my Lords Manor of Halcing in Surrey, where
I presented his Lordship with a Manuscript, or written Book of the names and
degrees of all the Knights of the Noble Order of the Garter, since the first
institution by king Edward the third, which was of mine own collections out of
Windsor Cattle, and some authontike ^^^^: His Lordship received it gratefully,
and rewarded me honorably; in the which Book was ^^^ Anagram of his name and
Earldom of Nottingham, which ^old very (...) to be he^re^^^, under Printed,
because it falls correspondent to the reverence of his ^^, and the happiness
which the words import.

Charles Howard, Earl of Nottinghame Anagramma: O Heaven calls, and has true
Glory for me.
And happy was this happy Anagram,
Heaven calls Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham:
And he obeyed the call, and gained true glory,
For change of earthly Titles transitory.
For the sacred Memorial of the Great, Noble and Ancient example of Virtue and
Honor, the Illustrious and well-beloved Lord, Charles Howard, Earl of
Nottingham, Justice in Air of all his Majesty's Forests, Parks and Chases on
this side Trent; Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter, and one of the
Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Council.
WHat English Muse forbeares to shead a tear
For Englands Nestor, grauest, oldest Peer?
Not only old in number of his days,
But old in virtue, and all good men's praise:
Whose actions all his pilgrimage did pass,
More full of honor then his title was.
And though his corpse be seuer'd from his spirit,
And that the world sufficient knows his merit:
Yet shall my poor unworthy artlesse Verse,
^^ dutious service wait upon his Hearse.
My self his Honor on the Seas attended,
And with his bounty have I been befriended,
And to acquit me from unthankfulness,
My lines shall here my gratitude express.
No monumentall Marble reard on hie,
He needs t'emblaze him to posterity,
No flattring Epitaph he needs to have,
To be engrau'd upon a gawdie grave,
His life and actions are his Monument,
Which fills each kingdom, Clime, and Continent.
And when their memories shall stink and dye,
Who in most stately sepulchers do lay,
Then royal histories shall still relate
To each degree, or age, or sex, or state,
The virtue, valor, bounty, and the fame
Of Englands all-beloued Nottingham:
And Noble hearts his memory shall retain,
Until the world to Chaos turn again.
That year of wonderment called eighty eight,
When fraud and force did our destruction wait,
When Hell, and Rome, and Spain did all agree,
That we should vanquished and invaded be,
Our foes at Sea thirty one thousand men,
With near four hundred ships and ^^^lies then,
Then this White Lion rowz'd with ^^ ^^^ue,
Defending both his ounrry and his Queen,
Like second Mars to battle brave he wen^,
God making him his worthy instrument:
His Chiefraine, Champion and his General
With six score ships, and Vessels great a^^ ^mall,
To conquer those that did for conquest ^^^
And foil the power of Hell, and ^^^ and ^^
Then valor was with resolution mixed
And manhood with true F^uo^^ ^^^
When death and danger ^^^^tned every where.
Brave Charles (all ^earel (...) ^^^) did encourage can
When roaring cannons coun^^^ heavens thunder
And slaughte^d men their vessels ^^^ under,
The Sun eclipsed with ^^^^, skies dark and dim,
And batt'ring bullets severed ^im from li^^
When as that Sea might be the Rea Sea called,
Then he with dreadlesse courage, vnappa^l'd,
Like a bright B^acon, or a blazing Staire,
Approved himself a thunder ^^olr of war
Whose valor and example valiantly,
Pursued and won a glorious victory.
And then by him (through the Almighties hand)
Preserved from invasion was this Land.
So that who ever shall his Tomb pass by,
And shall enquire who there does buried lie,
If answer be but made, He Is in this Grave,
Who did in Eighty eight this Kingdom save;
Then is the ^otall told, and service best,
Where with this little Land was ever blessed.
At 1596
Cales likewise the Sea Fight we did win,
By his direction and grave discipline
The Spanish ships soon from his force retired,
Some torn, some sunk, some taken, and some fired,
And whensoere he gave the overthrow,
He nere insulted ore his conquered foe,
But like a Noble Lion, every way
He scorned to prey upon a yielding prey:
With pity, piety, and true remorce,
His clemency was mixed with manly force.
Unto his foes a noble care he had,
Nor would affliction to affliction add:
So that his enemies much cause did find,
To love and honor his true noble mind.
Yet against offenders he was sharply bent,
Severe in throats, and mild in punishment,
His justice would condemn, and in a breath
His mercy saved whom justice doomed to death.
His adversaries he did ofe relieve,
And his revenge was only to forgive.
He knew that well got honor nere shall die,
But make men live unto eternity:
It as his greatest riches he esteemed,
And Infamy he basest begg'ry deemed.
He knew, through worthy spirits may be croft,
Yet if they lose no honor nothing's lost.
And those that have afraid of envy bin,
True honor or good fame did never win.
If he an auaritio^s mind had bore,
Of wealth no subject then had had such store:
So many years Englands high Admiral,
Fees offices, and prizes that did fall,
With gifts and favors from the queen and State,
And other things, amounting to a rate:
That had he been a mixer, close of hand,
No subject had been richer in this Land,
In deeds of pity, and ture charity,
Good housekeeping, and hospitality,
Bounty, and courteous affability;
He was the Brooch of true Nobility:
And for these virtues men shall scarcely find,
That he a fellow here has left behind.
He knew that Avarice and Honor be
Two contraries that never will agree:
And that the Spender shall have true renown,
When infamy the Mizers fame shall drown.
He every way most nobly was inclined,
And loved no wealth but riches of the mind:
His Pleasure was, that those that did retain
To him, and serve, should by him thrive and gain^
And he thought it was enough for him to have,
When as his servants did both get and save.
So amongst Nobles. I think few are such,
That keeps so little, gives away so much.
His latest Will did make it plain appear,
The love which to his servants he did bear.
To great and small amongst them, more or less,
His bounty did express his worthynesse;
To all degrees that served him every one,
His liberality excepted none.
And though base Envy often at him struck,
His fortitude was like a Rock vnshooke.
He knew that Fortunes changing was not strange,
Times variation could not make him change,
The frothy pomp of Earths Prosperity,
Nor envious clouds of sad adversity,
Within his mind could no mutation strike,
His courage and his carriage were alike:
For when base Peasants shrink at fortunes blows
Then magnimity most richly shows:
His gravity was in his life expressed,
His good example made it manifest,
His age did no way make his virtue live,
But virtue to his age did honor give,
So that the love he wan it is understood,
T was not for being old, but being good.
Thus like a pollish'd Iewell' among his Peers,
His virtue shined more brighter then his years:
For Wisdom ever this account does make,
To love age only but for virtues sake.
Near ninety years an honored life he led:
And honor's his reward, alive and dead,
For who so nobly here his life does frame,
Shall for his wages have perpetual fame.
His meditations he did often apply,
How he might learn to live, to learn to dye,
And die, to live and reign in glorious state,
Which changing time can never exterminate.
And therefore long his wisdom did forecast,
How he might best reform offenses past,
Order things present, things to come foresee,
Thus would his latter years still busied be:
He saw his Sand was near run out his Glass,
And wisely pondred in what state he was,
His waning years, his body full of anguish,
Sense failing spirits drooping, force to languish,
The ruined cottage of weak flesh and blood,
Could not long stand, his wisdom understood.
He saw his tide of life began ebb so low,
Past all expectance it again should flow:
He knew his pilgrimage would soon expire,
And that (from whence he came) he must retire
Old age and weak infirmities contend,
Man's dissolution warnes him of his end:
He knew all these to be deaths messengers,
His Calends, Pursiuants, and Harbingers,
And with a Christian conscience still he marked,
He in his final voyage was embarked.
Which made him skilfully his course to steer,
(The whilst his judgment was both sound and clear)
To that blessed Haven of eternal rest,
Where he for ever lives among the blessed.
He did esteem the world a barren field,
The naught but snares, and tares, and cares did yield,
And therefore he did sow his hopes in heaven,
Where plentious increase to him is given.
Thus was the period of his life's expense,
The Noble Nottingham departed hence,
Who many years did in his Countries right,
In peace and war, successful speak and fight,
Our oldest Garter Knight, and Counselor,
And sometimes Britains great Ambassador.
Now unto you suruiuers, you that be
The Branches of this honorable Tree:
Though Verses to the dead no life can give,
They may be comforters of those that live.
We know, that God to man has life but lent,
And placed it in his bodies tenement,
And when for it again the Landlord calls,
The Tenant must depart, the Cottage falls.
God is most just, and he will have it known,
That he in taking life, takes but his own:
Life is a debt which must to God be rendered,
And Natures retribution must be tendered.
Some pay in youth, and some in age do pay,
But it is a charge that all men must defray:
For it is the lot of all mortality,
When they being to live, begin to dye.
And as from sin to sin we wander in,
So death at last is wages for our sin.
He neither has respect to sex or years,
Or has compassion of our sighs nor tears,
He Will enter (spite of bars, or bolts, or locks)
And like a bold intruder never knockes.
To Kings and Caiti^^es, rich, poor, great and small,
Death plays the tyrant and destroys them all.
He calls all creatures to account most strict,
And no man's power his force can contradict.
We must perforce be pleased with what he leaves us,
And not repine at ought which he ber^anes us.
He Is lawless, and ^s folly to demand
Amends, or restitution at his hand.
He does deride the grief of those that mourn,
And all our frail afflictions laugh to scorn.
For he condemns, and never hears the cause,
He takes away, despite the power of Jaws.
Yet he our vassal ever does remain,
From our first birth unto our grave again;
And God does in his service him employ,
To be the bad man's terror, good man's toy,
Death is the narrow door to life eternal,
Or else the broad gate unto death internal:
But our Redeemer in his spotless offering,
Did lead the way for us to heaven by suffering.
He was the death of death, when he did die,
Then Death was swallowed up so victory,
And by his rising blessed souls shall rue,
And dwell in the celestial Paradise.
For these respects, you whose affinity,
Propinquity, or consanguinity,
Whose blood or whose alliance challenge can
A part in this deceased Noble man,
The law of Nature and affection moves,
That grief and sorrow should express your loves,
He was your secondary maker, and
Your authors earthly being, and you stand
In duty for your lives and honors bound
To him, for by him have you been renowned.
Yet Death that is common unto every one,
Should be intolerable unto none:
And therefore let his noble spirit rest,
Amidst those joys which cannot be expressed,
Let those that live, his goodness imitate,
And yield unto the course of mortal fate.
FINIS.
A FUNERAL ELEGY, IN THE SACRED MEMORY OF THE Right Reverend, Right
Honorable and Learned Father in GOD, LANCELOT, Lord Bishop of Winchester,
Deane of his Majesty's Chapel, Prelate of the Right Honorable Order of the
Garter, and one of the Lords of his Maiestices most Honorable Privy COUNCIL:
Who departed this life at his house in Southwarke, on Monday the 25th. of
September last, 1626, and was Honorably Interred in Saint Saviors Church in
Southwarke, the XI. of November.
TO THE WORSHIPFVLL AND RELIGIOUS GENTLE. man, Mr. John Parker, Citizen of
London, and of the worshipful Society of Marchant-Taylors.
Right Worthy Sir,
IN these ungrateful days of ours, wherein men's merits are forgotten, with
the expiration of the life; and that too many do glory, to leave happy or
unhappy posterities behind them to ^^^ their memories live when they are gone;
or else put a vain hope of a long lasting same, by e^^^cting painted
vainglorious Sepulchers, and marble Monuments, whilst small are the^^^ ber of
those that by Piety, Charity, Noble and virtuous Actions, and good life and
conversation, ^^ seek to attain the neuer-fading memory of Eternity, and true
lmmortality, so that it is a doubt, whither the death of the good, or the life
of the bad, are most to be lamented: Yet although the true worth^^ this
deceased Right Reverend, Right Honorable and right Learned Father, (whom God
in merry ^^ taken from the evil to come) is of that invincible and
impregenable strength, that the flattery or battle of future time cannot beat
it down into the gulf of oblivion and forget fullness, yet (though we^^
less) I in dutious love and reverence to the Dead, and true in affection to
the living (amongst whom ^^ ^^ of my departed Lords Friends and Servants, I am
much endeared and obliged unto) I have set ^^ rudely to paper, and as I could
(though not as I should) I have as it were onley looked into the Sui^^^^ of a
goodly City, tasted Manna afar off, and touched the skirts or hem of his
meritorious virtues; wh^^ I have made bold to dedicate to your Worships grave
and judicious view and censure, humbly desir^ your Worship to accept my
intention more then my Labor, in hope whereof, I cease to enlarge my E^^^
further, wishing you such happiness in this life, as is correspondent to your
worth, and such, felicity in ^^ life to come, as is laid up for good men in
Heaven.

Your Worships to command, JOHN TAILOR

A Silly Taper, or a Candles light,
Are vain additious to make Sol more bright:
^^^ can one little water-drop augment
The mighty bounds of Neptunes continent:
The raging Winds that threaten sea and shore,
^^^ one man's breath is not increased the more,
^^^ or can a handful of unstable sand,
^^yse mounts of earth, or amplify the land.
^^^ that am (the meanest man of men)
^^rane wanting learning, meaner for the pen,
^th glimering raper, or a drop of rain,
^^not increase the light, enlarge the maine,
^^^ any way in sitting terms set foth,
^ght Reverend Winchester, Admired worth:
^^^all the learned Poets of these days
^^ght write, and speak in his deserved praise,
^^^ spend their ink and paper, and their spirits,
^^^^add no fame or honor, ot his merits.
^^^as pute snow shows whiter to the eye,
^^^^hen cole-black Crows, or swarty Ravens are by:
^^^as the darkness makes light seem more clear,
^^^will his Virtues in my lines appear.
^^^speake his passage in this vale of strife,
London he had being first and life:
those Parents (as became their reputation)
^^^bring him up in worthy education,
^^^ Prem brook. Hall in Cambridge witness will,
^hereas his noble memory lives still.
^passing on in this his moral race,
^^ne'd by grace, from higher place to place,
^^^to the Deanery of Westminster,
^^^to this Bishopric of Chichester;
^^ James did next to Elye him prefer,
^ich learned Prince made him his Almoner,
^^^ (by Gods providence) nor his desire,
^^^to Winchester translated higher;
^^^of the Royal Chapel, and beside,
Garters Prelate he was dignifide.
^^^gracious James, did in his wisdom see,
^^^ worthy Lords upright integrity:
whom all loyal virtues were innate,
^^^^him a privy Counselor of State.
^^^his honors still did higher grow,
^ mind in meek humillity was low;
^^^like a blessed Samuel, was he
^yned from his infancy to be
^iant soldier of Christ's faithful Camp,
^in God Church a learned illustrious Lamp.
^^^^at the lord to Abraham did say,
From thy Country, and thy Kin away;
^^^from thy Fathers house I charge thee go,
^^^Lord that I to thee will show:
^is right reverend Lord, was from his youth
^^^from the world, to Gods eternal truth,
^being one in Heau' ns high business sent.
^igh in this world, yet from the world he went.
For though the world is, as it is understood,
Man's native Country, as he is flesh and blood;
Yet is his worldly part a prison foul,
Wherein in bondage lies his purer soul,
Which soul is heavenly, and makes heaven her aim,
And here she is in the World, not of the same.
So this deceased Subject of my muse,
He lived and grieved to see the worldsabuse;
And like a ^eremy, ^^ had ^^^ments
He sighed and greu'd, bewaynng the events
Which have, and do, and dad, ^^ are like,
Upon this woeful age of ours to strike.
He saw and grieved a: what all men should grieve,
How goodness small reipect, could here achieue;
And how the chiefest good that men do crave,
Is pomp and wealth, and rich appreil brave:
How man will for his body have good food,
Good fire, good clothes, good house, and, lodging good,
And all the care's how these goods may be had,
And few men cared though their souls be bad
Thus the sraile World, and in pous ^^^
Struck in his Christian heart, griefs deep impression,
That all that worldly was he quite ^orgor,
And used the World, as if he used it^ o^:
He (by the Spirit of God) perceived, plain,
That all earthes pomp and glory is but vain;
And therefore with a lowly mind and meek,
He did Christ's righteousness kingdom seek:
For which, (even as our Saviors word is past)
His earthly treasures were upon him cast:
For still the word of God confirmed shall be.
I Will honor them (says he) that honor me.
His heart was free from an ambitious thought,
No popular applause of men he sought;
His pride was godly, a true Christian pride,
To know Christ, and to know him crucifide;
And though frail men are with vain toys intis'd,
He with'd to be disolu'd to be with Christ.
His charity was not in out-ward show,
No Pharisey-like Trumpet ere did blow,
To make the World applause with speech or pen,
When he in pity pelp'd the wants of men.
Two chollers in the Universities,
He (private) gave most bountiful supplies:
To Prisoners he sent many a secret sum,
And the receivers nere knew whence it comes
God gave to him, and for his sake again
He gave it back to help distressed men:
Yet close and private, should his a mes still be,
That God might hane the glory, and not he.
Where ere he lodged, or where his house he kept,
His piety and charity nere slept:
Where still his gifts has clone and secret been,
And (to the view of men) but seldom seen.
When late our sins did Gods high wrath incence,
That he destroyed us with the Pestilence;
And that the poor did pine, the rich were fled,
And Charity seemed buried with the dead;
Then this true godly, honorable man,
Did with a zeal and love most Christian:
Knowing Saint Saviors Parish to be darge,
Oppressed with poor, and an excessive charge;
Means small, necessity exceeding great
Many to feed and little food to eater:
In this extremity, this worthy Peer,
Did in his charity so good appear,
That by his bounty many souls were cherished.
Which (but for him) undoubtedly bad perished.
The like he did in succouring the destresse,
Of many places in his Diocese.
He well remembered God had raised him high,
In state of eminence and dignity;
But yet his memory deserved more praise,
Remembering to what end God did him rayset;
For men all of Degrees, estates, and ranks:
Will give to God some superficial thanks,
Confessing he has in their state them set;
But yet the end wherefore, they quite forget,
Therefore he well and wisely understood,
That he had great promotions to be good;
And that he was endued with earthly pelf,
To give, and have least joy of it him self,
And as a stoward just, what he possessed,
He still distributed to the oppressed.
And though man's merrits challenge nothing can,
Yet God so loves a just and righteous man;
That here he lives with his protection guarded,
And after with eternal life rewarded.
His Learning
His learning was approved to be such,
As scarcely any one man had so much:
Yet though in Scholler-ship he did excel,
His chiefest honor was, he used it well.
When Romes chief champion famous Bellarmine,
Employed his studies and his best ingine.
To prove the Papal dignity had power
Over Counsels, Fathers, King or Emperor,
Or Church, or sacred text Cannonicall,
Or any thing which we may mortal call;
And that these errors printed were in Rome,
And scattered, and divulged through Christondome:
Then Winch^ster, did for the Gospells right
So learned; so gravely and profoundly write,
His Book that was Tortus Tortortum called,
Which made the Roman Clergy all apal'd.
He showed them there how vainly they did vaunt,
How far from truth they were disconsonant:
And how the Pope was proved the man of sin,
Maugre his mighty Bulwark Bellarmine,
Thus he (defending our Religion)
Shook Antichristian Romish Babylon,
Proouing our faith to be true Catholic,
And in antiquity Apostolic.
Indeed his learning so transcendant was,
And did so farr'e my silly praise surpass,
That I my wit and studies may confound,
And in un Ocean bottom less be drowned.
I Will therefore cease to touch that lofty strain,
So far above the Circuit of my brain;
His chiefest learning was, Gods Law he learned
Whereby to live and dye he well discerned.
As Malachy Malachy 2.7.^
of Priests did Prophecy,
His lips preserved knowledge plentiously,
That saving knowledge, which Hills. ^^
John Baptist brough^
Salvation, and Luke I.77.
remitting sins he taught;
Yea all his knowledge were to these intents,
To know God and keep his Commandments.
A single life he lived, but his desert,
And virtue, was in singlnesie of heart:
Well he knew Marriage or Virginity,
Were (of themselves) no perfect sanctity;
For mis-beleeuing Infidels do either,
Yet have no perfect holiness by neither:
But where the gift of continence is given
With single life, it is the grace of Heaven;
And this blessed gift was still in him so ample,
That he both lived and died a rare example.
Thus lived he 70 years, just David's span,
(Times circuit, for the Pilgrimage of man)
And in a good age, Dauid-like deecast,
With 1. Chron. 29.
Honor, Days and Riches fully blessed.
And for more honor of his hoary hairs,
Years graced his person, virtue graced his ye^^^
His port and places were of eminence,
But 'twas his goodness was their excellence:
So that although his honor was complete,
He graced it more in being good then great.
His servants of a Master are deprived,
Who showed himself to them whilst he suruin^^
Not as an Austere Master, but still rather,
A loving, and a wel-beloued father:
His love to them was in his gifts and cares,
And their for him, is in their sighs and tears.
Four brothers, and two sisters they were late,
But three have finished their suruiuing date;
Lancelot (the chief) Nicholas and Thomas, they
Have left this transitory house of clay:
And as from but one father they did spring,
So in one house they had their finishing.
But Roger, Mary, Martha, you are left,
And though you of your brethren are berest,
They are but gone, that you may come to them
To Glory, to the new Jerusalem.
Yet God's your father, as he is theirs (in bliss)
And Jesus Christ to you a brother is.
But note the prudence and the providence,
This good man whom God bath taken hence.
^^well sore-saw his bodies dissolution,
^^ therefore for his goods just distribution,
^^^^^^for his sole Executor elected
^^ (that like himself)the world respected:
^^^s my Lord all earthly pomp did hate,
^^did esteem this world at little rate:
^^ did venture love, and vice abhor,
^^ without doubt) does his Executor:
^^therefore he committed this great trust,
^^ he knew was honest, plain and just.
^^ for conclusion, for a final end,
^^^ time this Reverend Father did attend,
^^^new that he to Nature was a debtor,
^^ therefore longed to change this life for better.
^^ heart was open still to welcome Death,
^^ great desire was to expire his breath,
^^new it is a passage must be past;
^^ey that all flesh must go at last:
^^ of rest, a ceasing here to sin,
^^d, where endless glory does begin.
^^though conuulsions, sighs, and sickly groans,
Our parents, friends, and kindreds tears and moanes,
The bells sad toling, and the mourning weed,
Makes Death more dreadful then it is indeed,
Yet wise men all in general agree,
It Is natural to dye, as borne to be,
And as man cannot here avoid his birth,
So shun he cannot his return to earth.
The Pilgrimage, the race, the glass is run,
The thread is spun, they victory is won;
And Honorable Winchester is gone
Unto the Lamb, that sits upon the Throne:
For as I well have scanned upon his name,
And of it made a double Anagram:
(And Anagrams oft-times include a fate)
And it is no doubt but they explain his State,
For having past with troubles, griefs and cares,
This transitory life, this vale of tears;
Yet LANCELOT ANDREWS name, does this portend,
All sure, All due content, Crowns all art end.
FINIS.
True loving Sorrovv, ^^TTIRED IN A ROBE OF UNFEIGNED ^efe, presented upon
occasion of the much bewailed Funeral that Gracious and Illustrious. Prince,
LEWIS STEWARD, ^^e of Richmond and Linox, Earl of Newcastle and Darnely,
Lord of Torbolt^n and ^^uen, Baron of Settrington, Knight of the Noble Order of
the Garter, Lord High ^^^^irall, and great Chamberlain of Scotland, Lord high
Steward to the Kings most ^^lent Majesty's most Honorable Household, Gentleman
of his Majesty's Bedchamber, ^^^ one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council for England and Scotland: who ^^^^departed this life at White Hall, on
Thursday the 12 of February 1624. whose obsequies were solemnly and Princely
celebrated on Monday the 19 of April following, described in form as
follows. Dedicated generally to all his worthy Friends, and loving Servants;
and particularly to that trusty and well-beloved Servant of his, Arthur Neassmith.
ANd first my Muse finds, that his Graces name Significantly makes an Anagram.
LEWIS STEWARD. Anagram. VERTV IS WELL EASED. His Virtues such continual pains
did take For King and Country, Church and peoples sake; That for Earths
courtly toil, to him 'twas given, His VERTV IS WELL EASED t'the Court of Heaven.
A Funeral Elegy.
GReat God, that to thy self wilt take thine own,
By sundry ways, and means to man unknown,
Whose Eye of providence does still perceive
When, where, why, who to take, or else to leave,
Whose mercy, and whose Justice equal are,
Both Infinite, to punish or to spare,
All men do know, that men to dye are borne,
And from the earth, must to the earth return.
But Time and Circumstance conjecture may,
For some great cause thou took'st this Duke away.
Amongst us lurks so many a foul offense,
Which gives thee cause to take good men from hence:
And that this Prince was good as well as great
His life and timelesse loss does well repeat.
Devout and zealous to his God above:
True to his King, as did his service prove:
Discreet in Counsel, Noble in his mind,
Most Charitablly, Honorably kind:
So Affable, so Hopeful unto all,
And so Repleat with virtues general,
That we may say, This Land in losing him,
Has lost a gracious Peer, a prop, a lim.
It must be true, that well he spends his days,
Whose actions do attain all peoples praise:
And surely I suppose he does not live,
Who of this Duke a bad report can give.
So full endu'd he was of all good parts,
With Noble Courtesy he wan all hearts,
To love and honor his admired mind,
So well addicted, and so well inclined,
That as a Diamond in gold transfixt,
His virtues with his greatness were so mixed,
That he as one of an immortal Race,
Made Virtue virtuous, and gave Grace to grace.
Then since his goodness was so general,
The loss of him is General unto all;
This being true, let us recollect our spirits,
And weigh his worth with our unworthy merits;
The manner of the Funeral.
8. Conductors with black staves, and poor Gowns 10^

Servants to Gentlemen and Esquires in Cloakes, 50.

Servants to Knights, 46. Servants to Baroness, ^^

Three Trumpeters.

Then came the Standard, borne by Sir Ge^^

Samms Knight, accompanied with an Officer of Arms

The first Horse covered with black cloth, ^^^ with Scutchions, Shoffron and
Plumes, ledly a gro^^

Here went servants to Baron younger Sons, ^^^ some others of like quality,
in number, 15.

The servants to Knights of the Privy Council,30.

Servants to Earls younger Sons, 24.

Servants to Viscounnts eldest Sons, 6.

Then the Scholars of Westminster in ^oun^^

Surplices, their Masters following in mourning Go^^

Three Trumpeters.

The Guiators borne by Sir Andrew Boyd Knight, ^^^ companyed with an Officer of
Arms.

The second Horse led by a Groom, and furnished the former.

Barons servants, 60.

Bishops servants, 10.

Earls eldest Sons servants, 15.

Viscount servants. 10.

Marquesses eldest Sons servants.

3 Trumpeters

The Banker of the augmentation, borne by a kni^^ companied with an Officer of
Arms.

The third Horse led by another Groom of his Gr^^ Stable, furnished as the
others. Earls servant: ma^^^ set and Dukes servants, The Lord Priuy-Seales
Seruant^

President of the Cuoncell, Servant. Lord Treasurers. Servant. Lord Keepers,
Servant. And Lord Archbishops, Servant.
3 Trumpeters. The Banner of Steward, borne by ^^ John Steward accompanied with
an Officer of Armes^

The fourth Horse sed by a Yeoman of his Graces ^^^ble

And then our fraileties truly will confess,
God took him hence for our unworthiness:
Death was in Message from The Almighty sent.
To summon him to Heavens high Parliament,
He changed his Gracious Title transitory,
And (by the grace of God) attained true Glory;
And as his King had his integrity;
So did the Commons share his Clemency,
Which was so pleasing to his Makers sight,
That bounteously he did his life requite,
That Lambe-like, mildely hence he took him sleeping,
To his Eternal euer-blessed keeping.
Thus as his name includes, so God is pleased,
(From worldly sorrows) VERTV IS WELL EASED.
No sickness or no physic made him languish,
He lay not long in heart-tormenting anguish:
But as Gods fear was planted in his breast,
^^^oat his Rest, God took him to his Rest.
When like a good Tree, laden full of fruit,
Of Grace, of Virtue, Honor, and Repute:
Even in his best estate, too good for Earth,
Then did his soul put on a second Birth.
And though his part of frail mortality,
Yet Monumentall Marble here does lie:
As thousands weeping souls, with deep laments,
^^^s his most woeful mourning Monuments,
^^^ daily see, whose visages do show
That He Is interred within their hearts below;
Whose faces seem an Epitaph to bear,
That men may Read who is intombed there.
Epitaph.
GOod, Gracious Great, Richmond and Linox Duke,
God, King, and Countries servant here does lie;
those living Merits merit no rebuke,
^^^^ whose lives loss lamenting Memory,
^^^^^ hearts are groaning Graves of griefs and cares,
which when we dye, we will leave unto our heirs.
ME thinks the Sable Mourners did appear,
As if in form they numbering Figures were;
^^^ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Whilst all that viewed, like Ciphers did combine
Their mourning with the Mourners to unite,
Which made their Lamentations infinite.
And Infinite are now his Joys above,
With the Eternal God of peace and love:
Where, for a mortal Duke dome he has won,
(Through boundless merits of th'Amighties Son)
^^^ Kingdom that is immortal, where he sings
^erpetuall praise unto the King of Kings.
Thus what the Earth surrendered, heaven has seaz'd
Most blessed LEWIS STEWARD,
VERTV IS WELL EASED,
ble furnished as the other.

Servants to his Grace in Cloakes: Officers to his Grauce in Gowns.

3 Trumpeters.

The Banner of Steward, and the augmentation quartered with it, borne by a
Baronet accompanied with a Herald of Arms.

The 5 Horse led by a Yeoman of his Graces Stable, furnished as the former.

Servants of sever all Offices in his Majesty's House, and other Esquires, his
ma^stres servants of good quality.

The Gentlemen of his Majesty's Chapel in Surplaices and rich Copes, the
Sergeant of the Vestry accompanying them Chaplains, Doctors of Physic,
Doctors of Divinity, Knights, Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, Gentlemen of the
Bedchamber to the Prince: Baronets, Barons younger sons: Knights of the
Priuy-Councell, Viscounts eldest sons: a Velvet cushen cart^ed by an Esquire,
The Comptroller, Treasurer, Steward, and Chamberlain to his Grace, bearing
white Staves, Barons of Ireland, Scotland and England, Bishops, Earls eldest
Sons, Viscounts, Earls of Scotland, and England, The Duke of Linox eldest
Son, The Archbishop of Canterbury, The Mace, The Purse, The Iora Keeper,
Preacher, Sergeant Trumpetter, and four Trumpets, The Great Banner borne by an
Earls Son: accompanied with an Herald, The chief mourning Horse covered
with black Velvet, and garnished with Eschochens of Tassata, with Shaffron and
Plumes, led by Mr. Harton Clauell, His Graces Hatchinements borne as follows.
The Gauntlets and Spurs, The Helm and Crest, and the Sword borne by three
Heralds, The Targe and Coat of Arms, borne by two Kings of Arms. Then the
^^uely Effigies or representation of his Grace, drown in a Chariot by six
goodly Horses, garnished as the former, covered with a Canopy of black Velvet,
The Pall supported two Earls Sons, and two Marquesses Sons, The Fo^^^ going on
each side the Chariot, and likewise ten small Banners, carried by 10. Knights,
5 of Scotland, and 5 of England, round about the Chariot, two Principal
Gentlemen riding at his head and feet in the said Chariot. Then followed Garter
principal King of Arms, accompanied with a Gentleman ^ sher, who went
bareheaded, the Duke of Linox chief Mourner, The Lord Tresurer, and Lord
President of the Council, his supporters, 10 other Assistants, The Lord Privy
Seal, and Duke of Buckingham, The Marquis Hamilton, and Earl Marshall, The
Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's House, and the E. of Sussex, the E. of
Southampton, and E. of Essex, the E. of Salisbury, and E. of Exceter, The Mr of
the Horse to his Grace in close mourning, leading the Horse of Honor, ^^^^^^
furnished. Thus past this sad show from his Graces House in Holborne to
Westminster, where the Funeral Rites being solemnly ended, his Graces lively
Effigies was le^^ in the Abbey of St. Peter, under a Rich Hearse.

FINIS
GREAT BRITAIN ALL IN BLACK, OR, A short Elegy written in the manner of
AEquiuoques, in a sad and dutiful remembrance of the Royal Prince HENRY.
OH for a Quill of that Arabian Wing,
That Is hatched in embers of Sun-kindled fire,
Who to her self, her self does issue bring,
And three in one, is Young, and Dam, and Sire.
Oh, that I could to Virgils vein aspire,
Or Homers Verse the golden-languag'd Greek,
In polished phrases I my lines would tire,
Into the depth of Art my Muse would seek.
Mean time she amongst the linguish'd Poets throngs;
Although she want the help of Foreign Tongs.
TO write great Britains woe how am I able?
That having lost a peerless Princely Son,
So wise, so grave, so stout, so amiable,
Whose Virtues shined as did the mid-dayes Sun,
And did illustrate all our Hemispheare,
Now all the world affoords not him his pheare.
His Royal mind was evermore disposed,
From virtue unto virtue to accrue:
On good deserts his bounty he disposed,
Which made him followed by so brave a crew,
That though himself was peerlesse, many a Peer,
As his Attendants, daily did appear.
In him the Thundrers braine-borne daughter Pallas
Had taken possession, as her native Clime:
In him, and his terrestrial heavenly Palace,
Was taught how men by virtuous deeds shall clime,
So that although his years were in the spring,
He was true honors Fount and valors Spring.
So firm, so stable, and so continent,
So wise, so valiant, and so truly chaste;
That from his Microcosmos continent,
All heau'n-abhorred hel-hatch'd lust was chased:
He ran no vicious vice alluring grace,
To stain the glory of his Royal race.
His soul, from whence it came, is gone, again,
And earth has taken, what did to earth belong:
He whilom to this Land was such a Gain,
That memory of his loss must deeds belong.
All states and sexes, both the young and grave,
Lament his timelesse going to his Grave.
Man-murdring death, blind, cruel, fierce and fell,
How do thou gripe him in thy meagre arms!
By thy rude stroke this Prince of Princes fell,
Whose valor brau'd the mighty God of Arms:
Right well in peace, he could of peace debate:
Dreadlesse of dreadful danger or debate.
Robustuous rawbon'd monster death, to tear
From us our happy hope we did enjoy:
And turn our many joys to many a tear,
Who else might joyfully have lived in joy!
As wind on thousands all at once does blow,
By his deaths stroke so millions feel the blow.
Well could I wish, (but wishing is in vain)
That many millions, and amongst them I
Had slue'd the bloods from every flowing vein,
And vented floods of water from each eye:
To Have saved the life of this Maiestike Heir,
Would thousand souls had wandered in the air
But cease, my Muse, thou far unworthy art
To name his name, whose praise on hie does mount
Leave. (leave I say) this task to men of Art,
And let his soul rest to sweet Zions Mount:
His Angel spright has bid the world adue,
And earth has claimed his body as a due.
Epitaph.
Here under ground great HENRY'S corpse does be,
If God were pleased, I wish it were a lie.
JOHN TAILOR

THE MUSES MOVRNING: OR, FVNER ALL SONNETS ON THE Death of JOHN MORAY Esquire.
TO THE WHOLE AND ENTIRE NVMBER OF THE Noble and Ancient name of Morayes, John
Tailor dedicates these sad Funeral Sonnets.

Sonnet. 1.
When King Corbredus wore the Scottish Crown,
The Romans did the Britain Land afflict:
But Corbred joined confederate with the Pict,
By whom Queen ^eadaes foes were overthrown.
The Morayes, then, to have their valor known,
Did first the Roman forces contradict:
And made them render up their lives so strict,
That horse and foot, and all were beaten down.
Lo thus began the Morayes honored Race,
Of memorable Ancient worthy fame:
And since the five and fiftieth year of Grace,
^^ Scotland has suruiu'd that noble name.
To whom alive, and to my dead friends hear so,
In duty here I consecrate this verse.
He that is ever obliged to your Noble name: JOHN TAILOR.

Sonnet. 2.
Weep everlastingly, you Nymphs divine,
Your very Quintessence is waste and spent:
Sigh, groan and weep, with woeful languishment,
Dead is the life that made your Glories shine.
The heavenly numbers of your Sacred nine,
He tuned as an Aetheriall Instrument,
So sweet, as if the Gods did all consent
In him their Consort wholly to combine.
Weep, Muses, everlastingly lament,
Eclipsed is your Sire Apollo's shrine:
Grim Death, the life has from your Champion rent,
And therefore sigh; groan, weep, lament and pine:
And let the Laurel rot, consume and wither,
Dye, Muses, and be Tombd with him together.
Sonnets. 3.
FRom two strong Iailes thy corpse and ^on^^ acquitted,
The one compact of flesh, and blood and bone:
The other unrelenting senseless stone,
By God to one by man to one committed.
I ever did expect a happy time,
When thou should shake by bondage from thy backer:
I ever hoped that thy unwilling crime
Would be forgot, and thou secured from wrack.
For this I wished and prat'd both day and night:
I only aimed to have thy body freed,
But heaven (beyond my reason) had decreed,
Soul, body, both at once to free thee quite.
Thou in thy life have past a world of trouble,
But death from double Iailes has freed thee double.
Sonnet. 4.
COrruption, Incorruption has put on;
Immortal, weak mortality is made:
Earths woe has gained a happy heavenly throne,
By death, life dies, by life deaths force does fade.
Though death kill life, yet life does conquer death,
Death but puts off our Rags of shame and ^ine:
When for a moment's an eternal breath,
Life (passing through the door of death) does win.
This thou well know (my much beloved friend)
And therefore thou did dare death to his worst,
But he (much busied) could not thee attend,
Or durst not, till thy cares thy heart had burst.
And then the slave came stealing like a thief,
And against his will, did give thy woes relief.
Sonnet. 5.
THou fortunes football, whom she used to toss,
From wrong to wrong, from woe to woe again:
From grief rebounding back to pinching pain,
As't please the blindfold Dame to bless or cross:
But thou, unmoved with either gain or loss,
Nor joy, nor care, could vex they constant brain:
Thou smil'dst at all her buffets with disdain,
And all her favors thou esteem'dst as dross;
Her and her Favorites thou still did deem
Just as they are, not as they seem to be:
Her Minions all as fools thou did esteem,
And that is the cause she would not favor thee:
Then since such reckoning she of fools does make:
Would thou had been one, for her favors fake.
Sonnet. 6.
It Is written in the ever living Word,
(The Rule and Square that men should live thereby)
Afflictions are the tuch-stones of the Lord.
By which he only does his servants try.
Then Noble Moray, thou had many a tuch,
And still the patience good and current proved,
Thy manly carriage in thy griefs were such,
Which made thee (more then much) admired and loved.
What year, what month, week, day or fading hour,
Wherein some mischief did thee not befall?
Yet had Affliction over thee no power
To conquer thee, but thou did conquer all.
Unnumbered times thou wast both touched and tried,
And in thy Makers fear and favor died.
Sonnet. 7.
VVEep heart, weep eyes, weep my unable pen,
In tears of blood, of water, and lake:
With bread of sorrow, and afflictions drink
I live, for I have lost a man of men.
Yet heart, eyes, pen, dry up your tears again,
He is not lost, he is rather newly found:
Enfranchised from a doleful theeuish den,
And with a rich Immortal Crown is crowned,
Then heart, eyes, pen, no more with tears be drowned.
Weep not for him that does rejoice for ever:
Yet this again my comfort does confound,
He Is lost to me, and I shall find him never.
Then weep Muse, heart, eyes, pen lament and weep^
My joys are buried in eternal sleep.
Sonnet. 8.
Sleep, gentle spirit, in Eternal rest,
Free from all heart-tormenting sorrow sleep:
Whilst I do vent from my care-crazed breast,
Hart-wondring sighs that there their mansion keep^^
And let my groans from out that Cauerne deep,
With lamentations and cloud-cracking thunder,
And let mine eyes an Inundation weep,
Let sighs, groans, tears, make all the world to wonder,
I mean my little Microcosmo world,
Sigh storms, groan thunder, weep a flood of teares^
Through every part of me, let grief be hurld,
That whosoever my lamenting hears,
May moan (with me) the cause of this my Ditty,
Or if not moan with me, vonchsafe to pity,
Sonnet. 9.
SInce cursed fates have fatally decreed
To toss and tumble harmless Innocence:
And all the crew of hels abortiue breed
Have glutted Enuies maw, by laws defense:
Yet God whose knowledge knows the least offense,
Who all things sees, with his all-searching eye,
Does with his glorious great omnipotence,
Right wronged wrongs, and hears his servants cry,
His mercie's not immured within the sky,
But freely he does power it down on earth:
He with afflictions scourge his sons does try,
And when he pleases, turns their moan to mirth,
And though man lives in care, and dies in sorrow,
A heavy evening brings a joyful morrow.
Sonnet. 10.
WEll have thou run in this ^y weary race,
Well have thou fought with Satan hand to hand:
Thou Have won the Goal, and gained the blessed Land,
That Is neither limited with time or place.
There thou attendest on the th^^^^^^e of Grace,
There Angels, and Archangels sweetly sing:
Eternal praises to the eternal King,
And see the glorious brightness of his face.
All this I (doubt not) but thou w^ll have done,
Not of thy self (with shameful sin pollated)
But thy Redeemer has the co^^iest won,
And unto thee the victorie's imputed.
He paid the score, and cancelled all thy bands,
And gave thee to his blessed Fathers hands.
Sonnet. 11.
NOw may you theeuing Poets filch and steal:
Without controlement breaking Priscians pate:
For he that whilom could your theft reveal,
Your Critic, and your Hypercriticke late.
Now may you cog and lie and swear and prate,
And make your idle verses lame and halt:
For by the power of euiternall Fate,
He Is gone that could and would correct each fault.
But you have greatest cause to moan his want.
You sacred heavenly Sisters (three times thrice)
He from your Gardens, could all weeds supplant,
And replant fruits and flowers of pecrelesse price;
He kept (unbroke) your Numbers, Tipes and Tropes:
But now he is dead, dead are your only hopes.
Sonnet. 12.
AS Solon, to rich hapless Croesus said,
No man, is happy till his life does end:
The proof in thee so piainly is displaid,
As if he thy Nativity had kend.
What mortal miseries could mischief send,
But thou therein have had a treble share:
As if Calamities their powers should bend,
To make thy Corpse a treasure-house of care?
Yet fell Adversity thou did out-dare,
And valiantly against storms of woe resisted:
Love of the world they mind could not ensnare,
Thou knewst wherein the best of best consisted.
And as old Solon said, so I agree,
Death makes men happy, as it has done thee.
Sonnet. 13.
NO (...) Trophee Virtue needs,
And good report a marble Tomb out-weares:
^^^^^ plays the Herald, and proclaims men's deeds,
Her Trumps Thrill sound the spacious world hears.
And such an universal Tomb have thou,
Borne on the tops of thousand thousand tongs:
Thy living merit does thy name allow
A Monument for ever, which belongs
To none but such as whilom was thy self,
Who used the world as if they used it not:
And did acknowledge misbegorten pelf.
Must (like the getters of it) rust and rot.
And such a living Tomb thy Corpse inherit,
A good report, according to thy merit.
Sonnet. 14.
HAd I the skill of Homer, Maro, Naso,
Or had I that Admired ornated style
Of Petrark, or the brave Italian Tasso,
I could not overmuch thy praise compile.
But as I am (alas and woe the while)
A poor unlearned silly simple swain:
At whose attempt the world with scorn will smile,
And flout th'vnshapen issne of my brain.
But duty bids me lanch into this Maine,
Though my performance be but weak of store,
Yet worthy minds this goodness do retain,
Not to despise the service of the poor.
I loved him living, and my love to show,
My least and last poor love I here bestow.
FINIS.
A FUNERAL ELEGY: DEPLORING THE DEATH OF THE TRVE Pattern, Patron, and
mirror of Honor, the Right Honorable Lord, JOHN RAMSEY, Lord Discount
HADINGTON, Earl of HOLDERNESSE, Who departed this life on Tuesday, the 24 of
January last, and was buried in the Abby-Church of Westminster on Tuesday the
last of February following.

Haee dextra vindex, Principis and Patriae,
An A R M E and hand (well ARMED
With HEAVENLY might)
That gripes a just drawn SWORD,
thrust through a HEART;
Adorned with a ROYAL DIADEM:
This, and this Motto was his own by right,
Given by his SOVEREIGN for his just desert,
And in his Coat of ARMS inserted them.
His right Hand did revenge, and over came,
His Prince and Countries foes, and purchased fame.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and virtuous Lady, the LADY MARTHA, Countess of
Holdernesse.
RIght Honored Madame, to your noble view,
These lines of grief, with grief I dedicate:
Not that I would your cares a fresh renew,
Or any way your sorrows aggrauate.
Of you put please to read what I relate,
My hope is, that your grieved heart shall find
Some things that may your woe extenuate,
And add some comfort to your care-craz'd mind,
And as you still have nobly been inclined,
To bear with Christian patience every cross:
So be that Virtue still to you combinde,
Supporting you, to undergo this loss.
Thus craving pardon, I the heavens implore,
To make your sorrowers less, your comfort more.
JOHN TAILOR.

A Sonnet of true and notable observations, upon feuen several Teuesdayes.
Upon a Tuesday he his Birth began.
Upon a Tuesday he his baptism^ had,
Upon a Tuesday he his Honor ^ anne,
Upon the Gowries, (whose intents were bad.)
Upon a Tuesday he at first did wed
The Noble Sussex daughter, who deceast:
Upon a Tuesday then he married
Sir William Cockains C^alde, by heavens behest.
Upon a Tuesday he d^ataste Deaths Cup,
And to his blessed Redeemer gave his spirit.
Upon a Tuesday he was closed up
Within his Tomb, which does his Corp^ inherit.
Thus upon Tuesdaies 'twas his lot to have,
Birth, Baptism, Honor, two Wives, Death and Grave.
A FUNERAL ELEGY.
YOu Poets all, where is your Art become?
Are you all tong-ti'd? ar your Muses duin
Or are your sorrows in your breasts so shut
That you your pens to paper cannot put?
Can neither duty, or your love express,
The lamentable loss of Holdernesse?
Alas! I know, that you do know, his Worth
Was far beyond your skils to blazon forth,
And that when you had done what could be done,
It had been as a Taper to the Sun.
He was an Ocean, for whose sake I know,
A dry invention may with plenty flow:
He was a well manured fertile field,
Which to a barren wit would harvest yield:
He was a Subject of transcendent size,
Beyond each vulgar pen to Poetize:
And though I know my self unworthy far,
With my poor Glow-worme Muse, to attend this Star:
Yea, though I cannot as I would endite,
Attribute here I offer up my mite,
Which in his Noble Treasury I throw,
My latest Duty that I can bestow.
And well I hope these lines of m^ne shall last,
When as his Tomb by Time shall be de^ac'd,
Yea, though I had no hope to hue so long,
To write his Epicedia^, or Deaths song:
Yet since God so decrees, this Elegy
My duty, love, and thanks, shall testify.
How can the World but be in Honor poor,
Since it in losing him, has lost such store?
Or how can Virtue hope to live and thrive,
He Is dead, whose life preserved her alive,
Religion was his Tutresse, and his Matron,
And unto her he was a zealous Patron;
Tru^ Charity beloved with him did live,
And (to the poor) his Glory was to give.
Yet was his bounty from the world so hid;
His right hand know not what his left hand did;
So that his carriage, and his Noble parts,
Justly deserved, and firmly kept men's hearts,
That his true praise great Britains Bounds did fill,
And no man e're had cause to wish him ill.
His merits (through Heavens favor) did afford,
That Heldernesse had every man's good word,
For though the world does undergo this curse,
That every day it waxes worse and worse:
He had a Noble and a Christian way,
Whereby his life was bettered every day.
For to his end, even from his days of youth,
His time did sade, but goodness still had growth,
So as his life did wear, his Virtue grew,
And Grace did daily still more Grace renew.
He was no diuing Politician,
Or proiect-seeking Monopolitan.
He never prouok'd the silly orphants cries,
Nor filled with tears the woeful widows eyes,
But as his Princes favor he did merit,
He used it with such modesty of Spirit,
That though he might almost have what he would,
Yet in such bounds he his demands did hold,
Which Honor and his Conscience did restrain,
That Prince or people never could complain.
So as his life was all good men's content,
His death does generally make all lament;
Much like a fruitful piece of land well tilled,
Or as a Box with precious ointment filled,
Even so his Actions and his Conversation
Pleased, pleasur'd and much honored all our Nation.
And though that Honors do change mannees much,
Yet sure in him the effects were never such:
Though merit, and the kings benignity,
Did raise him unto Noble dignity,
Though he in Titles was promoted high,
Yet still his mind retained Humility,
That though desert had made his honors more,
His mind was raised no higher then before.
Promotion with humility combind
A losty Title, and a lowly mind.
These Virtues are exceeding great and rare,
And not by many men possessed are,
And yet in him these gifts were so apparent,
As if they had been natural inherent.
For had he been with love of Pride endowd,
He had the means that might have made him proud.
He never esteemed Court complementing bubbles,
Nor cared he for the flattring Knee that doubles:
He knew it was Ambitions only end,
To mount up higher when it seems to bend,
And therefore he these frothy toys did shun:
(Not fit for men, but Monkeyes to be done)
And in his actions showed himself to be
Full of plain, honest, true integrity:
He every way himself did so demean,
That from his harvest good and bad might gleane
Instructions to direct, and good directions
How to instruct their follies fond affections
No doubt but God did him preordinate,
To be a special blessing to the State,
By constellation and Heavens Influence,
Marked for remarked service for his Prince:
For all his youth almost to manly age,
He was to Royal James a trusty Page,
When as his conversation and behavior,
Gained and retained his Sovereigns special savor.
In our Redemptions sixteenth hundred year,
Then did his service happily appear
Then did he prove himself Heavens instrument,
His Gracious Masters murder to prevent,
Upon that day of famous memory,
Of Gowries wrack, and black Conspiracy.
That day of note (which never shall be forgot)
That fist of August, 'twas his lucky lot
To kill a brace of Traitors, at the time
When as they were in action of the crime.
For when the younger brother of the twain,
In murderous manner would the king have slain:
When nothing could his treachery divert,
But that he vowed to stabbe his Sovereigns heart,
The Whilst the King and he with eager will
Were striving, one to save, and one to kill,
So long that bustling both 'twixt life and death,
They both were tired and almost out of breath,
The king, (like Daniel in the Lions Den)
As 'twere by miracle preserved then,
Then Noble Ramsey was by God appointed,
To save his Sovereign, and the Leras Ano^^ted;
For he (by Gods direction) found a way,
Where they were feussting, and without delay,
He strait made Alexander Remthen feel
The force and fury of revenging steel.
For with three stabs he did the Traitor wound,
And cast him down the stairs (an Act renowned)
When strait Earl Gowry found his brother slain,
With two drawn swords ran up the stairs amain,
Well-knowing of his life's approaching date,
Infused with rage and madness desperate,
Laying about him like a demy-Diuell,
With purpose to conclude his last act evil:
With many a furious stroke and ill-meant thrust,
He madly did his best to do his worst,
Whilst this deceased Lord a Bulwark stood,
And wounded, Nobly spent his Noble blood,
And with a thrust most fortunate and fierce,
He with his sword the Earls heart through did pierce.
This happy service of most high esteem,
Was but his duty, as himself did deem,
Yea, though it was an action meritorious,
Yet selfe-opinion made him not vainglorious,
To arm or sword did he no praise impute,
Nor to his courage stoure and resolute.
But thanking God that had him so directed,
Whereby this worthy service was effected,
Attributing all praise and Majesty
To God that made him means of victory.
Thus he like one of David's Worthies then.
Gained at one time the love of God and men:
Of God, for his humility of heart,
Of men, for his good service and desert.
Consider you these mournful lines that read,
Think but how much true Nobleness is dead,
Which having pondred well, who can forbear,
But for his lofle to spend a sigh or tear?
For all that loved King James, must likewise love
Him, whose good service did so faithful prove,
Who loved his master so, that men might see
That from him long he could not sundred be;
And as he truly on him here attended.
So knowing him to higher state ascended,
To make his loyalty the more appear,
He left this world, to wait upon him there.
Each honest Britain in his loss has share,
The grief is universal, and the care
Has taken possession of both high and low,
Even from the Royal Throne unto the Plough.
The King has lost a servant true and just,
^^ whom he might reposc especial trust,
And his companions Peers have lost a friend,
Whose virtues very few men could transcend:
His honorable Countess she has lost
The comfort where her joy consisted most:
His Nobles father' in laws are full of grief,
And are (in sorrows) equal with the chief:
His worthy honored brethren are possessed,
With each of them a sad and grieved breast:
And From his servants, death a Lord has taken,
Whose like they have no hope to find again.
His kindred all are filled with sad laments.
His friends are fraught with woe and discontents,
His friends (say I) alas, he had no foes,
And therefore all are partners in these woes.
I, in particular am now deprived
Of him who formerly when he suruiu'd,
Did cause King James of his especial grace,
On me (desertlesse) to bestow a place,
Which makes me in these poor sad lines express
My love, my duty, and my thankfulness:
Thus as the waves each other has in chase,
So is our life in this our mortal race:
Through many changes from nativity,
We gain our manhood or maturitie:
And this dear Lord before his Winters age,
At mid-time was abridg'd his Pilgrimage,
Yet to the world it very plain appears,
His age was more in goodness then in years.
Thus every one may for his loss complain,
All losers, only Heaven and he did gain.
His mortal race he here so well did run,
That good report and love his life has won.
The glorious host of Heaven has gained a spirit,
(Through his firm faith in his Redeemers merit)
And he an earthly Earldom has forgone,
For true content, and an immortal Throne.
He lived the life of Grace whilst he was here,
And therefore has the life of Glory there.
He through the assistance of his Makers might,
Has fought a good, a valiant, Christian fight,
And now inshrin'd in everlasting bliss,
He from his house of Clay advanced is,
His course he ran so in this vale of strife,
That he has won, and wears a Crown of life;
Of true eternal happiness possessed,
Whilst we with cares and sorrows are oppressed.
FINIS.
JOHN RAMSEYE Anagramma. HONER'S I AIM, MY HONER'S AYE.
TO VERTVE, and to HONOR once in Rome,
Two stately Temples there erected was,
Where none might unto Honors Temple come,
But first through VERTVES Temple they must pass.
Which was an Emblem, and a Document,
That men by virtue must true honor win,
And that, that HONOR shall be permanent,
Which only did from Virtue first begin.
Thus was this Noble Lords high Honor won,
Through Virtue, and by Virtue it increased:
And though his mortal Pilgrimage be done,
Yet shall his Honor never be deceast.
And as for him, his Anagrams do say.
HONER'S I AIM; Therefore MY HONER'S AYE
THE WATER-CORMORANT.
DEDICATED TO GENTLEMEN, AND THOSE THAT ARE GENTLE.
Which nay scene, fearce, or Printers ^^^ work when a ^^^ ^^^ into the Proffe,
yet Cormorant oppress, and therefore worthy to the pressed; but mu Cormorant
has neither ^^^ his ^^^ ^^ ^^^. ^^ smooth the fai of the ^^^ worcester stoped his
mouth to ^^^^ ^^^^ tuous: I have thought good to sympathze ^^^ and I have done
my best to handle it in a fatable ^^^^.

The Cormorant is nost castly unduced to ass^^^^, nor I to stattery. J.s best
serunce is harsh and vnsectable, so is my style. His biting is sharp and
percing, so is my phrase. His thro^^^ wide and spacious, my subject is
spa^^ous. His color is black, Id sooner deeds of ^^^knesse. He grabs and
spuddles for his prey in muddy holes and obscure cauernes, my Muse ferrus hase
debaushed wretches in their swmsh dens. He like the Crocodile moves the upper
chap, thus Treatise condemns that beasts dissmula^^. He Is swallows down his
meat without taste, this book distastes such as sin without touch of
conscience.

The ods is, my Cormorants appetite is limited, but must of there is is vnsatable.

I aim not at such men's ^^^ as may fall by msirmty, for that were the Esops
crab, to offer to teach others to go right, going crooked my self.

Detraction is private wounding of means name, and flattery and a de^ourer of
men aloue. If I can sail betwixt these two, and not be spht, I shall arrive at
my desired [part.

In my passage I shall have Polipheme casting rocks to sincke me, Critics
misconstrung my words. like spiders sucking poison out of wholesome flowers.

But from these Antipodes to goodness, by their A^^^besis to ^^^^, I appeal
to my conference, which it a witness to me that can neither accese or condomme
me.

Fayme at none but such as de^uoure others, and set make thirst to keep
themselves out of thereach of Law, I name none personally, and therefore with
the faults, to amend with silence, rather thereby rubbing off a spot to make a
hole in the whole cloth, for I leave gleanings enough to make a second part if
need require. Such stomachs as cannot d^^gest this does, ^^ me rather de to
them a Choake-peare them a Gudgeon.

There is no degree of man or woman, whatsoever, from the Court to the Cottage,
or from the Palace to the Plough, but many make good ese of this Poem, either
for merry recreation, or vtees defamation: and in a word, if it please the
^^^^^ or be any way profitable for the confirming of the good, or reforming the
bad, I have then my full recompense, with the effect of my intentous and wishes.

JOHN TAILOR

THE VVATER-CORMORANT HIS COMPLAINT: Against a Brood of Land-CORMORANTS.
Divided into fourteen Satyrs.
1 A Jesuit. 2 A Separatist. 3 A Trust-breaker. 4 A Drunkard. 5 A prodigal
Gallant. 6 An Extortioner and Broker. 7 A Basket-Iustice. 8 A Cut purse. 9 A
good and bad Constable. 10 A Serieant and Iaylor. 11 A Patron and his Clarke.
12 A Country Yeoman. 13 A Figure-Stinger. 14 A Lawyer, and Vndershriue.
My Cormorant against these does inuey,
And proves himself much better far then they.
A Jesuit.
THE ARGUMENT.
King-killing Monsters out of Heavens mouth spewed,
Caters, and Butchers, unto Rome and Flell:
The bane of Youth and Age, in blood imbrow'd:
Perditions gulf, where all foul Treasons dwell.
Lands, lives, and Souls under the saving style
Of JESUS, they devour, confound, beguile.
IN setting down this Sect of blood compact,
Me thinks I see a tragic Scene in act:
The Stage all hanged with the sad death of Kings,
From whose bewailing story sorrow springs.
The Actors dipped in crueltre and blood,
Yet make bad deeds pass in the name of good.
And kindling new Commotions, they conspire
With their hot Zeal, to set whole Realms on fire,
As 'twas apparent when they did combine,
Against us, in their fatal Powder-Mine.
All Hell for that black Treason was plowed up,
And mischief drank deep of damnations cup:
The whole vast Ocean sea, no harbor grants
To such devouring greedy Cormorants,
In the wide gulf of their abhorred designs
Are thoughts that find no room in honest minds.
And now I speak of Rome even in her Sea,
The Iesiutes the dangerous whirle-pooles be,
Religions are made Waves, that rise and fall
Before the wind or breath Poutisicall,
The Pope sends storms forth, seuers or combines.
According to his mood, it raines or shines;
And who is ready to put all his will
In execution, but the Jesuit still.
Nor has his Cormorant long taken degree,
For Esacus more ancient is then he:
Years thousands since Troyes son he was created,
And from a man but to a Bird translated,
Whereas the Jesuit deriues descent
But from Ignatius Loyala, that went
For a maimed Spanish soldier, but herein
The difference rises, which has ever bin:
From Man to Bird, one's changed shape began,
The other to a Devil from a Man.
Yet here in these wide maw'd Esacians,
May Well agree with these Ignatians,
First black's the color of the gro^dy Foul,
And black's the Jesuits habit like his soul,
The bird is lean though often he be full craw'd,
The Iesuit's hatchet faced, and wattle jaw'd,
The Cormorant (as nature best be fits)
Still without chewing does deucure whole bits,
So Jesuits swallow many a Lordly living,
All at a gulp without grace or thanksgiving.
The birds throat (gaping) without intermission,
Resembles their most cruel Inquisition,
From neither is, Nonest redemptio,
For what into the Corm'rants throat does go,
Or Jesuits Barrathrum does once retain,
It never returns fit for good use again.
Eighty years since he stole the Epithet
From JESUS, to be called a Jesuit.
But I could find him out a style more right,
From Judas to be named Iscari^^^e,
Though Paul the third their title did approve,
Yet he confirmed their number that above
Three score they should not be, and yet we see,
How much increased now the vipers be,
That many a thousand Christian lies and groans,
Under the slau'ry of these devilish drones,
And he that knows but truly what they are,
Will judge a Cormorant'^ their better far.
A Separatist.
THE ARGUMENT.
Here earth and hell have made a false commixion,
Of painted Zeal, and holiness, and love:
Of Faith, of Hope, of Charity, (in fiction)
In smoke and shadows as the fruits do prove,
Hypocrisy, which long prayers dorb repeat,
D^oureth Widows, and poor Orphans cheat.
NOw enters next to play his Oily part
A Saiue in tongue, but a rough devil in heart:
^^^ that so smoothly swallows his prey down,
Without wrath shown, or any seeming frown.
You Would think him when he does't, in a Psalm,
Or at his prayers, hee'sfo mild and calm:
No noise, no trouble to his conscionce cries,
For he deuoures his prey with heau'd up eyes.
Stands most demurely swallowing down his bit,
And lickes his lips with long grace after it.
This Bell-wether (sit reu'rence) leads the slocke,
After his sense grafted in errors stock,
This reu'rend Barrabas, a Button-maker,
Himself with trusty Demas his partaker,
^leets with their Brethren, Chore, Abiram, Dathan,
And tear me our Church the Synagogue of Satan.
Wise Balaanz, Nabal, Esan, Ismael,
Tertullus, Theudas, and Ao^itophed,
Phyge^^us, Himereus, and Philetus,
(A crew of turne-coates that desire to cheat us)
These fellows with their ample folio graces,
With mumping chaps, and counterfeited faces,
Though they like shotten herrings are to see,
Yet such tall Soldiers of their teeth they be,
That two of them like greedy Cormorants,
D^^oures more then fix honest Protestants.
When privately a sister and a brother
Do meet, there is dainty doings with each other:
There Is no dulay, they never stand shall I shall I,
Hermogenes with Da^i^^ does dally:
And Simei with Saphira will dispute,
That nine months after the does bear the fruit.
When Zimri kissing Iezabel does greet,
And Cozbi with her brother C^am, oh sweet,
It Is fit to try (their humors to refresh)
A Combat twixt the spirit and the flesh:
Provided that they do it secretly,
So that the wicked not the same ^py:
These youths deride the Sutplesie, Cross and Ring.
The knee at Sacrament or any thing
The Church holds Reverend, and to testify
Their bastardy, the Fathers they deny.
And of themselves they frame Religions new,
Which Christ and his Apostles never knew;
And with vntemper'd mortar of their own,
They build a Church to all good men unknown,
Railes at the Harmonious Organs, and the Coape,
Yet in each Church of theirs, they rail a Pope,
Calls it the badge of Antichristian dross,
When they see butter printed with the Cross;
And yet for coin they ^eny man beguile,
For when they tell it, they turn up the pile,
Upon the Sabbath, they 'l no Physic take,
Lest it should work, and so the Sabbath break.
They hate to see a Churchman ride (why so)
Because that Christ bad his Apostles go,
Against our Churches all, they have exclaimed,
Because by Saints names most of them are named
If these new Saints, no old Saints will abide,
From Christendom they must, or run, or ride.
Saint George from England chases them away,
Saint Andrem does in Scotland bear like sway:
From Ireland good Saint Patriske them will banisn,
Saint Dennis out of France will make them vanish:
Saint James will force them out of spain to fly,
So will Saint Anthony from Italy,
And last of all (whom I had half forgot)
Saint Dany out of Wales will make them trot.
And what ungodly place can harbor then,
These sugitiue unnatural Englishmen:
Except that with the Turk or Inside^^,
Or on, or in the Sea, they mean to dwell,
That if in lesser room they may be crammed,
And live and dye at Amfier and be damned,
And sure I hold some Roman Catholics
Much better then these selfe-wild Scilmatickes.
For Papills have good affability,
And some have learning, most have Charity,
Except a Jesuit, whom I think a man,
May term a right Papistick Puritan.
And for the Sep'ratist l justly call,
A Scismatick Impuritanicass.
B^t yet the Iesuit's constant in his mind,
The Scismatick is wauertingly inclined.
Besides he thinks whilst he on earth does live,
It Is charity to take and not to give.
There are a sort of men which conscience make.
Of what they say, or do, or undertaker:
Who neither will dissamble, swear, or lie,
Who to good ends their actions all apply,
Who keep the Sabbath, and relieve the poor,
According to their portions and their store:
And these good people some men do backbite
And call them Puritanes, in scotne and spite,
But let all know that do abuse them so,
That for them is reserved a fearful woe;
I love and reverence only bear to such,
And those that here inuectiuely I touch
Are Birds whose Consciences are more unclean
Then any Cormorant was e're known or seen:
He stand toth censure of all honest men,
If they disprove me, I Will never write again.
A Trust-breaker.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Foe to Justice, a corrupted Friend,
Anou^ward Angel, and an inward Fiend;
A hidden Serpent, a most subtle Fox,
A Sugared poison, in a painted Box:
A Sirens song, assuring to mishap,
A Snzre to Honesty, and Vertuestrap.
THe Rich Trust breaker, upon whom hell waits
Does thrust into the River of Estates,
His soul devouring Beak, and at one prey
Will swallow fourteen Tradesmen in a day:
As many of the Country Lordships slips
Flapdragon like, by his insatiate lips,
The Father sometimes has been often undone,
By too much trusting his unnatural Son,
And a Trust-breaker has a trick in's pate
To bring a rich Ward to a Beggars state.
For some corrupted men have got tuition,
Of rich men's Heirs, and changed their condition
With false inducements to Recusancy,
Or suffering them through prodigality
To run so far in debt that all their Lands
Are lost before they come into their hands.
Fair schools of learning have bin built fr^o ground
For Boys whose fathers were not worth five pound;
But false Trust-breakers hold it for no sin,
To keep our poor men's Sons, take rich men's in.
This Breach of Trust is multiplide in time
TO a Catholic and universal crime,
That man to man is grown so much unjust,
That he is a wise man that knows who to trust,
But (if therebe such) they do want much care,
Who trust not in the world, nor trusted are.
Collectorships the Common wealth may lurch,
For Burnings, Highwayes, Bridges, or the Church,
For loss at Sea, for Hospitals and Schools,
One hundred knaves, may make ten thousand fools.
Yet these things are so needful as I wot,
He Is a base villain that contributes not,
But he is a Hell-bound that their Trust deceiues,
And the right due from those that want bereaues^
Why, this Trust-breaking has the exc^lent skill
To make a Wise to burn her Husbands Will,
Because his first Wives Children should not have
The Portions that within that Will he gave.
And oftentimes a gasping man for breath,
Distracted with the griping pangs of death,
Has to a forged will suscrib'd his hand,
And dispossessed his own Son of his land.
Trust breakers, may a senseless hand to ^^e.
(Though being six hours dead) ^o write a Name,
A rich man's wealth that is dead^ like unto, ^^ old
And that is because it is never truly) told^
For like to pitch it has polluting tricks,
And some unto the fing'rers fingers sticks.
But of all Rascals since the world began,
The Banckrupt Pollitick's the only man,
In courteous fashion many hee'lvndo,
And be much pittyed and rewarded too:
For having got much wealth into his claws,
He holds it faster then a Cormorants jaws.
Can hold a silly fish, and at the last,
Himself, himself will into prison cast,
And having broke for thousands, there the hound
Compounds perhaps for ten groates in the pound,
Sets richly up again till him he sees,
To break, to prison again, again agrees:
And thus a cunning knave can with a trice,
Break, and be whole again, once, twice or thrice.
These Cormorants are worse then thieves therefore,
And being worse, deserve a hanging more.
A Thief speaks what he means and takes your purse
A Banckrupt flattering rob^ you ten times worse,
The one does seldom rob ye of all your pelse,
The other leaves you naught to help your self:
And yet the one for a little the euins may,
At Tiburne make a hanging holyday;
Whilst the great Thief may with a golden prop,
To fair Revenues turn a Pedlers shop.
In this voracity Father stands not free
From his own Son, nor from his uncle, he
Being made Executor to the Scates of men,
My Corm'rant is a piddler to him then,
He will by cuning and vexation draw,
Heir, wealth and All, into his ravenous maw,
And when his gorge is full up to the brim,
Into some loathsome prison vomits him.
There leaves the honor of a house and name,
To be exchanged for misery and shame:
Now tell me they that love fair truth indeed,
If such mawes do not Corm'rants guts exceed.
And to what place soever such resort,
They are the Foul Birds both in Town and Co^^
A Drunkard.
THE ARGUMENT.
A madness dearly bought with loss of fame:,
Of credit and of manly reputation:
A cursed purchase of disease and shame.
Of death, and a great hazard of Dar^^uation:
In all that is bad, the diuel's only Aps,
Worse then a beast, in the best manly saape.
THis fellow with the dropsy grown as big,
And much more beastly then a Sow with pig,
His cheeks like Boreas swollen, he blowed and puffed,
His paunch like to a woolpaok crammed and stuffed:
And by the means of what he swil'd and gul'd,
He looked, like one that was three quarters mul'd.
His breath compounded of strong English Beer,
And th'Indian drug would suffer none come near.
From side to side he staggered as he went,
As if he reeling did the way indent.
Oae skirt of's cloak scarce reached unto his waste,
The other dragging in the dirt he traced.
His very brains within his head were stewed,
And looked so crimson colored scarlet hewed,
As'twere an Ignis faunus, or a comet.
His garments stunke most sweetly of his vomit.
Faced with the tap^lash of strong Ale and Wine,
Which from his ^au'ring chaps does often decline,
In truth he looked as red as any coal,
And bellied like unto a mare with foale:
With hollow eyes, and with the palsy shaking,
And gouty legs with too much liquor taking.
This valiant pot-leach, that upon his knees
Has drunk a thousand pottles up se freese,
Such pickled pharses he had got in store,
As were unknown unto the times of yore:
As when he drinks out all the toall sum,
Gave it the style of supernagullnum,
And when he quaffing does his entrails wash,
It Is called a bunch, a thruft: a whiffe, a slash:
And when earousing makes his wits to fail,
They say he has a rattl^ at his tail,
And when his wits are in the wetting shrunk,
You may not say he is drunk though he be drunk,
For though he be as drunk as any Rat,
He has but caught a Fox; or whist the Cat.
Or some say he is bewitched, or scratcht, or blind.
Which are the fittest terms that I can find,
Or seen the Lions, or his nose is dirty,
Or he is pot shaken, or out two and thirty.
And then strange languages comes in his head,
When he wants English how to go to bed:
And though it were fit the swine should in his stye be,
He spewes out latin with probibitibi.
Which is, provide for Tiburne (as I take it)
Or if it be not, he may chance to make it.
Then Irish Shachatwhorum from him flees,
And half dozen welsh me Vatawhees:
Until he falls asleep he skinks and drinks,
And then like to a Bore he winkes, and stinkes.
This Cormorant in one day swallows more,
Then my poor Esacus does in a score.
For mine but once a day does take his fill,
The drunkard, night and day does q^asfe and swill,
Drink was ordained to length mantainting breath,
And from that liquor, Drunkards draw their death:
Displeasing God, the devil he only pleases,
And drinks with others healths, his own diseases.
And in the end, contempt and shame's his share,
The whilst a Tapster is his only Heir
Thus drinke's a wrastlor that gives many a fall,
To death, to beggary and slavish thrall.
And drunkenness a wilful madness is,
That throws men to Hels bottomless abisse.
For why, where Drunkenness is mistress these,
Sobriety can hardly maistry bear:
And it is no question but the Land has down'd,
More men with drink, then Seas did e're confound.
Wine is Earth's blood, which from her breast does spring,
And (well used) is a comfortable thing.
But it abused from it then begins,
Most horrible notorious crying sins,
As Murder, Lechery, ^orietie,
Gods wrath, damnation in variety:
For hoe that is a Drunkard, is the sum,
And abstract of all mischiefs that can come,
It wafts him soul and body, life and limb.
My Cormorant's a sober beast to him.
He that persuades a man to steal or lie,
To swear, or to commit adultery,
To stab or murder any man that lives,
Can it be said that he good counsel gives?
And he that tempts and forces men to drink,
Persuades a man to damn himself, I think,
For drunken men have into dangers run,
Which (being sober) they would never have done.
I take them for no friends that give me Wine,
To turn me from a man unto a swine,
To make me void of manners, sense, or reason,
To abuse God, blaspheming odious treason,
To hurt my soul and body, fame and purse,
To get the devil, and gain Gods heavy curse.
Though many take such for their friends to be,
I wish them hanged that are such Friends to me:
For greater enemies there cannot dwell
In the whole world, nor in the bounds of hell.
Good friendly drinking I account not evil,
But much carousing, which makes man a devil,
Wanting the privilege that bath a horse,
And to be urged and fore'd to drink perforce.
For why a horse this government has still,
Drinks what he will, and not against his will,
And he that that good rule does ouer-passe,
Has less discretion then a Horse or Ass,
And any ^^man that does this temperance want,
Is a worse gluttoa then my Cormorant.
A prodigal Country Gallant, and his new made Maddam.
THE ARGUMENT.
Tailors fools, Times bables, and prides Apes,
That as a Squirrell skips from tree to tree:
So they like Porteus leap from shapes to shapes,
Like foul swords in gi^t scabberds, be and she
Their carcass pampers, goergeously bedect,
Whilst their poor starued souls they both neglect.
NOw steps my young gull-gallant into play,
Who (born to land) ^th country scorns to stay,
To live by wit (thanks Sire) he has no need,
And if he should be hanged can scarcely read.
Drabs, dice, and drink are all his only joys,
His pockets, and his spurs his gingling boys,
A squirrels tail hangs dangling at his ear,
A badge which many a gull is known to wear,
His eyes rod-blood-shot, arguing a sod brain,
His dam-him voice set to the roaring strain:
His nose will inlaid with rich jemmes about,
As from a watch Tower, their heads peeping out,
Attended fitly, (fitting for the age)
With two shagg'd Russians and a pyde-coat Page,
Who breares his box, and his Tobacco fills,
With stopper, tongs, and other vtensils.
This Fop, late buried er'e he came up hither,
Hit thrist and's Father in one grave together,
His Country stock he sold, for that is the fashion,
And to a Farmer gave it new translation:
His Fathers servants he thrust out of door,
Allows his mother but a pension poor:
Salutes you with an oath at every word,
Sirrah or slave he liberal does afford.
His Father (a good housekeeper) being dead,
He scorns his honest block should fit his head:
And through he be not skilled in Magic Art,
Yet to a Coach he turned his Fathers Cart,
Four Teames of Horses, to four Flanders Mares,
With which to London he in pomp repaires,
Woo's a she Gallant, and to Wife he takes her:
Then buys a kinghthood, and a maddam makes her.
And yearly they upon their backs are wear,
That which often fed five hundred with good cheer.
Whilst in the Country all good bounty's spilt
His house, as if a Iugler it had built,
For all the Chimneyes where great fires were made,
The smoke at one hole only is conuey'd:
No times observed nor charitable Laws,
The poor receive their answer from the Dawes,
Who in their caying language call it plain
Mockbegger Manor, for they came in vain.
They that dewoure what Charity should give
Are both at London, there the Cormorants live,
But so transformed of late do what you oan,
You Will hardly know the woman from the man:
There Sir Tim Twirlepipe and his lady gay,
Do pordigally spend the time away;
Being both exceeding proud, and scornful too,
And any thing but what is good they will do:
For Incubus and Succubus have got
A crew of fiends which the old world knew not;
That if our Grandfathers and Grand-dams should
Rise from the dead, and these mad times behold.
Amazed they half madly would admire,
At our fantastic gestures and attire;
And they would think that England in conclusion,
Were a mere babble Babell of confusion.
That Muld^ sack for his most vnfashion'd fashions,
Is the fit pattern of their transformations:
And Mary Frith does teach them modesty,
For she does keep one fashion constantly,
And therefore she deserves a Matron^ praise,
In these inconstant Moone-like changing days,
A witless Ass (to please his wives desire)
Pays for the sewell, for her prides hot fire:
And he and she will wast, consume, and spoil:
To feed the stinking lamp of pride with oil:
When with a sword, he gat a knightly name,
With the same blow, his Lady was struck lame,
For if you mark it she no ground does tread,
(Since the blow fell) except that she be led:
And Charity is since that time (some say)
In a Carts younger brother borne away.
These are the Cormorants that have the power
To swallow a Realm, and last themselves deuoare:
And let their gaudy friends think what they will,
My Cormorant shall be their better still.
An Extortioner and a Broaker.
THE ARGUMENT.
Friends to but few, and to their own souls worst,
With Aspish poison poisoning men at first,
Who laughing languish, never think on death,
Until these Wolves (with biting) stop their breathy^
The diued and they at no time can be sunder'd,
And all their trade is forty in the hundred.
Room for two hounds well coupl'd, and it is pi^^y
To part them they do keep such ra^ck ^'th cit^^
The Extortioner is such a fiend that he
Does make the Vsu^er a Saint to be,
One for a hundreds use does take but ten,
The Other for ten a hundred takes again:
The one among Christians is well tolerated,
Tother's of heaven and earth a^^ort'd and heated,
The one does often help a man distressed,
The other adds oppression to the oppressed.
By paying use a man may thrive and get,
But by extortion never none could yet.
Though usury be bad, ('it is understood,
Compared with extortion) it seemses good.
One by retaile, and the other by the great,
Lagr^se the prosi^s of the whole worlds sweat,
That man is happy that has meat and cloth,
And stands in need of neither of them both.
Extortioners are Monsters in ail Nations,
All their Conditions turn to obligations,
Wax is their shot, and writing pens their Guns,
Their powder is the Ink that from them runs.
And this dank powder has blown up more men
In one year, then gun powder has in ten.
Bills are their weapons, parchments are their shields,
With weh they win whole Lordships, towns and fields
And for they know in heaven they never shall dwell,
They ing^ose the earth before they come to hell.
Yet all their lives here they with cares are vexed,
Slaves in this world, and Hell Hounds in the next.
And what they over the devils back did win,
Their heyrres beneath his belly wast in sin.
The Broaker is the better senting Hound,
He hunts and scouts till he his prey has found,
The gallant which I mentioned late before,
Turning old Hospitality out of door,
And having swallowed Tenants and their crops,
Coming to town, he crams Extortions chops^
Craft there, may here again be set to School,
A Country Knave often proves a City Fool.
He that a Dogs part plays when he is there,
A Wolf deuoures him when he comes up here:
The silly swain the racking Landlord worries,
But swain and Landlord both extortion curries.
First thing is done, the Broaker smells him forth,
Hants all his haunts, enquires into his worth:
Sen^s out his present wants, and then applies,
R^nk payson to his wounds for remedies.
Instead of licking, he is a biting whelpe,
And rancles most, when he most seems to help,
And he hunts dry foot; never spends his throat
Till he has caught his game, and then his note
Lult him asleep fast in Extortions bands
There leaves him, takes his fee o'th goods and lands.
And as he is the Commonwealths deceiuer,
So for the most part, he is the thieves receiver.
Hangs up the hangmans wardrop at his door,
Which by the hangman has been hanged before.
A s^sh-wife, with a pawn, does money secke,
He^ two pence takes for twelve pence e^^^^ week
Which makes me ask my self a question
And to my self I answer make again:
Was Hen^d^d^ch ^^^ ^tch ^^^
Before the B^oskers in ^^^ street (...)
No sure it was not it has got that name
From them, and ^^^^ that come they thither came:
And well it now may called be H^^ds^itch,
For there are H^n^ds will g^ue a vengeance ^wich.
These are the Gulphes that swallow all by lending.
Like my old shoes, quite pa^^ all hope of ^pending:
I Would throw my Cormoran^^ deid into the pooles.
If they crammed sish so fa^^ as these eat fools.
A Basket-Iustice.
THE ARGUMENT.
The best of men, when tr^^ly exercis'd^
The actor may a Saint be cono^^^'d:
No Policy, but practice Justice ^ra^es,
Those whom br^bes ^^ have ^^^^ names:
Of what they should be, thus the La^^du
When judgments just flow from the Judges breast.
BEfore the noise of these two Hounds did ceasa,
A Justice (coming by) commanded peace:
Peace Curres (q ^. he) and learn to take your prey
And not a word, so wise folks go your way:
This is youth that sued his p'ac^ to have,
Bought his authority to play the knave.
And as for coin he did his place obtain,
So he will sell iustie to mak't vpagaine,
For the old proverb ^its his humor well,
That he that dearly buys must dearly sell.
The sword of Justice draw he stoutly can,
To guard a knave, and grieve an honest man,
His clarke's the Beethat fills his comb with honey,
He has the wit, his master has the money.
Such Iusticer as this (if men do mark)
It altogether guided by his Clarke.
He Is the vice Justice, he works all by's wits,
The whilst his master pickes his teeth or spits,
Walks, hums, and nods, calls knave at every turn,
(As if he in a dawes nest had been borne:)
No other language from his worship ^ees,
But prisons, Warrants, Mittimus, and ^ees:
Commit before he search out the often^s,
And hear the matter after two days hence,
Talks of Recognizances, and has scope,
To bind and loose as if he were the Pope.
Be the ease never so good, yet build upon it,
Fees must be paid, for that is the humor on'r.
And thus with only cursed wealth and beard,
He makes a world of witless fools afeard.
And when he gives them but a smile or nod,
They think this doughty else a demy-god.
When fortune falls he knows to use the same,
His Clarke and he as quiet as a Lamb,
Make not two words, but share, and go through stich,
Here Is mine, there is thine, for they know which is which.
There has been, are, and will be still again,
In all professions some corrupted men:
Before this branch of false Gebezaes Tribe,
It Is sacrilege to call a bribe a bribe,
Give him a Bucke, a Pig, a Goose, or Phesant,
(For manners sake) it must be called a present,
And when he is blind in Justice,'it is a doubt
But Turkies tallons scratcht his eyes half out,
Or Capons claws, but it is a heavy case,
That fowls should fly so in a Justice face.
Sometimes his eyes are goard with an Oxehorne,
Or sudden dashed out with a sack of corn,
Or the whiske burshing of a Coachmares tail
To fit the Coach, but all these thoughts may fail,
Some think they are but clouded and will shine,
Eclipsed a little with a Teirce of Wine,
Or only fallen into some hood winked nap.
As some men may upon the Bench, by hap.
But Justice seems dease when some tales are told,
Perhaps his Charity has taken some cold,
And that may be the cause, or rattling Coaching,
Or neighing of horses to her gate approaching,
From thence into the stable, as her own:
The certain truth thereof is not yet known.
But sure she is so dease that she can hear,
Nothing but what her Clarke blows in her care,
Which Clark, good men must oroach to, and stand bare
Or else small Justice amongst them they shall share,
His Master like a weather-cocke inclinde,
As he does please he makes him turn and wind.
This Justice of all senses is bereft,
Except his feeling, only feelings left:
With which he swallows with infariate power,
More bribes then does my Cormorant fish devour.
A Cutpurse.
THE ARGUMENT.
This is a mad knave, lives by tricks and sleights.
He dives by La^d, and dies within the air:
He serves noman, yet courteously he waits
On whom he lift, in Church, town, throng or fair.
He will not work, yet is well cleath'd and fed,
And for his farewell seldoms dies in's bed.
THis Spirit, or this Ferrit next that enters
(Although he be no Merchant) much he ventures.
And though he be a noted coward, yet
Most valiantly he does his living get.
He has no weapon but a curtoll knife.
Wherewith for what he has he hazards life,
East Indian Merchants cross the raging floods,
And in their ventering, venture but their goods:
When as themselves at hope securely sleep,
And never plow the dangerous Ocean deep,
If they do lose by pirates, tempests, tocks,
It Is but a Fleabite to their wealthy stocks:
Whilst the poor Cutpurse days and night does ^oile,
Watches and wards, and does himself turmoile^
Often cuts a purse before the Sessions bar,
Whilst others for their lives a pleading are,
To Sturbridge Fair, or unto Bristoll ambles
In ieopardie he for his living rambles,
And what he gets he does not beg or borrow,
Ventures his neck, and there is an end, hang sorrow.
Whilst midst his perils he does drink and sing,
And has more purse-bearers then any King,
Lives like a Gentleman by sleight of hand,
Can play the Foist, the Nip, the Stale, the Stand,
The Snap, the Curb, the Crosbue, Warpe and Lif^,
Decor, prig, Cheat, (all for a hanging shift.)
Still valiant where he comes, and free from care,
And dares the stocks, the whip, the Iaile out-dare.
Speak^the brave ^^^ with his del,
Or pa^, or ^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^
And lives as merry as the day is long,
In scorn of Tyburne, or the ropes dingdong,
But now a jest or two to mind I call,
Which to this function lately did befall:
A Cutpurse standing in a market-towne,
As for his prey his eyes seowld up and down,
At last he should ^r ^ near a Country Less,
And out her purse as by her he did pass.
She spide and caught him and began to rave,
Called him rogue, rascal, villkeyne, thief and slave,
Gep with a pox, the Cutpurse then replide,
Are you so fine, you can no i^sting bide,
I Have iested more with forty honest men,
So with a moraine take your purse again.
Another satin Cutpurse dawbd with lace,
A Country Gentlemen for's purse did chase,
On whom a blew-coat Serving man did wait,
And passing through a narrow obscure strait,
The thieuing knave the purse he nimbly nims,
And like aland-sharke thence by Land he swims.
The Serving man perceived the Cutpurse trick,
Said naught, but dogs him through thin and thick,
Until the thiese supposed the coast was clear,
As he was pissing Blew- coat out offs care.
The Cutpurse madly gins to swear and curse,
The other said, give me my masters purse,
Which you stole lately from his pocket, then
There Is no wrong done, but here is your eare^gen,
Thus though a Cutpurse trade be counted ill,
^^he is a m^n of action still,
Wai^es on Ambassadors that comes and goes,
Attends at Tiltings and tryumphant shows
As Westminster he still attendance gives,
O^ my Lord Mayor, his brethren and the Shrieues,
Although unbidden, yet he will be a guest,
And have his hand in sometimes with the best.
And whilst he lives, note how he takes degree,
Newgate's his hall, at Tyburne he is made tree:
Where commonly it so falls out with him,
He dies in perfect health, found wind and limb,
Hema Coaches elder brother rides,
And when his soul and cords from each diuides,
He souls no sheets nor any Physic takes,
^^ like a Bird in the air an end he makes:
And such an end I wish they all may have,
And all that love a shifting Cut purse knave,
For they are Cormorants wherefoere they haunt,
Until the Gallows proves their Cormorant.
A Good and a bad Constable.
THE ARGUMENT.
This man is to the Magistrate an eye,
Revealing things which Justice could not find.
Black deeds of darkness he death often desery,
And is (if he be honestly inclinde)
Sof^t the Common. wealth in peace to keep,
By watching carefully whilst thousands sleep.
When Titan steeps his bright resple^dant beams
And hides his burning Car in the Western streams;
When to ye under world day takes his flight
And leaves th'Horizon all in darkness dight,
When Philomell does against a thorn proclaim
I^ dulcet notes the lustful Tere^s shame,
When Maddam Midnight shows her Ebon face,
And darkness does the Hemisphere embrace,
T^en (to keep^ all things peaceable and well,
The watchful Constable keeps continell.
Then if a man (with drinks) his wit has left,
Or has committed leachery or these,
Or murder, then the Constable thinks fit
That such committers straightly he commit.
He Is Lord high Regent of the redious night,
Man of the Moo^e he may be called right:
Great general of Glewo^m, Owls, and Bats,
Comptroler over such a whip the Cats.
Dian^ts Forrester that with regard,
Does guard the Heard that lives within his ward,
His vigilance is most manifest,
For through his horns he lightens all the rest.
Like Mino^, or just judging ^^^^^^
He walks the dukesome (...)
Attended with his G blans clad in (...)
(...)
V^^^^^ ^^^^ sh^wes her blu^^^^^^ (...)
And ^^^^^^ does shine, and (...)
Ma^ge ^^^^^ whooting ^^^^^ ^^^ (...)
Then goes the Constable and's watch to ^ed.
Tais officer in the ^^^^ place ^ put,
H^ that comes next is of another ^^^
Yet he is a member of the peace com^^^^^^,
And writ most common ^ an a^^e in ^^^
Image of office he is held to be
And has his staff ^ipt ^^^ ^^^ ^^^^
He has his bill men which ^^^ hardly kerpe
The name of watchmen for ^^^^ ^^^^ asleep.
His word is, Who goes: there? ^^^^^^ ^^^^ (...)S
(...) stand still, and com^
(...)
Says a man's drunk, when his ^^^^ case is so.
But let a quar'ling slave indeed go by.
Leading by th^arme his ramp^^^ v^n^^y.
A thing of filthy ^^^^^, like a sw^n^,
That searce can go, laden with ^^^ and ^^^^,
They for their sixpence shall pa^^^ by in state,
The porter with a leg will open the gate,
Worshipped and guarded to their lodging safe,
Not with B^ls only, bu^th os^^^ous staff,
Whilst the good sober man, that nothing gave,
Is strait committed for a dangerous knave,
Traitor to the State, and in the lay le must lie,
Whilst th'other's lighted to their l^chery.
This Constable may have a trick in store,
His house may be safe harbor for a whore,
Because no man will offer to search there.
She there may rest, and roost secure from fear.
There she may lodge, and trade too if she will,
As sure and safe as thieves are in a Mill,
Or Suburbs for the birth of Basta^ds are,
For all desire to lay their bellies there,
Nay as a Compter for a Fellon's home,
Or Ladies chamber for a Priest from Rome.
But yet I say, it is po^ a matter hard,
To find an honest Constable in's ward,
Trust for bid else, and waking watchmen to,
Whose bills were never stolen, and much ado
To be corrupted with a villains sh^alling,
To wrong the good, and bad men's minds fulfilling,
Such men as those I think some few there be,
And for the rest, would they were hanged for me.
H^ when my Corm^ant is at rest, and thinks,
Poor fish no harm nor ought that water drinkers,
That Is a night Cormrant, and at midnight swils,
Whole cans and pots, with Cheaters and there Iils,
He makes all fish that comes into his net,
Drinks drunk, and sleeps, and then the watch is set.
A London Serieant and Tailor.
THE ARGUMENT.
A brace of Hell hounds that ^^ earth d^e dwell,
This tyr^^ize on p^ore men's b^dies more.
(If mo^e they could, then devils over souls in bell:
Whose music in the groanings of the poor.
These when they buy their office, sell their souls,
No Cormorants are such denouring fowls.
THe Seriea^t I before the Iaylor name,
Because he is the dog that hunts the game:
He worries it, and brings it to the toil.
And then the Iaylor lives upon the spoil.
I Have known a Serieant that four hours has sat,
Peeping and leeting through a tavern geate,
His Yeoman on the other side the way,
Keeping the like match bo^ for one poor prey:
Who when they sp^d, like Mas^^ff; they come near him
And by the throat like cruel c^rs they tear him;
If he has money to the Tavern straight,
These sucking purse, leaches will on him wait;
But if his stock below, and's pockets dry,
To th'layle with him, there let him starve and dye.
Yet for all this a Serieant is devout,
For he does Watch and prey much out of doubt.
He sels no spice, and yet in every place
He Is shalfe Groce^, for he lives by's mace:
He Is part a Gentleman, for up and down,
Their steps he follows round about the town.
And yet he seems a Iugler too by this,
He often from shape to shape so changed is:
As sometimes like an Amsterdammian brother,
Sometimes a Porters shape, sometimes another.
Sometimes t'a Counseilour at law, and then,
T'a lame and blinded beggar, and again
T'a Country Seruingman that brings a Dear,
And with these tricks his prey he does come near,
Wherein he imirates the Devil aright,
Who can put on an Angels thape of light,
That so his craft may on men's souls prevail.
So Serieants snare men's bodies for the Iaile,
Time was, he wore a proper kind of coat,
And in his hand a white rod as a note
Whereby a man far off a knave might spy,
And shun him if he were in jeopardy.
But now to no such ^abit he is bound,
Because his place never cost him eight scorc pound,
To get the which again, he must disguise
And use a thousand shifts and villainies.
Oh that a man so little grace should have
To give so much to be i^^eem'd a knave.
To be shau'd. duck'd, and vnpittyed dye,
Cursed and contemned within his guaue to ^^e.
To hazard soul and body, ne've to thri^e,
But by men's harms, deuo^ring them alive,
To be the hang-mans guard, and wait upon
The Gallows a^zn Execution,
But yet the office is most fit led ot ^^^,
And fit that honest men should have it f^^^
Now for the other sucking devil, the Iaylor
His work's brought to him, as he were a Tailor,
As if he were a ^^encer, he will begin,
And ask a man what Ward he will be in:
(But first the prisoner draws without delay,
A sop for Cerberus that turns the key.)
Then the old prisoners garnish do demand,
Which straight must be discharged out of hand,
But if he cannot pay, or does deny,
He thrusts him in the hole, there lets him lie.
If a good prisoner has a well linde purse,
The Iaylor then esteems him as his nurse,
Suckes like a Bulcaise, and does never cease
Till with much grief he hears of a release.
An vnder-keeper, (though without ^^^)
Is s continuali knave in spite on's heart:
If to the prisoners he be sharp and curell,
He proves their knave, and his good masters Iewell^
If unto them himself he will behave,
He is their Jewel, and his masters knave,
So let him turn himself which way he can,
He seldom shall be held and honest man.
Perhaps the Iaylor in one s^rinking room
Has six beds, for the Gallant and the Groom,
In lousy linen, ragged couerlets:
Twelve men to lodge in those six beds he sets:
For which each man does pay a groat a night,
Which weekely's eight and twenty shillings right:
Thus one foul dirty room from men unwilling,
Draws yearly seauenty three pound six. ecn shilling,
Besides a Iaylor (to keep men in fear)
Will like a demi.diuill dominere:
Roar like a Bearward, grumble, snarle, and growle,
Like a Tower Cat.a Mountain stare and s^owl^,
He and she serieant may be coupled too,
As bane of Mankind, for they both undo:
The Extortioner and Broaker named before,
Having both bit and gripped a man's state fore:
In comes the Serieant for his breakfast then,
Drags him to th'layle, to be new squeezd again:
And thence he gets not, there he shall not start,
Till the last drop of bloud's wrong from his heart,
Yet I have heard some Serieants have been mild,
And used their Prisoner like a Christians child;
Nip'd him in private, never trig'd his way,
As B^ndogs earrion, but fair went away,
Followed aloof, showed himself kind and meek,
And lodged him in his own house for a week.
You Would wonder at such kin in^ff^ in a man,
So many Regions from a Christian,
^^^ what is the cause, I Will lead you out o'th m^^,
It Is twenty shillings every day he slayes,
Besides the Serieants wife must have a stroke,
At the poor teate, some outside she must foake,
Although she tridge for it, whilst good fortunes fall,
He shall command house, serieant, and all,
^^^ may it come by the side o'th breeding woman,
The Serianes Son's a Gentleman, no Yeoman.
And Whilst they fish from men's decays and wants,
Their wives may prove foul fleshly Cormorants
T^^s a bad serieant and a Iaylor both,
^^^ Cormorants which all good people loath,
And yet amongst them some good men there are,
Like s^ow at Midsommer, exceeding rare.
A Symonicall Patron, and his penny Clarke,
THE ARGUMENT.
Here Magus seeks holy things to buy,
With cursed bribes and base corrupting gold:
Lets souls for want of Preaching starve and dye,
Fleres and slayes his flocks, bare pill'd and pold:
That to speak truth, in spite of who controls,
Such Clerks and Patron murder many souls.
THis is the bane both of the age and men,
A Patron with his benesices ten;
That wallowes in fat Livings a Church, leach,
And cannot keep out of my Corm'rants reach,
One of these Patrons does devour his Clarks,
As they do perish Souls, after four Marks,
And every year a pair of new high shoes,
For which betwixt two Churches he does use
Each Sabbath day with diligence to trot,
^t to what purpose, few or none know not.
Except it be'cause would he eat and feed,
^^^ starve two Cures, for he can hardly read.
This Sir John Lacklatine, true course does keep:
To preach the Vestry men all fast asleep,
And box and cuffe a Pulpit mightily.
Speaking nonsense with nose-wise gravity,
These youths, in Art, purse, and acire most bare
Give their attendance ^^^ sleep fair;
King once hired he will ^^^ase his Lord,
His surly Patron, nor dares pie^ch a word,
B^^ where he gives the text, and that must be
Some place of Scripture bites no usury,
Exortion or the like, but some calm Law,
That will not sret his sore b^t nere so raw.
As calmely preac^'d, as lamely too expressed,
With clamarous yell that likes the Parish best.
This Clarke shall be a drudge too, all his time,
We^^s in the garden, bearesou^ d^ng and s^^me:
Then up ^ Sabbath days the ^e^oy^e begins
^^^ vnhallow^d hands, to weed up sins:
And from cap ^^ing all ^is week days spent,
Comes then to give the Cup at Sac^ament.
And from his trencher waiting goes ^o serve
Spiritual food to those that almost statue;
And what is this Clarke that is of such seru^e mind,
Some smarting Peda^, or mechanicke hind,
Who taking an intelligenc^rs place,
Against poor tenants sust crept into grace,
And drudges for eight pounds a year perhaps,
With his great vailes of sundays trencher scraps.
This makes the scared ^^be of ^^^^ glad,
That many of them prove the Tribe of G^d.
This makes good Scholars justly to complain,
When Patrons take they care not who for gain,
When as a Carter shall more wages have,
Then a good Preacher that help^s Souls to save.
These Cormorants Gods part does eat and cram,
And to they fare well, care not who they damn,
The people scarce know what a Sermon means,
For a good Preacher there can have no means,
To keep himself with ^^athe^, and book, and bread
Nor scarce a pillow t'vnderlay his head.
The whilst the Patrons wife (my Lady Gay)
Fares, and is decked most dainty every day:
She Will see that preaching trouble not the ^owne,
And wears a hundred Sermons in a Gown.
She has a Preachers living on her back,
For which the souls of many goes to wrack,
And hires a mungrell cheaply by the year,
To famish those, christ's blood has bought so dear:
What greater cruelty can this exceed,
Then to pine those whom I ^^^ bids them feed,
These are hels cultures, Tophets greedy ^owles,
That prove (like devils) Cormorants of Souls.
A Country Yeoman.
THE ARGUMENT.
Here Dauy Dicker comes, God speed the Plough,
Whose Sonne's a Gentleman, and h^^^ and hawks:
His Farm good clothes and Seeding ^^^ allow,
And what so ^re of him the Country talks,
His ^^me's in ^^^ with feather in his head,
Until a Beggar bring a Fool to bed.
THe Roman Histories do true relate,
How ^^^^^^ changed his Emp'rors state,
To live in quiet in a Country Farm,
Out of the reach of treasons dangerous arm.
Then was a Farmer like a laboring Art,
And not a ^^^ devouring Cormorant.
For if a Gentleman has Lard to let,
He Will have it, at what price so'ere it is set,
And bids, and over bids, and will give more.
Then any man could make of it before:
Offers the Landlord more then he would crave,
And buys it, though he neither get nor save.
And whereas Gentleman their Land would let,
At rates that tenants might both save and get,
This Cormorant will give his Landlord more,
Then he would ask, in hope that from the poor
He may extort it double by the rate,
Which he will sell his corn and cattle at.
At pining famine he will never repine.
It Is plenty makes this Cormorant to whine,
To hoard up corn with many a bitter ban,
From windows, Orphans, and the laboring man,
He prays for rain in ha^uest, night and day,
To rot and to consume the grain and hay:
That so his mowes and reeks, and stacks that mould,
At his own price he may translate to gold.
But if a plenty come, this ravening thief
Torments and sometimes hangs himself with grief.
An all this raking toil, and carke and care,
Is for his elownish first borne Son and heir,
Who must be gentled by his ill got pelf,
Though he to get it, got the devil himself,
And whilst the Fathers bones a rotting lie,
His Son his cursed wealth, accursed lets slye,
In whores, drink, gaming, and in revel coil,
The whilst his fathers Soul in flames does broyle.
And when the Father on the earth did live,
To his Sons fancy he such way did give,
For at no season he the plow must hold,
The summer was too hot, the winter cold,
He robs his mother of her Butter pence,
Within the Alehouse serves him for expense.
And so like Coals.dog the vntutor'd mome,
Must neither go to Church nor bide at Lome.
For he his life another way must farm,
To Hawk, to hunt, abusing the Kings game,
Some Nobleman or Gentleman that is near,
At a cheap rate to steal what they call dear.
When if a poor man (his great want to serve)
Whose wife and children ready are to starve,
If he but steal a sheep from out the fold,
The chuffe would hang him for it if he could.
For alms he never read the word relieve,
He knows to get, but never knows to give,
And what so'ere he be that does live thus,
Is a worse Cormorant then my AEsacus.
A Figure-stinger, or a cot^z'ning Cunning-man.
THE ARGUMENT.
Amongst a foolish, faithless, graceless, crew,
This man has better credit then Gods word:
For less that is past, or profit to ensue,
Like is a Term, with Customers he is stored,
He Is a Soothsayer, but says seldom sooth,
And has the 'Diuels great seal for what he does.
HEre ^ow I draw a curtain and discover,
Amongst all knaves, the devils special lover:
One that does Court him still, and daily woe,
And feign would see the devil but knows not how
He has ^^^ in his works, that is his fare place,
But has not art to bring him to his face,
When he could wish him to his outward sense,
The devil sits laug^ing in his conscience:
Yet you shall have this figure stinger prate,
To his gull client (small wit shallow pate,)
As if he were Lord warden of hell fire,
And Lucifer and he had both one sire.
The Fiends his cousen Germans (once removed)
From earth to hell, where he is best beloved.
More fustian language form his tongue does drop,
Then would set sorth an honest tradesmans shop:
As if that all Magitians that e're were,
Unworthy were his learrel books to bear.
Nor Zorostres king o'th Bactrians,
Nor the sage Magi of the Persian^,
Nor any coniuring Son of Cham or Chus;
Nor Faustus with his Mephostophilus,
Corneli^s, Agrippa, Simon Magus,
Nor any twixt the River Thames or Tagus,
Nor B^itaines Bladud, Cambriaes Merlin Ba^^n
Companions for this man would never be taken.
For he is rare, and deeply read indeed,
In the admit'd ^ight reverend old wives Creed,
Talks of the Jewish Thalmud, and Cabals,
Sols^itiums and Equinoctials,
Of auguries, of prophesies predictions,
Prognostications, revelations, sictions.
And as he could the Elements command,
He seems as he their minds does understand.
By Fire he has the skill of Pyromanty,
By Air he has the Art of Heremanty,
By Water he knows much in Hidromanty,
And by the Earth he is skilled in G^omanty,
Palm Chiromanty, couz'ning Necromancy,
To gull the world, to fulfill fools fancy,
Hags, ghosts, and goblius, furies, fairies, elues,
He knows the secrets of the devils themselves.
There Is not a Nymph, a fawn, or goat foot Satyr,
The lives by Fire, by Air, by Earth, or Water,
S^^ D^d^s or Hamadriades,
Bewixt S^y^entrio and Meridies,
^^ he commands them to do what they list,
^but bend the brow, or clutch the fist.
He Will tell a man's hearts secrets what he thinks,
^Ordipus unfolds th'ambiguous Sphin^^,
With skill surpassing great Alfumazers,
He with intelligencing Funds confers,
And by his wondrous Artacoosticon,
^wes the Turks Counsel, and what Prefer Iowns
Determines, or what business now befalls
^^the Conclaue of Romes Cardinals,
He can release, or else increase all harms,
About the neck or wrests by tying charms,
He has a trick to kill the Agues force,
And make the patient better, or much worse,
To the great toe, three letters he can tie,
Shall make the Gowt to tarry or else fly.
With two words and three leaves of foure-leau'd grass
He makes the toothache, stay, repasse, or pass:
^^^ goods you again would feign have got,
^^but to him, and you shall speed, or not.
^^^ he will gain whether you get or lose,
^haue his Fee, for so the bargain goes:
He'^ tell you wonders when you are alone,
^Of the Philosophers admired stone:
And that it from Vtopia first did come,
Brought to him by a Spirit, he sent to Rome,
Where by (t'inrich the world he dares be bold)
To ^^^ns pans, pots, and dripping pans to gold,
And in the Goldsmith's burnisht glistring row,
^^^ Ironmongers with a fairer show,
^^^ Spits and Andir'ns to bright mettle shining,
^^^ when coine's scarce you straight may put to coining,
These and a thousand more, as idely vain
Fools swallow, and he swallows them again,
And though the mark of truth he never hits,
^^^ still this Cormorant does live by's wits,
^^d never will want a false devouring trick,
^hells Archcormorant devour him quick.
A Corrupted Lawyer, and a knauish Vndershrine.
THE ARGUMENT.
The soul of Commonwealths is in good Laws,
Their execution makes a happy State,
But where Corruption opes his ^^^^ry Jaws;
Where Lawyers do increase, not ^^^^ ^ ^,
Such Law-wormes are the Devils d^^^st brood,
Who make the common harms their private good.
A Hall, a hall, the tramplers are at hand,
A shifting Master, and as sweetly manned:
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
And by that mean^s could make a good prevention,
Contention would beget no more contention.
This Lawyers riches ever ^pings and bloomes,
From sheeps coat, c^lues skin, rus^et hobnaild grooms
Persuading them that all things shall go well,
Suckes out the Eggs, leaves them the empty shell.
He has a fleight to spinning out a Cause,
Till all the money out of purse it draws,
His Clients with tull budg^ts ^^ come to town,
But he takes order for their going down,
The full is now the Lawyers, the^^^ the wane,
Like b^^ckets turned to come up full again:
With papers laden think themselves most firm,
Carries them down^, to bring them up next cerme,
Horse, plow, and cattle go to wrack, split all.
It Is fit the Stable wait upon the Hall.
Their sheep the parchment bears, their G^^rse the quils,
Which turns their slate as this bad Lawyer wills.
Their shirts the paper makes, their B^^s^ the wax,
T'vndoe thems^lues that good discretion l^cks,
These man like Geese against themselves d^^ things,
I^ plucking quils from their own foolish wings,
This Lawyer makes him dangerous shalts withal,
And shootes them at the fools from whence they fall.
The Commonwealths Impost ^^^ he does cut,
And the corruption in his purse does put.
One gives him for a bribe, a Brawne or twine,
And that's drowned with another But of wine,
One gives Coach all decked and painted gay,
Another Horses draws it quite away,
One gives a Iarrs of Oil to escape the soil,
An Ox o'retures the Jar, and spils the Oil.
And thus like Pharaohs kine, he has the power,
To make the fastest bribes the lean devour.
His motions move commotions, and his suites,
Four times a year do Termely yield him fruits.
Four sundry ways a Kingdoms Laws are used,
By tow maintained, and by two abused:
Good Lawyers live by Law, and it is most fit,
Good men obey the Law, live under it.
Bad Lawyers (for their gain) do wrest the Law,
Bad men of God or man's Law have no awe.
But whether these men use Law well or ill,
Th'intention of the Law is honest still.
For as the text is rent, and torn, and varied.
And by opinions from the sense is carried
By ignorant and wilful Heretics,
Or impure separating Sehismaticks,
Though from the truth of text all men should sever,
The text is permanent and Sacred ever.
Even so the Law is in self upright,
Correcting and protecting, wrong and right:
It Is no just Lawyers, or the Laws desame.
Although some hounds of hell abuse the same.
This Cormorant I mean, gulps whom he list,
And having swallowed fees into his fist,
Deferres the motion till the Court with draws,
Then to the cushions pleads the poor man's cause,
As formally as if the Judge fate,
No matter for the man, the money's gat.
My Cormorant was never matched till now,
If I said o'rematch'd, I Will resolve you how,
And you that read it shall confess it true,
Perhaps it is a thing well known to you,
Where Cor^^ants haunts, numbers of fish grow less,
But where bad Lawyers come, there brawles increase,
Now master Vndershrieue I understand,
You bring my Lawyer work unto his hand,
You bring him stuff, he like a Tailor cuts it.
And into any shape he pleases puts it.
Though to the Client it appear slight stuff,
It shall out-last him any suite of Buffe:
For though from term to term it be worn long,
It Is dressed still with the teazle of the tongue,
That (though it be old) at every day of heating,
It looks fresh, as't had never come to wearing.
And though it seem as the owner never wore it.
A Broaker will not give him three pence for it.
Sweet master Shrieue, let it not grieve your mind,
You being the last o'th brood, come last behind,
No doubt you might be first in a bad case,
But being called under, I make this your place:
I know where e're you stand, you are so good,
You Will scorn to be unlike one of the brood,
And take it in dudgeon (as you might no doubt)
If among this rank of Corm'rants^ you were out.
I have a warrant here for what I do,
Plain truth it self, and that have seldom yoe.
Some of your tribe a man may honest call,
But those my Corm'rant meddles not withal.
You that dare fright men of a shallow wit,
Who cannot read when there is nothing writ:
And can return (when you are pleased to save)
A Non inuentus for a bribing knave.
For one that stands indebted to the King
A Nihil habet, if his purse can ring.
When a poor man shall have his Bullockes ceaz'd,
And prized at little, to make you appeaz'd
You have the art and skill to raze words out
Of Writs and Warrants, to bring gain about.
I will not serve you so, for if you look,
Your name stands fairly printed in my book,
For every one to read, how you can strain
On Widows goods, and restore none again.
Pick Iuries for your purose, which is worse
Then if you picked the wronged Plaintiffes purse:
Return your Writs to your advantage best,
Bring in some money, and drab out the rest.
Leaving (often times) the high Shrieue in the lurch,
Who stops the bounty should repair the Church,
Or buy some Bells to sound out his devotion.
If either Air, or Earth, or the wide Ocean
Can show worse Cormorants, or any brook.
I Will never ask a penny for my Book.
EPILOGVE.
Now Reader, tell me (if thou well can judge:)
If any honest man have cause to grudge
At these my Stayres, being plain and true,
Giving the world and the Devil their due.
I have but bluntly called a spade a spade,
And he that wincheth shows himself a ^ade.
Be quiet, see thy faults, and learnet' amend,
Thou show thy guiltiness if thou contend.
FINIS.
TAILORS WATER-WORKE: OR, THE SCVLLERS TRAVELS, FROM TYBER TO THAMES: WITH his
Boat laden with a Hotch-potch, or Gallimawfrey of Sonnets, Satyrs, and
Epigrams. With an Inkhorne Disputation betwixt a Lawyer and a Poet: and a
Quarterne of new-catcht Epigrams, caught the last Fishing^^^: together with an
addition of P^stor^^^ Equi^^^, or the complaint of a Shepherd.
^
DEDICATED To neither Monarch, nor Miser, Keaser nor Caitiffe, Pallatine or
Plebeian; but to great Mounsier Multitude, ahas, All, or every One; JOHN TAILOR
sends his Scull-boats lading, to be c^nsured as please their Wisdoms to screw
their Lunatike opinions.
MOst Mighty, Catholic, (or Vmuer sall) Mounsier Multitude, (whose many
millions of Hv^raes heads, Ar^^-e^es, and ^^^ hands,) (^^ if you please^ to
judge of my Water-Muses ^^^^^, to look with hundreds of ^^^ ^^^ ^^^ of my
Sculler, or to lend a few of your many hands, to help to tugge me a shore at
the Haven of your goodw^ls, which if you do, it is more then my ^^^ ^^^ ^^^^
^^^ expcet or merit. But if you will not ass^st me, I will ^^^^ the next high
tide, and scramble up into^ though ^he fast a ground for my labor. ^e grable
for Gudgeons or fish for Flounders in the Rereward of our e^^^ temporizing
^^umorists, sharp Satyrists, or ^^^ call ^^^

I could wish my lines might please like Cheese to a W^lchman, Rutter to a
Flemine, Vs^^^baugh to an Irishman, or Honey to a Bear: To conclude, I wish
best to the Protest^^t, I ^^^ the ^^^, praying for the perseverance of the one,
and a Re^ormation of the other. Mean ^^^, my ^^^ (like a Barbers shop) is
ready for all comers, be they of what Religion they well, paying their
Farewell.

Yours ten thousand ways, JOHN TAILOR.

To the Right Worshipful and my ever respected Mr. JOHN MORAY Esqire.
OF all the wonders this vile world includes,
I muse how s^atterie such high favors gain.
How adulation cunningly deludes,
Both high and low from Scep^er to the swain;
But it thou by S^^tterie could obtain
More then the most that is possessed by men,
Thou can not tune thy tongue to falsehoods strain,
Yet with the best can use both tongae and pen.
Thy sacred learning can both scan and k^n
The hidden things of Nature and of Art.
It Is thouh all ^^'d me from obliuions den,
And made my Muse from oblcure sleep to start.
Unto thy wisdoms censure I commit,
This first b^rne issue of my worthless wit.
I.T.

To my de^re respected friend, Master Benjamin Iehuson.
THou can not ^^^ for though the str^^^ of death
Depri^^^ the World of thyworst ^^^thly part:
Yet when the corpse has banished thy breath,
Thy living Muse shall still de^lare thy Art.
The fatal Sisters and the bless a Graces,
Were all thy friends at thy Nativity:
And in thy mind the Muses took their places,
A^oring thee With care capa^itie.
And all the Worthies of this worthy Land,
Admires thy w^ndr^u^ all admired worth,
Then how should I that cannot understand
Thy worth, thy worthy ^^^ sse set forth?
Yet bear the bold ^ff^ of the houest Sculler,
Whose worthless praise can fill thy praise no fuller.
I.T.

To my loving Friend John Tailor.
CO^ld my vnpractis'd pen advance thy name,
Thou should be feared on the wings of Fame.
For from thy toylesome Oar I wonder I,
How thy inuent^on siowes so io^ondly?
Not having dreamed on fair Pernassus Hill,
With truitfull numbers to enrich thy Quill.
Nor having washed in that Pegassion Fount,
Which lends the wits such nimblenesse to mount
With tickling rapture on Poetique strains,
On Thames the Muses floate that fills thy brains.
Thy happy wit produced thy happy times,
Which shall comm^nd thee unto after times.
And wortly enroll thy name amongst those,
Whose Temples are begirt, with Laurel bows.
For (footh to say) a work I saw not yet,
Less help^ with learning, and more graced with wit:
Then spite of envy and detractions scorn,
Though Art thou want, thou art a Poet borne:
And as a friend for names sake I Will say thus,
Nee scombros metuentia, Carminance thus,
Hen: Tailor

To the one and only water-Poet and my Friend, John Tailor.
Fresh Water Soldiers sail in shallow streams,
And Mile-end Captains venture not their liue^
A brain distempred brings forth idle dreams,
And gelded Sheathes have seldom golden Knives,
And painted faces none but fools bewitch:
Thy Muse is plain: but witty, fair: and rich.
When thou did first to Aganippe float,
Without thy knowledge (as I surely think)
The Nayades did swim about thy boat,
And brought thee bravely to the Muses brinke,
Where Grace and Nature filling up thy Fountain,
Thy Muse came flowing from P^rness^^ Moun^^^^.
So long may slow as is to thee most sit,
The boundless Occan of a Poets wit.
^^^

In laudem Authoris.
WIt, Reason, Grace, Religion, Nature, Zeal,
Wrought all together in thy working brain^
And to thy work did set this certain scale;
Pure is the color that will take no stain.
What need I praise? the work it self does praise:
In words, in worth, in sorme and matter to,
A world of wits are working many ways,
But'few have done, what thou do truly do:
Was never I ailor shapt so fit a Coat.
Unto the Corpse of any earthly creature,
As thou have made for that foul Romish Goat,
In true description of his devilish nature.
Besides such matter of judicious wit,
With quaint conceits so sitting every fa^ci^;
As well may prove, who scorns and spights at it
Shall either show their folly or their franzie,
Then let the Popes Bulls roar, Bell, Book and Candle.
In all the Devils circuit sound thy curse:
Whilst thou with truth do every trial handle,
God bless thy work, and thou art never the worse,
And while hels friends their hateful so do p^o^e thee,
The Saints on earth, and God in heaven will love thee,
Thy long friend N^^^^^ B^^t^^

When Tybers silver waves their Channel least,
And lovely Thames, her Wonted course fersait,
Then foul oblivion shall thy name b^reaue,
Drenching thy glory in her hell.bred lake,
But till that time this scourge of Popery,
Shall crown thy fame with immortality.
Thy friend assured Maximilian W^^^.

To my loving Friend John Tailor.
FErris gave cause of vulgar wonderment,
When unto Bristow in a boat he went;
Another with his Sculler ventured more,
That rowed to Flushing from our English shore,
Another did devise a wooden Whale.
Which unto Cassice did from Dover sail,
Another with his Oars and sl^nder Wherry,
From London unto Antwerpe over did Ferry.
Another maugre sickle fortunes teeth,
Rowed hence to Scotland and arrived at Leeth.
But thou have made all these but triuiall things,
That from the Tower thy watery Scuiler brings
To Hellicon: most sacred in account,
And so arrived at Peru assas Mount:
And back returned Laden with Poets wit,
With all the Muses hands to witness it;
Who on their Sculler does this praise bestow,
Not such another on the Th^^^ does row.
Thy loving Friend, Sam: Rowlands.

To my Friend both by Water and Land, JOHN TAILOR.
Often have thou trauail'd for me at thy Oar,
But never in this kind did toil before.
Toturne a Poet in this peevish time,
It held as rare as I should write in rhyme,
For one of thy profession, yet thy Art,
S^^passeth mine, this serves to paint that part,
I mean thy Poetry which in ^^^ lurks,
And not thy sweating skill in waterworks.
I cannot but commend thy Book, and say
Thou merit'st more then comman Scullers pay:
Then whistle off thy Muse, and give her scope,
That she may soundly cease upon the Pope:
For well I see that he and many more,
Are dared by her (which scarce was done before.)
Pr^^^d (good John) and when thou have done this work,
Fear not to venture trussing of the Turk.
I like thy vain, I love thee for those gifts
Of Nature in thee, far about the shifts
That others seek, plodding for what thy pen,
Wit Works in thee learning in other men,
Then Native Language we have done thee wrong
To say thou art not complete, wanting the tongue
Called Latin, for b^cre's are shall ^^^ the strife,
That never learned Latin word ^^^ life.
Then to conclude, I truly must confess.
Many baue more been taught, but learned less.
Thy assured friend R. B.

To my loving Friend JOHN TAILOR.
SOme say kind ^^^^ thou art a Poet borne,
And none by Art; which thou may justly scorn;
For if without thy name they had but seen
Thy lines, thy lines had artificial been,
Opinion carries with it such a curse,
Although thy name makes not the verse the worse.
If then this work, variety affords
Of Trophes, of Figures, Epethites, and Words.
With no harsh accent and with judgment too.
I pray what more can Art or Nature do?
So that in thee thy G^^i^s does impart,
To Artificial Nature, Natural Art.
Thy old assured friend IO: MORAY.

Prologue to the Reader.
GOod gentle Reader, if I do transgress,
I know you know, that I did never profess.
Until this time in Print to be a Poet:
And now to exercise my wits I show it.
View but the intrals of this little book,
And thou will say that I some patnes have took:
Pains mixed with pleasure, pleasure joined with pain
Produced this issue of my laboring brain.
But now me thinks I hear some envious throat,
Say I should deal no further then my Boat:
And ply my Fare, and leave my Epigram,
Minding, ne Suitor vltra crepidam.
To such I answer, Fortune give her guists.
Some down she throws, and some to honor lifts:
Amongst whom from me she has withheld her store
And gives me leave to sweat it at my Oar.
And though with labor I my living purse,
Yet do I think my lines no ^ot the worse,
For Gold is gold, though buried under moss,
And dross in golden vessels is but dross.
John Tailor,

TO TOM CORIAT.
What matters for the place I first came from
I am no Duncecomb, Coxecomb, Odcomb Tom
Nor am I like a wool-pack, c^a^m'd w^^ Greek,
Venus in Venice minded to go seek;
And at my back return to write a Volume,
In memory of my wits Garganina Colume.
The choysest wits would never so adore me;
Nor like so many Lackiesrun before me,
But honest Tom, I envy not thy state,
There Is nothing in thee worthy of my hate;
Yet I confess thou have an excellent wit:
But that an idle brain does harbor it.
Fool thou it at the Court, I on the Thames,
So farewell Obcomb Tom, God bless King James.
The Author in his own defense.
THere is a crew of ever carping spirits,
Who merit nothing good, yet hate good merits:
One wrings his laws awry, and then cries mew,
And that I stole my lines, he will plainly show.
Thou addle-headed Ass, thy brains are muddy,
Thy witlesle wit, incapable of study,
Deem'st each invention barren, like to thine;
And what thou can not mend thou will repine.
Lo thus to wavering Censures torturing Rack,
With truth and confidence my Muse does pack.
Let Zoyl^^ and let Momus do their worst,
Let Envy and Detraction swell and burst;
In spite of spite and rankerous sda^^e,
In scorn of any carping Critics brain,
Like to a Post I Will run through thick and thin,
To scourge Iniquity and spurgall sin.
You worthy favorites of wisdoms lore,
Only your favors does my Muse implore:
If your good stomachs these harsh lines digest,
I careless bid a rush for all the rest.
My lines first parents (be they good or ill)
Was my unlearned brain, and barten quill.
THE SCVLLER. To the whole kennell of Antichrists hounds, Priests, Friars,
Monks, and Jesuits, Mastiffes, Mongrels, Islands, Spanniels, Bloodhounds,
Bobtaile-tike, or Foystinghound: The SCVLLER sends greeting.
Epigram 1.
CVrse, exorcise, with Beads, with Book and Bell
Polluted shauelings: rage and do your worst:
Use coniurations till your bellics burst,
With many a Nigroma^ticke mumbling spell,
I fear you not, nor all your friends that sell
With Lucifer: vee damned dogs that durst
Devise that thundering Treason most accursed,
Whose like before was never hatched in Hell,
Half men, half devils, who never dreamed of good,
To you from ^aire and sweetly sliding Thames,
A popomasticke Sculler war proclaims,
As to the suckers of Imperial blood,
An Anti-Iesuice Sculler with his pen,
Defies your Babell beast, and all his Den.
I.T.

Epigram 2.
ROme, now approaches thy confusion,
Thy Antichristian Kingdom down must tumble
The NI^srods proud cloud-piercing Babylon,
Like hell-hatch'd pride, despite thy heart must humble,
In scorn of damned equivocation,
My lines like thunder through thy Regions rumble,
Down in the dust must lie thy painted glory,
For now I row and write thy tragic story.
Epigram 3.
When God had all things out of nothing framed,
And man had named all things ^^ are named;
God showed to man the way he should behave him,
What ill would dam him, or what good would save him,
All creatures that the world did then contain,
Were all made subjects to man's Lordly reign.
Fair Paradise was Princely ADAMS walk,
Where God himself did often with him talk:
At which the Angels, envious and proud,
Strived to ascend above the highest cloud:
And with the mighty God to make compare,
And of his glory to have greatest share:
Because they saw Gods love to man so great,
They strived to throw their Maker from his seat.
But he, whose power is All-sufficient,
Did headlong hurl them from Heavens battlement:
And for which envious pride they so did swell,
They lost heavens glory for the pains of Hell.
In all this time, man living at his ease,
His wife nor he not knowing to displease
Their glorious maker, till the Son of night
Full fraught with rage, and poison bursting spite,
Finding alone our ancient grandam EVE,
With false persuasions makes her to believe
^^ would eat the fruit she was forbidden,
^^^ should Gods secrets know, were from her hidden
^sing all was true the Serpent told,
^^^ both to ADAM straightway did unfold,
^^^ ^^^cherous horrid vile soul killingtreason,
^^^ ambitions, past the bounds of reason,
^^^ his posterities sole detriment)
^^ to the Woman and the Fiend consent.
^^^^ ADAM never had the devil obeyed,
^^^ not had the woman for his aid.
^^^ the sex that God made man to cherish,
^^^ by the Devil enticed to cause him perish.
^^^ supposing he had woone the field
^^^ taking man to his obedience yield)
^^^ ADAM now in corpse and mind dejected,
^^^ head to foot with shameful sin infected:
^^^ a slave to sin, the Devil and Death,
^ding the dinger of The Almighty's wrath,
^^^, banished from Gods presence thrust,
^^^ the earth being for his crime accursed,
^^^ with grief and selfe-consuming care,
^^ at the brimme of bottomless despair.
^^^ God in mercy thinking of his ^rail^ie,
^^^ sinful man to him had broken ^ealcie,
^^^ promise he would send his only Son,
^^^ for faults by man misdone.
^^^, he came, in his appointed time,
^^^ on his faultlesse shoulders took our crime,
^^^ like a malefactor death he suffered,
^^^^^^, once for all, himself himself has offered.
^^^ yet the Devil will not be satisfied,
^^^ though the Son of God for sinners died)
^^^ daily hellish damned enterprises,
^^^ Ministers and he against man devises,
^^^ the shelter of Religions cloak,
^cusly he does the world provoke,
^^^ God in traiterous manner to rebel,
^^^ amplify his everlasting hell,
^^^ tempting mankind still by fraud or force,
^^^ soul from his Redeemer to divorce,
^^^ yet not man alone must feel his sting.
^^^ he dares venture on our heavenly King,
those power though Satan Knows is everlasting,
^^^ after forty days and nights long fasting,
^^^cking him weak, attempts now to invade him:
^^^ with illusions seeking to persuade him:
^^^^^es our Savior up unto a Hill,
^^^ told him if he would obey his will.
^^^ oration to fall down^ before him,
^^^ of the worlds great glory would so store him
That he should Lord and Master be of all,
^^^ in reverence would before him fall.
Christ knowing him to be the root of evil,
With God-like power commands, avoid thou devil.
It Is writ, Thou Shall not tempt the Lord thy God,
^^^ seiue and fear the fury of his rod,
Satan perceiving all his labor lost,
Runs through the world, more switter then a post:
Proclaims large Kingdoms, and a tryple Crown,
To him that in his Reverence would fall down.
Ambitious thirst of fickle fading fame,
Did quickly minds of wordly man inflame:
Making them dream on pleasures ^^^^sitorie,
And to esteem earths pomp above heavens glory.
This made the Pope, with poisonous pride infused,
TO accept those honors Christ before refused:
Now has he won great fame, on this condition:
That fore the devil he fall in base submission:
So having won this great magnificence,
To countermaund the earths cir^^^ ence.
The Idiot world he proudly ou^r-swa^^^,
Under the name of Heavens immortal hayes,
Over all the Globe he ra^gnes as Lord and King,
And to Hels Goat.fold ^^e does millions bring,
Ot souls, ^^duc'd with buzard bl^ded zeal,
From men besotted he does honor steal,
And yet with his effrontit shameless face,
Seems to command the devil that gave him place.
A heinous fault in my dull understanding,
The Servant over his Lord should be commanding:
But yet I think it is but for policy,
More to increase the infernal Monarchy:
He seems to hate the Devil he most does serve,
Else would the world from Romes obedience swerue,
And leave the Pope and Papists in the lurch:
And then might Satan whistle for a Church,
The Isle of Britain has perceived their tricks,
And in Rebellion against the Pope she kickes:
For whom they have inucnted helle-hatcht plots,
Quite to extirpe the English and the Scots.
I wot not which of Rome or hell roared louder,
But they had like to have p^pper'd us with powder.
Yea all estates, from Scepter to the Crown,
Should topsie tur^ie all be tumbled down.
Without respect of person, sex, or age,
All had their doom, to abide the Roman rage.
But he that by his sacred self had sworn,
To guard his Church, did laugh them all to scorn:
For when those vassals of eternal night,
Thought all secure, then God brought all to light,
Casting their painted glory in the dust,
That any power besides his power does trust:
I.eauing their Corpse a prey for Crows and Kites,
That bravely so for Signior Satan fights.
But in this matter I Will no further travail,
Least want or water make my Ship to gravel:
Knowing there is many wits of far more worth,
That to the life has limbd this Treason forth;
But I Will conclude as I began before,
Because that Christ would not the devil adore,
Christ lost this glorious worldly pompous reign,
Which happy loss, the hapless Pope did gain.
Epigram 4.
HOw weakly is that weak Religion grounded,
That thinks ye Church on Peter's corpse is founded?
The Spouse of Christ is built on Faiths firm Rock,
Which not the sury of Hels direful shocke,
Though all the fiends in treupes do her assail,
Yet 'gainsts Gods power their force cannot prevail.
Peter's confessing Christ Gods Math. 16. If the Corpse of Peter be the Churches
foundation, as the Papis^s same, then how should the Spouse of our Savior have
done, if the Apostle Peter had never been borne
true begotten,
Is sure the Churches ground, but Peter's rotten,
Or else it Peter never had had life,
Through want of him Christ never had had wise,
For It is an Article of Faith profound,
To know S. Peter for the Churches ground.
And who denies it shall have fire and rope,
Believe me Reader, or go ask the Pope.
But yet I muse in what place of the earth,
Gods Church did stand before S. Peter's birth?
Epigram 5.
When as our Savior to the Temple went,
To tell the message that his Father sent:
And finding there a rude unruly rout,
That bought and sold, he angry beat them out,
And overthrew their Tressels and their tables,
And made them pack away with all their bables:
And further said (what all true hearts believes)
This house was made for Prayer, no den for thieves.
Those Merchants thus whipped from their market place
Practiced revenge against Christ for this disgrace.
And more to strength their power, joined with ye Pope:
Who by his lawless Law has given them scope,
That in the Church they still should buy and sell
Both God, and Devil, Heaven, Purgatory, Hell,
Now here is the odds, Christ out the Pedlers thrust,
And stayed himself there, preaching what was just.
And for revenge the haughty Roman Priest.
Has taken the Pedlers in, and thrust out Christ.
Epigram 6.
IT is a question fiarre beyond my Logic,
How those ye have ye Popedom won by Magic,
Can be Lieutenants It Is more then I can believe that the Devil has power to
elect an officer for God. Being of the Devils placing or displasing, the Pope
must needs be the devils deputy and not Christ's.
unto Christ our Savior,
Being known for hell hounds of most damned behavior:
Then since the devil has the Pope created.
His Vicar must he be, that there him seated:
'Twould make a wiset head then mine to muse,
That God should like the man the Devil does choose.
Epigram 7.
A Prouer be old, where had the Devil the Frye
Where had the Devil the Friar but were he ^^^
The Devil with the Friar sits in the Quire, ^^^
The Friar with the Devil says and sings Mass?
The devil and the Friar are never asunder,
The Friar to hate the Devil is more then wonder
Epigram 8.
COnferring with a Romish I my self did talk with such a fellow, and if
occasion ^^^ I can produce him.
Pharisee,
Who void of grace maintained this heresy,
That he the Law of God had never broken,
Nor never ill had done, nor ill had spoken.
I gave his Antichristian faith the lie.
And told him that for him Christ did not dye.
For he did suffer only for their sin.
Who were ensnared in the devils ginne.
And as for him that never had transgrest,
Twere good to hang him now he is at the best.
Epigram 9.
IT is an Art beyond the work of Nature,
The Pope should be It Is a rare piece of work for the pot to make the Pott^^.
Creator, and a Creature
Betwixt the Pope and God there is one thing odd,
For though God all things made ^^ Pope makes God
Epigram 10.
REligions scattered into diverse sects,
One likes one way for many sound respects,
Others like that way; others like another,
And what likes the one, is loathed by the other.
Yet each man deemes his own opinion's right,
And each against other bearesinated spite.
Amongst the rest the Roman Catholic,
Who scorns that his Religion sail should strike
To any, since from it two virtues springs,
That they may eat their God, and kill their Kings
By which maine Maxims they do strongly hope
To the worlds Period to uphold the If the devil betrue to his Servants, these
two principal Ar^^ ^mes will to the end of the world help the Pap^sts at a
dead ^^^
Pope.
Epigram 11.
IT is no wonder though Romes regal sway,
Is by a Sheapheard ruled with ^^^^ a reason a Shepherd should rule Rome,
because a Shep^^^rd did build it: and it stands by great reason, the Pope ^^^^
be of a wolu^sh nature, because a Wolte was nurie to his ^^^decessor Romulu^^
Lordly same;
For ancient Records truly does display;
How Romulus the Shepherd built the same:
And how his brother Rem^ and himself,
In Tybers restless wanesy drencht and ducke,
When infant misery was all their pelse,
A ravening wolf, most motherly they suckes
From whom does spring as from a flowing gulf,
Romes Priest and Prince, a Shepherd and a Wolf.
Epigram 12.
TVmultuous thoughts within my breast death struggle,
To think how sinely popish Priests can iuggle:
And make the world believe a a wafer ^though all the Scriptures do affirm
that the corporael pre^^^ of Christ is in heaven from whence he will not come
in his ^^^^ form, till he comes to ^^^ eternal judgment: yet a ^^^^ing
Priest, will daily take upon him to command and him ^^^^ and to iuggle him into
the shape of a Cake, or a piece of bread.
Cake,
Is that Creator that did all things make
Or that the sinne-polluted bald-crownd Priest,
With coniurations, can create his Christ,
When our belief does plainly testify,
He sits at Gods right hand in Majesty,
From whence in human for me he will not come,
Till quick and dead shall all abide his doom.
What Fools are they then thinks the Priest and Baker,
With impious hands makes their immortal maker.
Epigram 13.
NOt all the sophistry of Aristosle,
Cannot persuade me but the Pope did err,
When he and's son mistook the poy^ned ^^^ the 6, and his son Casar
Borgin^, were both poyso^^d in mistaking their liquor. But if his Holiness had
been in ^^^ Chair, he could not have erred in such a matter.
bottle.
'Twas' error sure, what ever they infer.
O't had been good then, both for him and's heir,
He had been haltered fast in Peter's Chair.
Epigram 14.
THe wa^ like Emperors before Christ come,
Subdued the wo^ld, both Sea and Land to Rome.
Then afterward the Heaven, Earth, sea, and Land being all won before these
^times by the Emperors and the godly Bishops, there re^^^^es^ only Hell for
the Pope to make a lawful claime^^^
Heavens their Bishops won.
By preaching truly Gods Immortal Son.
Heaven, Earth, and Sea, being taken in the prime,
What rests now for the Popes this latter time?
Since of the heavens and earth they loose their part,
They will have hell, despite the devils heart.
Epigram 15.
Christ's Church in no ways is the That Church that is so oposite to the
doctrine of Christ cannot be Christ's wi^e but the devils whore.
Church of
For Paul says, in the latter time should come,
Apostates, that the truth should quite forsake,
That lies and fables should Religion make:
Affi^ming meats and Matrimony evil,
Which Paul does call the doctrine of the devil.
Then since the Pope and all his shaueling rout,
What Christ commands they wilfully thrust out.
I with my betters must conclude this doom,
The Devils dear drab must be the Church of Rome.
Epigram 16.
O Yes, if any man would know a place,
Where God himself has neither power nor might,
Where as the Al^ighty never showed his face.
Where words, nor swords, can neither talk nor sight.
O such a place^ esse place ^^ God made heaven and earth, the Sea, and all
things contained in them: the Pope made Purgatory without Gods leave or
knowledge, therefore it is no reason that God should have any thing to do
there without the Popes leave
. Purg^^tory,
Created by the Pope without Gods leave,
To amplify his Antich^^^^ian glory,
And all the world with counning to deceive,
Where as the Pope hangs, draws, condemns, and ^dges
Commits, acquits, sets free, or ^^^ ^^^ all,
Whether he thousands sends, on heaps like drudges,
For in this no place, he is all in all,
And like a mighty ^^^ crowned P^^^ Prince,
With threats and bansh^ ^^ so the world be witches:
In sending thither, and recalling ^^^^^,
He gains himself the D^^ll and all for riches.
Epigram 17.
THe H^s holiness domineeres over all the devils in this life, but it is but
borrowed ware, for they pay him all his old score when he dies, and comes to
^^^ host.
Pope has charge of heavens immortal keys,
And triple-headed Cerberus obeyes,
His triple Crown, and who so e're he please,
He sends to Hell for pain, or Heaven for ease.
He can command the Angels and the Fiends,
What pleases them for him or for his friends,
Like as a Dog does fear a sti^ch of Bacon,
So his great name, Heaven, Earth, and Hell has shaken.
Epigram 18.
Who dares affirm the Popes of Rome are Proud,
Amongst the Heretics himself must shroud
Or who dares say they are given to Avarice,
In selling Heaven and Hell for sums of price?
Or who dares speak such words of treachery,
To say the Pope is given to Seven goodly virtues naturally ingrasted in his
hellish Holiness.
Letchery?
Or who is he, dares be so impious,
To say his Holiness is Envious?
Or who, for sear of everlasting scath,
Dares once accuse his Holiness of Wrath.
Or who is he that dares once verify,
The Pope does use excessive Gl^ttony?
Or who dares say, that like a drone or moath,
Like an unpreaching Priest, he lives by El^^th?
He that against him this dares justify,
Is a plain Protestant, and such am I.
Epigram 19.
MAy it be called intolerable Pride,
For man to sit in the His holiness never learned this of Christ, nor yet of
Peter.
Almighties seat,
Or on men's shoulders pompously to ride.
To terrify the world with thundering threat?
To wear a three^ pilde Crown upon his head?
To have both Kings and Princes at his beck?
Whose Horse by mighty Potenta^es is led,
Who proudly ^ootes upon the Emperors neck:
If tricks like these, ^o^ pride may be allowed,
Then I conclude, the Pope must needs be proud.
Epigram 20.
IF it be covetous for gripple gain,
To sell^ the Heavens, the Earth, yea God himself,
To dispossess Kings from their lawful reign,
To cramme his co^fers with unlawful pel^e.
To pardon sins for If you will know the price of sin, any ordinary Priest
can tell you, as well as Tom Tapster can tell a penny is the price of a pot of
Ale.
money, more then pity:
Nay more, to pardon sins that are to come:
To maintain Whores, and Stews in Town and City:
Who yearly pays the Pop^ a countlesse sum,
Who takes great interest, puts great sums to use,
It Is Couetousuesse I think without excuse.
Epigram 21.
IS it not brutish sensual Why may not his Holiness have as much privilege
as a Beast, for a beast may lawfully ^ngender with his own kindred, and the
Pope is called a Beast in many places of the Bible.
appetite,
The Sire to make a strumpet of his child,
Or is not Letcherie an Epethire,
For him that has his Fathers bed defilde?
For him that has des^ our'd Virginity?
That has defilde the Damozell and the Damme,
Without respect of Consanguinitie?
That like a wolf has spovld both Ewe and Lamb?
This may be rearm'd incestuons Luxury,
And yet his Holiness not wronged thereby.
Epigram 22.
HE like a God that gouernes in the world,
That Eu^^es ^^ch man's honor but his own:
He ^^^^^ ^^^ through the earth has hurld,
Who^^ E^uie has great Kingdoms ouer-throwne.
He that vngra^^s his ^^^ that is o^^ce entombed,
For Enu^^ that he wronged him whilst he lived,
And after death is E^^^^^ d^^m'd.
To be of live less sencel^^sie limbs depria'd.
If this be true none will deny I hope,
That Envy is ing^a^ted in the Pope. It is too true, that the Pope envying the
glory of other Princes, has by fraud of sorce gotten all the earthly glory to
^^^^^^. Pope Stephen the 6 caused the de^d body of ^^^ ^^^ ^^^^. ^^^ to be
dug up, and to be cut and mangled and cast into the River Tyber.

Epigram 23.
HE whose fierce Those that remember the powder Treason^^^ tell if I ly^^^^^
not, besides many horrible mur^hers committed by Popes, which ^^ are extant in
many learned Authors of their own sect.
Wrath with bloody rag^^doth swell
That cakes delight in ^^aughtering Gods ^^^
He that is sworn the Champion of Hell.
That Wrath and Murder only does effect:
He whose combu^^^ous all devouring ire,
Depopulates and lays whole Empires waste,
Whose Wrath like a consuming quenchl^^le fire,
Has blessed peace from Ch^stendome d^^plac't.
If I should need one, skild in Wrath and Murder
His Holiness commands me go no further.
Epigram 24.
WHO dares for it is a pitiful pining glutton^us fast, to refrain fic^h and
eat all manner of fish, and other Delicates, which they cause to swim in their
bell^es with the strongest Wine, which makes his Holiness and all his crew to
look as leave as so many Brawnes styed up against Christmas.
Glutony the Pope accuse,
Or' gunst voluptuous diet make complaints^^
His Holiness so many Fasts does use,
As L^nts, and Fasting days, and Eeucs of Saints,
Yet where Pride, Lust, and Avarice are found,
Heart gnawing Envy, and fell murdering Wra^^^,
There ravenous Gluttoxy must needs abound,
Else other vices will be out of breath.
For Papists Fasts are generally more dear,
Then Feasts of Protestants with all their cheer.
Epigram 25.
THose I mean the seven deadly sinnnes,
liberal Sciences in number soanen,
Began with Pride, and ends with drowsy Sl^^^b
Yet Christ's command unto the Apostles given
Was, feed my sheep that faith in them have growth.
Now I suppose, the feeding of Christ's flock,
Is truly Preaching of his sacred word, His Holiness knows ^^ should feed the
Sheep of Christ with such food as he com^^^ded they would soon find out his
knavery.

Which word's the Key that opes the heavenly lock,
Which, If the Pope ^^^^^^ this sword to be drawn, it would cut his throat,
and ^^^^^^ ^es both.
Sword and Word his Holiness does hoord.
Which drawn, cuts his throat and the Devils both,
For scare of which he lets it sleep in sloth.
The belief of a Roman Catholske.
Epigram 26.
I Do believe the holy Pope of Rome,
Is Lord of I would wish that this were not so, but I need not stand long is
persuading men to believe it, for their own Authors will te^^^ ^this and a
hundred times more.
Scriptures, Fathers, Church and all:
Of Councels of the world, whose dreadful doom,
Can at his pleasure make all rise, or fall.
I do believe, though God forbids the same,
That I should worship Images, and Saints:
I hope by mine own works I heaven may claim.
^^ tongues unknown, I must make prayers and plaints.
I do believe Christ's body made of bread.
And may be eaten by Dogs, Cats, or Mice,
Yet is a sacrifice for quick and dead,
And may be bought and sold for rated price.
I further do believe the Pope our Lord,
^^n at his pleasure all my sins forgive.
I do believe at his commanding I think as you think, ^^^^ think you?
word,
Subjects must Kings of lives and land deprive.
Like as the Church beleues, so I believe:
By which I hope the Heavens I shall atchieue.
Epigram 27.
LIke as the Vipers birth's his mothers bane,
So the Popes full, has been the Emperors wane:
The Empires Autumn, was the Popish Spring,
And Kings subjection made the Pope a King.
Then did his Holiness become a God,
When Princes children-like, began fear his rod.
Whilst earthly Potentates their own did hold,
Th^^ Popes then Shepheard-like did keep their fold.
And fore the sacred truth should be overcome,
They willingly would suffer Martyrdom.
But farewell Martyrs nows and welcome Myters,
For painful Preachers now, contentions fighters,
With blood or gold, ascends ^he Papal Chair,
Under the title of Saint Peter's heir.
I think if truth were brought unto the trial,
The Pope is heir to Peter in denial.
But want of penitence proclaims him base,
A Bastard not of P^^ers blesied race,
Unless when Christ did call the Apostle devil.
He Is Bastard to the good, and heir to the evil.
Epigram 28.
ME^ thinks I hear a swarm of Romani^^^.
Revile and curse, with Candle, Book and Be^l^
Yea all the pol^eshorne crew of Antichrists,
Condemns me all without remorse to Hell:
But I with resolution so do arm me,
Their blessings do no good, nor cu^sings harm me.
Epigram 29.
I That have rowed from Tyber unto Thames,
Not with a Sculler, but with Scull and bra^^^,
If none will pay my Fare, the more's their shames,
I am not first unpaid that has taken pa^nes.
Yet I Will be bold if payment be delayed.
To say and swear your Sculler is not paid.
To his approved good friend, Master Robert Branthwayt.
Dear friend, to thee I owe a countlesse d^bt,
Which though I ever pay will never be paid:
It Is not base coin, subject to cankers ^^^t,
If so, in time my debt would be defrayed,
But this may debt, I would have all men know.
Is love, the more I pay, the more I owe.
I.T.

To his well esteemed friend, Master Maximilian Waad.
VVlt, Learning, Honesty, and all good parts,
Has so possessed thy body and thy mind,
That couetously thou steal'st away men's hearts,
Yet'gainst thy theft, there is never none repined.
My heart, that is my greatest worldly pelse,
Shall ever be for thee as for my self.
I.T.

To my friend Master William Sherman.
THou that in idle adulating words
Can never please the humors of these days,
That greatest works with smallest speech affords,
Whose wit the rules of Wisdoms lore obeyes.
In few words then, I wish that thou may be,
As well beloved of all men, as of me,
I.T.

FINIS.
Epigram 1.
ALl you that steadfastly do fix your eye,
Upon this idle issue of my brain,
Who void of any intricate disguise,
Describes my meaning rusticall and plain.
My Muse like ^^phus with roylesome trade,
Is ever working, yet has never done,
Though from ^^ Romans^^^ Sea she well began wade,
Yet is her labor as 'twere ne^ begun.
For having at the Papists had a sling,
Great Brita^^es vice, or virtues now I sing.
Epigram 2.
THen cause I will not hug my self in sin,
First with my self, I mean for to begin.
Confessing that in me there is nothing good:
My veins are full of sinne-polluted blood,
Which all my corpse insects with hel^-bo^^^ crimes,
Which make my actions lawless like these times,
That had I power according to my will,
My faults would make compare with any ill,
But yet I muse at Poets now ad^yes,
That each man's vice so sharply will dispraise:
Like as the Kite does over the carrion houer,
So their own faults, with other men's they cover.
Cause you shall deem my judgment to be just,
Amongst the guilty, I cry guilty first.
Epigram 3.
GLacus that self conce^ted c^iticke fool,
Upon my Epigrams does look a scaunt,
And bids me pat my borren wit to School,
And I in anger bid the Affe aua^^^.
For till some better thing by him is pend,
I bid him fault not that he cannot mend.
Epigram 4.
A Skillful Painter such rare pictures drew.
That every man his workmanship admired:
So near the life, in beauty, for me, and new,
As if dead Art, against Nature had conspired.
Painter says one, thy wife's a p^^tty woman,
I muse such il^-shapt Children thou ^ast got,
Yet make such pictures as their like makes no man,
I preth^e tell the cause of this thy lot?
Quoth he, I paint by day when it is light,
And get my Children in the dark at night.
Epigram 5.
Unlearned Azo, store to Books has bought,
Because a learned Scholar he will be thought:
I counseled him that had of Books such store,
To buy Pipes, Lutes, the Violl and Bandore.
And then his Music and his learning share,
Being both alike, with either might compare.
Epigram 6.
Fair Betrice tuckes her coats up somewhat hie,
Her pretty leg and foot cause men should spy:
Says one you have a handsome Leg sweet ducke,
I have two (quoth she) or else I had hard ^ucke:
There Is two indeed, I think they are twins (quoth. he)
They are, and are not, honest friend (quoth she)
Their birth was both at once, I dare be sworn,
But yet between them both a man was borne.
Epigram 7.
THe way to make a Welch-man thirst for bliss,
And say his prayers daily on his knees:
Is to persuade him, that most c^^taine it is,
The Moon is made of nothing but green Cheese.
And he will desire of God no greater boon,
But place in heaven to feed upon the Moon.
Epigram 8.
A Gailant Less from out her window saw,
A Gentleman, whose nose in length exceeded;
Her boundless will, not limited by Law,
Imagined he had what she greatly needed,
To speak with him, she kindly does entreat,
Desiring him to clear her dark suppose:
Supposing every thing was made complete,
And correspondent equal to his nose.
But finding short where she expected long,
She sighed and said, O nose thou did me wrong.
Epigram 9.
YOung Sr. John Puckefoist, and his new made Madam:
Forgets they were the off spring of old Adam,
I Am sure it is not for wit, nor manlike fight,
His worthless worship late was dubbed a Knight.
Some are made great for wealth, and some ^or ^it,
And some for valor do attain to it:
And some for neither valor, wit nor wealth,
But stolen opinion, purchase it by stealth.
Epigram 10.
ONe told me fiattery was exi^'d the slate,
And pride and lust at Court were out of date,
How virtue did from thence all vice put sue,
It Is news (qnoth I) too good for to be true.
Epigram 11.
HE that does beat his brains, and try his wit,
In hope thereby to please the multitude,
As soon may ride a Horse without a bit,
Above the Moon, or Suns high altitude.
Then neither flatt^rie, nor the hope of pelf,
Has made me write, but for to please my self.
Epigram 12.
A Rusticke swain was cleaning of a black,
And hum he cries at every ponderous kr^o^^ke,
His wife says, Husband, where fore hum you ^^?
Quoth he, it makes the wedge in further go.
When day was done, and drow sie night was come,
Being both in bed at play, sh^^^ bids him hum.
Good wife(quoth he) ^ncreat me hum no more,
For when I hum I cleave, but now I bore.
Epigram 13.
When Cauale^o Hot shot goes with Oars,
Zoun's rowye Rogues, ye^^z knaves make have,
^^^yle of Fiddlers and a brace of Whotes,
At Lambeth stays for me to break their fast;
He that is so hot for's wench ere he come nie^^er,
Being at her once, I doubt he will be on fire.
Epigram 14.
IT was my chance once in my furious mood,
To call my neighbors wife an a^^^nt who ^re,
But she most ^^^^y on here credit stood,
^^aring that sorry I should be there ^o^^^ re,
Her Husband understanding of the case,
Protested he would sue me for a sla^der,
When straight I proved it to his forked face,
He was a Knave, a Cuckold and a Pander,
Obo (quoth he) good neighbor say no mo,
I know my wife lets out her buggle bo.
Epigram 15.
THe Law hangs Thieves for their unlawful Stealing
The law carts Bawd^, for keeping of the door,
The Law does punish R^gues, for rogu^^sh dealing
The Law whips both the Pander and the Who^e,
For yet I muse from whence this Law is grown,
Whores must not steal nor yet must v^^ their own.
Epigram 15.
OLd Fabian by Extortion and by stealth,
Hoth got a huge Mass of ill gotten wealth,
For which he gives God daily thanks and praise,
When 'twas the Devil that did his ^^tunes ray^^,
Then since the gatting of thy goods were evil,
The have reason to be thankful to the devil,
Who very largely hatn increast thy mock,
And sent the Miser Midaes golden lock.
Then thank not God, for he has h^lp^ thee leaft,
But thank the Devil that has thy ^^^^ ^^creast.
Epigram 17.
WHat matter is it, how men their days do spend,
So good report do on their deaths attend:
Though in thy former life thou never did good,
But made Religion for thy faules a hood,
And all black sins were^
And took thy Con^
Yet at thy^
^^^^ have ^ Sern^
A thread^
And in^
Will mak^^
And^
Our^
Who was the^
N D^^^^^ swearer,
No gr^ed^ V^urer,^
Ode^
And thus an end at has^
Thus Mr.^
To make a V^ll^ine^
And to one^
Much more then ^^^^^ ^^^^^ worth of words.
Epigram 18.
LOrd who would take him for a p'pp^n ^quire,
That's^
Can the dun'd wind^^^^ or base ^^^^^^,
Maintain the sl^u^ in this (...)?
No (...) V^^tue's at to law a price,
When man knows better how to thr^^^^ by Vice,
Epigram 19.
ALL Bradoes oaths are new founded quence,
As though they sprung from learned Sapience:
He swears by twit^ p^^d I ^^^^ fiery Car,
By Marses Lance, the fearful God of war,
By ^^u^ias Bo ^^ M^^^^^es charming Rod,
By B^^^^^^ Di^ty, that drunken God
By gum sac'd ^ut^ and A^ernus ^aues,
B^ Eoius blasts, and Neptun^^ raging W^ues,
B^ ^^^ swe^^ M^^^us ^^^^ght ^^ ^^^^ eyes,
All other Oaths his h^mon does despise.
Epigram 20.
SIgneor Scranoto and tro does range
And at high Noone he visits the Exchange:
With stately gate the peopled Burse he stalks,
Prving for some acquaintance in those walks;
Which if he Spy^^^^^^ but has strange salute,
Mark how he will spread to show his broaking suit,
When he perhaps that owed that cast apparel,
Not a fortnight since at Tyborne sought a quarrel.
Epigram 21.
OLd Grubsons Son a stripling of good age,
^ will make one laugh to see him and his Page,
Like to a guarded Vichin walks the streets,
Looking for reverence of each one he meets;
Eagles must honor Owls, and Lions Apes,
And wise men worship fools for far fetched shapes,
Epigram 22.
GReab Captain Sharke does wonderfully muse,
How he shall spend the day that next ensues:
There Is no Play to be played, but he has seen,
At all the Theaters he often has been:
And seen the rise of Clownes, and fall of Kings,
Which to his humor no contentment brings.
And for he scorns to see a Play past twice:
He Will spend a time with his sweet Cockatrice.
Epigram 23.
A Complete Gallant that has gone as far,
That with his hands from skies has plucked a star:
And saw bright Phoebus who^ he did take Coach:
And Luna when her throne she did approach:
And talk with Jupiter and Mercury,
With Vulcan and the Queen of Lechery.
And saw the net the stumpfoot Blacksmith made,
When ein fell Mars and Venus was betrayed,
With thousand other sights he saw in skies,
Who dares affirm i^ that this gallant lies?
I counsel all that either hate or love him.
Rather believe him, then go to disprove him.
Epigram 24.
DRusus his portion gallantly has spent,
What though? He did it to a good intent.
Unto a wise man it seems never strange,
That men should put their money to Exchange.
Nay then I saw he was a subtle Fox,
What had he for it I pray, sweet Sir the Pox.
I do not like his bargain: why, wherefore?
His money still wan'd less, his pox wax more.
He need not now fear wasting of his stocks.
Spend what he can, he nere shall want the Pox.
Epigram 25.
Neat Master Scape-thrist, railes against all ryet,
Commending much a temperate sparing diet,
What though he has been prodigal and wild,
Those idle fancies now he has exilde:
What though he has been frequent with excess
Of Dice, of Drabs, and drowsy Drunkenness,
Yet now he is changed Sir, he is not the man,
The case is altered now from what 'twas than:
The Prologue of his wealth did teach him spend,
And it is the Epilogue that makes him mend.
Epigram 26.
A Greedy Chuffe once being warned in post
To make appearance at the Court of Hell:
Where grifly Pluto hotly rules the roste.
And being ^ummon'd by the passing Bell.
With heaps of gold he would have bribed Death,
But he dildaining bribes deprived his breath.
Epigram 27.
DOctor Donzago one of wondrous learning,
And in Astronomy exceeding cunning:
Of things that's past and coming he is discerning,
His mind on Prophesies is ever running,
Of Comets, Meteors, Apparitions,
Of Prodigles, and exhalations,
Of Planets, natures, and conditions,
And of the spheres great calculations.
Yet want of one skill all his cunning smothers,
Who lies most with his wife himself or others.
Epigram 28.
Brave Bragadocia whom the world does threaten
Was lately with a Faggot stick sore beaten:
Wherefore in kindness now my Muse must weep,
Because his resolution was asleep.
Epigram 29.
VVAlking along the streets the other day.
A ragged Soldier crossed me on the way;
And though my purses lyning was but scant,
Yet somewhat I bestowed to ease his want.
For which he kindly thankt me with his heart,
And took his leave, and friendly we did part.
When straight mine eyes a Horse and Footcloth spy'd^^
Upon whose back in pompous state did ride,
One, whom I thought was deputy to Jove,
Yet not this Soldiers wants could pity move,
But with disdainefull looks and terms of scorn
Commands him travail whether he was borne.
'T will almost make a Puritan to swear,
To see an Asses Horse a cloak to wear.
When Christians must go naked bare and thin,
Wanting apparel t'hide their mangled skin.
Vain world unto thy Chaos turn again.
Since brutish beasts are more esteemed then men.
Epigram 30.
LIeutenant Pusse from Cleaueland is returned,
Where entering of a breach was sorely burned;
And from revenge he will never be persuaded,
Till the low Countries he has quite invaded.
When his hot wrath makes Neatherlands to smoke,
He Is bound for Deep in France with irefull stroke,
But have a care in these hot wars of France,
Least in a Pockie heat you spoil your Lance.
Epigram 31.
A Loue-sicke Wooer would a Sonnet write,
In praise of her that was his hearts delight'^
Hoping thereby his wished love to win,
And to attain it, thus he did begin.
Seure of the Earth, and Empress my Soul.
^Loue and Life, that does my thoughts control:
^ Queen of my affections and desire,
^^^^ to AE^na, sets my heart on fire.
^y Golden Locks, resembling brightest Amber;
^^^ ^it to grace some mighty Monarkes Chamber;
^^^eyes Eclipsing T^^^^ in his rising,
^y Face surpassing Natures best deuiung,
^y lips euaporates most sweet persumes,
^y roice the Music of the Spneares astumes.
^^^on wounds more then Loves shast and Bow,
^y red the Rose does shame, thy white the Snow,
^^^ Worlds wonder, Natures dearest Jewel,
^^^ not thy virtues with thy being cruel,
^^^ that art my Souls adored Saint ^^
^^^etrable to my woes complaint.
^^^ the poor Bull finch spends the day in moanes,
^^^ ^ight he wastes in deep heart-gnawing groans.
^^^ most filthy ugly odious Whore,
^^ whom he spends his substance and his store.
^^^sing millions of egregious lies.
^^rayse his Punckes foul feature to the skies.
Epigram 32.
^^^ke how yon Lechers legs are worn away,
^^^ With haunting of the Whore-hose every day:
^^nowes more greasy Panders, Bawds, and Drabs,
^ad eats more Lob sters, Articheck^^s, and Crabs,
^^w roasted Eggs, Potato^s Muskadine,
^^^^ers, and pith that grows ^^^ Oxes Chine:
^ith many Drugs, Compounds, and Simples store,
Which makes him have a stomach to a Whore,
^^ one day he will give cre when it is too late,
^^hen he stands begging through an Iron Grate.
Epigram 33.
Light fingered Francis begging in the Iayle,
Did chance to see a friend of his pass by,
^^inking his lamentations would prevail,
^ad that some coin would from his bounty stye,
These ancient friends, one thrall, and the other tree,
^^e hungry, lousy, ragged, and forlorn:
The other ^at with prodigality,
^akes him this answer mixed with pride and scorn,
What Frank (quoth he) art there for ^le and Cakes?
Why how the D^uell comes this lucklesse cross?
^^^^h sir (quoth Frank) your mastership mist^kes.
^^or I am here for stealing of a Horse,
^roth I mistook indeed, and ^o ^^st thou,
^^at this time I have no money now.
Epigram 34.
MOunsieur Luxuri has been with a Puncke,
Whereby his worships purse is ^hrodely shtunk,
And now for penance of his former ryet,
With good Duke Humfrey he must take his diet.
Thus with a cr^^^^^^ ^^^ (...)
^^adge his case (...)
Epigram 35.
THere chanst^
^
The ^^^ an old man^
^
The ^^^^ a Poet ^^^^^^ and (...),
The^^^ th a P^
These^
Who should^
The old man said that when he was a boy,
To ^^^ nine h^nd^^ed^^^^^ was ^^^^ a toy,
To jumpe in plain ^^^^^ ^ their ^^ (...) ^^^
Then was acc^^^^^ (...) ^^^.
The ^^raua^ler replied that he ^^^ ^^^^.
The King of Pigmies, and the Fair, Queen,
And been where triple headed (...),
Did guard the sulpheus ^^^^^ ^^^^^^
The Poet he had beene^^ H^^^^^^,
And raked from embers ^^^^ ^^^on
Old Saturnes down^^all, and ^^^^ royal rising,
With thousand fictions of his wits d^^^sing,
And for the Pa^nter scorns to come behind,
He paints a flying Horse, a Golden, Hind,
A Sagitary, and a grim wild man,
A two neckt Eagle, and a cole^ black Swan.
Now reader tell me which of those toure Liars,
Does best deserve the whetstone for their hyers,
Epigram 36.
THough Death do V^u^ers of life deprive,
Yet their extortions ever shall suruia^e.
Epigram 37.
MIraculous Monsters in the British clime;
Monsters of Nature sprungs from putred slime,
S(...) that pulled the Ga^es of ^^^^ down,
Nor Libian Hercules whose ^^^ ^^^^ ^rowne,
Would m^z^ strong Giants, t^^^ the Lions rage,
Were not so strong as Gallants of this age:
Why you shall see on vp^^r^ ^^^k^^^ a^nd lack,
Will bear five hundred Akers on his back,
And walk as stourly as if it were no load,
And bear it to each place of his abode,
Men of such strength I judge it necesiary,
That none but such should Porters burdens ^arry.
Epigram 38.
FOr Gods love tell what gallant Gullis that,
With the great Feat^er, and the Beauer Hat^
O now I know, his name is Mounsieur Sh^se,
Great Cozen^ german to Sir Cutb^rt ^he^^,
All his revenues still he beats about him,
Whore-house nor ordinary never are without him.
False Dice, sharp Knife, and nimble nimming fingers,
Are his swor^e subjects and his tribute bring ^^^.
Thus dath h^swagger, sharke, steal, fil^^ and quarrel,
Until the Hangmans Wardrop hangs his parrell.
Epigram 29.
A Famous House in poasting have is built,
^^^ Porch with Pillars all beguilt,
Brave l^^rie Chimnies pity to defile them.
Pray make no fire, for the smoke will soil them.
Epigram 40.
A Worthy Knight there is of ancient fame,
Ans sweet Sir Reverence men do call his name:
By whose industrious policy and wit,
There Is many things well taken were else unfit:
If to a foul discourse thou have prerence.
Before thy foul word, name Sir Reverence,
Thy beastly tale most pleasantly will slip.
And gain thee praise, when thou deteru'st the whip.
There Is nothing vile that can be done or spoke,
But must be covered with Sir Reverence Cloak,
His ancient pedigree who ever leekes,
Shall find he is sprung from amongst the gallant Greeks,
Was Ajax Squire, great Champton to God Mars:
Pray God Sir Reverence bless your Worships ()
Epigram 41.
HVnting is all this Gentleman's delight,
Yet out of Town his worship never rides;
He hunts invisible, and out of sight,
For in the City still his Game abides.
He hunts no Lion, Tygre nor the Bore,
Not Back, nor Stag, nor Heart, nor H^^de, nor Hound,
But all his sport's in hunting of a Whore,
And in the chase no traua^le he will spare.
He has one Dog for hunting of the Cunny,
Worth a wholekenell of your flip mouthed hounds.
He will not part with him for any money,
But yet the Curre will course beyond his bounds,
But I advise him to respect his lot,
Least too much heating make him pockie hot,
Epigram 42.
FAlling a sleep, and sleeping in a dream,
Down by the dale that flows with milk and cream,
I saw a Rat upon an Essex cheese,
Dismounted by a Cambrain clad in Freeze.
To bid his worship eat I had no need.
For like a Serieant he began to feed.
Epigram 43.
A French and English man at Dinner sat,
And neither understanding others prate
The Frenchman says, mange proface Mousieur,
The Englishman begins to storm and swear:
By all the Devils, and the Devils dams,
He was not mangie but ith wrists and ha^s.
Epigram 44.
A Dead dead bargain is a quick quick wife.
A quick wife lies ore long upon ones hands^^
But for a dead wife that has lost her life
A man may sooner utter then his Lands.
This Riddle greatly does amaze my head,
That dead things should be quick, and quick thin ^^^^
Lo then I Will make an outcrie, woundrous strange,
If death do any wife of life deprive:
I give her Husband coin to boot, and change:
And for his dead wife one that is aliu^:
Besides, I Will pay the burial and the Feast,
And take my wife a gain, when she is deceast.
Epigram 45.
MOmus sits mumming like an Anticke elfe,
Hates others good, nor does no good himself
Epigram 46.
REader is any thing this Book thee cost,
Thou need'st not deem thy c^^ and labor lost^
'Twill serve the^ well Tobacco for to dry,
Or when thou talkst with mother Anthony,
'Twill serve for Muckenders for want of better,
So farewell Reader, I remain thy debtor.
Satyr.
THou that have ever been a rouing Thief,
A diuing Cu^purse, or a perjured ^^ laue,
And in all villainy have b^^ne the eni^^^,
And with a brazen brow can ^^^^^ brave,
That steal'st thy Pedigree from ancient houses,
And iet'st in broaking Satin every day:
That take delight in stabbing and Carowses,
Not caring how thou lerst thy loose life shay,
Thou that have been a Traitor to thy P^^^^,
A great Arch villain to thy Native foil,
And would by treachery exile from thence,
The blested peace has been procured with toil.
Thou that have been a Machimlian,
For damned s^^igh^s, cone its, and policy:
Thou that have been an Antichristian,
Or Schismaticke with blinded Heresy,
If any of these vile iniq ^ities,
Have been the Axiom^ of thy passed life;
Then view the Roles of old antiquities,
And see goods got with falsehood, lost with strife,
There shall you see how Justice evermore,
Has poyz'd the Balance, and vpheld the Sword,
How Gravity inspit'd with Wisdoms lore,
Has Virtue honored, and foul vice abhorred.
How Treason has been seuer'd lim from lim.
How Theft and Murder there have paid their hire,
How those that erst in wordly Pomp did swim,
Ho^ ^^yld their fortunes in disgraces mire.
How Persurie has forfeited his c^ros,
How Cheating's mounted on the Pillorie,
How graceless Impudents that nothing fears;
Do end their days in loathed misery.
How V^urie is plagaed with the Goat,
How Avarice complains of the Stone:
How gailtie Consciences are still in doubt,
How E^uie gnawes on honor to the bone,
How Lercherie is laden with the Pox,
How Prodigalitle does end with woe:
How Pandarisme is headed like an Ox.
Because the Destinies appoint it so.
How Drunkenness is with the Dropsy fraught,
And made his visage like a fiery Comet.
Who being full must have the the other draught,
Till like a Swine he wallow in his vomit.
How damned Hypocrisy and painted zeal,
And outward show of painted Holiness:
(Does like a Canker eat the public weal)
All scornful pride, yet seems all lowliness.
To thee that read'st this, therefore be it known,
If any of these vices are immured
Within thy heart, not to the world yet shown:
If by this reading thou may be allured,
To turn thy tide of life another way,
And to amendment all thy thoughts incline
And to thy rebel will no more obey,
But seek by vertuou^ actions to combine
Fame to thy Friends, and terror to thy foe,
And say 'twas friendly counsel told thee so.
Satyr.
THis childish Anticke, doting pie-bald world,
Through which ye Devil all black sins has hurld
Has been so long by wickedness pressed down.
From ye ^reeze. Plow. swain to the Imperial crown.
We have so long in vice accustomed been.
That nothing that is wicked looks like sin.
The glistring Courtier in his gaudie tire.
Scorns with his heels to know his russet Sire.
The petrifogging Lawyer crammes up Crowns,
From hobnaild Boores, and sheep skin country clown:
The gaping greedy, g^^iping, Vsurer^
The Son of Hell, and Satan's treasurer:
The base ex^orting black sold bribing Broaker,
The Bane of Mankind and his Countries choaker.
The helhound whelps the shoulder-clapping Seriant,
That cares not to undo the world for Argent.
The Post knight that will swear away his soul,
Though for the same the Law his ears do powle,
The smoakie black-lung p^f^ Tobaccount:
Whose joy does in Tobacco sole consid.
The choleric G^^l that is ^angled with a Drab,
And in her quarrel will his Father stab.
The baudie dry boand ^^cherous Baboone,
Would ^aine repent ^^^^^^ it is too soon.
The riming ^^^ ^^^ would be a Poet,
But that the ^^^ ^^^ not wit to show it.
The wrinckled ^^^, and dimmed v^^^melian whore
That buys and sels the pox to ^^^^^^ ^^^ slore.
The greasy eauesdropping do^^^ ^^^ Pander,
That with a Punke to any man will wander.
The conveatching shister steals most brief,
And when he is hanged heel c^ase to be a thief.
The drousie Drunkard will ^^^ and ^^^,
Till like a hog he tumble in his dr^^st^.
Besides, there is diverse other Hell bo^ne sins,
As some great men are wra^t in M^sers skin^es,
For fear of whose dislike, I ^^^ old me still,
And not bumbast them with my Ganders quill.
Consider with thy self Good Reader then,
That here thou hu'st amongst those wicked men,
Who on this earthly stage together keep,
Like Muggots in a Putrified sheep,
Whose damned dealing^ black confusion brings,
By the just judgment of the King O. Kings.
Pastoral Equiuokes, or a Shepherds complaint.
I That have traced the mountains up and down,
And pip't and chanted Songs and pleasant lays:
The whilst my flocks have frisk't it on the down,
Now blinded Love my sportiue pleasure lays,
I that on greenie grass could lay me down.
And sleep as soundly as on beds of down.
I then was free from loves all wounding blow,
My Ewes and Lambs then merrily could fold;
I cared not then which way the wind did blow,
Nor had I cause with grief my arms to infold.
I feared not Winters frost nor Summers Sun,
And then was I a happy mothers son.
I then could haunt the Market and the Fair,
And in a trolicke humor leap and spring,
Till she whose beauty did surpass all fair,
Did with her frosty necenesse nip my Spring.
Then I alas, alas unhappy I,
Was made a captive to her scornful eye.
When loves fell shaft within my breast did light,
Then did my Cock horse pleasure all alight,
Lou's fiery flames Eclipsed all my light,
And she unkind, weyd all my woes too light.
Oh then my merry days away did hie,
When I so low did door on one so hie.
Her beauty, which did make Loves Queen a Crow,
Whose while did shame the Lilly, red the Rose.
When Ph^bus messenger the Cock did crow,
Each morn when from his Antipods he rose.
Despite of gates, and bars, and bolts and locks,
He Would kiss her face, and guild her golden locks.
Which makes my rest, like those that restless be,
Like one that is hard pursued and cannot fly:
Or like the busy buzzing humming Be.
Or like the fruitless naught respected Fly.
That cuts the subtle air so swift and fast,
Till in the Spiders w^b he is tangled fast.
As blustering Borcas rends the lofty Pine,
So her unkindness rends and reaues my heart;
I weep, I wail, I sigh, I groan I pine,
I inward bleed, as does the wounded Heart.
She that alone should only wish me well,
Has drowned my joys in Sorrows ioylesse well.
The ruthlesse Tiger, and the Savage Bear,
All Beasts and Birds of prey that haunt the Wood,
In my laments do seem some part to bear,
But only she, whose feature makes me wood,
As barbing Autumn robs the trees of leaves,
Her storm like soorne me void of comfort leaves:
No castle, Fort, no Rampire or strong Hold,
But love will enter without law or leave;
Fot where affections force has taken hold,
There lawless love will such impression leave,
That Gods, nor men, nor fire, eath, water, wind,
From loves strait laws can neither turn nor wind.
Then since my hapless haps falls out so hard,
Since all the fates on me their anger power:
Since my laments and moanes cannot be heard,
And she on me shows her commanding power.
What then remains, but I dissolve in tears.
Since her disdaines my heart in pieces tears.
Dye then sad heart in sorrows prison pend,
Dye face that is colored with a deadly dye;
Dye hand that in her praise has Poems pend,
Heart, Face, and hand, hapless and helpelesse dye.
Thou Serieant Death, that rests and take no bale.
It Is only thou must ease my bitter bale.
This said, he sighed, and sell into a sound,
That all the Hills, and Groves and neighboring Plains,
The Echoes of his groanings seemed to sound,
With repercursion of his dying plains.
And where in life he scorned council grave,
Now in his death he rests him in his grave.
Epitaph.
Here lies ingrau'd, whose life fell death did sack^
Who to his grave was brought upon a Beer:
For whom let all men ever mourn in Sack,
Or else remember him in Ale or Beer.
He who in life, Loves blinded God did lead,
Now in his death lies here as cold as lead.
Sonnet. In trust lies Treason.
THe fowlest friends assume the fairest forms,
The fairest Fields does feed the soulest road:
The Sea at calm'st most subject is to storms,
In choyfest fruit the cauker makes abode.
So in the shape of all believing trust,
Lies toad-inucnom'd-^reason coached close,
Till like a storm his trothlesse thoughts out burst
Who canker-like had lain in trusts repose.
For as the Fire within the Flint confinde,
In deepest Ocean still vnquencht remains:
Even so the false through tru^st seeming mind,
Despite of truth the treason still retains,
Yet maugre treason, trust deserves trust,
And trust suruiues, when treason dies accursed.
Death, with the four Elements.
Two infant-twinnes a Sister and a Brother,
When out of doors was gone their careful Sire,
And left his babes in the keeping with their Mother,
Who merrily sat singing by the fire.
Who having filled a tub with water warm,
She bathed her girl (O ruthlesse tail to tell)
The whilst she thought the other safe from harm,
(Unluckily) into the fire he fell:
Which she perceiving, lets her Daughter drown,
And rashly ran to save her burning Son,
Which finding dead, she hastily casts down,
And all aghast, does to the water run:
Where seeing the other was deprived of breath,
She' against the earth falls down, and dashed her brains:
Her husband comes, and sees this work of death,
And desperate hangs himself to ease his palnes.
Thus Death with all the Elements conspire,
To reaue man's life, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire.
FINIS.
An Inkhorne Disputation, or Mungrell conference, betwixt a Lawyer and a Poet.
With a Quarterne of new caught Epigrams, caught the last Fishing.tide: sit for
heaute stomachs in Ember-weekes. Fridayes, and Fasting-euens.
A Poet, and a Lawyer in dispute,
And one the other striued to confute;
The Poet talked of great Apolloes shrine,
Of mount Pernassus, and the Muses nine,
The Lawyer's all in Cases, and in Causes,
In Fixes, in Fees, Recou'ries and in Clawses,
The Poet answers him with Elegies.
With Madrigals and Epithalamies.
The Lawyer with his Writs, and his Attachments
His Habeas Corpus, and his strong Apeachments:
His Executions, and his Molestanaums;
His Score.facies, and Testificanaums,
His desperate Outlaries, his Capiendoes,
His Sursararies, and his Proscdendoes.
The Poet at the Lawyer lays on loads,
Of Dactiles, Spondees, Annagrams and Oades.
Of Satyrs, Epigrams. Apostrophies.
Of Stops, of Commaes, of Parenthesis.
Of Accents, Figures, Tautologia,
Of Types, Tropes, and Amphibologia.
Of Saturn, Jove, of Mars, of Sol's hot ranging,
Of Venus, Mercury, of Lunaes changing.
Of Tragical and Comicall predictions,
Of Truth, of Suppositions and Fictions.
Of Homer, Virgil, Ou^d, Ta^^o, Terence,
D^bartas, Petrach, Plutarke, Horace, from whence
He has the Art, the Knowledge, and the skill
To win the Laurel from the forked hill.
The Lawyer then begins to thunder louder,
As if he meant blow him up with Powder.
With Actions, Cases, Capias vt legatums,
With Decemtales, Scandala Magnatums:
With his Sede fendendoes, and Demurs,
With Proffes, Supplicauits, Praemumrs:
With his Scitations, Latitats, Delays.
And diverse more terms, which the Law displayes.
With Littleton, Fitzherbert, Ployden, Brook,
With many a lawful, and Law-wrested Book.
The Poet boldly yet maintains the field,
And with his Inkhorne terms disdaines to yield.
Upon the Lawyer all a fresh he comes,
With Eglagues, and with Epicediums,
With Palinodies, and Pentameters,
With sharp Iambicks, and Hexamiters.
The Lawyer saw the Poet had such store,
Of pickeld words, said hold; we will talk no more.
For thou by me, or I shall not by thee,
By prating never edified be.
And for Conclusion, let us both part friends,
And for our profits this shall be our ends.
We Lawyers live upon the times Abuses,
Whilst Poets starve, by wa^^^ng on the Muses.
Epigram 1.
Upon the world, Notwithstanding.
TOm swore to Kate, he never more would woo her,
Kate wished him hanged, when ^ext he com's unto her:
But Lou's great(little) God the man commanding,
That Tom must needs go to her Notwithstanding.
Kate rayld, and brawld and scoulded, cursed, and band
And against Toms not withstanding did withstand.
At last the Notwithstanding had ^or sooke,
And Kate affords her Tom a welcome look.
Thus Not withstanding did the wars increase
And Stiff withstanding made the friendly peace.
Epigram 2.
HAll and his wife into the water slipped,
She quickly Hall fast by the Codpeece gript
And reason good she had to catch him there,
For hold she fast she need no drowning leare.
She often had tried and proved, and found it so,
That thing would never to the bottom go.
Epigram 3.
GOod Besse forbear, ^^^be are thou can full well
For thou for bearing, bear away the bell.
Thy patience in thy bearing men admires,
That bearing many wrongs yet never tires.
Epigram 4.
It Is only women's manners, and their carriage,
That makes them unfit, or fit for Marriage.
Then Madge thy carriage still so good has bin
Thou getst the Dlu'll and all by commings in.
Epigram 5.
MAll does commend Sims comeliness of slature,
But most she likes his freenesle of his Nature.
For she will swear indeed la, and in truth:
That Sim ever a sweet natured youth.
Epigram 6.
A Messenger, (declaring of his mind)
In making courtesy, let a escape behind,
He looking back, peace (Sirrah) peace (quoth he)
For it you talk, I sure will silent be.
Epigram 7.
THe Merchant (Drubo) hyer'd a servant less,
And for her wages he does duly pay.
From Christmas quarter unto Michatlmas,
She has it paid her to hair (they say)
Sometimes betwixt the quarters she does take it,
For let it come when it twill shee'ie not forsake it.
And for her Master honest Drubo (he)
He often pays her with a standing fee.
Epigram 8.
FIe what an idle life man lives (quoth Dicke)
How idely they their lin^s away do^ pass:
Whilst paint full women wins both praise and p.
Enduring as they were composed of Brass.
I think men's idleness was never such,
And women never were occupi'd so much.
Epigram 9.
IT is no wonder wherefore little Nell,
So big below the waste begins to swell:
For being hungry (in the dark she stole,
A hasty Pudding, and devoured it whole.
Epigram 10.
AS through the City I did lately pass,
At a Carts tail, a Beadle whipped a less.
I slept unto him, and I asked the cause,
Quoth he I whipped her, for she brake the Laws:
In letting out her for most Room for pelf,
And (for her pleasure) backward lay her self.
Epigram 11.
A Little woman did a big man wed,
And he was loath to lie with her in bed,
For fear to hurt her: then she spyed a Mouse,
That played, and leapt, and skipt about the house.
O Husband would I had that Mouse quoth she,
Her skin would make a pair of gloves for me.
So wide (quoth he) I know twill never tretch,
Content your self (quoth.she) young things will reach.
Epigram 12.
A Lusty wench as nimble as an Eele,
Would give a Gallant leave to kiss and feel,
His itching humor straightway was in hope,
To toy, to wanton, dally, busse and grope,
Hold Sir (quoth she) my word I will not fail,
For you shall feel my hand, and kiss my Ta^^.
Epigram 13. On Mistress Charity.
IN very deed la, and sincerity,
There is much Charity in Charity,
She has so kind, so free a liberal heart,
That every man of her shall have a part.
Epigram 14.
TWo Sheep (in Law) did lately long contend,
And Wolf the Lawyer must the matter end.
Who with his fine fines, and his firking fees,
D^awes both their pur^es to the very l^es,
The money gone, the strife of Law did cease,
They fools fell out, and beggars made the peace.
Epigram 15.
MAd dapper Dicke, does very often shift.
And yet he is lowz^e through the want of ^^^^
Epigram 16. On Madam Temperance.
A Man that went to traua^le swore to's wife,
He would love Temperance as he loved his life,
Indeed he loved a fair and beauteous Dame,
(Although intemperate) Temperance was her name.
On whom he spent his love, his lust, his ^^^^^.
He might as well have spent it on a whore.
Epigram 17.
Doll held the Candle, Raph would feign be doing,
O when (quoth. she) will you ^^lewdnes turn ye^^
I prithee Doll ^^th Raph, regard my wo^ng,
In truth quoth Doll let be, or else i will burn ye.
Raph puts the light out, swears to have about,
And yet Doll burned him, though the fire was out.
Epigram 18.
A Sat an Inn I lately did a light,
I to my Chamber lighted was with lights:
Where a light Cur^^z^n (of manners light)
Make glad my heart, my Liver, and my Lights.
Yet when the Candle light was me berelt,
For all those lights I was in darkness left.
Epigram 19. Light vanity.
WHat is more light then vapor, cork, or feather ^^
Or what more light then Vanity can be?
Compact, compose, compare light things together,
And nothing's lighter then a wanton she,
Yet here is the Riddle, (past my wits to scan)
Her light nesse weighes down many a heavy man.
Epigram 20.
'Twas never so hard (since first the world began)
To find an honest true right, handed man.
Has man two left hands? no; I pray how then,
Are men nor right hand, or left handed men?
The left hand now, may well be called the left,
For true and honest dealing it has left.
And for the right hand, it is the wrong hand sure,
It self to wrong, or wrong does still inure.
So to conclude (I doubt) above the ground
A true right handed man, can scarce be found.
Epigram 21.
MY Lawyer said the case was plain for me,
The Angel told him so he took for fee:
But yet my Angel and my Lawyer lied,
For at my Judgment I was damnifi'd.
Epigram 22.
AS Gold is better that is in fire ^ride,
So is the Banktide Globe that late was burned:
For where before it had a thatched hide,
Now to a stately Theator it is turned.
Which is an Emblem. that great things are won,
By those that dare through greatest dangers run.
Epigram 23.
GOod companie's in such request with Ione.
It Is death to her to walk or lie alone.
Epigram 24.
IScorne (quoth Au^^) to be put down by any,
And yet it is known she is bin put down by many.
Epigram 25.
MY Ladies foysting bound (surnamed Musk)
Did chance to ^^^^ upon my Ladies buske:
But over all the world 't^^: Heaven and Hell,
I think no Musk had ever stronger smell
Ep^^^^^^
GOod Reader, if my harse unlearned rimes,
(Wherewith my Muse ^^^^ ^^^^ these heed less times
Has pleased thy pallat with: their true endeavor:
She then well think her self most fortunate,
And shall hereafter be ^^^^
Her self in better labor, to persevere,
I speak not to those, guorant lack dawes,
That with their Canker ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^
Will seem to ^^^^ my ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^
But in all humbleness I yield to these,
Who are detracting Ignorances foes:
And loves the labors of each good pretense.
Dislike and scorn may chance my book to ^^^ her,
But kind acceptance bring: forth such another.
YOu that the ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^
He Is very ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^
But if that any ^^^^
^^^ honest meaning ^^^ ^^^ ^^^
To such in all ^^^^^^
From Book are ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ board.
I.T.

FINIS.
THE DOLPHINS DANGER: AND DELIVERANCE. Being a Ship of 220. Tunhauing in her
but 36. men and 2. Boys who were on the 12. of lanuary 1616. set upon by 6 Men
of War of the Turks, having at the least 1500. Men in them, who fought with
them the space of 5 hours and a half, yet to the glory ^f God and the honor
of our English Nation, both Ship and goods safely brought up the River of
Thames and delivered. Truly set forth by the appointment of Master EDWARD
NICHOLS, being Master of the said Ship.
The names of such men as were in the said Ship. These men were killed outright,
and buried a shore.
WAlter Penrose, the first man killed, being shot in the belly. 2 Thomas
Shepherd, quarter Master his head shot off. 3 William Sweat Trumpetter, as he
founded in the sight had one arm shot off, yet he founded till another great
shot stroke off his other arm, with his Trumpet and all, then after he was
killed with a shot through the body. 4 William Russell, quarter master, had one
arm first shot off, afterward he was shot through and killed, 5 John Sands, the
Crown of his head shot off. 6 Benjamin Cornell^^ a Boy shot in the throat
killed. 7 David Fause, Masters mate, shot in the groyne, killed. These four men
dyed within 4 or 5 days and after were cast into the Sea. 8 John Black^t^^
quarter M^his leg maimed and burnt blind, yet he labored to quench the ship
being fired. 9 Thomas Worger a youth, the Masters servant, his shoulder blade
shot off, and lived three days. 10 William James, Trumpetter, burned with wild
fire, that he flamed like a fiery man all over then lohn Reff Purser cast
water on him, he lived 5 days in great pain; in the fight an arrow came
betwixt the Masters legs at the helm and ran into the laid James his leg
which the Master pulled out. 11 John Prestin, a youth, killed with a musket.
These following, were maimed and hurt, and are living.
Robert May, Masters mate, shot in the thigh.
Thomas Wright gunner with shot and splinters hurt in twelve places.
Tho: Daniel, burnt with powder, and lost an eye.
Roger Ginner, wounded in the head with splinters.
Rob: Downs the Masters boy, shot in the belly li^^s.
These men are alive unhurt.
Edward Nichols Master, shot with a small shot, that tore his hose and stockins
through, and gave his leg a scatre. and 4 times shot through the ^^^Fra^^
Constable Boat swain, John Rophe pu^^^ William Lucas Carpenter, Tho Hobs
Gunners mate, Will Moore quarter Gunner, Will. Colluel Steward Rob Grave
Surgeon. John Adiney, Couper Christ, Austen C^d^ son, Hump. Lee, Boatsons
mate, Will, Renfr^^ quart M. Will. Chalicom, Isa^e Watlington, Trumpetters. Thee
Anderson, Thomas Spurden, Nicho: Wilkingson, Henry Low, Cornelius Scot, Philip
a welchman, Sailors, The rest were passengers.

FINIS.
A FIGHT AT SEA. Famously fought by the Dolphin of London, against five of the
Turks men of War and a Sa^tie, the 12. of L^^^^, Anno Dom. 1616.
THe Magnanimitic and worthy resolution of this our English Nation, from time
to time indureth the true touch and trials of the Sea in deep extremity:
whereby other Countries (not only admires there^^, but ties to the same a
deserved commendation:) Amongst many other such like Adventures I am imboldened
to commit to your cen^re the Accidents of this our late Voyage and return from
Zant into England, which happened as hereafter follows.

Having at Zant, at the end of the year,1616. ^^^shed our business, and laden
our Ship for England, being named the Dolphin of London, of the Burden of 280.
Tun or thereabouts, having in the same some 19. pieces of Ordnance, and 9.
Murderers, manned with 36. Men, and two Boys, the Master thereof one Mr.
Nichols, a man of much skill, and proved experience; who making for England,
we came from Zant, the first day of January, 1616. the wind being North and
by East, when with a prosperous gale, by the 8. day in the Morning we had sight
of the Island of Sardaine, the wind being then come Westerly, the 9. in the in
the morning, we stood in for Callery, and at noone the wind being Southerly we
came close by the Towers, where some two leagues off we made the Fight, which
day at night the wind growing calm, we sailed toward the Cape, the 10. day
we had very little wind or none at all, till it was two of the clock in the
afternoon, which drove us some three leagues Eastward from the Cape Pola:
where we ^^pied a Fleet of Ships upon the maine of Sardaine near unto a Road
called Callarie, belonging to the King of Spain, being the 12. day of
January, on which day in the Mornings watch, about 4 of the clock, we had
sight of a Sail making from the shore toward us, which drove into our minds
some doubt and fear, and coming near unto us we espicd it to be a Sattie,
which is a Ship much like unto an Argosey, of a very great burden and
bigness, which perceiving, we imagined some more Ships not to be far off,
whereupon our Master sent one of our company up into the maine tip, where he
discovered five sail of Ships one after another, coming up before the wind,
being then at West Southwest, who in a prospectiue glaffe perceived them to be
the Turks men of War: The first of them booning by himself before the wind,
with his Flag in the maine-top, and all his sails gallantly spread abroad,
after him came the Admiral and the Vice Admiral, and after them two more, the
Reare-Admirall and his fellow, being five in number, all well prepared for any
desperate assault, whereupon we immediately made ready our Ordinance and small
shot, and with no little resolution prepared our selves to withstand them,
which being done, we went to prayer, and so to dinner, where our Master gave us
such noble encouragement, that our hearts ever thirsted to prove the success,
and being in readiness for the fight, our Master went upon the Poope, and
waued his Sword three times, shaking it with such dauntlesse courage as if he
had already won the victory, this being done we seconded him with like
forwardness, whereupon he caused his Trumpets to sound, which gave unto us
much more encouragement then before, and being within shot of them, our Master
commanded his Gunner to make his level, and to shoot, which he did, but missed
them all, at which the foremost of them bore up apace, for he had the wind of
us, and returned us as good as we sent so betwixt us for a great space was a
most fierce encounter, and having advantage of us by reason of the wind, about
11. or 12. of the clock they laid us aboard with one of their Ships, which was
of 300. Tun or thereabouts, and had in her 35. Pieces of Ordnance, and about
250. Men, the Captain thereof was one Walsingham, which seemed by his name to
be an English man, and Admiral of the Fleet, for so if signified by the Flag
in his maine top, having (as I said) boarded our Ship, he entered on the
Larbord quatter, where his men, some with Sabels which we call Fauchins, some
with Hat^^hets, and some with half Pikes, where they stayed some half an
hour or thereabout, tearing up our naile-bords upon the Poope, and the
trap-hatch, but we having a Murderer in the round house, kept the Larbord side
clee^e, whilst our men with the other Ordnance and Muskets played upon their
Ships: yet for all this they plied our Gallery with small shot in such sort,
that we stood in great danger to yield, but at the last we shot them quite
through and through, and they us likewise, but they being afraid they should
have been sunk by us, bore a head off our Ship, and as he passed along we
gave them a broad side, that they were forced to lay by the ley, and to mend
his leakes: This Fight continued two hours by our Glass and better, and so
near the shore, that the dwellers thereupon saw all the beginning and ending,
and what danger we stood in, for upon the shore stood a little house, wherein
was likewise turned a glass all the time curing the Fight, which measured the
hours as they passed, and this was Walsinghams part.

Now for Captain Kelleyes Ship, that came likewise up with his Flag in the
maine top, and another ship with his Flag in the Foretop, which Ships were at
least 300. Tun a piece, and had in each of them 25. Pieces of Ordnance, and
about 250. Men, so they laid us abord on the Starbord quarter, and the other on
the Larbord, where entering our Ship thick and threefold, with their Semiters,
hatchets, half pikes and other weapons, put us in great danger both of the
loss of our Ship and our lives, for they performed much manhood and many
dangerous hazards, amongst which there was one of the company that desperately
went up into our mai^ top to fetch down our Flag, which being spy^ by the
Steward of our ship, presently shot hi^ with his Musket that he fell headlong
into the Sea, leaving the Flag behind him, so these ^^^ Ships fought with us
with great resolution, playing upon us with their Ordnance and small sho^ for
the space of an hour and a half, of who^^^ we received some hurt, and
likewise they of v^^ but when they saw they could not prevail, no^^^ any way
make us to yield, they bore up and pa^sed from us to lay their ships by the Lee
to sto^ their leakes, for we had grievously some and ba^ tered them with our
great Ordnance, and th^^^ was the second attempt they made upon us.

Now for the third, there came two more o^ Captain Kelleyes ships of 250.
Tun a peece^^^ that in each of them had 22. Pieces of Ordnance and at the
least 200. Men all well provided a^ might be, which was as we thought too
great^^^ number for us, being so few in our ship, but God that was our friend,
gave us such strength and success that they little prevailed against us, for
at their first coming up, notwithstanding all their multitude of men, we shot
the one of them quite through and through, and laid him likewise by the Lee, as
we had done the others before, but the other ship remaining, laid us aboard on
the Starbord side, and in that quarter they entered our ship with their
Semiters, Fauchions, half Pikes and other weapons, running too and froe^ upon
the deck crying still in the Turkish tongue, Yield your selves, yield your
selves, promising wee^^ should be well used, and have part of our goods
delivered back, with such like fair promises, but we giving no care unto
them, stood suflie in our defense, choosing rather to die, then to yield, as it
is still the nature and condition of all Englishmen, and being thus resolved,
some of our men plied our Ordnance against them, some played with the small
shot, some with other weapons, as Swords, and half Pikes and such like, in
midst of which skirmish, it so happened by ill chance that our Ship was
fired, and in great danger to be lost and cast away, had not the Lord in his
mercy preserved us, and sent us means happily to quench it, but now mark the
accident, the f^^^ being perceived by our enemies to burn^ ^^^agiously, and
thinking that our Ship would ^^^ therewith been sudainly burned to the water,
they left us to our fortuines, falling a ^^^^^ of from us, and so we put to the
shore under the little house for some succor, where we let an Anchor fall
thinking to ride there all that night, which we had no sooner done, but we saw
another ship bear upon us, whereupon we were sore frighted and so forced to
let ou^ Anchour fl^p, and so set sail to get better succor, putting into the
Road between the two little ho^^s where we lay five days, mending the bruites
and l^^kes of our ship: the ^^^^^ received in the aforesaid sight, were ^. Men
and one Boy which were killed outright, and there were hurt eight men and one
boy more: but the Lord does know what damage we put them to, and what number we
flew in their ships.

The Master of our ship being at the Helm, was shot twice betwixt the legs:
And the Chy^^^gion dressing the wounds of one of our men, a Ball of Wildfire
^elt into his Ba^on, which he ^^^inly cast-into the Sea, otherwise it had
greatly endangered us. The Turks were aboard and founded their Trumpets, yet
notwithstanding our men assaulted them so ^^^^rcely, that they forced them off,
and the Boson (seeing them fly) most vndantedly with a whistle ^lourd them to
the skirmish, if so they durst. The Captains of three of their ships were
English men, who took part with the Turks thus to rob and spo^le upon the
Ocean, their names were Walsingham, Kelley, and Sampson.

Upon the 13. of January there came aboard certain Spaniards in the morning
betimes, to wines what hurts we had received, who seeing our men dead, went a
shore with us, and showed us where we might bury them, but as we were bu^^^ in
making their graves and covering the bodies with earth, there came sailing by a
Flemish Ship of twelve score tun, which had in it some five or six thousand
pounds, which had been chased with those men of war that had fought with us
before, all which money they brought in along Boat to the shore, and left in
the Ship only the men, which were 16.Sailers and two Boys, that afterward
within two days brought the said ship into the ^^^^ not ^^^^ at all endangered
God be praised.

^^^^ the 15 of the ^^^^ when we ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ as God would ^^^^ ^^^^
^^^^ ^^^^ tempest ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ of weather as taine ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^
that we thought we ^^^ got^^ ^^^^ from the Road where^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^
^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ which storm and tempest
these^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ man that had been ^^^^ ^^^^
^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ there bu^all, and to when the Wind
and Sea a little ca^^^es, we let up ^^^^^ in ^^^^^ forward: but within three
^^^^ after, webs^^d th^^e men more in the ^^^^^ the ^^^ ^^^^^^one we arrived in
the Road or Callery, and ^y at anchor, where again ^^^^^ ^^^^^ ship, we found
it ^^^^^ and ^^^^^ several places, one in the gun-room^, another between the
Deckes, the third ^^^^ (...), and the fourth in the Masters round ^on^^ in
Callery we mended our Ship, and ^ured ^^^^^ men there to help us to stop her
Leakes, and ^^^^^ all things most fitting for our Voyage homewards, upon the
30. day of January we committed our fortunes again unto the Sea, and so
leaur^^^ Callery we can^ forward with^^ Frenchman, who was bound to a place
called Orestone, some ^0; Leagues from Callery, where after 2. days we left
his company being the 1.day of February, and after that putting forwards still
toward^^ England, we are now by the will of God, most lately arrived, and our
Ship after so many ouerpassed dangers received into the Thames near London, to
the great joy and comfort of the Owners thereof:

God be praised.
FINIS.
A FAMOVS FIGHT AT SEA. Where four English Ships under the command of Captain
JOHN WEDDELL, and four Dutch Ships, fought three days in the Gulf of Persia
near Ormus, against 8. Portugal Gallio^s, and 32. F^^gots. As also, the
memorable Fight and loss of the good Ship called the Lion, with the barbaron^
Cruelty of the En^^^ truly declared.
DEDICATED To the right Worthy, Generous, and well experienced Commander
Captain JOHN WEDDELL, late General of the East India Fleet.
WOrthy Sir, having written the true manner of your late Famous, perilous, and
fortunate Fight with the Portugals in the Pos^^^ Gulf, and knowing that Books
without Patrons are like fatherless Children, I imagined that it was better to
send it to you for succor and protection, than to any other whomsoever; for
the most part which is herein by Relation, I am assured that you do know to
be ture by Action, and my Pen has but only superficially pratled of those
things which you saw, did, and suffered. I therefore humbly entreat you to accept
this poor Fish out of your own Ocean, this sheep of your own fold, this
cloa^h of your own weauing, and this deserved memory of part of your worthy
won Reputation. Thus not doubting but your affability is correspondent to your
approved knowledge and known sufficiency, I commit both my self and this
Relation to your acceptance and good censure, my best wishes still attending on
you, that your fortunes be ever equal to the goodness of your mind.

E^^er at your command to be employed, JOHN TAILOR.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
THe Eternal providence having divided Mankind into many Kingdoms, Climates,
People and Nations, yet to the end there should be an unity or mutual
society amongst all men, he has permitted Traffic and Commerce betwixt
Nation and Nation, Realm and Realm, N^^^ tion and Shipping being as it were
the fleeting Bridges, for the transportation and ex^^^^ ^^^^ and Merchandise,
from Country to Country, that though God has not enriched any our ^^^^^^
^^^^^ Country with all things, (the one having what the other has not:) yet
to maintain ^^^^^^ S^^^^ ^^us chiefly for his own glory in^ sp^^ing his
g^^fts) Commerce and traff^que ^^^^^ ^^^^^ at all ^^^^^, and in all Ages; for
the which noble employments our Kingdom of ^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^^ feriour to
any Nation for the ability and worthiness of Merchants^. and I think not
equalle^^ any for goodness and sufficiency of skillful Nauigators, and
Marr^ners, and strength of shipping, and ^^^^.

So that neither the parching heat of Lybia and AEthiopia, or the ^^^^ming
^^^^^ of Groenland, or the Hyperborean ^^^^^ Regions, neither the sarre
remoteness of China Eastwards, or the uttermost bounds of the new world
America Westwards, the dangers of Storms, Gusts, Fla^es, Tempests, Sp^^ts, and
Tornadoes, or Monsoones, the hazard of Shoales, Rocks, Leakes, Enemies,
Pirates barbarous and cruel Nations, unwholesome and intemperate Airs and
Climates Sea or Land Monsters, or what perils may be named or thought upon,
has ever daunted or hindered our Merchants and Marmers prosecute and accomplish
their continual, laudable and profitable undertakings.

Amongst whom our Noble, Worshipful, and worthy East India Merchants and
Adventurers, may in these later times be held us superlatiue to those of former
Ages, their mest^n able charge, their mighty force, their valuable returns,
and their aduenturous hazards rightly considered. All which being no part of my
purpose to treat of, I refer the Reader only to the description of two
famous Sea Fights, performed betwixt the English and the Portuga^s, which,
though the news of it could not be brought hither so soon as if it had been
done upon the Coast of Zealand or Flandets, yet, as soon as wind and weather
could bring it, I had it, and with what time I could well spare I have written,
is, assuring my self of what I dare assure my Reader, which is, that all is
true. In which regard, I thought it unfit to let it lie buried in oblivion, or
the hateful and ungrateful grave of forgetfulness. In it is valor
described, and manifested in the lives and deaths of many of our English, and
extreme cruelty and inhumanitie in the Enemy. But to the matter.

A BRAVE SEA FIGHT in the Gulf of PERSIA.
4. English Ships.
1 The Royal James, Admiral, 2 The Jonas, Vice Admiral. 3 The Star,
Reare-Admirall. 4 The Eagle, fourth Ship. John Weddell, chief Commander of the
English Fleet.
4. Dutch Ships.
1 The South Holland, Admiral. 2 The B^^ta^, Vice Admiral. 3 The M^^ud of
Dort, Reare-Admirall. 4 The W^a^^^pe, fourth Ship. Albert Bicke^, chief
Commander of the Dutch Fleet.
THe 30. of January, 1624. being Friday, the English and Dutch Ships being in
the Road of Gombroone, there arrived a small Frigot belonging to a place near
Chowle, (which is in war with the Portugals she came in between the Maine
and Ormus, to whom the General of the English, Capt. John Weddell, ^^ent Mr.
Andrew Evans, in a little Boat called a Gellywat, to know from whence he came,
and whether he could give us any intelligence of the Portugal Armado; his
answer was, that he came from a place some 8. or 10. Leagues to the Southwards
of Chowle, laden with Pepper and other Merchandise, and withal he said, that
on the Saturday before, being the 24. of January, he was off the Cape called
Cape Gordell, na^fe way betwixt the Coast of Ind^^^, and Cape Jacques, where to
Steward off (...) ^aw 8. great Gallions, and certain Frigots, which Frigots
gave him chase, but he kept himself so near the shore, that they could not
fetch him up; and this was the first information o^ the near approach of the
^nemie.

The 31. of January in the morning, the English and Dutch fleet heard three
pieces of Ordnance go off from ^^^^^ Castle, (a strong hold, and in war with
the Portugals) the Captain of the said Castle having before promised the
General (Captain Weddell tha^ ^f he descryed any cross Sails or Ships in
sight of the Castle, that then he would discharge those Pe^ces as a warning
unto him, which accordingly he did.

Whereupon a man was sent up to the topmast head in the English Admiral, to
look abroad, who being up, presently cried a saife, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. with
many Frigots in their company, then the General commanded the Gunner to shoot
off a piece of Ordnance, to give warning to all the flect to put themselves in
readiness for the entertainment of the Enemy putting also the bloody Colors
out, as likewise the Dutch Admiral did the like, with all speed getting their
men and boats from the shore, weighing their Anchors of all hands, and getting
under ^^le with all possible celerity, with courage and resolution they stood
toward the Enemy, (whose drift was to have taken the English and Dutch at
Anchor unprepared) but their expectations were frustrate Toward 8. of the
clock at night it fell calm, so that our ships came to an Anchor, when the
Commander of the Dutch fleet (named Albert^ Becker) sent his M^ster of his
ship, accompanied with some other Merchants, and Masters aboard the Royal
James, informing Captain Weddell that their Commander had sent them to see now
he did, and what he thought the Ships and Frigots to be that they had
descryed. The Commander Weddell answered, that they could be no other than the
Portugal Armado, which had bin two years preparing to meet with the English
and Dutch, and that now they were come in search of them, from Goa, unto this
place, hoping first to conquer both our and their Nation, and afterward to
fall to work upon Ormus, Kishme, and Gombroone, to destroy our settled trade,
and to extirpe and ^oot us out with all hostility and dishonor. Then the Dutch
demanded Captain Weddels resolution, concerning so common and open an Enemy,
he told them that his resolution was, for the glory of God, the honor of his
Nation, the profit of worthy Imployers, and the safeguard of lives, ships and
goods, he would fight it out, as long as a man was living in his ship to wear
a Sword, and that he doubted not but the other three ships under his command,
were all of the same mind and courage; to whom the Dutchmen answered, that they
were of the like resolution, and would stick as close to the English as their
shirts to their backs, and so in friendly manner, each took leave of other for
that night.

The 1. of February, being Sunday, the Dutch Admiral weighed anchor an hour
before daylight, and the English presently after him, but the Dutch got the
start of us all, though we made all the Sail we could; at last the English
came up to him with their whole fleet, but he discharged the first shot at the
Portugal Admiral, who presently answered him with three for one. The friends
and foes being in Musket shot of each other, it fell calm, whereby our ships
would not work but as the tide did set them, that when the Portugals were
Board and Board, they had a great advantage of us with their Frigots, that
rowed the^ clear one off another often, which help we wanted, thus we lay
some 4. or 5. hours pelting and beating one another with our Ordnance, the
whilst the Frigots plied us with small shot, as fast as they could, the Royal
James being forced to keep the Barge at head to pull the Ships head to and fro;
but toward the afternoon there arose a fine gale, but the Enemy had the wind
of us, whereupon the Admiral and Vice Admiral of the Portugals bore up room
upon us, making account to ^ay the Royal James aboard; the one on the
Starboord, the other on the La^boord side, which Captain Weddell perceiving,
scarce being able to shun it, he called to the Master, and told him the purpose
of the Enemy, to avoid which danger, he commanded the Master to bear a little
lasking to separate them further each from other, that he might have more room
to go between them, the Vice Admiral of the Enemy seeing the James bear up
so lasking, she likewise bore up with her, when suddenly Captain VVeddell
perceived there was hope to weather him, caused his Mizzen, and Mizzen top
sail to be set, and so presently got the wind of him, edging close up with the
Admiral, being within Musketshot of them both; the Portugal Admiral put to
stay, by which means the James got the Wind of him also, having much ado to
get out a w^eather off him, coming so close under his stern, that his boats
were close at ^ur ships side as she sheared by, when presently ^^^ gave him a
whole broad side, cuery shot ^king him fore and after, tacking forthwith, and
standing after him. Thus the first days ^ight lasted till five at Night,
wherein the Royal James lost eight men, and some others which ^ad some small
hurts: Also this day the Dutch lost their chief Commander, a brane and
valiant, fellow, who lived and dyed nobly in the Bed of honor. This Fight was
terrible and fierce for the time, for the Royal James alone spent near seven
hundred great shot, and all the other ships English and Dutch, did
proportionably do the like. The Sun being for, the Enemy sell off, and
came to an Anchor, at the East end of Kishme, the English being Northnorth-west
from them two Leagues, thus was concluded the first days fight.

Monday the second of February, being Candlemas day, the Wind being very
little which below off from Kishme, so that the Enemy had the advantage of it,
but never offered to make use of it, to make room toward us; the English and
Dutch being imployd busily^ to fit up their torn rigging and tackling, and
stopping such dangerous shot as they had received in the Fight betwixt wind and
water.

Also the same day in the afternoon, there was a meeting aboard the Royal
James, where both the English and Dutch concluded, that they would give the
Enemy fight the next morning and that the Royal James should be the leading,
ship, and the Admiral of the Dutch should second her, and that they should go
directly to the Enemies Admiral, not striking higher or lower till the James
came side by side with her. So the 3. of F. being Tuesday, both the flects
weighed Anchors at break of day, having the weather gage of the enemy, the
great James stood right with the Admiral of the Portugals, which was headmost but
one; but coming near them, they weaued to Leeward with their bright arming
Swords, and we the like to them, they saluted us with a whole broad side, but
Captain Weddell commanded his men not to answer them, til they were brought
nearer within danger, which charge was obeyed, but being come near the Admiral,
and another of their ships, the great James bestowed upon each of them a whole
broad side, making them both to bear up, the one a port, and the other a
starbord, by which means, one of their ships was cut off and sundred from the^,
and was chased 3. or 4. hours by the Eagle and Weasope, the hope of the
English and Dutch being, that she should no more return to her fleets company,
the James following still the Admiral and Vice Admiral^ got upon the Admirals
side, having the Vice Admiral on his starbord bow; insomuch that this days
sight grew very hot, for often the James was in thickest of the enemy being at
one time all round about us; but our men so plied their Ordnance upon them,
that they all refused to stand by us, but fled all before us as chafe, dust,
or smoke before the wind. In this sight the James got between one of their
fleet and singled her our, lying by her s^les with ^oresaile, and
sore-topsaile, a back stays, so near, as a man might quoit a Biscuit Cake
into her, when straight Master Johnson came up in the stern of the James, so
near, as he could hardly keep clear, to whom Captain Weddell called,
willing him to clap the Portugal aboard on the Larboord quarter (whilst the
James lay thundering upon him with her great Ordnance) he promised to do it,
but after he refused it, this Vessel had not so sew as 500. shot through her
Hull, Masts, Sails, and Yards, before the got clear.

Note, that in the morning Cap. Weddell had fitted a Portugal Vessel (which
had been formerly taken with some Cockernuts) and purposed to have fired her
thwart the Admirals l^awse she being appointed to come between the Dutch
Admiral, and the Jonas, but through disaster, or rather negligence in Darby the
Master, who came not up according to his appointed place, she was chased by the
Frigots (she having but ten men in her) being of no defense, they were forced
to set her on fire far from the fleet, and so the men betook themselves to a
Barge, which was left them for their safety, by which means the Generals
project was disappointed.

All this third day at night this Vessel burnt, and two hours before
daylight, whether she was towed by some of the Enemies boats or no, is
unknown, but she came burning amongst the English and Dutch Fleetes, and
forced them from their Anchors by slipping their Cables, which Anchors they
took up some three days after.

The 4. of February in the morning, both Fleetes made toward the Enemies, who
were under sail, and made all the have they could to get under the Island of
Lowracke, which lies some eight or nine miles from Ormus, unto which Island
their Frigots went ahead, conducting them in over a Bar, whom the English and
Dutch followed as far as with safety they durst having neither the help of
Pilots to shun the dangers of the place, or Frigots to go a head as
conductors, as the Enemy had. Besides, there might have been Ordnance^ planted
a shore by the Enemy, which would have been greatly to their advantage, or
otherwise in the dark night they might have chained two or three Frigots
together, and turning them upon them, upon the Ebb thwart their hawse might
much have endangered them, they knowing the Enemy to be implacable, malicious,
and politic; these reasons caused them to follow them no further at this
time, but to come to an Anchor a League from them, when Captain Weddell sent
for the chief of the Dutch, whose resolution was to go back again for
Gombroone, there to dispatch our Merchants affairs. So Anchors were weighed,
the James giving them a shot for a farewell, and they answered her with the
like, they all getting into Gombroone Road that night, where they speedily fell
to work to repair the ruins of wars, in fitting of Masts, Yards, Sails,
rigging and stopping breaches, all which in 3 days was accomplished, leaving
the Portugal like a Thief in his Mill, or a Fox in his hole, not minding to
triee as yet the hazard of another bout.

In this fight their Rear Admirals maine Mast was shot by the board, their
Vice-Admirals maine topmast was likewise shot by the board, their Admirals
Mizzen-mast, Flag, and flagstaffe shot by the board, and her Hull much rent and
torn. Their fourth ship had the head of her maine mast shot by the board.
Another of their ships had all her top-masts shot by the board. In conclusion,
all their eight ships were so torn and tattered, that they had neither good
Masts, Sails, or Yards to help themselves with, no tide sides to bear sail
upon. Thus it pleased the Almighty to give the victory of the day unto those
that rely upon his promise; to that great God be all glory for ever, and let
all true Christians say Amen.

The 13. of February being Friday, the English and Dutch Fleets set sail at
daylight from the Road of Gombroone, having also with them four Iunks, other
vessels of lading, under the conduct^^ and charge of the Dutch, which as soon
as the Enemy perceived, they let slip their Cables an^ slipped from their
harbor at the Island of Law rack, which is four or five Leagues from the
Road of Gombroone, the Enemy making all the sail he could to Sea-boord of
the English and Dutch all the day till Sunset; when they were got within
Saker-shot of each other, and a good bearing gale, they all kept company
together all night.

This 13. at night, it blew so hard at West^ south-west, that one of their
great Gallions bor^^ ouer-boord the head of her maine Mast, close under the
hownds, not being able to hoyst up he^ maine sail, she was forced to steer
along with her fore-saile, fore-top-saile, her Sprit-saile, and Mizzen, the
wind being at West-South-west, they steered away South and by East.

The 14. in the morning the Dutch Fleet staying, and bearing up unto the Iunke,
the night past was a star so far, that the English Fleet could scarce
descry them; so the James laid her fore-saile a back stays, and staid for
them, the Portugal never offering to alter his course, but kept on still.

The same day about noone, the Dutch being come up with the English, it was
agreed between them, that the Royal James should give the first onset upon
their Admiral, and the rest of the Fleet to second her; so about two of the
clock that afternoon the two Fleets came to weather of the Enemies Admiral,
receiving the first shot from their Vice Admiral, and presently a whole broad
side from their Admiral, both sides coming as near each other as they could
but well keep clean of each other, they ^ell to it of all hands pell mell,
the Ordnance going off as fast as small shot, the James for her part giving
them two broad sides, she then edged up in the wind. laying her fore-saile and
fore-topstyle, abacke stays, as well to give leave to the ^ (who was second to
the James) as also to suffer the Portugal Admiral to shoot a head, which the
suddenly did, then the James filling her top sail the second time, bore
upright with the Enemy Admiral, plying her whole broad side so fast upon him,
that he had scarce any lea^^^^ to return any shot back, whilst the English
and Portugal Admirals were so nere each other, that they could hardly clear
themselves. In this time whilst our ships plied the Enemies Admiral, (not so
much looking after or heeding the other ships) the Vice Admiral with the rest
of their fleet were left a stern, their Admiralll plied very hard upon the
James, giving and receiving many dangerous shots, the James being shot between
wind and water often, and had more ^oyle in her Sails and Rigging, than she
had done any of the two days fight before, then the third time, coming side
by side with each others Fleet, they let drive one at another like Thunder in
the air, the James coming up with the Admiral (the great ship of Damon, who
the first days fight lost her maine Mast)crept in betwixt the James and the
Portugal Admiral, lying as a Bulwa^ke to weather off her, to receive all that
might be put upon her, and indeed all that was meant to have been bestowed
upon tbe Admiral was still plied upon that great Hulke, as likewife the Jonas
and Dutch, did continue this third days fight till daylight was shut in, the
Portugals edging up to get nere the Arabian shore, insomuch that at 8. at Night
both English and Dutch were fair by it, chasing them in.

This Night the English and Dutch steered away their course for Surat, the
Portugals steering for Swar, a place where they have a Castle.

The Royal James with the rest were forced to give over the Chase for these
reasons.
FIrst, for that the time of year was so far spent, that they should not
have time enough to deliver their goods at Surat, and so to go clear off the
Coast, before the Westerly Mons^^ne, which is a Wind that blows at West six
months together, beginning in April, would be come, and so endanger the Ships
in getting off again.

A second reason was, that the Royal James had but 31. Barrels, and some 500.
Cartreges filled with Powder, and some 600. shot, all which was not above three
quarters of a days fight for her use, for in her former days work the third
of February, she alone spent 1000. great shot upon the Enemy, so that now
through want of Powder was not able to maintain such another days fight
according to that rate. And this last days fight she lost but one man, having
spent upon the Enemy more then three hundred great shot. To the Lord of hosts
the only giver of victory, the mighty God of Battles, be all honor, glory,
praise and dominion for ever, Amen.

A note of the men's Names slain in these three several fights with the
Portugals, out of the English Fleet. Slain in the Royal James.
Richard Dauis Nicholas Burton, quarter Masters.

Robert Skaife, Gunners Mate. Joseph Wright Thomas Bland John Burcham Godfrey
Howton Carpenters.

Richard Dauis, Junior, Richard Walker John Masters. William Wilcockes William
Clarke William Surdam dismembered in their legs, and dyed.

Sailers.


Slain in the Jonas
Robert Modding, Masters Mate. John Beedam, mid-ship-man. William Adams. Robert
Stacie. Edward Wilkinson Robert Lark Richard Hergoll Francis Blow. Thomas Page
Thomas Wilkinson Thomas Williams.
Slain in the Star.
James Wanderton. William Carter. Reignold Sanderson. Charles Robinson.
Slain in the Eagle.
John Sares.
The Dutch lost near the like number, amongst whom their chief Commander
Albert Becker was slain the first days fight.

A Relation by Peter Hillion a Frenchman, of the force of the eight Portugal
Gallions, which fought with the English and Dutch Fleet, in the Gulf of
Persia; as also the spoil they received by them, with their number of men
slain, on the 13. and 14. of February,1624. himself being then in the
Admiral, which afterward riding with three more of her Fleet at the Rivers
mouth of Surat, be escaped from her, and ran to the English, which were then
riding in the Bar of Surat.
THeir Admiral named S. Francisco Sanuer, wherein was General Non Aliud
Batellia, had 48. pieces of Brass Ordnance of whole Canon, Demy-Cannon, Cannon
Pethrow, whole Culuering, and Demy-Culuering, and 350. men, of which we slain
38, whereof three were chief Captains under the aforesaid General, named
Lorenzo Luis, Ieronimo Botelia, and Brassa Coze, who all three were killed with
one shot, the Ships Foremast, Bosprect and maine Mast, were so torn with
shot, that they were unserviceable, her Mizzen-mast, Flag and Flag staff,
shot, by the board, with the head of her maine topmast, and her Rigging much
rent and torn.

Their Vice Admiral named likewise S. Francisco, wherein was Commander
Francisco Burge, had 32, pieces of Ordnance as the former, and 250. men, of
which were slain 31. the aforesaid Commander being one of the number, her
maine topmast shot by the board, her maine. Mast, fore Mast, and Bosprect so
torn, that they were unserviceable.

Their Reare-Admirall named S. Sebastian, (their biggest ship) wherein was
Commander Don Antonio tela, who ws lamed of an arm, had 40. pieces of Brass
Ordnance as the former, and 400. men, whereof 20. were slain, her maine. Mast,
fore-top mast, fore-yard, and Sprit-sayletop-mast shot by the board, and her
fore mast so unserviceable, that she could bear no more sail but her
Sprit-saile.

Their fourth ship named S. Saluador, wherein was Commander Don Francisco de
Tuar, had 24. pieces of Brass Ordnance, and 250. men 41. whereof were slain,
the aforesaid Commander being one of the number, his Masts were so rent and
torn that they were all unserviceable.

There fifth ship named S.Iago, wherein was Commander Simon de Kintalle, had
22. pieces of Brass Ordnance, 200. men, whereof were slain 83. her Masts were
all standing, but she so leeked between wind and water, by shot received, that
they had much to do to free her, so that she was cast away upon the Coast of
India seven days after.

Their sixth ship named Trinidada, wherein was Commander Pedro Alua Botelia,
had 22. pieces of Brass Ordnance, and 250. men 243. whereof were slain, his
Top-masts were all shot by the board, and her other so torn, that the could
bear no sail thereon, but was towed by the Great Hulke Reare-Admiral, from
Muscat to Goa.

Their seventh ship named S. Antonio, wherein was Commander Antonio Burallia,
had 22. pieces of Brass Ordnance, and 200. men, whereof 22. were slain, her
Masts were all standing, but having a leake by shot received betwixt wind and
water, the seventh day after she was cast away upon the Coast of India.

The eighth ship named Miserere-Cor^^^, wherein was Co^mander Emanuel Rodreeges
Ch^^^ ^^, had 22. pieces of Brass Ordnance, and 200. men, whereof 3. were
slain, her fore-top-mast, maine-yard, fore-yard, and maine-top sayle-yard shot
by the board, and her foremast so torn that it was unserviceable. A Table
containing the former numbers. Ordnance. Men Men Slain The Admiral had 48 350
38 The Vice Admiral had 32 250 31 The Reare-Admirall had 40 400 20 The fourth
Ship had 24 250 41 The fifth ship had 22 200 83 The sixth Ship had 22 250 243
The seventh ship had 22 200 22 The eighth Ship had 22 200 3 The sumnce 232 2100
481

Thus it pleased God in mercy that the English and Dutch, not being half the
number of the Enemy, neither in men or Ordnance, that with only the loss of
58. or 60. men they should kill 481. of the Portugals, and with all so to beat
them (notwithstanding the help of 16.Frigots) being ^^^ torn, that they were
cast away seven days after, and the rest all unserviceable, not daring to
stand to the hazard of another conflict.

A brief description of the Disaster of the goodship called the Lion, one of
our English ships trading to the East India, who was lost in fight with the
Portugals, near Gombroone in the Gulf of Persia, on the eighth of November,
1625.
THe seventh of October 1625. about 4. in the morning, the Palsgraue, Dolphin,
and Lion, anchored about three Leagues to the Southwards of Surat Bar, and
when it grew light (men being in the top) espied certain Readers ryding
against Surat River, which some supposed to be English or Hollanders, others
affirmed to be affect of Frigots; but in fine, about an hour after they set
Sail and steered after us, and in short space we made them to be four
Portugal Gallions, and fifteen Frigots, the wind being them off shore, they
could not come to us that tide, but anchored about a League from us, out
Captain perceiving their intents put forth an Ensign for Council, and the
Master of each ship presently repaired aboard.

At which (...) our Master M. Richard ^^^ (...) propounded that ^^^^ ^^^^^^
^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^ Sail and stand off ^^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^
^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^ means to (...) the force of the ^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^
^^^^^ ^^ it sell out so that our Ships^ ^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^
Portugals, we (...) ^^^^ ^^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^ there^^
^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^ doubted that the Portugal
had a great force of shipping in Swalley Road.

Secondly, he feared whether our Merchants had friendship with the ^^^^ ^^^^
^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^ by reason of the ^^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^ them
at the Dolphins ^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^ England, which was the ^^^ ^^^^^^
^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^.

Thirdly, he doubted that the Portugals had made peace with the ^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^
^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^ Ordnance a shere Swalley ^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^
doubted what was become of Captain, Weddels fleet, for he affared himself if
there was any friends at that time in Swalley Road, they would not suffer the
Portugal to ride there, for he supposed that the Portugal had been in fight
with them the year past, and had either put them to the worst, or else for
want of munition to effect another fight, they were forced to repair to Ormus
Castle for succor, until supply came out of England.

A^l which being propounded, and the unreadiness and great charge of all three
ships well considered, it was concluded to set Sail, the which we did, the
wind being Northerly, and the tide of flood come, we flood ^^^^ Sea, and the
Portugal Admiral and Vice Admiral sailing better then the rest, fetched us up
about 4. in the afternoon, at which time the Lion being foremost of our Fleet,
the Enemy Admiral shot one piece or Ordnance at her, for the which she
answered 3. or 4. but could hardly reach further then half way: the Portugal
finding his Ordnance better than ours, both Admiral and Vice Admiral plied
upon the Lion for the space of half an hour, in which time she received many
shot both in her Hull and Rigging. Our Master Richard Swanley, seeing their
advantage, caused to bruile maine-saile, and edge within Musket Shot of them
both, and there maintained fight with them till Sunne-set, and received no hurt
at all.

All which time, and an hour after being calm, the other two ships of the
Enemy were at least a League a stern. The Palsgraue, and Dolphin all this time
being right a head, kept on there course, only plying their stern Pieces. The
Portugals seeing them still stand away, came both aboard of us, the one in the
one quarter, and entered at least 100. of their men, having fire-pots, and the
other in the other, and diverse sorts of fire-workes upon our decks, the Frigots
(as many as could lie about us) threw firepots in at the Ports, and stuck fire
pikes in her sides; all which (by the great mercy and assistance of God) we
still put out. Our Admiral and Vice Admiral in this our misery were quickly
out of our sight, the cause whereof is best known to themselves.

This conflict remained from 8. at night, till about 11. in which space our
Master Richard Swanley was slain, and four more of our men were also slain,
3. of our Masters Mates, and 20. more were exceedingly burnt, the rest almost
wearied, and more discomforted by reason our Fleet had left us, and in brief
we were in that case, that the word was given to blow up the ship, had not God
in his wisdom stayed it, by putting it in the mind of some of our men, to let
fall an Anchor, which being done (the tide running very strong, brought our
ship to so strong a bitter, that the fast which the Portugals had upon us
brake, whose unexpected sudden departure from us, left 50. or 60. of their
men upon our Poope, who still maintained the fire in such sort, that we were
forced to blow them up, which blast tore all the Stern of our ship in pieces,
from the middle-Decke upwards.

The Portugals being all repulsed, and the fire put out, we used all diligence
for the clearing our ship, and getting up our maine-top-sayle-yard, which then
lay upon our Deck, likewise bringing new sails of our Yard, the former being
all burnt and torn all which being as well done, as haste would give leave, we
expected their coming again the next tide, but they hoping we would either
have burnt or sunk, only left five Frigots without shot of us, and themselves
with the other two ships that were formerly a stern flood after the Palsgraue
and Dolphin, and in short space fetched them up, and fought with them all that
night, they standing still off to Sea, were but off our sight the next morning.

The 8. day in the morning, (all the ships being out of our fight) it was
agreed upon by the Officers of our ship, that Henry Crosbey our Masters chief
Mate should succeed as our chief Commander, until such time as it pleased God
we should meet with our Commander.

This being done, we being not able to weigh^ our Anchor, by reason our men
were most of them hurt, cut Cable in the haw^e, and let as much Sail as we
durst bear, our sore mast having received 3. shot, in such wise, as it had but
4. inches hold and stood off to Sea, and being fair weather, praised be God,
in short time ou^^ foremast was made serviceable.

The Frigots aforesaid that were left by us, stood four of them after the
Fleet, and the other in fo^^^ the shore, all that day we heard them in fight,
bu^ saw them not, likewise the next night we could see the light of their
Ordnance at our topmast head; but they being to wind-ward of us, we could not
get to them, nor indeed were not in case if we could, for our ship was so open,
and all our chief men killed and hurt.

The ninth in the morning, we could neither see them nor hear them, then it
was thought fitting by our Master, that according to the Consultation held
aboard the Palsgraue, the seventh day we should stand for Ormus, the which (by
the assistance of God) we did, having fair weather all the way; in which time
of our Sailing, our Carpenters had got up all the stern of our ship again as
well as his store would give him leave, our men also were recovered of their
hurts.

The fourth of November we arrived at Gombroone, where we had intelligence by
our Merchants there resident, that Rufrero was riding under Ormus Island, with
18. or 20. Frigots, the which when our Master understood, the (Merchants being
then aboard) it was concluded by consultation, that to prevent any ensuing
danger that might happen, and also for the clearing of our ship, whereby to
mount our lower Tier, all the Cloth and Currall, and four Chests of money
should besent a shore, with as much speed as possible, the other our Master
refused to send one of the ship, alleging, that if it should please God they
were forced to leave the Port by any disaster, there was no stock to buy any
refreshing for our men which then did want it, the rest of our Carriages, and
goo is lying low in Hold, could not then be come by,^^^^^^: much time which
then we wanted. It was also appointed that we should with all speed take in
water, and stand for Ormus, the which was a^^^yed to do, and partly effected,
for upon the fifth day the Merchants and our Purser rode with all speed to the
Sultan, (who was then out of Town) to ^^treat for Boats to Land the Goods, and
to water out ships, the which he granted, and also gave ^^a Boat to make us a
Long boat by reason we had lost both our Skiffe and Long boat the last sight.

The sixth there came Boot-haylers aboard, and took all the goods aforesaid
and carried them a shore, and also took in Caske to fill with water.

The 7. of November there came 12. Tun of water aboard, which was presently
taken in, and more Caske sent a shore; also in this short time our Lower Orlope
was also made Priddic, and our two chase Pieces were mounted, and we were in
good hope the next day to take in water enough to serve until the fleet came
to stand over for Ormus; but God having otherwise appointed, it fell out
contrary.

The eighth day, about 7. in the morning, Rusrero with his Frigots came rowing
toward tne Ship, and being then calm that the Ship could not work, he came
in such sort that she could have none but her Chase Piece to bear upon them,
which lay so well to pass, that they sunk two of their Figots before they
could board her, and two more after they were by her sides. But after they were
aboard, they plied their small shot in such wise, that they were not able able
to open a Port in the ship, but were forced to shoot away Ports, and all.

They also maintained such abundance of fire works round about her that in a
moment all her Masts and Sails ^^re on fire, her upper Deck was also on fire,
the which for all their heauing much water upon it, in less then half an
hour fell down upon their heads, and put them from their (...) death on each
side, some (...) put themselves to the mercy (...) the rest gave ^^^ to the
(...) up the ship. Those men which ^^^^ ^^^^^ b^ord, were all received into the
(...) ^^^^^ carried unto Ormus Island, and the next in ^^^^^ Rusrero gave or ^^^
to cut off all their heads but one, namely Thomas Winterborne, whom he sent
with a letter to the Merchants at Gombroone, the rest being 26. persons, were
(...)ely ^^headed.

Those that were blown up in the Ship, drove a shore and were burled at
Gombroone be^^^^ in number 42. there were also nine men a ^^^ about the
Companies ^^^ ^^^^, and one that Rusrero sent with a Letter makes 10. whom God
grant never worse fortune.

Thus was this good ship and men unfortunately and lamentably lost, yet as much
courage and manly resolution as possibly could be was performed by the
English, not can it be imagined how more industry or ^uer valor could have
been showed; on the other side, the cruel and bloodthirsty enemy gained
nothing but knocks loss of lives and limbs, having his Frigots suncke and
torn in pieces, his maine purchase being dishonor and infamy, for after all
our men had sought so long, and so manfully, being besieged round with death,
as the Sea to swallow them, the fire to consume them, or the Portugals swords
to cut their throats, not being possible to escape one of these ways of
emenent canger, that then in that extremity 27. men escaping into the Sea, were
all alive taken up by the Enemy, whom had he then killed in he ^^e of blood, when
war, rage death and sury were up, it had been then but the effect and
fortune o^ war; but to give them harbor all night, and the next day in cold
blood to cause them to be beheaded, it was one of the ignoblest, inhumaine, and
barburous parts of murder that could be committed. But Rusrero being a
Portugal or Spantard, could do no other (or the honor of his Country) but
show his bloody nature, especially to our Nation: a Barbarian, a Turk or a Jew
should have found more kind^ ^^^, for indeed they all are of one disposition.
And I am sure, no Record or Chronicle can show, no Histo^y can report, no
tradition can declare, nor any memory can re^^^, that ever an Englishmen, or
almost other Nation (except the Spaniard) did murder so many defirmed naked
men, having had them all a whole night in their custody.

A farewell and hearty well-wishing to the noble attempts of our English Sea
and Land forcas, with their Allies and Consederates.
YOu sons of Mars that furrow Neptunes brow,
And over the dangerous Deep (undaunted) plow;
You who esteem your Countries honor more,
Than life or pelse, (which Peasants do adore)
Your noble Ancestors, whose memories
Are borne by Fame as far as T^^ Rise,
And universally diuulg'd from thence
The Circle of the worlds circumference,
Let their example be a spur to you,
That you their worthy virtues may pursue:
They were but men, and you are each so much,
They were victorious, may you each be such;
They had good courage guided with good skill,
Which skill and Courage, Fortune, Grace and Will,
I do implore the Almighty to bestow,
On you in general, All, both high and low,
Time does record our Britains matchless force
By Sea and Land, with valiant foot or horse,
Has made France tremble and proud to quake
And great Ierusalems foundation shake:
And as true valor did inspire their breasts,
So Victory and Conquest crowned their Crests.
O may your good intendments fall out ^ight,
The God of Battles still your Battles sight;
That as your Fathers were so you maybe,
Rare Patterns unto your posteritre:
That all our Foes with terror now may know
They have been beaten, and they must be so,
True Honor, Fame, and Victory attend you:
And high ^^^ in your cause defend you:
That Immortality your fames may Crown,
And GOD may have the Glory and Renown.
JOHN TAILOR

FINIS.
TAILORS PASTORAL, BEING BOTH HISTORICAL AND SATYRICALL. OR, The noble
Antiquity of Shepherds, with the profitable use of Sheep: With a small touch
of a scabbed Sheep, and a C^ueat against that Infection.
DEDICATED TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP FVLL, I Vdicious, and truly Generous, my well
approved good friend, Mr. THOMAS DOVE, Archdeacon of Northampton, the
accomplishment of his worthy desires Temporal and Eternal.
RIGHT WORCESTER: SIR,
Books without Patrons, are like Babes without Parents, (for except the one be
pleasing and plausible to humor, the various dispositions of men, and the
other left with warm portions or legacies in the tuition of faithful
Executors or Guardians) both Books and Babes are happy if they die in their
birth, that the first minute of their misery may be the first moment of their
felicities: these Considerations have humbly emboldened me to lay this poor
Infant of my laborious Brain, at the door or gate of your patronage and
protection, not doubting but your innated charity, good disposition, and
unfeigned affectation of all laudable endeauours, will give it both free and
hospitable entertainment. The function I treat of being venerable and
honorable, as of Shepherds, the profit commendable, lawful, necessary,
ample, and universal, as of Sheep. The writing or methood of it historical,
mystical, tropicall; typical, literal, and Satyricall; which has encouraged
me to dedicate my poor Shepheardly invention, and their harmless flocks to
your Worships good acceptance, whose reverend function is truly Pastoral;
acknowledging that my many imperfections in writing, and unworthiness in
handling so worthy a subject, has made me doubtful to use the protection of
your Name? yet on the other side, considering your good inclination, and mine
own humble innocence, both my self and my best endeavors I here consecrate
to be employed ever in your Worships service.

He whose meaning, writing, and speaking, are one: JOHN TAILOR.

All those that will not read this plain Epistle, Lay down the Book, on
Gods name, and go whistle.
HOnest men's Sons (if I give you a wrong name, I ask your Fathers pardon)
although every one that eats Mutton, may truly be suspected for
sheepe-biter, yet I hope my Sheep shall find no such dogged dealing amongst
you. There are indeed three sorts of Creatures, two of which are so much
repugnant to a Sheep, that I think there will never be an union betwixt them,
which are a wolf and a Dog; the third is a Goat, which although they may
graze or pasture one with another, as Christians and Infidels are wouen
together in the linsey woolsey web of the World, yet I did never know any kind
of familiarity between them. And be thou in nature, a Wolf, a Dog, or a
Goat, that readst this, I pass not, but I rather pity thy accursed
inclination, then stand in any fear of thy Butting or Biting: she honest
minded Reader shall find my subject or Theme both landable and Honorable:
and those who hold the name of Shepherd in contempt or derision, may herre
find truly proved, that the whole World does not now contain, nor ever will
retain any men, who for Goodness, Honor, true Worth, Worthiness and
respect, that can or dare make comparison with the Shepherds of former Agos.
And though VIRGIL, OVID, MANTVAN, and many of our learned English and Scottish
Poets, have made their inventions travel up the top of the forked Mountain of
Parnassus; yet I would have the Reader know, that if they, each of them had
Argos eyes, of suruay and observe, and as many hands as Briareus, to write, yet
for all their pains, diligent search and collections, my weak cpabitie can
find matter enough to make an honest Pamphlet out of what they have ouerseene,
neglected, or made slight account of. Four things, I have, do, and ever will
observe in my Writings; which are, not to write profane, obsceane, palpable,
and edious Lies, or scandalous Libels. In keeping which Decorum, I hope I shall
keep my self within the limits or bounds of good men Respect. And this
Advertisement more I give the Reader, that there are many things Imprinted
under the name of two Letters, I. T. for some of which I have been taxed to
be the Author: I assure the world that I had never any thing imprinted of my
writing, that I was either afraid or ashamed to set my name as large to it; and
therefore if you see any Authors name I. T. I utterly disclaim it: for I am as
I have bin, both I, and T. which with addition of Letters, is yours to be
commanded in any laudableendeauours,

JOHN TAILOR

TAILORS PASTORAL, BEING BOTH HISTORICAL AND SATYRICALL OR, The noble
Antiquity of Shepherds; with the profitable use of Sheep.
APOLLO (Father of the Sisters nine,
I c^aue thy aid t'inspire this Muse or mine,
Thou that thy golden Glory did lay by
(As Ovid does relate most wittily)
And in a Shepherds shape, did deigne to keeps
Thy Loves beloved Sire, Admerus sheep.
And rural Pan, thy help I do entreat,
That (to the life) the praise I may repeat
Of the contended life, and mighty stocks
Of happy Shepherds, and their harmless sockes.
^^ better thoughts my Errors do control
^^ an offense, most negligent and foul,
^us inuoking, like a Heathen man,
^^ helpless, from Apollo, or from Pan
When as the subject, which I have in hand,
^almost infinite, as Scarres, or sand,
^^ With Antiquity, upon Record
^ the Eternal, neuer-failing Word.
^^ere it is engraven true and manifest,
^^That Shery and Shepheares, were both best and blessed.
^^ Therefore invoke the gracious aid
Of Thee, whose mighty Word has all things made,
Isreal's great Shepherd numbly c^aue
That his assured assistance I may have:
That my unlearned Muse no verse compile,
When may be impious, profane or vile,
^^^ad though through Ignorance, or negligence,
^^ poor iuucation fall into offense,
^^implore that boundless Grace of his,
Nor stricaly to regard what is amisle,
^at but unto me belongs all the blame,
And all the Glory be unto his Name.
Yet as this Bookers verse, so men must know,
^^must some Fictions and Aliusions show,
Some shreds, sow ^mnants relics, or some scraps,
The Muses may inspire me with perhaps.
Which taken laterally, as line may sceme,
And so mil-vnderstanding may misdeeme.
Of Sheep therefore, before to work I fall,
Isle show the Shepherds first original:
Those that the best Records will read and mark,
Shall find just Abel was a Patriarch,
Our father Adams second son, a Prince,
(As great as any man, begotten fince)
Yet in his function he a Shepherd was:
And so his mottall Pilgrimage did pass.
And in the sacred Text it is compild,
That he that is father of the Faithful styled,
Did as a Shepherd line vponth increase
Of Sheep, until his days on earth did ceasel
And in those times it was apparent t^en
Abel Abel a Princes Patriarch, figure of the true Church a type of ^^^tt and a
shepherd, Abraham a Prince a Patriarch, ^^ ^uled with the Glorious title of
Father of the Faithful, a Shep: heard.
and Abram both were Noble men:
The one obtained the title righteously
For his unfeigned serving the most High,
He first did offer Sheep which (on Record)
Was Sacrifice accepted of the Lord.
He was (before the Infant world was ripe)
The Churches figure, and his Saurours type,
A murdered Martyr, who for serving God,
Did first of all feel persecutions rod.
And Abraham was in account so great,
Abramclech his friendship did entreat,
Faiths pattern, and Obedience sample, he
Like Stars, or sand, was in posteritis:
In him Isack.
the Nations of the Earth were blessed,
And now his bosom figures heavenly REST,
His Sheep almost past numbering multiplied,
And when (as he thought) I save should have died,
Then by The Almighty's Mercies, Love, and Grace
A Sheep from out a Bush supplied the place.
Lot was a Shepherd,(Abrams brothers son)
And such great favor from his God he won,
That Sodom could not be consumed with fire,
Till he and his did out of it retire,
They felt no vengeance for their foul offense,
Till righteous Lot was quite departed thence.
And Jacob, as the holy Ghost does tell,
Who afterward was called Israel,
Who wrastled with his God, and (to his fame)
Obtained a Name and Blessing for the same,
He (under Laban) was a Shepherd long,
And suffered from him much ungrateful wrong,
For Bachel and for Leah, he did bear
The yoke of servitude full twenty year,
He was a Patriarch, a Prince of might.
Whose wealth in Sheep, was almost infinite,
His twice six sons (as holy writ describes,
Who were the famous Fathers, of twelve tribes)
Were for the most part Shepherds, and such men
Whose like the world shall never contain again.
Young Joseph, amongst the rest, especially,
A constant mirror of true Chastity:
Who was in his affliction, of behavior
A morrall Tipe of his immortal savior:
And Truth his Mother Rachet does express
To be her father Labans, Shepherdess,
Meek Moses, whom the Lord of hosts did call
To lead his people out of AEgypts thrall,
Whose power was such, as no man's was before,
Nor since his time has any man's been more,
Yet in the Sacred text it plain appears,
That he was letbroes Shepherd forty years.
Heroycke David, Ishaies youngest son,
Whose acts immortal memory has won:
Whose valiant vigor did in pieces tear
A furious Lion and a ravenous Bear:
Who (armed with Faith and fortitude alone)
Slew great Gohah, with a sling and stone,
Whose victories the people sung most plain,
Saul has a thousand, He ten thousand slain,
He from the Sheepfold came to be a king,
Whose same for ever through the world shall ring;
He was another Tipe of that blessed HE
That was and is, and evermore shall be.
His virtuous Acts are writ for imitation,
His holy Hymns and Psalmen for consolation,
For Reprehension and for Contemplation,
And finally to show us our salvation.
The Prophet Amos, unto whom the Lord
Kear^l'd the sacred secrets of his Word:
God raised him from the Sheepfold to foretell
What Plagues should fall on sinful Israel,
True Job.
Patience pattern Prince of his affections.
Most mighty tamer of his imperfections,
Whose guard was God, whose guide the holy Ghost,
Blessed in his wealth of which Sheep was the most,
Just Jobs loft riches doubled was again,
Who lived beloved of God, admired of men.
Seth and Noab, were Shepherds and feeders of Cattle,

The first of happy tydiageon the earth,
Of our all only Saviors blessed birth,
The glorious Angels to the Shepherds told,
As Luke th'Euangelist does well unfold.
And should my verse a little but decline Lok.^.^
To humane stories, and leave divine:
There are some mighty Princes I can name,
Whose breeding (at the first) from Shepherds came
Romes founder ( Romulus) was bred and ted,
Among Shepherds where his youthful days he led
The Persian Monarch ( Cyr^^^)he did pass
His youth with Valeriux, Maximus, and Aureliaxus, were raised from been
Heardsmen to the imperial dignity,
Shepherds, and a Shepherd was,
The Terror of the world, that famous man
Who conquered Kings, and kingdoms ouer-ran
His style was, (as some stories do repeat)
The Scythsan Shepherd Tamberlaine the Great.
It Is sueh a Title of pre-eminence,
Of reverence, and such high magnificence,
That David, (who so well his words did frame) ^^^^
Did call our great Creator by the name.
Our blessed Redeamer (Goas eternal Son)
Whose only merits our Salvation won.
He did the harmless name of Shepherd take ^^^
For our protection, and his Mercres sake.
Those that will read the sacred Text, and look
With diligence, throughout that heavenly Book,
Shall find the Ministers have Epithires,
And named Angels, Stewards, Watchmen Lights,
Salt, Builders, Husbandmen, and Stars that shine,
(Inflamed with the Light which is Divine)
And with these names, within that books compiled
They with the Style of Shepherds are instil'd.
Thus God the Sire, and son, the Scriptures call
Both Shepherds, my stieall and literal,
And by similitudes comparing to,
All kings and Churchmen bear that title do.
A.E.I.O.V. two Anagrams of the five Vowels, the one serves for the glorious
name GOD, and the other in the Spanish tongue is a Sheep, which name the
Prophet Esaias does figuratively or mystically call our Creator IEOVA, or
JEHOVAH, OVEIA, is a sheep.
Wherein may be perceived, that there is no Word, Name or Action, in or under
Heaven, but has one or more of the five Vowels, and that no Word or Name has
them all Without other Letters, but IEOVA, and OVEIA, Which does admonish us in
the fear and reverence of the Almighty, because in all our thoughts, Words
and actions, some part of his Wonderful Name is infinitely included. And
withal that OVEIA or a sheep is a most significant Emblem or sign of our God
and Saviors innocence and patient sufferings.

WIse and Insorutable, Omniscient,
Eternal, Gracious, and Omnipotent,
In Love, in Justice, Mercy and in Might
In Honor, Power and Glory infinite
In works, in words, in every Attribute
Almighty All. commanding, Absolute;
For who so notes the Letters of the name
IE MOVAH, shall perceive within the same,
The Vowels of all Tongues included be:
^^^^th no name that e're was named but HE,
^^^ I have heard some Scholars make Relation,
^^ is but a breathing Aspiration;
A letter that may be left out and spared,
Whereby is clearly to our sight declared,
That Great IEHOVA may be written true
With only Vowels, A, E, I, O, V:
And that there is no word or name but this,
That has them all alone, but only His,
So that the Heavens with all the mighty Host
Of Creatures there, Earth, sea or any Coast,
Or Climate, any Fish, or Foul, or Beast,
Or any of His works, the most and least,
Or thoughts, or words, or writing with the Pen,
Or deeds that are accomplished by men,
But have some of these Letters in them all,
And God alone has all in General.
By which we see, according to his will,
He is in all things, and does all things fill,
And all things said or done, he has ordained,
Some part of his great Name's there in contained
All future, present, and all past things seeing,
In whom we live, and move, and have our being.
A Almighty, All in All and every where,
E Eternal, in whom change cannot appear,
I Immortal, who made all things mortal else,
O Omnipotent, whose Power all Power all Power excels,
V United, Three in one, and one in Three,
IEOVA: Unto whom all Glory be.
Besides the learned poets of all times,
Have chanted out the praise, in pleasant times,
The harmless lives of rural shepherds Swains,
And beauteous shepheardesses on the plains,
In All the famous Poets and Poetesses of all tongues and nations, have
written upon this worthy subject.
Odes, in Rouudelaies and Madrigals,
In Sonnets, and in well. penned Pastorals:
They have recorded, most delightfully,
Their loves, their fortunes, and felicity,
And sure, if in this low terrestrial Round
Plain honest happiness is to be found:
It with the Shepherds is remaining still,
Because they have least power to do ill:
And whilst they on their feeding flocks attend,
They have the least occasions to offend.
Ambition, Pomp, and Hell begotten Pride,
And damned Adulation, they deride:
The complementall flatt'rie of kings Courts,
Is never intermixed amidst their sports;
They seldom envy at each others state,
Their love and fear is Gods, the deuil's their hate.
In weighty business they nor mar or make,
And cursed bribes they neither give or take.
They are not guilty (as some great men are)
Tvndoe their Mercer and Embroiderer,
Their Tailor, Butcher Bewer, Baker, Powlter,
(For which there is some have well deserved a halter)
Their Shoemaker and Silkman I forgot,
Though breaking, or else begg'rie be their lot,
Nor is it a Shepherds trade, by night or day
To swear themselves in debt, and never pay
He Is no state-plotting Macbiushan,
Or Proiect-monger Monopolitan:
He has no tricks or wiles to circumuent,
Nor fears he when there comes a Parliament.
He never wears his cap, nor bends his knee
To feed Contention with a Lawyers fee:
He wants the art to Cog, Cheat, Swear and Lie,
Nor fears the Gallows, or the Pillorie.
Nor cares he if great men be fools or wise,
If honor fall, and base dishonor rise,
Let fortunes mounted minions sink or swim,
He never breaks his brains, all is one to him,
He Is free from fearful curses of the poor,
And lives and dies content, with less, or more.
Great temporance in Shepherds.
He does not waste the time as many use,
His good Creators creatures to abuse,
In drinking sicks ungodly healths to some,
They veryest Cankerwormes of Christendom;
My Lord Ambition and my Lady Pride,
Shall with his quasting not be magnifide:
Nor for their sakes will he carowse and feast,
Until (from man) he be turned worse then beast,
Whereby he scapes vain oaths, and blasphemy,
And surfets, (fruits of drunken gluttony.)
He scapes, occasion unto lusts pretense,
And so escapes the Pox by consequence,
Thus does he escape the Parator and Proctor,
Th'Apothecary, Surgeon, and Doctor,
Whereby he this prerogative may have,
To hold the laying in into his grave,
Whilst many, that his betters far have bin,
Will very hardly hold the laying in.
These are great privileges though few men seek or care for them

Thus Shepherds liu^e; and thus they end their lives,
Adorned and graced with these prerogatives:
And when he dies he leaves no wrangling heirs
To law till all be spe^nt, and nothing theirs,
Hook, Tar-box, Bottle, Bag, Pipe, Dog, and all,
Shall breed no iarres in Westminsters great Hall:
Peace and tranquillity was all his life,
And (dead) his goods shall breed no cause of strife.
Thus Shepherds have no places, means, or times,
To fall into these hell-deseruing crimes,
Which Courtiers, Lawyers, Tradesmen, men of arms.
Commit, unto their souls and Bodies harms.
And from the Shepherds now i will turn my style
To sundry sorts of sheep another while,
The Lambs that in the Jews passover died,
Were figures of the Lambe^ that is crucified ( Esa.53.7.
And Esaias does compare our heavenly food 1. Ioh.1.29
T'^ Sheep, which dumb before the shearer stood:
Whose death, and merits, did this title win,
The Lamb of God, which freed the world from sin LAMB Anagram's BLAME. LAMB
Anagram's BALM.

The Anagram's of Lamb is Blame and Balm.
And Christ, the Lamb, Upon him took our Blame.
His precious Blood (Gods heavy wrath did calm)
'I'was the only Blame for Sin to cure the same
All power, and praise, and glory be therefore,
Ascribed to the Lamb for evermore.
And in the threescore nineteenth Psalm we read,
That like a Sheep our God does Ieseph lead,
Again, of us he such account does keep,
That of his Paffure we are called Sheep.
And every day we do confess (almost)
That we have erred and strayed like Sheep that is lest.
Our Saueour (that has bought our Souls so dear)
Has said, his Sheep his voice will only hear:
And Thrice did Christ unto Saint Peter call,
(In which he spoke to his Disciples all) Iab.21.15.16.
If you do love me, feed my Sheep (quoth he)
And feed my Lambs well, if you do love me.
Moreover, in the final Judgment day,
There is the right hand, and the left hand way,
Whereas the sheep he to himself does gather,
With saying, Come, Ye blessed of my Father, etc,
And to the Goats, in his consuming ire,
He bids, Depars into eternal fire.
Thus our Redeemer, and his whole elect,
The name of Sheep held ever in respect,
And the comparison holds reference
To profit, and to harmless innocence.
For of all beasts that ever were, or are,
None can (for goodness) with a Sheep compare:
Indeed, for bone and burden I must grant,
He Is much inferior to the Elephant,
The Dromedarie, Camel, Horse, and Ass,
For load and carriage does a Sheep surpass:
Strong Taurus, Eunuch son, the laboring Ox,
The stately Stagge, the bobtaild crafty Fox,
These, and all ravenous beasts of prey, must yield
Unto the Sheep, the honor of the field.
An Ox is the Eunuch son of a Bull.

I could recount the names of many more,
The Lion, Unicorn, the Bear and Bore;
The Wolf, the Tiger, the Rhinoscerot,
The Leopard, and a number more I woe.
But all these greedy Beasts, great Ouids pen
Does say are metamorphos'd into men,
For Beast to Beast afford more conscience can,
And much less cruelty, than man to man.
I Will therefore let such Beasts be as they be,
For fear they Kick, and snap and snarle at me ^^
Unto the Sheep again my Muse does fly,
For honest safety, and commodity,
He with his flesh and fleece, does feed and clad,
All Languages and Nations, good and bad:
What can it more, but dye, that we may live,
And every year to us a livery give?
It Is such a bounty, and the charge so deep,
That nothing can afford the like, but Sheep.
For should the world want Sheep but 5. whole year.
Ten thousand millions would want clothes to
And were not for the flesh of this kind beast, (wear:
The world might fast, when it does often feast,
There Is nothing does unto a Sheep pertain,
But'tis for man's commodity and gain;
For men to men so much untrusty are,
Tolye, to cousen, to forswear and swear;
That oaths, and passing words, and joining heads.
Is like assurance written in the sands,
To make men keep their words, and mend all this,
The silly Sheep skin turned to parchment is
There Is many a wealthy man, whose.whole tstate,
Lies more in Parchment, then in coin or Plate.
Indentures, Leafes, Euidenoes, Wills,
Bonds, Contracts, Records. Obligations Bills,
With these (although the sherpeskin is bat weak)
It binds men strongly that they dare not break.
B^^ if man eats Spiders no.v and then,
The oil of Parchment cures him oftagen.
And what rare stuffes which in the world are framed
Can be value like to Parchment named:
The richest cloth of gold that can befound,
A yard of it was nere worth fifty pound:
And I have seen two foot of Sheepeskin dressed,
Which has bin worth ten thousand pounds at least.
A piece of parchment well with Ink Iac'd over,
Helps many a gallant to a Satin cover;
Into the Mercer it some Faith does strike,
It gives the Silkeman Hope of no dislike:
The Tailor it with Charity assailes,
It thrusts him last betwixt his Bill and Vailes,
And by these means, a piece of parchment can
Patch up, and make a Gull a Gentleman,
The Nature of it very strange I find,
It Is much like Physic, it can loose and bind:
It Is one man's freedom, and another noose,
And like the Pope it does both bind and loose.
If the Tailors Bill be out of measure to the Gentleman, then be can make a fit
measure for him with his own bond.

And as the Ram and Ewe do fructify,
And every year a Lamb does multiply:
So does a sheepe-skin Bond make money breed,
And procreate, as seed does spring from seed.
^^ hundred pounds the Ewe, which every year
Does breed a ten pound Lamb, all (charges clear).
A Bond is the Ewe, the borrower and lender are both Rams, and the Interest is
the Lamb.

Thus is a sheepe-skin proved the only Tie,
And stay, whereon a world of men rely,
Which holds a crew of Earth worms kin more awe,
Then both the Tables of the sacred Law.
Past number, I could many functions name
Who (as it is parchment) live upon the fame:
But it is sufficient this small homely touch,
Should all be writ, my Book would swell too much.
Now for the Ram, the Ewe, the Lamb, and Weather,
I Will touch their skins as they are turned to Leather,
And made in Purses, Pouches, Laces Strings,
Gloves, Points, Book. Couers, and ten thousand things.
And many Tradesmen line and thrive thereby,
Which if I would, I more could amplify.
Their Guts serve Instruments which sweetly found,
Their Dung is best to make most fruitful ground:
Their Hoofes burnt will most venomed Serpents kill,
Their grated Horns are good against poison still:
Their Milk makes Cheese, man's hunger to prevent.
As I have seen in suffex and in Keut.
Their Trotters, for the healthy or the sick,
(Dressed as they should be)are good meat to pick.
The Cooks and Butchers with the Ioints do gain
And poor folks eat the Gather, Head, and brain;
And though all wise men's judgment will allow
A Sheep to be much lesser then a Cow,
Yet in a Leg of Mutton I can see,
More meat then in a leg of Beef can be.
A live Sheep has one Neck, yet I perceive,
Sheep being dead, two necks of Mutton have.
Four legs each living Sheep has, but once slain,
(Although he loose none, yet)he has but twain.
Now for the honor of the valiant Ram,
If I were learned more treble then I am,
Yet could I not sufficiently express
His wondrous worth, and exc'llent worthiness.
For by Altronomers it is verifide Aries.
How that the Ram in heaven is stellifide,
And (of the twelve is placed head figne of all,
Where Sol keeps first his Equinoctial.
For, having at the Bull drunk Aprils showers
And with ye Twins, May decked ^ earth with flowers
And scorched the Crab in June with burning beams,
Made Iulies Lion chafe with fiery gleames;
In August solace to the Virgin given
With Battance in September made Time even,
Octobers Scorpion with declining course,
And passing by December Archers force,
Then having past Novembers frozen Goats,
He next to Ianus Waterie Sign does floate:
He to the Lenten Sign in February,
And so bright Phoebus) ends his years vagarie.
Then, to the Ram, in March, in his careere,
He mounts, on which this Sonnet's written here.
Sonnet.
NOw cheerful Sol in his illustrious Carre,
To glad the Earth, his Journey gins to take;
And now his glorious beams he does vnbarre,
What absence marred, his presence now does make:
Now he Earths weeping visage gins to dry
With Eols breath, and his bright heavenly heat, (fly:
March dust (like clouds) through air does march and
Dead-seeming Trees and Plants new life does get.
Thus when the Worlds eye^azler takes his Inn,
At the celestial Ram, then Winter's done:
And then Dame Nature does her liueriespinne
Of flowers and fruits, which all the Earth puts on.
Thus when Apollo does to Aries come,
The Earth is freed from Winters Martyrdom.
Thus have I proved, the' Ram a luckie sign,
Wherein Heaven, Earth, and Sun and Air combine,
To have their universal comforts hurld
Upon the Face of the decaying world.
With twelve signs each man's body's governed,
And Aties or the Ram, does rule the head,
Then are their judgments foolish, fond, and base,
That take the name of Ramhead in disgrace;
It Is honor for the head to have the name,
Derived from tie Ram that rules the same:
And that the Ram does rule the head, I know,
For every Almanacke the same does show.
To be called Ramhead is a title of honor, and a name proper to all men.

He that sels wood, is called a Woodmonger;
He that sels fish called a Fishmonger;
He that does brew, is called a Brewer; and
He Is called a Landlord, that takes rent for Land;
He that bakes Bread, scorns not the name of Baker;
He that makes Cuckolds, is a Cuckold-maker.
So as the Ram does rule the head, I see,
By Constellation all men Ramheads be.
And as the twelve Celestial signs bear sway,
And with their motions pass man's life away:
The Ram, the head, the Bull, the neake and throat,
Twins, shoulders, Crab, does rule the breast, I note,
But it is the Lions portion and his part,
To be the valiant ruler of the heart.
A comfort for Cuckolds, that though a man has a Rams head, yet he has a
Lions heart.

From whence such men may gather this relief,
That though a Ramhead may be cause of grief,
Yet Nature has this remedy found out,
They should have Lions hearts to bear it stout,
And to desend and keep the head from harm,
The Anagram of Ram, I find is: Arm.
Thus is a Ramhead armed against all fear,
He needs no helmet, or no headpiece wear.
To speak more, in the plural number, Rams,
It yields signifique war like Anagrams,
For Rams is Mars, Mars is the God of War,
And Rams is Arms, Arms wars munitions are;
And from the fierce encounters which they make.
Our Tilts and Tournyes did beginnings take,
For as the Rams retire and meet with rage,
So men do in their warre-like equipage.
Strange mysteries in the words Ram or Rams: the Rams the first runners at
Tilt, and first teachers of warlike battle. Josephus Beller Lib. 3. cop.9.
Rams horacs the first Trumpets.

And long e're powder, (from Hels damned den,
Was monstrously produced to murder men,
The Ram, an Engine called a Ram, did teach,
To batter down a wall, or make a breach.
And now some places of defense against shot,
Have (from the Ram) the name of Rampires got.
First warlike trumpets that Ie're heard named,
At Ierscho, were all of Rams horns framed:
For at the Rams horn Trumpets fearful blast,
Their curled Walls were suddenly down cast.
Thus is the Ram with many virtues stored,
And was in AEgygt for a God adored:
And like a Captain he the flock does lead,
As fits their General their Prince or head:
Thus have I proved a Sheep, a beast of price,
Clean, and reputed fit for Sacrifice:
And sleeping, waking, early, or else late,
It still does chew the cud and ruminate.
Of all Beasts in the worlds circumference,
For meekness, profit, and for innocence,
I have approved a Sheep most excellent,
That with least cost does give man most content.
There Is such instinct of Nature in the Lamb,
By bleating, It among thousands knows the dam:
For which the name of Aguoscendo knowing,
Is given to a Lamb, its knowledge showing.
Agnus, Great knowledge in the Lamb.

But to consider more seriously, the wonderful blessing that the whole world
has had and has by Sheep at this present, I think it not amiss to use the
words of an ingenuous and well affected Poet of our time, Master T. M. where he
truly says,

No Ram no Lamb, no Lamb no Sheep, no Sheep no Wool, no Wool no Woolman,
no Woolman no Spinner, no Spinner no Weauer, no Weauer no Cloth, no Cloth no
Clothier, no Clothier no Clothworker, Fuller, Tucker, Shearman, Draper, or
scarcely a rich Dyer.

And what infinite numbers of people rich and poor have lived, and do live,
having their whole dependence from the poor sheep back, all men of
judgment, will acknowledge; besides, I think it not amiss to set down the
names of many worthy men, who have been free of London, of such Trades and
mysteries whereof the Sheep is the original under God. And first, to begin
with the Right Worshipful Company of Drapers, with the names of such as have
borne the honorable Office and Dignity of Lord Maier of London, with their
pious deeds, and diverse other persons of the said Company, their names, and
memorable Charities, with the live remembrance of the Worshipful Company of
Clothworkers. And first, I begin with the first.

Anno 1189. In the beginning of the reign of King Richard the first, Sir Henry
Fitz Allen Draper, was the first Lord Mayor of London, who continued in that
dignity twenty four years together, till the fourteenth year of King John,
1212 when he dyed he was a worthy benefactor to his Company, and gave Houses to
the use of the poor in the Parish of Saint Mary Bothaw, in walbrooke Ward.

Anno 1252. John Talason Draper Mayor. 1253. Richard Hardell Draper, 6. years
Mayor. 1330. Sir John Pultney Draper, 2. years Mayor. 1332. John Preston
Draper Mayor. 1333. Sir John Pultney Draper Mayor. 1336. Sir John Pultney the
tourth time Lord Mayor, he built a Chapel in Paul's, where he lies buried: he
also built Saint Laurence Pultney Church, and the Church of little Alhalowes,
and the Church called the Friars in Couentrie: he gave to the poor of Saint
Giles in the Fields, to the poor Prisoners in the Fleet and Newgate, ten
shillings to each yearly for ever, besides many other deeds of Charity which
he did
Many of these men did good and charitable deeds, but they did them secretly in
their lives time.

Anno 1363. Stephen Candish Draper Mayor. 1367. James Andrew Draper Mayor.
1381. Ioh. Northampt. Draper 2. years Mayor. 1391. John Hind Draper Mayor.
Anno 1402. John Walcot Draper Mayor. 1404 John Hind the second time Mayor, he
newly built the Church of Saint Swithin. near London stone. 1413. Sir William
Cromer Draper Mayor. 1415. Sir Nicholas Wotton Draper Mayor. 1423. William
Cromer Draper Mayor. 1427. John Gedney Draper Mayor. 1430. Nicholas Wotton
Draper Mayor. 1433. Ihon Brockle Draper Mayor. 1441. Robert Clopton Draper
Mayor. 1445. Sir Simon Air Draper Mayor, he built Lraden Hall for a Garnetie
for the City, and gave five thousand marks to charitable uses. 1447. Sir John
Gedney Draper Mayor. 1453. Sir John Norman Draper Mayor. 1458. Sir Thomas Scot
Draper Mayor. 1462. Sir Thomas cook Draper Mayor. 1464. Sir Ralph Ioslin
Draper Mayor, 1474. Sir Robert Drope Draper Mayor, he lies buried in Saint
Michaels Church in Cornehill London; he gave toward poor Maids marriages of
that Parish twenty pound, and to the poor of that Ward ten pound, and three
hundred shirts and smockes, and hundred gowns of Broadcloth. 1476. Sir Ralph
Ioslin Draper, the 2. time Mayor. 1479. Sir Bartholomew James Draper Mayor.
1481. Sir William Harriet Draper Mayor. 1484. Sir William Stocker Draper Mayor.
1489. Sir William White Draper Mayor. 1503. Sir William Capell Draper Mayor.
1507. Laurence Aylmer Draper Mayor. 1509. Sir William Capell the 2. time Mayor.
1511. Sir Roger Achley Draper Mayor. 1514. Sir George Monox Draper Mayor, he
repaired the ruinated Church at Walthamstow in Essex, and erected a
Free-schoole there, and thirteen Almes-houses for aged people, also he built
a long Timber Cawsway over the Marshes from Walthamstow to Locke-bridge. 1512.
Sir John Bruges Draper Mayor. 1521. Sir John Milbourne Draper Mayor, he built
fourteen Alines houses for fourteen aged poor people, near the Lord Lumleyes
house in the crossed or crouched Friars, allowing to each two shillings four
pence monthly for ever. 1524. Sir William Bailie Draper Mayor. 1528. Sir John
Rudston Draper Mayor. 1533. Sir Christopher Askew Draper Mayor, he paid
largely to the building of eight Alms houses in Beechlane London, for eight
poor widows of his Company. 1540. Sir William Roch Draper Mayor. 1560. Sir
William Chester Draper Mayor. 1565. Sir Richard Champion Draper Mayor, a good
Benefactor to the poor of Saint Dunstans in the East, and to the poor in
Saint Edmunds in Lumbard street, he gave fifty four shillings yearly in
bread for ever, besides other guists. 1578. Sir Richard Pipe Draper Mayor.
1580. Sir John Branch Draper Mayor. 1584. Sir Thomas Pullison Draper Mayor.
1588. Sir Martin Calthrop Draper Mayor. 1614. Sir Thomas Hayes Draper Mayor.
1615. Sir John Iolls Draper Mayor. 1621. Sir Edward Barkeham Draper Mayor.
1623. Martin Lumley Draper Mayor.
These good deeds following were done by others of the said company, who were
not Lord Majors.
John Holmes Draper, gave his house to the poor in Saint Sepulchers Parish for
ever, the yearly rent of it being thirty two pound.

John Russell Draper, gave eighty pound to Schooler, and to other pious uses.

John Quarles Draper, gave six pound a year for ever, to be given to the
poor in bread.

William Dummer Draper, gave to the poor thirteen pound eighteen shillings
four pence, yearly for ever.

Owen Clun Draper, gave to the poor five and twenty pound yearly for ever.

William Parker Draper, toward the maintenance of Preachers at Saint Antlins,
six pounds yearly for ever.

John Skeet Draper gave to the Hospitals at London three hundred pound, and to
four poor Scholars at Oxford fiae pound a piece, and the like to four poor
Scholars at Cambridge.

Henry Butler Draper, gave to Saint Thomas Hospital ten pound, to
Christ-Church, Saint Bartholomewes, and Bridewell, five pounds to each.

Peter Hall Draper, gave to Christ's Hospital ten pound, to Saint Bartholomewes
and Saint Thomas Hospital three pound to each.

Thomas Church Draper, gave to Christ's Hospital and to Bridewell, to each ten
pound, and to the Hospitals of Saint Thomas, and Saint Bartholomew, to either
five pound.

Humphrey Fox Draper, gave to Christ's Church Hospital fifty pound.

Edmund Hill Draper, gave to the poor of Saint Andrew Under shaft fifty two
pound, Anno 1609.

William Guilborne Draper, gave four marks the year for ever, to the poor
of Saint Katherine Christ Church, near Aldegate, and twenty pound he gave to
build a Gallerie in the same Church.

John Quarles Draper, gave to the poor in Saint Peter's in the poor in
Brecstreet ward fifty pound to be bestowed yearly in bread for ever.

Sir Richard Goddard Draper, and Alderman, gave to the Hospital of Bridewell
two hundred pound.

Master Benedict Barnham Draper, gave for the relief of the poor Prisoners in
the several prisons in London fifty pound.

Sir James Deane, Draper and Alderman, gave to the several Hospitals in London
a hundred and thirty pound, and to sundry prison 70.1.

Lady Bainham, sometimes an A dermans wife of the Drapers Company, gave to the
poor of the said Company ten pound yearly for ever.

Lancelot Thompson Draper gave to the parish of Saint Peter's in Cornehill,
twenty pound for five Sermons, and a hundred pounds to the poor of the Drapers
Company, and five pound yearly to he bestowed by them in fire and bread on
the poor of that Parish.

Richard shore Draper, gave fifteen pound to build a Church porch at Saint
Mildreds in the Poultry.

John Calthrop Draper, built the brick Wall betwixt the Hospitals of Christ
Church and S. Bartholomew.

John Chertsey Draper, gave to the Hospitals 20.1. and to other charitable uses
a 100.pound.

Master Henry Woolaston Draper, gave to Saint Thomas Hospital forty pound,
with other charitable beneuolences.

These memorable and pious works, (with many more then my weak capacity can
collect or reckon) have been done by the Drapers or Clothsellers, which does
approve the sheep to be a thriuing, happy, and a most profitable beast. Now to
speak somewhat of the Right Worshipful Company of Clothworkers.

Anno Domini, 1559. Sir William Hewet Clothworker, Lord Mayor.

1574. Sir James Hawes Clothworker L.Mayor 1583. Sir Edward Osborne Clothworker
L. M. 1594. Sir John Spencer Clothworker L.Mayor 1596. Sir Thomas Skinner
Clothworker Lord Mayor gave to the Hospitals in London and the Suburbs 120. l.
1599. Sir Nicholas Mosley Clothworker L.M. 1606. Sir John Wats Clothworker Lord
Mayor gave to Christ Church Hospital ten pound, ^^ to the Hospital of S.
Thomas in Southwarke^tic pound.
King Ioses (our most gracious Sovereign) was made a Irec ^ of the Worshipful
Company of Clothworkers, Sir John ^^^ being then Lord Mayor, who seasted his
Marestie, Sir Wis^^ Knight, being then Master of the Company, at which ^ the
King gave a Guist of two brace of Buckes to the said Company yearly for ever,
to be spent at their feast in their ^^^^

Richard Faringdon Clothworker and Aldermangaue to the several Hospitals in
London and the Suburbs 66. pound 13. shillings 4d.

Sir William Stone Clothworker, gave to the ^^rall Prisons in London 50 pound.

Lady Barbara Stone, wife to the forenamed Sir William Stone, gave to the
Hospital of Christ church one hundred pounds.

Lady Spencer wife to Sir John Spencer clothworker gave to the several
Hospitals 20. pound.

William Lamb Esquire, free of the Company Clothworkers, and one of the
Gentlemen of the Chapel to King Henry the 8. built a Free Grammar School at
Sutton Valence in Kens, where he was borne) allowing yearly for ever to the
Master of the said School twenty pound, and to the Usher ten pound: Also he
built six Alemet-houses there, with Gardens and Orchards and ten pound yearly
to each of them forever. Besides he gave to the Free School at Maidstone in
Kent ten pound yearly for ever, which he appointed to be bestowed only upon
^^ children, who were destitute of friends and ^courlesse. Also he bestowed
three hundred pound for the use of decayed Clothiers in the county ^^^^ of
Suffolk, and in the Towns of Bridg^^^le. and Ludlow. Moreover, he built two
conduits in London, one at Holbourne Bridge, and the other on the Hill toward
New Gate, ^oth of which cost 1500 pounds; at which time ^^gaue 120. new Pailes
to so many poor wo^^ to bear Water withal: Moreover, he gave thirty pound a
year to his Company for ever, and 4. pounds yearly to a Minister for 4.
Sermons, and 301. yearly for ever, to be bestowed on twelve poor men, and
twelve poor women; each of them to have a Freeze Gown, one Lockerom shirt or
smock, one pair of winter shoes; which guist is yearly distributed on the
first of October; he also gave to the poor of Saint Giles Parish without
Cripplegate fifteen pound. To the poor of the Company of Stationers, he gave
six pounds, thirteen shillings, 4d. yearly for ever, to be bestowed every
Friday in the Parish of S. Faiths, on twelve poor people twelve pence in
bread, and twelve pence in money. He gave to Christ's Hospital Six pounds
yearly for ever, and 100. pound in ready money present: He gave to S. Thomas
Hospital 4. pounds yearly for ever: and to poor Maids marriage he gave 20.
pounds: besides Newgate, Ludgate, the two Comptors in London, the Marshalsea,
the Kings Bench, and the White Lion, had all most loving tastes of his
Charitable liberality: and in conclusion, he gave 108. Gowns to poor aged
people at his Funeral.

This was a Lamb, whose like was never any,
Whose love and pity fed and clothed so many:
And'sis no doubt, but these good deeds of his,
Did help to lift his soul to endless Bliss.
Master John Berriman of Bishops Tannton in the County of Devonshire,
Clothier, and free Draper of London, gave to the Hospital of Christ Church
100. pounds to S, Bartholomews 5.pounds: to S. Thomas Hospital 6. pounds; to
Bridewell 40. shillings: and to the Hospital of Bethlehem, 50. pounds.

Peter Blundell Clothier, gave to Christ-Church Hospital, 500. pounds: to
Saint Bartholomewes Hospital 250. pounds: to Saint Thomas Hospital 250.
pounds: to Bridewell 8. pounds yearly for ever: to the Reparation of the
Church at Tiuerton (where he was borne) fifty pounds: toward the mending of
Highways, one hundred pounds; to the twelve Companies in London, to every of
them one hundred and fifty pound: to poor Maids marriages in Tiuerton four
hundred pound: to the poor at Exeter, he gave nine hundred pound: to build a
Grammar-schoole at Tiuerten, 2400.l. and after laid out by his Executors, one
thousand pound: to the Schoolmasters fifty pounds yearly for ever: to the
Usher 13. pound 6. shillings 8. pence yearly: to the Clarke 40. shillings
yearly: to place four poor boys yearly Apprentises, twenty pounds per
annum: to keep 3. Scholars at Oxford, and three at Cambridge, 2000. pound.

Robert Chilcot, servant to the aforesaid Mr. Blundell gave to Christ's
Hospital 100. pound, toward a meauer School to have Children taught, to be
fit for his Masters Gra^mer, school: he gave 400. pound to maintain it: he
gave 90. pound, allowing the Scholemaster yearly 20. l. the Clarke 3. pound,
and toward Reparations 40. shillings per annum: to fifteen poor men he gave
sixteen pounds, 10. shillings a year for ever: to 15. poote laboring men,
15. pound: to 15. poor people weekly, six pence each, for ever to mend the
Church at Tiuerton, 19. pound ten shillings; to mend High ways ten pounds; and
to other charitable vles more then is mentioned.

Thus has it pleased God, that these men (whose trades and livings were
derived from the poor Sheep back) have not only grown to great wealth and
places of honor, but have bin also great Instruments of the Almightles mercy,
in relieuing the needy and impotent members of Christ: and should I reckon up
the particulars of profits that arise from this Beast, to Graziers, Butchers,
Skinners, Glouers, Felmongers, Leather sellers, Feltmongers, Tailors, and an
infinite number of other Trades and Functions, who could not live, or else live
very hardly without this Commodity. I say, should I write of these things in
particular, my work would never be done in general.

Wool has been formerly in such esteem in England, that in Parliament
holden the 36. of Edward the 3 the King had his Subjects paid him in Wool; and
before that, in the eleventh year of his Reign, it was forbidden to be
transported out of this Kingdom; and then did strangers come over hither, from
diverse parts beyond the Seas, who were Fullers, Weauers, and Clothworkers, whom
the King entertained, and baro all their charges out of his Exchequer: at which
time, the Staples, or places of Merchandise for Wools, were kept at diverse
places of this Land at once; as at Newcastle, York, Lincoln, canterbury,
Norwich, Westminster, Chichester, Winchester, Exeter, Bristoll, and carmarthen:
by which may be perceived what a great commodity Wool was in those days. But
in the 6. year of King Edward the 4. the King sent certain Sheep out of
Cotswold, in Gloucester shire, into Spain, the increase of which so enriched
the Spaniards with our Wool, that ever since, it has been in the less
request in England: nevertheless as it is, it is the means of life and
maintenance for many hundred thousands.

Here fokoweth a touch of paultry Scabbed and infectious kinds of Sheep, which
I think sit to place by themselves in the lagge end of my Book, as far ^^ I
can from the clean, sound and profitable Sheep before mentioned, for fear
the bad should infect the good.
ANd now from solid Prose I will abstain
To pleasant Poetry, and mirth again.
The Fable of the golden Fleece began,
Cause Sheep did yield such store of gold to Man,
For he that has great store of woolly Fleeces,
May (when he please) have store of golden pieces,
Thus many a poor man dying has left a Son,
That has transformed the Fleece to Gold like Iases
And here is a my stery profound and deep,
There Is sundry sorts of Mutton, are no Sheep:
Laced Mutton which let out themselves to hire,
Like Hackneys, who'lbe fired before they tire.
The man or man which for such Mutton hungers
Are (by their Corporation) Mutton mongers:
Which is a brotherhood so large and great,
That if they had a Hall, I would entreat
To be their Clarke, or keeper of accounts,
To show them unto what their charge amounts:
My brains in numbering then would grow so quick
I should be Master of Arithmeticke:
All States, degrees, and Trades, both bad and good,
Afford some members of this Brotherhood;
Great therefore needs must be their multitude,
When every man may to the Trade intrude;
It is no freedom, yet these men are free,
Not sauers, but most liberal spenders be:
For this is one thing that does them bewitch,
That by their trading they ware seldom rich:
The value of this Mutton to set forth,
The flesh does cost more than the broth is worth:
They all Ewes, yet are exceeding Ramish,
And will be dainty fed, whoso'uer famish.
Nor are they marked for any man, or no man,
As mean, or thine, but every man's in common,
^^beads, and necker, and breasts, they yield some itore
^^^scarcely one good liver in nine score:
Livers being bad, it is understood,
The reinea are filled with putrified blood,
Which makes them subject to the scab, and then
They prone most dangerous diet unto men.
And then the proverb proves no lie or mock,
On seabbed sheep's enough to spoil a focke.
But yet for all this, there is many a Gall,
^^^ Mutton well, and dips his bread ^ the weell.
And were a man put to his choice to keep,
It Is said, a Sbriw is better then a Sheep.
^^^ if a man be yoked with such an E^^^,
See may be both seabbed Sheep and Shrew.
And he that is so marched his life may well
Compared be unto an earthly hell.
Into my Theme which I wrote of before,
Let this Mutten must have one cut more.
These kind of Sheep have all the world ore'growne,
And seldom do wear flecces of their own,
For they from sundry men their pelts can pull.
Whereby they keep themselves as warm as wool.
Besides, in colors, and in shape, they vary
Quite from all profitable sheep contrary
White, black, green, rawny, purple, red, and blue,
Beyond the Rainbow for their change of hue:
^^^ like in alteration,
^^^ that bare Air they cannot live upon.
The Moons mutation's not more manifold,
Silk, Velvet, Tissue, Cloth, and cloth of Gold:
These are the Sheep that Golden fleeces wear,
Who robe themselves with others Wool or hair:
And it may be, 'twas such a Beast and Fleece,
Which Jason brought from Cholcos, into Greece.
They are as soft as silke-wormes.
Were it no more but so, I dare be bold
To think this Land does many Iasons hold:
VVno never durst to pass a dangerous wave,
Yet may (with ease) such Golden fleeces have,
Too much of one thing's good for naught (they say)
I Will therefore take this needless dish away:
For should I too much of of Laced Mutton write
I mayo'recome my readers stomach quite.
Once more unto the good Sheep i will recare,
And so my Book shall to its end exspire:
Although it be not found in ancient writers,
I find all Mutton-caters are Sheepe-biters
And in some places I have heard and seen,
That cutrish Sheepe-bisers have hanged been.
If any kind of Tike should snarle or whine,
Or bite, or wootry this poor Sheep of mine.
Why let them bark and bite, and spend their breath,
I Will never with them a Sheep bitter's death.
My Sheep will have them know her Innocence
Shall live in spite of their malcuolence;
I wish them keep: themselves and me from pain,
And bite such sheeps as cannot bite again.
For if they snap at mine, I have a pen,
That (like a truky dog) shall bite again.
And in conclusion, this I humbly crane,
That every one the honesty may have,
That when our frail mortality is past,
We may be the good Shepherds sheep at last.
FINIS.
THE PRAISE OF HEMP SEED. WITH The Voyage of Mr. Roger Bird and the Writer
hereof, in a Boat of browne-Paper, from London to Quinborough in Kent. As also,
a Farewell to the matchless deceased Mr. THOMAS CORIAT.
The Profits arising by Hemp seed are Clothing, Food, Fishing, Shipping, The
Profits arising by Hemp seed are Pleasure, Profit, Justice, Whipping.
DEDICATED TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP FVLL, PAternes and Patrons of honest endeavors,
Sir THOMAS HOVVET, and Sir ROBERT WISEMAN Knights: And to the worthy Gentleman,
Mr. JOHN WISHMAN, Health, Mirth, and Happiness, be ever attendants.
NOBLE SIRS:
I Could have soyled a greater volume then this with a deal of empty and
triuiall scuffe: as puling Sonets, whining Elegies, the dog-trickes of Love
^^^^ to mock Apes, and transform men into Asses. Which kind of writing is
like a man in Authority, ancient in years, rouerend in Beard, with a
promising outside of Wisdom and Gravity, yet in the expected performances
of his profound under standing, his capacity speaks nething but Mutimus, But
here your Worships shall find no such stuff: for thou I have not done as I
should, yet I have performed as much as I could. I have not had rivers of Oil,
or fountains of wine to fill this my poor caske or book: but I have (as it
were) extracted oil out of steels, and wine out of dry chafe. I have here of
a grain of Hempseed made a mountain greater then the Apenines or Caucalus,
and not much lesser then the whole world. Here is Labor, Profit, Clothing,
Pleasure, Food, Navigations: Divinity, Poetry, the liberal Arts, Arms,
Virtues defense, Vices offense, a true man's protection, a Thiefes execution.
Here is mirth and matter all beaten out of this small Seed.

With all, my self for my self, and in the behalf of Mr. Roger Bird, do
most humbly thank your Worships for many former undeserved courtesies and
favors extended toward us, especially at our going our dangerous Voyage in
the Paper boat: for which we must ever acknowledge our selves bound to your
Goodnesses. Which voyage I have merrily related at the end of this Pamphlet,
which with the rest I have made bold to dedicate to your Worshipful and worthy
Patronages, humbly desiring your pardons and acceptances, ever remaining to be
commanded by yon and yours in all obsequiousness.

JOHN TAILOR.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
1 The most part of such Authors are nominated, as have written of triuiall
matters. 2 The Names of most of the Pagan and Heathenish Idols, that have been
and are honored at this present. 3 The profit and pleasure all Countries have
by Hemp Seed. 4 How it propagates the Gospel. 5 Navigations, with the
Commodities it brings and carries. 6 How many Trades and Functions live by it.
7 How when it is worn to rags, it is made into Paper. 8 How many live by it
being Paper. 9 The sacred memory of Patriarchs, Prophets, Evangelists,
Apostles, and Fathers. 10 The four Monarchies. 11 The seven Wonders. 12
Philosophers, Historians, Chronographers, Poets ancient and modern, the best
fort mentioned. 13 The Anatomy of a Brownist, or precise Amsterdamd Puritan.
14 A Voyage in a Paper-boat to Quinborough. 15 The description of a Sea-storme.
16 The Names of the most famous Rivers in the World. 17 The praise of the noble
River of Thames,
A. Preamble, Preatrot, Preagallop, Preauick, Preapace, or Preface; and Proface
my Masters, if your stomachs serve.
Book, go thy ways, and honest mirth provoke:
And spightfull spirits with Melancholy choke.
^^^ I command thee, where thou do resort.
To be the bad men's terror, good men's sport.
Netre as thou can, I pray thee do not miss,
In make them understand what Hempseed and.
Me thinks I hear some knauish foolish head,
Accuse condemn, and judge before be read:
Saying, the fellow that the same has made,
It ame bouicke Waterman by trade:
And therefore it cannot worth reading be,
Being compiled by such anoue as he.
Another spends his censure like Tom ladle,
(Brings in his fine eggs, sour of which are adle)
Mewes and makes faces, yet scarce knows what is what:
Hemp.seed (quoth he) what canbe writ of that?
Thus these deprauing minds their judgments scatter
Eyber against the Writer or the Matter.
But let them (if they please) read this Preamble,
And they will find that I have made a scamble
To s^ew my pocre plentious want of skill,
How Hemp Seed does deserve, preserve, and kill,
I muse that never any exe'lent wit
Of this forgotten subject yet bath writ.
The theams is rich, although esteemed mean,
Not scuvrulous, profane, nor yet obsceane.
And such as task may well become a quill
To blaze it, that has all the grounds of skill.
This work were no dishonor or abuse,
To Homer, Ovid, or to Marots Muse.
A thousand Writers for their art renowned
Have made farrt baser things their studies ground.
That men have cause to raile' against fruitless Rimes,
(Vainly compiled in past and present times,)
And say, O Hemp Seed, how art thou forgotten
By many Potts that are dead and rotten I
And yet how many will forget the still,
Till they put on a Tyburne Pickadill.
The Names of most of such Authors or their Works, as have writ upon many
poor subjects.
Erasmus, that great Clerk of Rotterdam,
In praise of Folly many lines did frame:
The sum and pith of all his whole intents
Shows Fools are guilty, and yet Innocents.
Another, briefly, barely did relate
The naked honor of a bare bald Pate:
And for there is not a hair twixt them and heaven,
The title of tall men to them is given:
And sure they put their foes in such great dread.
That none dares touch a hair upon their head.
Mountgomerie, a fine Scholar did compile
The Cherrry and the Sloe in learned style.
Homer wrote bravely of the Frog and Rat,
And Virgil versifi'd upon a Gnat,
Ovid set forth the Art of lustful Love.
Another wrote the Treatise of the Deue.
One with the Grasshopper does keep a rut.
Another rimes upon a Hazell Nut.
One with a neat Sophisticke Paradoxe
Sets sorth the commendations of the Pox.
Signout Inamorato's Muse does sing
In honor of his Mistress Glove or Ring,
Her Mask, her Fan, her Pantosle, her Glass.
Her Any thing, can turn him to an Ass.
Pliny and Aristotle Write of Bees.
Some write of Beggeries twenty four degrees.
One of the Owl did learnedly endite,
And brought the Night bird welcome to daylight.
A second did defend with tooth and nail.
The strange contentment men may find in Iayle.
A third does the third Richard much commend,
And all his bloody actions does defend.
A fourth does show his wits exceeding quickness,
In praise of Tauerns healths and Drunken sickness.
A fifth does toil hit Muse quite out of breath,
Of adverse Fortune, banishment or death.
A sixth the very Firmament does harrow,
Writes of the Parret, Popinjay and Sparrow,
The Storke, the Cuckoe: Nothing can escape,
The Horse, the Dog, ass, fox, ferret, and the ape.
Mounsieur de Gallia, writes all night till noone,
Commending highly Ten^is or Baloone.
Another Museus high as Luna flies,
In praise of hoar sursse, dropsies, and bleare eyes,
The Gout, Sciatica, scab'd hams, small legs:
Of threadbare cloakes, a jewes-trump, or potch'd eggs.
One, all his wit at once, in Rhyme discloses
The admirable honor of red noses:
And how the nose magnificat at does bear
A tincturs, that did never color fear.
One does her ^icke it throng hout our coast,
The virtue of muld-facke, and ale and toast.
Another takes great paints with ink and pen,
Approving fat men are true honest men.
Out makes the ha^^ig h^y va^ty welkin ring
In praise of Custards, and a bag, pudding.
Another, ^the^^^ ink and paper,
Exalting Dancing makes his Muse to caper.
Another humor will nothing allow
To be more profitable ^^^ a Cow,
Licking his lips, in thinking that his theme
Is milk, cheese, butter, whay, whig, curds, and cream,
Leather ana Veale, and that which is most chief
Tripes, chitterlings, or fresh powdered beef.
A number have contagiously rehearsed
And on Tobacco vpouriz'd and vearsed.
Maintaining that it was a drug divine
Fit to be served by all the Sisters nine.
Yet this much of it, I shall ever think,
The more men stir in it, the more 'twill stink,
A learned Knight, of much esteem and worth,
A pamphlet of a Privy did set forth,
Which strong breathed Ajax was well like'd, because
It Was writ with wit and did deserve applause.
One wrote the Nightingale and laboring Ant.
Another of the Flea and th'Elephant.
Tom Nash a witty pamphlet did endite
In praise of Herrings, both the red and write.
And some have writ of Maggots and of Flies
A world of fables, fooleri^s, and lies.
And this rare Hempsee a that such profit brings,
To all estates of subjects, and of Kings,
Which rich commodity of man should lack,
He were not worth a shirt unto his back.
And shall is no tryamphant honor have,
But lie dead, buried in obliuions grave?
Some Critticks will perhaps my writing tax
With falsehood, and maintain their shirts are flax,
To such as those, my answer shall be this,
That Flax the male and Hemp the female is,
And their engendring procreatiue seed
A thousand thousand helps for man ^ath breed.
And as a man by glauncing up his eye
Sees in the air a stock of wild Geese fly:
And ducks, and woodcocks, oyboth sexes be
Though men do name but one, forbreuity,
There'eganders amongst the geese, hens with the cocks,
Drakes with the ducks, all male and female stocks,
The Ewe, the Ram, the Lamb, and the sat weather,
In general are called sheep together.
Hearts, Stages, Bucks, Does, Hinds, Roes, Fawnes, every where,
Are in the generality called Dear.
So Hemp and Flax, or which you list to name
Are male and female, both one, and the same.
Those that against these comparisons deride,
And will not with my lines be satisfide,
Let them imagine e'^e they do condemn
I love to play the fool with such as them.
The cause why Hempseed has endured this wrong
And has its worthy praise obscured so long,
I do suppose it to be only this
That Poets know their insufficience is,
That were earth Paper, and Sea ink, they know
'T were not enough great Hempseeds worth to show,
I muse the Pagans, with variety,
Of godles Gods, made it no Deity.
Heeree follows the names of most of the heathen Gods and ^^^s.
The Egyptians to a Bull, they Arts named
A temple most magnificent they framed,
The ^^is, Crocodile, a cat, a dog,
The Hippopostamy, beetles, or a frog.
^^^^^^mons, dragons, the wolf, aspe, ^^le, and R^^,
(Base beastly gods, for such cursed ^^^^ of Cham,)
^^s were so with I dolatry misted,
They worshipped Onio^s, and a garlike h^ad.
If these people had tasted but a mess of Tewxbury must and they would surely
have honored it ^ot a God or ^eared it as a ^^^^^.
King Jeroboam for his gods did take,
Two golden calves, and the tru^ God forsake,
^^^ Philistines, and the Assirians,
The Persians and Babilonians,
S^^^^rit^ns, and the Arabians,
The Thebans, Spartans, and Athenians,
The Indians, Parthians, and the Libians
The Britains, Galliant, and Hibernians:
Since the first Chaos, or creation
^^^ry has crept in every Nation,
And as the devil did men's minds inspire,
Some worshipped, earth, seem air, or water, fire,
Winds, Rivers, Rainbow, Stars, and Moon and Sun:
Ceres, and Bacchus riding on his ^un,
Mars, Saturn, Jove, Apollo, Mercury;
Priapus and the Queen of techery,
Vulcan, Diana, Pluto, Proserpine,
P^^^^^, Neptune, and Pan^ piping shrine:
Old B^^^m Ber^c^rthia: Stones and Trees
B^wit^ ^^^ creat^r^^ worshipped on their knees.
B^^l, B^^^z, ^^^, Ni^ro^^, the Di^^ll, and D^^gon,
Ash^a^^oth, R^mmon, Belus, B^li, the Dragon:
Flies, souls, hawks, ^^^men; any thing they) saw:
Their very P^^^ies they did serne with awe:
And the^ did sacrifice, at sundry ^^^sts
Their ch^^^^e^ unto devils, stocks, stones and beasts.
O had these men the worth of Humpseed known,
Their b^^^^, z^^^ (no doubt) they would have shown
In building Temples, and would alters frame.
Lake Ephesus to great Dianaes name.
And therefore Merchants, Marr^ners, people all
Of all trades, on your marrow bones ^^ ^^^ fall:
For you could neither rose, or b^te or ^^p,
If noble Hempseed did not hold you up.
And Reader now ^^ ^^^^^ it is ^^ ^^^^
To come unto the matter with my ^^^^.
But judge not ^^^^ you ^^^ well read and scanned.
And asks your selves if you dec under stand:
And if you can, do but this favor show
Make no ill faces, cry^^^ ^^^^ and ^^mew:
For though I dare not brag, I dare ^^^^ taine
True censurers will judge I have ^^^^ pain.
Unto the wise I humbly do submit:
For those that play the fools for want of wit,
My poor revenge against them st^^^ shall be,
I Will laugh at them whilst they do scoff at me.
THE PRAISE OF HEMP SEED: WITH The Voyage of Mr. Roger Bird and the Writer
hereof, in a Boat of browne-Paper, from London to Quinborough in Kent.
SWeet sacred Muses, my invention raise
Unto the life, to writ^^ great Hempseeds praise.
This grain grows to a stalk, wrose coat or ^^in,
Good industry does ^a^chell^t ^^^, and ^pin,
And for man's best advantage and auailes
It makes clothes, cordage, halters, ropes and sails,
From this small A^ome, mighty matters springs,
It is the Art of nauigations wings;
It spreads aloft, the lofty sky it scales,
^^^s over the great Leuiathan and Whales,
D^^es to the boundless bottom of the deep,
What Neptune does among dreadful monsters keep,
From Pole to pole, it cuts both Seas and Skies,
From th'orient to the occident it flies.
Kings that are s^ndred far, by Seas and Lands,
It makes them in a manner to shake hands.
It fills our Land with plenty wonderful,
From th'Esterne Indi^^ from the great Mogull,
From France, from Portiagale, from Venice, Spain,
From Denmark, Norw^y, it se^ds over the maine,
Unto this Kingdom it does wealth acrue
From beyond China. far beyond ' Peru
From Be^g^a, Almaine, the West Indies, and
From Guiny, Biny, ^^^and, New sound land,
This little seed is the great instrument
To show the power of God Omnipotent,
Whereby the glorious Gospel of his Son,
Millions misled souls has from Satan won.
It is an instrument by the appointment of God for the increase of the Gospel
of Christ.
Those that knew no God in the times of yore,
Now they their great Creator do adore,
And many that did think they did do well
To give themselves a sacrifice to Hell,
And served the Devil with th'inhumane slaughters,
Of their unhappy hapless sons and daughters.
Now they the remnant of their lives do frame
To praise their Makers and Redeemers name.
Witness Virginia, witness many more,
Witness our selves few hundred years ago,
When in Religion, and in barbarous natures,
We were poor wretched misbeleeuing creatures.
How had Gods Preachers faild to sundry coasts,
Tinstrust men how to know the Lord of Hosts?
But for the Sails which he with wind does fill.
As Servants to accomplish his great will.
But leaving this high supernatural strain,
I Will talk of Hempseed in a lower vain.
How should we have gold, silver, jems, or Jewels,
Wine, oil, spice, rice, and diverse sorts of fewels:
Food for the belly, clothing fot the ba^ke,
Silk, Satin, Veluat, any thing we lack,
To serve neces^icies? How should we get
Such sorts of plenteous fish, but with the net?
The smelt, Roaoh, Salmon, Flounder and the Dace,
Would in fresh rivers keeps their dwelling place.
The Ling, Cod, Herring, Sturgeon, such as these
Would li^e and dy^ in their own native Seas.
Without this feed the Whale could not be caught,
Whereby our oils are out of Greenland brought.
Nay were not for the net made of this seed,
M^n could not catch a Sprat whereon to feed.
Besides, it liberally each where bestows
A living upon thousands where it grows:
As beaters, Spinners, Weauers, and a crew
Of halter makers which could s^^rce line true,
But for th'imployment which this little grain
Does use them in, and pays them for their pain.
Mirth and Truth are good companions.
The Rope makers, the Net makers, and all
Would be trade fallen, for their trade would fall.
Besides, what multitudes of Fishers are
In every Sea, town^, numbers past compare,
Whilst they their servants, children and their wives.
From Hempsceed get their living all their lives.
The Fish-mongers would quickly go to wrack,
The lack of this seed would be their great lack,
And being now rich, and in good reputation,
They would have neither Hall nor Corporation,
And all that they could buy, or sell, or barter
Would scarce be worth a Gubb in once a quarter.
The mounting Lark, that seems so high to f^ye,
Until she seems no greater then a Fly;
And to the flaming Sun does chirp and prate,
Does in the net come to her ending date.
My neighbor Woodcocke, buzzard and the Gull,
And Philip Sparrow all most plentiful.
All sorts or fair foul, or the soule^^ foul,
From the degree of the Eagle to the Owl,
Are with ingenucut j^ns, grins, ne^s and snares
For man's relief often taken unawares:
Deeres, Hares, and Conies would too much abound,
And ouer-run the beating breeding ground,
And We^z^ls, Polcats, Wildcats, Stoats ans such
Like spoiling Vermin, would annoy men much
But for toils, hayes, for traps, for snares and grins,
Which brings us food, and profit by their skins,
No Plowman lives beneath the azure Cope,
But for his plough or cart must use the rope:
No Ho^tler lives in ours, or other Lands,
But makes the halters Horses falling bands.
B^l^ would hang dead within the lofty steeple
And never call to Church forgetful people,
Mute like a bagbite, that has lost his bag,
Except the Bell ropes made the clappers wag.
It were an endless t^^ke^o go about it,
To reckon those that cannot live without it,
Alas what would our silken Mercers be?
What could they do (sweet Hempseed) but for thee?
Rash, Taffata, Paropa, and Nouato,
Shagge, Pillizetta, Damask and Mockado,
No Veluers Piles, two Piles, pile and half Pile,
No Plush, or Grograines could adorn this I Will,
No cloth of silver, Gold, or Tisue, here:
Philip and Cheiny never would appear
Within our bounds, nor any Flanders-ferge
Could ever come within our Kingdoms verge:
Should Mercers want these things with diverse more^
Their trade were nothing or else very poor.
This seed does help the Grocer every season,
Or else his wisdom could not yield a reison;
He could not long be Current in his state.
And (scarcely worth a fig) would end his Date.
For Cloves his credit would be cloven quick,
Not from the loaf or lump, his lips could lick:
No Natmegs, Liquoris, or biting grains
Or Almons for a Parrat, were his gains,
Sans Ginger weakly he would run his Race,
And Powltry Mace, would put down Indian Mace:
And he unable (through his want of pelf)
To pepper us, or yet to prune himself.
The Draper of his wealth would much be shorted
But that our clothes and Kersies are transported,
Our cottons, penistones, frizadoes, baze,
Our sundry sorts of frizes, blackes and grayes.
And linen D^apers but for transportation,
Could hardly, Canuase out their occupation.
Hempseed does yield or else it does allow
L^awne, Cambricke, Holland, Canuase, Callico,
Normandy, Hambrough, strong poledauis, Lockram,
And to make up the Rhyme (with reason) Buckram.
The Gold smiths trade would totter and unsettle,
And he could be a man of no good mettle,
Were It not for Sails and Ropes that Ships do rig,
That bring gold, silver, many a Sow and Pig;
Which makes them by an admirable skill
To live by that which many a Horse does kill,
Which is the A Goldsmith and a Tailor live by that which will kill a horse.
Fashions: for continually
They sell the fashion, but they seldom buy.
And brave wine Merchants, little were your gain,
By Mallegoes, Canaries Sack from Spain,
Sweet Allegant, and the concocted Cute,
Hollock and Tent would be of small repute.
O all you Ba^hinalian dr^nkards honor Hamp-seed.
Your Bastards their own Fathers would forget,
Nor they our Gossips lips no more would wet.
The wind no Muskadine could hither bandy,
Or sprightfull Malmesey out of fruitful Candy.
Liatica or Corsica could not
From their own bearing breeding bounds be got.
Peter-se-me^, or head strong Charnico,
Sherry, nor Rob-o-Dauy here could flow.
The French Frontini^cke, Claret, Red nor White,
Graves nor High-Country could our hearts delight.
No Gascoygne, Orloance, or the Crystal Sherrant
Nor Rhenish from the Rheine would be apparent.
Thus Heempseed, with these wines, our land does spread
Which if we want, wine Merchants trades were dead.
The Vintners trade were hardly worth a rush
Unable to hang up a sign, or bush;
And were it not for this small forgotten grain
Their coniuring at midnight would be vain.
Anon, anon, would be forgotten soon,
And he might seore a pudding in the Moon,
But not a pint of Clarret in the Sun,
Because the empty hogshead co^k^ not run,
His blushing lattice would look pile and wan.
Nor could he long be a well liquord man:
No more could all his regiment^ of pots
A^^right men daily, with scores^ bell^s, and s^ots.
The Tailors trade would hardly get them bread
If Hempseed did not furnish them with thread;
And though it ^^ a terror to most ^^ues
Yet it thus occupation never greeues,
They love it, black, brown, yellow green, red, blew,
Which is a sign, that Taylers must be true:
The worthy Company, or warm lined Skinners
Would in short spact be miserable sinners
It Hempseed did not often supply their boxes
With Russian Sables, Miniuers and Foxes:
With Bears and Budges, and rare powe^red Ermines,
And with the skins of diverse beasts and Vermines.
The Habberdasher of small ware, would be
In a small time, a man of small degree:
If Hempseed did not help him by the great,
Small would his gains be, to buy clothes or meat.
Then might his wares be rightly termed small
Which would be either few or none at all,
And They might live to dye poorly, but not dye to live rich.
Dyers though you do no colors fear,
It Is Hemseed that does you to riches rear,
Woad, Madder, Indico and Cutcheneale,
Brazil, and Logwood, and abundant deal
Of drugs, which did they not your wants supply,
You could not live, because you could not dye.
Apothecaries were not worth a pin,
If Hempseed did not bring their commings in;
Oils, Unguents, Sirrops, Minerals, and Baulmes,
(All Natures treasure, and The Almighty's alms,)
Emplasters, Simples, Compounds, sundry drugs
With Necromanticke names like fearful Bugs,
Fumes, Vomits, purges, that both cures, and kills,
Extractions, consernes, preserues, potions, pills,
Ellixers, simples, compounds, distillations,
Gums in abundance, brought from foraigne nations.
A brave world for Physicians and Chyrurgions the while.
And all or most of these forenamed things
Helps, health, preservatives: and riches brings.
There Is many a Gallant dallying with a Drab,
Has got the Spanish pip, or Naples scab.
The Golliae Morbus or the Scottish fleas,
Or English Pox, for all is but one disease,
And though they were perfumed with Ciuet hot
Yet wanting these things they would stink and rot,
With gowts, Consumptions, Palsies, Lethargies,
With apoplexies, quinzies, plurifies,
Cramps, cataracts, the teare-throat cough and tisick
From which, to health men are restored by Physic,
Agues, quotidian, quartan:, tertian, or
The leprosy, which all men do abhor.
The stone, strangury, botches biles, or blaines,
Head ^ aches, cankers, swimming of the brains,
Ruptures, Herni^^quosa, or Carnosa,
Or the Evlien hernia veniosa.
All Dropsies, Collicks, laundizes, or Scabs,
Gangrenaes, Vicers, wounds, and mortal stabs.
Illiaca passioes, Megrims, Mumps, or Mange,
Contagious bloods, which through the veins do range
S^^rsses, ^eazles, murraines, fluxes, all these griefs,
T^ansported me^^^ines daily bring releefes,
Most serviceable Hempseed but for thee,
These helps for man could not thus scattered be.
T^bacoes fire would soon be quenched out,
Nor would it lead men by the nose about:
Nor could the Merchants of such Heathen D^cks
From small beginnings purchase mighty stocks:
By folles daily dancing to their pipe
Their states from rotten stinking weeds grow ripe;
By which means they have into Lordships run
The Clients being beggered and, undone:
Who having smock'd their Land to fire and air
They whiffe and puff themselves into despair.
Ovid amongst all his Metamorphosis
Never knew a A strange change, and yet not stranger then for the women of
these times to be turned to the shapes of men.
transformation like to this,
Not yet could Ocdipus e're understand,
How to rurne Land to smoke, and smoke to Land.
For by the means of this bewitening smother,
O^e Element is turned into another,
As Land to fire, fire, into Ayrie matter,
From air (too late repenning) turns to water.
By Hempseed thus, fire water, air, earth, all
Are changed by padding, leaf, roll, pipe and ball.
Lip licking Comfit-makers, by whole trade,
Dainties come thou to me are quickly made;
Baboones, and hobby horses, and owls, and apes,
Swans, geese, dogs, woodcocks, and a world of shapes,
Castles for Ladies, and for Carpet Knights,
Unmercifully spoyld at feasting fights.
Where hattering bullets are fine sugared plums,
No fear of roaring guns, or thundering drums:
There Is no tantara, sa sa sa, or force,
Of man to man, or warlike horse to horse;
No mines, no countermines, no pallizidoes,
No parrapets, or secret ambuscadoes,
Of blood and wounds, and dismal piercing lances
Men at this fight are free from such mischances.
For many gailants gilded swords do wear,
Who fight these battles without wit or fear:
All ^^uing as they did for honor thirst,
All greedy which can give the onser first;
Each one contending in this Candied coil,
To take most prisoners, and put up most spoil.
Sweet warris, and dangerous to^th.v^lours.
Retiring never when they do assoile,
But most aduenturously with tooth and nail,
Raze, r^^^te, demol'sh, and con'ound,
The sugared fabric ^^^ll with the ground.
And having la^d the buildings thus along,
They swallow down, and pocket up the wrong.
That who so that way afterward do pass.
Can see no sign where such a Castle was:
For at these wars most commonly it is seen,
Away the victors carry all things clean.
It fortunes in these battles now and then
Women are better Soldiers far then men:
Such sweet mouthed fights as these do often fall
After a Christning, or a Funeral.
Thus Hemp the Comfit-makers does supply,
From them that newly live, and newly dye.
If the black Indians or Newcastle co^les
Came not in Fleets, like fishes in the sholes,
The rich in gowns and rugs themselves might sold,
But thousands of the poor might statue with cold.
The commodities of these black indi^s are worth more white money to us, then
either the East or West Ind^es ^^^ be profitable.
Smiths, Brewers, Diers, all estates that lives,
This little seed service or comfort gives.
For why, our Kingdom could not serve our turn,
For Londons use, with wood uen years to burn:
And which way then could coals supply our need,
But by the Almightie^ bounty and this seed?
You brave Neptunians, you salt water crew,
Sea-plowing Mariners; I speak to you:
From Hemp you for your selves and others gain
Your Sp^it sail, fore-sayle, top-sayle, and your maine,
Top, and top-gallant, and your mizz^n abaft,
Your coursers, bonnets, drablers, sore and aft,
The sheats, tacks, boliens, braces, halliars, ties,
Shrowds, tatlings, lanyards tackles, lists, and guies,
Your martlines, ropeyarnes, gaskets, and your stays,
These for your use, small Hemp Seed up does raise:
The boirope, boatrope, guest^rope, catrope, portrope
The bucket rope, the boat-rope, long or short rope,
The entering-rope, the top rope (and the rest
Which you that are acquainted with know best:
The lines to sound in what depth you slide,
Cables and hausers, by which ships do ride:
All these, and many more then I can name,
From this small seed, good industry does frame.
Ships. Barks, Hoyes, Drumlers, Craires, Boats, all would sink,
But for the Ocum ^aulk'd in every chink.
Th'vnmatched Loadstone, and best figured Maps
Might show where foraine Countries are (perhaps)
The Compass (being rightly touched) will show
The thirty two points where the winds do blow;
Men with the Jacobs staff, and Astrolobe
May take the height and circuit of the Glo^e:
And sundry Art like instruments look clear
In what Horizon, or what Hemisphere
Men sail in through the raging ruthlesse deep,
And to what coast, such and such course to keep;
Guessing by th'Artike, or Antartike star,
Climates and countries being never so far.
But what can these things be of price or worth
To know degrees, heights, depths, East. W.S. North
What are all these but shadows, and vain hopes,
If ships do either want their Sails or Ropes?
And now ere I offend, I must confess
A little from my theme I will digress;
Striving in verse to show a lively form
Of an impetuous gast, or deadly storm.
Where uncontrolled Hyperborean blasts
Tears all to tatters, Tacklings, Sails, and Masts;
Where boy ^^erous puffes of Eurus breath did hiz
And among our shrouds and cordage wildely whiz;
Where thundering Jove amidst his lightening flashing
Seem'douerwhelm'd with Neptunes mountain dashing
Where glorious Titan has his burning light,
Turning his bright Meridian to black night:
Where blustering Eole blew confounding breath,
And thonders fearful larum threatened death,
Where Skies, and Seas, Hail, Wind, and slauering Sleet
As if they all at once had meant to meet
In fatal opposition, to expire
The world, and unto Chaos back retire.
Thus whilst the Winds and Seas contending gods,
In rough robustious fury are at ods,
The beaten ship tossed like a forcelesse feather,
Now up, now down, and no man knowing whither:
The Topmast some time tilting at the Moon,
And being up does fall again as soon,
With such precipitating low descent,
As if to hels black Kingdom down she went.
Poor ship that rudder. or no steerage feels,
Sober, yet worse then any Drunkard reeles,
Vnmanag'd guidlesse, too and fro she wallowes,
Which (seemingly) the angry billows swallows.
A storm.
Midst darkness, lightning, thunder, sleet, and rain,
Remorcelesse winds and, mercy wanting Maine,
Amazement, horror, dread from each man's face
Hid chased away lives blood, and in the place
Was sad despair, with hair heau'd up upright
With ashy visage, and with sad affright,
As if grim Death with his all-murdering dart,
Had aiming been at each man's bloudlesse heart,
One tryes the Master, lower the top-saile, lower,
Then up aloft runs scambling three or four,
But yet for all their hurly ^ urly have,
E're they got up, down tumbles Sail and Mast.
Veere the maine sheat there, then the Master cride,
Let rise the fore tack, on the Latboord side:
Take in the sore-sayle, yare, good fellows, yare,
Aluffe at helm there, ware no more, beware.
Steer South, South East there ^I say ware, no more,
We are in danger of the Leeward shore,
Clear your maine brace, let got the bol^ in there,
Port, port, the helm hard, Rumer come no near.
Sound, sound, heave, heave the lead, what depth, what depth?
Fadom and a half, three all,
Then with a whisse, the winds again do puff,
And then the Master cries aluffe, aluffe,
Make ready th'anker, ready th'anker hoe,
Clear, clear the boighrope, steady, well steered, so;
Hale up the boat, in Sprit-sayle there before,
Blow wind and burst, and then thou will give over,
Aluffe, clap helm a lec, yea, yea, done, done,
Down, down allow, into the hold, quick run.
There Is planck sprung, something in hold did break.
Pump bullies, Carpenters, quick stop the leake.
Once heave the lead again, and sound abafte,
A shafnet less, seven all.
Let fall the Ancker there, let fall,
Man man the boat, a woat hale, up hale,
Top yet maine yard, a port, veere cable allow,
Ge way a head the boat there hoe, dee row,
Well pumpt my hearts of gold, who says amends
East and by South, West and by North she wends.
This was a weather with a witness here,
But now we see the skies begin to clear,
To dinner hey, and lets at ancker ride.
Till winds grow gentler, and a smoother tide.
I think I have spoken Heathen. Greek, Vtopian, or Bermudian, to a great many
of my readers, in the description of this storm, but indeed I wrote it only
for the understanding Mariners reading. I did it three years since, and could
not find a fitter place then this to insert it, or else it must have lain in
silence. But to proceed to my former theme of Hemp Seed.
The Shoemaker and Cobbler with their Ends
One always makes, and the other ever mends:
Take away Hemp, the sole and upper leather
I know could never well be sowed together.
And for the Cobbler it appears plain
That he is the better workman of the twain,
For though a Shoemaker in art excel,
And makes his shoes and boots never so well:
Yet evermore it is the Cobblers trade
To mend the work the Shoemaker has made.
The Character of a Cobbler.
The Cobbler (like a Justice takes) delight
To set men that do walk aside, upright,
And though he look black as he carried coals,
He daily mendeth desperate wicked soles:
Though Crowns and Angels may perhaps be scant,
Yet store of pieces he does never want:
And let his woke be ended well or ill,
Here Is his true honor, he is mending still.
And this his life and occupation is,
And thus he may thank Hempseed for all this.
For Hempseed if men rightly understand,
Is known the greatest Justice in a Land:
How could men travail safely, here and there,
If Hempseed did not keep a Thief in fear;
No man within his house could live or rest
For villuines, that would pilfer and molest,
And breakedowne walls, and rifle chests and truncks
To maintain drinking, dicing, Knaves and Punks:
That many a one that is wealthy over night,
Would t're the break of day bebegger'd quite:
Worth thousands lately, now not worth a groat,
And hardly scapes the cutting of his throat.
No doubt but many a man does live and thrive,
Which but (for Hemp Seed) would not be alive;
And many a wife and Virgin does escape
A rude deflouring, and a barbarous rape:
Because the halter in their minds do run,
By whom these damned deeds would else be done.
It is a bulwark to defend a Prince.
It is a Subjects armor and defense:
No Poniard, Pistol, Halbert, Pike, or Sword
Can such defensive or sure guard afford.
There Is many a Rascal that would rob, purloine,
Pick pockets, and cut purses, clip and coin,
Do any thing, or all things that are ill,
If Hempseed did not curb his wicked will.
It Is not the breath or letter of the Law
That could keep Thieves rebellious wills in awe;
For they (to save their lives) can use persuasions.
Tricks, sleights, repriues, and many strange euasions.
But trick, repriue, or slight nor any thing
Could ever go beyond a Hempen string.
This is Laws period, this at first was made
To be sharp Justice executing blade.
This string the Hangman monthly keeps in tune,
More then the Cuckoes song in May or June,
It does his wardrobe, coin and stock vproare,
In every month and quarter of the year.
Yet there has been two or three Sessions, wherein none has been execused;
by which means he is in danger of breaking, or bankeruptisiue; for the
Hangmans trade is maintained by Justice, and not by mercy.
Besides it is an easy thing to prove,
It is a sovereign remedy for love:
As thus, suppose your thoughts at hourly strife
Half mad, and almost weary of your life,
All for the love of some fair female creature,
And that you are entangled with his feature,
That you are sad, and glad, and mad and tame,
Seeming to burn in frost, and freeze in flame,
In one breath, sighing, singing, laughing, weeping,
Dream as you walk, and waking in your sleeping,
Accounting hours for years, and months for ages,
Till you enjoy her, that your heart encages,
And she has sent you answers long before
That her intent is not to be your whore:
And you (for your part) mean upon your life
Never while you live to take her for your wife,
To end this matter, thus much I assure you,
A Tiburne Hempen-caudell well will cure you.
It can cure Traitors, but I hold it fit
T'apply't ere they the treason do commit:
Wherefore in Sparta it yeleped was,
Snickup, which is in English Gallow-grasse.
The names that diverse Nations did attribute to Hemp Seed.
The Libians called it Reeua, which implies
It makes them dye like birds a twixt earth and skies,
The name of Choak-wort is to it assigned,
Because it stops the venom of the mind.
Some call it Neck-weed, for it has a trick
To cure the neck that is troubled with the crick,
For my part all is one, call it what you please,
It Is sovereign against each Commonwealth disease,
And I do wish that it may cure all those
That are my Sovereigns and my Countries foes.
And further, I would have them search^d and seen
With care and skill when as their wounds be green,
For if they do to a Gangrena run,
There Is little good by Hempseed can be done;
For could I know men's hearts, I hold it reason
To hang a Traitor in his thought of treason:
For if his thought do grow unto an act
It helps not much to hang him for the fact.
But that example may a terror strike
To others, that would else attempt the like.
To end this point of Hempseed, thus in brief
It helps a truemanl, and it hangs a Thief.
Rates, Imposts, Customs of the Custom House
Would at the best rate scarce be worth a Louse:
Goods in and our, which daily ships do freight,
By guess, by tale, by measure and by weight,
Which yearly to such mighty sums amount,
In number numberless: or part account:
Were It not for Hempseed, it does plain appear
These profits would not be a groat a year.
The names of many brave discouerers: Sir Richard Gr^^ile, Charles Earl of
Nottingham, Henry Earl of South ^^^^^^
Columbus, Cortois, Magellan, and Drake,
Did with this seed their great discoueries make,
Brave Hawkins, Baskeruile, Cauendish, Fenner, Best.
Smith, Sherley, Rawleigh, Newport, and the rest,
Web, Towerson, Willoughby, Sir Thomas Roe,
The Lord'la Ware, Frobusher, many more.
Nubols and, Malum, Rolph, and Midleton,
And Sir James Lancaster, and Withringheton.
And all the worthy things that these men did
Without this seed had bin undone, and hid,
^^me never had trumpetted their noble fames
And quite forgotten were their acts and names.
The worlds seven wonders, we^^ not for this grain
In poor remembrance, or forgot had lain.
The walls of Babel, sixty miles about,
Two hundred foot in height, thick fifty foot:
Which Queen Samiramis is state did rear,
Employed three hundred thousand men ten year.
Nor the great Image that at Rooles was made
Whose metal did nine hundred Camels lsde.
The Pyramides of Egypt, so renownd
At the ^oat in compass forty acres ground:
The which in making twenty years did then
Employ work thirty sixs thousand men.
The Toomb of Mausull, king of Carea
Built by his Queen, (kind Artimisia)
So wondrous made by art and workmanship
That skill of man could never it outstrip;
'Twas long in building, and it does appear
The charges of it full two millions were.
Dianaes Temple built at Epbesus
Had bin unheard of, unknown to us,
Which was two hundred twenty years in building
With marble pillars and most sumptuous guilding.
The Image of Olimpique Jupiter,
Had from Achay^ not been famed so far,
Not Pharoes Watch tower which the world renownes
Which cost 400. fourscore thousand crowns.
Thus Without Hemp Seed we had never known
These things, nor could they to the world be shown.
O famous Coriat, had thou come again
Thou would have told us news, direct and plain,
Of Tigers, Elephants, and Antelops
And thousand other things as thick as hops,
Of men with Iong tails, faced like to hounds,
Of oysters, one whose fish weign'd forty pounds,
Of spiders greater then a walnut shell
Of the Rhinoceros thou would us tell,
Of horses taken with hawks, of bears of bulls,
Of men with ears a span long, and of guls,
As great as Swans, and of a bird called Ziz
Whose egg will drowned some there score villages,
Of cranes, And pigmies, lizzards, buzzards, owls,
Of swine with horns, of thousand beasts and souls,
All these and more then I to mind can call
Thou would have told us, and touch more then all,
But that our expectations were prevented,
By death, which makes thy friends much discontented.
But farewell Thomas, never to return.
Rest thou in peace within thy foreign Vine,
Hempseed did bear thee over the raging some
And O I wish that it had brought thee home,
For if thou had't come back, as I did hope,
They fellow had not been beneath the Cope.
But we must loose that which we cannot save.
And freely leave thee whom we cannot have.
I think it best to sow all our Land with it every third year, for now ou^
bread and drink corn growing out of the excrements of beasts, makes us to
participate of thn beastly natures, as when barley grows where ^^^ have dungd,
those that drink the ale or beer made of that malt, are many times as beastly
as swing, and as drunk as hogs.
Moreover, Hempseed has this virtue rare
In making bad ground good, good corn to bear,
It fats the earth, and makes it to excel
No dung, or marle, or mucke can do it so well:
For in that Land which bears this happy seed
In three years after it no dung will need,
But sow that ground with barley, wheat, or rye
And still it will increase abundantly;
Besides, this much I of my knowledge know
That where Hemp grows, no stinking weed can grow,
No cockle, darnell, henbane, tare or nettle
Near where it is can prosper, spring, or settle,
For such antipathy is in this seed,
Against each fruitless vnderseruing weed,
That it with fear and terror strikes them dead,
Or makes them that they dare not show their head.
And as growing it all weeds does kill
So being grown, it keeps it nature still,
For good men's uses, serves, and still releiues
And yields good whips and ropes for rogues and thieves.
I could rehearse of trades a number more
Which but for Hempseed quickly would grow poor;
As Sadlers for their elks hair to stuff their sadles,
And girses, and a thousand fidle fadles;
But that I Will put my Reader out of doubts,
What a rich thing it is being worn to clouts:
For now how it to Paper does convert
My poor unable Mule shall next insert.
And therefore noble and ignoble men
Judge gently of the progress of my pen,
In forma pauperis, poor men may sue,
And I in form of paper speak to you.
But paper now is the subject of my book,
And from whence paper its beginning tooks:
How that from little Hemp and flaxen seeds,
Ropes, halters, drapery, and our napery breeds,
And from these things by art and true endeavor,
All paper is derived, whatsoever.
For when I think but how is paper made
Into Philosophy I straight ways wade:
How here, and there, and every where lies scattered,
Old ruined rotten rags, and ropes all tattered.
And some of these poor things perhaps has been
The linen of some Countess or some Queen,
Yet lies now on the dunghill, bare and poor
Mixed with the rags of some baud, thief, or whore.
And as these things have been in better states
Adorning bodies of great Potentates,
And lies cast off despised, scorned, dejected,
Trod under foot, contemned and unrespected,
By this our understandings may have seeing
That earthly honor has no certain being.
For who can tell from whence these tatters springs?
May not the torn shirt of a Lords or Kings
Be pasht and beaten in the Paper mill
And made Pot-paper by the workemans skill?
May not the linen of a Tyburne sl^ue,
More honor then a mighty Monarch have:
That though he dyed a Traitor most difloyall
His shirt may be transformed to Paper-royall?
And may not dirty socks from of the feet
Form thence be turned to a Crowne-paper sheet?
And dunghill rags, by favor, and by hap,
May be advanced aloft to sheets of cap?
As by desert, by favor and by chance
Honor may fall, and begg'ry may advance,
Thus are these tatters allegorical
Tropes, types, and figures, of man's rise or fall.
Thus may the relics of sincere Divines
Be made the groundwork of las^iuious lines,
And the cast smock that chaste Lucretia wore
Bear baudy lines betwixt a knave and whore.
Thus may a Brownists zealous ruff in print
Be turned to Paper, and a play writ in it.
Or verses of a May pole, or at last
Injunctions for some stomach hating Fast.
And truly 'twere profane and great abuse,
To turn the brethrene linen to such use,
As to make Paper on it to bear a song,
Or Print the Superstitious Latin tongue,
Apocrypha, or Ember-weekes, or Leus,
No holy brother surely will consent
To such ldolatry, his spirit and zeal
Will rather trouble Church, and commonweal.
He hates the Fathers works, and had much rather
To be a bastard, then to have a Father.
His own interpretation he will afford
According to the letter of the word,
Tropes, Allegories, Types, similitudes,
Or Figures, that some my stick sense includes.
His humor can the meaning so unfold,
In other fashions then the Fathers could:
For he (dogmatically) does know more
Then all the learned Docters knew before.
All reueread Ceremonies he will oppose,
He can make an Organ of his nose,
And spin his speech with such sincerity,
As if his bridge were fallen in verity.
The Cope and Surplesse he cannot abide,
Against the corner-Cap he outhach cride,
And calls them weeds of Superstition,
And liueries of the whore of Babylon.
The Crosses blessing he esteems a curse,
The Ring in marriage, out upon it it is worse.
And for his kneeling at the Sacrament,
In sooth he will rather suffer banishment,
And go to A^^^erdamd, and live and dye
E're he will commit so much ldolatry.
He takes it for an outward Seal or Sign,
A little consecrated bread and wine,
And though it from his blessed Saulour come
His manners takes it fitting on his bum,
The spirit still directs him how to pray,
Nor will he dress his meat the Sabbath day,
Which does a mighty mystery unfold,
His zeal is hot, although his meat be cold,
Suppose his Cat on Sunday kill a Rat,
She on the Monday must behang'd for that.
His faith keeps a continual Holy day,
Himself does labor to keep it at play:
For he is read and deeply understood
That if his faith should work 'twould do no good,
A fine clean fingerd faith must save alone,
Good works are needless, therefore ho'l do none,
Yet patience does his spirit so much inspire,
He Will not correct a Servant in his ire,
But when the spirit his hot fury lays.
He congregates his folks, and thus he says;
Attend good Nichodemus, and Tobi^,
List to your reverend Master Ananias,
And good Aminadab, I pray attend,
Here Is my man I smael highly did offend;
He told a lie, I heard his tongue to trip,
For which most surely he shall taste the whip.
Then after some sententious learned speech,
The servant humbly does let fall his breech,
Mounts on his fellows back as on a Mule,
Whilst his pure Master mounts his rod of rule.
The boy in lying with his tongue did fail,
And thus he answers for it with his tail.
O Upright, Sincere, Holy execution,
Most patient, unpolluted absolution.
Shall Paper made of linen of these men,
Be stained with an unsanctified pen?
In sooth who ere does so, be^'t he or she,
They little better then the wicked be,
Children of Satan and abomination,
The brood of Belials cursed congregation,
The bastard off spring of the purple where,
Who do the Babylonish Beast adore.
From the Creation to the general Fleed,
The name of Paper no man understood:
But by tradition still from Sire to Son,
Men living knew the deeds by dead men don't,
Yet many things were in the Deluge san'd
In stony Pillars charactered and grau'd
For the most part antlquity agrees,
Long since the flood men writ in barks of trees:
Which was observed late in America,
When Spanish Cortois conquered Mexica.
Then after in Fig-leaues and Sicamour,
Men did Characters their minds explore.
^^^ when it is worn to Rags, it is made into Paper.
Long after, as ingenuous spirits taught,
Rags and old Ropes were to perfection wrought
Into quare forms yet how to give a name
Unto their workmanship they could not frame.
The Original of Paper.
Some Authors do the name of Paper gather,
To be de^iu'd from Papa, or a Father.
Because a learned man of Arrius sect
Did Christendom with heresy infect:
And being grear errors much mistook,
Writ and divulged in a Paper book.
And therefore Nimphs^ag thus much does infer,
The name of Paper sprung from Papaerr.
Some bold the name does from a Rush proceed,
Which on Egiptian Nilus banks does breed:
Which rush is called Paptr us for on it
The Egiptian people ofteneimes had writ.
And some again of less authority
Because it is made of rags and poverty,
In stead of Paper name it Pa^peris,
Be sure thinks they take their marks amiss,
For four and twenty sheets do make a Quire,
And twenty Quire does to a Reame aspire,
And every Reame were kingdoms for their strength
^^ that they want a single (1) in length.
A Reame of Paper therefore keeps great port,
And were a Realm, wer'^ not an (1) too short.
Besides, we have an old Progu^^icater,
An erring Father, quast arta Pater.
^^^ everlasting Almanac tells plain,
How many miles from hence to Charles his waine.
From ^^^^ unto Mercury how far
To venus, Sol and Mars that warlike st^rre:
From Mars to merry thunder-thumping Iea^:
And thence to fullen Saturns highest above:
This if I lie not, with advice and leisure,
Old Erra Pater to an inch did measure,
But hollow, Muse what mounted to the sky,
I Will clip your soaring plumes for you and I
Must talk of Paper, Hemp, and such as this,
And what a rich commodity it is.
It was time to remember my self, for I was a degree too high.

The best is I have elbow room to trace,
I am not tide to times, to bounds, or place,
But Europe, Asia, Sunburned Africa,
America, Terra^^^^^,
The Christians, Heathens, Pagans, Turks and Jews.
And all the world yields matter to my Muse:
No Empire, Kingdom, Region, Province, Nation.
No principality, Shire, nor Corporation:
No Country, County, City, Hamlet, Town,
But must use Paper, either white or brown.
No Metropolitan, or gracious Primate
No Village, Palace, Cottage, function, Climate,
No age, sex, or degree the earth does bear,
But they must use this seed to write or wear.
How it Propagates the Gospel.
This Paper (being printed) does reveal
The Eternal Testament of all our Weal:
In Paper is recorded the Records
Of the Great all-Creating Lord of Lords.
Upon this weak ground strongly is ingrau'd
The means how man was made, and lost and saved,
Books Patriarchall, and Prophetical,
Historical, or Heavenly Mystical,
Evangelical, and Apostolical,
Writ in the sacred Text, in general.
The sacred memory of Patriarchs, Prophets, Euangeiists,-Apostles, and Fathers.

Much has the Church (our Mother propagated)
By venerable Fathers works translated
Saint Jerome, Gregoris, Ambrose, Augustius,
Saint Basil, Bernard, Cyprian, Constantive:
Eusebius, Epipleanssu, Origin.
Ignatius and La ctantius (reverend men)
Good Luther, Calvin, learned Zwinglius,
Melancton, Beza Oecolampadius,
These, and a world more then I can recite
Their labors would have slept in endless night,
But that in Paper they preserved have bin
T'instruct us how to shun death hell, and sin.
The memorial of Monarchies and Wonders with their alterations from time to
time, and chiefly by Paper.

How should we know the change of Monarchies.
Th'Assyrian, and the Persian Emperies,
Great Alexanders large, small lasting glory
Or Romes High Casars often changing story?
How should Chronologies of Kings be known
Of either other Countries, or our own?
Philosophers, Hystorians, Chronographers, Poets ancient and modern, the best
for mentioned.

But that Josephus and Sueronius
Possedore, Virgil, and Or^^lius,
Seneca, and Cornelins Tacitus
With Sca^^ger, and Quintus Curticus;
Piutarch, Guichiardiue, Gallobelgicus
Thomasio, and Hector Boethius;
Fox, Cooper, Froysard, Grafton Fabia^,
Hall, Houe den Lanquit, Sleiden, Buchanan,
The Reverend learned Cambden, Selaen, Stowe,
With Polychronicon, and Speed, and How,
With Parris, Mal^^^bury, and many more
Whose Works in Paper are yet extant store.
Philemon Holland (famous for translation)
Has (with our own tongue) well inricht our Nation.
Esope, and Aristotle, Plinse, Plato.
Pythagoras, and Cicero, and Cato,
Du Bartas, Ariost^, Martial, Tasso
Pla^^^us and Homer, Terence, Virgil, Naso,
Franciscus Petrark, Horace, Iu^enal,
Philosophers and exc'lent Poets all.
Or Orators Hystorians, every one
In Paper made their worthy studies known.
Who ever went beyond our famous King
Whose^ ^^^ throughout the spacious world does ring;
Such a Divine, and Poet, that each State
Admires him whom they cannot imitate.
In Paper, many a Poet now suruiues
Or else their lines head perished with their lines.
Old Chaucer, Go^er, and Sir Thomas More,
Sir Philip Sidney, who the Laurel wor^.
Spencer, and Shakespeare did in Ar^ excel,
Sir Edward Dy^^^. Gr^^^, Naso, Daniel,
Silnester, Be^^^^^, Sir John Harington.
Forgetfulness their works would over ru^,
But that in Paper they immortally
Do live in spite of Death, and cannot dye.
And many there are living at this day
Which do in paper their true worth display:
As Dauis, Drayton, and learned D^^.
Johnson and Chapman, Marston, Midd^^ton,
With Rowley, Fletcher, Withers, Massinger,
Heywood, and all the rest where e're they are,
Must say their lines but for the paper sheet
Had scarcely ground, whereon to set their feet.
Acts, Statutes, Laws would be consumed and last
All right and order topsy-^^^uy tossed:
Oppression, wrong, destruction and confusion
Were not for Paper, were the worlds conclusion.
Negotiation, and Embassages
Maps Chartes, discoueries of strange passages:
Leagues, truces, combinations, and contracts,
Ecelefiasticke monuments and acts,
Laws, Natural, Moral, Civil and Divine,
T'instruct, reprove, correct, enlarge, confine.
All Memorandums of forepassed ages,
Sayings and sentences of ancient Sages,
Astronomy, and Physic much renownd,
The lib'rall Arts, rules, maxicmes, or ground,
The glory of Apolloes Radient shine,
Supporter of the Sacred Sisters Nine,
The Atlas, that all Histories does bear
Throughout the world, here, there, and every where.
How many line byst being Paper.
All this and more is paper, and all this,
From fruitful Hempseea still produced is.
Were It not for rags of this admired Lint,
Dead were the admirable Art of Print.
Nor could the Printers with their forms and proofs.
Work for their own and other men's be^^oofe^,
Octano, Quarto, Folly or sixteen:
Twelues, nor yet sixty four had ere been seen,
Nor could their Pages be the means to feed
And cloth them and their families at need.
The Stationer that lives, and gains well,
And does the word of God, both buy and sell,
I know not which way he could live and eat,
It printed paper did not yield him meat.
Some foolish knave (I think) at first began
The ^^^der that three Taylers are one man:
When many a Taylers boy, I know has been,
^^^ made tall men much fearful to be seen,
The boy has had no weapon, nor no skill,
^^ armed with a Taylers Paper-bill,
Which being edgd with Items, stiffnings facings,
With Bumbast, cottons, linenings, and with laccings,
The boy has made a man his head to hide
And not the bare sight of the Bill abide.
When boys with paper Bills frights men so sore,
^^^is doubtless but their Masters can do more.
And many millions both of boys and men,
^^^ only live, and flourish with the pen:
Yet though the pen be through the world renowned
^^were nothing except paper were the ground.
All Lawyers from the highest degree or mark.
Unto the lowest Barrester or Clarke,
How could they do if paper did not bear
The memory of what they speak or hear?
And justice Clerks could hardly make strong warrants.
For Thieves, or Baudes, or whores, or such like arrants,
^^^ that in Paper it is their only use
To write, and right the Commonwealths abuse.
Thus much of Paper here my Muse has said,
^^ yet if all its profits were displaid,
^en paper Mils could not afford enough
To write upon in praise of writing stuffs:.
A Uoyage in a Paper-boat from London to Quinborough.
I therefore to conclude this much will note
How I of Paper lately made a Boat,
And how in form of Paper I did row
From London unto Quinborough lle show,
I and a Vintner ( Roger Bird by name)
(A man whom Fortune never yet could tame)
Took ship upon the vigill of Saint James
And boldly ventured down the River Thames,
Leiuing and cutting through each raging billow,
(In such a Boat which never had a fellow)
Having no kind of metal or no wood
To help us either in our Ebb or Flood:
For as out boat was paper, so our Oars
Were Stock Fish, caught near to the Island shores.
Stock-fishes unbeaten, bound fast to two Canes with packthread.

Thus being Oar'd and shipped away we went.
Driving 'twixt Effex Calves, and sheep of Kent:
Our Boat a female vessel began to leake
Being as female vessels are, most weak,
Yet was she able which did grieve me sore,
To down Hodge Bird and I and forty more.
The water to the Paper being g^t,
In one half hour our boat began to rot:
The Thames (most lib'rall) filled her to the halues,
Whil^t Hodge and I sat liquor'd to the calves.
In which extremity I thought it fit
To put in vso a ^^ratagem of wit,
Which was, eight. Bullocks bladders we had bought
Pust stiffly full with wind, bound fast and tought,
Which on our Boat within the Tide we ty'de,
Of each side four, upon the outward side.
The water still role higher by degrees.
In three miles going, almost to our knees,
Our rotten bottom ali to tatters fell,
And left our boat as bottomless as Hell.
And had not bladders horn us stiffly up,
We there had tasted of deaths fatal cup.
And now (to make some sport) I Will make it known
By whose strong breath my bladders all were blown.
One by a ch^uerell conscienc'd Usurer,
Another by a drunken Bag piper,
The third a Whore, the fourth a Pander blew,
The fist a Cutpurse, of the Cursed crew,
The sixth, apost-knight that for five groats gain
Would swear and for four groats forsweare't agine,
The seventh was an Informer, one that can
By informations beggar any man.
The eight was blown up by a swearing Royster,
That would cut throats as soon as eat an Oyster.
We had more winds then the Compass, for we had eight several winds in our
bladders, and the 32 of the Compass in all 40.

We being in our watery business bound,
And with these wicked winds encompassed round,
For why such breaths as those it fortunes ever,
They end with hanging, but with drowning never:
And sure the bladders bore us up so tight,
As if they had said, Gallows claim thy right.
This was the cause that made us seek about,
To find these light Tiburnian vapoursour.
We could have had of honest men good store,
As Watermen, and Smiths, and many more,
But that we knew it must be hanging breath,
That must preserve us from a drowning death.
Carefully and discreetly provided.

Yet much we feared the graves our end would be
Before we could the Town of Grauesand see:
Our boat drunk deeply with her dropsy thirst;
And quast as if she would her bladders burst,
Whilst we within six inches of the brim
(Full of salt water) down (half sunck) did swim.
Thousands of people all the shores did hide,
And thousands more did meet us in the tide
With Sc^^crs, Oars, with ship boats, and with Barges
To gaze on us, they put themselue, to charges.
Thus did we drive, and drive the time away,
Till pitchy night had driven away the day:
The Sun unto the under world was fled:
The Moon was loath to rise, and kept her bed,
The Stanes did ^winckele, but the Ebon clouds
Their light, our fight, obseures over shrowds.
The tosling billows made our boat to caper.
Out paper form scarce being form of paper,
The water four mile broad, no Oars, to row,
Night dark, and where we were we did not know.
And thus 'twixt doubt and fear, hope and despair
I sell to work, and Roger Bird to prayer.
And as the surges up and down did heave us,
He cry'dmost fervently, good Lord receive us.
I prayed as much, but I did work and pray,
And he did all he could to pray and play.
Thus three hours darkeling I did puzz^ll and toil
Sows'd and well pickled chafe and muzzell and moile,
Dernch'd with the swaffing waves, and stewed ^^ sweat
Scarce able with a cane our boat to set,
At last (by Gods great mercy and his might)
The morning began to chase away the night.
Aurora made us soon perceive and see
We were three miles below the Town of Lee.
And as the morning more end more did clear,
The fight of Quinborogh castle did appear.
That was the famous monumentall mark,
To which we strived obring our rotten bark:
The only aim of our intents and scope.
The anchor that brought Roger to the Hope.
He dwells now at the Hope on the Banck-side.

Thus we from Saturday at evening Tide,
Till Monday mor^e, did on the water bide,
In rotten paper and in boy sterous weather,
Dark nights, through wet, and toyled altogether.
But being come to Quinborough and aland,
I took my fellow koger by the hand,
And both of us ere we two steps did go
Gave thanks to God that had preserved us so:
Confessing that his mercy us protected
When as we least deserved, and less expected
The Mayor of Quinborough in love affords
To entertain us, as we had been Lords;
It is a yearly feast kept by the Mayor,
And thousand people th^^her does repair,
From Towns and Villages that is neer^ about,
And it was our luck to come in all this roue.
I'th'street, Bread, Beer, and Oysters is their meat,
Which freely, friendly, shot-froe all do eat,
But Hodge and I were men of rank and note,
We to the Mayor gave our aduenturous boat;
The which (to glorify that Town of Kent)
He meant to hang up for a monument.
He to his house invited us to dine,
Where we had cheer on cheer, and wine on wine,
And drink, and fill, and drink, and drink and fill,
With welcome upon welcome, welcome still.
But whilst we at our dinners thus were merry,
The Country people tore our tattered wherry
In mammocks pecoemeale in a thousand scraps,
Wearing the relics in their hats and caps.
That never traitors corpse could more be scattered
By greedy Ravens, then out poor boat was tattered;
Which when the Mayor did know, he presently
Took patient what he could not remedy
The next day we with thanks left Quinbroght coast
And hied us home on horseback all in post.
Thus Master Birds strange voyage was begun,
With greater danger was his money won.
And those that do his coin from him detain
(Which he did win with peril and much pain)
Let them not think that e're 'twill do them good,
But eat their marrow and consume their blood.
The worm of conscience gnaw them every day
That have the moanes, and not the will to pay.
Those that are poor, and cannot, let them be
Both from the debt and malediction free.
Thus (I in part) what Himp-seed is have shown,
Cloth, ropes, rags, paper, poorly is made knowne^
How it maintains each kingdom, starte and trade,
And how in paper we a voyage made.
I therefore to conclude, think not amiss^
To write something of Thames, or Thamasis,
The names of the most famous rivers in the world.

Maz^, Rubicon, ^lue, Volga, Ems, Scamander,
Loyre, Moldous, Tybar, Albia, Scyne, Meander,
Hidaspes, Indus, Iuachus, Tanaies,
(Our Thames true praise is sarre beyond their praise)
Great Euphrates, Jordans, Nilus, Ganges, Poe,
Tagus and Tygris, Thames does far out-goe.
Danubia, Ister, Xanthus, Lisus, Rhrine,
Wey, Seuerue, Auon, Medway, Isis, Tin^,
D^^ Ouze, Trent, Humber, Eske, Tweed, Annan, Tay.
Firth (that brave Demy-ocean) Clide, 'Dun, Spay,
All these are great in sames, and great in names,
But great'st in goodness is the river Thames,
From whose Diurnall and Nocturnall flood
Millions of souls have fuel clothes and food;
Which from twelve hours to twelve does still succeed,
Hundreds, and thousands both to cloth and feed.
Of watermen, their servants, children, wives,
It does maintain near twenty thousand lines.
I can as quickly number all the stars,
As reckon all things in particulars:
Which by the bounty of the All-giuing giver
Proceeds from this most matchless, famous River.
And therefore' cis great pity, shelfe or sand
From the forgetful and ingrate full land,
Should it is clear crystal entrails vilesy,
Or soil such pureness with impurity.
What does it do, but seruas our full contents,
Brings food, and for it takes our excrements,
Yields us all plenty, worthy of regard
And dirt and mucke we give it for reward?
Rivers sabled or seigned to be in Hell.

Oh what a world of Poets that excel
Is ar, have fabled rivers out of hell,
As Erebus, Cocitus, Acheron,
Sur Orchus, Tartarus, and Phlegeton,
And all internal Barathrums Damned Creekes,
With Charous Passengers, and fearful shriekes,
Who writing drinking Lethe to their shames
Unthankfully they have forgot the Thames.
But noble Thames, whilst I can hold a pen
I will diuulge thy glory unto men:
Thou in the morning when my coin is seant
Before the evening do supply my want.
If like a Be I seek to live and thrive,
Thou wile yield honey freely to my hiue,
If like a drone I will not work for meat,
Thou in discretion gives me naught to eat
Thou the true rules of Justice do observe,
To feed the lab'rer, let the idle sterue,
And I so many faithless men have found
As any man that lives upon the ground,
Who have done me wrong and themselves no good,
And swore, and forswore in their damned mood:
Whilst I (fond I) have lent and given away
To such as not so much as thanks will pay,
For shame and modesty I name them not;
But let their black souls bear the impure blot
Of falsehood perjury, and odious lies
That devils in shape of Mankind can devise,
If these lines happen to their hands to come.
They Will pick their teeth, look downward and cry hum'
But goodness how should ever I expect,
From such who do so true a friend neglect.
And therefore Thames, with thee I have decreed
Because thou never faild me in my need,
To thee, to thee again I do retire
And with thee I Will remain till life expire.
The Oar has four or five virtues; first, it is healthful, second, it
auoyds bad company, third, it keeps men sober, seur^h is gets money, filt, it
anoyds expenses all which virtues I will put in practice and fall to rowing.

Thou art my Mistress, and often times from thee
Thy liberality has flowed to me,
And for thou always give me means to lin^^
My self (most thankefully) my self do give,
Momus thou Son of Somnus, and of Nox,
Take not my lines all for a Paradox:
For most of them seem true, and I do rue
That many of them I do know too true.
Sleep Momus sleep, in Murceas slothfullbed,
Let Morpheus lock thy tongue within thy head:
Or if thou need^^ wilt prate, prate to this end
To give commends to that thou can not mend.
It Is not a gilded Gull made up with oaths,
That swears and dams himself into good clothes.
That wears his cloak beneath his skirts and wast
Cause men may see how he is trust and brao'd:
Such a fantastic a^^e, I care not for,
He flewts my lines, and I do him abhor.
My poor invention no way is supplied,
With cutting large thong^ from another hide:
I have not stolen a syllable or letter
From any man, to make my book seem better.
But similies, comparisons, each line,
Indifferent, good or bad, they all are mine,
Yet I confess I have read many a book
From whence I have some observations took.
Which I make use of, as occasions touch,
And any Poet (I think) will do as much.
I will not brag, to all men be it known
(By learning) I have nothing of mine own,
But had I tongues and languages, like many
Sure I should filch and strale as much as any.
But like an Artlesse Poet, I say still,
I am a Tailor, true against my will.
Thus ending (like to Iasons Golden-fleece)
This work of Hempsecd is my Master-p^^^^.
FINIS.
TAILORS TRAVELS To Hamburgh in Germany.
DEDICATED To the Cosmographicall, Geographicall describer, Geometrical
measurer; Historiographicall Calligraphicall Relater and Writer; Enigmaticall,
Pragmaticall, Dogmaticall Obseruer, Ingrosser, Surueyer and Eloquent British
Grecian Latinist, or Latin Grecian Orator, the Odcombyan Deambulator,
Perombulator, Ambler, Trotter, or untyred Traveler, Sir THO: CORIAT, Knight of
Troy, and one of the dearest darlings to the blind Goddess Fortune.
Most worthy Sir, as Quintillian in his Apothegmes to the naked, learned,
Gimnosephists of AEthiopia, very wittily says, Potanto Machayo corbatio
monomosco kayturemon Lescus, Ollipufftingere whingo: which is, knowledge is a
maine Antithesis to ignorance, and pains and travail is the high way to
experience. I being therefore well acquainted with the generous vrbanity
innated or rooted in your humanity, (in these days of vanity,) I dedicate out
(of my affability, debility, ability, imbecility, facility, or agility,) this
poor Pamphlet to your nobility, in all seruility and humility: not doubting
but the fluent secundity of your wisdoms, profundity, in your heads
retundity, will conserve, reserve, preserve, and observe, what I and my
industrious labors deserve. I do (out of mine own congnition) auerre and
abett, that he is senseless that will assent, that the Fates did assign, with
their whole assistance, that any should aspire to be an associate in any
assembly, boldly to assimulate, assay, assault, or ascribe to any mortal but
your self, super latiue marority or transcendency for travails, observations,
and or atorie. These things being reuolued and ruminated, in the sagacitie or
acuteness of my Pericranion, I imagined that no man under the Cope was more
worthy then your self to be a Patronizing Poplar to shelter my poor reed-like
endeauours. Howsoever in the preter lapsed occurrences there has been an
Antagonisticall repugnancy betwixt us, yet I hope time and travail has worn
it thread bare, or brought it to an irrecouerable consumption; withal I know
you are incapable of inexpugnable malice, inueterate malignancy: or emulation.
I protest tongue-tide taciturnity should have imprisoned this work in the
Lethargicall Dungeon, or bottomless Abisse of euer-sleeping oblivion, but that
I am confident of your Patronage and acceptance, which if it fall out (no
according to any Promerits of mine) but out of mine own expectation of your
matchless and vnparalcll dd sposition, I shall hereafter sacrifice whole
Hecatombs of invention both in Prose and Verse, at the shrine of your
vnfellowed and vnfollowed virtues. So wishing more to see you then to hear
from you, because Writers want work, and the Press is turned, voluntary
through the scarcity of employments, which I hope your presence will supply, I
pray that Neptnne, AEolus, Tellus, Bacchus, and all the watery, windy, earthly,
and drinking Deities may be officious, auspicious, and delicious unto you,
humbly imploring you to take in good part this my sophistical, paradoxicall,
submission, with a mental reservation of my love and service, to sympathize or
be equivalent to your kind liking and corroborated affecting.

He that has a poor muse to trot in your service with all obsequious
observance: JOHN TAILOR

TAILORS TRAVELS. Three Weeks, three Days, and three Hours Observations,
from LONDON to HAMBVRGH in ^^^ Amongst Iemes and Gentiles, with Descriptions of
Towns and Towers, Castles and Cittadels, artificial G^^lowies, Natural
Hangmen: And Dedicated for the present, to the absent Odcombian Knight Erra^t,
Sr. THOMAS CORIAT, Great Britains Error, and the worlds Mirror.
Upon Saturday the 17. of August, 1616. (after I had taken leave of some
friends that would hardly give me leave to leave them) I was associated with
five or six courteous Comrades to the Haven of Billingsgate, where I was no
sooner come, but I was shipped to a wherry for the Port of Grauesend, and having
two Women and three Men in my company thither, we past the way away by telling
tiles by turns. Where one of the women took upon her very Logically to defend
the honesty of Brokers, and she maintained her Paradoxicall Arguments so
pithily, as if her self like a desperate pawn had layn: seven years in
Lauender on sweeting in long Lane, or amongst the dogged inhabitants of
Houndsditch. And one of the men replied that he thanked God he never had any
need of them; whereupon I began to suspect him to be a crafty knave, because
the proverb lays, A crafty knave needs no broker, and indeed after I had
inquired what countriman he was he told me he was a Welsh man, and a Justices
Clarke. I left him as I sound him, hoping never to be troubled with his binding
over, and withdrawing: and so landing at Graves end, we all went to the
Christopher where we took a Bachanalian farewell one of another, where I
remained till the Monday following, awayting the coming down of the ship that
I was to be transported in. About the hour of three in the afternoon, with
good hope we weighed Anchor, and with a courteous tide and a gentle wind we
sailed down the river of Thames,. as sarre as the grand Oyster haven of
Quinborough, where though our ship was not Sea-sicke, yet she cast, (Anchor I
mean.)

On the morrow, being Tuesday, we weighed, and with the friendly breath of
Zephirus, alias a Western wind, our sails being swollen, our ship called the
Judith, who with her stern cut the liquid mounting mountains of Neptunes
wavering territories, as nimbly as Hebrew Judith b^headed Holosernes, so that
by the bountiful favor of him that rules both Winds and Seas, the Thursday
following wecespied the coast of Freezeland, and the next day we sailed by an
Island called the Holy Land, which may be called the Land of Lobsters, or the
Country of Crabs for the plenty of those kind of crawling creatures that are
taken there. But we, taking time by the fore-top, let no advantage slip, but
with a merry Gale, and a friendly flood, on the Friday we sailed up the River
of Elue, as far as Stoad, where we Anchoured till the morrow, being Saturday,
and the feast of S. Bartholmew the Apostle, we arrived at a bleake alias, a
town an English mile from Hamburgh, called Altonagh, which is so called by the
Hamburgers because it stands allcoo-nigh them for their profit, being inhabited
with diverse tradesmen which do hinder their freedom. I was no sooner landed
there, but my company and my self went to a Dutch drinking-schoole, and having
vpsefreez'd four pots of boon beer as yellow as gold, our host said we had
four shilling to betall, or to pay, which made me suspect it to be a bawdy
house by his large reckoning, till at last I understood that the shillings he
meant were but stiuers, or three half pence a peeco. So this terrible shot
being discharged (which in the total amounted to the sum of sixepence English)
we departed toward Hamburgh, where by the way I noted some 20. men, women, and
children in diverse places of Altonagh, all deformed, some with one eye, some
with hare-lips, crooke-backt, splay-footed, halfenosed, or one blemish or
other. I admiring at them, was told they were Jews, wherein I perceived the
Judgment of the high Judge of all, that had permitted Nature to desorme their
forms, whose Graceless minds were so much misshapen through want of Grace.

But I being entered the City of Hamburgh on the Sarurday, I was presently
conducted to the English house, where I found a kind Host, an honest Hostess,
good company, store of meat, more of drink^, a true Tapster, and sweet Lodging.
And being at dinner, because I was a stranger, I was promoted to the chiesest
place at the Table, where to observe an old custom, every man did his best
endeavor to hauns me for my welcome, which by interpretation is, to give a
man a loaf too much out of the Brewers braket; in which kind of potshot, our
English are grown such stout Proficients, that some of them dares bandy and
contend with the Dutch their first teachers. But after they had hanced me as
well as they could, and I pleased, they administered an oath to me, in manner
and form as follows; Laying my hand on a full pot.

I swear by these contents and all that is herein contained, that by the
courteous favor of these Gentlemen, I do find my self sufficiently hanced,
and that henceforth I shall acknowledge it; and that whenever I shall offer
to be hanced again, I shall arm my self with the craft of a Fox, the
manners of a Hog, the wisdom of an Ass, mixed with the ciuility of a Bear.
This was the form of the oath, which as near as I can shall be performed on
my part; and here is to be noted that the first word a Nurse or a Mother does
teach her children if they be Males, is Drink, or Beer: So that most of them
are transformd to Barrels, Firkings, and Kinderkins, always sraight with
Hamburge beer.

And though the City is not much more then half the bigness as London is within
the walls, yet are there in it almost 800. Brewhouses, and in one day there has
been shipped away from thence, 337. brewings, of Beer, besides 13. or 14.
brewings have been wrackt or stayed in the Town, as not suffieient to be
beczeled in the Country.

The Saturday being thus past, and Sunday come, I went toward the English
Church, where I observed many shops open, buying and selling, chopping and
changing of all manner of wares, with the streets furnished with Apples,
Pears, Plums, Nuts, Grapes, or any thing else that an ordinary Market can
afford, as commonly as if the Sabbath were but a bare Ceremony without a
Commandment. In which I note the Jews in their execrable superstition, to be
more devout and obseruant, then these Pedlars in their profession; for on the
Saturday (being the Jews Sabbath) they neglect all humane affairs, and betake
themselves irreligiously to their misbeleeuing faithless religion.

The Sermon being ended at the English Church, I walked in the afternoon with
a friend of mine, (an Inhabitant of the Town) to see and to be seen, where at
one of the gates was placed a strong guard of Soldiers with Muskets, Pikes,
Halberts, and other warlike accoutrements, I asked the cause, and I was
informed it was because of the building of new mounts and Bulwarks which were
partly erected without the old wall: And when I perceived these fortifications,
I was amazed, for it is almost incredible for the number of men and horses that
are daily set on work about it, besides the work it self is so great that it
is past the credit of Report, and as I suppose will prove most inexpugnable
and invincible Rampires to strengthen the Town on that side-against the
inuasiue attempts of the greatest Monarke that should assail them.

But aftermuch musing, walking further toward the fields. I espied four or
five pretty parcels of modesty go very friendly up into a Councell-house by
the ways side, as we and thousands of people used to pass; they were
handsome young Girls of the age of 18. or 20. years a piece, and although
they had a door to shut yet they knowing their business to be necessary and
natural, ^ate still in loving and neighbourly manner, so having traced a turn
or two we returned into the Town again, and entering a long Garden within the
Walls, some of the Townes-men were shooting for wagers at a mark with their
muskets: some bowling: some at slide thrift, or shouel-boord: some dancing
before a blind Fiddler, and his cow-bellied, dropsy dutty Drab: some at one
game, some at another most of them drinking, and all of them drink that though
it was a Sabbath, which should wholly be dedicated to God, yet by the those of
these bursten-gutted bibbers, they made it an afternoon consecrated, or more
truly execrated to the service of hell, and to the great amplification of the
Devils kingdom.

When Christians dare Gods Sabbath to abuse,
They make themselves a scorn to Turks and Jews:
It Is stealing Barabasses beastly race,
Rib God of Glory, and your selves of Grace.
Think on the supreme Judge who all things tryes,
When Jews against you shall in Judgment rise.
Their feigned truth, with fervent zeal they show,
The truth vnfeign'd you know, yet will not know.
Then at the Bar in new Jerusalem,
It shall be harder much for you then them.
But leaving them to their drunken designs, I returned toward my Lodging,
where by the way I saw at the common Iayle o^ the Town, a great number of
people were clustred together, I asked the cause of their concourse, and I was
certified that there was a P^i^oner to be broken upon the wheel the next day,
and that these idle Gazers did prease to gape upon him or want of better
employments, I being as inquisi^iue after novelties, as a Trauailer of my ^
^all experience might be, enquired earn^st^y the true cause of the next days
execution: my friend told me that the Prisoner was a poor Carpenter dwelling
^^ the Town, who lately having stolen a Goose, and plucking it within his
doors, a little Girl, (his daughter in Law) went out of his house, and left
the door open by which means, the owner of the Goose passing by espied the
wretched These very diligently picking what he before had been stealing, to
whom the owner said: Neighbor I now perceive which way my Geese use to go,
but I will have you in question for them, and so away he went: the Caitiffe
being thus reproved grew desperate, and his child coming into his house; ye
young whore, quoth he, must ye leave my door open for folks to look in upon
me? and with that word, he took a Hatchet and with a cursed stroke, he cloue
the childs head: for the which murder he was condemned and judged to be
broken alive upon the wheel. Close by the Iayle I espied a house of free
stone, round and flat roofed, and leaded, upon the which was erected the true
picture of a most unmatchable Hangman: and now I am entered into a discourse
of this brave abject, or subject, you must understand that this fellow, is a
merry, a mad, and a subsidy Hangman, to who^ our Tyburn^ Tatterdemalian, or
our Wapping winde-pipe stretcher, is but a Raggamuffin, not worth the hanging:
for this teare-throat Termagant is a fellow in Folio, a Commander of such great
command, and of such greatness to command, that I never saw any that in that
respect could countermand him: for his making is almost past description, no
Saracens head seems greater, and sure I think his brainepan if it were
emptied, (as I think he has not much brain in it,) would well contain half
a bushel of malt, his shaggie hair and beard would stuff a Cushion for
Charons boat, his Imbost nose and embroydered face, would furnish a Ieweller;
his eyes well dried, would make good Tennis-balls, or shot for a small piece of
Ordinance, his yawning mouth would serve for a Conniborrow, and his two ragged
rows of teeth, for a stone wall, or a Pale; then has he a neck like one of
Hercules his pillars, with a winde-pipe, (or rather a beer pipe) as big as
the boar of a Demiculuering, or a wooden pumpe; through which conduit half a
brewing of Hamburgh beer does run down into his unmeasurable paunch,
wherein is more midrisfe, guts and garbage then three tripe-wiues could be able
to utter before it stunke. His post^like legs were answerable to the rest of
the great frame which they supported, and to conclude, sir Beuis, Ascapart,
Gogmagag, or ou English sir John Falstaff, were but shumps to this bezzeling
Bombards longitude, Iatitude, altitude, and crassi^ude, for he passes, and
surpasses the whole Germane multitude.

And as he is great in corpulencie, so is he powerful in potencie, for
figuratively he has spiritual resemblance of Romish authority, and in some
sort he is a kind of demy-Pope, for once a year in the dogge-dayes he sends
out his men with bates in stead of Bulls, with full power from his greatness,
to knock down all the cus without contradiction, whose masters or owners will
not be at the charge to buy a pardon for them of his mightiness, which pardon
is more dureable then the Popes of wax or parchment, for his is made of a
piece of the hide of an Ox, a Horse, or such lasting stuff, which with his
stigmaticall stamp or seal is hanged about every dogs neck who is freed from
his fury by the purchase of his pardon. And sure I am persuaded that these
dogs are more sure of their lives with the hangmans pardon, then the poor
besotted blinded Papists are of their seduced souls from any pardon of the
Popes.

The privileges of this graund haulter-master are many, as he has the
emptying of all the vaults or draughts in the city, which no doubt he gains
some favor by. Besides all Oxen, Kine, Horses, Hogs, Dogs, or any such beasts,
it they die themselves, or if they be not like to live, the hangman must
knock them on the heads, and have their skins: and whatsoever inhabitant in
his jurisdiction does any of these things aforesaid himself, is abhorred and
accounted as a villain without redemption. So that with hangings, headings,
breakings, pardoning and killing of dogs, flaying of beasts, emptying vaults,
and such privy commodities, his whole revenue sometimes amounts to 4. or 5.
hundred pounds a year. And he is held in that regard and estimation, that any
man will converse and drink with him, nay sometimes the Lords of the Town
will feast with him, and it is accounted no impeachment to their honors; for
he is held in the rank of a Gentleman, (or a rank Gentleman) and he scorns
to be clad in the cast weeds of executed offenders: No, he goes to the
Meroers, and has his Satin, his Velvet, or what stuff he pleases, measured
out by the yard or the ell, with his gould and silver lace, his silk
stockings, laced spangled garters and roses, hat and feather, with four or
five brave villains attending him in Livery cloakes, who have stipendary
means from his ignominious bounty.

Monday the 19. of August, about the hour of 12. at noone, the people of the
town in great multitudes flocked to the place of execution; which is half a
mile English without the gates, built more like a sconce then a Gallows, for
it is walled and ditched about with a drawbridge and the prisoner came on
foot with a Divine with him, all the way exhorting him to repentance, and
because death should not terrify him, they had given him many rowses and
carowses of wine and beer: for it is the custom there to make such poor
wretches drunk, whereby they may be senseless either of Gods mercy or their
own misery; but being prayed for by others, they themselves may die
resolutely, or (to be feared) desperately.

But the prisoner being come to the place of death, he was by the officers
delivered to the hangman, who entering his strangling fortification with two
grand hangmen more and their ^ which were come from the City of Lu^^ and
another Town(which I cannot name) to assist their Hamburghian brother in this
great ^^ weighty work: the drawbridge was drawn ^d the Prisoner mounted on
a mount of ^^ built high on purpose that the people without may see the
execution a quarter of a mile round about: four of the Hangmans men takes each
of them a small halter, and by the hands and the feet they hold the Prisoners
extended all abroad lying on his back: then the Arch-hangman, or the great
Master of this mighty business took up a wheel, much about the bigness of
one of the fore-wheeles of a Coach: ^^, having put off his doubler, his hat,
and being in his shirt, as if he meant to play at tennis, he took the wheel,
and set it on the edge, and ^^ it with one hand like a top or a whirligig, then
he took it by the spoakes, and lifting it up with a mighty stroke he beat
one of the poor wretches legs in pieces, (the bones I mean) at which he
rored grievously; then after a little pawse he breaks the other leg in the
same manner, and consequently breaks his arms, and then he stroke four or
five maine blows on his breast, and burst all his bulk and che^^ in shiuers,
lastly he smoate his neck, and missing, burst his chin and jaws to mammockes;
then he took the broken mangled corpse, and spread it on the wheel, and thrust
a great post or pile into the Naue or hole of the wheel, and then fixed the
post into the earth some six foot deep, being in height above the ground,
some ten or twelve foot, and there the carcass must lie till it be consumed
by all consuming time, or ravening Fowls.

This was the terrible manner of this horrid execution, and at this place are
twenty posts with those wheels or pieces of wheels, with heads of men nailed
on the top of the posts, with a great spike driven, through the skull. The
several kinds of torments which they inflict upon offenders in those parts
makes me to imagine our English hanging to be but a flea-biting.

Moreover, if any man in those parts are to be beheaded, the fashion is, that
the P^soner kneels down, and being blinded with a Napkin, one takes hold of
the hair of the crown of the head, holding the party upright, whilst the
hangman with a backward blow with a sword will take the head from a man's
shoulders so nimbly, and with such dextertie, that the owner of the head shall
never want the miss of it. And if it be any ma^s fortune to be hanged for
never so small a crime, though he be mounted whole, yet he shall come down
in pieces, for he shall hang till every joint and Limb drop one from another.

They have strange torments and varieties of deaths, according to the various
nature of the offenses that are committed: as for example, he that
counterfeits any Princes coin, and is proved a Coyner, his judgment is to be
boiled to death in oil, not thrown into the vessel all at once, but with a
pulley or a Rope to be hanged under the Arm pits, and let down into the oil
by degrees: first the feet, and next the legs, and so to boil his flesh from
his bones alive. For those that set houses on fire wilfully, they are smoaked
to death, as first there is a pile or post fixed in the ground, and within an
English Ell of it is a piece of wood nailed cross whereupon the offender is
made fast fitting then over the top of the post is whelmed a great tub or
Dryfat, which does cover or ouerwhelme the Prisone as low as the middle. Then
underneath the executioner has wet straw, hay, stubble, or such kind of
stuff, which is fired, but by reason it is wet and danke, it does not burn
but molder and smoke, which smoke ascends up into the tub where the Prisoners
head is, and not being able to speak, he will heave up and down with his
belly; and people may perceive him in these torments to live three or four
hours.

Adultery there, if it be proved, is punished with death, as the loss of
both the parties heads, if they be both married, or if not both, yet the
married party must dye for i^, and the other must endure some easier
punishment, either by the purse or carcass; which in the end proves little
better then half a hanging.

But as after a tempest a calm is best welcome; so I imagine it not amiss
after all this tragical harsh discourse, to sweeten the Readers pallat with a
few Comicall reports which were related unto me, wherein I seem fabulous, it
must be remembered that I claim the privilege of a traveler, who has
authority to report all that he hears and sees, and more too. I was informed
of a fellow that was hanged somewhat near the high way, within a mile or two of
Collcin, and the fashion being to hang with a halter and a chain, that when
the haulter is rotten with the weather, the carkafse drops a butten hole lower
into the chain. Now it fortuned that this fellow was executed on a winters
afternoon toward night, and being hanged, the chain was shorter then the
halter, by reason whereof he was not strangled, but by the gamming of the
chain which could not slip close to his neck, he hanged in great torments
under the Jaws, it happened that as soon as he was trust up, there fell a
great storm of rain and wind, whereupon all the people ran away from the
Gallows to shelter themselves. But night being come, and the moon shining
bright, it chanced that a Country Boore, or a waggoner and his Son with him
were driving their empty wagon by the place where the fellow was hanged, who
being not choked, in the extremity of his pains did stir his legs and
writhe and crumple his body, which the waggoners Son perceived, and said,
Father look, the man upon the Gallows does move: quoth the old man he moves
indeed, I pray the let us make have, and put the Wagon under the Gibbet, to
see if we can vnhang and save him. This being said was quickly done, and the
wretch half dead was laid in straw in the Boores wagon, and carried home,
where with good attendance he was in four or five days recovered to his
health, but that he had a cricke in his neck, and^ the cramp in his jaws. The
old man was glad that he had done so good a deed, (as he thought) began to give
the thief Fatherly counsel, and told him that it was Gods great mercy toward
him to make me (quoth he) the Instrument of thy deliverance, and therefore look
that thou make good use of this his gracious favor toward thee, and labor to
redeem the time thou have mispea, get thy into some other Princes country,
where thy former crimes may not bring thee into the danger of the Law again,
and there with honest industrious endeavors get the living.

The thief seemed willing to entertain these good admonitions, and thanked
the Boore and his Son, telling them that the next morning he would be gone ^
and if ever his fortunes made him able, he promised to be so grateful unto them
that they should have cause to say their great courtesies were well bestowed
upon him; but all his sugared sweet promises, were in the proof but Gall and
wormwood in the performance: for this graceless Caitiffe arose betimes in the
morning, and drew on a pair of Boots and spurs which were the man's sons
of the house, and slipping out of the doors, went to the stable and stole one
of his kind hosts best horses, and away rode he. The man and his Son, when
they were up and missed the thief and the horse, were amazed at the
ingratitude of the wretch, and with all speed his soon and he rode several
ways in pursuit of him, and in brief one of them took him, and brought him
back to their house again, and when it was night they bound him, and laid
^^^^ in their wagon(having deaf ears, and hardened hearts to all his
entreaties) and away to the Gallows where they found him hanging, there they
with the halter being a little shortened, they left him. The next day the
Country people wondered to see him hanging there again, for they had seen him
hanged, and missed him gone, and now tobe thus strangely and privately come
again in boot and spurs, whereas they remembered at his first hanging he had
shoes and stockings, it made them muse what journey he had been riding, and
what a mad G^est he was to take the Gallows for his Inn, or (as I suppose)
for his end.

The rumor of this accident being bruited abroad, the people came far and near
to see him, all in general wondering how these things should come to pass. At
last, to clear all doubts, proclamations were published with pardon, and a
reward to any that could discover the truth, whereupon the old Boore and Soon
came in and related the whole circumstance of the matter.

At another place (the hangmans place being void) there were two of the blood
(for it is to be noted that the succession of that office does liueally descend
from the Father to the Soon, or to the next of the blood) which were at strife
for the

possession of this high indignity. Now it happened that 2. men were to be
beheaded at the saine town, and at the same time, and (to avoid suit in law
for this great prerogative) it was concluded by the Arbitrators, that each of
these new hangman should execute one of the Prisoners, and he that with
greatest cunning and slight could take the head from the body, should have the
place, to this they all agreed and the Prisoners were brought forth, where one
of the Executioners did bide a red silk thread double about his Prisoners
neck the threads being distant one from another only the breadth of one thread,
and he promised to cut off the head with a backward blow with a Sword, between
the threads. The other called his Prisoner aside, and told him that if he
would be ruled by him, he should have his life saved; and besides (quoth he) I
shall be sure to have the office. The Prisoner was glad of the motion, and said
he would do any thing upon these conditions, then said the Hangman, when thou
art on thy knees, and have said thy prayers, and that Idoe lift up my Axe, (for
I will use an Axe) to strinke thee, I will cry He^, at which word do thou rise
and run away, (thou know none will slay thee if thou can once elcape after
thou art delivered into my custody, it is the fashion of our Country) and let
me alone to shift to answer the matter. This being said or whispered, the
headsman with the sword did cut off the Prisoners head^ between the threads as
he had said, which made all the people wonder at the steadiness of his hand,
and most of them judged that he was the man that was and would be fittest to
make a mad hangman of.

But as one tale is good till another be told, and as there be three degrees of
good, better, and best; so this last hangman did much exceed and eclipse the
others cunning: For his prisoner being on his knees, and he lifting up his axe
to give the fatal blow, He^^, (said he according to promise) whereupon the
fellow arose and ran away, but when he had run some seven or eight paces, the
hangman threw the Axe after him, and struck his head smoothly from his
shoulders, now for all this, who shall have the place is unknown, for they are
yet in Law for it; and I doubt not but before the matter be ended, that the
Lawyers will make them exercise their own trades upon themselves to end the
controversy. This tale does favor somewhat Hyperbolicall but I wish the
Reader to believe no more of the matter then I saw, and there is an end.

At another Town there stood an old ouerworne despised pair of Gallows, but
yet not so old but they will last many a fair year with good usage, but the
Towns men a little distance from them built another pair, in a more stately
Geometrical port and fashion, whereupon they were demanded why they would be
at the charge to erect a new Gallows, having so sufficient an old one: they
answered, that those old Gallows should serve to hang fugitives and strangers;
but those new ones were built for them and their heirs for ever. Thus much for
hangmen, the eues, and Gallowses.

Yet one thing more for thieves: In Hamburgh those that are not hanged for
theft, are chained 2. or 3. together, and they must in that sort six or seven
years draw a dung-cart, and cleanse the streets of the town, and every one of
those thieves for as many years as he is condemned to that slavery, so many
Bells he has hanged at an iron above one of his shoulders, and every year a
Bell is taken off, till all are gone, and then he is a Freeman again, and I
did see ten or twelve of these Carts, and some of the Thieves had 7. Bells, some
5. some 6. some one, but such a noise they make, as if all the Devils in Hell
were dancing the morris.

Hamburgh is a free City, not being subject to the Emperor, or any other
Prince, but only governed by twenty four Burgomasters, whereof two are the
chief, who are called Lords, and do hold that dignity from their first
election during their lives: The buildings are all of one uniform fashion,
very lofty and stately, it is wonderful populous, and the water with boats
comes through most of the streets of the town.

Their Churches are most gorgeously set forth, as the most of them covered with
copper, with very lofty Spires, and within sides they are adorned with
crucifixes, Images and pictures, which they do charily keep for ornaments,
but not for idle or idol adoration; In S. Jacobs and in Saint Katherines
Churches there is in one of them a Pulpit of Alablaster, and in the other a
pay of such Organs, which for worth and workmanship are unparalleled in
Christendom, as most trauailers do relate.

The women there are no fashion mongers, but they keep in their degrees one
continual habit, as the richer sort do wear a Huicke, which is a robe of
cloth or stuff plated, and the upper part of it is gathered and sowed together
in the form of an English potlid, with a tasfell on the top, and so put upon
the head, and the garment goes over her ruff and face if she please, and so
down to the ground, so that a man may meet his own wife, and perhaps not know
her from another Woman.

They have no Porters to bear burdens, but they have big burly-bon'd knaves
with their wives that do daily draw Carts any whether up and down the town,
with Merchants goods or any other employments: And it is reported that these
Cart-drawers are to see the rich men of the Town provided of milch-nurses for
their children, which nurses they call by the name of Ams, so that if they do
want a nurse at any time, these fellows are cursed, because they have not
gotten wenches enough with child to supply their wants.

But if a man of any fashion do chance to go astray to a house of iniquity,
the whilst he is in the house at his drudgery, another of the whores will go
to the Sherif, (which they call the Rightheere) and inform that such a man is
in such a suspected house, then is his coming forth narrowly watched, and he
is taken and brought before the Right-heere, and examined, where if he be a
man of credit, he must, and will pay forty, fifty, or sixty Rex Dollers before
he will have his reputation called in question. Of which money the queen that
did inform shall have her reward.

A Lawyer has but a bad trade there, for any Cause or Controversy is tried
and determined in three days Quirks, Quiddits, Demurs, Habeas Corposes,
Sursararaes, Procedendoes, or any such dilatory Law-tricks are abolished, and
not worth a button.

But above all, I must not forget the rare actions and humors of a Quacksaluer
or Mountebanke, or to speak more familiarly, a shadow o^ a skillful
Chyrurgian. This fellow being cla^ in an ancient doublet of decayed Satin,
with Spruce Leather Ie^kin with Glass buttons, the rest of his attire being
correspondent, was mounted upon a Scaffold, having shelfes set with Viols,
Gallipots, Glasses, Boxes, and such like stuff, wherein as he said, were
Watcrs, Oils, Unguents, Emplafters, Electuaries, Vomits, Purges, and a world
of never heard of Drugs, and being mounted (as I said) he and his man begin to
proclaim all their skill and more, having a great number of idle and ignorant
gazers on, he began as follows (as I was informed by my Interpreter, for I
understood not one word he spoke.)

I Iacomo Compostella, Practitioner in Physic, Chyrurgery, and the
Mathematics, being a man famous through Europe, Asia, Affe^ cke, and America,
from the Oriental exhaltation, of Titan, to his Occidentall declination, who
for the Testimony of my skill, and the rae cures that I have done, have these
Princes hands and seals; as first the great Cham of Tartaria, in whose Court,
only with this water which is the Elixar of Henbane, diafracted in a Diurnall
of Egredients Hippocratonticke, Auiceni^^, and Catarackt, with this did I cure
the great Duchess of Promulpho, of the cramp in her tongue: and with this
Oil did I restore the Emperor Gr^gory Euanowich, of a Convulsion in his
P^^icranion. From thence I travailed through Slauonia, where I met with
Mustapha Despot of Seruis, who at that time was intolerably vexed with a
Spas^us, so that it often drove him into a Syncope with the violent
obstructions of the conflagerating of his veins. Only with this precious
Unguent being the Quintessence of Nugwort, with Auripigmenty terragrophicated
in a Limbecke of Chystalline translucency, I recovered him to his former
health, and for my reward I had a Barbary Horse with rich Caparisons, a Turkish
Semitar, a Persian Robs, and 2000. Hungarian Ducats.

Besides, here are the hands and Scales of Pot^hamacke, Adelant ado of
Prozewgma, and of Gulc^ Flownder scurfe chief Burgomaster of Belgrade, and of
diverse Princes and estates, which to avoid tedious prolixity I omit. But good
people if you or any other be troubled with Apo. plexies, Palsies, Cramps,
Lethargies, Cataracks, Qunsies, Tisicks, Pleurisies, Coughs, Headaches,
Terrian, Q^^artan, and Q^otidian Agues, burning ^^auers, laundizes, Dropsies,
Collicks, Illiaca passio's, the Stone, the Strangury, the Pox, Plague,
Botches, Bi^es, Blanes, Scabs, Scurfs, Mange, Leprosies, Cankers, Megrims,
Mumps, Fluxes, Meazels, Murreins, Gouts, Consumptions, Toothache, Ruptures,
Hernia Aquosa, Hernia Ventosa, Hernia Carnosa, or any other malady that dares
affl^ct the body of man or woman, come and buy while you may have it for money,
for I am sent for speedily to the Emperor of Trapezond, about affairs of
great importance that highly concerns his royal person.

Thus almost two hours did this fellow with embost words, and most laborious
action, talk and sweat to the people, that understood no more what he said,
then he himself understood himself. And I think his whole takings for simple
compounds did amount in the total to ^pence sterling.

But leaving Hamburgh, (having gathered these few observations aforesaid) out
of it I went August 28. and my first iaunt of my travels was by water, to a
Town called Buckstahoo, it is a little walled town, and stands on the other
side of the River, 3. miles as they call it from Hamburgh. The boat we passed in
is called an Iuar, not so good as a Grauel end barge, yet I think it be as
great, and the three miles longer then from London, to Grauel-end, for I am
sure that we were going 9. hours before we could be Landed: Our passage cost
us 3. pence a piece, and one thing I remember well, that the lazy water men
will si st^ll all (or the most part of the way) whilst their Passengers, (be
they never so rich or poor, all is one to them, be they men or women) they
must row by turns an hour or such a matter: and we landed in the night at a
place called Crants, where all the passengers were to go to Supper, but such
dye^ we had, that the Proverb was truly verified. God sent meat, and the Devil
sent Cooks: for as there was no respect of persons in the boat, so all
fellows at the Table, and all one price, the Palatine and the Plebeian: our
first mess was great platters of black broth, in shape like new tar, and in
taste Cofen Germane to slut pottage; our second were dishes of Eeles, chopped as
small as herbs, and the broth they were in as salt as brin^: then had we a
boyld Go^se, with choke pears and carrets buried in a deep dish; and when we
demanded what was to pay, it was but three pence a man, I mused at the
cheapenesse of it, but afterward they came upon us with a fresh reckoning of
five pence a man for beer, for they never count their meat and drink
together, but bring in several reckonings for them: but the morning being
come, we hired a Boor^s Wagon, to carry us to a place called Cit^zen, three
miles there, or 12. English miles from Buckstahoo: a little bald dorp it is,
where we came about noone, and found such slender entertainment, that we had
no cause to boast of our good cheer or our Hostess Cookery. We having
refreshed our selves, and hired a fresh Wagon, away we went two miles further
to a Dorp called Rodonburgh, this village belongs to the Bishop of
Rodonburgh, who has a fair house there, strongly walled and deeply ditched
and Moated about very defensible, with draw bridges, and good Ordinance. This
Bishop is a temporal Lord, notwithstanding his spiritual title; and no doubt
but the flesh preuailes above the Spirit with him; So the Bishops of Breame,
Lunningburgh, and diverse other places in Germany, do every charitably take the
fleece, (for they themselves never look to the flock) by reason they use no
Ecclesiastic function, but only in name.

Being lodged at Rodenburgh, in a stately Inn, where the Host, Hostess,
Guests. Cowes, Horses, Swine lay all in one Room; yet I must confess their
beds to be very good, and their linning sweet, but in those parts they use no
couerlet, rug, or blanket, but a good featherbed undermost, with clean sheets,
pillowes, and pillowbears, and another featherbed uppermost, with a fair sheet
above all, so that a man's lodging is like a wormans lying In, all white.

August the 30. we went from Rodenburgh, and about noone we came to an old
walled town, called Feirden, it has two Churches in it, and the hangmans
statue very artificially carved in stone, and set on a high pillar, with a rod
rampant in his hand, at this Town I met with six strangers, all trauailers,
where we went to dinner together all at one Table, and every man opened his
knapsacke or budget with victuals; (for he that carries no meat with him, may
fast by authority in most places of that Country) but to note the kindness of
these people one to another, some had bread and a box of salt butter, some had
raw bacon, some had cheese, some had pickled herring, some dried beef, and
amongst the rest, I had brought three ribs of roast beef, and other provision
from Hamburgh: to conclude, we drew all like fiddlers, and led (for the most
part) like Swine, for every man eat what was his own, and no man did proffer
one bit of what he had to his neighbor, so he that had cheese must diue with
chesse, for he that had meat would offer him none; I did cut every one a part
of my roast beef; which my guide told me they would not take well, because it
is not the fashion of the Country: I tried, and found them very tractable to
take any thing that was good, so that I perceived their modesty to take one
from another, proceeds from their want of manners to offer. But dinner being
done, away we went over a bridge, in the midst whereof is a Iynn, made in the
likeness of great Lantern, it is hanged on a turning Gybber like a Crane: So
that it may be turned on the bridge and over the River, as they shall please
that have occasion to use it. It is big enough to hold two men, and it is for
this purpose if any one or more do rob Gardens or Orchards, or Corn fields,
(if they be taken) he or they are put into this same whiligig, or kickumbob,
and the gybbet being turned, the offender hangs in this Cage from the River
some 12. or 14. foot from the water, then there is small Line made fast to the
party some 5. or 6. fadome, and with a trick which they have, the bottom of
the Cage drops out, and the thief falls suddenly into the water. I had not gone
far, but at the end of the bridge I saw an old Chapel, which in old time
they lay was dedicated to S. Frodswicke, which has the day after Saint Luke
the Enangelist: I entering in, perceived it was a chartiable Chapel, for the
doors and windows were always open, by reason there were none to shut, and
it was a common receptacle for Beggars and Rogues. There was the Image of our
Lady with a veil over her, made as I think of a Bakers bolter, and Saint
Peter holding a candle to her. I cut a piece of her Veil, and taking Peter by
the hand at my departure, the kind Image (I know not upon what acquaintance)
being loose handed, let me have his hand with ^ntc, which being made of wood,
by reason of ruinous antiquity, burst off in the handling: which two precious
relickes I brought home with me to defend me and all my friends from
Sparrowblasting.

From this place we were glad to travail on foot 1. Dutch mile to a Dorpe
called Durfurne, where we hired a Boores Wagon to a Town called Neinburgh,
but we could not reach thither by 2. English miles, so that we were glad to
lodge in a Barn that night: on the morrow early we arose and came to
Neinburgh, which is a little walled town, belonging to that Byshopricke from
whence it is so named. There we stayed 3. hours before we could get a Wagon,
at last we were mounted to a Dorpe called Leiz, 2. Dutch miles; I would have
bargained with the Boore to have carried us to Dorne, which I bade my guide
tell him it was but a mile further, a mile quoth the Boore, indeed we call it
no more, but it was measured with a Dog, and they threw in the tail and all to
the bargain; so to Leize he carried us, and there we found a Wagon of Dorne
homeward bound, which made us ride the cheaper; but it was the longest mile
that ever I rode or went, for surely it is as much as some ten of out miles in
England. But having overcome it at last, from thence I took a fresh Wagon to
carry me two miles further to a town called Buckaburgh, where I had, and have
I hope, a Brother residing; to whom my iourny was intended, and with whom my
perambulation was at a period. This town of Buckaburgh is wholely and solely
belonging to the Graff or Grave of Shomburgh, a Prince of great command and
eminence, absolute in his authority and power, not countermanded by the
Emperor, or any other further then coutesie requires; and in a word, he is one
of the best accomplished Gentlemen in Europe for his person, port, and Princely
magnificence.

He has there to his inestimable charge, built the Town, with many goodly
Houses, Streets, Lanes, a strong wall, and a deep ditch, all well furnished
with munition and Artillery, with a band of Soldiers which he keeps in
continual pay, allowing every man a Doller a Week, and double apparel every
year. Besides, he has built a stately Church, being above 120. steps to the
Roof, with a fa^e pair of Organs, a curious ca^ued P^lpit, and all other
Ornaments belonging to the same. His own Palace may well be called an earthly
Paradise, which if I should run into praise of the description of, I should
bring my wits into an intricate Labyritch, that I should hardly find the way
ou^, yet according to the imbecility of my memory I will only touch a little at
the shadow of it, and let the substance stand where it does.

At the front or outward gate is a most stately Arch, upon the top whereof is
erected the image of E^uy, (as great as a de ny Coloss ^^) between two
Dragons, all guilt with gold, before the gate is an iron grate to open and that
as it were of flowers or work of E(...), at which gate stands always a C^^^rt
of Guard, and a Sentinel. and at the Lower part of the Arch is the Princes
title or in Capital Letters as follows; ERNESTVS DEIGRATIA, COMES HOLST,
Scomburgh, Sternburgh, etc.

After I was entered within the outward gate, I was showed his stables, where I
saw very fair and goodly horses, both for war and other v^es, amongst the
rest there was one naturally spotted like a Leopard or Panther, and is called
by the name of Leopard, a stately courageous beast, and so formed as If Nature
had laid all her cunning aside, only to compose that Horse, and indeed I mvst
acknowledge he was made for the Service of some great Prince, and not for any
inferior Person.

Passing further, I came to another Court of Guard, and over a Draw bridge,
into the inner Court, where on the right hand, I was conducted into the
Chapel, in which Chapel, if it were possible that the hand of mortal men
(with artificial workmanship) could visibly set forth the magnificent glory
of the immortal Creator, then absolutely there it is, but being impossible so
to do, (as near as I can) I will describe it; the pauement is all of black
and gray marble, curiously wrought with Chequer-worke, the S^ats and Pues are
carved wainscot of wonderful cunning and workmanship ^ the roof is adorned
with the statues of Angel and Cherubins, many in num^^^, all so richly gilded,
as it Gold were as pentifull as pewter, there could not be more liberality
bestowed: besides there are a fair set of Organs, with a brau: sweet Q^ire of
Q^iristers: so that when they f^g, the Lures, Viols, Bandoraes, O gans,
Recorders, S^gbuts, and other musical instruments, all strike up together,
with such a glorious delicious harmony, as if the Angelical music of the
Sphea ^^ were descended into that earthly Tabernacle. The Prince himself is a
Protest^^^^, very zealous in his Prayer, and diligent in his attention to the
Preacher, who although I vndestood not, yet I perceived he was a good D^^ine,
who gravely and sincerely with reverence and eloquent ^locution, delivered the
bread of life to the understanding Auditors.

In this Town I ^^^ with my brother from Saturday the la^^o August, till the
Thursday following which was the fifth of September. When I was conducted an
English ^^^^ on my way by certain of my Country men my Lords Musicians, where
we drank and parted, only my Brother and my Guide brought me that night to a
strong walled Town called M^nden, which stands on the River o^ Weazar, and
belongs to the Bishop of that See. O^ the morrow I walked to see the Town,
where I bought thirty fi^e C^eeses for eight pence, which I brought into
England for raritres pence, and a yarda^la halte of padding for five So about
noone we took a Boat to pass down the River, which boat is much longer then
any Western Barge, but nothing near so broad, it was half laden with Lime
and Cnalke, and by reason the W^^blew hard, we were almost choked with ^^
flying and scattering of that d^stie commodity. Besides the Water was so
shallow, that we ran a ground three or four times, and sometimes an hour,
sometimes less before we could get a float again: which made me and my Guide
go a shore at a Village called Peterhaghen, where we hired a Wagon to Leize,
where we stayed all night, (being come into our old way again) where were a
crew of strowling Rogues and Whores that took upon them the name of
Egyptians, Iuglets, and Fortune Tellers, and indeed one of them held the
Goodwise with a tale, the whilst another was picking her chest, and stole out
ten dollers which is forty shillings, and she that talked with her looked in
her hand, and told her that if she did not take great heed she knew by her Art
that some mischance was near her: which proved true, for her money was gone,
the whilst her fortune was telling.

But I appointed a Wagon over night to be ready by three of the Clock in the
morning, when I arose and applied my travail so hard by changing fresh Wagons,
so that that day I came as far as Rodenburgh, which was nine Dutch miles,
where I stayed that night: The next day being Sunday the eighth of Semptember,
we took Wagon toward Buckstahoo, we had a merry Boore, with an hundred
tatters about him; and now I think it fit a little to describe these Boores,
their natures, habits, and unmannerly manners. In our English tongue the name
Bore or Boore does truly explain their Swinish condition, for most of them
are as full of humanity as a Bacon-hog, or a Bore, and their wives as cleanly
and courteous as Sowes. For the most part of the men they are clad in thin
buckerom, vnlined, bare legged and foored, neither band nor scarce shirt, no
woollen in the world about them, and thus will they run through all weathers
for money by the Wagons side, and though no better apparelled, yet all of them
have Houses, Land, or manual means to live by. The substantial Boores I did
meet above 120. of them that Sunday, with every one a Hatchet in his hand, I
mused at it, and thought they had been going to fell Wood that day, but my
Guide told me they were all going to Church, and that instead of Cloakes they
carried Hatchets, and that it was the fashion of the Country: whereupon it came
to my mind. Cloak, quasi Cleaue-oake, ergo the Boores wear Hatchets in steed
of Cloakes.

There are other fashion Boores, who wear white Linen breeches as close as
lrish iouze^, but so long, that they are turned up at the shoe in a role like
a Maids sleeves at the hand, but what these fellows want in the bigness of
their Hose, they have in Dublets, for their sleeves are as big as Breeches, and
the bodies great enough to hold a Kinderkin of beer, and a barrel of Butter.

The Country is very full of Woods, and especially Oaks, which they very
seldom cut down, because of the Mast for their Swine, which live there in
great abundance. If any man be slain or murdered in the way, they use to set
up a wooden Cross in the place, for a memorial of the bloody fact committed
there, and there were many of those wooden Crosses in the way as I travailed.

They seldom have any Robbery committed amongst them, but there is a murder
with it, for their unmannerly manner is to knock out a man's brains first, or
else to lurk behind a Tree, and shoot a man with a piece or a Pistol, and so
make sure work with the passenger, and then search his pockets.

It is as dangerous to steal or killan Hare in some places there, as it is to
rob a Church or kill a man in England, and yet a two penny matter will
discharge the offender, for the best and the worst is but an Halter; and I was
informed that an English Merchant (not knowing the danger) as he was riding on
the way, having a piece charged in his hand (as it is an ordinary weapon to
travail with there) by chance he espied an hare, and shot at her and killed
her; but he was apprehended for it, and it was like to have ecst him his life;
but before he got out of the trouble, he was feign to use his best friends and
means, (and pleading ignorance for his innocence, at last with the loss of a
great deal of liberty, and five hundred pound in money he was discharged: The
reason of this strict course is, because all the Hares in the Country do
belong to one Lord or other, and being in abundance, they are killed by the
owners appointment, and carried to the markets by Cart-loads, and sold fot the
use of the honorable owners: And no Boore or Tenant that dwells in those parts
where those Hares are plenty, must Keep a Dog, except he pay five shillings
a year to the Lord, or else one of his fore feet must be cut off, that he may
not hunt Hares.

A Man is in almost as high proportion to be a ^naue in England, as a Knight in
Germany, for there a Gentleman is called a Youngcur, and a Knight is but a
Youngcurts man, so that you shall have a scuruy Squire command a Knight to hold
his stirrup, pluck off his boots, or any other vnknightly piece of service:
and verily I think there are an 100. several Princes, Earls, Bishops, and
other Estates, that do every one keep a mint, and in their own names stamp
Money, Gold, Silver and Brass, and amongst 23. two pences which I had of their
brass money, (which they call Grushes) I had 13. several coins.

Many more such worthic in^unctions and honorable ordinances I observed, which
are hardly worth pen and ink the describing, and therefore I omit them, and
draw toward an end, for on the Wednesday morning I was at an anchor at Stoad,
and on the Friday night following I was (by Gods gracious assistance) Landed at
London. So that in three weeks and three days I sailed from England to
Hamburgh and back again, staying in the Country 17.days, and travailed 200.
miles by Land there: gathering like a busy Be all these honied observations,
some by sight, some by hearing, some by both, some by neither, and some by bare
supposition.

FINIS
TAILORS TRAVELS TO PRAGVE IN BOHEMIA.
Reader, take this in your way.
A Pamphlet (Reader,) from the Press is hurld,
That has not many fellows in the world:
The manner's common, though the matter's shallow,
And it is all true, which makes it want a fellow.
ANd because I would not have you either guld of your money, or deceived in
expectation, I pray you take notice of my plain dealing, for I have not given
my book a swelling bumbasted title, or a promising inside of news; therefore if
you look for any such matter from hence, take this warning, hold fast your
money; and lay the book down yet if you do buy it (I dare presume) you shall
find somewhat in it worth part of your money, the ^roth is that I did chiefly
write it, because I am of much acquaintance, and cannot pass the streets, but
I am continually stayed by one or other, to know what news, so that sometimes
I am four hours before I can go the length of two pair of Buts, where such
nonsense or senseless questions are propounded to me, that calls many seeming
wise men's wisdoms in question, drawing aside the curtains of their
understanding, and laying their ignorance wide open. First John Easy takes me,
and holds me fast by the fifth half an hour; and will needs torture some news
out of me from Spinola, whom I was never near by 500.miles; for he is in the
Phllatinate Country, and I was in Bohemia I am no sooner eased of him, but
Gregory Gandergoose an Alderman of Gotham, catches me by the goll demanding if
Bohemia be a great Town, and whether there be any meat in it, and whether
the last fleet of ships be arrived there: his mouth being stopped a third
examines me boldly, what news from Vienna, where the Emperors Army is, what
the Duke of Bauaria does, what is become of Count Buquoy, how sares all the
Englishmen; Where lies the King of Bohemiaes forces, what Bethlem Gabor does,
what tidings of Dampeier, and such a tempest of inquisition, that it almost
shakes my patience in pieces. To ease my self of all which, I was enforced to
set pen to paper, and let this poor Pamphlet (my harald or nuntius travail
and talk, whilst I take my ease with silence. Thus much I dare affirm, that
whosoever he or they be, that do scatter any scandalous speeches against the
plenty in Bohemia of all manner of needful things for the sustenance of man
and beasts, (of the which there is more abundance then ever I saw in any place
else) or whatsoever they be that report any ill success on the Kings party,
this little book, and I the Author, does proclaim and prove them false Liars,
and they are to be suspected, for coining such falsehoods as no well willers to
the Bohemian prosperity. One thing I must entreat the Readers patience in
reading one hundred lines: wherein I have kept a filthy stir about a beastly
fellow, who was at my going from England a piece of a Graves end Constable) at
which time he did me such wrong, as might have drawn my life in question; for
he falsely said that I would have fired their Town. I did promise him a ierke
or two of my pen at my return; which now I have performed, (not out of any
malice, but because I would be as good as my word with him.) Thus craving you
to read if you like, and like as you lift. I leave you a Book much like a
prattling Gossip, full of many words to small purpose.

Yours, as you are mine, JOHN TAILOR.

TAILORS TRAVELS From the City of LONDON in England, to the City of PRAGVE
in Bohemia. WITH The manner of his abode there three Weeks, his Observations
there, and his return from thence. AS ALSO, How he past 600. Miles down the
River of Elue, through Bohemia, Saxony, Anhalt, the Byshopricke of Magdenburg,
Brandenburg, Hamburgh, and so to England. With many Relations worthy of note.
I Came from Bohem, yet no news I bring,
Of business 'twixt the Keysar and the King:
My Muse dares not ascend the lofty stairs
Of state, or write of Princes great affairs.
And as for news of battles, or of War,
Were England from Bohemia thrice as far:
Yet we do know (or seem to know) more here
This was, is, or will be ever known there.
At Ordinaries, and at Barbar-shops,
There tidings vented are, as thicks as hops,
Hyu many thousand such a day were slain,
What men of more were in the battle ta'us,
When, where; and how the bloody fight begun,
And ^^^ such scences, and such Towns were won;
How so and so the Armies bravely met.
And which side glorious victory did get:
The month, the weeks, the day, the very hours,
And ^^^, they did oppose each others power,
These things in England, prating fools dee chatter,
When all Bohemia knows of no such matter.
For all this Summer that is gone and past,
Until the first day of October last.
The armies never did together meet,
Nor scorce their eyesight did each other greet:
The fault is neither in the foot or horse,
Of the right valiant brave Bohemian force,
From place to place they daily seek the foe,
They march and remarch, watch, ward, ride, run, go,
And grieuing so to waste the time away,
Thirst for the hazard of a glorious day.
But still the Enemy does play boe peep,
And thinks it best in a whole skin to sleep,
For neither martial policy, or might,
Or any means can draw the foe to fight:
And now and then they conquer, speele and pillage,
Some for thatcht houses, or some pelting Village:
And to their trenches run away again,
Where they like Foxes in their holes remain,
Thinking by lingering out the wars in length,
To weaken and decay the Beamish strength.
This is the news, which now I mean to books,
He that will needs have more, must needs go look.
Thus leaving wars, and matters of high state.
To those that dare, and knows how to relate,
I Will only write, how I past here and there.
And what I have observed every where,
I Will truly write what I have heard and eyed,
And those that will not so be satisfied,
I (as I meet them) will some tales devise,
And fill their ears (by word of mouth) with lies:
THe Mouth that bears a mighty Emp'rers name,
(Augustus bight) I passed down the stream,
Friday the fourth, just sixteen hundred twenty
Full Moon, the sign in Pisees, that time went I;
The next day being Saturday, a day,
Which all Great Britain well remember way,
When all with thanks do annually combine,
Vntoth' Almighty majesty divine,
Because that day in a most happy season,
Our Sovereign was preserved from Gouties treason;
Therefore to Churches people do repair,
And offer sacrifice of praise and prayer,
With Bells and be^fires, every town addressing.
And to our gracious King their loves expressing,
On that day, when in every nooke and angle,
Fa^gets and banins smoked, and bells did ^angle:
Only at Graves end, (why I cannot tell)
There was no spark of fire, or sound of bell,
Their ^eepls, (like an instrument unstrung,)
Seemed (as I wish all scolds) without a tongue.
Their bonfires colder then the greatest frost,
Or chiller then their charities (almost)
Which I perceiving, said, I much did muse,
That Graues-end did forget the thankful use,
Which all the towns in England did observe;
And cause I did the King of Britain serve.
I and my fellow, forour Masters sake.
Would (near the water side) ab^fire make;
With that a Scotchman, Tompson by his name.
Bestowed four forgets to increase the flame,
At which to kindle all a Graues-end Baker.
Bestowed his baui^e, and was our partaker:
We eighteen feet from any house retired,
Where we a Jury of good Faggots fired,
But e're the flames or scarce the smoke began,
There came the fearful shadow of a man.
The Ghost or Image of a Constable,
Whose frantic actions (downeright dance-stable.)
Armed out of France and Spain with Bacchus bounty:
(Of which there is plenty in the Kentish County)
His addle coxcombs with tobacco puffed
His guts with ^^^ full bumbasted and stuffed,
And though half blind, yet in a looking glass,
He could perceive the figure of an Ass:
And as his slauering chaps non since did flutter,
His breath (like to a jakes) a ^^^ did utter,
His legs indenting scarcely could bear up,
His drunken trunk (over charged with many a cup)
This riff raff rubbish that could hardly stand,
(Having a staff of office in his hand.)
Came to us as our fire began to smother,
Throwing some faggots one way, some another,
And in the Kings name did first break the peace.
Commanding that our banfire should succease,
The Scotchman angry as this rudeness done,
The scatlered faggots be again laid on:
Which made the ^^my Constable go to him,
And punch him on the breast, and outrage do him:
At which a cuffe or twain were given, or lent.
About the ears (which neither did content.)
But then to be are bow fearful, be ass braid,
With what a hideous noise be howld for aid,
That all the ^^^ in Graues-end, in one hour,
Turned either good, bad, strong, small, sweet, or sour:
And then a kenuell of incarnate currs,
Hanged on poor Thompson no like so many burrs;
Haling him up the dirty streets, all foul.
(Like Devils pulling a condemned foul)
The Iaylor (like the grand den'^) gladly sees.
And with an itching hope of ^^^s and fees,
Thinking the Constable and his sweet self.
Might drink and quaffe with that ill gotten pelf
For why such beunds as these, may if they will,
Under the show of good, turn good to ill,
And with authority the peace first break,
With Lordly domineering ^^^ the weak,
Committing (often) they care not whom or why,
So they may exercise themselves thereby.
And with the Iaylor share both fee and fine,
Drowning their damned gain in smoaks and wine:
Thus hiredings Constables, and Iaylors may,
Abuse the Kings liege people night and day,
I say they may. I say not they do so,
And they know best of they do so or no,
They haled poor Thompson all along the street,
Tearing him that the ground scarce touched his feet,
Which be perceiving did request them cease
Their rudeness, vowing he would go in peace,
He would with quietness go where they would,
And prayed them from his throat to loose their held,
Some of the to townsmen did entreat them there,
That they their barbarous baseness would forbear,
But all entreaty was like oil to fire,
Not quenched but more inflamed the scuruy Squire,
Then they fresh began to bale and tear,
(Like mungre^^ Mastiffes on a little Bear.)
Leaving kind Thompson neither foot or fist,
Nor any limb or member to resist.
Who being thus apprest with eds and might.
Most valiant with his teeth, began to bite,
Some by the fingers, others by the thumbs,
He fang'd within the cercust of his gummes;
Great pitty's was his chaps did never close,
On the half Constables, cheeks, ears, or nose:
His service had deserved reward to have,
If he had marked the peasant for a Knave:
Yet all that labor had away been thrown,
Through town and Country he is already known:
His prisoner he did beat, and spurned and kicked,
He searched his pockets, (I Will not say he picked)
And finding as he said no many there,
To hear how then the Bellweather did swear,
And almost tearing Thompson into quarters,
Bound both his hands behind him with his garters,
And after in their rude robustians rags,
Tide both his feet, and cast him in the Cage,
There all night be remained in louzis litter,
Which for the Constable had been much fitter,
Or for some vagaband (that is sprung from Caine.)
Some Rogue orrunnagate, should there have lain,
And not a Gentleman that is well descended,
That did no hurt, nor any harm intended:
But for a bonfire in sit time and place,
Tobee abused and used thus beastly base,
There did I leave him tell the merrow day,
And how be escaped their hands I cannot say.
This piece of Officer, this nasty parch,
(Whose understanding sleeps out many a Watch)
^like a a town bull, roaring up and down,
Saying that we had meant to fire the town;
And thus she Devil his Master did devise,
To baulster out his late abuse with lies,
So all the street down as I past along,
The people all about me in a throng.
Calling me villain, traitor, rogue and thief,
Saying that I to fire their town was chief.
There ^^ wrongs as patient as I might,
Vowing my pen should ease me when I write;
Like to a grumbling cur, that sleeps on hay,
Eats none himself, drives other beasts away.
So this same fellow would not once express,
Unto his Prince, a subjects ioyfulnesse,
But cause we did attempt at (as you see)
Himrsson'd Thompson, and thus slandered me.
Thus having cased my much inceused muse.
I crave the reader this one fault excuse,
For having urged his patience all this some.
With such a scar^y Subject and warse rims;
And thou Graues-endian officer take this,
And the ^^^ thy self, for all that written is.
It Is not against the towns this tale I tell,
(For sure there does some honest people dwell,)
But against thee thou Fiend is shape of man,
By whom this beastly outrage first began,
Which I could do no less but let thee know,
And pay thee truly what I long did owe,
And now all is even betwixt thou and I,
Then farewell and be hanged, that is twice God bwye.
The first letters of his names are R L and his full name being ^^agramatiz'd
is a A Trobeler, a trobeler he was to me, and so, I fear he has been to my
Reader.

Sunday the 26. August of we set sail from Graus end, and with various win
les same large and some scarce, we happily past the Seas, and layled up the
River of Maze, by the Brill, and on the Wednesday following I arrived at
Roterdam in Holland, at which time the worthy Regiment of the right honorable
Colonel Sir Horace veere, and the two noble Earls O Essex, and Oxford
departed from thence in Mar^^ll Equipage toward the Pallatinate Country, whose
Heroic, and Mignanimous endeauours, I beseech the Lord of Hosts, and God of
battles to direct and bless.

The same day I went to the Hage, and from thence to Leiden, where I lodged all
night, and the morrow being Thursday the 30. of August, I sailed from Leyden to
Amsterdam, where I saw many things worthy the noting, but because they are so
near and frequent to many of our Nation, I omit to relate them, to avoid
tediousnes: but on the Friday at night I got passage from thence toward
Hambrogh, in a small hoy, in the which we were weather-beaten at Sea three
days and nights before we arrived there.

Saturday the eighth of September I left Hambrogh, and being carried day and
night in Wagons, on the Monday night following I came to an ancient town
called Heldeshim, it stands in Brunswicke Land, and yet it belongs to the
Bishop o^ Collin, where I did observe in their Doom Kirk, or Cathedral
Church, a Crown of silver 80.foot in Compass, hanged up in the body of the
Church, in the circuit of which crown were placed 160. wax Candles, the which
at Festival days, or at the celebration of some high Ceremonies are lighted
to lighten their darkness or their ignorance, choose ye whether.

Moreover, there I saw a silver Bell in their Steeple, of thirty pound weight,
and the Leads of their steeple shining and sparkeling with the Sun beams,
they did affirm to me to be gold, the truth of which I am doubtful of.

In this town I stayed four days and on Friday the 14. of September, I went
six Dutch miles to the strong town of Brunswicke, where by reason of my short
stay which was but two hours, I observed nothing worthy of memory, but their
triple Walls, and double Ditches, there artillery and fortifications, which they
think to be impregnable; besides, there I saw an old house of the Duke of
Brunswicke, with the statue of a golden Lion, of a great bigness, standing
aloft upon a Pillar, with the broken Walls, and houses, which the Dukes Canon
has left there six years since, as tokens and badges of his fury, and their
rebellion.

From thence on the morrow, I went one Dutch mile further, to an ancient town
called Wolfunbottle, where the Duke of Brunswicke keeps his Court, in the
which I and my fellow could get no further admittance, then over a bridge into
his outtermost, or base Court; for his Soldiers seeing us with Swords and
Pistols, were fearful, belike, that we would have taken the fortress from
them, and therefore though we were but two Englishmen, yet they durst not let
us enter; which made me call to remembrance the frequent, and daily Egresse and
Regresse, that all people have to his Majesty's Court of Great Britain, where
none that are of any good fashion and aspect, are debat'd entrance: when those
inferior Princeshouses are guarded with hungry Halberdiers, and reuurend rusty
bil-men, with a brace or two of hot-shots; so that their Palaces are more like
Prisons, then the free and Noble Courts of Commanding Potentates.

After two days entertainment at Wolfunbotle, with an English Merchant
residing there, of good fame and credit, named Master Thomas Saekuile, I with
my brother, my fellow Tilbery, and another man in my company, departed thither
on foot onward on our journey toward Bohemia, in which travail, what
occurrences happened, and what things of note I saw, were as follows.

Passing with many weary steps through the towns of Rosondink, Remling,
Soulem, Hassen, Darsam, and Haluerstadt, (which is all in Brunswicke land,) but
this town of Haluerstadt belongs to a Bishop so styled, who is Duke Christian
brother to the now Duke of Brunswicke, a long Dutch mile (or almost six
English) is a small town or a Blecke called Groaning belonging to the Duke, in
the which place I observed two things worthy of remembrance.

First a most stately Palace built with a beautiful Chapel, so adorned with
the Images and Forms of Angels and Cherubins, with such exquisiteness of arts
best industry of caruing, grauing, guilding, painting, glazing and pauing, with
such superexcellent workmanship of Organs, Pulpit, and Font, that for
curiosity and admirable rareness, all the Buildings and Fabrics that ever I
beheld, must give it pre-eminence. I confess that Henry the seuenths Chapel
at Westminster, Kings College Chapel in Cambridge, and Chaist Church in
Canterbury, are beyond it in height and workmanship of stone ^ for indeed this
Chapel is most of wood gipps, and plaster of Paris; but it is so gilded as
if it had been made in the golden age, when gold was esteemed as Dross, so
that a man had need to wear a veil over his dazeling eyes, or else he can
hardly look upon it.

The caruing and painting seem to out go the arts of Pigmalion, Apelles, or
Praxiitles, the pauing of the chequered black and white marble, and the
windows glassed with Crystal: but all this great cost and show is very
little to the honor of God, or the propogation of the Gospel, the edification
of the ignorant. For in this Church of case, there is no Service. If the
painted Pulpit could preach, the dumb Images might (perhaps) have a Sermon now
and then, for scarce at any time there comes any body into the Chapel, but a
fellow that shows the beauty of it for two pence or three pence a piece.

In the same house, in a place or Cellet built of purpose, is a great tonne or
Vessel of wood, that was 7. years in making, and was used to be filled with
Rhenish wine: it is said to be twice as big as the vessel at Heidelberg, and
the hoops of it are twelve inches thick, and the staves or border of it being
as much; I went up to the top of it with a Ladder of 18. steps, he that keeps
it faith it will hold 160. tonnes. My fellow Tilbery did creep in at the tap
hole; it is in length thirty two foor, and in breadth a cross 19. and verily I
think that babble cost more money the making, then would have built a good
ship, or founded an Alms house for 6. poor people.

This is a Tub of Tubs, Tub of Tubs hall,
Who never had fellow yet nor ever shall;
O had but Diogenes but had this a ton,
He would had thought that he more room had won,
Then Alexanders Conquests, or the bounds,
Of the vast Ocean and the solid grounds.
Or had Cornelius but this tub, to drench
His Clients that had practiced too much French,
A thousand hogsheads then would haunt his sirkin,
And Mistress Minks recover her lost mirkin.
This mighty Caske great Bacchus used to stride,
When he to drunkards hall did often ride.
And in this barrel he did keep his Court,
^^^ng himsefe in R^en^sh f^rd sport.
But now these eight years it has dry been kept;
In it the wine God has not p^st or wept;
That now the Chapel, and the Caske combine,
One has no preaching, the other has no wine.
And now the use they put it to is this,
Tisshew'd for money, as the Chapel is.
From Groaning we travailed to a Town called Ashers Leaven, to Ashleauen, to
Kinderne, to Hall, and so to Le pzig, which is one of the chiefest towns in
Saxony, being famous for a yearly Mart that is yearly held there, where to
Merchants and other people from the most part of Christendom have annual
concourse: in this town we stayed two days, and taking our leave then of some
English Merchants, who used us kindly, we there would hauehired a coach or
wagon to Prague; but all the Saxen coach men and carters were afraid to look
upon any part of Bohemia, because their Duke is a professed enemy in arms
against the King of Beam, so that we were forced to hire a fellow with a
wheel barrow 2. days to carry our cloaks, swords, guns, pistols, and other
apparel and luggage which were our necessaries, to a town called Boorne, to
Froburge and so to another town called Penigh, where we cashierd our one
wheeled coach, and hired a cart with two, which carried both us and our baggage
to Chemnizt another town in Saxony, from whence to a place called Shop we
were feign to be our own sumpter horses walking on foot to the last town in
Saxony, called Marienberg. From thence passing up and down inaccessable
mountains, we came to a wood, which parts Bohemia from Saxony on the west;
which wood is c^^led by the people of those parts the Beamer Wolts or Wolt, and
is in breadth ten English miles, and in length further then I know how to
discribe truly: but this much of it I dare aff^^^, that it is a natural
inpregnable wall to the kingdom of Bohem, which kingdom is all incompast
round with woods and mountains, so that there is no passage on that side of
it, for any army to enter into it with munition and artillery, all the ways
being uneven, and the mountain tops all boggs, mosses, and quagmires, that
great Ordnance or any heavy carriage either of horse, cart or wagon, with s^^ke
and be lost. Besides, there are numbers past numbering of Fur trees, many
standing, and such store fallen of themselves, that any passage might easily be
stopped by laying the^ cross the way. And of all my iourny, the travel
through that dismal wood was the most heavy unto me, for the trees grew so
thick, and so high, that the S^^ was obscured, and the day seemed ^igh^; in
some places, the way paued with swimming trees 2. miles together on the tops of
Hills, which now and then I st^pping beside, sunk to middle in a Q^g^nire.

When we had thus footed it, and travailed past the hills and woods, (being at
the least 4.hours toil) and that we might look down the mountains, into
the fruitful Land of Bohem, never did sight more reioyee us, the lower Hills
being all full of Vineyards and the Val^yes corn and pasture; not an English
mile distance, but a village every way; and 20.30. or 40.reckes or stacks of
corn which their barnes cannot hold, in the space of every hours journey: in
a word, every thing that belonged to the use and commodity of man was and is
there, and all the delightful objects to satisfy every sense, is there
abundantly so that nature seemed to make that Country her store house or
granary, for there is nothing wanting, except men's gratitude to God for such
blessings. The first night we lodged there at a pretty town called Comoda,
which town, by negligence and occasion of fire, had fifty houses burnt, two
days before our coming thither, it being eleven Dutch miles from Pragus.
There we hired a wagon 7 dutch miles to a town called Slowne from whence we
walked on foot along 16. English miles to Prague, which long looked for City
we could not see until we came within an hours travel of it: within half a
dutch mile is a fearful place, being frequented with inhumaine and barbarous
murderrers, that assault travelers, first shooting and murdring them, and
after searching their pockets, where if they have money or not, all is one, it
is but so many slain: for these villains have a wood and a deep valley to
shelter themselves in, that they are hardly taken afterward; but if they
chance at any time to be but apprehended, they are racked and tortured to make
them confess, and afterward their executions are very terrible, But (I thank
God) we past that place, and many other as dangerous as that, where some were
robbed and murdered (as report told us) both before, us behind us, and on each
side: and we saw in our iourny above. score Gallowses and wheels, where
thieves were hanged some fresh, and some half rotten, and the carkases of
murderers, broken limb after limb on the wheels; and yet it was our happiness
only to see the dead villains, and escape the living. I came into Prague on
Thursday the 7. of September, whither if I had come but the Friday before, I
had seen a most fearful execution of a notorious offenders, the manner how,
with their faults, as it was truly related to me by English Gent. that saw it:
I think it not much impertinent to relate. The one of them being taken,
apprehended and racked, for ripping up a live woman with child, and for taking
the infant out of her body, did sow a living puppy into her belly; all which he
confessed he did, to make properties for witch craft: and being further
tortured, he confessed when and where he had committed 35. murders more: the
other in respect of him was but a petty offender, for he in all his lifetime
had murdered but 14. For the which execrable facts, their deserved executions
were as follows: First, they were brought out of the Iayle naked from the
girdle upward; and so being bound fast on high in a Cart, that the spectators
might see them; then the Hangman having a pan of coals near him, with red hot
pincers nip'd off the nipple of one breast; then he took a knife and gives him
a flash or cut down the back on one side from the shoulder to the wast; and
presently gave him such another flash, three inches from the first, then on the
top he cut the flashes into one; and presently taking pincers, took hold of
the cross cut, and tore him down like a Girse below the middle, letting it
hang down behind him like a belt: after which he took his burning pincers,
and plucked of the tops of his fingers of one hand: then passing to another
place of the Town, his other nipple was plucked off, the other side of his
back so cut and mangled, (which they call by the name of rimming, (if it had
been riming, I would never have written but in prose) his other fingers nip'd
off, then passing further all his toes were nip'd off with the burning pincers,
after which he was enforced to come out of the Cart, and go on foot up a
steepehill to the Gallows, where he was broken with a wheale, alive, one bone
after another, beginning at his legs and ending with his neck, and last of all
quartered and laid on the wheel, on a high post, till Crows, Ravens, or
consuming time consume him.

This was the manner of both their executions, but I speak of the greatest
murderer particularly, because it is reported that all these torments never
made him once to change countenance, or to make any sign or action of grief,
to call to God for mercy, or to entreat the people to pray for him; but as if
be had been a senseless stock or stone, he did most scornafully, and as it
were in disdain abide it; whilst the other villain did cry, rore, and make
lamentation, calling upon God often; the difference was not much in their
lives, and manner of their deaths, but I am persuaded the odds was great in
their dying.

The City of Prague is almost circular or round, being divided in the middle
by the River of Moldoue, over which is a fair stone Bridge, of 600. paces
over, and at each and a strong gate of stone: there is said to be in it of
Churches and Chapels, 150.for there are great numbers of Catholics, who have
many Chapels dedicated to sundry Sts. and I was there at 4.senerall sorts of
divine exercises, viz. at good Sermons with the Protestants, at Mass with the
Papists, at a Lutherans preaching, and at the Jews Synagog; 3.of which I saw
and heard for curiosity, and the other for edification. The Jews in Prague,
are in such great numbers, that they are thought to be of men, women and
children, betwixt 50. or 60000. who do all live by brocage and usury upon the
Christians, and are very rich in money and Jewels, so that a man may see 10. or
12.together of them, that are accounted worth 20.30 or 40000.l.a piece; and yet
the slaves go so miserably attired, that 15. of them are not worth the hanging
for their whole ward-ropes.

The Castle where the King and Queen do keep their Court, is magnificent and
sumpruous in building, strongly situated and fortified ^^^ by nature and art,
being founded on a high ^^^, so that at pleasure it keeps the town in
command, and it is much mere spacious in ^^^^^ for receipt in Gardens and
Orchards, then the Tower of London. I was in it daily the space of 20 days,
and saw it royally graced with the presence of a gracious King and Queen, who
were honorably attended by a gallant Courtly train of Lords and Ladies, and
Gentles of the High Dutch and Bohemians, and where was free and boun^^^^^
entertainment to strangers in abundance: I must ever humbly and thankfully
acknowledge the Queens Majesty's goodness toward me, whole undeserved
favors were helpful unto me both there, and in my tedious iourny homeward.
Moreover there I saw (and had in mine arms) the King and Queens youngest Son
Prince Robert, who was borne there on the 16.of December last: a goodly child
as ever I saw of that age, whom with the rest I pray God to bless; to his
glory and his Parents joy and comfort.

There for a token I did think it meet,
To take the shoes from off this Prince his feet:
I do not say I stole, but I did take,
And whilst I live, I Will keep them for his sake:
Long may his Grace live to be styled a man,
And then I Will steal his boots too, if I can.
The shoes were upright shoes, and so was he
That more them, from all harm upright and free:
He used them for their use, and not for pride,
He never wronged them, or e're trod aside.
Lambskin they were, as white as Innocence,
(True patterns for the foot steps of a Prince,)
And time will come (as I do hope in God)
He that in childhood with these shoes was shod,
Shall with his manly feet once trample down,
All Antichristian foes to his renown.
The City of Prague has in it (by reason of the wars) thrice the number of
its own Inhabitants, and yet for all that, victuals is in such great plenty,
that six men cannot eat three half penny worth of bread, and I did buy in
the Market a fat Goose well roast for the value of 9. pence English, and I and
my brother have dined there at a Cooks with good roasted meat, bread and
beer, so that we have been satisfied and left, for the va^ of five pence: a
good Turkey there may be bought for two shillings, and for fresh fish I never
saw such store, for in one market day I have known in Prague 2000. Carps,
besides other fishes, which Carps in London are five shillings a piece, and
there they were for 8. pence or 10.pence at the most, so that one of their
fresh fish markets here, were worth at the least 5. or 600. pounds, and as for
all other manner of wild foul, they are there in fatiety, besides their
fruits are in such abundance, that I bought a basket of Grapes of the
quantity of halle a pecke for a penny and farthing, and a hatfull of fair
Peaches for as much, pickled cowcombers I have bought a pecke for three pence,
and muskmellions, there has been cast five or six ca^ ^ load of them in one
day to their hogs.

As concerning the diet that is in the Kings Armies, I could never yet hear
any man complain of want, but that it is more plentiful then in the City,
the greatest scarcity has been to some sick soldiers, who being not able to
march with the Leaguers (by reason of their weakness) they have been left
amongst the Boores, or Husbandmen in the next villages, where their Languages
not understood, their succor has bin but small, but for all this in the Camp
has ever bin a continual cheapenes of all things, the King most duly paying
his Soldiers at the end of every month, having in his great Leaguer, under the
conduct of the Princes of Hollock and Anhalt of foot and horse 43000. and at
the least of carts and wagons to carry provision, and baggage for the Army, to
the number of 18000. In his little Leaguer, under the leading of Count
Mansfelt, there are of Foot and Horse 7000.besides Carts and Wagons for
carriage, and yet for these great numbers of men and beasts, there is food in
all abundance.

In the Camp with Grave Mansfelt is the Britain Regiment under the Col. Sir
Andrew Gray Knight, and in Prague I met with many worthy Gentlemen and
Soldiers which were there sick, as the worthy Captain Bushel, Lieutenant
Grimes, Lieutenant Langworth, Ancient Galbreath, Ancient Vandenbrooke, Master
Whitney Master Blundell, and others, all which did most courteously entertain
me, unto whom I must ever rest thankful, and they do affirm that now it has
it pleased God to grant their Soldiers recovery, that they do hope every
Britain Soldier does retain more good spirit, then three enemies of what
nation soever.

Thus having showed part of the best things in Bohemia, the Court and City of
Prague, it shall not be amiss if I relate a little merrily, of some things
there tolerable, some intolerable, some naught, and some worse then naught; for
as every Rose has a prickle, and every Be a sting, so no earthly Kingdom
has such perfection of goodness but it may be justly taxed with
imperfections.

PRague is a famous ancient, Kingly seat,
In situation and in state complete,
Rich in abundance of the earths best treasure,
Proud and high minded beyond bounds or measure,
In Architecture stately; in Attire,
Beizonians Ple^beians do aspire,
To be apparelled with the stately port
Of Worship, Honor, or the Royal Court;
Their Coaches, and Caroches are so rise,
They do attend on every trades-mans wife,
Whose Husbands are but in a mean regard
And get their living by the Ell or Yard,
How ever their Estates may be defended,
Their wives like demi Ladies are attended:
I there a Chimney-sweepers wife have seen,
Habilimented like the Diamond Queen,
Most gaudy garish, as a fine Maid-marrian,
With breath as sweet as any sugar carrion,
With satin cloak, lined through with budg, or sable,
Or cunny furre, (or what her purse is able)
With velvet hood, with tiffanies, and purles,
Rebatees. frizlings, and with powdered curles,
And (lest her hue or sent should be attainted,)
She Is antidoted, well perfumed and painted,
She Is fur'd she is fringed. she is laced, and at her wast:
She Is with a massy chain of silver braced,
She Is yallow staach'd, and ruff'd, and cuff'd, and muff'd,
She Is ring'd, she is braceleted she is richly tuff'd,
Her petticote, good silk as can be bought,
Her smock about the tale laced round and wrought,
Her gadding legs are finely Spanish booted,
The whilst her husband like d a slave all sooted,
Looks like A Courtier to infernal Pluto,
And knows himself to be a base cornuto.
Then since a man that lives by Chimney sweep,
His wife so gaudy richly clad does keep,
Think then but how a Merchants wife may go
Or how a Burgamasters wife does show;
There (by a kind of topsieturuy use,)
The women wear the boots, the men the shoes,
I know not if's be profit or else pride,
But sure they are oft'ner ridden then they ride:
These females seem to be most valiant there,
Their painting shows they do no colors scare,
Most Art-like plastring Natures imperfections,
With sublimated, white and red complexions;
So much for Pride I have observed there,
Their other faults, are almost every where.
Thus having staid in Prague almost 3 weeks, I returned from thence homeward,
on Tuesday, the 26. of September, having in my company a widow (and four small
children) whose Husband being an Englishman and the Kings Brewer for Beer,
deceased, and was buried there in Prague whilst I was there: the good desolate
woman having received reward after seven years Service there and at
Heidelbergh, being desirous to return to her Country ( England) came with us,
with my brother, and my fellow Tilbery. We took two Coaches at the Castle of
Prague, and in a day and half, we were carried 7. Dutch miles, to a Town in
Bohemia (standing on the river of Elue) called Leutmeritz, at which town we all
laid our moneys together, and bought a boat of 48. foot in length, and not 3.
foot in breadth, and because we did not know the river, we hired a Bohemian
waterman to guide us 15. dutch miles, to the Town of Dreason in Saxony. But 4,
miles short of that Town, which was the first Town in the Saxon Country,
called Pirne, where we were stayed 5. hours without the Gates, till such time
as the Burgamaster would be pleased to examine us: in the mean space our
waterman (not daring to abide the terrible trial of examination, because the
Duke of Saxon was in Arms against the King of Beam, he ran away, and left us
to bring the boat down the river 600. English miles our selves to Hamburgh

But now to close up all, I will relate what rare diet, excellent cookery, and
sweet Lodging we had in our journey in Germany: first, for our comfort, after
very hard getting of houseroome our lodginge was every night in straw, where
lying together well littered, we honestly always left our sheets behind us:
then at our suppers at a table square, and so broad, that two men can hardly
shake hands over it, we being some twelve about it. Our first dish being a raw
Cabbadge, of the quantity of half a pecke, cut and chopped small, with the fat
of resty bacon powered upon it in stead of oil, which dish must be emptied
before we could get any more: Our second dish perhaps a peoke of boyld apples
and honey, the Apples being boiled skins, cores, stalks and all: Thirdly 100.
Gudgeons newly taken perhaps, yet as salt as if they had been three years
pickled, or twice at the East Iadies, boyld with scayles, guts and all, and
buried in Ginger like sawdust: a fresh pike as salt as brine, boyld in flat
milk, with a pound of Garlic. This was the manner of the most part of our
diet; and if we did ask them why they did salt their meat so unreasonable,
there answer was, that their beer could not be consumed, except their meat
were salted extraordinarily.

If a man find a fault or seem distasted with there beastly diet, he is in
danger to be thrust out of doors, and take up his lodging in the streets, and
in the conclusion when dinner or supper is ended, then comes mine Host, or his
leather lip'd Froe, with a saucy reekoning of what they please, which sounds in
our ears like a harsh Epilogue, after a bad play; for what they say we must
pay, their words are irreuocable (like the ancient Kings of Persia) and we must
not question or ask how and how it can be so much, but pay them their demand
without grumbling, to half a farthing.

Which made me call to miad six several principals, that do belong to a
traveler, as patience, silence, wariness, watchfulness and a good stomach,
and a purse well moneyed; for if he want any one of these, (perhaps) the other
five will never bring him to his iournies end. A man's patience must be such,
that (though he be a Barron) he must bear all abuses, either in words,
lodging, diet, or almost any thing, though offered from or by a sowter, tinker,
or a Merchant of tripes and turnips; his silence must be, that though he bear
and understand himself wronged, yet he must be as dumb as a Gudgeon or a
Wniting mop: and though his mouth be shut, his wariness must be such, that his
ears must be ever open, to listen and ouer-heare all danger that may be
complotted against him, his wate^fulnesse must be so, that he must seldom
sleep with both his eyes at once, least his throat be cut before he wake
again. But for his stomach, he must eat grass with a horse, and draffe
with the hogs, for he that cannot eat pickel'd herring broth, and dirty
puddings, shall many times fast by authority, and go to bed without his
supper: and last of all he must have Fortunatus or a Prince, his purse, that
must be (like a Drunkards dagger) ever drawn, to pay bountifully for such wash
and grains, as his valiant stomach has overcome, conquered and devoured; but
of this a little in verse.

Six things unto a Trauailer belongs,
An Asses back, to abide and bear all wrongs:
A fishes tongue (mute) grudging speech forbearing.
A Hearts quick ear all dangers over hearing,
A dogs eyes, that must wake as they do sleep,
And by such watch his corpse from peril keep.
A swines sweet homely taste that must digest
All Fish, Flesh, Roots, Foul, foul and beastly dressed;
And last, he must have ever at his call
A purse well lynde with coin to pay for all.
With this kind of lodging and dyer, and with tedious labor sometimes night
and day; we came in 14. days 607. miles from Prague in Bohemia, to Hambrogh
on the hither skirts of Germany, the River having above 1000. shelues and
sands, and 800. Islands, so that a man cannot see on which side of them to go,
there being 240. mils chained in boats on the first stream, and a number
numberless of Oaks and other trees sunk with the violence of the River, and
sometimes fogs and mists that we could not see a boats length from us: besides
great Rocks, and stones that were fallen into the water, that any or many of
these impediments do often overthrow boats, and drown passengers; yet I, and
my fellow Tilbery (we being both his Majesty's watermen) did by Gods assistance
safely escape them all, and brought our selves, as is before said, to Hamborogh,
where being windebound 10. days, I thank the English Merchants, I was well
welcomed, until a ^^st it pleased God, the wind came fair, I ^^oke ship,
and after nine days and nights of various weather (I give praise to the
Almighty) I came home to my house in London on Saturday the 28. of September,
1620.

You that have bought this, grieve not at the cost,
There Is something worthy your noting, all is not lost,
First half a Constable is well bumbasted,
If there were nothing else, your coins not wasted,
Then I relate of hills, and dales, and downs,
Of churches, Chapels, Palaces, and Towns,
And then to make amends (although but small)
I tell a tale of a great tub withal,
With many a Gallows, Gybbet and wheel ^^^^^
Where murd'rers bones are broke from head to
How rich Bohemia is in wealth and food,
Of all things which for man or beast is good.
How in the Court at Prague'a Princely place,
A gracious Queen vouchsafed me to grace,
How on the sixteenth day of August last,
King Frederick to his royal Army past,
How fifty thousand were in arms araid,
Of the Kings force, beside to Hungarian aid,
And how Bohemia strongly can appose,
And cuffe and curry all their daring foes.
Then though no news of state may here be had,
I know here is something will make good men glad,
No bringer of strange tales I mean to be,
Nor I Will believe none that are told to me
FINIS.
PRINCE CHARLES HIS WELL COME FROM SPAIN: Who Landed at Portsmouth on Sunday
the 5. of October, and came safely to London on Monday the 6. of the same,
1623. WITH The Triumphs of LONDON for the same his happy Arrival. And the
Relation of such Towns as are situate in the ways to take post-horse at,
from the City of London to Dover: and from Callice through all France and
Spain, to Madrid, to the Spanish-Court.
AFter great Britain (overwhelmed with doubts, hopes, fears, and most
careful, loving and dutiful Jealousy) had dolourously drooped and mounted in
a robe of melancholy 8.monethlong, for the absence our hopeful, unparalleled,
and illustrious Prince Charles, each minute of whole unexpected and unthought
of Journey from hence, seeming a tedious torture to millions of loving and
wel-wishing hearts, whose happy and wel-comes home does like the radiant Sun
expel all the dismal and moody clouds of grief and melancholy; to the
universal joy of his Royal Father, and all his loyal Subjects, having passed
so long and tedious a Journey, so much change of air and varieties of diet,
(preserved by the Almighties especial providence) from all dangers and
casualties that might any way impeach his Highness health, or prejudice is
Princely person, in any of his affairs.

After his Highness stay from the 7. of March with his Catholic Majesty at
his Court at Madrid with the great and magnificent Entertainments, Feastings,
Maskings, Banquetings, Huntings, Hawkings, and diures other royal pleasant,
laudable, costly sumptuous, and manly disports, and exercises, wherewith the
King, the Queen, the fair, virtuous and lovely Lady Maria, (the highborne
Infanta) his highness having all the content and welcome which so potent a
Monarch could any way express, or our gracious Prince expect: Then to ease our
common grief, and to revive our half dead hopes, it pleased his grace to take
his leave of Madrid and passingby easy Iournies on his way, accompanied some
partby the King after whose departure from his Highness was attended by
certain of the Graundes of Spain, so that in 13. or 14. days space, his
Highness came in perfect health to the Portof Saint Anderas, in the Province
of Biscay, where when our English Fleet had knowledge of his long looked for
and welcome coming, then did the hearts of every man leap within him for joy,
their eyes ouerflowed with tears of loving and dutiful affection, their
voices shooted with acclamations. The great Ordnance thundered and filled the
earth and skies with loud reioycings, the trumpets clangor pierced the welkin,
the beaten drums ratled tryumphantly, all manner of Instruments sounded
melodiously, and to better and sweeten all the rest, his Highness most
graciously accepted their loves mutually and thankefully. But blustering Boreas,
with his brother Eurus (the North and East wind) blew most stiffly and,
churlishly detained our joy and happiness from us here in Britain. So that
never any loving mother desired with more longing to see her hopeful Son,
whose long absence had filled her with grief, then all the honest Inhabitants of
this Kingdom did hunger and thirst to see or hear from their most hopeful and
beloved Prince. With what greedy desire did many thousands (as it were) nail
their eye sights daily upon Fanes, Weather-cocks, the smoke of Chimneyes, and
the Racking of the Clouds; and for fifteen long days and nights, the
thwartouer and cross North and Easterly Wind blew us nothing but lengthening
of our Sorrows, and delaying of our comforts, until at last on Friday the
third of October last it pleased the great Archmaster of winds and Seas, to
tutne the breath of Eolus the way we most heartily prayed for: So that his
Highness speedily taking advantage of this most happy and prosperous Gale;
Anchors were soon weighed, Sails suddenly displayed and by the providence
of the Almighty, and the diligent industry of the skillful Nauigators and
Martiners, his Highness most safely Landed at Portsmouth in Hampshire, on
Sunday the fifth of October, betwixt the hours of three and four in the
afternoon, where he took Coach and came that night and Lodged near Guilford
in Surrey, 25. miles from London, at the house of the Right Honorable the Lord
Viscount Anuan's.

The happy news of his Highness most welcome arivall, was brought to London
on Monday being the sixth of October, and shortly after the same morning he
came in person himself, taking Barge at Lambeth with the Duke of Buckingham,
followed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and diverse other; whence he past to
Yorkehouse, betwixt eight and nine of the clock, where he having taken some
repast, he took Coach again to go toward his Royal Father, to rejoice his
heart with his Princely presence.

The joyful news of his happy return filled the whole Kingdom with
excessive joy; first his most royal Father had a chief share in the comfort:
Secondly, many of his good Servants, who were almost with grief for his long
absence like so many bodies without life: but now they are all relieved by his
welcome presence, with the spirits of mirth and alacrity. But the City of
London, in expression of their loving duties, have spared for no cost, either
general or particular.

THe Bells proclaimed aloud in every Steeple,
The joyful acclamations of the people.
The Ordnance thundered with so high a strain,
As if great Mars they meant to entertain.
The Bonfires blazing, infinite almost,
Gave such a heat as if the world did roast.
True mirth and gladness was in every face,
And healths ran bravely round in every place:
That sure I think this sixth day of October
Ten thousand men will go to bed scarce (etc.)
This was a day all dedicate to Mirth,
As 'twere our Royal CHARLES his second birth.
And this day is a Jewel well returned,
For whom this Kingdom yesterday so mourned
God length his days who is the cause of this,
And make us thankful for so great a bliss.
The whole day being spent thus in mirth, triumphs, and thanksgiving, wherein
the people of all degrees, from the highest to the lowest, both rich and poor
in London, Westminster, and the Suburbs, to their powers expressed their loves:
that not so much but the four Elements, Fire, Water, Air, and Earth, seemed
to applaud the celebration of this happy and welcome day, for the Heavens most
abundantly powered down a shower of rain of nine hours continuance, which
the dry and thirsty earth drank most greeddy or as I may say most lovingly, to
the health of so joyful and auspicious a solemnity. The fire (or fires) in
all places, Streets, Lanes, Courts, and Corners,(despite the Rain, or envying
that it should quench the flaming ardency of its tran^^^^dent Love) ascended
upwards in show of thankfulness: and the vast, empty, and subtle Air, was
filled with the shours and acclamations of people, with the rejoicing noyles of
Instruments, Ordnance, Muskets, Bells, Drums, and Trumpets. And further I heard
it credibly reported, that there was one Bonefire made at the Guildhall in
London, which cost one hundred pounds (belike it was some Logwood which was
prohibited and unlawful to be used by Dyers and being forfeited, was ordained
to be burnt in triumph:) But (as good cause we had) the day was commanded to be
kept holiday, so that no shops were opened, no manner of work was done from
morning to night, but carrying and recarying Wood to make Bonfires, ringing,
filling and emptying of pots, tha^al seemed as if the world was newly preserved
from some second Flood (as indeed our whole Kingdom was from a flood of
grief) to the sale and happy haven of happiness.

Moreover his Highness happy and joyful coming on that day, was a putting
off an execution which six men and two women condemned male factors were to
suffer at Tyburne, whereby he was the most fortunate cause of their reprieues
and saving, and a larger time of repentance to amend their iiues.

The very Vintners burnt their bushes in Fleetstreet and other places, and
their wine was burnt (all over London and Westminster) into all colors of the
Rainebow, whole Pints, Quarts, Pottles, and Gallons, were made into Bonefires
of Sack and Claret, whilst good fellows like loving Salamanders swallowed
those liquid fires most sweetly and affectionately. But as concerning this
fuel of Bacchus, a great many would not stay, or could not endure to see it
burnt, and so devoured those French and Spanish Billets and Faggots raw, which
afterward being warmed with shooting, laughing, singing and Leaping, the heat
burst out so hotly, that it appeared in many a high colored face, till in the
end the fire was quenched in the embers and ashes of sleep.

And to the intent all estates should be merry, there were diverse Noblemen,
Gentlemen, and other, that gave store of gold to the poor, some gave vessels
of wine in the streets.

Thu, was the whole day spent, till the dark night came, and then began the
second part of Englands joy: for the nights Love did as it were scorn to be
outstripped with the days affection and obedience. Amongst the rest, the
Spanish Ambassadors, both at Exeter house in the Strand, and at Ely house in
Holborne, did express their Loves by their charges and reioycings.

Then began a most merry and joyful confusion of Billets, Faggots, Bauins, and
Logs, Baskets, buckets, and tubs were hotly and merrily consumed, Buts, Pipes,
Hogsheads, Teirces, puncheons, Barrels, Kilderkins, Firkins, Ru^lets, and
Dryfats most bravely blazed and suffered; Some in Smithfield burnt their old
Coaches, (and I wish they had all been so well bestowed) washing boules, and
beetles went to wrack, old graters and stools were turned to ashes,
mouse-traps and tinder boxes came tolight, and he or she that had but four
tokens or as much credit, committed their whole estate to fire and faggot;
insomuch that Chandlers-shops and storehouses, were almost willingly emptied.
But in Paul's Churchyard was exceeding benighted tryumphs for on the cross
round about were placed, on the batlements and on the top of it as many burning
Linkes, as the Prince his Highness was years old: and in some good distance
from the Cross, were two mighty bone fires; besides there was a cross of wood
erected which extended into four branches, and upon every branch a pitch
barrel was fastened, and one in the midst on the top, which made a brave show
in the burning ^ then were there Cr^ssit Lights, and most excellent
fire-workes, with squibs, cracker, rackets, which most delightfully flew, every
way. And it is certain to be proved, that betwixt Paul's Churchyard and London
bridge in the nearest way that could be gone, there were 108. Bonefires told,
many of them having at least one Load of wood in each, some less: I speak not
of oath Streets Lanes which are out of that way, besides the Strand,
Westminster, and Holborne, with hundreds of places which I saw not.

All these and much more was done here in London, Westminster, and the
adjoining places, nor is it to be doubted but that all Cities, Towns, and
Villages, will generally and particulary show their loving obedience and
affections.

Here is set forth the long and tedious Journey, with the several stages or
places where men take Post-horse quite through the Spacious Kingdom of France;
and so throughout into Spain, to the City of Madrid, being in all 141.
several stages or PosteTowns, some 8, some 10.12. or 16. miles from each
other, being in all about 1100. miles.

London Saint Leu Darford Lufarder Rochester Escouen Sittingbourne Saint Dennis
Canterbury PARIS Dover La Burlarayur CALLICE Longuemeaux Le Bison Chator
Marquessa Bonur Bulloigne Estampe Newchattell Guillerua, Franeaz Angueruille
Montruell Shaupillary Newpon Shate^gaillad Bernai Artenay Noieane Sercott
Abeuille ORLEANC^ Aillyle hanc dordes Saint Minion Flaircourt Nostra Dama
Piguigny de Clara. Amiens Lestroya shemina Hancourt. Le Laurena der ^ux Flaire
Maid Briteur Mondinaux Rauigny BLOIS Saint Remy Les Montriba Cleremont Lambin
R^ucellei Mont Richard Vr Liege Lochez Vr voya de Lion Varenur Cusac Liguer Le
port de Crussac La bay Le Charbon blanc Perlane Le port de la Ba. Shatibben
still La Tredeuir BOVRDEAVX Chaffener Le petit Bordeaux POICTIERS Rufigni
Hauborre Vr port Ai^utete Troia Vinour Pooter Vmenicur Belleene Cover Muret
Chour Allispostel Chouffa Le Brouheer Villafoignant Ien Guiller Aiger Laharee
Gouruille Les Sperroone St. Seuerdeaux Chastel Villara Mayor Chasteauneuf Saint
Vincent Nonnauille Le Cabalon Barbefieux Les Anders Raignar Vnposte Aioutee La
Grole BAYON Mou Lien Bidarbe Plonte Balc S. Ian de Luz Chauignon Arinanat
What Towns are named in this Catalogue since you read Callice, are all
standing in France: Now we come to relate of the passage through Spain to the
City of Madrid; And first after your passage from Bayon you come shortly into
the Kingdom of Navarre, which is now in the King of Spaines Dominions, the
first place therein where they take Post-horse is named, Iron, or Feria Poypela
Oyason Miranda Eseruand Maiogur Tollousette Sogure Tolosa Brenica Verafrangij
Castil de pione Segaur Quinta Pall^ Gallarette BVRGOS Andi^amer Bisbregur
VITORIA Song^ide ^^^ma ^^habon ^^andadeduera ^^^ubia Fressenuille Cana^uille
Chastel St. Augustine St. Mresieur Acauenda Bouteagur MADRID.
Thus having showed the long and dangerous tract by Land and from London to
Madrid, we may herein see is part how much we are all bound to be thankful to
our great and good God, who has so healthfully, happily, and timely preserved
and ^^^^ned our gracious Prince so wishedly, after so many perils past on his
part and so many doubts and fears on ours, upon the which I have (for a
conclusion) written these following verses.

THe Prince of Princes, and the King of Kings,
Whose Eye of Prauidence foresees all things,
To whom what ever was, or ere shallbe,
Is present still before his Majesty.
Who does dispose of all things as he list,
And graspeth Time in his eternal fist;
He sees and knows (for us) what is bad or good,
And all things is by him well understood,
Men's weak conjectures no way can areed,
What Is in the immortal Parliament decreed,
And what the Trinity concludes there,
We must expect it with obedience here.
Then let not any man presume so far,
To search what the Almighties councels are,
But let our wills attend upon his will,
And let this will be our direction still.
Let not Pleibeans be inquisitiue.
Or into any profound State-businesse diue.
We in five hundred and nere sixty year,
Since first the Norman did the Scepter bear,
Have many hopeful royal Princes had,
Who as Heaven pleased to bless, were good or bad,
Beanclarke was first (who was first Henry crowned)
For learning and for wisdom high renowned)
Beyond the verge of Christendomes Swift Fame,
Did make the world admire his noble name.
The black Prince Edward, all his life time ran
The race of an accomplished Gentleman:
His valor and tryumphant victories,
Did still the world and mount unto the skies.
The warlike Henry of that name the fist,
With his innated virtue up did lift
His name and fame to such perspicuous grace,
Which time or no oblivion can deface,
Prince A^^hur whom our Chronicks record,
To be a virtuous and a hopeful Lord:
His budding fortunes were by death prevented,
And as he lived beloved he died lamented.
His brother Henry from his fall did spring,
First to be Prince of Wales, then Englands King,
He was magnificent and fortunate,
According to the greatness of his state.
Next Edward his undoubted heir by birth,
Who (for the sins of men upon the earth)
God took him hence as he began to bloome,
Whose worthy memory men's hearts into^ be.
Prince Henry last, a Prince of as great hope
As ere was any yet beneath the Cop^
He lived and died be wailed and renowned
And left this Land with tears or sorrow drowned
Then only this illustrious b^^^ remained.
Our gracious Charles, by Heauen^ high grace ord^in'd
To be our loy, whose virtues (as I gather)
Will length the life of his beloved Father.
True love and honor made his Highneste please,
Aduenturously to pass ore Lands and Seas.
With hazard of his royal person and
In that, the hope of all our happy Land.
But blessed be his Name, whose great protection
Preserved him still from change of airs infectiorn,
That gave him health and strength among sundry Nations,
To Endure and like their dyers variations,
That though to others these things might be strange,
Yet did this Princely vlgour never change,
But with a strong and able constitution,
He bore out all with manly resolution.
Love sometimes made the Gods themselves disguise,
And mussle up their mighty Dieties,
And virtuous Princes of the Gods have ^ds,
When Princes goodness do outgoe the Gods,
Then foolish man this is no work of thine,
But operation of the power Divine,
Let God alone with what he has in hand,
It Is saucy, folly, madness, to withstand
What his eternal wisdom has decreed,
Who better knows then we do, what we need.
To him lets pray for his most safe protection,
Him we implore for his most sure direction:
Let his assistance be Prince Charles his guide,
That in the end God may be glorifide,
Let us amendment in our lives express,
And let our thanks be more, our sins be less.
Amongst the rest this is to be remembered, that two Watermen at the Tower
Wharfe burnt both their Boats in a Bonefire most merrily.

FINIS.
AN ENGLISH-MANS LOVE TO BOHEMIA.
DEDICATED To the Honorable, well approved, and accomplished Soldier, Sir
ANDREW GRAY Knight, Colonel of the Forces of Great Britain, in this Noble
Bohemian Preparation.
SIR ANDREW GRAI^. Anagramma, I GUARD IN WARS.
Honorable Knight:
THere are two especial Causes that have moved me most boldly to thrust these
rude lines into the world: The first is my hearty affection to the generality
of the cause you undertake, (which I believe God and his best servants do
affect:) and the other is my love and service which I owe to your worthy Self
in particular, for many vnde served friendships which I have received from you,
and many of your noble friends for your sake. Ingratitude is a Devil, so far
worse them all the devils, that if I should crave harbor of me, in the
likeness of an Angel of light, yet it would never by persuaded to entertain
it. My thankful acknowledgement of your goodness toward me is my prayers and
best wishes, which shall ever be a poor requital toward you, not forgetting
my thanks in the behalf of all the worthy Ladies and others of that
Angelical sex that are married and resident in London, whose chaste honors
you(as became a true Knight) defended, when an audacious Frenchman most
slanderously did (without exception) swear there was not one honest Women
dwelling within the bounds of this populous City, but that they had all
generally abused the bed of Marriage: then did your noble self enforce the
pestiferous peasant to swallow his odious calumny, and in humility to comfesse
there were fifty thousand or a greater number that never had wronged their
Husbands in that unlawful act. I have made bold to speak of this matter here,
because the abuse was so general, and your quarrel so Honorable, which I
think unfit to be buried in silence or forgetfulness: howsoever, I crave your
pardon and worthy acceptance, whilst I most obsequiously remain,

Ever to be commanded by you, JOHN TAILOR,

AN ENGLISH-MANS LOVE TO BOHEMIA. With a friendly Farewell to all the noble
Soldiers that go from great Britain to that honorable Expedition. As ALSO,
The most part of the Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, Bishops, and
other friendly Confederates, that are combined with the Bohemian part.
Wars, noble wars, and manly brave designs.
Where glorious valor in bright Armor shines:
Where God with guards of Angels does defend,
And best of Christian Princes do befriend,
Where mighty Kings in glittering burnisht arms
Lead bloody brusing battles, and alarmes.
Where honor, truth, love royal reputation,
Make Realms and Nations join in combination,
Bohemia, Denmarks and Hungaria,
The upper and the lower Bauaria,
The two great Counties of the Pa^^atine,
The King of Sweden friendly does combine,
The Marquess and Elector Brandenburge,
The Dukes of Brunswicke and of Lunenburge,
Of Holstein, Deuxpont, and of Wittemberge,
Of the Low-Saxons, and of Mackelberge,
Brave Hessens Lantsgraue Anholts worthy Prince of Tuscani^.
Prince.
The inhance Towns whom force cannot convince:
Prince Mauric^, and the States of Netherlands,
And the ancient Knights of The Empire lend their hands (famed,
These and a number more then I have named,
Whose worths and valors through the world are
With many a Marquess, Bishop, Lord, and Knight,
Toppose foul wrong, and to defend fair right:
Whose warlike troops assembled bravely are,
To aid a gracious Prince in a just war.
Bishops of Ha^^flads, Magenberg, Hoeshri^^ ^senburgh. The Marquess of
Auspasts, ^^ullinbag, Dwil^gh. The Count Palatine of ^^^tricks and Luxemburgh.
Tho States of v^^^^and Sauoy.

For God, for Natures, and for Nations Laws,
This martial Army, undertakes this cause;
And true borne Britains, worthy Countrymen,
Resume your ancient honors once again.
I know your valiant minds are sharp and keen
To serve you Souereignes daughter Bohems Queen,
I know you need to spur to set you on,
But you think days are years till you are gone,
And being gone, you will wealth and honor win,
Whilst riot here at home adds sin to sin,
You (God assisting) may do mighty things,
Make Kings of Captives, and of Captives Kings,
Riches and love those that survive shall gain,
And Fame, and Heaven the Portion of the slain.
The wounds and scars more beautiful will make
Those that do wear them for true honors sake.
Since God then in his love did preordaine
That you should be his Champions, to maintain
His quarrel and his cause^ a fig for foes,
God being with you, how can man oppose?
Some may object, Your enemies are store,
If so, your fame and victori'es the more;
Men do win honor when they cope with men,
The Eagle will not triumph over a Wren,
The Lion with the Mouse will not contend,
Nor men Against boys and women wars will bend,
But clouds of dust and smoke, and blood and sweat,
Are the maine means that will true honor get,
Thus to Fames altitude must men aspire
By noble actions won through sword and fire,
By trumpets Clangor, drums, guns, flute of fife:
For as there is an end to every life,
And man well knows, that one day he must end it,
Let him keep't well, defend, and bravely spend it.
O grief to see how many stout men lie
Half rotten in their beds before they dye;
Some by soul surfets, some by odious whoring.
In misery lie stinking and deploring,
And e're a lingering death their sad life ends,
They are most tedious loathsome to their friends;
Wasting in Physic which adds woe to grief
That which should yield their families relief:
At last when wished death their cares do cure,
Their names like to their bodies lie obscure.
Whereas the Soldier with a Christian breast,
Wars for his Soueraigues peace, and Countries rest:
He to his Makers will, his will inclines.
And never against Heaven impatiently repines,
He to his Savior says that thou art mine,
And being thou redeem'st me. I am thine,
That if I live or dye, or dye or live,
Blessed be thy name whether thou take or give,
This resolution pierces heavens high roof,
And arms a Soldier more then Cannon proof.
Suppose his life ends by some noble wounds,
His Soul to Heaven, from whence it came reb^unds:
Suppose blown up with powder up he flies.
Fire his impurity repurifies.
Suppose a shot pierce through his breast or head,
He nobly lived, and nobly he is dead,
He lies not bedred stinking, nor does rave
Blaspheming against him that should him save,
Nor he in Physic does consume and spend
That which himself and others should defend,
He does not languish drawing, loathsome breath,
But dies before his friends do wish his death,
And though his earthly part to earth does pass.
His fame outweares a Monument of brass.
Most worthy Countrymen courageous hearts,
Now is the time now act brave manly parts,
Remember you are Sons unto such Sires,
Whose sacred memories the world admires,
Make your names fearful to your foes again,
Like Talbot to the French, or Drake to Spain:
Think on brave valiant Essex and Mounti^y,
And Sidney, that did Englands foes destroy,
With noble Norris, Williams, and the Veeres,
The Grayes, the Willing ^bi^s; all peerless Peers,
And when you think what glory they have won.
Some worthy actions by you will be done.
34. Battles fought in France by Englishmen since the Conquest. Henry the sixth.

Remember Poi^tiers, Cressy, Agincourt.
With Bullein, Turwin, Turnyes warlike sport.
And more (our honors higher to advance)
Our King of England was crowned King of France.
In Paris thus all France we did prouoake
To Obey and serve under the English yoke.
In Ireland 18. bloody fields we fought,
And that fierce Nation to subjection brought,
Besides Tyroues rebellion which foul strife
Cost England many a pound, lost many a life,
And before we were Scotlands, or it ours,
How often have we with opposed powers
In most vnneighboutly, unfriendly manners,
With hostile arms, displaying bloody banners:
With various victories on either side,
Now up, now down, our fortunes have been tried,
What one fight wins, the other loosing yields,
In more then sixescore bloody foughten fields.
But since that we and they, and they and we
More near then brethren, now conjoined be,
Those scattering powers we each against other lead,
Being one knit body, to one royal head.
Then, let this Island, East, West, South and North
Jointly in these brave wars emblaze out worth
And as there was a strife that once befell
Twixt men of Judah and of Israel:
Contending which should love King David best.
And who in him had greatest interest.
Long may contention only then be thus
Twixt vsand Scotland, and twixt them and us:
Still friendly striving which of us can be
Most true and loyal to his Majesty.
This is a strife will please the God of peace,
And this contending will our loves increase.
You hardy Scots remember royal Bruce,
And what stout Wallace valor did produce:
The glorious name of Stewards, Hamiltons,
The Er^^kine, M^rayes, nd^ he Leuingstons,
The noble Ramseyes, and the illustrious Hayes,
The valiant Dowglasses, the Grimes and Grayes.
Great Sir James Douglas, a most valiant Knight.
Lead seauenty battles with victorious fight.
Not by Lieutenants, or by deputation.
But he in person wan his reputation.
The Turks and Sarazens he overcame,
Where ending life he purchased end less fame,
And his true noble worth is well derived,
To worthies of that name that since suruiu'd,
The praise of Sir James Douglas, in the Reign of King Robert Bruce, 1330. In
13. maine battle she overcame Gods enemies, and as last was slain.

Then since both Nations did and do abound
With men approved and through all lands renowned,
Through Europs and through Asia, further far,
Then is our blessed Redeemers Sepulcher.
Through all the Coasts of tawny Africa,
And through the bounds of rich America,
And as the world our worths acknowledge must,
Let not our valor sleeping lie and rust;
^^ to immortalize our Britains name,
Let it from imbers burst into a flame.
We have that Land and shape our Elders had,
Their courages were good, can ours be bad?
Their deeds did manifest their worthy minds,
Then how can we degenerate from kinds?
^^ former times we were so given to war,
Witness the broils ('twixt York and Lancaster)
Having no place to sorreigne Foes to go,
Amongst our selves, we made our selves a Foe
Fall threescore years with fierce unkind alarmes,
Were practiced fierce uncivil civil arms,
Whilst fourscore Peers of the blood royal did,
With hundred thousands Com^oners beside.
Thus Englishmen to wars did bear good will.
They would be doing, although doing ill.
And Scotlands History avouches clear,
Of many civil wars and turmoyles there.
Rebellion, discord, rapine and foul spoil,
Has pierced the bowels of their Native soil,
Themselves against themselves, Peers against Peers,
And kin with kin together by the cares,
The friend against friend, each other has withstood,
Unfriendly friends weltering in their blood,
Thus we with them, and they with us contending,
And we our selves, and they themselves thus rending,
Does show what all of us has ever bin
Addicted unto martial discipline:
S^^^^ can report, and Portingale can tell,
Denmark and Norway, both can witness well,
Sweden and Poland, truly can declare
Our Service there, and almost every where.
And The Low Countries, Holland, Zealand, etc,
Belgia but for the English and the Scots,
Perpetual slavery had been their lots
Under the great commanding power of Spain,
By the Prince of Par^a's and the Archdukes train.
Far for my witnesses I need look,
It Is writ in many a hundred living book.
And Newports famous battle bravely tells,
The English and the Scots in fight excels:
Yea all, or most Towns in those seuen^^^^ Lands
Have felt the force, or friendship of their hands.
Ostend whose siege all other did surpass
That will be, is, or I think ever was,
In three years three months, Scots and Englishmen
Did more then Troy accomplished in ren.
Ostend endured (which never will be forget)
Above seven hundred thousand Canon shot:
And, as if Hell against it did conspire,
They did abide death, dearth, and sword and fire,
There danger was with resolution mixed,
And honor with true valor firmly fixed.
Were death more horrid then a Gorgons head,
In his worst shapes they met him free from dread.
There many a Britain died, and yet they live,
In fame, which fame to us does courage give.
At last, when to an end the siege was come,
The gainers of it cast their loosing samme.
And the uneven reckoning thus did run:
The winners had most loss, the loosers won:
For in this siege upon the Archdukes side
Seven Masters of the Camp all wounded did.
And fifteen Colonels in that war deceast.
And Serieant Majors twenty nine, at least.
Captains five hundred sixty five were slain.
Leiutenants (whilst this Leaguer did remain)
One thousand, and one hundred and sixteen
Dyed and are now as they had never been.
Ensigns three hundred twenty two, all even:
And nineteen hundred Serieants and eleven.
Corp'rals and Lantzpriz^ does death did mix
In number seauenteene hundred sixty six.
Of Soldiers, Mariners, women, children, all,
More then seven times ten thousand there did fall.
Thus Ostend was at dear rates won and lost,
Besides these lives, with many millions cost.
And when 'twas won, 'twas won but on conditions,
On honorable terms, and compositions:
The winners wan a ruined heap of stones,
A demi- G^lgotha of dead men's bones.
Thus the brave Britains that the same did leave,
Left nothing in it worthy to receive.
And thus from time to time, from age to age,
To these late days of our last Pilgrimage,
We have been men with martial minds inspired,
And for our meeds, beloved, approved, admit'd.
Men prize not Manhood at so low a rate
To make it idle, and effeminate:
And worthy Countrymen I hope and trust
You Will do as much as your forefathers durst,
A fair advantage now is offered here
Whereby your wonted worths may well appear,
And he that in this quarrel will not strike,
Let him expect never to have the like.
He that spares both his person and his purse,
Must (if ever he use it) use it worse.
And you that for that purpose go from hence
To serne that mighty Princess, and that Prince,
Ten thousand, thousand prayers shall every day
Implore the Almighty to direct your way.
Go on, go on, brave Soldiers never cease
Till noble War, produce a noble Peace.
A brief Description of BOHEMIA.
THE Kingdom of Bohemia, is well peopled with many brave Horsemen and
Footmen: Rich, fruitful, and plentifully stored (by the Almighties bounty,)
with all the treasures of Nature fit for the use and commodity of Man: It has
in it of Castles, and walled Towns, to the number of 780. and 32000. Villages;
by a Grant from the Emperor CHARLES the Fourth, it was freed for ever of the
payments of all Contributions to the Empire whatsoever; Morauia, Silesia, and
Lusatia, are as large as Bohemia, well replenished with stout Horsemen and
Footmen.

FINIS.
Honor Concealed; Strangely Revealed: OR, The worthy Praise of the Unknown
Merits of the Renowned Archibald Armestrong, who for his unexpected
Peacemaking in France, betwixt the King and the Rochellers, has this Poem
Dedicated as a Trophee, to his matchless Vertues^ This being done in the year
of our Lord, 1623. Written by him whose Name Annagramatiz'd, is LOYOL IN HEART.
It Is not the Wars of late I write upon
In France, at the Isles of Rhea or Olleron:
These things were written in K. JAMES his Reign.
Then Read it not with a mistaking Brain.
Dedicated to the Reader or Understander, or both, or either, or neither.
WHat you are you partly know, and how you will like my lines I partly know
not, A better man's pen might have undertaken this task, for the Subject for
worth is net inferior to Ajax, of whom the learned Sir John Harington wrote a
well approved Volume; the smallest baires have their shadows, and the least
shadow its substance, and though virtue belong Eclipsed by the corrupted
Cleudes of Enny, yet at the last, the Sunbeames of noble m^^t. w^ll^reake
through those Contagious Vaepours, expelling the obscure caertaines of
Malignity, to the Eternizing of the owners fume, and the unrecalled Obloquy of
hateful and malicious opposition. And in this Iron age, where men hoard up
their goodness as they do their money. Wherein it is to be condoled (to the
tune of Lachrime) to see how much Vice is expressed, Poverty depressed,
Innocence oppressed, Vanity impressed, Charity suppressed, the Muses made
Bawdes and Parasites to hide and slatter the wilfulness and folly of
Greatness: whilst honor of a men's own winning, spinning and weauing, cannot
be allowed him for his own wearing. This made me to stir my sterrill
i^^^ention from the Leathean Den of obliuions Cimcrianisme, and take this
neglected subject in hand, which else is to be seared, had been irrecouerably
swallowed in the precipitated bottomless Abisse of sable Mourning melancholy
Taciturnity and Forgetfulness. Herein may the Reader without much wearying his
eyesight, see Werth emblazed, Desert praised, Valor advanced, ^^ it
described, Art commended, and all this (Paradoxically) applied, to the person
and successful Industry, of the overmuch and worthy to be praised. Archiball
Armestrong, the Camplementall Comma of Courtly Contentment; Whose Admirable
Fortunte, Fate, Luck, Hap, Chance, Destiny, or what you please to term it,
was to appease the furious Wars in France, and make a wonderful. Accord or
Peace, betwixt the King and his Subjects, whereby it may be observed, how
Rochell was conserved, the Kings Honor reserved, act France preserved, and
what Archy deserved.

JOHN TAILOR.

THE PEACE OF FRANCE, With the Praise of ARCHY.
Ulysses was a happy man of men,
In that his acts were writ with Homers pen,
And Virgil writ the Actions and the Glory,
Of bold and brave AEneas wandering story,
Great Alexander had the like success,
Whose life wise Quintus Curtius did express,
And (worthy Archy) so it fares with thee
To have thy name and same emblaz'd by me.
For Homer was the Prince of Poets styled,
And Princely actions only he compyl'd.
And Quintus Curtius, with ornated skill,
Did soar aloft with his Hystorian Quill.
But pardon me, much short of their great worth
If in alowerstraine I set thee forth.
And sure I hold it for no little Grace
That it is my lot thy honor to uncase,
Nor can it be impeachment to thy name
To have so mean a pen divulge thy fame.
For when the business is in order knit,
The subject for the writer will seem fit.
First, I have read in Prophesies of old,
That written were by Merlin, who soretold
Some strange predictions, that without all doubt
Does Cull, or pick, or point, or mark thee out.
The Prophecy, as thus.
WHen as the fect of Mabom^t
Themselu's against themselves shall set:
When as the Gauls the Gauls shall spur and Gall,
When Castles, Towns and Towers shall fall,
When naught but Horror, Death and Dread,
Shall famous fertile France over spread,
Then shall a man depart our strands,
Borne 'twixt the Rumps of two great Lands,
And he shall make these brawles to cease
And set all France in friendly peace.
His name shell Strong in Arm be called,
With Chief (though Bearded) joined with Bald,
This Prophecy in charily kept by one Himpshage Scottish witch who dwells in a
Cave in Ram one of the Isles of the Hebrades.

About nine hundred years, or somewhat nigh,
Are past, since Merlin speak this Prophecy,
And all the world may see, that what he sed
In Archies person is accomplished.
First all the Turks that Mahomet adore
Are by the ears, and welter in their Gere.
Next France, which Gaul in time of yore was named;
With war has wasted been, with fire inflamed.
Then thirdly, Armestrong thither was conuaid
And then, and not till then the peace was made.
We fourthly find (to further our auailes)
How he was borne between the Rumps, or tails
Of two great Kingdoms, which were called the borders.
Now midst of Britain, free from old disorders.
And lastly Strong in Arm his name shall be.
Chief, Arch, or Bald or bold, which all agree.
There is a fellow, with acrafty pate
That made a cunaing Anagram of late.
The words were Merry Rascal, to be hanged,
But if the writer in my hands were sang'd,
I quickly would enforce him know that he
Should moddle with his fellows not with me.
But unto thee, from whom I have digrest
Brave Archybald, I find it manifest
The name of Armstrong, like strong men of arms.
Have ever valiantly outdar'd all harms.
And for their stout atchieuments bin acoounted,
To be regarded, waited on and mounted.
Whilst those, whose merits could not win such state
Were grieved at their heart to so their fate.
And may thodrise. Within this age of ours,
Unto the honor of thy ancestors.
That the Auxungia of thy Matchless breast
May breed fresh Mandrahes to cause sleep and rest.
To charm the Temples of consuming wars.
As thouhast done amongst the Rocheslers.
'Twas sharp contention that began those broils
Which filled all France with fell domesticke spoils.
And that discention did so far offend
That wisdom scarcely could the mischief end,
And therefore 'twas ordained that thou should come
To hang the Colors up, and still the Drum
To cease the trumpets clang, and fifes shall squeaking
And bring forth frightfull peace that close, ^ay sneaking
Not dating once her visage out to thrust
Till Armours were committed unto rust;
Oh thou who art half English and half S^^^
I would not have thee proud of this thy lot,
But yet I should be proud if it were my chance
To do as thou say thou have done in France.
But should thy worth and acts be here denyd:
Thou have ten thousand witnesses beside.
Who will maintain against either friend or foe,
If thou did make the peace in France or no.
It Is certain that thou soundst them all unruly
Within the Month of August, or of July:
And in September, or I think October
Thou lefst them all in peace, some drunk, some sober;
Then what is he that dares expostulate,
Or any way thy fame extenuate,
But he whos^e Idleness will make it known.
That he has little business of his own.
Nor can he be of any Rank or note
That enuies thee, or any of thy Coat:
Then let desert fall where desert is due
Thine honor is thine own, and fresh and new.
War could not end the war, it was plainly seen
Wealth could not stop the floudgates of their spleen,
Strength could not make them lay their weapons by
Wit could not help, nor martial policy,
Persuasion did not do that good it would,
And valor would decide it. If it could.
When neither of these virtues are in price
Then thou did boldly show them, what a Vice
It was for Subjects to provoke their King,
By their Robellion their own deaths to bring.
When many a Mounsieur of the gallant Gauls,
Vnnat'rally was slain in civil braules,
When many a Mother childlesse there was made
And Sire against Sonoppos'd with trenchant blade,
When Roaring Cannons counterchekt the thunder
And slately buildings lay their Ruins under.
When smoke eclipsing Sol, made skies look ^^^,
And murdering bullets seuer'd lim from lim;
Then did ^ thou come, and happy was thy coming
For then they left their Gunning and their Dromming.
And let the world of thee say what it list,
God will bless him that made the war defist.
It Is wondrous strange, fate cannot be withstood
No man did dream thou ever would do good:
And yet to see beyond all expectation
All France and Britain Ring with acclamation
And with applaw sefull thanks they do rejoice
That great Navarre, and Burbon, and Valoyes,
Guize, Loraine, Bulleins, all the Gallian Pesros.
Like fixed stars, are settled in their spheres,
A soole can raise a flame from out a spark,
But he is a man of special note and mark
And worthy to be guerdon'd for his pain
That turns a flame into a spark again;
So have thou done, or else there are some Liars
Thou did extinguish wars combustious fires,
And what thou did, I see no reason but,
In print the Memorandums should be put.
Thou have a brace of Brothers trauailers.
Who each of them in their particulers
Shows of what house they came, and of all others,
They Will do things worthy to be known thy brothers.
The one to Poland, or the Land of Po
To unexpected purpose late did go.
The other furnished with as brave a mind
Unto Virginia wandered with the wind,
Whore like a second Rephabus, brave Kitty
Does make those parts admire him, he is so witty;
And though but little service he did here
It Is past man's knowledge what he may do there.
And where they are, they strive still to appear,
To do as much good there, as thou do here.
I wish you all were married, that your seed
Like Sons of Caine might multiply and breed:
For it is great pity, such a stock, or race
Oblivion should consume, or time deface.
Had thou but lined amongst the hairebraind elss,
In Italy the Gibtliues and the Guolphs:
Thou with thy oylely Oratory words
Had made them (at their own wills sheath their swords:
Or when Angustus, Pompey, Anthony,
Sought Monarchy in Wars Triumuiri,
Had thou beeno near them er'e their mortal fight
Thou had done more then I can truly write.
Or had Jerusalem but had thy mate
Before Vespatsan it did Ruinate,
The Mad men Eleazar, Simon, John, ^^
Had never wrought their own destruction.
And happy had it been, if thou had bin
When York and Lancaster did loose and win
Thou had done more then any man can tell
Those mighty factions to suppresle and quell.
There Is a late Current stufr'd with tales and news
Of the Hungarians, Sarazens, and Ienes,
And to the Turkish City ( Hight) it come
Constantinople, or Bizantium,
In which Caranta all the French disignes,
With Archies name endors'd did grace the lines,
And how thou wast the Pipe or Instrument
That made the peace there to their great content.
And scanning of the business thus and thus
They did admire thee there as much as us.
For they are there like rough tempestnous Seas;
All by the ears, whom no man can appease,
At last amongst themselves they did agree,
To send a great Ambassador for thee,
The great Grandsigneor, the Commission signed
And they abide to have Moon, Sun and Wind,
The name of him that brings the Embassy.
Is Halye Bashaw, Lord of Tripoly.
He is attonded and well waited on,
By Sinan Beglerbeg of Babylon.
The Sanzake of 'Damascus comes along
And many more, a mighty troop and throng.
And sure twill be much honor unto thee
To cause these Mad Mabometant agree.
Thou shall be fed with dainties and with suckets
And thy reward shall be Chickens and Ducats.
The Turks are at ciull Wars, and entend to lend an Am bassador for Archy,
to do as much for them as he did for France. He set sail for this place the
32. of November last.

The Tartar Chrim, Icleaped Tamor Can.
Wars with the mighty great Mosccuian
And unto them have thy exploytes bin told,
But go not there, the Climates are to cold.
Our Merchants might do well to hire thee hence
Against Tuuis and Argiera, for their desence,
There in the Straites, of in the Gulf of Veuice,
(Where Neptune to sseth Ships, like ^^ls at tennis)
Thou may amongst the Pirates take some course,
To mitigate or aggrauate their force.
I muse what Planet had within the sky,
Predominance at thy Nativity,
For surely Fortune wrapped thee in her smoke,
And like a Lamb, did in the Cradle Rock:
She dandled thee and luld thee in her lap
And tenderly she gave thee suck and pap;
Her purblinde fancy to her more delights
Esteemed thee amongst her chiefest sauc^tites;
Much happy was it that ^^^^^^? ^^^^ to smile
On us, that thou had birth within our I Will,
For thou at I^yic might have been borne,
Then all our hopes in thee had been forlorn,
Or at Cathay in China, ordapan,
And when can tell what we should all do than,
And sure did Prestor John and the Mogull
But know thy worth and virtue to the full
Not Britains Bounds thy Carcass then could hold
If thou for Gold or Silver might be fold.
Or it is a question they would make pretense
'Tinuade our Land, by force to take thee hence.
For why in thee a Jewel we enjoy,
As Whilome the 'Palladium was to Troy:
Or like the Target, dropped from Heaven to Rome
So on thy person waits a fat all doom;
In Terra called Incognita did they
That there inhabit, know but any way
To compass thee, they 'ld hazard blood and bone
And pass the Frigide and the Torid Zone,
The trope of Cancer and of Capricorn,
To hold them from the hazard they would scorn
And they would cut the Equinoctial line
'Tenioy (as we do) that sweet corpse of thine.
Wer^t thou with Powhaton, he would agree
To leave the Devil, and fall to worship thee,
And (like that image) give thee honor there
Nabuchaduezzar did in Babel rear.
But whether does my Muse thus Rambling run,
It Is known the Wars in France are past and done.
And if themselves they to remembrance call,
For what thou did, they ought to thank thee all,
Mars, and Bellona from thy presence fled,
And Baccbus with fair Venus came in stead,
The Codpiece God ( Priapus) is erected
In France, and Somnus is by Pax protected,
Thou have hercau'd the soldiers of some knocks,
And wounds and slashes are transformed to packs,
For C^berea's the Chyrurgians Star
And makes more work in peace then Mars in was.
The Generals and Masters of the Camp
The Colonels now cease to swear and stamp.
The Captains have laid by their bastinadoes,
Lieutenants put to silence their braua does.
The Colors surdled up, the Drum is mute,
The Seriants Ranks and Files does not dispute.
The Corp rall knows no watchword. Lantzprezzdoes.
Nor Soldiers scowt or lie in ambuscadoes,
Now murdring Bullets, morrall Cuts and stabs,
Are metamotphos'd to Dice, Drink, and Drabs,
To Fiddlers, Pipers, Panders, Parasites,
Fools, Knaves and Fester^, and such rare delights;
The Cups run round, the tongue walks quick and glid
Whilst every Tinker does enjoy his Tyb.
Thrice happy France, that in thee did arrive
Our thong armed Archy, that war thence did drive.
And happier Britain, now thy worth is known
In having such a lewell of thine own.
A Jewel pollish'd, and most brightly, burnished,
Foyld, and well painted, set in Gold, Rich furnished;
But all men knows a Jewel shows not well,
Except it be dependant like a Bell,
But Archy let delay breed no distaste,
There Is time enough for all things, have makes wasle.
There was a Post came late all tired and weary,
From Callice over the Sea to Canterbury:
And he reported that in every angle,
Of France, did bonfires burn, and Bells did Iangle;
In every market Town, and Street and City,
The Ballad makers have composed a Ditty
To magnify thy name which is resounded,
And wondered at as far as France is bounded,
That in their drinking Schools and tippling Houses,
The Fiddlers sing thy honor, for two touses.
The whilst thy health runs round with wondrous quicknes,
'Till too much Health or health at last brings sickness.
And shall a foreign Land thus farte expretle
To thee (for thy deserts) their thankefulness,
And shall thy health in Britain not be gazled
And all our Muses be hide-bound and muzled.
Great Iouc forbid, that such indignity
Should ere befall to thy malignity.
For since the Graces here do not befriend thee
And since the Virtues will no way attend thee,
The Senses seem as senseless unto thee
The Sciences to thee Regardlesse be.
The Gods and Goddesses seem dumb and stupid
(Except the Punke of Daphes, and young Ca^^)
Only the deadly Sins, the Fates, and F^i^^,
On thee (as on ten thousand more) attends,
I noted this, and grieved much in mind,
That in our loves we were so far behind;
I was resolved to undergo this Chance,
To write thy praise, as some have done in France;
And now I enterd am, I Will further in
And spur my Muse amain through thick and thin,
'Till I have made the Court thy praises ring,
'Till in thy lawd the City Songs do sing.
Till I have forced the Country Rural Styaines
Chant, Pipe, and dance thy praises on the Plains,
The tongues confusion in our brave Exchange
Shall Babell like declare thy story strange,
The news of thee shall fill the Barbers shops,
And at the Bake-houses, as thick as hops
The tatling women as they mold their bread
Shall with their dough thy fourefold praises knead,
Whilst Water bearers at the Conduits all
Within their tankerds sound thy honor shall,
And at the house of office at Qucene hithe.
Men shall record thy actions brave and blithe.
Then France shall well perceive, who'ere says nay,
That we have bauins here as well as they,
And that we can make bonefires, and ring bells,
Drink healths, and be stark drunk, and something else,
That we can time beyond all sense or Reason
And can do what we may at any season,
This shall be done before that I have done
And then thy glory shall a gallop run,
Like to the gliding of a shooting Star,
East, West, South, North, from Deuer to Dunbar,
Mean space accept the rudeness of my Rhyme.
And I Will do twice as much another time.
Thus wishing to Escape occasions Male,
In Courtly Complement, my pen bids Vale.
FINIS.
HEAVENS BLESSING, AND EARTHS JOY. OR, A true relation, of the supposed
Sea Fights and Fire-workes, as were accomplished, before the Royal Celebration
of the all-beloued Marriage, of the two peerless Paragons of Christendom,
FREDERICK and ELIZABETH. With Triumphall Encomiasticke Verses, consecrated to
the Immortal memory of those happy and blessed Nuptials.
DEDICATED To the illustrous Lamp of true VVorth, the noble, Ingenious,
judicious, and understanding Gentleman, Sir JAMES MVRAY Knight.

Unto the prospect of your Wisdoms eyes,
I Consecrate these Epithalamies.
Not that I think them worthy of your view,
But for in Love my thoughts are bound to you:
I do confess my self unworthy far
To write, in such high canses as these are,
Which, Homer, Virgil, nor the fluent Tully,
In sitting terms could scarce express them fully:
But since the Muses did their bounties show,
And on me did poor Poesy bestow;
I hold it best to play the thankful man,
To spend their gifts the best ways that I can,
And not like pedling Bastards of the Muses,
That like to Lawyers, live on Times abuses.
Thus unto you I give it as it is,
Desiring pardon where there is oughts amiss.
Your Worships, Ever to be commanded in all integrity: JOHN TAILOR.

THE FIGHT BETWEEN the Ships and Galleyes.
I Did not write nor publish (this description of fire and water tryumphs) to
the intent that they should only read the relation that were spectators of
them for to such (perhaps) it will relish somewhat tedious like a tale that is
too often told: but I did write these things, that those who are far remoted,
not only in his Majesty's Dominions, but also in foreign territories, may have
an understanding of the glorious Pomp, and magnificent Domination of our High
and mighty Monarch King James: and further, to demonstrate the skils and
knowledges that our warlike Nations has in Engines, fireworks and other
military discipline, that they thereby may be known, that howsoever war
seem to sleep, yet (upon any ground or lawful occasion (the command of our
dread Sovereign can rouse her to the terror of all malignant opposers of his
Royal state and dignity. But to the purpose.

In the representation of this Sea Fight there were 16 Ships, 16. Gallyes, and
6. Frigots: of the which Navy, the Ships were Christians, and the Galleys were
supposed Turks, all being artificially rigged and trimmed, well manned and
furnished with great Ordinance and Musketeers: one of the Christian fleet was
a great vessel or a supposed Venetian Argosey, and another was a tall ship, as
it were appointed for the safe Connoy of the Argosey. And for the auodying of
the troublesomnesse of Boats and Wherries, and other perturbatious multitudes,
there was a lists or bounds, made with Lighters, Hoyes, and other great Boats
to the number of 250 or thereabouts: the one end of the Lists was as high
(almost) as Lambeth bridge, and the other end as low as the Temple stairs, and
so fastened to the South shore, or the upper end of the Bank on Southwarke
side, in the form of a half Moon or Cemicircle. So that boats might pass
up and down the River betwixt London side and the Lighters any way. The
aforesaid Turkish Galleys lying all at an Anchor over against Westminster, in a
Hanen or Harbor made artifically with Masts and other provision 60 yards into
the River, which harbor or haven was belonging to a supposed Turkish or
Barbarian Castle of Tunis, Algiers, or some other Mohammedan fortification,
where the Galleys might scowt out for purchase, and retire in again for
safeguard at their pleasure. About two of the clock on Saturday the 13. of
February, the aforesaid Argosey and the Venetian Ship her conuoy, sets forward
fromward the Temple, and driving up with the wind and tide till they came as
high as York house, where 4 Galleys met and encountered with them: where upon a
sudden there was friendly exchanging of small shot and great Ordinance on
both sides, to the great delectation of all the beholders: the Drums, Trumpets,
Fifes, Weights Guns, shouts, and acclamations of the Mariners, Soldiers and
Spectators, with such reuerberating Echoes of joy to and fro, that there
wanted nothing in this fight (but that which was fit to be wanting) which was ships
sunk and torn in pieces, men groaning, rent and dismembered, some slain, some
drowned, some maimed, all expecting confusion. This was the manner of the happy
and famous battle of Lepanto, fought betwixt the Turks and the Christians in
the year of grace 1571. or in this bloody manner was the memorable battle
betwixt us and the invincible (as it was thought) Spanish Armado in the year
1588. but in the end (in this friendly fight) the ship and Argosey were
encompassed round by the Gallyes, and surprised and taken; whereupon the whole
fleet made toward them to rescue them, and revenge their received injuries.

Then there was a Beacon fiered by the Turks which gave warning to the Castle
and the Gallyes, of the coming of the Christian Fleet: Then all the Ships and
Gallyes met in friendly opposition and imaginary hurly-burly battalions: then
the lofty instruments of Wars clamorous encouragements sounded: the thundering
Artillery roared, the Musketeers in number less volleys discharged on all
sides, the smoke as it were eclipsing Titans refulgent Beams, filling all the
Air with a confused cloudy mist. The Castle and the Land adjacent, continually
discharging great shot in abundance at the Ships, and the Ships at them
again: so that after this delightful battle had doubtfully lasted three
hours, to the great contentment of all the beholders, the Victory inclining to
neither side, all being opposed foes, and combined friends: all victors, all
tryumphers, none to be vanquished, and therefore no conquerors. The Drums,
Trumpets, Flutes and Guns, filling the Air with repurcussiue acclamations:
upon which, for a Carastrophe or Period to these delightful royalities,
command was given that the Retreat should be founded on both sides. And thus
these Princely recreations were accomplished and finished.

These things could not conveniently be printed in order as they were done, by
reason of the diversity of them.

For here I was feign to describe the fight of the Ships and Gallyes first,
which was performed last. For the fire-workes were performed on Thursday night
the 11. of February, and the fight was upon the Saturday following.

At the which fire works the Master Gunner of England, on the shore did
perform many skillful and ingenious exploits with great Bumbards, shooting up
many artificial Bals of fire into the Air, which flew up into one whole
mighty sierie Ball, and in their falling dispearsed into diverse streams like
Raine-bowes, in many innumerable fires. After all which, was discharged a great
peale of Chambers, to the contentment of the royal spectators, and the great
credit of the performers.

The true description of such part of the Fire-workes as were devised and
accomplished by Mr. John Nodes Gunner, and Servant to the Kings most excellent
Majesty.
THe Imperial and Beauteous Lady Queen of the Feminine Territories, of the
man hating Amazonians, with whose bright eye dazeling Coruscancie, and whose
Refulgent feature, the Black-sould Hell-commanding Magitian Mango (a Tartarian
borne.) was so ensnared and captiuated, for her Love, and to be assured to
enjoy her, he would set all Hell in an uproar, and pluck Don Beelzebub by the
beard: assuredly persuading himself that without her he could not live, and
for her he would attempt any thing: but she having vowed her self ever to be
one of Vestaes Votaries, always kept Cupid out at the arms end: and bad Madam
Venus make much of stump-footed Vulcan, and keep home like a good Huswife, for
she had no entertainment for her.

Whereupon this hellish Necromancer Mango, (being thus repulst) conuerts all
his Love to outrageous rigor, and immediately with his Charms, Exorcismes,
and Potent execrable incantations, he raises a strong impregnable Pauilion, in
the which he immures, and encloses this beautiful Amazonian Queen with
attendent Ladies, where (though they lived in captivity and bondage) yet, they
had variety of Games and pleasant sports allowed by the Magitian, in hope that
time would work an alteration in her fair flinty breast. And for her sure
guard in his absence, he had erected by Magic, another strong Tower, as a
watch-house, wherein he had placed a fiery Dragon, and an inuinsible Giant: (of
whom I will speak in an other place hereafter.)

Now to this aforesaid Pauilion wearied with toil and travail, the Great
irresistable Champion of the world, and the uncontrollable Patron Saint George
comes: and seeing so bright and luculent a Goddess, (according as his
necessity required) demanded entertainment, whereby he might be refreshed
after his laborious achiuements and honorable endeauours.

The courteous Queen (although she cat'd not for the society of man) seeing his
outward or external feature and warlike accounterments, did presently resolve
with her self that so fair an outside could not be a habitation for foul
Treachery, and with most debonayre gesture, admits his entrance into the
Pauilion, where after he had feasted a while, she relates unto him the true
manner and occasion, of her unfortunate thraldom: Saint George (ever taking
pleasure in most dangerous attempts, holding it his chiefest glory to help
wronged Ladies) vows, that as soon as Phoebus rowz'd himself from the
Antipodes, he would quell the burning Dragon, Conquer the big bon'd Giant,
subvert the enchanted Castle, and enfranchise the Queen with her followers, or
else die in the enterprise thereof. After which promise of his, the Queen to
pass away the time, delights him with these pastimes following, being all
fire-workes.

First, the Pauilion is beleaguerd or inurioned round about with fires, going
out of which, many fiery balls flies up into the Air, with numbers of smaller
fires ascending, that cemicircled Cinthia is (as it were) eclipsed with the
flashes, and the stars are hud wincket with the burning exhalations.

Secondly, is seen a royal hunting of Bucks, and Hounds, and Huntsmen, flying
and chasing one another round about the Pauilion (as if Diana had lately
transformed Acteon, and his ignorant dogs ready to prey on his Carkas) from
whence continually as flying many fires dispersed every way: The lower part of
the Pauilion always burning round about, giving many blows, and great
reports, with many fires flying aloft into the Air.

Thirdly, there does march round about the Pauilion Artificial men, which
shall cast out fires (as before) as it were in skirmish: another part of the
Pauilion is all in a Combustious flame, where Rackets, Crackers, Breakers, and
such like, gives blows and reports without number.

Fourthly, the Queen of Amazonia with all her train of Virgin Ladies, with
fires, marches round as the men did before, with the fire flying dispersedly
diverse ways: the whilst another part of the Pauilion is fired, with many
blows and reports and fires flying alost in the air, from whence it comes
down again in streaming flakes of flashing fire.

Fifthly, aloft within the Turret, shall run (whirling round) a fiery Globe,
with the Turret and all on fire, with many more greater blows then before had
been heard, and diverse and sundry other sorts of fires (then any of the
former) proceeding from thence, and flying into the air in great abundance.

All which things being performed, and the undaunted Knight Saint George taking
his leave of the Amazonian Queen Lucida, he mounts upon his Steed, and
aduenrurously rides toward the enchanted Tower of Brumond.

Now these disports being ended, wherein St. Georges entertainment was only
expressed, with the Queens relation of her bondage, this brave Champion was
seen to ride over the bridge to combat with these aforesaid Monsters, the
Dragon and Giant: all which was expressed in the next devise of Mr. Thomas
Butler: and so I end, with my hearty inuocations to the Almighty to send the
Bride and Bridgroome the years of Methushalah, the fortitude of Joshua, the
wealth of Cressus, and last of all an endless Crown of Immortality in the
highest heavens.

A true description of the Platform of a part of the fire-workes, devised and
made by Mr. Thomas Butler Gunner, and servant to the Kings Royal Majesty.
THis enchanted Castle or Tower of Brumond is in height 40. foot and 30.
square, between which and the Pauilion of the Amazonian Queen, is a long
Bridge, on the which Bridge, the valiant and heroicke Champion Saint George
being mounted on horseback, makes toward the Castle of Brumond, which being
perceived by the watchful Dragon, (who was left by the Margo the Coniuer as a
Centinell) is encountered by him, where as Saint George (being armed at all
points (but especially) with an vnrebated courage) having in his helmet a
burning flaming Feather, and in one hand a burning Lance, and in the other a
fiery Sword, with which weapons he assailes the dreadful Dragon, with such
fury and Monter quelling strokes, as if the Ciclops had been forging, an I
beating T^^erbolts on Vulcans A^uile: where in conclusion, after a terrible and
long endured Combat, with his Lance he gores the Hell-hound under the wing,
that he presently after most hideous roaring, and bleching of fire is vanquished
and s^ine: at which the terrible shaped Giant rises (who having fate as a
Spectator of this bloody Battle upon a stamp of a Tree at the Castle Gate)
and addresses himself toward Saint George, meaning to revenge the death of
the Dragon, and to swallow his enemy for a medium: but at their first
encounter, the blows on both sides fell like thunderclaps, enforcing
Lightnings, and fiery exhalations to sparkle from whence their powerful
strokes lighted: at last the Monster gaping wide as an Arch in London Bridge,
runs furiously, intending to swallow his Adversary at a bit: which Saint George
seeing, upon the sudden thrust his Sword into his greedy throat, and
overthrew him: at which the Monster yels and cores forth such a terrible noyle,
as if the Center of the Earth had cracked, that with the uncouth din thereof,
the Neighboring Hills, Woods, and Valleys, seemed to tremble like an earth
quake.

The Giant lying at the mercy of Saint George, entreats him to spare his life,
and he will show him the way how he shall conquer the Castle, and bring the
Inchanter to his everlasting downfall.

Upon which promise, Saint George and the Giant walk into the Castle together,
where he tells Saint George that there is an Enchanted fountain, and whosoever
can attain to drink of it, shall be he, whom the Fates have ordained to be the
conclusion of the Castles glory.

In the mean space whilst these things were doing, the Magitian Mango, having
intelligence of the dangerous estate of his Castle, and fearing the loss of
his Lady: suddenly mounts him on a flying invisible Devil, and in a moment
alights within the Castle upon whom St. George makes a present conquest. The
Castle has on the top thereof a fiery Fountain, which burns and sends up
Rackets into the Air, some great, and some less, and fire dispearsed many
ways in great abundance with innumerable lights round about.

Secondly, the Magitian it taken with his Coniuring Scepter in his hand, and
bound to a Pillar by Saint George, and burned with store of lights (as before)
with Fires and Rackets ascending and descending too and fro in the Air.

Thirdly, the four Squares of the Tower are fiered, with abundance of Lights,
with Rackets flying into the Air, with fires dispearsed, and scattered diverse
and sundry ways, and with reports and blows, some great, and some less,
according to their making.

Fourthly, the four Turrets are fired with fire, and innumerable lights, with
abundance of Rackets flying too and fro in the Air giving diverse reports, as
before.

Then the maine Castle is fiered, and upon two of the corner Turets are two
Globes fiered, and betwixt each Globe at two other corner Turrets, are a-men,
catching as it were at the Globes which still turn from them, and they chasing
and following the Globes, still burning and turning till all be extinguished
with fire: always Rackets flying and reports thwacking, and Lights burning.

THOMAS BYTLER.

William Bettis his invention, of such part of the fireworkes as were
performed by him at the Royal Celebration: which he had contrived in such
sort, that if the weather had been Rainy or Windy, yet his designements should
have been accamplished.
A Castle with diverse fire works, representing and assuming diverse variable
shapes, and imaginary forms; which continued the space of an hour or
thereabouts: the nature and quality of which fire-worke, was performed as
follows.

1. First, there was seen 13. great fires, to fly too and fro round about the
Castle, whereby it seemed to be beleag^uerd or Circumuolu'd with fires, which
yeeled a most pleasing object to all the Spectators. 2. Secondly, a flight of
great store of Rackets was seen to ascend into the air, and descend again,
which in their descending were extinguished. 3. Thirdly, the whole Castle was
all on fire, wherein was seen many things very delightful. 4. Fourthly, was
seen many buttons fly, dispearsed diverse ways from the Castle, with great
cracks, blows, and reports in great number. 5. Next that, was seen a Stag or
Heart, hunted and chased sed with dogs, all their bodies being artificially made
and proportioned in one flame of fire, where the following Hounds were plainly
seen to pull down and vanquish the Stagge, which they before had chased. 6.
Sixthly, there was seen a great flight of Rackets, with two or three fires a
piece. 7. Seauenthly were seen two or three hundredth fires flying from the
Castle, and then flying too and fro in and out, many ways altogether. 8. Next
which, was seen a great flight of Rackets, with many great fires, some of the
said fires breaking into many parts, diverse ways dispersed in abundance,
which fires were seen to fall burning into the water. 9. Ninthly, was seen
many Rackets flying into the Air in great abundance, giving many blows,
cracks, or reports, numberless. 10. Tenthly, was seen diverse other Rackets
flying aloft into the Air, which Rackets did assimulate the shapes and
proportions of Men, women, fowls, beasts, fishes, and other forms and
figures. Last of all, was heard 100. blows and reports as loud as the report
of a reasonable Chamber is able to give, and so with fires, lights, Rackets,
and such like, (to the delight of all the beholders, and the great credit of
the inuentor of this fireworke) all was extinguished and concluded.
WILLIAM BETTIS.

Master John Tindale Gunner and servant to the Kings Royal Majesty, The true
description of such part of the Fire-workes as were by him devised and
performed at this Royal Tryumphs.
A Castle, old and very Ruinous, called the Castle of Envy, situated and
erected on a Rock (all ragged and horid to behold) called the Rock of Ruin;
encompassed round, and drenched in a troublous Sea, called the Sea of Disquiet:
The Captain of this Castles name was Discord, with his Lieutenant Lawless,
Ancient Hatred, Serieant Malice, Corporal Contention, with his Lansprezado
Hell-hound. The Rock or foundation of this Castle being all replenished with
Adders, Snakes, Toades, Serpents, Scorpions, and such venomous Vermin, from
whose throats were belched many fires, with Crackers, Rackets, blows and
reports in great number.

To the subversion of these maleuolent edifices, there came three Ships, the
one of them being called Good Will, in whom Loyalty was Captain, and Zeal
was Master.

The second ship was named the True-loue, in whom Trust was Captain, and
Perseverance was Master.

The third ship was called Assurance, in whom Circumspection was Captain, and
Providence the Master.

These three ships and Captains with their valiant and confident associates,
assaults this Castle of Envy, where after half an hours fight or thereabouts
(by the invincible prowess of the assai^ants) the Hell borne defendants were
vanquished, their Castle utterly razed, demolished, and subverted, with
Rackets, breakers, blows, and reports innumerable.

JOHN TINDALL.

The description of such part of the Fire works as were devised and
accomplished by Master William Fishenden Gunner, and Servant to his Majesty.
Apiramides or lofty platform, in the form of a Triangled spire, with a
Globe fixed on the top thereof the whole work turning and burning, the space
almost of half an hour, or near thereabouts, from whence proceeded many
Rackets, firea, blows and reports, in great numbers, to the great delight and
contentment of the King, the Queen, the Prince, the Princess Elizabeth, the
Prince Palatine, and diverse others the Nobility, the Gentry, and Commons of
this Kingdom.

FINIS.
EPITHALAMIES. OR, Encomiasticke Triumphall Verses, Consecrated to the
Immortal memory, of the royal Nuptials of the two Parragons of Christendom
FREDERICK and ELIZABETH.
He God.
that upon the Poles has hing'd the skies
Who made the Spheres, the Orbs, and Planets seven.
Whose justice dams, whose mercy justifies,
What was, is, shall be, in earth, Hell, or Heaven:
Whom men and Angels lauds and magnifies,
(According as his Laws command has given)
The poor, the Rich, the Beggar and the King,
In several Anthems his great praises sing.
Then as the meanest do their voices stretch,
To lawd the sempiternall Lord of Lords:
So I a lame Decrepit-witted wretch,
With such poor Phrases as my skill a floords:
From out the Circuit of my brain did fetch,
Such weak invention as my wit records.
To write the tryumphs of this famous I Will,
On which both Heaven and earth with joy does smile.
My Genius therefore my invention moves,
TO sing of Britains great Olympic Games,
Of mirth, of Heaven and earths beloved loves,
Of Princely sports, that noble minds enflames
To do the utmost of their best behoues;
To fill the world with their achieved Fames.
T'attaine Eternities all-passing bounds,
Which neither Fate, nor Death, nor Time confounds.
Guns, Drums, and Trumpets, Fire-workes, Bonfires, Bells.
With acclamations, and applausefull noise:
Tilts, Turneyes, Barriers, all in mirth excels,
The air reuerberates our earthly joys.
This great Tryumphing, Prophet-like fore-tels
(I hope) how The Lake or Gulf of forgetfulness of the which I hope our griefs
have sufficiently carowled.
Leathes Lake all grief destroys,
For now black sorrow from our Land is chased,
And joy and mirth each other have embraced.
How much Ichouah has this Island blessed,
The thoughts of man can never well conceive:
How much we lately were with woes oprest.
For him Prince Henry.
whom Death did late of life bereave.
And in the midst of grief, and sad unrest,
To mirthfull sport God.
freely giu'es us leave:
And when we all were drenched in black despair,
Joy conquered grief, and comfort vanquished care.
Thou high and mighty (...) ^^^,
Count Pallatine and pal(...) of the ^^^^^:
Bauares great Duke, whom God on high does life,
To be the tenth unto the Worthies nine.
Be ever blessed with thy beloved The Princess Elizabeth.
Guilt,
Whom God, and best of men makes only thine:
Let annually the day be given to mirth,
Wherein the Nuptials gave our loy loyes new birth.
Right gracious Princess, great Elizabeth
In whose Heroicke, pure, white Iuory breast,
True virtue lives, and living flourishes:
And as their Mansion has the same possessed:
Beloved of God above, and men beneath,
In whom the Goddesses and graces rest.
By virtues power, Ichonah thee has given,
Each place does seem (where thou remain'st) a heaven.
The Royal blood of Emperors and Kings,
Of Potent Conquerours, and Famous Knights
Successively from these two Princes springs:
Who well may claim these titles as their rights:
The Patrons Christendom to union brings,
Whose unity remoted Lands unites,
And well in time (I hope) this sacred work,
Will hunt from Christian Lands the faithless Turk.
By this happy marriage, great Britain, France, Denmark, Germany, and the
most part of Christendon^e are united either in affinity or consanguinity.

Since first the framing of the worlds vast Room,
A fitter, better match was not combinde;
So old in wisdom, young in beauties bloome,
And both so good and graciously inclinde.
And from this day, until the day of doom;
I doubt succeeding ages shall not find;
Such wisdom, beauty, grace, compact together,
As is innate in them, in both in either.
None (but the Devil and his infernal crew)
At this beloved heavenly match repines,
None (but such fiends, which hell on earth does spue)
Which wish Eclips of their illustrious shines,
The Gods themselves with rare inventions new,
With inspiration man's device refines;
And with their presence undertakes these taskes,
Devises, motions, Revels, plays, and Maskes.
That which God loves most, the Devil hates most: and I am sure that none but
the black crew are offended with these Royal Nuptials.

The thund'rers June.
Bride has ^efe her heavenly bed,
And with her presence this great wedding graces;
Him^^ in Saffron Robes inuelloped:
Ioynas and accords these Lovers loved embraces:
Yea all the Gods down to the Earth are fied.
And among our joys their pleasures enterlaces.
Immortals joins with mortals in their mirth,
And makes the Court their Paradise on earth.
Maiestick Jove has left his spangled Throane
To dance Leuoltoes at this Bridal feast:
Infusieg Iouiall glee in every one,
The high, the low, the greatest and the least.
Sad minds to sable melancholy prone,
Great love their vital parts has so possessed:
That all are wrapped in sportfull ecstasies,
With shows and Glamors ecchoing in the skies.
Where the Plane^ Jupiter has sole predominance, there is all Royal mirth,
and jou^all alacrity.

Sol.
Apollo from the two topt Pernassus.
Muses Hill
Eight of the The Muses.
Sisters nine has brought from thence
(Leaving A tragical mourneful Muse who has been here already, but I hope
now she is lame of the Gout, that she will keep home for ever.
Me^pomence alone there still
To muse on sad and tragical events)
The rest all stretching their all matchless skill
To serve this Royal Princess, and this Princes.
Thus Sol descended from his Radient shrine,
Brings Poesy and Music down divine.
The wrathful God of Mars.
War in burnished Arms
Lays by his angry all confounding mood:
And in the Lifts strikes up sweet Loves Alarmes,
Where friendly wars draws no unfriendly blood,
Where honors fire the noble spirit warmes
To undertake such actions as are good.
Thus mighty Mars these tryumphs does increase At Tilt.
With peaceful war, and sweet contentions peace.
The Queen of Venus.
Love these Royal sports attend,
And at this Banquet deignes to be a guest:
Her whole endeauours she does wholly bend,
She may in Loves delights outstrip the best:
For whosoever does Hymen's Lawos pre^end
If Venus be but absent from the feast,
They may perhaps be merry in some sort,
But it is but painted mirth and ayrie sport.
All worth nothing.

Bright Maias So^e the God of tricks and sleights, ^^^^
Has opened the treasure of his subtle wit; mercury
And as a Servant on this Wedding waits
With Masks, with Reuals, and with tryumphs fit,
His rare inventions and his quaint conceits,
(Twixt Heaven alost, and Hell insernall pit)
He in imaginary shows affords
In shape, form, method, and applausefull words.
Old sullen A dogged melancholy Planet, a maleuolent opposite to all mirth
Saturn hid his moody head,
In dusky shades, of black Cimerian night:
And wavering The Moo^ ^^ who does never continue at a stay, and therefore
she^^^ herself from those delights which I hope will be pe^^^.
Luna closely couched to bed,
Her various change she knew would not delight
The loyal minds where constancy is bred,
Where Protens thoughts are put to shameful flight,
These two ^^^ Luna or indeed the nights, were dark at the Wedding because the
moon s^ined not.
by Jove's command were straightly bound
To stay at home (as better lost then found)
Cupid descended from the Crystal skies
And leaves befind his golden feathered darts:
In steed of whom, he makes fair Ladies eyes
The piercing weapons of true loning hearts,
And he amongst these high Solemnities,
His awful presence freely he imparts,
To all in general with mirthfull cheer,
All sport's the better if loves God be there.
The off spring of the high celestial Jove,
His brain.bred Minerua whom the Poets saine to be the Goddesses Wisdom,
Borne and bred in the brain of Jupiter.
Daughter and his thigh borne Son
Bacchus whom his Father love saved from Abor^iue buth from his mother Se^d,
and sowed him up in his Thigh till the time of his birth was come to a period.
Gai^ Lib.3.
One with advice of wisdom she wed her love,
And the other bounteously made plenty run:
Where wine in streams against one another strone,
Where many a Caske was ba^ckrout an undone,
Deprived the treasure of the fruitfully vinese
By Bacchus bounty, that great God of Wine.s
Thus Jove and Juno, Jmps of aged Ops
With wise Minerua, Mars and Mercury:
Resplendent Sol with musicks strains and ileps
Fair Venus Queen of Loves alacrity,
Loves God with shafts betipe with golden tops
And Bacchus showring sweet humidity,
Gods, Goddesses, the Graces and the Muses,
To grace these tryumphs all their cunnings uses.
Amongst the rest was all recording Fame
Inscalping noble deeds in brazen l^aues:
That meagre Envy cannot wrong that name,
Where brave Heroic acts the mind vpheaues:
F^mes golden trump will through the world proclaim
Whom Fortune, Fare, nor Death nor time bereaues.
Thus like a Scribe, Fame waited to Record
The Neptialls of this Ludy and this Lord,
All making marring time that turns never
To these proceedings still has been auspicious,
And in his Progress will I hope, persevere,
To make their days and hours to be delicious.
Thus Fame, and time, affoords their best endeavor
Unto this royal match to be propitious:
Time in all pleasure through their lives will pass
Whilst Fame records their Fames inleaues of Brass.
Times Progress.

Yon Sons of Judas and Achitophei,
Whose damned delights are treasons, blood, and death:
The almighties power your haughty prides will quell,
And unlike your vassals, vessels of his wrath,
Let all that wish these Princes worse then well,
Be judged and doomed to everlasting Scath,
For it is apparent, and experience proves,
No hare preuailes, where great Ichouah loves.
To whose Omnipotent Eternal power,
I do commit this blessed beloved pair:
Oh let thy graces daily on them shower,
Let each of them be thine adopted Heir a
Raise them at last to thy Celestial Bower,
And feate them both in lasting glories Chair.
In fine, their earthly days be long and blessed:
And after bettred in eternal rest.
A Sonnet to the Imperious Maiestick mirror of King James, great Britains
Monarch.
GReat Phoebus spreads his Rays on good and ill,
Dame Tellus feeds the Lion and the Rat,
The smallest Sails God AEols breath does fill:
And Ttetic Harbots both the Whale and Sprat.
But as the Sun does quicken dying Plants,
So thy illustrious shine does glad all hearts:
And as the Earth supplies our needful wants,
So does thy bounty guerdon good deserts.
And like the aytie AEols pleasant gales,
Thou filst with Joy the Sails of rich and pore,
And as the Sea does harbor Sprats and Whales,
So thou to high and low yields harbor flore.
Thus Sea, Air, Earth, and Titans fiery face,
Are Elementall Servants to thy Grace.
To Life.
SInce that on earth thou wondrous wandering gest,
Arithmeticians never number can
The several Lodgings thouhast taken in man,
In Fish, in Foul, in tame or brutish beast:
Since all by thee from greatest to the least,
Are squared (and well compared) unto a span,
Oh fleeting Life take this ^^y counsel than,
Hold long possession in thy royal breast:
Dwell ever with the King, the Queen, the Prince,
The gracious Princess, and her Princely Spouse.
In each of these thou have a lasting house:
Which Fate, nor Death, nor Time, cannot convince.
And when to change thy Lodging thou art driven,
Thy self and they exalted by to Heaven.
To Death.
To thee, whose auaritious greedy mood,
Does play a sweep stake with all living things
And like a Hors-leech Quaffes the several blood,
Of subjects, Abiects, Emperors and Kings:
That high and low, and all must feel thy stings,
The Lord, the Lowne, the Caitiffe and the Keasar,
A beggars death as much contentment brings
To thee, as did the fall of Julius Caesar.
Then since the good and bad are all as one,
And Larkes to thee, no better are then Kites,
Take then the bad, and let the good alone,
Feed on base wretches, leave the worthy wights,
With thee the wicked evermore will stay,
But from thee, Fame will take the good away.
To Eternity.
THou that beyond all things do goes as far,
That no Cosmographers could e're suruay.
Whose glory (brighter then great Phoebus Carre)
Does shine, where night does never eclipse the day:
To thee I consecrate these Princes acts.
In thee alone let all their beings be:
Let all the measures of their famous tracts.
In the begin, but never end like thee.
And when thy Servant Time, gives Life to Death,
And Death surrenders all their lives to Fame:
Oh then inspire them with celestial breath,
With Saints and Martyrs to applaud thy name.
Thus unto thee, (as thine own proper rights)
Iconsecrate these matchles worthy wights.
John Tailor.

FINIS.
TAILORS FAREVVELL, TO THE TOWER BOTTLES.
THE ARGUMENT.
ABout three hundred and twenty years since, or thereabout, (I think in the
Reign of King Richard the Second) there was a gift given to the Tower, or to
the Lieutenants thereof, for the time then and for ever being, which gift was
two black Leather Bottles, or Bombards of Wine, from every Ship that brought
Wine into the River of Thames; the which has so continued until this day, but
the Merchants finding themselves agreeued lately, because they thought the
Bottles were made bigger then they were formerly wont to be; did wage Law with
the Lieutenant (Sir Geruis Helwis by Name) in which suit the Lieutenant had
been overthrown, but for such witnesses as I found that knew his right for a
long time in their own knowledge. But I having had the gathering of these
Wines for many years, was at last Discharged from my place because I would not
buy it, which because it was never bought or sold before, I would not or durst
not venture upon so dishonest a Nouelty, it being sold indeed at so hugh a
Rate, that who so bought it must pay thrice the value of it: whereupon I took
occasion to take leave of the Bottles in this following Poem, in which the
Reader must be very melancholy, if the reading hereof does not make him very
merry.

JOHN TAILOR.

BY your leave Gentlemen, I Will make some sport,
Although I venture half a hanging for it:
But yet I will no peace or manners break
For I to none but Leather bottles speak.
No anger spurs me forward, or despite
Insomuch plain Verse I talk of wrong and Right.
The looser may speak, when the Winner wins,
And madly merrily my Muse begins.
Mad Bedlam Tom, assist me in thy Rags,
Lend me thy Army of foul Feinds and Hags:
Hobgoblins, Elues, fair Fayries, and foul Furies,
Let me have twelve Groce of Infernail luries,
With Robin. Gooasellow and bloody Borre
Assist my merry Muse, all, every one.
I will not call to the The 9. Muse.
Pegassian Nine,
In this they shall not aid me in a Line:
Their favors I Will reserve till fitter time,
To grace some better business with my Rhyme,
Plain homespun stuff shall now proceed from me,
Much like unto the picture of we The picture of two Fools, and the third
looking on, I do fitly compare with the two black Bottles and my self.
Three.
And now I talk of three, just three we are,
Two false black bottles, and my self at jarre,
And Reader when yon read our cause of strife,
You Will laugh or else lie down, l'le lay my life,
But as remembrance lamely can rehearse,
In sport I Will rip the matter up in Verse.
Yet first I think it fit here down to set
By what means first. I with those Bottles met.
Then stroke your beard my Masters and give ear,
I was a Waterman twice Four long year,
And lived in a Contented happy state,
Then turned the whirling wheel of fickle Fate,
From Water unto Wine: Sir William Waad
D^^ freely, and for nothing turn my trade.
Ten years almost the place I did Retain,
And I filled the two Bottles, being in quantity six gallons, from every ship
that brought Wines up the River of I hames.
gleaned great Bacchus blood from France and Spain,
Few S^ips my visitation did escape,
That brought the spright fuil liquor of the Grape:
My Bottles and my self did often agree,
Full to the top all merry came We three.
Yet always 'twas my chance in Bacchus spite,
To come into the Tower vnfox'd upright.
But as men's thoughts a world of ways do range,
So as Lieutenancs changed, did customs The Wines had been continually
brought into the Lieutenants Seller of the Tower for ^16. years, and never
sold till ^^ of late within this four or five years.
change:
The Ancient use used many years before,
Was sold, unto the highest Rate and more,
At such a price, that whosoever did give,
Must play the Thief, or could not sa^e and live.
Which to my loss, I manifestly found
I am well sure it cost me thirty pound
For one year but before the next year come,
'Twas almost mounted to a It was sold at these hard Rates by another
Lieutenant. (an honest religious Gentleman, and a good Housekeeper) by the
per^wasions of some of his doubled diligent Servants.
double sum:
Then I, in Scorn, Contempt, and vile Disgrace,
Discarded was, and quite thrust from my place,
There Bacchus almost cast me in the mire,
And I from Wine to Water did retire.
But when the blind misiudging world did see,
The strange unlooked for parting of us Three,
To hear but how the multitude did judge,
How they did mutter, mumble, prate and grudge,
That for some Against all the world I oppose my self in this point, but yet
^^ purpose to confess more, then any man can accuse me of.
faults I surely had committed,
I, in disgrace thus from my place was quitted.
These imputations grieved me to the heart,
(For they were caustesse and without desert)
And therefore, though no man above the Ground
That knew the Botles would give Twenty Except he were a Fool, or a Madman.
pound
Rather then I would branded be with shame,
And bear the burden of desertlesse blame,
To be an Owl, contemp^uously b^wondred,
I would I did ^eareth at that Lieutenant was to leave his place, which made me
bargain with him at any price, in hope that he would not stay the full
Receiving, which fell out as I wished it.
give threescore, fourscore, or a hundred.
For I did vow, although I were undone,
I would redeem my credit ouetrunne,
And it is much better in a layle to rot,
To suffer Begg'ry, Slavery, or what not,
Then to be blasted with that wrong of wrongs,
Which is the poison of Backbiting tongues.
Hoysted aloft unto this mounting tax^,
Bound fast in Bonds in Parchment and with wax,
Time galloped, and brought on the payment day,
And for three Months I eighteen pounds did pay
Then I confess, I played the Thief in grain,
And for one Bottle commonly stole twain.
But so who buys the place, and means to thrive,
Must many times for one take four or five.
For this I will maintain and verify,
It is an office no true man can buy.
And by that reason sure I should say well,
It is unfit for any man to sell:
For till at such an extreme rate I bought,
To filch or steal, I scarcely had a thought.
And I dare make a vow before God and men,
I never played the Thief so much as then.
But at the last my friendly stars agreed,
That from my heavy bonds I should be That Lieutenant left his place, by which
I was eased of my hard payments.
freed:
Which if I ever come into again,
Let hanging be the Guerdon for my pain.
Then the By this Lieutenant that now is.
old custom did again begin,
And to the Tower I brought the Bottles in,
For which for serving more then half a year,
I (with much Love) had wages and good cheer,
Till one A desperate Clothworker, that did hunger and thirst to undo himself.
most valiant, ignorantly stout,
Did buy, and ouer-buy, and buy me out.
Thus like times Footeball, was I often tossed
In Dock out Nettle, up down, blessed and crossed,
Out-fac'd and faced, graced and again disgraced,
And as blind Fortune pleased, displaced or placed.
And thus, for ought my A^gury is a kind of Soothsaying by the slight of Birds.
Augury can s^e
Diuorc'd and parted ever are we Three.
Old Nabaoth, my case much is far worse then thine,
Thou but the Vineyard lost, I lost the Wine:
Two witnesses (for bribes) the false accused,
(Perhaps) some prating Knaves have me abused:
Yet thy wrong's more then mine, the reason why,
For thou wast Naboath was stened to death, so am not I.
stoned to Death, so am not I.
But as the Dogs, did eat the flesh and gore
Of Iezabell, that Royal painted Whore,
So may the Gallows eat some friends of mine,
That first strived to remove me from the Wine.
This may by some misfortune be their lot,
Although that any way I wish it not.
But farewell bottles never to return,
Weep you in Sack, whilst I in Al^ will mourn;
Yet though you have no reason, wit, or sense,
I Will senseless caide you for your vile offense,
That from your foster Father me would slide
So dwell with Ignorance, a blind sold guide.
For who in Britain knew (but My Boules do deserve a little reproose.
I) to use you,
And who but I knew how for to abuse you;
My speech to you, no action sure can bear,
From Scandala magratum I am clear.
When Vpland Tradesmen thus dares take in hand
A watery business, they not understand:
It did presage things would turn topsie turny,
And the conclusion of it would be scuruie,
But leaving him unto the course of Fate,
Bottles let you and I a while debate,
Call your extrauaga^t wild humors home,
And think but whom you are departed from;
I that for your sakes have given stabs and stripes,
To glue you suck from Hogsheads and from Pipes,
I that with p^ines and care you long have nursed,
Often filled you with the best, and left the worst.
And to maintain you full, would often pierce,
The best of Batts, a Puncheon, or a Teirce,
Whilst Pipes and Sack buts were the Instruments
That I playdon, to fill your full contents.
With Bastart, Sack, with Allegant, and Rhenish,
Your hungry mawes I often did replenish.
With Malmesie, Muskadell, and Corcica,
With White, Red, Claret, and Liatica,
With Hollocke, Sherant, Mallig, Canara,
I stufe your sides up with a surserara,
That though the world was hard, my care was still,
To search and labor you might have your fill,
That when my Master did or sup or dine,
He had his choice of This was a credit ^^ the Kings Castle, and to the
Lieutenant thereof,
fifteen sorts of Wine.
And as good wines they were I dare be bold.
As any Seller in this Land did hold.
Thus from these Bottles I made honor spring.
Besitting for the Castle of a King.
This Royastie my labor did maintain.
When I had meat and wages for my pain.
Ungrateful Bettles, take it not amiss
That I, of your unkindness tell you this,
Sure if you could speak, you could say in brief,
Your greatest want, was still my greatest grief.
Did I not often in my bosom hug you,
And in mine arms would (like a Father) hug you,
Have I not run through Tempests, Gusts, and Storms.
And me with danger in strange various former,
All times and tides, with, and against the stream.
Your welfare ever was my labors sheame.
Sleet, Rain, Hail, Wind, or Winters frosty chaps,
Jove's Lightning, or his dreadful Thunderclaps,
When all the Elements in one consoire,
Sad earth, sharp air, rough water, flashing fire.
Have warred on one another, as if all
This world of nothing, would to nothing fall.
When showring Haile-shot, from the storming heaven
Nor blustering Gusts by AEols belching driven,
Could hold me back, then often I searched and sought,
And found, and unto you the purchase brought.
All weathers, fair, foul, Sunshine, wet and dry,
I trauail'd still, your paunches to supply.
Often have I fought, and swagger'd in your Right,
And filled you still by either sleigh^t or might.
And in The Exchequer I stood for your Cause,
Else had you been confounded by the Laws.
I did produce such I found and brought 30 w^nesses that know and took their
^^^hes of the quantity of the Bottles for 50.years,
witnesses which crossed
The Merchants suit, else you had quite been lost,
And (but for me) apparently it is known,
You had been Kicksie winsie over thrown,
And for my Service and my much pains taken,
I am cashiered, abandoned, and forsaken.
I knew it well, and said, and swore it too.
That he that bought you, would himself undo,
And I was promised, that when he gave over,
That I should fill you, as I did before,
For which four years with patience I did stay,
Expecting he would break or run away.
Which though it be fallen out as I expected,
Yet nevertheless my Service is rejected,
Let men judge if I have not cause to write
Against my Fortune, and the worlds despite,
That in my prime of strengh, so long a 14. years.
space,
I toiled and drudg'd, in such a gainelesse place,
Whereas the best part of my life I spent,
And to my power gave every man content,
In all which time which I did then remain,
I gave no man occasion to complain,
For unto all that know me, I appeal,
To speak if well or ill I used to deal,
Or if there be the least abuse in me,
For which I thus from you should sundred be.
For though my profit by you was but small,
Yet sure my Gain was Love in general.
And that I do not lie nor speak amiss,
I can bring hundreds that can witness this,
Yet for all this, I ever am put off,
And made a scorn, a Byword and a scoff.
It must some villains information be,
That has maliciously abused me,
But if I knew the misinformingelfe.
I would write lines should make him hang himself.
Be he a great man that does use me ill,
(That makes his will his Law, and Law his will)
I hold a poor man may that great man tell,
How that in doing ill, he does not well,
But Bottles black, once more have at your breech,
For unto you I only bend my speech
Full fourteen times had Sols illustrious Rays,
Ran through the Zodiac, when I spent my days
To conserve, reserve, prestrue and deserve,
Your loves, when you with wants were like to starve.
A Groce of Moons, and twice 12. months besides,
I have attended you all time and tides.
^^ I gained Twelve. penez by you all that time,
May I to Tyburne for promotion Climb,
For though the blind world understand it not,
I know there is nothing by you can be got,
Except a drunken pate, a scuruy word,
And now and then be tumbled over board,
And though these mischiefs I have kept me fro,
No other Bottleman could e're do so,
It Is known you have been stabbed, thrown in the Thames,
And he that filled you beaten, with exclaimes,
Merchants, who have much abused bin
Which Exigents, I never brought you in,
But I with peace and quietn ^^^ got more,
Then any brabling over could do before.
The Warders knows, each Bottleman (but I)
Had always a cracked crowns ^^^ black eye,
Often beaten like a Dog, with a s^arch'd faee.
Turned empty, beaten back with vile disgrace.
These injuries my self did bring ^^ q^iet,
And still with peace I filled you free from Riot.
My labors have been ded care to you,
And you have dealt with me, as with a Jew,
For unto thousand witn^ss^s it is known.
I did esteem your welfare as mine own,
But an objection from my words may run,
That seeing nothing by you may be won,
Why I do keep this deal of do about you
When as I say, I can li^^ best wi^^o ^t you.
I answer, though no profit you do bring,
Yet there is many a profitable thing,
Which I of This course never came into my mind, in 14. years whilst I kept
the place.
M^^^^s might often buy,
Which unto me would yield c^^^d^^ty
And I expected when the time should be
That I should fill you, as 'tw^^ prom^t me,
Whereby some other profit might be got,
Which I in form^r times rem^^^^d not,
All which could do the C^^to^^ ^^^^^ A Jar of Olives and ^yle, a few
Po^atoes, Oranges, Le^mons, and diverse other things, which a man may buy, get,
and sane by.
no wrong,
Which to repeat here, would ^^ ouer-long,
But I was sl^ighted with most vile disgrace,
And one that was my Prentise place'd in The fellow was ever a true man to me,
and I enoy not his happiness, but yet: ^^^ very ^ou^e play o^^erd me.
place. They are made of a Beast hide

But holla, holla, Muse come back come back,
I speak to none out you, you Bottles black,
You that are now turned Monsters, most ingrate,
Where you have cause to love most, most do hate,
You that are of good manners quite d^priu'd,
Worse then the Beast from whence you are derived,
If you be good for nothing but what is naught,
Then sure you have bin better sed then taught:
Besides the world will tax me, and say still
The fault was mine, that nurtured you ^o ill.
Perfisting thus in your injurious wrong.
It shows you are drunk with being E^^^ long.
Long fasting sure, has made you wea^ and dull,
For you are stedyest, when you are most full.
Me thinks I hear you say the fault's no^ yours,
You are commanded by Superiou^ powers,
But if the choice were yours, you had much rather
That I, than any one the Wines should gather.
Alas poor fools, I see your force is weak,
Complain you cannot, wanting power to speak;
If you had speech, it may be you would tell,
How with you and the Merchants I dealt well,
But it is no matter though you silent be,
My fourteen years long service speaks for me.
And for the Merchants still my friends did prove,
I Will tell them somewhat to req^ite their Love.
First let their wisdoms but collect and sum,
How many ships with wine do yearly come,
And they will find that all these Bottles shall
Not fill At 1. gallons from a ship, and from some but I ^^^ and a ^^^, I
account 30. ships allowance is the quan^^^ ^^^ Hog head had ^^^ ^^^ may be
easily found in the Custom house if I speak true or not
nine Hogsheads, at the most of all,
Then he that for them Three Tonne dares to give,
The ease is pl^i^e, he must or beg or thieue.
I do not say that you have been abused,
But you may partly guess how you were used,
Indeed Now I speak of the bordes again.
I think we nere so soon had parted,
Had friendly outsides bin but friendly hearted,
The sweet bate couers the d^ceiuing hooks,
And false hearts can put on good wards and looks.
All is not gold the Prouerbesayes that g^^^ters,
And I could with their tongues were full of Blisters,
That with their flattering diligence most double,
Themselves, and you, and I, thus much did trouble,
For misinforming p^l^ry Knaves must be
The inst^^^n^^ of such indignity.
But as the fairest Gardens have some weeds
And among the cleanest flock, some ^cab'd sheep breeds.
Or as the Tare amongst the wheat does grow,
Good only for what is ill, yet makes a show.
So there is no greatness fixed on the ground,
But Claw back Sycophants may there be found,
For it is a Maxim held in every Nation,
Great men are waited on by Adulation,
No doubt but some does to the Court resort,
And sure the Tower must imitate the Court,
As Caesar's Palace may (perhaps) have many,
So Caesar's Castle cannot say not any.
I have found some that with each wind would mo^e
With hearts all hatred, and with tongues all Love,
Who with hats moved, would take me by the fist,
With Complements of honest Jack how is it?
I Am glad to see thee well with all my heart,
Long have I longed to drink with thee a quart,
I have believed this Dross had been pure Gold,
When presently I have been bought and sold
Behind my back (for no desert and Cause)
By those that kindly Cap'd and kissed their Clawer.
For one of them (an ancient Reverend Scribe)
Received forty shillings for a Bribe,
On purpose so to bring the case about
To put another in, and thrust me out,
Long was the time this business was a brewing,
Until fit opportunity accruing,
I was displaced, yet spite the bribed Sharke,
The man that gave the bribe did miss the mark.
O Bottles, Bottles, Bottles, Bottles, Bottles,
Platoes Divine works, not great Aristoteles,
Did never make mention of a guist so Royal,
Was ever bought and sold like slaves disloyal.
For since King Richard second of that name,
(I think your high Prerogatius you Claim:
And thus much here to write I dare be bold
You are a guist not given to be sold,
For sense or reason never would allow,
That you should e're be bought and sold till now.
Philosophers with all their Documents,
Not aged Times with all their monuments,
Did ever mention such untoward Elues,
That did more idly cast away themselves.
To such low ebb your basenesle now does shrink,
Whereas you yearly did make thousands drink.
The hateful title now to you is left,
You Are instruments of begg'ry and of Theft.
But when I filled you (I dare boldly sweat)
From all these imputations you were clear,
Against which I dare, dare, who dare or can,
To answer him and meet him man to man,
Truth arms me, with the which I will hold Bias,
Against the shocke of any false Golias.
Bottles you have not wanted of your fill,
Since you have left me, by your heedlesle will.
You scarce have tasted penury or want,
(For cunning Thieves are seldom ignorant)
Yet many times you have been filled with trash,
Scarce good enough your dirty skins to wash.
All this I know, and this I did divine,
But all is one, Draffe is good enough for Swine.
I do not here inueigh, or yet Envy,
The places profit, none can come thereby,
And in my hand it lies (if so I please)
To spoil it, and not make it worth a Pease.
And to the world I Will cause it to appear.
Who e're gives for you twenty pounds a yeare^
Must from the Merchants pilfer fourscore more,
Or else he cannot live and pay the score.
And to close up this point, I say in brief,
Who buys it is a Beggar or a Thief,
Or else a Fool, or to make all agree,
He may be Fool, Thief, Beggar, all the Three,
So you false Bottles to you both adieu,
The Thames for me, not a Denier for you.
FINIS.
VERBVM SEMPITERNVM.
DEDICATED TO THE MOST GRACIOUS AND ILLUSTRIOUS KING CHARLES
MOst mighty Sovereign, to your hands I give
The sum of that, which makes Us ever live:
I humbly crave acceptance at your hand,
And rest your Servant ever to Command,
JOHN TAILOR.

To the Reader.
THou that this little Book do take in hand,
Before thou Judge, be sure to understand:
And as thy kindness thou extend'st to me,
At any time I Will do as much for thee.
Thine, JOHN TAILOR.

Genesis.
Jehovah here of nothing, all things makes,
And man before all things his God forsakes.
Yet by The Almighty's mercy 'twas decreed,
Heavens Hair should satisfy for maus misdeed.
Man's age is long, and all are great, not good,
And all (save eight) are drowned in the Flood.
Old Noah, second sire to worst and best,
Of Cham the eurst, Iaphet and Sem blessed,
Of Abraham's starre-like numberless increase,
Of of-springs of-springs, and his rest in peace.
Of Isreal's going into Egypt, and
Of their abode and living in that Land.
Of Joseph's, brethren faithless, and unkind,
Of his firm Faith, and ever constant mind.
He pardons them that did his death devise,
He s^es his Childrens children, and he dies.
Exodus.
The increase of Jacobs stock is grown past number,
And fear of them, the AEgyptean King does cumber.
Who giving credit to the Inchanters tales,
Commands to kill all Infant Hebrew Males.
But Moses is preserved in the River,
To be a Captain Israel to deliver.
Stern Pharaobs cruel Adamantine heart
Will not permit Gods people to depart.
Ten plagues from heaven, are on the Egyptians powered
Blood, frogs, lice, flies, beasts, scabs, hail, thundering showered.
Grasshoppers, darkness, death of first borne men,
These were the Egyptian plagues in number ten.
The Isra'lites are freed, and Pharaobs Host,
In chasing them, are in the red Sea lost.
A cloud does shroud them from the burning day,
By night a fiery Pillar leads the way.
The murmuring people fearingfamine, railes.
God raines down Manna from the Heaven and quails,
The Law is writ in stone (to Moses given)
By Gods own hand, to guide man unto Heaven,
The Ceremonial Sacrifice is taught,
As types of whom out blessed redemption's wrought.
Leniticus.
Here man is showed, it is the Almightles will,
To guard the good, and to correct the ill.
The truest Service of the highest stands,
In no man's fancy, but as he commands.
And cause men are so apt from Grace to swerue,
He shows them here, their Maker how to serve.
The Levites are appointed by the Lord
To preach unto his chosen flock the word.
Numbers.
Old Jacobs blessed off spring numbered are,
Their valiant Captains and their men of War.
Cursed Korah with his kinsman desp^rate Dat^^n,
And bold Abiram (three sworn Sons of Sathad)
Rebel against Moses, with their tongues unhallowed,
And by the earth by heavens just Vengeance swallowed.
The Israelites to fell confusion brings,
Great Og and Sib^n misbeleeuing Kings.
Where Balaam thought to eurse, of force he blessed.
And by his Ass was told how he transgrest.
Five Midian Monarchs, Iudaes Host does slay.
And all their spoil divided as a pray.
The Land of C^naan, measured is, and found,
That in it all things plenteous do abound.
Deut^ronomy.
This Book again the Law of God repeats.
With blessings, cursings, teachings, and with threats.
Meek Moses dies, lies in an unknown too me.
And Nuns Son ( Iosuab) does supply his room,
Joshua.
Great Captain Joshua, great in faith and courage,
Through greatest dangers valiantly does forage.
He passes Iordane with his mighty host,
And to the Tribes divides Coast from Coast.
The harlot ( Rahab) does preserve the Spies,
She knows the Lord that reigns above the skies.
They all pass Jordan, which is parted dry.
Whilst they securely match inuasiu^ly.
The fear of Canan^tes does much increase,
Ierichoes taken, and Manna here does cease.
Vile Achan closely steals the cursed prey,
And Isreal's beaten from the Walls of Ai,
Five Kings are hanged, and Phoebus stands still,
At Iosuah's prayer, whilst he his Foes did kill.
Just one and thirty mighty Kings were slain,
Ere Israel could in peace the Land attain.
Which being done, the bloody wars do cease.
Their faithful Captains ( Ioshuah) dies in piece.
Judges.
Judah is Captain, Anaks Sons are flaine,
The C^nanites as vassals do remain.
The Israelites rebel and serve strange Gods,
And are all plagued with heavens correcting reds.
The men of Midia, Israel much did grieve,
Stout Gideon comes their sorrows to relieve.
And is Gods Spirit does his Servant move,
He overthrows Baals Altar and his Grove.
A woman's hand King Iabins Host does quail,
And killed his Captain Sis'ra with a nail.
Abimeleh (by wrong) the kingdom gains,
A woman dashe oat his ambitious brains.
Victorious Iph^ab, rashly swears (not good)
And ends his conquest in his Daugliters blood.
Great Sampson's borne, whoseuer marchlesse strength
Orethrowes the Philistims in breadth and length,
Fair flattering Dal^lab, her Lord deceiues,
He Is ^ane himself, himself of life bereaues.
The Beniamites abused a Levites wife,
For which all but six hundred lost their life.
Ruth.
(According to the flesh) this woman Ruth,
Was ancient Grandame to the eternal Truth,
And though the from the M^abites does come,
It shows the Almighty in all Lands has some.
1. Samuel.
The Prophet Samuel's borne and Elies Sons
To sin and flat confusion headlong runs.
The Isralites are by the Lord forsaken,
And by the Philistines the Arc is taken.
The figured presence of this all in All,
Does make the Devils invention Dagon fall.
God takes his people to his love again,
The Ark's brought back, the Philistines are slain.
The Sons of Samuel wrong their Fathers trust,
By partial Indgements and with bribes unjust.
Saul seeking straying Asses, finds a Crown,
And is anointed King in Raman town.
The fell Philistians Isr^el does oppress,
King Saul does proudly against the Lord transgress,
God dids kill Agag, Saul will have him spared,
His will more than his Gods, he does regard.
Goliath armed leads an host from Gath,
Defies the Lord of Hosts, prouokes his wrath.
Young David comes, and in his hand a sling,
And with a stone the Giant down does ding.
Old Ishays Son before the Kings preferred,
And David has Saul's Daughter for reward,
The ungrateful King, seeks David's causlesse death,
True hearted Jonathan preserues his breath.
Saul leaves his God, and to a Witch does go,
And so himself, himself does overthrow.
The Philistines his childrens blood do spill,
And with his Sword King Saul, King Saul did kill;
Saul leaves his God, and to a Witch does go,
And so himself, himself does overthrow.
The Philistines his childrens blood did spill,
And with his Sword King Saul King Saul did kill.
2. Samuel.
King Deuids royal heart is filled with woe,
For Jonathan and Saul, his friend, and foe,
In Regal state he lives and flourishes,
And loves Saul's Grandchild lame Mephibosheth.
Affection blinds him on Vriahs wife,
TO accomplish which, her husband lost his life.
The King's reprou'd by Nathan, and repents,
And by repenting, heavens high wrach preuents.
Incestuous Amnon, Abs^lon does kill,
For forcing Tamar against her Virgin will,
He Is reconciled unto his loving Sire,
And proudly to the Kingdom does aspire.
The old King flees, and over Iordane hies,
The Son pursuing, and the Father flies,
Achitophel himself hangs in despair,
And Absolon dies hanged by the hair,
The King for his rebellious Son does mourn,
His people numbered are at his return,
The Lord is wrath, the pestilence increast,
That seventy thousand dye, and then it ceast.
1. Kings.
The Kingly Prophet (valiant David dies.
His Throne is left to Solomon the wise,
False Adoniah, Ioab, Shimei killed,
By his command, as erst his Father wild.
With speed he sends for workmen from farte Coasts,
To build a Temple to the Lord of Hosts,
Before or after him was never such,
That had of wisdom or of wealth so much.
A thousand women, some wed, some vnwed,
This wise King to Idolatry misled.
He dies and's buried by his fathers toome,
And Rehoboam does succeed his room.
Now Israel from Judah is divided,
Both Kingdoms by bad Kings are badly guided.
Yet God to Jacobs seed does promise keep,
And raises faithful Pastors for his sheep.
2. Kings.
Eliah works wonders with his word,
By inspiration of the living Lord:
He Is taken up alive, and his blessed Spirit,
Does doubly in Elisha^s breast inherit.
Some Kings do govern well, most govern ill,
And what the good reformes, the bad does spill.
Till Israel, Judah. King and Kingdome's lost,
To great Nebu^hadn^zzar and his host.
1. Chronicles.
Here every Tribe is numbered to their names,
To their memorials, and immortal fames,
And David's acts t'instruct misguided men,
Are briefly here recorded all again.
2. Chronicles.
The state of Israel, I^dah. and their Kings,
This Book again, again, Recordance brings.
Their plagues of plague, of ^^mine^ ^l^uery, sword,
For their contem^ing heavens All saving word,
M^^^ss^^^ Pra^er.
M^^^ss^^ almost drowned in black despair,
Gains mercy by repentance and by prayer.
Ezrs.
The Persian Monarch ( C^^^^) grants have,
The Jews once more their freedom^ should receive.
When at Ierus^l^m they make ab^d.
They all with zeal ^^^^^ the house of God.
Malicious men (with poysnous ^^^^^ filled)
Makes Arta^^^ ^irde^ tho'e that build.
Yet God so works, that Isreal's is love and z^ale,
Res^mes again their ancient Church and weal.
Nehemiah.
The book of Ezra does concord with this,
Commanding good, forbidding what is amiss.
And godly Nehemiah ^^^^^ reformed,
What sin and Satan had long time deformed.
Esther.
Here he that dwells in heaven does deride.
Queen Vshy's and ambitious Hamans pride,
The Jews are saved by Esters suite from death,
And Haman and his Sons; hanged, loose their breath.
Poor Mordecay is held in high account,
And to great greatness humbly he does mount.
Thus God does raise all those his Laws do seek,
He lays the lofty low, ex^l^s the meek.
Job.
No lusse of Sons and Daughters, goods and all,
Make not this man into impatience fall,
Assailing Satan tempring wife, false friends,
With perfect patience he ^ll woe^^ defends,
I ^^^^ ^^^^ (quoth he) into this world,
And ^^^^d her^^^^^^ I shall be hur^d.
God gives and takes according to his word,
And blessed ever be the living Lord.
Ps^lmes.
The blessed Kingly Prophet sweetly sings,
^^^nall praises to the King of Kings.
Gods Power, Justice, Mercy, Favor, look
For they are comprehended in this Book.
Proverbs.
The wisest man that ever man begot,
In heavenly Proverbs, shows what is good what is not.
Ecclessiastes.
Health, strength, wit, valor, wordly wisdom, pelf,
All Is naught, and worse then vanity it self.
Salomons song.
This Song may well be called, the Song of Songs,
It to the heavenly Bride, and Groom belongs.
It truly shows Christ's love unto his love,
His Church, his Wife, his Virgin Spouse, his Dove.
Isa^ah.
This worthy Prophet truly does foretell,
How Christ shall come to conquer death and hell,
Rewards unto the godly he repeats,
And to the godless he denounces threats.
Jeremy.
This Man of God long time before foreshoes,
Ierusalems Captivity and woes.
Lamentations.
He wishes here, his head a fountain deep,
That he might weep, weep, nothing else but weep.
That he might gush forth flowing streams fo tears
For Iuaah's thraldom, misery, and fears.
Eze^hiel.
In Babylon this Prophet Captive is,
And there he prophesies of bale and bliss.
How all must come to pass the Lord has said,
How Judgment surely comes, although dalayed.
Daniel.
The Kings dark dream, the Prophet does expound,
For which, he is highly honored and renowned.
Nabuchadnezzar does an Image frame,
Commands all pain of death to adore the same.
Three godly Jews by no means will fall down,
And for contempt are in the furnace thrown.
Where, midst the flames unhurt they sweetly sing.
Which wonder does convert the tyrant King.
Here Daniel Prophesies of Christ to come,
Of Babel, Persia, Gra^ia, and Rome.
Hosea.
He tells misgouern'd Israel their sins,
And how the loss of grace, destruction winnes.
Joel.
This Prophet tells the stubborn. hearted Jews,
How heavens consuming wrath apace ensues.
He therefore does persuade them to contrition,
And by contrition they shall have remission.
Amos.
Man's thanklesse heart, and Gods vnmeasur'd love,
This Prophet does to Isr'els faces prove.
Obadiah.
He comforts Pudah (ouer-prest with woes.)
And prophesies destruction of their foes.
Jonah.
Here Jonah tells the Nini^itrs, except
Repentance wrath of Heaven do intercept:
In forty days, high, low, rich, poor, great, small,
The Lords hot fury shall consume them all.
With hearts vn^aign'd, the sinful City mournes,
The Lord grants mercy, Jonah back returns.
Micah.
He speaks of Isr'els and of Iuda's crimes,
And tells them their confusion comes betimes.
Nah^m.
The Nini^ites again forsake the Lord,
And are subdued by the Assirian sword.
This Prophet comforts those that are oppressed,
And tells the godly, they shall be releast,
Habakkuk.
He does be wail the oppression of the poor,
For mercy, humbly he does God implore.
To keep the Captived Jews from fell despair,
He te^ches them a heavenly form of Prayer.
Zephania^.
He fills the good with hope, the bad with ^eare,
And tells the Jews their thraldom draws near.
Haggay.
He exhorts them to patience in their pain,
And bids them build the Temple once again.
Zachariah.
He tells the Jews why they have plagued been,
He bids them shun Idolatry, and sin.
Malachi.
For sin he does repro^e both Peince and Priest,
And shows the coming both of John and Christ.
Which Christ shall be a Savior unto all.
That with true faith obey his heauo^ly call.
Ap^^ryph^.
These books do all in general intimate
The State of good men, and the reprobate.
In many places they do seem to vary,
And bear a sense from Scripture quite contrary,
In Tobis and Dame Indith disagrees,
From Text, and Ra^es in the Machab^es.
For which the Church has ever held it fit.
To place them by themselves, from holy writ.
FINIS.
SALVATOR MVNDI.
DEDICATED. TO THE HIGH MAJESTY OF QVEENE MARY.
GReat Queen, I have with pains and labor took
From out the greatest Book this little Book.
And with great Reverence I have culled from thence,
All things that are of greatest consequence.
And though the Volumne and the Work be small,
Yet it contains the sum of all in ALL.
To you I give it, with a heart most fervent,
And rest your humble Subject, and your Servant.
JOHN TAILOR.

To the Reader.
Here Reader then may read for little cost.
How thou wast ranso^^'d, when thou quite wast lost.
Man's gracelesuesse, and Gods exceeding grace,
Thou here may read and see in little space.
JOHN TAILOR.

Matthew.
Lo here the blessed Son of God and Man
(Newborn) who was before all worlds began,
Of heavenly seed the eternal living Rock
Of humane race, of Kingly David's stock.
Our blessed Redeemer, whom the Prophets old
In their true preachings had so often foretold.
In figures, ceremonies, types and tropes,
He here sulfils their words, confirms their hopes.
The worlds saluations sole and total sum,
Poor Mankinds Savior, JESUS CHRIST is come.
From married Mary, wife and Virgin, springs
This heavenly, earthly, supreme King of Kings.
He Is naked borne, and in a manger laid,
Where he and's Mother (blessed wife and maid)
Are by the wite men sought, and seeking found,
And having found, their joys do all abound,
Where they their love, their zeal, their faith unfold,
And offer incense, myrthe, and purest gold.
False-hearted Herod seeks to destroy
This newborn Infant, our eternal joy.
But Joseph by a dream is warned by night,
T'ward Egypt with the Babe to take his flight.
Amongst the Egyptians be not longsoiournes,
But back to Naz'reth he again returns.
To end the Law, the Babe was circumcised,
And then by John in Iordane was baptized.
When lo the Father from his glorious Throne,
Sends down the Holy Ghost upon his Son.
In likeness of a pure unspotted Dove,
Which did his Birth and Baptis me both approve.
Now subtle Satan he attempts and tempts him,
And fasting, to the wilderness exempts him.
But Jesus power the soul siends power destroyed,
Commanding Satan hence, Avoid Avoid.
The fearful Devil does slay. Christ goes and preaches,
And in the Mountain multitudes he reaches.
He said, Repentance wipes away transgressings,
And to the godly he pronounced blessings.
He makes the lame to go, the blind to see,
Deaf hear, dumb, speak, the leapers cleansed be.
The devils from the possessed out he drove,
The dead are raised, the poor the Gospel have.
Such things he does, as none but God can do,
And all is to bring his flock his fold unto.
All that are laden come to me (quoth he)
And I will ease you, therefore come to me.
You of your heavy sins I do acquit,
My yoke is easy and my burden's light.
Upon Mount Taber there our blessed Messiah,
Does show himself with Moses and Elias.
Yet all these mighty wonders that he wrought,
Nor all the heavenly teachings that he taught,
The stiff neckd stubborn Jews could not convert,
But they ramaine obdurate, hard of heart.
The man (quoth some) by whom these things are done,
It is the Carpenters, poor Joseph's Son.
Some said how be these things to a pass did bring
By power of Beelzebub th^insernall King.
Thus with the poison of their envious tongues,
They guerdon good with ill, and right with wrongs,
His own not knows him, Judas does betray him,
To Annas and to Caiphas they convey him.
From Caiphas back to Annas, and from thence
Is sent this everlasting happy Prince.
Thus is this death, this sir^^, this Sathan-killer,
Among sinful wretches tossed from post to Pillar.
He Is slouted, spitted on, derided, stripped, ^
He Is most unmercifully scourged, and whipped.
By Impious people, he is blasphemed and railed,
And of the Jews in (scorn) as King is hailed.
He like a Lamb unto his death it led,
Nailed on the Cross for man, his heart blood shed,
He (after three days) glorious does arise,
He leaves the sinful earth, and mounts the skies.
But first to his Disciples he appeures,
Where he their drooping half dead Spirits cheares.
Mark.
Saint Mark declares how blessed baptizing John,
Forerunner was of Gods eternal Son.
Which John in Wilderness baptizes, teaches,
And of contrition and remishon preaches.
Our Savior calls no Pharisees or Scribes,
Or princely people out of Iudahs Tribes.
But Simon, Andrew, James and John are those,
Poor toy ling Fishermen which Jesus chose,
To show that with the humblest smallest things,
God greatest matters to perfection brings.
By sundry wondrous works our Savior Jesus,
From sin and Satan lab'reth to release us.
And in requital the Ungrateful Jews
Devise their blessed Redeemer to abuse.
Some inwardly do hate him, some belie him,
His Servants all for sake him, or deny him.
But Peter thou wast bless in ^hy dyniall.
Orthy presuming thou have ^^^ the trial.
Repentance was^ away thy ^^nities crimes,
And thou a parterp^ to after times,
The Son and Heir of never sading Heaven,
Into the hands of sinful men's given.
He dies, he is buried, and in glory rises,
Triumphing over all his foes devises,
S. Luke.
Here Mary and old Zacharias sings,
In joyful manner to the King of Kings.
And aged Simeon in his armed did take,
The Lord of life and does reioycings make,
Christ teaches, preaches mercy unto all,
That by amendment will for mercy call.
He Is taken, and by false witnesses accused,
He Is beaten, scoffed, scorned and abused.
He Is hanged upon the Cross betwixt two thieves,
The one does rails on him, and one believes.
He dies, he is buried; tising he does quell
And conquer all his soes, sin, death, and hell.
B. John.
In the beginning was the eternal Word,
The Word with God was, and that Word the Lord,
In the beginning the same Word with God
Was, and for ever has with him abead,
With it were all things made, and made was naught
Without this Word, the which was made or wrought
Here Christ's Divinity is told by John,
The blessed Trinity, one three, three one.
How God had now performed the oath he swore,
To Abram, and to Israel long before.
How Christ should come to ransom Aaa^es loss,
And satisfy Gods Justice on the cross,
Though times and places far a sunderb.,
Yet Prophets and Evangelists agree.
In Jesus birth, his Doctrine, life and death,
Whereby our dying Souls ga^ ne living breath.
If all things should be writ which ^rst was done,
By Jesus Christ, (Gods everlasting Son)
From Cratch to Cross, from Cradle to his tomb,
To hold the Books, the world would not be room.
Acts.
The Apostles praising God, and singing Songs,
The holy Ghost in fiery cloven tongues,
Descends upon them, who are all inspired,
With learned lang^ages adorned admired.
Saint Peter preaching, tells the people plain,
How they the living Lord of life had slain.
Some slout and mock, remaining stubborn. hearted.
And many Souls perverted are converted.
The Church increases, daily numbers comes,
And to the Gospels furth'ring give great Sums.
Acts.
False Ananias and his faithless wife,
In dreadful manner lost their wretched life.
The envious people stone the Martye Steven,
He praying for his foes, leaves earth for Heaven.
The Churches Arch foe, persecuting Saul,
Is made a convert, and a preaching Paul.
He Is clapped in Prison, manacled and fettered,
And through his troubles, still his zeal is bettered.
Th Apostle James, by Herod's put to death,
And Herod eat with Lice, loft hateful breath.
The increasing Church amongst the Gentiles spreds,
By N^re, Paul, and Peter, lost their heads.
Romans.
The Apostle Paul from Corinth writes to Rome,
To strength their faith, and tell them Christ is come.
He shows how high and low, both Jew and Greek
Are one with God, who faithfully him seek.
He tells how sin in mortal bodies lu^kes,
How we are saved by faith, and not by works.
In loving terms, the people he does move,
To Faith, to Hope, to Charity, and Love.
1. Corinth^.
Paul to Corinthus from Philippy sends,
Their Zeal, and Faith he lovingly commends.
He tells them if Gods Service they regard,
The Eternal Crown of life is their reward.
2. Corinths.
In this Saint Paul sends the Corinthians word,
Afflictions are the blessings of the Lord.
He does desire their Faith may still increase,
He wishes their prosperity and peace.
Galathians.
He tells them that their whole Saluations cause,
Is all in Christ, and not in Moses Laws.
The Law's a glass where men their sins do sec,
And that by Christ we only saved be.
Ephesians.
Paul bids cast off the old man with his vice,
And put on Christ, our blessed redempcions price.
Philippians.
He bids them of false teachers to beware,
He tells them that Humility is rare:
And though they live here in a veil of strife,
Yet for them laid up is the Crown of life.
Colossians.
The Apostle does rejoice, and praises God,
That these Colossians in true Faith abode.
He praises them he bids them watch and pray,
That sin an Satan work not their decay.
1. Thessalonians.
He thanketh God, his labor's not in vain,
So steadfast in the faith these men remain,
That they to others are ablelled light,
By their example how to live upright.
2. Thessalonians.
Again to them, he lovingly does write:
He bids them pray the Gospel prosper might.
He wishes them prosperity and wealth,
And in the end, Souls everlasting health.
1. and 2. to Timothy.
Paul shows to Timothy, a By shop must,
In life and doctrine be sinc^re and just.
And how the Scriptures power have to persuade.
Whereby the man of God is perfect made.
Titus.
To Titus ('among the Creetans) Paul does send.
And warnes him what ^allow, or reprehend.
Philemon.
Paul earnestly the Master does request,
To pardon his poor man that had transgrest.
Hebrews.
Although this book does bear no Authors name,
It shows the Jews how they their lives should frame
And that the Ceremonial Law is ended
In Christ, in whom all grace is comprenended.
S. James.
Hear, speak, and do well, the Apostle faith,
For by thy works, a man may see thy faith.
I. and 2. to Peter.
He counsels us, be sober, watch and pray,
And still be ready for the Judgment: day.
1, 2, and 3. of John.
He shows Christ di'de, and from the grave arose,
To save his friends, and to confound his foes.
S. Jude.
Jude bids them in all Godliness proceed,
And of deceiving teachers on take heed.
Revelation.
Divine S. John to Pathmos I Will exilde,
This heavenly wor^ t'instruct us he compild.
He tells the godly, God shall be their gains,
He threats she godless with eternal pains.
He shows how Antichrist should reign and rage
And how our Savior should his pride assuage.
How Christ in glory shall to Judgment come,
And how all people must abide his doom.
A Prayer.
GOod God Almighty, (in compassion tender,)
Preserve and keep King Charles, thy Faiths defender.
Thy Glory, make his Honor still increase,
In Peace, in Wars, and in Eternal peace.
Amen.
THE BOOK OF MARTYRS.
DEDICATED TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM, EARL OF PEMBROOKE, etc.
MY Lord, my weak Collection out has took,
The sum and pith of the great Martyrs Book:
For pardon and protection I entreat,
The Volume's little, my presumption great.
JOHN TAILOR.

I Sing their deaths (who dying made death yield
By Scriptures sword, and faiths vnbattered shield
Whom Satan, men, or monsters could not tame
Nor sorde them to deny their Saviors name.
Evangelists that did the Gospel write,
Apostles, and brave Martyrs, that did fight.
Against death and hell; and all the power of sin,
And boldly d^de eternal life to win.
John Baptist by King Herod lost his head,
Who to the world repentance published.
Our blessed Redeemer in his love did follow,
And conquered death, man's sinful soul to hallow.
He was the death of death, and he did quell
The sting and power of Satan, sin and hell.
And under his great standard, valiantly,
A number, numberless have darde to die.
Through bondage, famine, slavery, sword, and fire,
Through all devised torments they aspire.
Victoriously to gain the immortal Crown,
Of neuer-ending honor and renown,
Saint Steven was the third that lost his breath,
And (for his Masters sake) was stoned to death,
And after him in Scripture may we read,
The Apostle James was brained and butchered,
Saint Mark th Evangelist in fire did burn,
And Bartholmen was flead, yet would not turn,
Saint Andrew like a valliant champion did,
And (willing) on a croste was crucifide.
Matthias, Philip, Peter, and Saint Paul,
Stoned, crucified, beheaded, Martyrs all.
The Apostles of their lives no reckoning make,
And think them well spent for their Saviors sale,
The tyrant Emperors, in number ten.
(Most cruel, barbarous, and inhumaine men)
More Christians by their bloody means did s^^y,
Then for a year five thousand to each day,
And many Roman Bishops in those days,
Were Martyrd, to their high Creators praise,
And though each day so many thousands bleed,
Yet doubtly more and more they daily breed.
As Camomile grows better b^ing trod.
So death and tortures draw more unto God,
Or as the vine that's cut and pruned bears more.
In one year then it did in three before,
This bloody persecution did out-weare,
After Christ's death the first three hundred year,
Thus did the primitive first Church endure,
Being Catholic, Apostolic, and pure,
Then over all the world it was truly known,
That Romish Bishops claimed but their own,
In their own Diocese to be chief Pastor,
And not to be the worlds great Lord and master,
And now our Britain glory will I sing
From Lucius reign, the worlds first Christian King.
Unto these days of happy peaceful state,
A Catalogue of Martyrs I Will relate,
First, Vrsula, and eleven thousand with her,
All Virgins, for Carists faith did dye together.
Then Hengist with the Saxons hither came,
Who many killed with sword and furious flame.
Besides eleven hundred Monks were killed,
At Bangor Abbey all their bloods were spild.
And when the Saxons race to end was run,
The Dines came in, and all the Kingdom won.
Before whose Swords did many thousands fall.
Which on the name of JESUS CHRIST did call.
Then William Conqueror with a multitude,
Unto the Norman^ vo^ke this Land subdude.
The Pope then caused all Priests to leave their wives,
To lead soul Sodomiticke single lives.
Then afterward in second Hearies raig^e.
Was saucy Sir Saint Thomas Becket slain.
A Popish Saint and Martyr made, because
He died a Traitor to his Sovereigns Laws.
King Henry and King Richard dead and gone,
Their brother John (by right) ascends the T^^rone.
Whom all his life, the Pope of Rome did vex,
And with oppressions all the Realm perplexe.
With Candle, Book, and Bell, he cursed and blessed,
And Bals, and Legates did the King molest:
Until such time he on his knees fell down,
And to the Pope surrendered up his Crown.
At last, because he durst the Pope withstand.
He dyed imposned by a ^^yers hand.
When thus by treason, they had killed King John.
Then the third Henry, Englands Crown put on.
Then England bought the R^mesh doctrine dear,
It cost her threescore thousand marks a year,
For Agnus Deses, Pardons Peter pance,
For which the Pope had all this coin from hence.
King Henry dyed, then Edward took the sway,
His Son and Grandchild England did obey,
The first of them called Long-shanks conquests won,
Lost by Carnaruan his unhappy Son.
Who by his Queen was in a Dung^on cast,
Till (being murdered) sadly breathed his last.
Edward the third a brave victorious King,
Did Frenchmens pride into subjection bring.
Kickard the second next to reign began,
Who lost more than his Royal Grandsire wan:
Then began John Wicklisse boldly to begin,
To preach against Antichrist, that man of sin.
Who many troubles stoutly did abide,
Yet (spite the Pope) he naturally died.
And being dead, from out is grave was turned,
And had his Martyred bones to ashes burned.
Which ashes they, did cast into a Brook,
Because he had the Romish Faith for sooke.
Yet whilst the second Richard here suruiu'd.
No Martyrs were by fire of lite deprived.
Henry the fourth was in the Throne invested,
In whose Reign many were too much molested.
And Wi^^^^ Sautre first his life ^^^ ^^^,
Through flames of fire, who now in heaven does live.
The next John Ba^^by in the fu^^^^ flame,
And William Tharpe, both was immortail fame.
Then the fifth Henry a victori^^^ Prince,
The Realm of France did ^^ quar and ^^^.
The good Lord Ceb^^, then (O ^^^ ^^^)
By Popish Priests an Heretic proc^aim'd,
Washang'd and burned by the unit ^tull doom,
Of Satan's Servants, sleues to Hell and R^^e.
And leaving some unnamed, John 'B^owne^ qu^re.
John Beu^^ly a Preacher dyed in ^^^.
B sid s a number from the Le^^rds Tower,
Rackes, tortures, halters, and the flame devour.
Ioba Hu^ a glorious Martyr of the Lord.
Was in Eohe^^^ burned or Gods word.
And ren^rend Icrome did to Constance come
From Pragae, and stoutly suffered Martyrdom.
In Smith-sield one John Claydon suffered death,
And with him Richard Turming lost his breath.
At this time sixete^ne godly folks in Kent,
The Antichristian vassals d^d torment.
Then death cut off the fifth King Henry's, Reign,
The Crown the sixth King Henry did obrame.
And William Tailor, a true zealous Priest.
Did pass through fire unto his Savior Christ.
Good Richard Houedon, with him William White,
Each unto God (through fire) did yield his sprite.
Duke Humphrey, though no Martyr, killed in's bed,
And Richard Wych a Priest was burned dead.
Then Saint like good King Henry was deposed,
By the fourth Edward, in the tower enclosed,
Then Edward fl^d, and Henry once again
By Warwickes power the Kingdom did obtain.
Thds did the various slate of humane things,
Make Kings of Capriues, and of Captives Kings,
Until at last King Edward turning back,
Brought Henry's royalty to final wrack.
In whose Reign John Go^se (as the story says)
Was the first Martyr burned for Christ's faith,
King Henry in the Tower was ab'd to death,
And Edward yielded up his hie and breath.
His Son young Edward of that name the sift,
Whom the third Richard from his life did lift.
Who by foul murders, ^loud and tyranny,
Usurped the Throne of Englands Monarchy,
Till valiant Henry of that name the seven,
Killed him, and made vncu^n England even,
Then first Ioane Beugh^on, and a man called Babram^.
By faith (through fire) went to old Father Abram.
An Old man was in Smithfield burnt because,
He did resist against the Roman Laws.
One Ierom hanged and burned on the Gallows
In Florence, with two other of his f^llowes.
And William Tiliesworth, Thomas Bernard, and
James Morton, cause they did the Pope withstand.
Burned all, and Father Rogers, and old Reine,
Did dye by fire, a better life to gain.
One Thomas Nouice, and one Thomas Chase,
Died constant Martyrs by the Heavenly Grace.
A woman and a man called Laurence Guest,
By Deah gained everlasting life and rest.
Besides a number past man's reckoning up,
For JESUS sake drank of afflictions cup.
Some carried faggots through a world of mocks,
Some racked, some pinde, some fettered in the stocks.
Some naked stripped, and scourged with a lash,
For their rejecting of their Romish trash.
Some branded in the cheek, did always bear,
The mark and badge of their Redeemer dear.
Thus the insulting tyrannizing Pope,
With cursings, tortures, fire, and sword and rope.
Did force the Souls and Consciences of men.
To run dispairing to damnations Den,
And those who valiantly his power withstood,
Did seal their resolution with their blood.
Before his triple, treble, trouble Crown,
(In adoration) Emperors must fall down.
Were they as high as any Caesar borne,
To kiss his feet they must not hold it scorn,
Henry the sixth, the Emperor did fall down,
Whom with his Feet Pope Celestine did Crown.
Henry the fourth, his Empress and his young Son.
All three to Rome did barefoot go and run.
And three days so, these three did all attend,
His holiness a godless ear to lend.
Which afterward was granted, on condition
That he should give his Crown up in submission.
Pandulphus the Popes Legate with a frown,
Did make King John of England yield his Crown:
King Henry of that as me the second, he
Kneeled down, and kissed the Romish Legates knee:
The Emperor when Pope Adrian was to ride,
Did hold his stirrup on the near wrong side:
For which his Holiness in angry sort,
Disdainfully did check the Emperor for it,
When as the Pope does ride in Cope of gold,
Kings (like to footmen) must his bridle hold.
In pomp he must be borne upon men's shoulders,
With glorious show, amazing the beholders.
Whilst Kings and Princes must before him go,
To usher him in this vainglorious show.
This being true as no man can deny,
Those that will not be blind may plainly spy,
That their insulting proud commanding Priest,
Is ^bsolute, and only Antichrist.
H'exalts himself above all that's called God.
Upon the Emperors neck he proudly trod.
He is th'abomination (void of grace)
That mounts himself into the holy place,
He makes the Princes of the Earth drink up,
And quaffe the poison of his cursed Cup.
Who being drunken with the dr^gs of sin,
They have his sworn and forsworn vassals been,
Bewitched with his foul Enchanting charms,
Against one another they have rose in arms.
By foreign and domesticke bloody broils,
Whilst he has filled his his coffers with their spoils.
His double dealing too plain appears.
In setting Christian Princes by the ears.
Whilst he into his anatitious hands,
Has feiz'd their persons, moueables and lands.
And as the Christian Kings themselves made weak,
The Turk into their Kingdoms began to break.
And thus the Turk and Pope joynd with the devil,
Have been the authors of all Christian evil.
FINIS.
THE BOOK OF MARTYRS. The Second Part.
DEDICATED TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, PHILLIP, EARL OF MONTGOMERIE, etc.
MY Lord, the lives and deaths of Saints and Kings,
This little Book unto your Greatness sings:
Protection and acceptance if you give,
It shall (as shall Your self) for ever live.
JOHN TAILOR.

When the 7 Henry in his grave was laid,
And the eight Henry, Englands Scepter swayed,
Romes bloody persecution raged more
In England, than in ten Kings reigns before.
And therefore Reader, in this little Book.
For every Martyrs name thou must not look.
But men of chiefest note, respect and same,
That dyed in England, only these I name.
And first the Papists tyranny began,
In murdering Richard Hun, a zealous man,
For being kept in prison by their power,
They closly hanged him in the Lollards Tower.
And then they all in general decreed,
Reporting Hun himself had done the deed.
Ann sixteen days just after this was don,
They burned the foresaid corpse of Richard Hun.
Then to the number of full thirty five,
The surious flames did all of life deprive.
In several places of this woeful land,
Because they did the Pope of Rome withstand.
At which time Thomas Bilney did begin,
To preach and teach against Antichristian sin.
Where in Saint Georges Church in Ipswich Town,
The Papists from the Pulpit plucked him down.
And as in doleful prison he did lie,
He put his finger in the flames to try,
He proved, and God did give him strenght to bear
His death, to live with his Redeemer dear.
The next of note, was one John Frith, a man
Of learning great, a Martyrs same he wan.
Then learned Luther, and grave Zwinglius,
With Calvin, Beza, Occolampadius,
All glorious, gracious, reverend lamps of light,
Were instruments to clear blear'd Englands sight.
In Flanders, William Tindall for Gods Word,
Was Sacrificed to glorify the Lord.
John Lambert valiantly his death did take,
And burned in Smithfield for his Savior sake.
About this time that Honorable man,
Lord Cromwels life, and timelesse death began.
He like an Earthquake made the Abbeys fall,
The Fryeries, the Nunneries, and all.
This famous Noble, worthy Essex Earl,
This Iemme, this Jewel, this most orient pearl,
Was for his truth from all he had discarded,
And with his heads loss all his faith rewarded.
The next of worthy note by fire that did,
Was good Anne Askew, who did strong abide,
Rackes, tortures, and the cruel raging flame,
To magnify her high Creators name.
Then began the Kings eyes to be opended quite,
Enlightened by the everlasting light.
He banished Superstitious idle sables,
And packt the Papists hence with all their bables.
Then Bonner, Gardner, Brethren both in evil,
Factors and Actors, bloudhounds for the Devil.
Their burning fame to infamy soon saded,
They Godless, graceless, were disgracst, degraded.
The King thus having this good work begun,
He dyed, and left the Kingdom to his Son.
Then reigned young Edward that sweet Princely child,
By whom all Popery was clean exilde.
But he too good to live among wicked men,
The Almighty took him hence to Heaven again.
No sooner Edward was laid in his Tomb,
But England was the slaughterhouse of Rome.
Gardner and Bonner were from prison turned,
And whom they pleased were either saved or burned.
Queen Mary imitating Iezabell,
Advanced again the Ministers of Hell,
Then tyranny began to tyrannize,
Tortures and torments then they did devise.
Then Master Rogers with a says most fervent,
Was burned, and died in Smith field Gods true Servant.
Next unto him did Laurence Sanders dye,
By fire (for Jesus sake at Couentry.
He did embrace and kindly kiss the stake,
To gain Heavens glory, did the world for sake.
Good Bishop Hooper, was at Gloucester burned,
Cause he against the Romish Doctrine spurned,
And Doctor Tailor, a true zealous man,
At Hadly burned, eternal glory wan,
Then Bishop Ferrar next his life did spend,
In fire to gain the life shall never end.
Next William Fowler first did loose his hand,
Then burned, because the Pope he did withstand,
In Essex Thomas Hawks with faith victorious,
Did dye by fire, to gain a life most glorious,
Master Ioha Bradford (for his Saviors sake,
In Smithsield burned a godly end did make.
Two reverend Bishops, Father Latimer.
And Ridley each of them a heavenly star,
Lived in Gods foare, and in his favor died,
At Oxford burned, and now are glorisi'd,
John Philp^t gladly did the fire embrace.
And died and lives in his Redeemers grace.
Then that grave Father and religious man.
Archbishop of Cranmars troubles hot began.
His Pomp, his state, his glory, and his pride,
Was to know Jesus, and him crucifide:
He lived a godly Preacher of Gods Word.
And died a glorious Martyr of the Lord.
John Carcles in close Prison carefully,
Did change his cares for joys eternally.
But this small volum: cannot well contain
One quarter of the Saints in England flaine,
In Henry's Reign and Mary's (cruel Queen)
Eight thousand people there has slaughtered been,
Some by the Sword, some Hanged, some burnt in fire,
Some starved to death in Prison, all expire.
Twelve thousand and seven hundred more beside,
Much perse^uting trouble did abide.
Some wrackt, some whipped, some tortured some in stocks,
Some doing penance, with a world of mockes,
Some with an iron in the faces burned,
Some out of all their goods to beggry rurn'd.
Some barefoot, bearing faggots on their shoulders,
We^e made a wondering stock to the beholders.
All this, and more, much more they did endure,
Because they would not yield to live impure.
But now to speak the law less ^ause wherefore,
And why these people troubled were so sore,
Because they would not make their plaints and mones,
To senseles I mages, dead stocks and slones.
Because they said the Sacramental bread,
Is not the Lord, which shall judge quick and dead.
Because they not believed a Purgatory,
And held the Popes decrees an idle story.
Because they would not creep unto the cross,
And change Gods sacred Word for humane dross.
Because they held the Mass an Idol soul,
At once, which picked the purse, and damned the Soul.
Because they knew the Pope, and all his crew,
H^^ hounds, who^ heauern (in rage) on earth did spue.
And in a word, they thus were ouer-trod,
Because they truly served the living God,
This was the maine, and only cause of all,
Because they would not offer unto B^el.
The Popes outrageous and courageous actor,
Was Bishop Bonner, hells most trusty factor.
Romes hangman, and the firebrand of this Realm,
That with a sloud of blood did ouerwhelme,
The true believers of Gods holy truth,
He burchered, not regarding age or youth.
With him was joined a man almost as ill.
Who took delight Gods servants bleud to spill,
Called Stephen Gardner, Englands Chanceller,
And Bishop of the Sea of Winchester,
These two did strive each other to excel,
Who should do greatest service unto Hell,
Until at last God heard his servants cry,
And each of them did die immediately,
Thus when I^honah heard the just complaints,
Of his beloved poor afflicted Saints,
Then this too cruel Pope defending Queen,
(The bloudiest Princess that this land has seen)
She did decease, and persecution ceast;
And tired, wofull^ Englands purchased rest,
Queen Mary, being dead her welcome death.
Reuin'd our joys in blessed ELIZABETH,
Innumerable were her woes and cares,
Abundance were the subtle wiles and snares.
Which Satan and his Ministers often laid,
To reaue the life of that most harmless Maid;
She was accused, abused, reuil'd, miscal'd,
She was from prison unto prison haled.
Long in the Tower she shas close prisner shut.
Her loving servants all way were put.
From thence to Windsor; thence to Woodstocke sent,
Closely mewd up from all the worlds content.
But God whose mercies ever did defend her,
Did in her greatest Sorrow comfort send her.
He did behold her from his Throne on hie,
And kept her as the apple of his eye.
Let Hell and Hell Hounds still attempt to spill,
Yet the Almighty guards his Servants still,
And he at lest did ease her Sorrows moan,
And raised her to her lawfall awful throne.
This Royal Deborah, this Princely Dame,
Whose life made all the world admire her fame.
As Judith in Bet h^lias same was spread,
For cutting off great Holophernes head:
So our Eliza stoutly did begin.
Vntopping and beheading Romish sin,
She purged the Land of Papistry^agen,
She lived beloved of God, admired of men.
She made the Antichristian Kingdom quake,
She made the mighty power of Spain to shake.
As far as Sun and Moon dispears'd her Rays,
So far and farther, went her matchless praise,
She was at home, abroad, in every part,
Loadstar and Loadstone to each eye and heart.
Supported only by Gods powerful hand,
She four and forty years did rule this Land:
And then she lest her Royal Princely Seat,
She changed earths greatness to be heavenly great.
Thus did this Western Worlds great wouder dye,
She fell from height to be advanced more hie.
Terrestrial Kings and Kingdoms, all must fade,
Then blessed is she, that is immortal made.
Her death filled woeful England full of fears,
The Papists longed for change with itching ears,
For her decease was all their only hope,
To raise again the doctrine of the Pope.
But he whose power is all omnipotent,
Di^ their unhappy hopeless hopes prevent.
Succession lawfully did leave the Crown,
Unto a Prince, whose virtue and Renown,
And learning did out-stripall Kings as sarre,
As does the Sun obseure a little star.
What man that is but man, could bass^ more
Romes seauen^headed purple beastly Whore?
How wisely has he Bellarmine con^uted,
And how divinely hath'he ost dispated?
How zealously he did Cods faith desend,
How often on Gods word he did attend.
How clement, pious, and how gracious good
Was he, as fits the greatness of his blood.
Were It not for him how should the Mu^^s do?
He was their pattern, and their patron too,
He was the Apollo from whose radient Beams,
The quinteffence of Poetry our-streames,
And from the splendour of his piercing rays,
A world of worthy writers won the bays,
Yet all the worthy virtues so transparent,
And so well known to be in him inharent,
Could not persuade the Papists leave their strife,
With cursed treasons to attempt his life,
For when their disputations helped them not.
They would dispute in a damned powder plot.
In which the Romists went beyond the devil,
For Hell could not invent a plot so evil.
But he that placed him on his royal Throne,
The God of Jacob, Iudahs holy one)
That God (for Jesus sake) I do beseech,
(With humble heart and with unfeigned speech)
That he or his may Britains Scepter sway,
Till time, the world, and all things pass away.
But now he is gone into Eternal bliss^e, Crowne^
And with Eternal glory crowned is
Long may King CHARLES wear Britains royal
And heavens best blessings raise his high Renown.
FINIS.
GODS MANIFOLD MERCIES IN THESE MIRACVLOVS DELIverances of our Church of
England, from the year 1565. until this present, 1630. particularly and
briefly Described.
IOSHVA 4.21, 22. 24. When your Children shall ask their Fathers in time to
come, What means this Pillar: Then ye shall let your Children know, saying;

THESE ARE THE DELIVERIES WHICH GOD HAS VOVCHSAFED TO HIS CHVRCH IN ENGLAND
SINCE THE BEGINNING OF QVEENE ELIZABETH'S REIGN TO THIS DAY:

That all the People of the Earth might know the hand of the Lord that it is
mighty, that ye might fear the Lord your God for ever.


THere was a Bull in Rome was long a breeding,
Which Bull proved little better then a Calfe:
Was sent to England for some better feeding.
To fatten in his Holiness behalf.
The virtues that this Beast of Babell had,
In thundering manner was to banne and curse:
Rail at the Queen, as it were raging mad;
Yet God be thanked she was never the worse.
The goodly Sire of it was Impious Pius the fufh of that name, Pope of Rome.
piu^.
He taught it learnedly to curse and banne:
And to our faces boldly to defy us.
It madly over England quickly ran:
But what succe^^e it had read more and see,
The fruits of it herevnder written be.
This Bull did excommunicate and curse the Queen, ^^dep^^eth her from her
Crown, it proclaimed her an Here^^^^, it cursed all such as loved her, it
threatened damnation to all subjects as dur^t obey her, and it promised the
kingdom of heaven to those that would oppose and kill her.

This was the effect and nature of this Popish Beast, which all wise, godly,
and under standing men did deride and contemn.

1.
A Priest called Moort^n, by the Pope assigned,
Northumberland and Westmerland seduceth:
With whom the Duke of Duke of Norfolk, and Earl of Northumberland beheaded,
Earl of Westmorland fled.
Norfolk is combined:
The whilst the Pope nocost or charge refuses,
But pawnes his challices, his Beads, and Crosses,
Gives them his graceless blessing for their aid:
The fruit where of were heads and honors losses.
God still defending Englands Royal Maid.
Thus we (by proof) must thankefully confess,
That where the pope does curse, there God does bless.
2.
Dou John He was Brother to the King of Spain, and failing of the hope be had
to be Crowned King of Tums be practices to invade England, Whereof sailing, he
dies for grief.
of Austri^, whom the pope incites
Our Queen and kingdom both to Cap^uate
And whilst he war prepares with sub^ll slights,
A fained peace he does cap^^ulate.
Nay more, he does perpetual peace proclaim,
Thereby to make us sleep the more secure,
But Gods great Mercy made him miss his aim,
And what he thought most certain, proud unsure
This plot of our invasion thus orethrowne,
Don John's ambition with his life did end.
Whereby the Almighty to the world makes known,
That he his Church will evermore defend.
His vine she is, his power does guard her round,
And all her Enemies he will confound.
3.
Romes malice and Spaines practice still concurs,
To vex and trouble blessed Elizabeth:
With S^nk^l^y they combine to raise new stirs.
And Ireland bragging sinkely promises
To give unto the popes brave Bastard Son
James 'Boncatn^ag^^, an ambitious boy.
And St^^ely from the pope a prize has Won,
A holy Peacocks Iaile (a proper toy)
But St^^ely was in Maurstania slain,
In that great batt^ll at Alcazor fought.
Whereby we see his power does still defend
H^^ Church, which on his mercy does depend.
Pope Gregory and the king of Spain, Conspire to ^^^^ Rebell^^^ in Ireland by
means of Thomas Stuke^^an English^ can, who was slainem the field with three
Kings with ^^^^^.

4.
An English Priest called Nicholas Saunders next,
A consecrated Banner gets from Rome,
And like a trayterons wretch mistakes his text,
Rebelliously does into Ireland come,
He with the Desmons ioynes in bloody manner,
And when John Desmond was brother to the Earl of Desmond
John Desmond murder did commit,
Then by the virtue of his babble banner,
Applauded it, and did the crime remit.
This good success Romes f^^^^ p^r(...) had,
The Earl was by a common ^^^^ ^^^^,
And Saunders r^n mad in the wild Mountains, Woods, and bogs of Ireland, and
dyed by ^^^.
Saunders pind^, (...) ^^^^.
His conscience with (...)
Thus treason is accordingl^ rewa^^^,
And still the Church of Godby ^^^ is guarded.
5.
Persons and Campion, a most wicked brace.
Of English T^a^ors Ro^^^^h ^e^uites,
Get from the Pope the favor and the grace
To play in England the ^^ear^^^^ites
Fr^e leave they from his Holiness obtain
To draw true subjects from their loyalty,
To make our Kingdom va^^all unto Spain,
And to depo^^ the Queen from Royalty.
At last (despite the blessing of the pope)
Their plots were kno^ ne, and qvickely Parsons ^i^d,
But Campion died at Tyburne in a Rope,
Hanged all (as' it is supposed) but the head.
God still the practice and the p'ots orethrowes,
O^ his most dear beloved churches foes.
These ^esuites walked in disguise h^ve long before they were taken, sometimes
like swagge^^g Ruffians, sometimes like Ministers, sometimes like Noblemen,
sometimes like soldiers, and sometimes like Aparators.

6.
Here So^^erui^^ an English Gentleman
Seduced by Romesh Priests the Queen to kill,
Attempts it in the despurat' ^ sort he can.
And with a drawn Sword runs her blood to spill:
But by the way, with one or two he met.
Who did oppose him and his damned intent:
Whilst like a mad man he began rage and f^et,
At those that did the mischief then prevent.
But ^ane he was, and clos^ in prison pent,
There to remain till Justice him should try,
And then to have de^erued punishment.
That others might example take thereby.
But Sommer^^^ was strangled in the layle.
Thus God to guard his Church does never fail.
It was thought that Sommeruill was strangled by some that set him on works,
for fear^ least his con^ession. might have preferred them to the Ga^^owes.

7.
Mendoza here, Ambassador for Spain,
Foul trea^on with Throckmorton practices.
To move sedition, raise a warlike trains,
Invade the Realm, depose Elizabeth.
Mendoza is discoutred, and disgraced,
And out of England in disgrace was thrust,
Whilst in each hand he has a Letter placed.
Which he had got from Traitors most unjust.
In one of them was written all the Names
Of English Lords, that did the Pope affect.
In the other all the Havens and the streams,
For shipping, and our foes how to direct,
But God his Church, our Queen and Realm desended
Thr^gmorton hanged and quartered, all was ended.
In these dangerous times, the Queens mercit was very great toward the
Priests and Ies^^es, for she commanded that the severity of the Law might be
mittiga^ed toward them.

8.
The Remish Vipers never taking rest
Most dangerous Letters trait ero^sly were writ:
That foraigne Princes England might mole^t,
The b^arer was a His name was Creighton, being taken at Sea, he cast his
Letters, torn in pieces, into the Sea, for fear of being discovered, but the
Wind blow them into the Ship again.
Scottish ^os^ite,
Who by Dutch Pirates on the Sea was taken:
His Letters torn^, he over board did fling.
But the Wind blowing from the raging Maine,
The Papers back into the Ship did bring,
Which though they were in many pieces rent,
Were placed together by Sir William Wade,
Who found, the Guise, the Pope, and Spaines intent
Were strong combined England to invade.
These proiects thus were blasted in their bud.
And their pretense of Harm God made our Good.
9.
Here William Parry has got leave from Rome,
To broach new mischiefs on our English shore,
And he to kill Elizabeth does come,
Though she his life had pardoned long before.
His Absolution from the Pope does show
That ere the murders done it is forgiven:
Nay more, his Holiness does free bestow.
Upon the ^^sitor endless loyes of Heaven.
False Parry with his Dagger purposely
Went to the Queen^ in dutious sort dissembling,
When with her looks of awful Majesty,
She struck the villain full of fear and trembling.
Then was he took and hanged as he desern'd,
And only God our Church and State preserved,
Parry was a Doctor of the Civil Law, whom the Queen had pardoned six years
before, for killing of one Huge Hare, yet afterward by the devils in^ligation,
and the Popes abselntion and encouragement, he fe^^ into this treason, Exceuted
at Westminster.

10.
Here Ballard, Savage, Ti^^burne. Babington,
Gage, Trauerse, Tilney, Windsor, Charneck, D^^.
Jones, Barnewell, Salisbury and Abington,
These fourteen into dangerous treasons run:
They would but kill the Queen, subvert the State,
Make England bear the yoke of Antichrist:
And for thofe ends they work both soon and late,
Whilst Ignorance to Erro^r is entis'd,
They in Saint Giles his fields their proiects laid,
There was the consultations of their brains:
And in those fields they had their wages paid,
Handsomely hanged and quartered for their pains.
Thus God does still our Church defend and bless,
And those that are her foes have ill success.
This year Rowland York and Sir William Stanley turned Tray^^rs. September 13.

11.
An English Gentleman This Stafford was a Gentleman well descended, his Mother
was of the Bed chamber to the Queen, and his Brother Leiger Ambassador in
France at the same time.
William Stafford named,
Was by the French Ambassador persuaded,
That if he would kill the Queen he should be famed,
For by her death might England be invaded.
Besides, for it the Pope would thankful be,
And all the house of Guise, should be his friends.
But Stafford to their plots feemet' agree,
Yet told the council on his knees their ends.
These things unto the Ambassador were told,
(And Stafford did avouch them to his face:)
Which he denied audaciously and bold,
Much ill besee^^ing his estate and place.
Thus what fo^euer gain^t our Church was wrought,
God still did bring their purposes to naught,
12.
This year Spain with a mighty preparation
With tweluescore Vessels loadeth Neptunes back,
With thirty thousand men attempts inuafion,
Of England^ Kingdom, and Eliz^^s wrack.
Then many a bragging desperate doughty Don,
Proud of the strength of that great huge The Spanish flee^ were in all of
Ships, Gall^ons, Galleys and Pinaces, 242. of Soldiers, Mariners, and Galley.
^^^^^ 31030. of great Ordnance 2630. Our Fleet were in all but 112. the Camp
as Ti^bury were 22000, foot, and 12000. horse.
Armad^,
Went barely off, though they came bravely on,
The power of Heaven opposing their branado.
Our numbers unto theirs inferior ^arre,
Yet were they taken, sunk, slain, banged thump'd, and battered,
Because the Lord of Hosts the God of War,
He was our trust and aid, our ^oes he scater'd.
His name is oner all the world most glorious,
And through his power his Church is still victorious.
13.
Lopez a Doctor, by descent a ^ew,
A Port^^ga^ by birth, the Queens physiti^n:
Forgetting duty,(to his Sovereign due)
Would poison her to further Spaines ambition.
The Spaniards and the Doctor are compacting,
How this sweet piece of service might be done,
They promise gold, and he does vow the acting.
A bargain wisely made is partly won.)
But this base Jew is taken in the trap,
The Queen pre^er^'d the Spaniards cake is dough,
The Doctor wronged his breeches by mishap,
And hanging his reward was good enough,
Still treasons working, though its luck be ill,
Gods gracious power, his Church defending still.
The Queen had been gracious and beautiful to this same Lopez many ways,
and he was accounted a man of good integrity till he was corrupted by the
Pope and Spaniard.

At his Araignment fear made him wrong his ^^^ches: he was hanged at Ty^^rns.

14.
Tyrone supported by the Pope and Spain,
Had put our English Kingdom to much cost,
Perceiving all his treasons were in vain,
His dangers desperate, fruitless labor lost:
Although his Holiness from Rome had sent,
A plume of Phoenix feathers for a blessing,
Which babble from Tyrone could not prevent
Rewards of Iustcie for his long transgressing.
To the Lord Deputy be does su^mit,
Craves the kings mercy, and obtained the same:
Yet afterward he did his faith forget,
And new rebeilions did in Ireland frame.
At last with guilty mind, away he flies,
Thus God confounds his Churches enemies.
Tyrone an Irish Earl, a man of great power and Policy, a most peruitions and
dangerous trayter, 1604. be came into England, and was most graciously
pardoned by the King, yet afterward would have le^ all Ireland rebellion, but
fa^ling of his purpose, fled to Rome.

15.
Among all these dangers Queen Elizabeth,
Preserved still, and reigned ^oyally:
Defended all her life from violent death,
And seauenty years of age died naturally:
To her succeeded (as his prop^r right)
King James Great Britains blessed Solomon:
When straight began new tricks of Romish spite,
For Church and King, and Lands subversion.
Watson They would have altered Religion, brought in Foreign power,
imprisoned the King, and raised Arbella Watson, Clarke, Master George Brook,
executed.
and Clarke, two Priests, two Popish brothers,
Seduced Lords, Cobham; Gray, two Noblemen,
Sir Walter Rawleigh, Markham, Brook, and others,
To take the King, and him in p^fon pen.
The plot's found, Justice would th'^^^ ndors kill,
But the Kings mercy saved, what L.w might ^pill.
The Kings mercy saved the Lord Cobham. Lord Gray Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir
Griffith Markeham at the Block, as the stroke was readis to be given.

16.
Now treason plotted in the infernal Den,
H^ls mischief master piece began to work,
Assisted by unnatural English^^^,
And les^ites, that within this Land did lurk,
These would Saint Peter-to Salt. pe^^er turn,
And make our Kingdom caper in the air,
At one blast, Prince and Peers and commons burn;
And fill the Land with murder and despair,
No treasonere might be compared to this,
Such an escape the Church had nere before:
The glory's Gods, the victory is his,
Not unto us, to him be praise therefore.
Our Church is his, her foes may understand,
That he defends her with his mighty hand.
Percy and Catesby would needs be heads of this treason and their heads are
advanced for it on the Parliament house: they were killed with powder, being
both shot and burnt; and powder was the main^ Instrument of their hopes; All
the Trayt^rs falling into the 'Pit which they had prepared for us.

Not any of all these treasons, but either the Pop^ the Spanish King, Priests
or Jesuits, had a hand in it.

17.
The dangers of a long and tedious way,
The perils of the raging Sea and Land,
The change of air and diet many a day,
And Romes temptations which thou did withstand,
And after all thy safe return again,
(Amongst those blessings make up much more blessed).
In mind, and body ^^^^ from Rome and Spain,
For which our ^^^^ to heaven is ^^^^^ ^^ pressed,
Long may (...) Gracious instrument,
To propaga^e his Gospel and his glory:
All Antichistian foes to (...),
And with thy a^^s to fill a royal story.
That (...) truly may ^^^^^
These Deeds were done by Britains CHALES the Great
Great ^^^^ the interprize and hazard of our gracieus Pride ^ but great^^^ was
Gods, i^guiding and guarding him back again to all Joy and Comforts.

18
And last of all, with Heart and ^^nds erected,
Thy Church does magnify thy name O^L^^^^
Thy prouid^^ce p(...) thy power protected.
Thy planted ^^^ according to thy Word.
My God what shall I rende ^^^ ^^^^,
For all thy guise ^^^^ do^^ ^^ ^^^^?
Love and unfeigned Thanke^^^^^^ shall be,
Ascribed for thy Mercies, ^^^^^yes.
To thee my Priest, my Prophet and my King.
My Love my Counselor, and Comforter,
To thee alone, I only praised sing;
For only thou art my^ Deliverer;
All Honor, Glory, Power, and Praise therefore,
Ascribed be to thee for evermore.
The Churches Thanksgiving to God for all his Mercies and her Deliverances.
The Church of Christ does acknowledge no other Intercessor, Desenrer;
Maintinrer and Deliverer, but only Christ himself.

FINIS.

