Drink and welcome: OR THE FAMOVS HISTORY of the most part of Drinks* in use
now in the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland; with an especial
declaration of the potency, virtue, and operation of our English ALE.

With a description of all sorts of Waters, from the Ocean sea, to the tears
of a Woman.

As also, The causes of all sorts of weather, fair or soul, Sleet, Rain,
Hail, Frost, Snow, Fogges, Mists, Vapors, Clouds, Storms, Winds, Thunder
and Lightning.

Compiled first in the high Dutch tongue, by the painful and industrious
Hvldricke Van Speagle, a Grammatical Brewer of Lubeck, and now most Learnedly
enlarged, amplified, and Translated into English Prose and Verse.

By JOHN TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed by ANNE GRIFFIN. 1637.

THE FAMOVS HISTORY of the most part of Drinks, in use now in the Kingdoms of
Great Britain and Ireland; with an especial declaration of the potency,
virtue, and operation of our English ALE.
Compiled first in the high Dutch tongue, by the painful and industrious
Huldricke Van Speagle, a Gramaticall Brewer of Lubeck, and now most Learnedly
enlarged, amplified, and Translated into English.
By JOHN TAILOR.
I Huldrick Van Speagle, do ingeniously confess my boldness, and crave
pardon of the Britains and Irish Nation; for that I (being a stranger) have
presumed to write of such Drinks as are Potable in their Climates and
Countries; with such particularities of their Originals and virtues, as I have
by experience and practice, with my collections out of diverse learned Authors
gathered. I purpose not to insist in a methodicall way, but according to my
quality in a plain and brief Relation.

It is not unknown to men of any reading, that this Island which has now
regaind it is ancient name of Great Britain, was by Brute inhabited by the
remainders of some scattered and dispersed Trojans: the drinks they used in
their best and worst of fortunes after their plantation here, are observed to
be these; Syder, Perry, Metheglin, Mead, Bragget, Pomperkin, and chiefly,
though lastly, Ale, with its appendix Beer. Of which in order.

Syder.
SYder (whose Anagram is Desyr) desires and deserves the first place, as being
the most ancient: it is made of Apples, and is of that antiquity, that it is
thought by some to have been invented and made by Eve, and afterward
practiced by Cain, who by the making of it in the time of his vagrancy, got a
very competent estate. Certainly it was a most frequent and usual drink
amongst the Trojans, and was with the remainder of that Nation, first brought
into this Island: It is called Syder a Sydera, (as the Dictionary tells me) of
the Stars, whose influence in those Heathenish times was much invoked in the
composure of that most excellent liquor, whereof my native Country of the
County of Glocestershire most plentifully flows; It does much refrigerate and
qualify the inward heat of man, it is also very purgative, and cleanses the
small guts of all viscous humors, and is much meliorated by the addition of
Sugar, in which way being taken the poorest cottage in Wales that affords it,
outvies the Sollyard, and the men of that Country may without blushing (their
ordinary virtue) parallel it with the glory of the Rhine.

Perry.
PErry is more Aromaticke, being made of Pears, from whence it seems to have
its Appellation: there is much disagreement amongst ancient and modern Writers
about the antiquity, original, and derivation of the name of it; Gorbonus the
Lacedemonian sales, it was first made in Syria by one Pericles. Trappoza (a
most learned Theban) ascribes it to one Periander: Nimpsbagg will have it from
Persepolis a City in Persia: but some Britains will, that desire to vindicate
the Antiquity of times, of one Parry, a Nephew to Cadwallader the great, the
last King of the Britains, who was most ^^^ious in the composure of liquids of
this nature.

Others would seem to derive it from Perrue in America, who in regard of the
luxuriant soil, and salubrious air abounded wonderfully with Pears;
alleging that Mangotapon one of the seven that hid themselves in a cave,
called Particumbo, at that great deluge of the world, was at his coming forth
(for he lived to come forth) the first compounder of this drink, which in
honor of his Country he then called Perrue.

Amongst all these various opinions of foreign Authors, common experience
tells us, that Worcestershire is our British Maggazin, or plentiful
storehouse for Perry; nor will I seek further to dispute the point, the
drink being usual and equal with what has been said before of Syder. It is
very availeable in quenching of thirst, good against obstructions of the liver
and spleen, and most effectual against contagious diseases, by the opinion of
the British Doctors, to whose treatises I refer the learned for larger
instructions.

Metheglin and Mead.
MEtheglin, and Meade in regard of the coherence of their conditions, I may
very well handle them together, without any disparagement to either; how ever
there be some preportion in their several compositions, yet the maine
Ingredient being Honey stands allowable to both. The common appellation of the
first by the name of Matthew Glinn, (although it seem a Nick't name to the
world) is generally received by the History of Monmoth, to be the Authors name
of this Mellifluous mixture: for this Matthew dwelling in a Valley (for so the
word Glinn imports Englished from the Welsh) being master of a very great
stock of Bees, and wanting vent for the issue of their labors, in an abundant
year betook himself wholly to his study, and being most ingenious in things
of this nature, in a short time he profited so well, as out of his maternall or
mother-wit, of himself he perfected this rare composure. This name being now
ingeminated by the quotidian calls of his well disposed Countrymen, renders it
vendible in the most municipall Towns of those parts, at the rates of six
pence the quart, which is the most predominant price of any of our homebred
liquors.

Concerning the virtues of it, it is to be held in most extraordinary regard,
for it is purgative in respect of the Mell (or Honey) and of singular efficacy
against Tremor Cordis; indeed the overmuch taking of it is to a melancholicke
man in the nature of an Opiate, and therefore to be refused (if not taken with
caution) by men of that constitution.

Mead or Mead.
FOr Meade or Mead (as some will have it) there are diverse unwarrantable
Authors that would wrest the original and derivation of the name from Medusa,
the inchantresse, some there are that the crewell Media was the inventor of it:
but Padesh shellum Shagh, a learned Gimnosophist (whose opinion I most leave
unto) in his ninth book of Hidromancy, faith, that it was a drink in use and
potable by the Medes and Persians in the first erection of that Monarchy (from
whence most significantly it has the name) and that a British Lord, a
favorite of a Sultan there, first brought it to these parts, the Receipt being
freely bestowed upon him, for his especial service; in the belief of all
which, I must crave pardon, that I am not guilty, but I rather think it as an
abstract from the former, however it has some several virtues, but in regard
of the cheapnesse it is now grown contemptible, being altogether ecclipsed by
the virtue of Metheglin.

Braggot.
THe next to be handled is Braggot, a drink in my opinion, not much beholding
to antiquity, although some extant writings of the Barley avouch the receipt
for the making of it to be sent over from the Emperor of the East, to Liolin
the great Prince of Wales. This drink is of a most hot nature, as being
composed of Spices, and if it once scale the sconce, and enter within the
circumclusion of the Perricranion, it does much accelerate nature, by whose
forcible attraction and operation, the drinker (by way of distribution) is
easily enabled to afford blows to his brother; it is hot in the third degree,
in which respect it is held medicinable, against all cold diseases of the
Stomach.

Pomperkin.
THe sixth sort of British drinks is Pomperkin, a drink whose original was
from Pomeranea (a Province in Germany) as some writers relate. Some derive it
from the Pomponii (a Noble Roman family) however Authors differ about it, it is
not much material; most certain it is that it is made of Apples, as the name
of it imports; being nothing but the Apples bruised and beaten to mash, with
water put to them, which is a drink of so weak a condition that it is no
where acceptable but amongst the Rusticks and Plebeyans, being a heartlesse
liquor much of the nature of Swillons in Scotland, or small Beer in England,
such as is said to be made of the washings of the Brewers legs and aprors;
and I do most yield to their opinions that the first Author of Pomperkin was
Perkin Warbecke in the reign of Henry the seventh, who in his private
retirements and Iurking holes, had occasion to practice the thrifty making of
this infusion. It is of an Hidropicall and Aquarian operation, the vigor of it
does seldom evaporate upward or ascend to the brain, and being it is likewise
of a coroading condition, yet the British bodies being well antidoted with
their compounded Cream, Whig, Whey, and Butter-milke; in their constitutions
it becomes matter of nutriment.

Ale.
HAving gone thus far, it remains that I speak something of what has been,
and now is used by the English, as well since the Conquest, as in time of the
Britains, Saxons, and Danes, (for the former recited drinks, are to this day
confined to the Principality) so as we enjoy them only by a statute called the
courtesy of Wales. And to perfect my discourse in this I shall only induce
them into two heads, viz. the unparaleld liquor called Ale, with his Abstract
Beer; whose antiquity amongst a sort of Northern pated fellows is if not
altogether contemptible, of very little esteem; this humor moved the
scurrilous pen of a shameless writer in the reign of King Henry the third,
detractingly to inveigh against this unequaled liquor. Thus For muddy, foggy,
fulsome, puddle, stinking,
For all of these, Ale is the only drinking.


Of all Authors that I have ever yet read, this is the only one that has
attempted to brand the glorious splendour of that Ale-beloved decection; but
observe this fellow, by the perpetual use of water (which was his accustomed
drink) he fell into such convulsion and lethargick diseases, that he remained
in opinion a dead man; however the knowing Physicians of that time, by the
frequent and inward application of Ale, not only recovered him to his pristine
estate of health, but also enabled him in body and brain for the future, that
he became famous in his writings, which for the most part were afterward spent
with most Aleoquent and Alaborate commendation of that Admired and most
superexcellent Imbrewage.

Some there are that affirm that Ale was first invened by Alexander the Great,
and that in his conquests this liquor did infuse much vigor and valor into
his soldiers. Others say that famous Physician of Piemont (named Don Alexis)
was the founder of it. But it is known that it was of that singular use in the
time of the Saxons that none were allowed to brew it but such whose places and
qualities were most eminent: insomuch that we find that one of them had the
credit to give the name of a Saxon Prince, who in honor of that rare quality,
he called Alla. Some Aleadge that it being our drink when our Land was called
Albion, that it had the name of the Country: Twiscus in his Euphorbium will
have it from Albania, or Epirus, VVolfgang Plashendorph of Gustenburg, says
that Alecto (one of the three furies) gave the receipt of it to Albumazer a
Magician, and he (having Aliance with Aladine the Sultan at Aleppo) first
brewed it there, whereto may be Aleuded, the story how Alphonsus of Scicily,
sent it from thence to the battle of Alcazor. My Author is of Anaxagoras
opinion, that Ale is to be held in high price for the nutritive substance that
it is endued withal, and how precious a nurse it is in general to Mankind.

It is true that the overmuch taking of it does so much exhilerate the spirits,
that a man is not improperly said to be in the Aletitude (observe the word I
pray you, and all the words before or after) for you shall find their first
syllable to be Ale, and some writers are of opinion that the Turkish Alcaron
was invented by Mahomet out of such furious raptures as Ale inspired him
withal; some affirm Bacchus ( Alias Liber Pater) was the first Brewer of it,
among the Indians, who being a stranger to them they named it Ale, as brought
to them by an Alien; in a word, Somnus alt^^ signifies dead sleep: Quies alta,
Great rest; Altus and Alta noble and excellent: It is (for the most part)
extracted out of the spirit of a Grain called Barley, which was of that
estimation amongst the ancient Galls that their Prophets (whom they called
Bardi) used it in their most important prophesies and ceremonies: This Grain,
after it had been watered and dried, was at first ground in a Mill in the
Island of Malta, from whence it is supposed to gain the name of Malt; but I
take it more proper from the word Matteolus, which signifies a Hammer or Maule,
for Hanniball (the great Carthaginian Captain) in his sixteen years wars
against the Romans, was called the Maule of Italy, for it is conjectured that
he victoriously Mauld them by reason that his Army was daily refreshed with the
spiritefull Elixar of Malt.

It holds very significant to compare a man in the Aletitude to be in a
planetarie height; for in a Planet, the Altitude is his motion in which he is
carried from the lowest place of Heaven or from the Center of the Earth, into
the most highest place, or unto the top of his Circle, and then it is said to
be in Apogaeo, that is the most Transcendent point of all, so the Sublunarie of
a stupefied Spirit, being elevated by the efficacious vigor of this
uncontroleable virtue, renders him most capeable for high actions.

I should be voluminous, if I should insist upon all pertinent and impertinent
passages in the behalf of Ale, as also of the retentive fame that York,
Chester, Hull, Nottingham, Darby, Gravesend, with a Toaste, and other Countries
still enjoy, by making this untainted liquor in the primitive way, and how
Windsor does more glory in that Composition than all the rest of her
speculative pleasures, which is daily strengthened by the Agitive endeavors of
the most pregnant spirits there, whose superlative issue affords us a quotidian
expectation, and questionless cannot but succeed with general applause in
regard of the undertakers; Also there is a Town near Margate in Kent, (in the
Isle of Thanett) called Northdowne, which Town has ingrost much Fame, Wealth,
and Reputation from the prevalent potencie of their Atractive Ale.

I will only now speak somewhat of its virtues, and in the weakness of my
expressions shall crave pardon, of those many and learned Doctors of our Time,
whose daily and gustave Approbation adds to the glorious Splendor of that
unequalled Element.

Concerning the fructifying or fruitfulness of Ale, it is almost incredible,
for twice every year there is a Fair at a small Town called Kimbollon, or
Kimolton in North-hamptonshire, (as I take it) in which town there are but 38.
houses, which at the Fair time are increased to 39. Alehouses, for an old
woman and her daughter do on those days divide there one house into two, such
is the operation and increasing power of our English Ale.

First then, it is a singular remedy against all melancholic diseases, Tremor
cordis, and Maladies of the spleen, it is purgative and of great operation
against Iliaca passio, and all gripings of the small guts, it cures the stone
in the Bladder, Reins or Kidneyes, and provokes Vrin wonderfully, it mollifies
Tumors and swellings in the body, and is very predominant in opening the
obstructions of the Liver. It is most effectual for clearing of the sight,
being applied outwardly, it asswageth the unsufferable pain of the Gowt called
Artichicha Podagra, or Gonogra, the Yeast or Barme being laid hot to the part
pained, in which way it is easefull to all Impostumes or the pain in the Hippe
called Sciatica passio; Indeed the immoderate taking of it (as of the best
things) is not commended, for in some it causes swimming in the head and
Vertigo, (but I speak still of moderation) in which respect it is not only
availeable for the causes aforesaid, but for all defluxions and Epidemicall
diseases whatsoever, and being Buttered (as our Gallenists well observe) it is
good against all Contagious diseases, Fevers, Agues, Rhumes, Coughes and
Catarres with Hernia Aquosa and vertosa.

I might proceed to nominate the Towns of the Kingdom that have their
happiness to enjoy their names from Ale, Alesfoord, in Hampshire, and Alesbury
(or Aylesbury) in Buckinghamshire, Where the making of Aleberries so excellent
against Hecticks was first invented. As also of many Sirnames of great worth in
this Kingdom, as these of Ale-iff, Ale-worth, Good-ale, Penny-Ale, and in
Scotland, the generous and ancient name of Lamsd-Ale, but not to insist
further, in this strain, I make no question, but the Capacious apprehension of
a free understanding will spare me that labor.

I will therefore shut up all with that admirable conclusion insisted upon in
our time by a discreet Gentleman in a solemn Assembly, who, by a politic
observation, very aptly compares Ale and Cakes with Wine and Wafers, neither
does he hold it sit that it should stand in Competition with the meanest Wines,
but with that most excellent Composition which the Prince of Physicians
Hippocrates had so ingenuously compounded for the preservation of mankind, and
which (to this day) speaks the Author by the name of Hippocras, so that you
see of Antiquity, Ale was famous amongst the Trojans, Britains, Romans,
Saxons, Danes, Normans, English men, Welsh, besides in Scotland, from the
highest and Noblest Palace to the poorest or meanest Cottage, Ale is
universal, and for Virtue it stands allowable with the best receipts of the
most Antientest Physicians; and for its singular force in expulsion of poison
is equal, if not exceeding that rate Antidote so seriously invented by the
Pontique King, which from him (till this time) carries his name of Mitbridate.
And lastly, not only approved by a National Assembly, but more exemplarily
remonstrated by the frequent use of the most knowing Physicians, who for the
wonderful force that it has against all the diseases of the Lungs, Justly
allow the name of a Pulmonist to every Alebrewer.

The further I seek to go the more unable I find my self to express the
wonders (for so I may very well call them) operated by Ale, for that I shall
abruptly conclude, in consideration of mine own insufficiency, with the
fagge-end of an old man's old will, who gave a good sum of money to a Red-fac'd
Ale-drinker, who played upon a Pipe and Tabor, which was this: To make your Pipe
and Tabor keep their sound,
And dye your Crimson tincture more profound,
There grows no better medicine on the ground,
Than Aleano (if it may be found)
To buy which drug, I give a hundred pound.


Ale is rightly called Nappy, for it will set a nap upon a man's thread bare
eyes when he is sleepy. It is called Merry-goe-downe, for it slides down
merrily; It is fragrant to the sent; It is most pleasing to the taste; The
flowring and mantling of it (like Chequer work) with the Vendant smiling of
it, is delightful to the sight, it is Touching or Feeling to the Brain and
Heart; and (to please the senses all) it provokes men to singing and mirth,
which is contenting to the Hearing. The speedy taking of it does comfort a
heavy and troubled mind; it will make a weeping widow laugh and forget sorrow
for her deceased husband; It is truly termed the spirit of the Buttry (for it
puts spirit into all it enters,) It makes the footmans Head and heels so
light, that he seems to fly as he runs; It is the warmest lineing of a
naked man's Coat, (that is a Bull) It satiates and asswageth hunger and cold;
with a Toaste it is the poor man's comfort, the Shepherd, Mower, Plowman,
Labourer and Blacksmiths most esteemed purchase; It is the Tinkers treasure,
the Pedlers Jewel, the Beggars Joy, and the Prisoners loving Nurse; it will
whet the wit so sharp, that it will make a Catter talk of matters beyond his
reach; It will set a Bashful suitor a woing; It heates the chill blood of the
Aged; It will cause a man to speak past his own or any others man's capacity,
or understanding; It sets an edge upon Logic and Rhetoric; It is a friend to
the Muses; It inspires the poor Poet, that cannot compass the price of
Canarie or Gasenigne; It mounts the Musician bove Eela; It makes the
Balladmaker Rhyme beyond Reason, It is a Repairer of a decayed Color in the
face; It puts Eloquence into the Orator; It will make the Philosopher talk
profoundly, the Scholar learnedly, and the Lawyer Acute and feelingly, Ale at
Whitsontide, or a Whitson Church Ale, is a Repairer of decayed Country
Churches; It is a great friend to Truth, for they that drink of it (to the
purpose) will reveal all they know, be it never so secret to be kept; It is an
Emblem of Justice, for it allows and yields measure; It will put courage into
a Coward, and make him swagger and fight; It is a seal to many a good
Bargain. The Physician will commend it; the Lawyer will defend it, It neither
hurts, or kills, any but those that abuse it unmeasurably and beyond bearing; It
does good to as many as take it rightly; It is as good as a pair of Spectacles
to clear the eyesight of an old parish Clarke; and in Conclusion, it is such a
nourisher of Mankind, that if my mouth were as big as Bishopsgate, my Pen as
long as a Maypole, and my Ink a flowing spring, or a standing fishpond, yet I
could not with Mouth, Pen, or Ink, speak or write the true worth and
worthiness of Ale.

Beer.
NOw, to write of Beer, I shall not need to wet my pen much with the naming of
it, It being a drink which Antiquity was an Aleien, or a mere stranger to,
and as it has scarcely any name, so has it no habitation, for the places or
houses where it is sold does still retain the name of An Alehouse; but if it
were a Beere-house, (or so called) yet it must have an Inferior style of
hous-roome than An Alehouse; for An is the name of many a good woman, and the
name An cannot be properly given to a Beere-Brewer, or Beere-house; for to say
An Beer Brewer or An Beer house is ridiculous; but An Ale-Brewer or An
Alehouse is good significant English; or to say An Beer brewer or An
Beerehouse or (by your favor An Tavern) is but botching language in great
Britain; but to say A Alebrewer or A Alehouse, is more improper than to bid a
child A A in his Chair, when there is neither Chair or stool.

This comparison needs a Sir Reverence to Usher it, but being Beer is but an
Upstart and a foreigner or Alien, in respect of Ale, it may serve in stead of a
better; Nor would it differ from Ale in any thing, but only that an Aspiring
Amaritudinous Hop comes crawling lamely in, and makes a Bitter difference
between them but if the Hop be so cripled that he cannot be gotten to make the
odds, the place may poorly be supplied with chopped Broom (new gathered)
whereby Beer has never attained the sober Title of Ale, for it is proper to
say A Stand of Ale, and a Hogs Head of Beer, which in common sense is but a
swinish Phrase or Appellation.

Indeed Beer, by a Mixture of Wine, it enjoyes approbation amongst some few
(that hardly understand wherefore) but then it is no longer Beer, but has
lost both Name and Nature, and is called Balderdash, (an Utopian denomination)
and so like a petty Brook running into a great stream looses it self in his
own current, the legs being washed with the weaker or smaller sort of it, is
contemptuously called, Rotgut; and is thought by some to be very medicinable to
cure the Scurvie. The stronger Beer is divided into two parts ( viz.) wild and
stale; the first may ease a man of a drought, but the later is like water cast
into a Smiths forge, and breeds more heartburning, and as rust eats into Iron,
so overstale Beer gnawes auletholes in the entrales, or else my skill fails,
an what I have written of it is to be held as a jest.

I have now performed my promise, yet cannot so cease, being much desirous to
speak something of a foreign Element, which in some sort seems to obscure
the glory of all the forenamed drinks; and is known to us by the name of Sack,
which appellation was archieved by derivation from Donzago, a Spaniard of the
Province of Andalowsia, who was the first discoverer of this Castilian Ellixar.

But herein (as before) I shall but loose my self the subject being most
excellently handled, tasted, and well rellished both in verse and prose,
especially in that late Illustration of Aristippus, in which respect only it
is held fit that Cambridge should precede Oxford.

Sack.
SAck is no hippocrite, for any man that knows what an Anagram is, will
confess that it is conta1ined within the litterall letters and limmits of its
own name, which is (to say) a Cask. Sack then contains it self, (except it
be drawn out) within its enclosed bounds, like Diogenes, in his Tun; yet Sack
(overmuch drawn and excessively abused) has drawn the abusers of it into
many abuses and damages, for Tangrephilax, a learned Lybian Geographer of our
time, affirms that it sumes into the head, though it well pleases the palate,
yet nevertheless that it helps the natural weakness of a cold stomach more
than any other wine whatsoever. The old ancient Poets only write of Helicon,
Tempe, Aganippe, the Pegasean fountain, the Thespian spring. The Muses well
and abundance of other unknown rich invisible blessings; But our age approves
that Sack is the best lineing or living for a good Poet; and that it enables
our modern writers, to versifie most ingeniously, without much cud gelling
their headpieces (a thing very much used in the pumpers for wit) whereby they
get some portion of credit, a great proportion of windy applause, but for
money, etc. For mine own part, I do not, nor will drink any of it, which is
the reason that my verses want vigor, but if I could but endure to wash my
midrisle in Sack, as the most grave Musehunters Hexametrians, Pentametrians,
Dactylians and Spondeians do; I should then reach with my Invention above the
Altitude of the 39. sphere, and dive 50. fathom below the profundity of the
depest Barrathrum: The troth is, I have no reason to love Sack, for it made me
twice a Rat in Woodstreet Counter-trap: besides where other wines have scarce
strength to make me drunk (as I may take them) Sack has the power to make me
mad, which made me leave it.

Yet for the virtues that are in mine enemy, I must and will give due
commendations; therefore I will give a touch at some things which is praise
worthy in this Iberian, Castilian, Canarian, Sherrian, Mallaganian, Robalonian,
Robdanian, Peterseamian.

Is any man oppressed with crudities in his stomach, so that it takes away all
appetituall desire, insomuch that the sight of meat is a second sickness to
him? let that man drink Sack, the cure follows beyond belief: Is any man
Ingurgitated, so that he is in the condition of a strong surfeit? let that man
drink Sack too; the remedy is sudden indeed to a point of wonder or
admiration. Is any man so much out of the favor of Elous, that he is
short-winded, or that his voice or speech fails him, let him drink Sack, (as
it may be taken) it shall make him capable to vent words and speak beyond
measure: Does any man (for the clearing of his stomach) desire a vomit? let
him take a quantity of Sack, and by the operation of the same it shall be
effected; So that we may justly say that Sack is a second nature to man, and
that the Physicians well knew, when they confinde it to the Apothecaies shops
(which was not till near the end of King Henry the eights Reign, about the
year 1543, and in King Edward the sixts first and second year 1548.) till
which time none but the Apothecaries had the honor to fell Sack, and that was
only for medicine, and for sick folks: but though now it be more dispersed
into Great men's houses and Vintners cellars, yet it has obtained no absolute
freedom to this day, for in the mansions or dwellings of many that keep the
fairest houses, the Mannagement and tuition of Sack is to some lewd (ill
natured, or nurtured) yeoman of the Winecellar, whereby it is too often
adulterated, and also brought to such an astringencie, brought to such points
of mortification, that it is impossible it should ever be worthy to gain the
approbation of a Wine-vinegar man, and it were heartily to be wished that this
enormious abuse were punished by the virtue of a Dog-whip.

A word or two for example, and I shall conclude: Lucius Piso that great
General that conquered Thrace, was wonderfully given to the drinking of Sack,
insomuch that he was oftentimes carried from the Senate house; and it was so
far from being an impeachment to his honor, that nevertheless Augustus
Caesar committed to him the charge, care, and trust of the most secret affairs
of State, and never had any cause to be discontented with him: the like we read
of Tiberius and Cassus; and as faithfully was the plot and purpose to kill
Caesar, (in the Senate) committed unto Cimber (who drank nothing but Sack,) as
unto Cassius who drank nothing but Water; and certain I am that the Persians,
after their drinking of Sack, were wont to consult of their chiefest and most
serious state-businesses: and Cyrus, (that so far and famous a renowned King)
among his other high praises and commendations, meaning to prefer himself
before his brother Artaxerxes, and get the start of him, alleges the cause of
his being victorious over him to be chiefly because he could drink more Sack
than he.

I commend not intemperance in all these allegations, the Reader may please to
Remember my former test for moderation, and Sack, being so taken, will be to
the moderate taker a comfort against cares and crosses, and so with Iuvenals
words in his foureteenth satire I shut up all; Thou shall be from disease and
weakness free,
From moan, from care, long time of life to thee
Shall by more friendly fate afforded by:
Drink Sack therefore if you will be ruled by me.


Here follows, a laborious and effectual discourse, in praise of the Element
of all Waters fresh and salt, with their opperation; with a touch of the causes
of all sorts of weather, fair and foul.
I That of Earth was made, yet no earth have,
No not so much as may afford a grave:
For when that death my lives thread shall untwine
I have no burial in a ground that is mine:
Of all the Elements, the Earth is worst;
Because for Adams sin it was accursed:
Therefore no parcel of it will I buy
But on the Water for relief rely.
When as man's crying crimes in volleyes flew
To Heaven, and Heavens high vengeance downward drew:
Then Water all the World did overrunne,
And plagued the abuses that on Earth were done.
From showers of Water, rained from Skies to Earth,
Spring, Summer, Harvest, Winter have their birth.
For Water is the Milk of Heaven, whereby
All things are nursed, increase and multiply.
The old^st and most grave Astronomers,
The learned and most sage Philosophers
Do hold, that in the highest Altitude
A sphere of Water is, in Amplitude
Envelloping all other Orbs and Spheres,
With all the Planets swift and slow careares,
Even as the Sea the Earth does compass round,
The Water so the Firmament does bound.
Should I of Water write, but what it is,
I should be drowned in my Theames Abyss:
And therefore I Will but dabble, wade, and wash,
And here and there both give, and take a dash.
In blessed Records it truly is approved,
That Gods blessed Spirit upon the Waters moved:
Then All things were involved in the Waters,
All earthly, Airie, and all fiery matters:
Until the Almighty (whose works all are wonders)
With saying ( Let there be) the Chaos sunders.
Of a confused lump, void of form and fashion,
He spoke, and gave the world its fair creation.
And as at first the Waters compast all
The Chaos, or worlds universal Ball.
So still, of all the works of God, most glorious
The water was, is, and will be victorious.
It does surmount the Air, the fire it quenches
With Inundations it the Earth bedrenches:
The Fire may burn a house, perhaps a Town,
But water can a Province spoil and drown:
And Air may be corrupted, and from thence,
A Kingdom may be plagued with pestilence:
Where many die, old, young, some great, some small,
But water floods plays sweep-stake with them all.
Earth may be barren, and not yield her store:
Yet may she feed the rich, and starve the poor.
But Earth in triumph over all never rid,
As in the Diluge once the Waters did.
War may make noise with Gunnes and rattling Drums,
But Water, where it comes, it overcomes.
Thus Earth, nor Air, nor Fire, nor rumbling War,
Nor plague, or pestilence, nor famine are
Of power to win, where Water but commands,
As witness may the watery Northerlands.
Concerning Merchandise, and transportation,
Commerce and traffic, and negotiation,
To Make each Country have by Navigation
The Goods, and Riches of each others Nation.
Commodities in free community,
Embassages for war or unity:
These blessings, by the Sea, or some fresh River
Are given to us, by the All-giving Giver.
And in the vasty and unmeasured room
Of Neptunes Regiment, or Thetis womb,
Are almost shapes and forms of all the things
Which in the Earth, or Air, or dies, or springs.
Ther'e Fishes like to Sun or Moon, and Stars,
Fowls of the Air, and weapons for the Wars,
Beasts of the Field, and Plants and Flowers there,
And Fishes made like Men and Women are.
All instruments for any Art or Trade,
In living forms of Fishes there are made.
This is approved, if any man will seek
In the first day of Bart^^ his first week,
Heaven has ordained the warry Element
To be a Seal and sacred Sacrament,
Which does in Baptism us regenerate,
And man again with God does renovate.
And as it in the Laver (mystical)
Does cleanse us from our sin original:
So for our corp'rall uses it is most meet
To wash our clothes, and keep us clean and sweet.
Were not for Water thus we plainly see,
No beast on Earth more beastly were than we.
Our selves with nastinesse our selves should smother,
Or with our own sterich poison one another.
It keeps our vessels clean to dress our meat,
It serves to cleanse and boil the meat we eat.
It makes our houses hansome, neat and clean,
(Or else the maid is but a sluttish queen)
Thus Water boyles, parboyles, and mundifies.
Cleares, cleanses, clarifies, and purifies.
But as it purges us from filth and stincke;
We must remember that it makes us drink,
Metheglin, Braggot, Beer, and headstrong Ale,
(That can put color in a visage pale)
By which means many Brewers are grown Rich,
And in estates may soar a lofty Pitch,
Men of Good Rank and place, and much command
Who have (by sodden Water) purchased land:
Yet sure I think their gain had not been such
Had not good fellows vs'de to drink too much;
But wisely they made hay whilst Sun did shine,
For now our Land is overflowne with wine:
With such a Deluge, or an Inundation
As has besotted and half drowned our Nation.
Some that are scarce worth 40 pence a year
Will hardly make a meal with Ale or Beer:
And will discourse, that wine does make good blood,
Concocts his meat, and make digestion good,
And after to drink Beer, nor will, nor can
He lay a Churl upon a Gentleman.
Thus Bacchus is adored and deifide,
And We Hispanializ'd and Frenchifide:
Whilst Noble Native Ale, and Beeres hard fate
Are like old Almanacks, Quite out of Date;
Thus men consume their credits and their wealths,
And swallow sicknesses, in drinking healths,
Until the fury of the spritefull Grape
Mounts to the brain, and makes a man an Ape,
A Sheep, Goat, Lion, or a Beastly swine,
He snores, besoyl'd with vomit and much Wine.
At Good men's Boords, where of^ I eat good cheer,
I find the Brewer honest in his Beer.
He sels it for small Beer, and he should cheat,
In stead of small to cosen folks with Great.
But one shall seldom find them with that fault,
Except it should invisibly rain Malt.
O Tapsters, Tapsters all, lament and cry,
Or desp'rately drink all the Tavernes dry:
For till such time as all the Wine is gone,
Your are bewitched, and guests you shall have none.
Then to the Tavernes hye you every man:
In one day drink four Gallons, if you can,
And with that trick (within a day or twain)
I think there will but little Wine remain.
Your hopes to hoppes return again will be,
And you once more the golden age will see.
But hold, I fear my Muse is mad or drunk,
Or else my wits are in the wetting shrunk:
To Beer and Ale my love has some relation
Which made me wander thus beyond my station.
Good Reader be my Priest, I make confession,
I pray thee pardon me, my long digression.
From Beer and Wine to water now a while,
I mean to metamorphose back my style.
Were not for Water, sure the Dyers would die,
Because they wanted where withal to dye.
Cost would be lost, and labor be in vain,
It Is Water that must help to die in Grain.
They could then fear no colors, it is clear,
Want water, and there will be none to fear.
The Fishmongers, (a worthy Company)
If Water did not still their Trade supply,
They would be Tradefalne, and quite down be trod,
Nor worth the head or braine-pan of a Cod.
Then Lent and Ember-weekes would soon be shotten,
All fasting days would quickly be forgotten:
Carthusian Friars, in superstitious Cloisters
Would want their st^irring Cockles, Crabs and Oysters:
And Catholics turn Puritanes straight way,
And never more keep Lent or fasting day.
But leaving Neptune, and his Trumping Triton,
Of other Waters now I mean to write on,
(Exhaled by Phoebus from the Ocean maine)
Of Clouds, of misty Fogs, all sorts of Rain,
Of Dew, of Frosts, of Hail, of Ice of Snow
Which falls, and turns to water here below,
Of Snow and Rain, as they together meet
Well mingled in the Air, are called Sleet.
Of Springs, of petty Rils, of Crystal Founts,
Of Streamelets here my merry Muse recounts;
Of Foordes, of Brooks, of Rivers, Lakes and Bournes;
Of Creekes, of Ebbes and floods, and their returns,
Of Gulphs, ponds, Whirlpooles, Puddles, Ditches, Pooles,
Of Moates, of Bathes, some hot, and some that cooles,
Of Waters, bitter, sweet, fresh, salt, hot, cold,
Of all their operations manifold;
These (if I can) I Will mention with my Pen
And last of Urin and strong Watermen.
Of Clouds.
A Cloud's a Vapor, which is cold and moist,
Which from the Earth, or Sea, the Sun does hoyst
Into the middle Region of the Air,
And is (by extreme cold) congealed there,
Until at last, it break and falls again,
To Earth, or Sea, in snow, sleet, Hail or Rain.
Of Mists.
Mists are such clouds, which near the earth do lie,
Because the sun wants strength to draw them high.
When radiant Sol displaies his piercing Beams
Of Rain.
Into a cloud, it Thawes, and Raines, in streams:
And as the cloud is distant near or far,
So, great, or small the showrie drops still are.
Some men ('against Rain) do carry in their backs
Prognosticating Aching Almanacks:
Some by a painful elbow, hip, or knee,
Will shrewdly guess, what wether's like to be:
Some by their corns are wondrous Weather-wise,
And some by biting of Lice, Fleas, or Flies:
The Gowt, Sciatica, The Gallian Morbus,
Does often foretell if Tempests shall disturb us;
For though these things converse not with the start,
Yet to Man's Grief they are Astronomers;
In Spring time, and in Autumn Phoebus Ray
From land and sea draws vapors in the day,
Which to the Airs lowest Region he exhales,
Dew.
And in the night to pearly dew is false.
Here often fall Meldewes, sweet as Honey; And
Dew often turns Manna in Polonia land.
Twixt Dew and Hoare-frost, Hoare frosts
all the ods, I hold
One comes from heat, the other from the cold.
Hayle.
Hayle is an Ice which often in flawes and storms
In spring and Harvest falls, in sundry forms;
For in the Autumn, Winter, or by night
Scarce any Hayle within our land does light.
And last comes Snow, Snow.
the cold of Winters Weathers,
Which falls and fills the Air with seeming feathers.
These from the land, and from the Ocean Maine,
The Sun draws up, and then lets fall again.
Thus water universally does fly
From Earth and sky to Sea, from them to Sky:
For 'twixt the Firmament, the land and Ocean,
The Water travels with perpetual Motion.
Now, from the Airy Regions I descend,
And to a lower course my study beside
He that of these things would know more, may please
To look them in some Ephimerides.
Springs, Springs.
(in the Earth) I do Assimulate
To veins of Man, which do evacuate,
And drop by drop through Cavernes they distill.
Till many meetings make a petty Rill:
Which Rill (with others) do make Rivolets,
And Rivolets, Brooks, Bournes and foords begets,
And thus combined, they their store deliver
Into a deeper trench, and make a River.
Then Rivers join, Rivers.
as Isis does with Tame,
And Trent with Owse, and Humber does the same.
Those altogether do their Tributes pay
Unto their sovereign Ocean night and day.
These make Dame Tellus womb to fructisie,
As blood in veins of men do life supply,
Lakes in low vallied Grounds have Generation, Lakes

Or from some several Rivers Inundation.
Some Lakes seem Oceans, amongst which are these
The Dead-lake, Hircan, and the Caspian seas.
A Whirpooles like unto state policy
Not to be sounded, but with jeopardy.
Hot Bathes do spring from Brimstone veins, whose heat
For many cures have opperation great.
Some mineral earth is bitter, and does make
The water issuing thence, that taste to take.
In Scicily, they say, there is a Well
Whose water does for Vinegar serve well.
A Well near Bileu in Bohemia lies
Which (like burnt Wine) the Country there supplies.
And diverse springs in Germany there be,
Whose taste with Vinegar, or Wine agree.
For there the Brimstone mines, and Minerals
With Fumes infuting vapors up exhales
And with the waters do incorporate
Hot, cold, sweet, sour, as they ennaccuate.
Some Rivers are of such strange working might,
Which drank (by sheep) does change them black from white,
Some that with bathing cure, blind, dease, and lame,
And makes men's hair red that do drink the same,
Some are at noone key-cold, at midnight hot,
Some makes a man mad, some a drunken sot,
Some are in summer cold, in winter warm,
And some are banefull, full of poysn'ous harm.
Some (do with lost) make men's affections burn,
And some (through coldness) wood to stones will turn,
Some will quench burning torches strait, and then
Dipped in the water they are light again,
I read that in Silicia one may find
A well which if Thieves drink of, are struck blind,
My self, and many thousands more than I
Would (rather then to drink thereof be dry.)
If Britains waters all were such, I think
That few of us would dare thereof to drink:
I could write more of strange wells opp'tatious:
And waters of our own and other Nations.
But Doctor Fulk of late has writ a book,
Of Met'ors, and who lists therein to look,
May read, and reading may be well sufficed,
So learnedly he has Epitomized.
There are two Springs, which women (when they mump)
Or lumpish lowering from their eyes can pumpe,
And in those pearly streams the fool, and witty,
Has oftentimes been duck'd or sous'd with pity:
Kind hearted men are drowned in sorrow deep
When they do see a handsome woman weep.
But April like, soon dry and quickly wet
(As anger, love, or hate do rise or set,)
But as for those that truly spring from grief,
I wish them consolation and Relief.
Now (to ecclips the vigor of the Vine)
We have strong waters, stronger much than Wine:
One with a quart of water drunk may be,
When (of the best wine) he may hold out three,
The sellers of these waters seldom row,
And yet they are strong-water-men, I know.
Some watermen there are of sight so quick,
They Will tell by water if a man be sick,
And (through the urinall) will speedily
Find out the cause, the grief and remedy.
These men deserve much honor, love and thanks.
But hang base pispot cheating Mountebankes.
'Twere fit the Ratcatchers with them should be,
Combined in one, and at one Hall made free.
I could speak why the sea does ebb and flow,
And why it is salt, but Doctor Fulke does show
Compendiously, as I have said before;
And therefore her I Will touch these points no more.
Month changing Luna, has the government
Over all the various watery element,
And as the Moon is mutable even so
The waters still are turning to and fro:
It Is smooth, it is rough, deep, shallow, swift and slow,
Whose motion does perpetual ebb and flow:
Most weak, most strong, most gentle, most untamed
Of all the creatures that were ever named:
It is so weak that children may it spill,
And strong enough millions of men to kill:
As smooth as Glass, as Rugged as a Bear,
Weak, and yet greatest burdens still does bear,
And as the waters from the Moon does carry
Her inclination, and like her do vary:
So I (a Water-man) in various fashions,
Have wroate a hotchpotch here of strange mutations,
Of ancient liquors, made by Liber Pater,
Of drinks, of Wines, of sundry sorts of Water:
My Muse does like a Monkey friske and frigge,
Or like a Squirrell skip, from twigge to twigge:
Now sipping Sider, straightway supping Perry,
Metheglin sweet, and Mead, (that makes her merry)
With Braggot, that can teach a Cat to speak,
And poor Pomperkin (impotent and weak)
And lastly (as the chief of all the rest)
She tipples Huff-cap Ale, to crown the feast.
Yet now and then in Beer and Balderdash
Her lips she dips; and clean her entrails wash:
And ending, she declares Sack's mighty power,
Which does time, coin, wit, health, and all devour.
Not by the moderate use, but by the abuse
Which daily is in universal use.
For Rhenish, Claret, White, and other Wines
They need not the expression of my lines:
Their virtue's good, if not commix'd impure,
And (as they are used) they may both kill or cure.
Through drinks, through wines, and waters, I have run,
And (being dry and sober.) I have DONE.

