In Memorabilis Effigies.
VEiw and behold his Monumentall Pictor,
Whose trade was Arms, whose Fortune still was Victor:
Look on Truncheon how it is becrowned,
By which you may perceive how he is Renowned.
His Beard, a Grave bush (Naturally fitted)
Shows by the store of hair how he is witted.
And howsoever Times or Seasons change-thinges,
This Captain very truly has done strange-thinges;
Whilst some (perhaps) will say these lines do scoff him,
Read what the Inside of the Book speaks of him.
John Tailor.
These 8. Lines by an unknown Author.
GReat Moguls Landlord, and both Indies King,
(Whose self admiring Fame does lowdly Ring)
Writes 4. score years: More Kingdoms he has right to
The Stars say so. And for them he will Fight too.
And though this worthless Age will not believe him,
But clatter, spatter, slander, scoff and grieve him,
Yet he and all the world in this agree,
That such another TOOL, will never be.
ARTHURUS SEVERUS O-TOOLE NONESUCH: AEtatis 80.


Great Mogul's Landlord; of both Indies King,
Whose self-admiring fame does loudly ring;
Writes fourscore Years, more Kingdoms he has right to, for them he will fight
too:
And though this worthless Age, will not believe him,
But clatter, spatter, slander, scoff, to grieve him
Yet He and all the World in this agree,
That such another Tool will never be.
THE GREAT O Tool.

ENglands, Scotlands, Irelands Mirror,
Mars his fellow, Rebels Terror:
These Lines do gallop for their pleasure,
Writ with neither feet or measure;
Because Prose, Verse, or Anticke Story,
Cannot Blaze O Tools great Glory.
LONDON. Printed for Henry Gosson. 1622.

AN ENCOMIVM OR ENCO-MI-ASS-TRICK, dedicated to the unlimited memory of Arthur
O Tool, or O Tool the Great: Being the Son and Heir of Brian O Tool, Lord
of Poores Court and far Collen, in the County of Dublin, in the Kingdom of
Ireland. The Mars and Mercury, the Agamemnon and Ulysses both for Wisdom and
Valor, in the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland.
Prologue.
Brave Vsquebough that fierce Hibernian liquor,
Assist my brain, and make my wit run quicker:
To heat my Muse like to a well warmed Chimney,
I beg thy merry aid kind Polihimny.
I list not to call Fables into question,
Nor of Baboones, or idle b^bles jest I on:
And yet if Sense or reason here you look for,
For neither, or for either read this Book for.
And if perchance I do in any word lie,
Do, as I writ it, read it over absurdly;
Though in these days there are a Crew of fond men,
That for invention strive to go beyond men,
And write so humerous Dogmaticall,
To please my Lord and Lady what do you Call,
With Inkehorne terms stiff quilted and bumbasted,
And (though not understood) yet are well tasted.
And therefore I Will not reach beyond the bounds of
My weak capacity, nor search the sounds of
Deep Natures secrets, or Arts spacious cirquit:
My Muse is free from those, my self will her quit.
But leaving Idle toys, with toil endure I on,
To write the praise of this brave bold Centurion.
The Argument and meaning, of this following History.
IN all Ages and Countries, it has ever bin known, that Famous men have
flourished, whose worthy Actions, and Eminency of place, have ever been as
conspicuous Beacons Burning and blazing to the Spectators view: the sparks and
flames whereof has sometimes kindled Courage in the most coldest and Effeminate
Cowards; as Thersites amongst the Grecians, Amadis de Gaul, and Sir Huon of
Bordeaux in France, Sir Beuis, Gogmagog, Chinon, Palmerine, Lancelot, and Sir
Tristram amongst us here in England, Sir Degree, Sir Grime, and Sir Gray Steel
in Scotland, Don Quixot with the Spaniards, Gargantua almost no where, Sir
Dagonet, and Sir Triamore any where, all these, and many more of the like Rank
have filled whole Volumes, with the ayrie Imaginations of their unknown and
unmatchable worthes; So Ireland amongst the rest, had the Honor to produce and
breed a spark of Valor, Wisdom, and Magnanimity, to whom all the Nation of
the World must give place. The Great O Tool, is the tool that my Muse takes
in hand, whose praises (if they should be set forth to the full) would make
Apollo and the Muses Barren; To whom the Nine Worthyes were never to be
compared: betwixt whom, and Haniball, Scipio, the Great Pompey, or Tamberlaine,
was such odds, that it was unfit the best of them should hold his stirrup,
and who (by his own Report) in whom Ireland may rejoice, and England be
merry, whose Youth was Dedicated to Mars, and his Age to Westminster, which
ancient City, is now honored with his beloved Residence.

To the Honor of the Noble Captain O Tool.
THou Famous man, Est, west, and North, and Southward,
From Boreas cold rump, to Austers slauering mouth ward,
I call Apolloes daughters all, to witness,
Much would I praise thee, but my Wit wants fitnes.
But thou thy self (of thy self) can speak so-well,
That though my Rimes not altogether goe-well,
Yet if the Worlds applause would not attend thee,
were all tongues mute, thy own tongue would commend thee
Thy self (unto thy self) art Fames Trump blasting,
To make thy name (like Buffe) tough, long and lasting.
Yet grant me (thou brave man that never feared colors)
T'accept the poor Lines of an Artles Scullers.
Thy Bilboe often bathed in the blood of Foe man's,
Like Caius Marius, Consul of the Romans:
When thou have seemed more dreadful in thy harness,
Then Babels General great Holophernes,
More in command then was Nabuchadnezar,
And more renownd then Cayus Julius Caesar:
Upon thy foes breast thou have often troad free,
As on the Pagans did brave Boloignes Godfrey.
Fierce Methridates the stout King of Pontus,
If thou do lead us, dares not to confront us:
Thy matchles valor, ten to one more tried is,
Then ever was the Libian strong Alcides:
And all men know that never such an od piece
Of fighting mettle, sprung from Mars his Codpiece.
Upon the maine land and the raging Ocean,
Thy courage has attaind thee high promotion.
Thou never fear'dst to combat with Gargante,
Thy fame's beyond the battle of Lepanto.
The mighty Alexander of Macedo,
Nere fought as thou have done with thy Toledo.
We hold thee for a worthy and no base one,
But one that could have won the fleece from Jason:
Thou durst oppose against Bore, Bear Wolf or Lion,
And from the torturing wheel to fetch Ixion,
And I acknowledge that thy matchles valor is,
To kill Pasiphaes or the Bull of Phalleris,
Though age has ouertane thee, yet thy will is,
To grapple with an Ajax or Achilles,
Or with Hells Monarch envious ill faced Pluto,
And prove him by his horns a dambd Cornuto.
Thou fearst no Devil, nor no Demogorgon,
Nor yet the valiant Welchman Shon a Morgan:
So that most Wizards and most fortune tellers,
Approve thee for the greatst of Monster quellers:
And absolute and potent Dominator,
For War or Counsel both by land and Water,
In times of tumult thou amongst the Irish,
Have made them skip ore bogs and quagmires mirish,
Whilst in the pursuit, like an angry Dragon,
Thou made them run away with not a rag on.
For had thy foes bin Thousands, with thy Pistall,
And thy good sword, thou bravely would Resist all.
Thou wast to us, as unto Rome was Titus,
And stoutly sent our foes to black Cocitus.
To kill, and cut throats, thou art skild in that trick,
As if thou were the Champion to Saint Patrick:
I know not to which worthy to compare thee,
For were they living, they could not out-dare thee.
To thee what was great Tamberlaine the Tartar,
Or matched with thee what was our Britain Arthur?
Great Haniball, that famous Carthaginean,
Was not a mate for thee in mine opinion,
And all Seuerus virtues, sum'd up total,
Remain in thee, if this blind Age would note all.
Thou shewdst thy self a doughty wight at Dublin,
When Irish Rebels madly brought the trouble in:
At Baltimore, Kinsale, at Cork, and Yoghall,
Thou with thy power have made them often cry fogh all,
Often in thy rage, thou have most madly Ran on,
The burning mouth of the cumbustious Cannon.
For in thy fury, thou have often been hotter,
More swifter then an Ambler, or a Trotter,
As witness can the bounds of fierce Tirconnell,
and the rough Bickerings with the stout Odonnell.
The slaves did scud before thee over the Quagmires:
Where many a warlike Horse and many a Nagge mires:
Thou kildst the gammon visag'd poor Westphalians,
The Al-to-totterd, torn Tatterdemalians:
The broaging, roaging, brauling, base Bezonians:
The swift foot, light heeld, run away Slauonians,
Thou letst them have no ground to stand or walk on,
But made them fly as Doves do from a Falcon.
For if thou list in fight to lead a Band on,
Thy slaughtering sword if thou but layst thy hand on
Thy fearful foes would straight the place abandon,
Without or hose, or shoes, shirt, or a band on:
Thou letst them have no quiet place to stand on.
By tongue or pen it cannot well be verifide,
How many hundred thousands thou have terrifide,
For thou have rac'd more Castles, forts and Garrisons,
Beyond Arithmeticke, and past comparisons:
The Proverb says Comparisons are odious,
I Will therefore leave them being incomodious,
In all thy actions thou have been impartial,
Accomodating thy designs as Martial,
In mortal Battles and in bruising battery,
Thy ears would entertain no smooth tongued flattery,
That though to all men thy exploits seemed very od,
Thou broughst them still to an auspitious Period.
And as thy valor durst out-dare bold Hector,
Like wise Ulysses thou can speak a Lector
Such policies thy wits mint could devise on,
Which wiser pates could never once surmise on:
With many a hundred never heard of Stratagem,
Thou have got precious honor, is not that a Iem?
What tricks, or slights of war so ere the foe meant,
Thou can descry and frustrate in a moment.
Upon his Wisdom, and Policy.
OF thy Heroic acts, there might be more said,
For sure they are but slightly touched aforesaid,
But Gods or Muses, Men, or Fiends infernal,
To blaze thee to thy worth, can nere discern all:
And should I write but half that I know of thee,
Some Critticks would persuade thee I did scoff thee.
Thus having showed thy valor, now I Will expound,
Part of thy policies, and wisdom profound.
Vnfellowed, and vnfollowed, and unmatched,
Are the rare sleights that in thy pate were hatched:
Of Engines, Mines, of Counterscarphs and Trenches,
And to keep clear the Camp from whoring wenches:
To teach the Soldiers eat frogs, snailes and vermin,
Such Stratagems as these thou could determine.
That Cato, Plato, or Aurelius Marcus,
Wise Socrates, or reverend Aristarcus,
Diogenes, or wise Pithagoras,
Licurgus, Pliny, Anaxagoras,
Archidamus of Greece, or Roman Tully,
Could nere demonstrate Sapience more fully.
And specially when there was any trouble like,
To vex, molest, or trouble the Republike.
That wit with valor, valor joined with wisdom,
From all the world thou have attained this doom:
To be wars Abstract, Counsels Catechiser,
That can direct all, and all scarce the wiser.
A Complaint and a Petition to him.
THus thou of Yore have followed great Belona,
And shined in Arms like twins of bright Latona:
But now those manly martial days are gone. A
Time of Cheating, sweating, drinking, drabbing,
Of Burst gut feeding and inhumane stabbing,
The Spanish Pip. or else the Galtan Morbus,
Bone-bred diseases, mainely do disturb us:
That now more men by riot are confounded,
Then valiant Soldiers in the wars were wounded.
Mars yields to Venus, Gown-men rules the roast now,
And men of War may fast, or kiss the post now.
The thundering Cannon and the rumbling Drum now,
The Instruments of War are mute and dumb now,
And stout experienced valiant Commanders,
Are turned Saint Nicholas Clarks and high way standers.
And some (through want) are turned base Pimps and Panders,
The watchful Corporal, and the Lansprezado
Are Merchants turned, of smoaky Trinidado.
His shop, (a fadome compass) now contains him,
Where midst the misty vapors he complains him,
That he who has made Forts and Castles caper
Lives now Camelion-like, by Air and Vaper.
Whilst fools and flatterers thrive, it greatly grieves him,
When all Trades fail, Tobacco last relieues him.
Besides each day some hound-like senting Sergeant.
Scoutes, gapes, pries, peyes, and tires on him for argeant:
And Longlane Dogditch, dambd soul wanting Brokers
The Common wealths bane and poor men's vnclokers,
The Countries Spunges, and the Cities soakers,
The Peaces Pestilence, and Warriors choakers.
These beat their hogs-heads all, to try conclusions
By base extorting, working our confusions.
The Soldiers naked, by the Broakers bribing,
The Scriuener lives brave by sophisticke scribing
The slaves grow rich (and it is not to be wondered)
By taking Forty intrest for a hundred.
And Nasty Beadles with their breath contaminous,
With what are you, and who go there examine us:
With hums and hawes, Sir reverence, nods and becking,
With senceles nonsense, checkes and Counter checking:
The brownbild Rug-gownd bench do think it fitting
To exercise their Office, by committing,
Where our expense, with Ale their faces varnish,
Whilst we incounterd, pay fines, fees and garnish.
And Tyburne, Wapping, and St. Thomas Watrings,
Poor Soldiers ends to every neighboring State rings.
Whilst lowzy Ballad-mongers gape and look out,
To set some Riming song, or Roging Book out,
Where more then all is against the dead imputed,
By which means men are doubly executed:
That sure the Gallows has eat up more Pe -- ople,
Then would subdue and win Constantinople.
O rouse thee, rouse thee, then brave man of Action,
Make Fur-gown'd peace burst into Armed faction:
Thou have a pate that can the State unsettle,
Be as thou have been then, a man of mettle
And now base Cowardice does seem to rust us,
Into some worthy business, quickly thrust us,
Now show thy self a noble Ahashuerus,
And once more make our brauing foes to fear us,
Do thou but lead us on, and look but Grimly
And make no doubt, we will do the business trimly.
Among all the tools of war, be thou great O Tool,
And never let the world esteem thee no Fool.
O make the wheel of reeling State, and Fate turn
In spite of sullen melancholy Saturn
To Arms, but from the Arms of lustful Venus
I do entreat thy warlike care to weane us.
Let not the prick-eard power, of proud Priapus
In bonds of painted Curtezans entrap us,
And Rouse us from our Acts and thoughts libidinous,
That (Traytor-like) in ambush do lie hid in us.
Let not thy Tents of worthles Martial discipline,
Be turned to stinking Tap-houses to tipple in:
But make the freezing pot of num-cold war-boyle,
And bubble to a hurly burly Garboyle:
Do as thou have done often most noble Spartan,
Strike silken peace into a fever Quartane;
Or else like Phoebus in his hot Meridian,
Astonish all the world with a Quotidian.
I know thy worth the world does all admire on,
Then clad thy self in burnisht steel and Iron.
I know that all men knows thou have been tried well,
Discreetly thou can talk, fight, run and ride well,
I know the reach of thy polliticke skull, can
Pluck rugged Mars from out the bed of Vulcan,
To make war roar more loud then any Bull can,
I know thou can do more then any Gull can.
I know thou hold'st it Valors ignominy.
To spend thy days in peaceful whip her Ginny.
Thy name and voice, more feared then Guy of Warwick,
Or the rough Rumbling, roaring Meg of Barwicke.
We should do some what, if we once were Rouzed,
And (being Lousy) we might then be Lowsed.
Encourage Soldiers to demean them like men,
And measure Velvet with their Pikes brave Pikemen.
Let shouts and clamors, Woods, groves, dales, and hills fill,
With dreadful noise and cries of follow, follow, kill, kill,
Let Drums cry dub, dub, and let Cannons thunder,
Tantara Trumpets, and let Cowards wonder:
Let Muskets bounce, bounce, let the Welkin rumble,
Let Towns, Turrets, topsituruy tumble,
Do this (as well I know thou can do it wisely)
Exceeding careless, feareles and precisely,
And then thy Fame shall farther far be noysed,
Then Titans rays, or Justice scales are poysed.
And since thou know man's time on earth is short all,
Let mortal Actions make thy name Immortal.
Lenuoy.
IVdge O you Gentiles, what is writ is probable,
And though it seem a babble, yet it is no babble.
Doom amongst ill tinges, that the best is meant all,
And what is amiss, pray take as accidental,
For like a puny practizing Astronomy,
And knows no grounds nor rules so far o'regon am I:
In diuing to his valors whirlepit bottom,
That like the Reverend Sages of old Gotam,
I now perceive how much I ouershot am:
I Will wade no further in it, but in brief breuity,
Abrupt, absurd, abject, thus cast thus leave it I.
These forced Rimes, fully stuffed with fruitless labor,
Has Curried my poor braine-pan like a Tabor:
And to recure me from this strange quandary,
Hence Vsquebaugh, and welcome sweet Canary.
FINIS.

