Differing Worships, Or, The Odds, between some Knights Service and God's.

OR TOM NASH his Ghost, (the old Martin queller) newly roused, and is come to
chide and take order with Nonconformists, Schismatiques, Separatists, and
scandalous Libellers.

Wherein their Abusive opinions are manifested, their Jeeres mildly retorted,
and their unmannerly manners admonished.

By JOHN TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed for William Ley, and are to be sold at his shop near Paul's
chain. 1640.

TO THE FRIENDLY, UNFRIENDLY, PREjudicate, or Indifferent Reader, or Hearer,
and so consequently to all, and every body.
I (with applause) have writ, near seavenscore Books,
Yet never feared base words, or scurvy looks:
Though some detracting spirits snarle and hiss,
I (with mine own hand) do acknowledge this:
Let Rake-hells rail, and Rebels kick and spurn;
The Bush shall be unburnt, when they shall burn:
Such as would sink the Arc ( which does denote
That then Gods Church was in that sacred Boat)
More barbarous than the barbarous soldiers were
That did refuse Christ's seam-lesse Coat to tear;
To such as these, and none but such as these,
My lines may have a relish to displease;
And I do say (as better men have said)
God is my record, I am not afraid
Of Force or Fraud; for he that fears such,
Will never dare to abide the Test or Tutch:
Nor is it flattery that does cause me write,
(My Climactericall does say, Good Night)
And it is a Court-like adulating sin,
Which I never used, nor will I now begin;
He that is offended, let him tell wherefore,
And show some reason why he has therefore;
And where my error is, but show me it,
In all Humility I will submit.
Some satin Momus, or some silken Zoylus,
Or Midas puffed in plush, or musky Troylus;
This was not writ to do them any pleasure,
Nor can their Wisdoms take of it true measure;
If such as understand not, are offended,
I bid them all come kiss my Muse, and mend it.
But sure, as long as God is on my side,
What need I care if raskals do deride;
My dear, dear Mother, Englands Church, it is she,
(In humble duty) draws these lines from me;
For though I am no Clergie-man, I know,
That I obedience unto HER do owe;
In HER, I was baptized, and in HER
I have been showed Truth, and to shun to err;
In HER the eternal food (most excellent)
I have received, in the Word and Sacrament,
And for HER sake (to vindicate her cause)
Expecting neither proffit nor applause,
These following lines unto the world I send,
Which (I am sure) shall last, till time shall end.
J. T. Poeta Aquaticus.

Differing Worships, Or The Odds, between some Knights service and Gods.
And first to begin with the Knights or Ladies High and Mighty Worships.
NOte the Rare fabric of his Worships Building,
Behold The Illustrious Splendour of the Gilding,
View well the Columns, and the Buttresses,
Mark the fair Pompous Porches Glorious dress,
The Pillars, and the Pillasters admire,
Look how the pointed Pyramids aspire,
The Obeliskes, Corinthian carved work fine
Of purest Marble, Ieat, or Serpentine,
Of Alabaster, Tutch, or Porphiry,
Or of th'admired (mock-Jeat) Ebony;
From the Foundation to the Battlement
Most sumptuous, stately and magnificent.
His Worships Radient Hall, wood-linings pure,
Miter'd and Cipher'd, and Reval'd Immure:
His Marble Pavement Checkered black and white,
T'Amaze and Ravish the beholders sight;
His Worships fair Glasse-windowes, with his name
And Arms, (which shows from what descents he came)
His Worship eats and sleeps, in Rooms, are hung
With costly Arras, and himself among
(I mean his Picture, if right understood)
Gentles Allied, in Marriage, or in Blood;
See more, and take note what you see, at length
His Worships Altar's Crowned with Glorious strength
Of Massy Plate; His Worships Tables hold
Large Purple Velvet Carpets, fringed with Gold.
His Worships Spouse, and Issue; like a Rood
Of Glistring Images; his Worships food
Approaching, Be uncovered, Stentor cries;
His Worships Waiters bow before him thrice,
With servile reverence, humbly stooping low,
They pay the duty they his Worship owe.
His Worships Chaplain, twice, (with double grace)
In fear and trembling, takes and leaves his place,
And (having read his Chapter) still must say,
Thus ends your Worships Lesson for the day.
His Worships Lady (likewise mighty fine)
Adored is, as 'twere a Thing Divine;
Her Waiting Woman, and her Chamber-mayd
Is sude to, bowed to, and implored and prayed.
Knights Service thus, and Lady Worship, see
How odly, madly Gods and this agree.
Here follows the unfashionable fashion, or the too too homely Worshipping of
God.
GODS Houses, almost like Troyes Ilion,
Are also built of course and baser stone,
With broken Pavement, Window, Wall and Door;
Well, if but White-lim'd, and then Oaker'd over;
Drillings of Rain, make green and yellow streakes,
And (Where they give him place) the Painter speaks
In Creed, Commands, and Prayer, and against his Will
To the Kings foes, puts Dizzie Painter still,
Says Woodcock was Churchwarden, then cries Woe
Over the Pulpit, and in mind to show
Beggars at door, how dreadful to their trade
Death is, he sets him working with a Spade.
Nine dusty Seats, twelve Tressels, two cracked Bells,
Three broken Halters. And what? Nothing else
Goes to a Church? The Chancell has a Board
Worth nine pence (most unworthy of the Lord)
With pretty homespun Linsey-woolsey Spread
Under the Linen, whither (scarce white) Bread
And cheap sour wine, two hob-nail'd Wardens dragge
In Gibeons Bottles, and course Pudding-bagge.
All manners, and all decency must be
Laid by; as much as bowing of the Knee,
Unlawful is, though Paul commands it so,
Yet many new pure spirits do say no.
That Kneeling, comes so near Idolatry;
To Avoid which, they will be so mannerly
To be Christ's fellow, and to sit at's Table,
And give his house like reverence as the stable.
Thus saucy Morrals (vile and transitory)
Do rob themselves of grace, and God of glory;
These rude behaviors every good man greeves,
When Temples are esteemed like dens of Thieves.
Gods Worship this! The great Kings Service! see
How odly madly God's and man's agree.
The unequal or incomparable comparison.
It Is strange that some Religions do allow,
That men to stocks and stones shall bend and bow;
And that the man that did the Image frame,
Must kneel (in adoration) to the same;
Imploring aid, and hoping for a good
From rags and relics, stones, and stocks of wood.
Erecting Churches with great charge (profuse)
For man's idolatry, and Gods abuse;
And think they merit their salvation.
For impious works of superstition;
With Ceremonies such superfluous store,
As Pagans, Jews and Gentiles never had more;
With humble bending, bowing, crouching, creeping,
With kneeling, crossing, penitential weeping,
With slavish fear, and fearful reverence,
Preposterous zeal, and blind obedience;
They think it too little, all they can or may
In serving God* the quite contrary way.
On the other side, a peevish crew does lie
(Most perverse pure, in their impuritie)
And they so sparing of their manners be,
They Will move no hat at Church, nor bend a knee;
And whilst they dwell in houses seel'd in State,
Gods Houses must lie waste and desolate;
The consecrated Temples they will come in,
Esteeming Reverence there to be a sin,
And that (for holiness) there is no ods
In manners, 'twixt his horses house and God's.
But leaving this Saint-seeming holy crew,
Who (in their brains) do strange religions brew: They have neither
Scriptures, examples of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Councels, Ancient
Fathers, nor the Primitive first true Church, but all are against them in this
point of duty.

Whose Grounds have neither Reason, Root or Pith,
Which Patriarchs were never acquainted with,
Which from the Prophets were unknown and hid,
Which Christ and his Apostles did forbid,
Which Councels, or old Fathers never decreed,
Nor from the first true Church did e're proceed.
If either Separatist, or Schismatique,
Or Anabaptist, Hare-brain'd Heretic,
From Scripture, Church, or Father could but show
That reverently to God men should not bow,
In triumph then, they might display their Banners,
And show some reason for their want of manners.
To thee (that read'st or hear'st) these lines I send,
That art so stiff in th'hams, thou can not bend;
Thou ought (in fear and love) bow down thy knee
To him, whose Grace and Love came down to thee;
Oh fall before him that has raised thee up,
And (for thy souls life) drank Deaths bitter cup.
Thy Body prostrate, that it may express
Thy Souls intentions humble thankfulness;
As he is thy Maker, duteous honor do him;
As he is a Judge offended, kneel unto him;
The Captive doomed to hell for his offense,
Ought kneel to Him that did redeem him thence;
Fall down, (and with thy soul) thy body bend,
And then (no doubt) thy prayers will ascend;
For though Heaven be from Earth, a mighty space,
The most High's neer'st the lowly with his grace.
An injured man oft-times such mercy feels
To pardon his offender, when he kneeles.
Judge and condemn thy self, and then the fruit
Will be, God will not Judgment execute.
For free remission of thy sins unholy
Thou can not (in thy gesture) be too lowly;
He that is ashamed to worship God, is then
Like him that does deny him before men.
Then, if thy soul be touched with penitence
Express it, with thy bodies reverence;
For though God of our kneeling has no need,
To bless Humility he has decreed.
And not to kneel, when we Gods blessings seek,
Does show we neither lowly are or meek.
To bow thy heart, true faith does thee persuade;
And he that made thy heart, thy knee has made;
And since he has made all, and every part
He Will have thy knees obedience, with thy Heart:
He Will have no halfes, he made, and will have all,
And there is no halting safe, 'twixt God and Baal.
Beware therefore, when God thou come before,
Thy rude behavior not incense him more,
Thy misery bewail, upon thy knee
And he (from misery) thy soul will free;
For as thou often kneel'st for daily Bread
Wherewith thy earth-decaying corpse is fed;
So forth' Eternal Living Bread must thou
Both heart and knee, both soul and body bow.
The Prodigal with kneeling and with mourning
Was graced, and feasted at his home-returning.
That Christ to man Coheireship does impart,
It Is Gods abundant Love, not man's desert;
His humble servants here, by him shall be
Exalted to Eternal dignity.
Will thou, or dare thou (thou frail earthy clod)
Be fellow to The Immortal Son of God,
Or dare thou stand or sit with saucy pride
To entertain thy Savior glorifide?
Do thou not know the Great Kings Seal of Heaven
Is come from thence to thee, and to thee given,
Wherein the pardon of thy sins is signed,
Whereby thou may true peace of conscience find?
Whereas Christ's Holy Spirit present is
Wherewith his Grace does bless this work of his,
Where Bread of Life, the bread does sanctify
To all that Eat it, in Humility:
Thou also (in the Cup) by faith may see
His precious Blood, that deigned to die for thee;
Which signs and figures of Remembrance must
Put us in mind that we must firmly trust
His Body offered for us, and his Blood
Is All in All, the Sum of all our Good.
He that Receives this, and will not afford
To kneel and thank so Great, a Gracious Lord;
Is Atheist, Pagan, or besides his wits,
Unworthy of such blessed Benefits.
There is the figure of The Eternal Feast,
And thither Grace invites thee as a Guest,
The Royal Robe, the wedding Garment there
Is set before thee, for thy soul to wear;
The King is present, Angels wait on thee,
And will thou not kneel down, and thankful be?
And now some proofs I plainly will unfold
How good men worshipped God in times of old.
When God (who is for evermore I AM)
Genesis 17.17.
Did promise Isaac unto Abraham:
The good old man his duty knew so well,
That humbly bowing, on his face he fell.
Deuteronomy. 9.18.
Moses did fall before the Lord, and pray
He would from Israel turn his wrath away:
2 Samuel 12.16.
Blessed David all night on the earth did ly,
And fast and pray in great humility.
1 Kings 8.54.
King Solomon did to this duty yield,
2 Chronicles. 6.15.
That (though his prayer was long) he praying kneeld:
1 Kings 18.42.
Eliah humbly kneeled, and prayed for rain,
And blessed fruitful showers he did obtain:
Math. 8.2.
The Leper worshipped Christ, and faith procured
Mark. 1.4.
Luke 5 12.
That (I WILL, BE THOU CLEAN) was said, which cured:
Math. 8.8.
When our Humility is of such proof,
Luke 7.6.
To know our selves unworthy that our roof
Christ should come under; then such Grace we win,
That then the King of Glory does come in.
Mark. 7.25.
The woman kneeled, and begged, and her request
Was granted, and the devil dispossessed
The man possessed, with many fiends fell down,
Luke 8.28.
And all the Legion to the swine were thrown.
Luke 8.41.
When Iairus kneeled, and did for favor plead,
His daughter was revived, that was dead.
Luke 8.47.
The woman with the bloody Issue fell,
And kneeled, and trembled, and she was made well.
Among ten Lepers cured, Grace bore such sway,
That one returned, Luke 17.16.
and tithe of Thanks did pay.
Our Savior (humbly) kneeled and meekly prayed
God his heavenly Father for his aid. Luke 1^.4.
Mat. 26.39.

St. Peter kneeled, and prayed unto the Lord, Mark. 14.35.

And Dorcas was from death to life restored. Acts 9.36.40.

And blessed Paul with kneeling did implore,
That God would bless his Church fot evermore;
And when from Tyrus he did make repair, Acts 20.36.

He (with the rest there) humbly kneeled in prayer.
St. Steven kneeled and prayed with veh'ment cries, Acts 7.60.

For his stone-hearted stony enemies.
The slave did kneel, Mat. 18.26.
and from his Lord did get
Forgivness for ten thousand talents debt.
The Almighty (by himself) has sworn and vowed, Isay 45.23. God did swear
here; and it is not in man's power to make him call it back.

That every knee shall unto him be bowed,
In Heaven, in Earth, all things beneath the same,
That every knee shall bow at Jesus name.
The wicked and accursed fiends of Hell Phil 2.10.

In fear and trembling down before him fell. Mark 3.11.

In Heaven (where endless Glories Saints do crown) Revel. 4.10.

The four and twenty Elders do fall down,
And worship him that sits upon the Throne, The Nonconformist may perceive by
these comands and examples that kneeling and boweing must be used but the
Scripture does not commad standing or sitting or disobeying in any place.

That lives for ever, the blessed three in one:
There Angels, Heavens, and all the Powers therein,
The chaunting Cherubin and Seraphin
Continually three Holies loud do cry
Unto the Lord of Sabbothes majesty;
The Glory of whose majesty does fill
Both Heaven and Earth, whose praise is singing still
By blessed Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, and
The holy Church through every Realm and Land;
All these do knowledge him alone to be
The Father of infinite majesty;
Whose honorable, true, and only son
By his obedience, has our pardons won;
The Holy Ghost, the comforter of all
Such as with steadfast faith for comfort call;
To this God, Good and Gracious, Glorious, Great,
To him all knees must bow, all souls entreat;
All those that will not bend, such power he has
That he will break them in his furious wrath;
It Is well t'avoyd will worship, but it is ill
Private men must not frame what worship they will.
To frame what kind of worship each man will.
When in the Temple we do God implore;
It Is God, and not the Temple we adore.
Exodus 37.6.
The Priest did worship toward the mercy Seat,
1 Kings 6.23.
And 'twixt the Cherubins our God entreat;
He worshipped neither Seat, nor Cherubins,
But only God that takes away our Sins.
And as on Sea and Land, in every place,
With humble reverence we must sue for Grace:
So in his Church, and houses consecrated,
And to his service only dedicated,
Wherein Christ Crucified is preached, where he
In Word and Sacraments does deigne to be,
Sure, in those places, where Gods love is such*
All men's best manners cannot be too much.
For though we owe God reverence everywhere;
Yet in the Church it best becomes us there;
When we participate most of his Grace,
O, then, and there, show manners in that place.
The Saints in Heaven do kneel, and praise Gods name,
And Saints on earth must likewise do the same.
O come let us sing unto the Lord, rejoice
In our salvations strength, Psalm. 91.
our hearts and voice;
Let us (with thanks) before his face appear,
And show (in him) with Psalms our Gladness there:
O, come, let us worship, fall, and kneel before
The Lord our maker, let us him adore.
This doctrine David to the Church did teach,
Which (from those times to these) all good men preach.
Only a new fantastic upstart Troop
Of proud contentious spirits, scorn to stoop.
I have showed proofs, and more I will produce,
How men are bouud unto this reverent use.
St. Paul repeats the places I have showed,
That every knee shall to the Lord be bowd; Romans 14.11.

For there is no other name else under Heaven,
But Jesus name, Acts 4.12.
by whom Salvation's given.
The Apostle kneeled, and told the Ephesians why,
To pray that Grace their faith might fructify. Ephesians. 3.14.

In Jesus blessed name, our souls releife
And life eternal does consist in chief. Ioh. 20.31.

In all we say or do, we still must frame
To say and do (with thanks) in Jesus name; Coloss. 3 17.

Believers in this name, with faith most steady
Are saved, Ioh. 3.18.
and unbeleevers damned already.
This name alone was the Apostle's aid
To dispossess the devil from the maid; Acts 16.18.

That from this name no bonds should make him fly,
And for this name he willingly would dye. Acts 21.13.

Full of such proofs as these the Scriptures are,
Which to all people plainly does declare
That it is The Almighty's Mandate and decree,
That all, at Jesus name, shall bend the knee.
And in all ages, till these times and days,
The Churches practice it has been always;
And that (amongst us) this duty is not new,
But Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions view:
Injunct. 52.
Or else King James his eighteenth Canon read;
There (by Authority) it is published.
Archbishop Whitguift if you please to note
In's Book, which he against master Cartwright wrote,
Maintains, that all men must this duty do;
(Imprinted, page, seven hundred forty two.)
Lib. 5.. 30. page 148.
And learned Hooker does the same defend,
In that rare Tract and Treatise which he pend,
Ecclesiastic Polity instil'd;
The true use there, of Kneeling is compiled,
So absolute, acute, and exquisit;
That all the Christian world approves it.
Calvin's Institutions lib. 1. cap. 13.. 24. lib. 2. c. 11.. 12 lib. 2. c. 14..
3. lib. 2. c. 15.. 5. lib. 3. c. 5. in all these places Calvinis plain for the
reverend use and practice of this duty.
Those unkneeling saucy Separatists
Are often falsely called Calvinists:
For master Calvin's flat against their side;
And they are all from his directions wide:
He (in his Institutions) does allow
At Jesus name, that every Knee shall bow;
Those that will read, may (in five places) find*
How Calvin clearly has declared his mind.
Mad Innovaters, in their Consultations
Do nothing but cry out against Innovations;
Like he that robbed himself, and by and by
Cried thieves, thieves, and pursude with Hue and Cry.
So these men have new fashioned fangles found,
Which have from Scripture or the Church no ground;
Whilst we in our Church Government do hold
Not any thing but what is authentic old:
Yet vile Impuritans revile the State
And Church; when they themselves do innovate.
Sure they are Ignorants or Hypocrites
That are inspired with these unholy fits;
And with a heav'd-up hand, and white of eye,
They Will do a man a mischief zealously,
And on religious points will stand most stoutly,
But in conclusion cozzen men devoutly.
These peoples brains are stuffed with froath and bubbles,
Their concord's discord, and their peace is troubles.
He that can measure smoke, or weigh the wind,
Or to the Peace the restless Ocean bind;
Number the Stars, or Sands on Neptunes bounds;
Or take great Whales at Sea, with hunting hounds;
Make Mountains swim, stop Rivers in their source,
Or stay the Sun in his Diurnall course:
He that can do all these, has power and skill
To fix these fellows steadfast in their will.
These are our Church and Ceremony haters,
That love to fish in foul and troubled waters;
Swift in defame, their reason is their will,
And Will shall be their reason, they say still.
To end this point, they are a sort of youths,
Whose judgments still are farthest off from truths,
But He that in the Heavens does reside,
Does see their malice, and their plots deride;
And though they rave and rail, our State shall stand
Supported only, by The Almighty's hand.
And through the venomed vapors of their spite,
Our Churches Government shall shine more bright.
Their errors have been answered, quashed and quelled,
And often (by grave learned men) repelled
Their causes have been canvas'd and disputed
By Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, all confuted,
Ecclesiastic Canons, Statutes, Laws,
Decrees, Sense, Reason, all against their Cause;
All Institutions, Orders, Decency,
And Ancient Custom tells them all, they Lie.
But all these they esteem at slender rate,
For they have vowed still to be obstinate.
They'have been refeld by wisemen, grave, and good,
And learned, and still all these they have withstood;
Therefore they are unworthy of Reply
From wise men, but from such poor fools as I,
To Answer their poor cavils, they are such,
A Sculler's fitter than a Scholar much.
I know two Enemies Gods Church resists
(The Papists, and Schismatique Separatists)
And She (alas) like Christ between two Thieves,
Prays daily for their Pardons and Repreeves.
For why? Betwixt the Roman Monarchy,
And the severe Geneva Anarchie,
Our Church disperseth her resplendent Beams,
As blessed Virtue is 'twixt two extremes.
For whilst She has a biding in this world,
From Wrong to Injury She Is daily hurled,
From Scylla to Charibdis, flung and tossed,
And (did not grace preserve her) she were lost.
And yet Both those, that thus do her oppose
(One against the other) are inveterate foes,
Yet both agreed, maliciously entic'st,
Like Herod joined with Pilate to kill Christ.
'Twas our sins killed him (as my faith avowes)
And shall we rend and tear his sacred Spouse?
(The Church I mean) O impious shame of shames!
Unworthy are all such of Christian names.
The Ceremonies of our Church are three,
Which neat, and decent, and convenient be:
Kneeling was one, which I have treated on;
The other two I le not be long upon.
The Cross in Baptism, (that most Christian Sign)
Against which these seeming Christians do repine.
About some seven and thirty years agone,
When blessed King James did grace Great Britains Throne, Canon and Constitution
Ecclesiastical 30, Anno primo Iacobi 1603.

The first year over England that he reigned,
Canons and Constitutions were ordained,
Wherein this Ceremony they derive
From the true Church that is called Primitive.
For then the Ethnicks, and the faithless Jews
Did both The Apostles, and the rest abuse,
Because they did believe and preach Christ died
And suffering on a Cross, was crucified
Amongst mis-beleevers; all Christians were then
Derided and esteemed the scorn of men;
The Christians (deeming all the world as dross)
To Express their constant faith, professed the Cross.
The Jews did mock the Christians; and again,
The Christians gloried in the Jews disdain;
The scorns of men, not daunted them awhit,
The Cross (their comfort) they rejoiced in it,
They loved the Cross, and triumphed in the same,
And (for the Cross) were never feared with shame.
Since then the Greek and Latin Church combinde
With great applause, and one consent of mind,
That (at Baptizings) every Church and Nation
Should Sign all Christened in each Congregation
With that most Christian Badge, to show that we
From world, flesh, fiend, and sinful lusts must flee,
And under our Redeemers Banner fight
Against sin, the Devil, and the worlds delight.
These reasons plainly do demonstrate this;
This Ceremony now, no new thing is,
Nor yet from Rome did first admittance win,
For from The Apostles times it did begin;
Yet had it come from Rome, the Roman faith
Was Or published. ^m 1.8.
Famous through the world, The Apostle says;
And those that will have nothing that was there,
Must neither have Gods Church, his Grace, nor fear.
The Romish Church was Right, for many years,
Till ('among their wheat) the Envious man sowed tares:
Wherefore we first began to leave her quire,
When she began to mingle wrong with right.
She parted not from us, but we from her,
And we left her in all that she did Err:
As far as she leaves Christ, it is good that we
Should so far from her Errors sundred be;
The Roman Church was Right; but superstition
Has made her Wrong, and altered her condition:
Her Errors (not her Essence) we oppose,
With prayers and tears we do resist our foes;
And they allow our Service and our Prayers
Are good, and that we leave much good of theirs;
But let them keep what is good: Let us be glad
That we have left them (only) in what is bad.
And for the sign o'th Cross, no man that lives
Does think it virtue unto Baptism gives;
It Is but a Ceremony (used of old)
Which signs Christ's sheep and lambs into his fold;
All Emperors and Kings, who Christ profess,
All Potentates and Princes (great or less)
Their Hatchments, Arms, Escoucheons, every one,
The figure of the Cross is formed on;
Their Banners, Ensigns, Flaggs, and golden Crowns,
The Crosse's figures fixed for their Renownes:
And by the Ball and Cross, the world may see,
That underneath the Cross the world must be,
And by the Cross they show (by signs external)
The Christian Faith (professed) is supernall;
All Christian Coins do, likewise Crosses bear,
(But those put not our Puritans in fear)
The sight of those, to them are much delicious,
They only unto such are superstitious,
They love them, with such zeal and verity,
They Will never part with them in charity.
The Crosse's use proved since The Apostles time,
Through the ancient practice of the Church called Prime
And in the reign of the Emperor Constantine,
All Christians that were baptized, had this Sign,
And that from thence unto these very days;
This Ceremony has been used always,
By Christians through all Christendom so graced,
So long a time with great regard embraced.
Shall any proud Scismatique, impure crew,
Dare offer to suppresse't or call it new*
It adds no virtue to the Sacrament,
Nor is it used for any such intent;
For after Baptisme's done, our Church does use
To sign with the Cross (which wranglers do abuse)
Thus it is a decent and indifferent thing,
And from it does no superstition spring,
Yet not so' indifferent any should withstand it;
It must be; for the King and Church command it;
The Almighty does the Higher Powers ordain;
Romans 13.1.2.
And Kings bear not the sword for naught, in vain:
And seeing this command is just and good,
It neither ought, nor must not be withstood;
All power proceeds from God, therefore submit,
And escape Gods judgment in obeying it.
We must not dare to conster, mould, or fashion
The Scriptures to each man's interpretation;
2 Pet. 1.20.
And surely, the unlearned and unstable,
2 Pet. 3.16.
To understand hard Scriptures are unable.
The Lords thoughts, and his ways, are his, not ours,
Isay 55.89.
And high as Heaven from Earth, above our powers.
Where God commands, weak men must not dispute,
We ought to obey the King in love, for conscience sake, especially in such of
his commands as are not contrary to Gods word.
And where they understand nor, there be mute.
Then, as the King is Gods Leivetenant here,
Obey in conscience, not in slavish fear,
And as the Church and State, with pains and cares
Ordained good Laws obeyed for many years.
What bold audacious spirits then are they
That King, Church, State and Laws thus disobey?
Ten millions of their brains can never devise
A book so good as that which they despise;
(The Common Prayer I mean) if they should sit
Ten thousand years, with all their Art and wit,
They would prove Coxcombs all, and in the end,
Leave it as it is, too good for them to mend.
These are the Crew that under fair pretenses,
By flattery cause division and offenses,
Romans 16.17.18.
These serve not the Lord Jesus Christ a jot,
They are their bellyes servants (well I wot)
With adulating speech, and fair deceit,
They do the hearts of simple people cheat;
Contentious men that do contention crave; ^ Cor. 11.

We, nor the Church of God such custom have:
And thus to these cross men I have declared
How much of old the Cross was in regard,
And though the Papists use it with abuse,
That cannot take away the lawful use;
For though a golden Idol be a curse,
That makes not God (well used) to be the worse.
Material Crosses made of wood or stone,
(Through zeal) most of them are cast down and gone,
From age to age, the Sires to their succession;
Those Crosses stood to express our faiths profession;
But when the abuse of them began to grow,
That to those Crosses Sotts would creep or bow,
For this cause (chiefly) they were overthrown,
Abused from their first use, were beaten down;
But our Cross used in Baptism, Some 12 (...) since at Te(...)bury in
Gl(...)stershire, a (...)cise Church warden put down a (...) of stone caused a
h(...) trough to made of (...) top of it; his hogs (...) mad and (...) and he
his whole family came (...)denly to chances o(...) timely end
still has been
A sign invisible, yet never seen:
Nor does it on the Infants face appear
That ever any Cross was figured there.
Then what mad men are those, that bear such spleen
Against a thing, not to be felt, or seen,
Yet heard (though hardly to be understood)
By many of the perverse brotherhood?
For of their constant faith we may despair
Who are afraid of shadows in the air.
And thus much for the Cross may well suffice
To give content to all, except precise
Now, for the Surplice, which is third and last
Of Ceremonies, which make fools aghast:
Such as do prize it as a ragge of Rome,
An issue of the Whore of Babels womb;
Such as do hold it (for their Sect) more meet
To suffer penance in a milk-white sheet,
And think it better does affect their sight,
Than in the Church to see a Surplice white.
These Amsterdamnable opinions run,
As fierce as pellets from an Elder-gunne;
Their witt's less than their reverend beards by half,
And each of them as wise as Walthams calfe,
And wisdom is as thick amongst the rout
As Water-grewell when the Oate-meale's out.
Yet they are wise enough, with tooth and nail,
To libell, and talk nonsense, rave, and rail,
And with a scandalous and vile intent,
To cast contempt upon all government;
Now, for an answer to their cavilling,
(Who are indeed not worth the answering)
Note, what high names the Holy Ghost has pend,
To honor such as on his Church attend;
(...). 1.2.
For their great dignity he does afford
To call them Angels, in his sacred word;
To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus,
Of Smyrna, Sardis, and of Pergamus,
Of Thyatira, Philadelphia,
And of the (lukewarm) Laodicea;
To these seven Ministers St. John did write,
And gave them each an Angels Epithet;
And heavenly Angels often did appear,
(...). 28.3.
In vestures white as snow, bright, pure and clear:
(...). 16.15.
Which does denote that Churchmen ought to be
(...). 24. (...) 20.12.
In Doctrine sound, and in integrity,
Angelical, white, clean and clear, unspotted,
Wherefore the Surplice was to them allotted
To be an Emblem of pure Sanctity,
And for distinction of their quality;
Whereby, the ministerial function may
Be known, and well distinguished from the Lay.
And as on White a spot is soonest seen,
So with, Gods Ministers it still has been;
A Lay-mans crimes like little Glo-wormes glow,
A Church-man's like prodigious Comets show;
Therefore the Surplice was, on good pretense,
Given as a Robe of spotless Innocence,
To show (that though all men are sinful, frail)
Pastors should be most cautious how they fail;
Because so many look on them and pry, This Pope Stephen was a glorious
Martyr, beheaded by Decius the 29 Emperor from Julius Caesar, of which 29 only
16 did reign but 45 years of 252 years time after Christ. And in those times
many Popes were put to death by those Tyrants, because they would not deny
their Christian faith.

And to their conversations have an eye.
The Surplice came from Rome, I dare confess,
(What tho, it is not to be esteemed the less)
Nay more, it was Romes Bishop did ordain it,
And yet that not a jot at all does stain it.
Pope Stephen lived, as by Record appears,
Since Christ, two hundred, fifty and two years;
And as his Name was Steven, so his fate
Was, that he did Saint Stephen imitate.
When Decius was the Roman Emperor,
That Pope died by that Pagan Tyrants power;
He (for his Savior) suffered Martyrdom,
And he ordained the Surplice first in Rome.
Thus, when the Church was in her prime perfection,
This vestment was ordained by good direction,
For order, ornament, and decency,
And not for perverse Non-conformitie.
There were no Brethren then so out of frame
To think clean linen was the Churches shame;
Revel. 6.11. and 7.9.
No, they believed That long white Robes in Heaven
To th'everlasting blessed should be given;
Revel. 15.8.
And in that place sev'n Angels did appear,
And they all pure white linen Robes did wear;
Pure, fine, white shining linen does express
The Saints most ever happy blessedness:
And at the Marriage of the Lamb it is said
Revel. 19.8.
The Church (Christ's Spouse) in white shall be arrayed.
And when our Savior (graciously) did show
Matthew. 17.2, 3.
His Glory, to John, James, and Peter's view;
His face shined as the Sun, his clothes as white
As was the radient luster of the light:
Yea, very white as Snow, and that no Fuller
Mar. 9.5, 4.
Upon the earth can make so white a color;
And therefore with our glorious Blessed Messiah
Luke 9 29.
Appeared two good men, Moses and Elias.
Thus spotless Innocence, Immaculate,
In most pure white was seen in glorious State.
Thus Angels, Saints, and blessed immortal Spirits
(Who are where all true happiness inherits)
And Christ, when he his three Disciples led
To Tabor's Mount, and was Transfigured,
They all wore Linen white, (or like the same)
They did themselves in their appearance frame;
The Saints wore white, as figures mystical,
Christ as a glorious Robe Majesticall.
Which shows Gods Ministers (in Imitation)
May wear a Surplice in the Congregation;
For men (on Earth) are in the best estate,
Who do the Saints in Heaven most imitate:
These Ceremonies (Three) are proved to be
Past fifteen hundred years Antiquity:
And they that murmr, prate, and call them New,
Are Corahs, Dathans, and Abirams crew.
It Is falsely called Religion that does cause
Men to resist God's, King's, and Churches Laws,
They being all from Gods decree derived
So long used, with such charge and care contrived,
So Tolerable to be undergone,
So necessary, easy to be done,
So reverend (in their use) discreet, and neat,
Most decent (as I did before repeat)
That they who against them do revile and brawle,
Are (in their fiery zeal) Topheticall;
It Is not Religion, It Is Divillitie
To Oppose the King, It Is bad Divinity.
And what a fine Church were we like to have
If these companions had what they would crave?
Yet not to wrong their learning in a letter,
It Is known, no men can rail or libell better,
As if they had learned of Oyster-wives to prate
At th'Universitie of Bellinsgate.
Cain sacrificed, and Iesabel did fast,
Prince Absalom some silly fools embraced,
So Judas kis'd when as to kill he meant,
So Pilate washed, yet was corruptly bent,
So Ananias brought his feigned gift,
So Satan alleag'd Scripture for a shift:
These were all Hypocrites, and so are you,
Pretending Truths, intending nothing true:
Whose glazen Arguments will bide no hammer,
For they are but bad Logic, and worse Grammar.
Their suppositions, false mistrusts and doubts
They prove with nothing else but lies and flouts.
A Good cause may be spoiled, and quite disgraced
By indiscretion, and by words misplaced:
But these men's causes being bad, their course
And filthy language makes it much the worse.
And these sweet Rules and Grounds they do profess
As mighty Maxims of their holiness.
Such men, who in authority are great,
With Envy still are round about be set:
They are not only blamed so doing ill,
Put for not doing all that all men will.
Their honors are so mixed with toils and cares
Which often (before old Age) does bring gray hairs;
Their broken sleeps make us more soundly sleep,
Their unrest does in rest and peace us keep,
And whilst the Peasant takes his sweet repose,
The Peer is round behem'd with oats and woes.
No labor's like the labor of the mind,
And Kings rich Crowns with pricking Thorns are linde.
Shall we be disobedient then to such,
Who for our peace disturbed are so much?
Shall Hell Hounds dare aspersions base to fling
Against those that thus few God, the Church and King?
No; let us implore the Eternal Majesty,
To guide and guard their true integrity.
To draw to end, kind brethren, take advice,
In things indifferent be not over-nice,
Presume not to bind Princes Wills to yours;
Love, and seek Peace, obey superior powers;
Stand to the Faith, do more good Works I pray,
And serve not God the clean contrary way.
And now my pen in Quiet shall Remain,
Except some madmen Rouse it up again.
FINIS.
Lenvoy, or Postscript.
FRom wronging of my King, from State reviling,
From Libels writing or in Print compiling:
From troubling of my coxcombe, brains, or mazzard,
From putting my estate or ears in hazard:
From seeking things that are beyond my reach;
From dreaming I could all the Clergy teach;
From Pride, Vainglory, and Hypocrisy,
From striving to obtain a Pillory,
And from deserving of the triple Tree,
Good Lord of Heaven and Earth deliver me.

