A Brave MEMORABLE AND DANGEROUS SEA FIGHT, foughten near the Road of Tittawan
in Barbary, where the George and Elizabeth (a Ship of London) under the Command
of Mr. Edmond E^^ison, having but 19. pieces of Ordnance, was encompassed and
encountered by nine great Turkish Pyrat ships, or men of War, they being in
number of men at the least 60. to one; and their Ordnance more than ten to one
against the English, yet (by Gods assistance) they were encouraged to a
resolute fight, and obtained a glorious victory over their miscreant enemies,
and a happy return with men, ship, and goods to London.



LONDON:

Printed for Henry Gosson; and are to be sold at his shop on London Bridge.
1636.

TO THE LOYAL AND Generous minded for his Prince and Countries service, the
hopeful Mr. EDMOND ELLISON, the Master and Commander in the ship and fight
hereafter related.
SIR, as Childhood brings us to manhood, manhood to old age, and old age to
death, so (by consequence) a good life begets fame, which though Time do seem
to devour, yet when time is ended, an honest fame shall be invested with
Eternity. For as all the valiant men cannot boast of high birth and great
houses, so all dejected and cowardly spirited mungrils are not borne in mean
Tenements and poor Cottages: for my part (being a mere stranger unto you) I
dare not to delineate your pedigree, having no skill in honorable Heraldry;
yet hearing of the worthy forwardness, and fortunate endeavors of yours, I
could not refrain to set my pen to paper to the publishing of your late
imminent dangers and most happy deliverance; which by the Almighties blessings,
and your valorous fight, and directions, and the worthy and remarkable courage
of your few men, for the glory of God and the honor of our Country, you have
accomplished. Sir, I did not write this only for your sake, but for the
example of others, that they in the reading of it may in the first place
magnify his great name, who is the giver of all victory; and secondly to be
truly constant in all extremities, by your worthy imitation: for as charity
commands us to forget men's faults, so it is shame and pity that virtue and
extraordinary good Actions should be buried in the gulf of oblivion.

I have made bold to make relation of what you know to be true in action; you
do know best if I have erred, which I hope I have not: I know that you are the
son of a most worthy, approved, and serviceable Seaman, whose old and good
improvements you do most filially follow. To close up my dedication, I do
recommend my self and my labors to your love, you to your fathers, and both
of you to the Almighty, craving pardon for my boldness, and remaining yours.

In any service befitting your worth to be commanded, JOHN TAILOR.

A brave memorable and dangerous Seafight, foughten near the Road of Tittawan
in Barbary, where the George and Elizabeth (a Ship of London) under the Command
of Mr. Edmond Ellison, having but 19. pieces of Ordnance, was encompassed and
encountered by nine great Turkish Pyrat ships or men of War, they being in
number of men at the least 60. to one; and their Ordnance more than ten to one
against the English, yet (by Gods assistance) they were encouraged to a
resolute fight, and obtained a glorious victory over their miscreant enemies,
and a happy return with men, ship, and goods to London.

Invocation.
FIrst to begin, I Will invocate and pray
To Him that has both heaven and earthly sway,
That he will direct my spirit and my quill,
That Truth, and only Truth from them distill:
As falsehood is man's credits greatest blot,
Let not my lines with lies the paper spot.
Thus (being armed with Truth and Fortitude,
I send my verse amongst the multitude
Of critic censurers, whose best and worst
Is to vent out their follies, or to burst.
Th'yeere sixteen hundred thirty five, that is past,
Friday the 20. of November last,
The ship named George and Elsabeth, abode
At Tittawan, at Anchor in the Road;
Our business and occasions at that place
Caused us to anchor there some certain space.
Betimes w'arose, and as all Christians should,
We fell to prayer, for mercies manifold
Before extended, and to be extended,
Imploring heavenly power, that had defended
Us in all dangers (though we often transgress)
Would quit our crimes and help us in distress.
Our praise to God and prayers being done,
Even with the mounting of the morning Sun,
Whose golden beams did guild the Oceans face,
And Zephirus balmy breath the Air did grace,
Both skves and seas seemed calm in beauteous form,
When straight we spide an unexpected storm.
Nine Warlike ships, with swelling sails appeared;
And toward us their course directly stear'd;
And by the reason that we did not know
If they were Christians, Turks, or friend or foe,
We to prevent the worst that might befall,
Betook our selves unto our tackling all:
Some to the Capstane, some hold of the Cable,
Some heave, some quoyle, (it was no time to fable)
Some with Fish, Cat, and Boighroaps (we know how)
Did bring and bend our Anchor at the bough.
Both Topsailes out, the Maine and Foresaile fell,
Our Spritsaile and our Mizzen were handed well;
Our Sheats, Tacks, Boleins, Braces, Ties and Lifts,
Martlines, and Halliers, (all manned, all make shifts)
With Helm and Steeresman to do each his best,
T'avoyd destruction, and to purchase rest.
Their Admiral, (at least 500. tons)
Fenced with two tire of Ordnance (forty Gunnes)
Gave warning (to the rest oth' cursed crew)
By shooting off a Piece, us to pursue.
Nor was the Admiral himself inclinde
To come too near us, he was richly linde
With gold and treasure, therefore he thought meet
To charge the other eight ships of his Fleet
To charge and chase us; straight in little space
They gave another Gunne for charge and chase.
Thus near and nearer they upon us come,
Whilst we with Trumpets sound, and beaten Drum,
Toward Suttye, where we thought secure to be,
But God did otherwise for us foresee.
By reason of the foulness of our ship,
She was unapt those Rovers to outstrip;
And therefore force perforce, we all must stay,
Fight, or give men, ship, goods and all away:
Which upon short consideration then
We did bethink our selves that we were men,
Not heathen Infidels, that Christ denide;
But those for whom our blessed Redeemer did,
For whom h'arose again, and did ascend
To bring us to those joys that never shall end.
And shall we give our selves away to those,
That are the son of Gods malicious foes?
And shall we, for base fear be so un just
To part with Ship and goods within our trust?
No surely, Bulk and Fraught much more did cost,
Then cow'rdly to be given away or lost:
Besides the slavery of our persons, and
Our Ransoms begged from many a mizers hand,
Who (some of them) as willing with it do part,
As they would do from blood dropped from their heart,
These things considered, we did hold it best,
True Christians fortitude to manifest.
Because they twice did shoot, and twice begun,
Upon their second Gun we gave a Gun;
And so unto't pell-mell straight ways we went,
Our shot and powder liberally we spent;
But they were much more bountiful than we,
For every shot we sent, they gave us three.
Then board and board on either side they laid us,
Where we paid them, and (as they could) they paid us;
When ten men (of the Turks) at first were slain,
Which made them with all speed fall off again
And leave us, yet I something do mistake,
That Conflict more than ten did kill or shake.
We being from the first two parted thus,
Straight two more came, and fiercely boorded us;
Where all those villains (on the Ocean deep)
Strived (all we had) to get, and we to keep;
Where shot and shot flew free; we gave and took,
Till (finding us too hot) they us forsook.
The Air was filled with Drum and crying sounds
Of thundering Ordnance; And the noise rebounds
Down from the verge of the rotundious skies,
That what with Guns, Drums, Clamors wounded crics,
Confusion, horror, and the cowards fear,
Grim Death himself began to domineere.
The accursed blood (from the base sons of Cain)
Gushed, and began the greene-fac'd sea to stain,
Thus six times boorded by those cruel men,
We still sent some of them to Plutoes den,
And in their fury they did mount our tops,
Shot through our Sails, and Masts, and cut our Roaps,
Shatterd our ship, and would in shivers tear her,
They had been better they had never come near her,
For we were all resolved to fight and dye
For God, Prince, Country, and our liberty.
Their ships much rent with round and cros-bar shot,
And steel in bundles (which we spared not)
Their men hurt, and unknown what number slain,
They all in general the fight refrain.
Their Admiral came hot within our reach,
Whose shot and ours made now and then a breach,
Until at last, good fortune did afford,
We shot, and beat her Mainmast bye the Board,
Which made her leave the fight; that lucky blow
Did ease us gladly from our greatest foe.
Encompast round with smouldring smoke and sire,
Our enemies did finally retire.
Thus (by the power of God) their force was foyld,
Three of their ships went home torn, split and spoyld,
The other six their course to Sea-ward bore,
Having no mind to trouble us no more;
But as they made away (our loves to show)
We gave them now and then a parting blow:
For any man of judgment may conceive,
We spent some powder at their taking leave.
In this sharp conslict with those faithless Turks,
God showed his 'Mercy over all his works.
For though for one of us they had threescore men,
And for one Gun of ours they had more than ten,
Yet from the first to last of all the fight,
We lost but three men which were slain outright.
And five or six men had some wounds or scarres
To wear, as noble jewels of the wars;
Yet none of those that with us wounded were,
We hope the use of one limb shall forbear;
For which we give all Honor, Laud, and Praise
Unto The Almighty Ancient of all days.
He is the God of Battles, and 'twas He
With his strong Arm, that got the victory:
The Lord of Hosts was only our defense,
And we were his unworthy Instruments.
His power has brought to pass most wondrous things,
And with small means confounded mighty Kings:
When Egypts Pharaoh did his name despise,
He foyld him with an Host of Lice and Flies,
And ('against that King) Gods soldiers in those wars,
Were Hailstones, Scabs, and Frogs, and Grasshoppers,
For such contemptuous vermin he can make
His Armies, to enforce great Kings to quake.
Gedeon, with poor three hundred (Truth recites)
Destroyed the mighty Host of Midianites. Judge. 7.

With Foxes, and the Jaw Bone of an Ass,
Gods strength in Sampson brought great things to pass.
With Shamgars slender goad, and Jaels Nail, Judge. 15.
Judge. 3 and 4.

(Against the proud) the Almighty can prevail.
All ea^thly force (to oppose his force) is feeble,
Goliahs brains were pierced with a pibble;
And surely, had the Lord not fought for us,
We had not lived to tell our story thus.
These Rabshakaes, that each occasion waits
To rob and spoil all Christians in the Straits,
Whose barbarous and inhumane cruelty
Is worse than Death (for Death ends misery)
For such as dye under our Saviors Banner,
(Dye Conqu'rors) it is no matter in what manner.
Would every man resolve thus, surely then
Men would not give away ships, goods, and men
To these Mohammedan base Infidels,
Whose spite against Christ and Christians so excels,
Then would our resolution strike a fear
And terror in these Hell Hounds of Argiere,
Their hopes are numbers, threats and composition,
A Trembling, cowardly and base submission;
And thus with Bug-beare looks, and scarecrow words,
They often win more than with Guns, Pikes, or swords.
Had Weddell yielded in the Persian Gulf,
Rufrero had devoured him like a Wolf:
Had Nichols yielded like a fearful mome,
His ship with victory had never come home:
Had Malam basely given himself away,
He had bin captived, and lost a glorious day.
And e're this fight had Ellison given over,
His credit he should never again recover;
Then let men strive to do as has bin done
By VVeddell, Nichols, Malam, Ellison,
Take faith, and hope, and courage in distress,
Trust in the Lord, and he will give good success.
We brag not (I would have it understood)
It Is not the arm of man, nor flesh and blood
That can effect such mighty things as these,
But only he that rules heaven, earth, and seas,
He gives the courage, and the fortitude
To few men, to withstand a multitude;
And yet to brag and boast there is none more apt
Than such as in a cowards skin are wrapped:
Such as dare not look danger in the face,
But seek some skulking hole, or hiding place,
Between the Decks, or in some Cable-Teire,
To keep their carcass shot-free in their fear;
Who fear a Guns report, more than they do
The Hangman, Gallowse, and the Halter too.
These, and none else but such as these will prate,
And lies and letters often shall relate
The unknown worthy Actions which they did,
Remembering not to tell how they were hid
In The Cook-roome, or some Cabin, or the Hold,
As is before a little plainly told.
We are not such, we therefore say again,
Gods be the glory; all our force was vain;
But yet we knew our cause was just and right,
And so the Lord encouraged us to fight.
But some perhaps may say we are too free,
And that good ships and men may taken be
With multitudes of enemies combinde,
And disadvantage of Sea, Sun, and wind;
And that in such a case, good composition
On reasonable terms, a forced condition
Is better part with part, than to lose all,
And into an assured destruction fall.
All this is right; but yet all this is wrong,
If men do not what does to men belong:
We know that ships, and men, as good as any,
Have been sunk, slain, and taken, too too many;
But sure we think their detrimentall Fate
Should not make men despairing, desperate;
But stand upon defense whilst hope does last,
And never compound or yield, till hope is past.
For certain it is, these Argeire dogs are such,
With faith and troth they seldom do keep touch;
But contrary to humane kind profession,
Their composition turns to base oppression:
Besides, we know not what will Merchants say,
When (without leave) we give their goods away.
Therefore, as Merchants make account of men,
Let men so serve them honestly again;
If they pay us, we hold it right and just
To serve, and to be worthy of their trust:
But if there were such as would not depart
With freight and wages, fitting men's desert,
Shall men turn ill' cause they are ill inclined?
Or shall their being dark make others blind?
If any such therebe, we hope they will mend;
Or if they mend not, they will one day end.
So gracious God thy mercy we implore,
To bless all such as do thy Name adore:
And for thy glorious sons most boundless merit,
Give Christians all, thy All-preserving spirit;
Encourage them to fight, and to withstand
Thine enemies and theirs, let thy strong hand
And their weak faith be strengthened still by thee,
That in thy name they may victorious be.
Snaffle, and curb those rude unmanag'd jades
That live by Theft, and spoil of Merchants Trades.
Thine are the Seas, O let the Seas be free
For Traffic, and the honor be to thee;
And as these Turks with Satan's guiles are wounded,
Be they by thee conformed, or confounded.
And if thou please in Mercies manifold,
As there is one shepherd, make us one sheepfold.
To make some things more plain and obvious to the Reader, we desire him to
take into consideration, that we went to a place called Buttow, upon the Coast
of Barbary, where finding no goods to freight our ship as we expected, but
only Wheat, which was sold for six shillings the bushel there, which, though
it were dear, we desired to be fraighted with it, and to carry it to the
Canaries; but theMerchantsFactors there, would not give so great a price for so
much of it as would freight us; but they adventured for so much as did a
quarter lade us; with the which Corn, and some gold and silver of the
Merchants, we weighed Anchor from Buttow, and came to the Road at Tittawan,
where the nine Argeire Pyraticall ships (or men of war) did assault us, as is
before related; but when (by Gods assistance) we had gotten from our enemies,
we made for the Canaries, there to sell our Corn, and to freight our ship from
thence for England: we being arrived at the Canaries, did find the people
oppressed with an extreme famine, so that they looked rather like the ghosts or
Anatomics of dead carcasses than of living men or women. In brief, they were
so pyn'd and pinched with hunger, that many of them did drop down dead daily
in the streets, starved to death; so that our small quantity of corn which we
brought from Buttow (which cost but six shillings the Bushel) we sold it at
the Canaries for 33s. the Bushel. So that if our Merchants Factors had fully
fraighted us with Wheat at Buttow, we had made a profitable voyage with it at
the Canaries, for they would have given almost any price for it.

Our Wheat being sold, we could have no freight at the Canaries, the season
was so far past, and therefore with such gold and silver as we had (which was
the Merchants) we weighed from the Canaries, and (by the favor of God) we
after all these dangers arrived safely at London in April last, 1636.

To close up all, Mr. Ellison had one of his men, named William Ling, who was
a quarter Master. This Ling (with two men more) had the charge to ply two
pieces of Ordnance in the Steerage. Ling having a Cabin on the Deck over his
head, had in his Cabin some Barbary gold and other good stuff, which he had
crammed into an old Boot. In the Steerage where Ling was, he did open a small
Loope-hole, through which he espied a Turk that had broke open his Cabin,
and had made a booty of his Boot; which Ling perceiving, not well pleased with,
put to a charged Musket, presenting it through the aforesaid Loop-hole he shot
the Turk thorough, who strait fell down; and after the fight Ling found him
dead with the golden lynde Boot in his hand, a good Semiter by him, a great
silver sealed Ring on his finger, which finger was so swelled that he was
feign to cut it off to have the Ring; which having done, and pillaged the
pillager naked, Ling gave him a cast of his office overboord, to feed Cods,
Haddocks and Sharks.

I have named Captain John VVeddell, and Master Edward Nichols, and Master
Malam, in this former relation, which although two of them are dead, and the
third only remaining alive (I mean Captain John VVeddell) and though their
persons and worth were known to many, yet there are more that knew them not;
for whose satisfaction I will give a memorable touch of their three several
noble and valiant Sea Fights, although some of them have bin more at large
related by me many years ago.

Mr. Edward Nichols was Master of the good ship called the Dolphin of London,
of the Burden of 240 tuns (or thereabouts) manned with 36 men and 2 boys, 19
pieces of Ordnance, and 9 murderers, being laden at Zant, and bound homeward
for England, was set upon by six great Turkish men of war, with 1500 men in
them at least, and 140 odd Guns, and after a cruel and bloody fight (which
continued the space of five hours) with three most terrible assaults, with the
loss of eleven men and boys who were killed, and five maimed and hurt, the
ship was set on fire in the fight, which made the Pirates forsake her (having
their ships sorely torn and rent with the Dolphins Ordnance) three of their
Captains being fugitive or Renegade Englishmen; namely, Captain Kelley,
Captain Walsingham, and Captain Sampson; but lastly, it pleased God that by
the men's industry the fire was quenched: This fight was fought the 12. of
January, 1616. And when the ship was repaired, at a place called Callarie, she
set sail homewards, and after all these dangers, arrived safe at London. The
fame of which danger and deliverance came to the hearing of our Royal Prince
Charles, who is now our gracious Sovereign; he to honor and give applause to
so worthy a design, did come aboard of her, and viewed her hurts and dangerous
breaches, where to the encouragement of others to imitate Master Nichols in
resolution and noble valor, his Highness graced him to make him his servant,
with the title of a Captain.

Captain John VVeddell on the first of February being Sunday, 1624. was
homewards bound for England from the East Indies: and in the Gulf of Persia,
he being general Commander of the Fleet, which consisted of four good ships;
namely, the Royal James, Admiral; the Jonas, Viceadmirall; the Star,
Rere-admirall, and the Eagle; There was also (to associate the English) four
good Dutch ships, whose names were, The South Holland, Admiral; the Bantam,
Vice Admiral; the Mawd of Dort, Rere-admirall, and the VVeasop, under the
Command of an experienced brave Seaman named Albert Becker. These two
Commanders were set upon by eight great ships or Galliows of the Portugales,
and 32 Friggots, which were under the Command of Rufrero (an inexorable and
implacable enemy to Captain VVeddell.) These two Fleets met and fought on the
day aforesaid with furious opposition, fighting three days without
intermission, at which time the Dutch Admiral Albert Becker was slain, with
28 more that were killed in his ships, and the English lost much about the same
number; but (as it was related by a Frenchman that was with the Portugals in
the fight) the enemy had of his men slain 481, besides many maimed and hurt;
they having 232 pieces of Ordnance, and 2100 men, besides 32 Friggots, against
the English and Dutch; yet were some of them sunk, many of them spoyld, and by
the mercy and assistance of God, they were all foyld. So that after many
dangers past, Captain VVeddell with ships and goods came richly welcome to
London.

Concerning Captain Richard Malam, his fight was inferior to none of the
former, and his deliverance was as remarkable as any: the story of it was never
published, therefore I may err in the time when, but I shall hit right upon
the matter how it was; and (as I think it was in Anno 1621. or thereabouts,)
which if I fail, there are many yet living in Rederiffe and elsewhere to
confute me.

This Richard Malam being Commander in a small ship of London named the
William and Francis, or William and John, having but eleven pceces of
Ordnance, was (near the South Cape) set upon and fiercely fought withal by
eleven Tukish men of War; the fight continued from the morning till the
darkness of the night made them come to a parley and truce till the next
daylight, upon condition that Captain Malam, and one Master Hughkinson of
Dover (who was Cape Merchant, and then in the fight) should come aboard of the
Turkish Admiral for pledges that Malams ship should not be stolen or slipped
away in the night: In this hard exigent and condition they both went into a
Boat which the Turk sent for them, for the ships were so torn in the fight,
and many men slain and hurt, that they were all willing to have a little ease
till the morning. But as Malam and the Merchant went down out of his ship into
the Turkish Boat, he spoke softly to his mate and some other of his men, that
if they could they should convey the ship away in the night, whilst he was
aboard of the enemy, and let him and the Merchant shift for themselves as they
could.

The Boat carried Malam and Hughkinson aboard the Turk where they were well
entertained, and their wounds dressed (for Malam had received a hurt, but I know
not whether the other was hurt or not) but the Turk contrary to a Turkish
nature did deal very affable with them, applauding their valors, though they
had done him much spoil; but in the morning, when they thought to have set
them aboard their ship again to renew the fight, the Turks perceived the ship
was gone, in a rage commanded that Malam and the Merchant should be both hanged
at the yard Arms of his ship.

In this extremity Captain Malam told the Turk that his ship was so torn
and rent with their Ordnance, that he thought she was sunk to the Seas
bottom, and not conveyed away as he suspected, all which the Turk would not
believe, but commanded his men to make speed with the execution: Then Malam
said to him, Sir, I have done you no wrong, but I have sustained a great loss
by you; I have lost in the Sea my men, my ship, my goods, with a great deal
that did belong to other men, and shall I now lose my life? If it must be so, I
do entreat you that we may not dye thus ignominiously by the Halter; but let
us be fastened to the mast, and be shot to death with muskets.

The Turk presently condescended to his request; but as they were making ready
for death, there was a small Scottish ship came sailing about a point of land
in ken of them: The Turks being greedy for prey, deferred the execution, and
made toward the Scottishman, which being a small Vessel of little resistance
or defense, was presently at the Pirates mercy, who did but half pillage her,
and in a generous way did release both Captain Malam and Hughkinson, putting
them both into the Scottish Ship, which Ship (being the Turks prize) he gave
to Malam; but when she brought him to London, he gave her freely to the
Scottishman again: And thus was this fight and escape; and for a further
happiness, after Captain Malam had been at home at Rederiffe some certain
days, his men brought the ship home, where she arrived safe at London.

FINIS.

