The second book of the Garden of wisdom, wherein are contained wytty,
pleasant, and net sayenges of renowned personages collected by Richard
Tauerner

Anno. M. D. XXXIX. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Richard Tauerner to the gentle readers.
I Confess my self a debtor unto you, gentle readers, in yt I promised in my
for mer book to add the second Assuredly, although I have marked that this
argument of writing is not ingrate unto you, as well for the variety of the
matter, as for the sharpenes of the sentencies (for which consideration they
were called of the Greeks Apophthegmata, that is to say, short and quycke
speakynges) yet for my sundry occupations where with I am dyuersly interrupted,
I shall not be able to make my promise good, namely, in such sort as I may
satisfye, either your expectation, or mine own. Wherefore I must desire you,
not only to pardon mine incondite and gross phrase, on which ye shall happen to
stomble, but also to wynke at the co^fuse order herin. For order in this book,
I protest, I keep none, but according to the proverb that first comes to
the hand that I write. And thus fare you well, and se ye favor mine honest
endeavors.

Here follows the second book of the garden of wysdom conteynyng wytty and
pleasant saienges of renoumed persons, selecte by Richard Tauerner.
Of Achilles.
A Chilles was asked of Ajax which were ye greatest and hardest labors yt ever
he took upon him. He answered, those yt he sustained for his friends. Again
Ajax asked him, which were the most pleasant labors, yt ever he suffered, He
answered even those same. Meaning herby, that a noble and worthy personage
adourned in deed with heroical virtues, brenneth with a certain wonderful
desire and lust, to further ye common weal, with which desire being pricked
and inwardly, tickeled he valiau^tly ventureth upon most high and ieoperdous
matters, naught regardyng his own private weal, but his countries utility and
benefit. When with this noble courage with this arde^t zele and stomach he is
thus rapte, doubtless no thing is sweater, then upon things most diffycile and
weyghtye to enter pryse and to go through in, even as unto a musicien nothing
can be more pleasant, then the most conning exercises of his art

Alfonsus king of Aragon.
A Certain knight had ryottously and prodigally wasted al his patrimony and
lands which were very great, and moreover had indebteh him self excedyngly
much. His friends in the court were suitors to ye king for him, yt at least
his body might not be imprisoned for his debtes. Alfonsus makes them this
answer. If he had bestowed this so great riches either in ye service of me
his prince or upon the common weal of his country, or in releuynge of his
kynsfolkes, I could hear your suit. Now sith he has spent so great
substance upon his body, it is mete, that his body suffer for it. Let this be
a lesson to all prodigalities children to pluck back their fete betymes ere
all be wasted, least if they do not, they happen to be served as this wise
gentylman was.

When he herd say, that a certain king in Spain should say, that learning
was not comely for princes and noble men, he made an exclamation and said, this
was never no man's voice but an oxes. Assuredlye although perchaunche all kind
of letters be not mete for princes: yet the study of Gods laws, the
political sciences, moral letters, and the reading of Cronicles be so
necessary unto them, that without these, it shall be very hard for them, to
furnysh and dyscharge the offices whereunto they be appointed.

He was accustomed to say, that wedded persons may thus pass over their lives
quietly and without complaynynges, if the husband become deaf, and the wife
blind. Signifyenge, that womankynde is much subject to the sycknes of
gelousie, whereof undoubtedly springs great variau^ce and playntes. Again,
that the husband is very sore noyed and greuen with the iangelyng and unquiet
tongue of the wife, which greuaunce he should lack, if he were deaf, nether
should she be vexed with the suspicion to be made Cokequen, if she wanted her
eye syghte. But to this commodity may wise me^ and women without detrime^t and
blemishe of their body very well atteyne, if the husband will not hear that
he hears, nor the woman see that she sees.

This king Alfonse was wonderful courteouse and familier with all that resorted
to his court. Wherefore on a time certain his special friends cou^sailled him
to beware, least his ouermuche familiarity might bread him co^tempte, and of
co^tempte might ensue great peril, and consequently destruction to his person.
He answers. Nay, it is more to befeared, least severity and roughnes get
us the envy and grudge of our commons whereupon hangs a greater peril of
destruction, than upon gentle behavior.

When one of his knights was always crauynge somewhat of him and nevertheless
forthwyth lasshed out again what soever he received at the kings hand: Uerely
quod the king, if I would continue to give ye such things as thou ask, I
should sooner beggar my self than enriche the. For he that gives ye, does
nothing else but pour water into a boto^les tubbe.

Demanded whom of his subjects he had most dear unto him, he answered,
those that fear rather for me tha^ me. He meant, that those only be the hartye
friends, which rather love their prince, then fear him.

Also when he was asked whether he was more bound to his books tha^ to his
weapons or arms, he answered: Out of my books I have learned both arms and
the laws of arms knowlegyng by this saying that he might impute all
together unto learning.

This King Alfonse delited much in his cognisau^ce, which was a Pelecane
diggyng her breast with her byll and launchinge out her own blood to feed
therwyth her young. To this picture he added this inscriptio^ Pro lege and pro
grege, that is to say, for the law and for the flock. Signifyenge, that a
prince ought with a noble courage to ve^ture upon al dangers, as well for the
defense of his people as for ye auau^ceme^t of true godliness and religion.

Of Athanasius.
AThanasius was an invincible defendour of ye catholyke troth, who^ because ye
most pestilent sect of the Arrie^s could not overcome with scriptures and
arguments, they had co^spired to lay feloniouse crimes to his charge, and so
to put him down. Wherefore through their maliciouse suggestio^s they had so
kyndled ye emperor Consta^cius against this most godly bishop, yt he straight
awarded out his commission unto such as they them selves named, to sytte upon
him. Two principal crimes were laid to his charge, the one was, that he had
rauyshed a woman, the other, that he had cut of, a dead ma^sarme to serve for
enchauntement. For the proof of ye first, they had hired a woman, to give
evidence against him yt he had ravished her. For the probation of the other
crime, they had gotten one Arsenius sometime Athanasius lcctour, which for
fear of the bishops chastenynge, whom he had offended was fled away from him.
This fugitive Arsenius the Arrians had hyd out of men's syghtes for a good space
to the intent it might be the better believed that he were dead. Nevertheless
this Arsenius when he had learned througly what they had in hand against his
old master, whether he abhorred their detestable co^spiracye, or whether he
was desyrouse by this occasyon to come in favor again with his bishop,
pryuily by night sted his way out of the secret place where he was hydden, and
arriuyng at Tire came to Athanasius, unto whom he opened all the matter. Here
this noble prelate as he was passinge holy, so also being of a right sharp wit
(for according to the Lords commandment he had joined the simplicite of the
dove with the prudence of the serpent) he gave Arsenius in commandment to hyd
him self, till time he should be called forth for the purpose. To be short,
the council is assembled, the commissyonred, the woman appears, the biere of
a dead man to the terrible sight of all that were present is brought in, a
dead man's arm cut of being laid upon the biere, is showed forth. Men's minds
were stryken at the sight hereof with indignation and hatred. For who would have
thought that these things had been feigned, namely of prestes? The woman which
had her lesson ready taught her before, begins to tell, how on a time she
harbored this bishop athanasius in her house, and how in ye night season when
she suspected nothing les then any such matter, she was by him rauyshed
perforce. Athanasyus was brought forth to make answer to this accusation.
Here Athanasius of an excedyng pregnau^t wit, secretly warned Timothy his
priest to cou^terfeyt him and make answer in his stead to the woman. For he
perceived full well yt the woman knew him not so much as by sight. When she had
ended her accusation, the^ thus begins Timothy in his masters name Say
thou, woman, I had ever carnally to do with the and that also by force? Yea
even thou, quod the woman, thou I say if thou remembrest in such a place at
such a time did forcybly rauyshe me. Some of them were ashamed seeing ye
woman's sklander thus so easily detected and auoyeded. Yet nevertheless they did
not acquitte Athanasius neither punyshe ye woman for her sklaunder, because the
self same were his judges and his accusers. They came tha^ to the other crime
loo, say they, this matter is to plain, here ye se ye arm of Arsenius, which
to what purpose it was by the, cut of, declare thou Athanasius unto us. Here
with like sharpnes of wit the prudent bishop asks the^, whether they ever
well knew Arsenius. Some of them make answer they knew his face very well.
Athanasyus desires leave to send for one that he should have need offor this
matter. They granted him. To make short tale, Arsenius is brought forth, and
his face discovered, Loo quod ye bishop here is Arsenius a live, behold his
right arm, behold his left, hole and sownd, now how yonder arm comes
cut of, declare you. Let this exemple of this most holy liver admonyshe us
to fense our selfs against the wyly and crastye foxes with columbyne prudencie,
for all hasardes and chances.

Sigismund The Emperor.
THe emperor Sigismu^d had in his court many years a servant, upon who^ he
never bestowed any notable benefyte for all the service he did him. On a time
as the emperor rode through a water it chanced his horse to stale. At which
thing his old servant lawghed and said to his companio^s riding with him
before the emperor, yt the^perours horse had like property with his master.
The Emperor by chance hearing this, asked what he meant, Mary, quod the
servant. As your horse by his stalyng adds more water to the rywer where is
already abundaunce of water, even so does your Majesty. For to such as be
welthy already and flow in riches ye give more riches. Here the emperor
perceiving he was closely touched of illiberatye, in that he never rewarded
his old servant with any worthy benefyte, answered in this wise. Assuredly, I
never wa^ted a good will to further and auaunce my friends and trustye
servants, but ye must consider that gifts of princes happen not always to
them that have deserved them, but to such only as the fatal providence of God
appoynteth. And this God wylling, shall I euidentlye declare unto the, so soon
as, my busynes dyspetched, I shall have gotten any opportunity and leyser. A
while after, leyser to his desire obtained, he commands two boxes of like
fascion and proporcion to be brought forth, he fylleth the one with gold,
the other with lead of like weight, he byddeth his said servant to chose
whether box he would. The servant peysyng now this, now that box, stryken
with great perplexity which he might best take, at last chase that which
contained the lead which when he opened and saw yt lead, thou see now, quod
The Emperor, that the fault is not in me that thou were not among other
promoted of me, but in thy own mysfortune. Declarynge herby very prudently,
that the happy success of things only chau^ceth unto men from God above.

This Emperor being much praise worthy for other things, in this one thing
was excedynglye to be commended, that like as his self loved the knowledge of
tongues and of good letters, so he always studied to auaunce and promote men
that excelled other in learning. For which thing when he was blamed of
certain princes of Almayne which hated good letters, that he so exalted men of
low birth for the commendacion of learning: Why, quod he, should I not love
such as nature would have excel the rest of men? The Almaynes do attribute
very much to nobility of blood. But ye prudent Emperor observed, that in
learned personages was a thing of much more worthynes and noblenes, then in
stocks. They have the walls of their houses portered with arms, with
conisaunces, and with the images of their ancestors, learned me^ have their
mind furnyshed and decked with good disciplines. Wherefore, as by nature the
mind is more excellent, then ye body, so the orname^tes of ye wit be far
fayrer, then the badges of outward nobility. He that has nothing else, then
the arms and images of his ancestors, in opinion is noble rather the^ in
deed. But who so is adourned and decked with virtue, from whens flows also
that vulgar nobility, has the true and unfeigned nobility. The truth of
this matter declares to all the world the most noble king Henry the eight, who
to ye most royal nobility of stock has also joined the most true and very
nobility that is to say renown of learning, of prudence, of grave judgment
mete for so noble and magnifycent a prince. Would god al other noble me^ of
birth would take exemple of his Majesty to purchase unto them this renown.

Plotinus.
PLotinus a philosopher was desired by a certain paynter named Amelius yt he
would suffer him to porture and draw out the form and pycture of his body. The
philosopher would in no wise suffer him saying: Is it not enough for men to
carye about with them these images (pointynge to their bodies) but they must
also leave behind them to their ofsprynge and posterity the images of their
images to be looked and gased upon? This panym philosopher iuged with
Pithagoras, that man's body is but a sheathe or case as it were of the mind,
which after a manner it expresses and resembles, and that he sees ye least
part of man, which sees and marketh nothing else but the body. Assuredlye
though pyctures, as well of the living as of the dead do offentymes stir and
move the dulle mind of man, yet it can not be denied, but that pyctures or
images of the body without records and monume^tes of the mind to put men in
remembrance of the noble virtues of such as be represented by ye images, be
much more hurtful, then profitable. Images of sayn tes be lay men's books I
grant, so that lay men be taught and instructed, what great faith in Christ,
what exemple of good living, what patience what bearing of Christ's cross,
they had, that be resembled by those images, while they were conuersaunts here
in earth.

Cyrus the elder.
CYrus king of Persia was wont to say yt no man ought to take upon him to rule
other onles he were better, the^ those whom he took upon him to govern.
Meaning, that this is the principal office and function of a prince, to forse
for others, and to counsel for the publyke profytes and commodities, but this
can not be done, oneles he surmount and excel the rest of men in wise dome, in
vigilauncie, in honestye, holy nes of mind in godlynes. Now it is not the
birth of man that brings this to pass, but right institution, good letters,
experience of things.

When ye Persians, because their country was hylly and rough, coueted to
change it with a champyon and more gentle soil, their king would not suffer
them, saying, that even as graftes and seeds be, so be the manners of men
changed according to the nature of the country. Meaning hereby that he would
have hard men, paynfull and such as should be given to labor. For a delicate
and fyrtyle region gendreth delicate and slothful persons.

Cyrus absteyned his eyes from beholdinge of the fair lady Panthea. And when
Araspus said unto him, that the woman was of an excellent bewtye, and worthy
for the eye sight of a prince, the king au^swered: Even for this self cause O
Araspus we ought the rather to abstain from lokynge upon her. For if now I
obeyeng thy counsel should resort unto her while I am as yet at leyser,
perchance she might so persuade me yt I should repare often unto her yea eue^
when I should have no leyser, and so be feign to sytte still by her side, my
seriouse busynes and affairs neglected. Featly he shyfted away the argument
that seemed lasciuiouslye to entise a king or ruler to love a bewtyfull woman,
from loving such. Let Chrystiane magistrates and rulers take here an holsom
document and lesson of a pamym prince, sensuality set a part, ernestly to
remember their function and office whereunto they be called of god almighty, and
unto who^ for the same they shall render just accomptes, be they now never so
hault and careless.

Artoxerxes.
ARtoxerxes King of Persia surnamed the mindful, when a certain pore man
presented him with a very great apple, he received it exceeding thankfully,
and said: Now in faith this fellow seems to me to be such a person that if
a man would commytte a city to his keeping, he could make it of a little a
great one.

At an other time a certain other vplandyshe man perceiving that diverse men
brought diverse presents unto the king, and having none other thing to
present him with, he took out of ye next river both his hands full of water
and with a cherefull countenance offered it unto the King. The king herwith
being delyted, commanded a pot of gold to be given him and rewarded him
furthermore with a great sum of money. Let other nations wonder at this
Artoxerxes. English men which have king Henry theygt to their Sovereign Lord
think this but a tryfle to his incomparable humanity.

When Adides Japson had rayled all at large very despitefully upon the king
with vnfyttyng and opprobriouse words, ye king thus farforth revenged him, he
pronounced by the Captain of his guard, that it was lefull for Japson to
speak upon the king what he would, but again it was lefull for the king upon
Japson both to speak and to do what he would. Truly we are very straytly
charged by gods commandment in no wise to rail nor gest upon our rulers
forasmoch as they represent unto us the parson even of god him self. Yea and he
adourneth them with the honora ble title of his own name calling the Gods.

When Artoxerxes being on a time put to flyghte, and all his provision of
vittayles taken awey, was feign to eat dry fygges and barley bread, O Lord,
quod he, from how great pleasure have I hitherto been kept back? Here ye
king proved it true that Socrates the wytty Philosopher was wont to say.
Optimum condimentum, fames, that is to say, hungre is the best sauce.
Assuredly nothing better sauoureth meats and drynkes, than hungre and thrust,
beside that it is both most holsom to the body and most profitable to the
soul. For surfette and dronkenes not only cast the body in to sundry
maladyes and sickenesses, but also do distempere the mind, make man no man, but
worse then a brute beast, and (that is worst of all) bring gods most terrible
curse and displeasure upon him.

The same Artoxerxes being on a time very sore pressed with thurst and in manner
lost for lack of drink, Peribarzenes his chamberlayne sekyng about for drynk
and not fynding any other, brought at last from a shepeherd a greasye botel of
water not all of the clearest. This water when the king had drunk quyte and
clean up, being asked whether that drink lyked him well, he called God to
witness, yt he never drancke wine more pleasant, then was this water, nor
never water, were it never so pure, more sweet then this seemed. And afterward,
the king espyenge the sheparde in his court, which had given him this
water, made him of a pore sheparde a rich gentylman. Such a thing it is to
give a benefyte in time.

Orontes.
ORontes son in law to king Artaxerxes, when the king was grievously
displeased and angry against him, he was not only utterly rejected and thrust
out of ye court, but also condemned. Which excedyng unkindness did not a little
vex him. At last considering the mutabilitie and unstableness of men's things
in the world uttered these words to such as stood about him. O friends take heed of the brykylnes and slyppery change offortune, trust not the flatterye
of the world, name ly of the court. For like as the fyngers of auditors when
they cast accomptes can lay otherwhyles an in fynite nombre, and otherwhyles
again but one, even so the friends of kings now can do all, and now nothing.
Here ye shall note that in old time they made their accomptes with their fyngers,
as now with counters.

Duke Memnon.
WHat time the valiant capitayn Memnon held wars against ye great Alexander
on the behalf of Darius king of Persia, it chanced that a certain hired
sowldiour in the army of Memnon made very much raylynge upon king Alexander.
Memnon hearing him, laid him on the pate with his spear and thus rebukes
him. I give the wages, sir knave, and meat and drink to fight with Alexander
and not to rail upon him. Let Christen men at lest way take example herby, to
leave their foul and detestable raylynges far unworthy for such as
profess Christ's doctrine, that forbyddeth us to call our brother but fool.
Some we call Pharisees, we beknaue, we defye as naughtye papists with other like
opprobriouse words, unmeet for Christen men's ears, but as for to fight
against them, and to confound them with pure doctrine and good living, that
we woll not. Again other some, we beheretike, we call Lutheranes, and all that
naught is, but to show them charitably where they err, and rightly to
instruct them, we woll not.

The Egyptians.
THe Kings of Egypt, according to the custom of their countreye were wont to
take an oath of such as were made judges, that although the king him self
would command the^ to judge any thing that should be against right and
equytie, they should not judge it. So greatly they thought it expedient for the
common wealth, that the people should have just judges. But how can that
people have just and incorrupte iuges, where (as is reported) ye prince
sells the office and power of iugyng for a great some of money.

In England thanked be God, in the iuges of the law there is as little
corruption as in any other regyon. And if any default in this behalf be, it is
sooner in inferior courts, where the iuges be appointed not by ye Kings
Majesty, but by others, among whom if any corruption were found I would
wyshe, for ye terrible exemple of other they might be served as a certain judge
of whom I shall now make relation.

Of Cambyses.
CAmbyses King of Persia was otherwise a very wicked and cruel tyraunte.

Yet there is no prince of so disperat an hope of so naughtye a life, but that
at the lest way otherwhyles does some ho nest act. For gods propertye is, to
garnyshe and exornate the office of the magistrate and rulers, and he causes,
that for the co^seruatio^ of civil governance in the common weal, sometime
excellent and profitable works be of necessity done of the^ that bear rule.
But to my purpose, Cambyses in all hystories is commended for this one fact,
for which no doubt he deserves praise. In the former part of Asia he had a
deputy named Sisam nes, now he was credibly infourmed that this Sisamnes
being corrupted with brybes and rewards, had falsely judged against the kings
laws and against good right and conscience. The matter being examined and
found true, sorthwyth he commanded he should be put to death, and yt the
skin of his body should be plucked of, and laid over the judgment seat, where
he gave the false judgment, and in his rowme he did set Dtane the said
judges son to succeed his father in office which was admonished by
co^templacion of his fathers skin, yt he should succeed him also in like kind
of punyshme^t if he followed his fathers steps.

This exemple teaches them yt bear office and rule to remember, yt god
suffers not injustice nor injury unrevenged. But for as much as I have entered
to speak of Cambyses, which otherwise as I have said, lived a very tyra^nouse
and wicked life: I think it here good to report certain his notoriouse crimes
and his end, to thyntent all rulers, what so ever they be, may take exemple
at him, to fear God, to preserve the common weal, to execute justice and
judgment, to use their subjects as men and not as beasts. This Cambyses
began to raygne, after that Cyrus his father had made his viage against the
Scithians. And albeit at the beginning he subdued and conquered Egypt, yet
anon he forgatte all goodness and degendred quyte and clean from the renowned
and excellent virtues of his father Wherefore when Prexaspes one of his chosen
counsaylours aduertysed him very freely and said unto him, that the Persians
praised him very much, but this one thing dyspleased them, that he was so
subject to the vice of dronke^nes, anon he commanded the chyefe estates and
lords of the^pyre to be called together, and asked of the^, whether in any
thing he were worthy to be reprehe^ded? They espyeng how thankful and plausible
a thing flattery is, au^swered, no, but yt in virtue and prowess, he also
excels his father Cyrus, forasmuch as unto his empire and dominion he had
gotten by way of conquest the kingdom of Egypt. But contrary wise Cresus a
worthy lord, unto whose cure and governance Cyrus had to^mytted his son
Cambyses to be instructed and brought up in honesty and virtue, by cause he
would merylye, as much as might be borne, abate the kings pride, answered,
and said, that Cambyses might not be yet compared to his father Cyrus,
forasmuch as there is not yet begotten such a son of him, as Cyrus left
Cambyses. This thing then, as featly spoken, pleased the king welynough. Thus
the counsel being parted, when none of the lords had blamed any thing in
him, he commanded Prexaspes to be called before him, and bad him bring unto him
his younger son. For he would declare, how well he could seem sobre even when he
had most of al dronken for he said he would eue^ when he were dronke^ with his
bow shote at Prexaspes son, and if he might with his arowe stryke through
his heart, the^ it might be judged, that in the mids of his cups he wa^teth
not the practyse of cou^saylle, and judgment of reason. If not, yt he were
worthy to be called a dro^kard. To be short, when Ca^hyses had thoroughly
washed his brains with wine, he shot at the child as at an appointed mark,
and strykynge him through the heart, he co^mau^nded it should be cut out, and so
he showed it to ye father Prexaspes, saying, that the chyldes heart was well
hit, wherefore he might esteem full well herby, yt he was no dro^kard. So
barbarouse, so savage, and so tyrannical manners, does dronkennes bring upon
the minds of men, although they were before ryghtly institute and brought up,
like as it is no doubt, but that king Cambyses was at the beginning in his
youth brought up in most honest manners. And albeit this dro^karde was not
ignorant of the feate of shotyng, yet in the mean season he could not use the
right cou^saylles of reason, but lacked those virtues which be wont to allure
men unto gentle sobriety and to the study of honest renown. Such manner
exemples must be propowned unto young men, which for ye most part be given to
the foul vice of dronke^nes for what end followed of these manners, a little
herafter shall be dedared. He murdered also his own brother smerdis, who^ he
privily caused to be put to death, lest he might at any time be king.
Furthermore he took to wife his own suster germayne, whereas nature abhors
from such kind of copulation. Now it befell so, that when king Cambyses sat
at a feast with his sister the queen, for their sport and pleasure he set a
young lion and a very eger dog together by the ears, so when the lion in
strength and fyercenes had prevailed, an other dog no les fyerce, brastyng
his bands wherwyth he was bound did help the dog his brother and
vaynquyshed the lion. The king was excedyngly delyted with this sight for the
faythfulnes of ye dogs between themselves. But by the same fact the queen
being moved began very largelye to weep and pour out tears and to water her
tender chekes. The king took this her weeping very heuely and demanded of her
the cause of her sorrow, she answered in this wise. Certes, my dear husband
and brother, even so great a feythfulnes might have chanced unto us of our
brother as we se here between these two dogs that be of all one lytter. The
king grievously taking this answer, commanded she should forthwith be taken
out of his sight and put to death. But such manners could not long have
success. For God speaks in the scripture. Blowdy men and wylye shall not
fynyshe half their days upon the earth.

Wherefore not long after, with a greuouse vengeance, God plaged him. For as he
was coming out of Egypt in to Persia, when he should mownt on horsbacke, his
swerd fell out of the skaberd and sore wounded him in such wise that he dyed
of it. This exe^ple testifyeth, that god woll not long suffer tyrants to
reygne. For not long after ye death of Cyrus above ye space of one year lived
Cambyses, neither left he any heir of his kingdom.

Of Darius king of the Persians.
After the death of Cambyses, the chief lords assembled together and began to
consulte, whom they might best make their head and king. Seven were appointed
to deliberat upon this most weyghtye matter. First, stood up Otanes, and
cou^sayled, that no mo kings should be chosen, but that by leage and sure
co^federacie made between them, all the lords might rule alyke, so should
liberty be maynteyned and kept one every side and every man at fredom. For
before, it was well proved by examples, that where one man is Lord of so many,
and so great things, he may easyly be to proud and hawtye, and sone grow
out of kind and degendre unto tyranny, even as now of late it was seen of
Cambyses.

After him stood up Megabysus, which disalowynge this counsel of Otanes,
affyrmed, that such liberty was much more hurtful and pestiferous to the
common weal, then tyranny should be. For noble men and cities if they lack a
lord and hedde they can not but abuse this liberty unto private offection and
lust. But to thentent no such thing should ensue, his counsel and advise
was, not to chose some one King, but to appointe certain noble men, with whom
might always remain the title, prerogatyue, and right of the Imperial power.

The sentences of these both, the third lord named Darius disalowed and
cou^sayled to chouse one king. For albeit in this kind of governance like as
in all other humane things, many and great inco^modities may chance, yet no
rule, no governance is so stable, so sure, as is a monarchy that is to say,
where one rules in whose hands is put the charge of the hole kingdom. Uerily
albeit these three counsayles be all both honest and good, yet if they be
compared together, sure it is, that nothing can be found either fayrer or
more profitable then the governance of one person called a Monarchy, for as
much as it most resembles the divine and heavenly kingdom of God.
Furthermore it can not be, that concord can long be kept among free
princes and cities, or there, where to the administration of a most ample and
mighty empire, be a sort of lords chosen in lieu of one King, and that
because of the diversity of most grave and wyghtye affairs, which ever
among, in so large a dominion should chance, upon which ye princes should not
ever agree within them selfs. Besides all this, there should not want also
among these self princes an inordinat study and desire of dignity and
dominion above the rest, over whom some one would labor to have power as over
his subjects or iferiours. And these were in effect the causes, which Darius
brought forth for the prove of his purpose, unto which the other four princes
subscribed, and so at last it was determined after the old usage to chouse a
king. But least any dissentio^ might arise between ye seven princes, they
thought it best, to commit the lotte of the election unto God. It was a greed
upon, that upon a morning very erly the princes on horsbacke should mete
together at a certain place, and that he whose horse first neyghed, should be
forthwith proclaimed king. The princes returned every one to his home. Darius
showed the counsel and determination of the princes unto the Stuard of his
house, who forthwith took the matter upon him, to bring his lords purpose to
good pass. Wherefore the evening before the day appointed, he brings his
lords horse and a mare unto the place appointed, and there committed the horse
and mare together, to thentent, that the next morning, the place known, the
horse might for desire of the mare, which then should be absent, neyghe
according to his property.

The morning ensuynge, according to thappoyntme^t, at the hour prescribed, yt
said princes do march forward on horsbacke unto the said place. They were not
sooner there, but loo forthwith Darius horse begins to neyghe, and that they
should not doubt, but it was the divine providence of God to have Darius to
their king, incontinent in an open and clear wether without any manner tempest,
it both lyghtened and thondered while the horse neyghed. By and by the other
princes leaping of from their horses exhibited unto Darius kyngly honors, and
saluted him king. Thus by this accasyon was Darius auaunced to the kingdom
and empire of the Perssans, which he afterward with high praise administered.

King Darius was wont in praise of him self to say, that by wars and
adversities, he was made the wyser and more prudent. Certeynlye, though this be
como^ly true, for experience is mother of prudence, yet such prudence and
wysedom cost the common weal much. Wars for defense of ye country be
necessary and much to be preferred before cowardly peax and quiet. And again,
I grant, such troubles and storms do engendre wisdom and experience of
things. But doubtless, out of the case of necessity far better it were and
also much more godly, to fetch wisdom out of wise men's books, then to
gather wretched prudence with experimentes and such hasardes as put the hole
country in danger.

The same Darius, when he had imposed laid and a tribute upon his subjects, he
sent suddenly for his collectours, and asked them, whether the trybute which
he had assesed, seemed to greuouse and ouerchargeable to the commons. When they
answered that it seemed mean and indyfferent, he commanded they should
demand but the half of yt which was assessed. The prudent king in deed
intended at the beginning to have had no more. But if he should have taxed the^
forthwyth at no more, he perceived they should not have been so well wylling to
have paid it, as they were now, when he assesed them at the double and after
released them of the one half.

When this king had cut a very great pome granate, one asked him, of what
thing he would wyshe to have so great a no^bre as there were graynes or
kernels, he answered, of zopyres. This zopyre was the son of Megabyses,
which was one of the said seven princes, a very good man, and a right trusty
and assured friend to king Darius. Signifyeng by this, that to a king nothing
ought to be dearer nor more preciouse, the^ good and faithful friends. This
zopire did cut of his own nose and ears, and so, not be yng aknowen whom he
was, fled away, like a fugitive person, unto the Babilonia^s, which at yt
time were at mortal war with king Darius, faynynge that he was most cruelly
hand led of Darius. The Babilonia^s beleuyng him, and being persuaded by his
colorable words, that his tale was true, espyeng him a very wise and hardye
man, made him one of their chief captains. He sekyng his occasion, delivered
up ye hole city of Babylon unto Darius. After which feate, Darius was
accustomed oftentimes to say yt he had rather have one zopyre hole and sou^de,
the^ to co^quere an hundred Babylones Babylon at that time was a city most
floryshyng, and flowynge full of all richesse, yet preferred he one friend,
before an hundred Babylones.

Of queen Semiramis.
SEmiramis queen of ye Caria^s which is cronicled to have builded Babylon,
caused to be written upon her to^be this saying: What king so ever shall have
need of money, let him open my grave and take so much, as he woll desire.
Darius after he had won the city, gyuynge credit to the title, with much
ado at last remouyug away ye great stone, wherwyth the grave was covered,
money he found none at all, but on the other side of ye stone, he found this
inscripciou. Onles thou had been an evil man and with money vnsatisfyable,
thou would never have moved the graves of the dead.

Of king Xerxes.
Between Xerxes ye son of Darius and Arimenes his elder brother but borne
before Darius was chosen king, was great strife, who should be king. So when
Xerxes had knowledge, that his brother was coming from the country of the
Bactrians, he sent unto him rich presents and to them that bare them he gave
in commandment that they should say in his name thus unto his brother. With
these rewards thy brother Xerxes at this time honoreth the, but if he may be
onesproclaimed king, thou shall be with him ye chyfest of all other. Arimenes
assuaged with this excedyng humanite, left his contention, and his brother
being now pro claimed king, forthwith he saluted and honored him as king and
moreover did set the crown upon his hedde Again Xerxes ye king for his
part gave him the next place unto him. Ye shall read a like thing of Jacob and
Esau in the book of Genesis.

This king being sore agreued with the Babilonia^s, because they traytorously
shronke from him, and renou^ced him for their lord: after he ones had brought
them under again, forbad them to bear any more weape^s, and further
commanded they should sing at the lute and shalmes, keep harlottes, haunt
tauernes and alehouses and use wide and long garments, to the intent that
being molifyed and made effeminate with pleasures, they moughte no more study
to fall away from their lord. By this prudent fact of a panim and hethen
prince we be taught, what is the success of delicate and voluptuouse living.

When he saw al Hellesponte full of ships, and all the sea coostes and
playnes of Abydon, filled with men, he boasted himself to be blessed and
fortunate, yt he had so great power at his commandment, and anon he wept
a good pace. Artabamus ye kings uncle wo^deryng at so sodayn change, asked
the cause. Then xerxes the king thus answers.

Oh uncle, a right deep thought enters my mind, how short ma^s life is, sith
of so passing great a multitude of men that I now see, wtin an hundred
years not one shall be left a live. Undoubtedly if man would thus consydre ye
shortness of his time, and in what state God has set him here in earth, he
would not run so headlonge to all kinds of myschyefes. This Xerxes what time
he purposed to give battle to Greece, called to gether all the princes of Asya
and thus said unto them. Lest I mough^ seem to enterprise this thing of my
own private counsel, I have gathered you together, but I woll ye remember
that ye must obey me rather, then counsel me. This oration of Xerxes is not
here recounted, to thintente it should be followed. For without doubt it is
tyrannical, and that two manner ways, first because he abused the assembly
of his lords for a color, to cast a myste before men's eyes, making them
believe that al he did was done by thaduyse and counsayl of his lords, second,
that he would venture upon a matter so daungerouse to the hole people, being
enforced rather of his own sensual lust, then induced by sage and wise
counsel.

When this king was vexed and almost put to the worse but of. iii. hu^^^
Lacedaemonians where as he himself had with him a very great multytuue of
soldiers: He confessed himself deceived in this, that he took with him many
me^, but few soldiers. He perceived well that it forces not so much how
many there be, as how well assayed, pyked, and tried men there be.

When the espyes of the Greeks were taken in his host, he would do the^ no
manner harm at al, but moreover bad them mark and view diligently his hole
army, which thing when they had done, he licenced them to depart without
hurt of any person. An example of a synguler confydence and affyaunce in him
self and in his power.

Of King Artoxerxes with the long hand.
ARtoxerxes the son of Xerxes surnamed with the long hand because his one hand
was longer then the other, was wont to say that it is more Kynglyke to put to,
than to take awey. Regalius est addere quam adimere. Meaning that it is more
worthy for a prince and ruler of the people, to augment the honor and riches
of such as he has rule over, rather then to diminyshe the same.

When Saubarzenes his chamberlayne begged a thing of him, which was skarse
lawful, and the king parceyued yt he was provoked unto it by one that promised
him. xxx. thousand coygnes of that country money for thobteyning of the suit,
the King commanded his treasauroure to bring him thyrtie thousand coins
called Darikes, which so sone as they were brought him, he gave the^ al to
Satibarzanes, saying. Hold here o Satibarzanes. For while I give the this I
shall not be the porer, but I should be the worser and the vnrightuouser man,
if I should have granted the thing that thou demaundedst. The most noble and
excellent king, had devised, how he might, neither make sad his freende,
nor deflecte from right and equytie.

Cyrus the younger.
CYrus ye younger, what time he should pitche hisfeld against his enemies, his
freende Clearchus cou^sailled him to kepehim self behynd the Macedonians, and
not to cast himself in to the danger of ye wars. What say thou clearchus
quod the king? Do thou connsaille me that where as I couette a kingdom, I
should show my self unworthy for a kingdom?

Of Cresus.
IN ye time of Cyrus ye great which was the first king and monarche of ye
Persians, of whom we have hertofore sum what spoken, reigned the rich Cresus
over the Lydians, and in ye first part of Asia he warred against king Cyrus,
but Cyrus vaynquished him, conquered his land, and took him prisoner. Now,
when Cresus saw the soldiers of Cyrus spoylyng, brennyng, and making
havoc of all that was in the city which they had taken, he asked Cyrus
what they did. Cyrus answered, marye they destroy thy city, and spoil thy
goods: No no, quod Cresus, Nothing here is now mine, it is thine that they
destroy, These words wyttyly spoken moved Cyrus to call back his sowldiours
from spoil.

But when by the commandment of King Cyrus he should be burnt, even when he
should now goo to the fire, he cried out with a very lamentable and weeping
voice, O Solon, Solon. King Cyrus wonderynge what these words should mean,
bad one of his servants ask him, for what cause with so great sorrow, he
cried thus and named Solon. Then Cresus drawyng a great syghe even from the
botome of his heart answered in this wise. Solon, sumtyme among the Athenians
was a very wise man, unto whom Jones when he was with me did show and exhibit
much kyndnes and worship. I showed him all my power and treasures, which done
I asked him whether he thought that ever any adversity or misfortune cowld
happen unto me, being furnyshed and fensed with such power and riches against al
chau^ces of fortune, or force of enemies. But to this, answered Solon,
rebukyng me for my security and careless mind and said: No man in the world o
king Cresus is so happy and fortunate in this lief, that he can be called
thoroughly and in every part blessed, before he dye, neither is there any man I
assure the, be he never so mighty, but some aduersitye may come upon him and
overthrow him or he be aware. But at that time trusting alas reche lesly upon
my happy luck and success of things, I despised his words, neither cowlde I
fere this so exceeding a fall, as now I find. Wherefore because now first I
understood the sentence of Solon, therefore now before my death I named him. And
I do wysshe all me^ in prosperity not to be vnmyndful of misfortunes and
calamities that may chance, lest they become over hawlty by reason of their
present felicity, and gready to attempt things headyly yt by occasyon may
be their utter co^fusio^. These things when Cyrus ye king herd, he was not a
little touched with pytie and clemency toward Cresus, and said, he would not
herafter show him self to hard upon Cresus, which was sometime a right
mighty king, for he remembers that he himself also is a man, and that it
might chance him to have need of other men's aid and mercy. After that, he
commanded Also Cresus to be brought unto him whom he enterteyned like a noble
prince and used his advise and cou^saille in all his affairs and procedinges

This Cresus after he was taken prisoner of Cyrus, by this argument preferred
peax before wars, that in time of peax, the sons be wont to burye the
fathers, but in wars contrary wise the fathers burye the sons.

Of Amyntas and Alexander his sone.
While ye Persians were a lofte and had the chief empire and ye monarchy of
the world they went about also to subdue all Greece and Macedonye. But because
god has prefixed the certain limits to every kingdom which can not be
passed over, therefore ye kings of ye Persia^s could never subdue unto their
dominions neither the Macedonyans nor the Greeks. Nevertheless on a time the
Persyans sent their ambassadors unto Amyntas then king of Macedony and
required him to yield him unto them. King Amyntas fearyng the power of the
Persians, voluntarily in manner submittyng himself, promised to do what so ever
they would have him, and interteyned the Ambassadors with al kind of
humanity. Now, when to the ambassadors desire a solemn feast was ordained,
they required that for the furniture of the feast certain noble matrones and
their daughters might be brought thither. Amyntas durst deny them no thing
but commanded they should be brought to the feast. So when the Persians had
well fauoredly washed their throtes with wine, forgettyng all honest
sobriety they began to dally with the Ladies so vnshamefastsly, that Amyntas and
the younger king Alexander his son were not a little abashed and weary to se
their shameful demenours. Alexander desired his father for the reverence of
his age, that he would depart from the banquet, and go to his rest, saying, that
he would keep thembassadours company. When he had thus conuayed away his
father, he pretended great mirth, and suffered the Persians to dallye and
sport with the ladies at their pleasure. At last he desired them they would
rise for a while, and lycense the ladies to depart a little, for they should
come in again forthwyth much more gorgi ously arrayed. The lords of the
Persians were very well content herwith In the mean season the yo^ge king
caused a pyked sort of young men that had good faces, to be decked like
ladies, and to return to the banquet, to whom he had given in commandment,
that every one should have under his clothes a swearde, wherwyth in the mids
of the dalyaunce they should kill the Persians, which thing was done in deed.
For of these young men the Persia^s were slain every one, and by this means
was their knauerye grievously punyshed. Chys Alexander is nombred among the
ancestors of Alexander the great.

Of king Scilurus.
SCilurus king of the Scythia^s having four score sons, when he lay on his
deadebed, called them all before him. A(...)ended a bounche of rods to be
brought unto him, which forthwyth he delivered first to one and then to an
other to break. When every one of them refused it, because it seemed
impossyble, himself took in his own hand rod by rod and so easily brake them
al, and monyshynge his sons with these words: If ye shall continue together
in love and concord, so shall ye remain strong and invincible, but contrary
wise if ye dysseuer your selves by debate and sedition, so shall you be weak
and easy to be vaynqueshed.

Gelo.
GElo king of Sicile at a certain banquet when according to ye guyse of the
country the lute was carried about and all the rest did sing at the lute in
order, for that was among (...)es counted a thing of great comendacion and
honestye, when it came to the Kings course to play upon the lute, he
commanded his horse to be brought into the bankettynge house and forthwith he
easily and lyghtelye lepte upon him. Signifyenge by this his doing, that
chyualrye is much more princely and mete for a king, then to sing at the
lute, albeit in very deed lutynge is an honest pastyme and mete for ge^tylmen,
so that it be moderately used and be no impediment to thexercyses of chyualrye.

This king on a time exacted money of his commons, whom when he perceived in a
hurly turly for the same, and ready to make an insurrection, he thus suddenly
appeased, he sent them word that he would but borowe the money that he
required of them, for he would restore it them again within a certain time.
Tha^ they wyllyngly gave their money. By this gentle sufferaunce and pollecie
he brought about, that he wanted not money necessary to his wars, and
nevertheless he had his commons hearts fast unto him. Which thing brought to
pass, yt he anon had the victory over his enemies, where as peradventure if
in that sodeyne tumulte and rore, he had continued to exacted of his obstinate
commons vnexpedye^tly the thing yt had been nevertheless leful, he might have
chanced sooner in yt rage and furye of the people, to have been destroyed of
his own como^s, then by his comens to have vaynquyshed his enemies. Such a
thing it is, otherwhyles to give place to a multitude, and by wise dome to
compass that thing, which by dyrecte means could not else be brought
about. Albeit in deed, this king, when the wars were fynysshed,
considering the grea(...)ueryshynge of his subjects (...) by contynuall
wars and gre(...)e exactio^s they had sustained, he repayed them their lone.
Paul wylleth us to render unto all men that is due, to whom tribute, tribute,
to whom custom, custom, to whom fear, fear, to whom honor, honor. He
byddeth us be subject to our prince not only for fear of the princes
indignacion, but even for conscience.

And for this cause he says we pay trybutes. This I write to the intent we
should pay our duties wyllyngly to our prince and obey him as gods ministre,
for so Paul calls him, to the terrible damnacion of the most cursed
Anabaptystes, which at this day go about to pluck men from their
allegiaunce and due obedience unto their prince.

Of Hieron.
HIeron which succeaded the for said Gelon in the kingdom of Sicile, said
that noman that freelye spoke his mind unto him was either importune or
greuouse. But such as blabbed out men's secrets: those he thought hurted them
also unto whom they blabbed them, for as much as we hate not only the^ that
dysclose our cou^sayles, but also them that have herd such things as we
would not have known.

One vbrayded him, yt his breath did stynke. He conuneth home and chydeth his
wife, because she never showed him, that his mouth sauered Uerely, quod she, I
thought that al men had sauered in like wise. These words declared an
exceadynge great chastity of the woman, which never in all her life, had
approached so nere unto any man that she (...)de feale the breath of his mouth,
save only her husband.

This king also because in the queen his wyfes presence the poet Epicharmus
spoke certain rybawdouse words, set a fine on the poets head. If hethen
princes thus punyshe knavery and wanton words, what ought christians do, which
be expressly by Christ's mouth threate ned to yield accomptes for every idle
word that proceeds forth of their mouths?

Demetrius the son of Antigonus.
King demetrius was of such exceeding cleme^cie, that when he had reconquered
the Athe nians which sediciously had shrunk from him and perceived they were
welnere famyshed for default of corn he calling them together, in an open
assemble granted them freely a great quantity of grain. And when in his
spekyng of these things to the people, he chanced to commit a barbarysme,
pronouncyng a certayneword otherwise, then it ought to have been pronounced, and
one of thassemble interrupted him in his speaking and showed him how to
pronounce that word ryghtly: Truly, quod he, for this correction, I grant
you other fyftye thousand busihelles. I doubt in this fact whether we may
marvel at the greath benignity of this prince toward them which alytle
tofore were his enemies, or rather at his exceeding courtesye and ciuylitie
which not only took in good part that one of his subjects corrected him in
his words, but also esteemed the same worthy of so great a reward.

When this king Demetrius had won the city of Megara, and his men of war
had dispoyled and made havoc of all together, according to their manner, it
was showed him that an excellent philosopher named Stiibon was among them.
The king which ever had learning in high price and admiracion, badde that ye
philosopher should be brought forth unto him. He came, the king him lovingly
received and after he had awhile with gentle communication interteyned him, he
asked him if his soldiers had taken any of his goods from him. Noma^, quod
the philosopher, has taken awey our goods For I could espy noma^ that
dispoyled us of our lernyng and knowledge. Meaning, that only the goods of the
mind (which be the true goods) be not subject to ye violence of wars.

Demosthenes.
DEmosthenes ye most famous and excellent Dratour among the Athenia^s, of
who^ in my former book I have made mention, on a certain time while he was
making an oration in the parlyament house among the commons of Athens, of
most weyghtye things belongyng to the commonwealth and perceived that the
people gave no ear unto him, but rather murmured against him to make him hold
his peax he stynted of his oration and said he would brefely tell the^ a new
pleasant and pratie tale. The people now beginning to lift up their ears
attentifely unto him: There was, quod he a certain young man, which had hired
an ass, upon whose back he might carye certain stuff from Athens to Megara.
In his journey the heat of the day being very fervent (for it was in the
mids of somer) because he could find no shade under which he might defend
him self from the breunynge heat of the son, he took the fardelle down of
the asses back and sittynge under the Ass, by this means covered himself
with the shadow. Which thing when the Hakeney man which did let him his
Ass, espied, (for he went with him to bring home his ass again) he would in
no wise suffer him, but pusshed him awey from under the shadow, sayng he hired
not of him his asses shadow, but his ass only. The other contented on the
contrary side, that forasmoche as the shadow is a thing so annexed and knyt to
the body that it can not be severed from it, he ought by his bargayne to have
also the shadow. Thus between these two arose a very sharp and bitter strife,
in so much that at lenght the matter came to strokes gyuing, ye one stiffely
affirming that the asses shadow was not hired, the other as styffely
aunswerynge that the shadow also was hired. At last they go to law together.
When Demosthenes had spoke this and had perceived that the people now gave
good ear unto him, suddenly he began to depart out of the parliament house.
The Athenians holdyng him still and desyering him to tell up the rest of his
tale, he smiled and makes the^ this answer. And are ye so desyerouse to
hear of an asses shadow, and when I speak of ernest matters ye woll give no
ear? Cruly I would wysihe that Christen men might not be lykened to these
Athenia^s. The tales of Robyn hode, of Beues of Hampton, of sire Guy of warwyke
with such other fables are gredily read and red again. But the holy Bible of
God, which treats of ernest matters, that is to wit, of our belief in
Christ, of true repentance, of the worthy fruits of the same, of the
difference between Gods law, and man's tradition, and of such other things
touching our gostly health and salvation, we set little by, yea we discouragemen
and weme^ from readinge of it. If we begin a little to talk of scripture,
anon we be heretics. But (...)long as we common De as^i vmbra, of Robin good
fellow, or of the Fayrye we be good Chrystians.

When it was laid to his charge that he studied eloquence vnmeasurably, he
thus avoided the^. In yt I study eloquence I declare yt I am under awe and law,
and yt I wol use no extort power Contrariwyse they yt despice ye study of
eloquence be commonly such as look to rule ye people perforce, and which go
about not to persuade me^ with words but to co^pelle the^ with swords.
Assuredly, I am afraid, lest among Christen men there be not a few which in
Councelles and assembles seek rather to enforce with threttes and power tha^ with
approved reasons to parsuade other to agree unto them.

The commons of Athens on a time required Demosthenes that he would accuse a
certain person, which thing to do when he refused, the people began to
cry out (as their custom is) ayenste him as though they would have killed
him. Then Demosthenes rysynge up, thus began to speak unto them. A counsailour
ye shall have of me (o ye men of Athens) whether ye woll or not, but a
sklaunderour ye shall not make me, though ye would. Here is to be noted the
excedyng great stomach and honest heart of Demosthenes whom the Commens of
Athens (for in them at that time was the governance) could not bow from the
path of justice for all their manacies. And shall Christen men's mouths then be
stopped from professyng the truth or be enforced to speak vntrouthes for
heavy lokes?

When King Alexander of Macedonye offered peax under this condition unto the
Athenians, if they would yield unto him. viij. cititens, among whom was
Demosthenes, Demosthenes began to tell them a fable of the wolf, which upon
this condition offered peax to the sheep, if they would yield up the dogs, by
the wolf he understood Alexander, by the dogs those that then had charge
of the peoples matters, by the sheep the commons of Athens. This tale of
Demosthenes very witty steyed the Athenians to deliver up from them their
wisest cou^sailours, which with their vigilau^cye and prudence might chase away
their enemies. Let this fable monysh comonalties what so ever they be, to keep
ever among the^ some witty and sage Counsaylours against all cyaunces and
storms.

This most eloquent Dratour in his youth, when he first should begin to
exercise the office of a common counsaylour, was wont to say to his
familiares, that knowing within him self how great envy, grudge, fear,
sdaunder and danger hangs over his hedde now approchynge to the ministracion
of the common wealth, if it were in his election to choose the one of the two,
he would rather run to his death, then go to speak in the parliament house
or in judicial matters.

Demosthenes for his high eloquence and wit was I said, chosen of the people
to be one of their Cou^saylours, which office, consydering the nature of the
people, he said he had lever forbear then bear. The respect of God, the
love of a man's country may work much. But surely else, this regard taken
away, what man onles he were worse then mad, would be a Counsaylour to a
co^monaltye or chief ruler, if he might choose? If he bear him self a good
man and vpryght in all things, his counsaylle and proceadynge can not please
the blind and ignorant multitude, whose judgment is ever overthwart and
crooked. If he be an evil dysposed man and cares neither for god nor man (as
many be) he shall be hated and abhorred both of god and man And truly it is very
hard to please a multitude, either with godlynes or with worldly policy and
wit, which thing they know well enough that have had thexperience. I speak
not this to dyscourage Christen officers and rulers from doing their
mynistration, which is both godly and gods own ordinance, as Paul
testifyeth, but rather to comfort them in their calling, remembrynge, that
the more troublesome a charge it is and subject to dyspleasures, enuyes, and
grudgynges of the people, the more thank it deserves of him that at length
rewards all things done with a simple and pure eye.

Of Cato the sage.
CAto ye elder was wo^t to say, that he had lever for a good turn have no
reward: tha^ for an euel turn have no punishment. Signifyenge, that nothing
is more perilouse to a common wealth, then impunitie, which always allureth
me^ to do worse and worse.

The same Cato also said, that he forgave al me^ that offended save him self.
Now that man does pardon and forgive himself which repe^teth not him self of
that he has mysdone And again he takes punyshmente of him self, which with
diligence redresseth the thing that by negligence was committed.

Adhortyng officers and rulers to punysh offenders, and malefactors, he
said, such as might restrain wicked doers and wolle not: ought to be stoned
to death.

He said, he hated that souldyour which in walkyng moved his hands and in
fighting his fete, and which louder routed in tente, then cried in field. And
that Captain or Ruler was stark naught which could not rule him self.

He said he loved rather those yongmen that blusshed then yt waxed pale,
because blusshynge is token of an honest nature, but palenes not so.

He said that every man ought most to stand in awe of himself, because no
man can at any time depart from himself. So should it come to pass, that what
so ever we durst not do in presence of other, we would be abashed to do the
same, when we be alone.

When he saw other Senators and lords of Rome set up gorgiouse images in
memory of them selves: I had lever, says he, that men should ask and
maruayle at me, why Cato has no image set up for his memorialle, then why he
has one. Sygnifyenge, that he had rather do worthy acts to thyntent in time
coming, men knowing, that he deserved an image to be erected in memory of
him, might wonder why he has none set up in his commendacion and memory.

He admonyshed, such as be of great power to use skantly their power, that they
may use it ever. Meaning that power by clemeneye and gentylnesse is made
long, by roughnes, short.

Such as defrauded virtue of her due honor, he said, take away virtue from
youth. Meaning, by rewards and promocion young men's minds be kindled unto
virtue which if ye pluck away: anon virtue wol ware faint and quale.

He said, a Magistrate or judge ought neither to be prayed for good men, nor
entreated for evil men. By thyshe meant, that it is a great lack in the
judges if they must be prayed to be indyfferente unto good men sithe they
ought of their own mere mocion favor honest persons Now for unrighteous
persons a man to be a suter, it is a token perchance of humanity, but a
judge to be entreated for such, surely is a part of a shrynker of justice.

He said that iniurye although it brings no danger to the worker of it,
yet is it dangerous vniuersaily to all men. Meaning, that thexemple of
iniurye unpunished threatens injury to every man. For if it were lawful to
do hurt without punyshement there should be no man sure from the violence of
the wicked and deuelyshe persons.

He said an angrye body does nothing dyffer from a mad man but in the
tariaunce of time. Signifyeng that wrath is (as Horace the poet says) a
short frensye.

Such he said as moderately and soberly could use the auauncemente of
fortune: be nothing at all assaulted with the grudge or envy of the people.
For he said me^ envy not us but our gods wherwyth they se us adourned and
flowynge. Outward goods be out of man, but the vice of using them proudly,
is within man.

Such as accustom them selves to be ernest in tryfles, he said shall be in
ernest matiers, trifelynge.

He blamed the cytizens, because they committed their offices ever to all one
persons. For me think, said Cato, ye either little esteem the offycies of
your city, or else ye judge few worthy to have the^. Whereof the one was to judge
amiss of the public power, the other to have an evil opinyon of the citizens.

He exhorted young men, that those which were come up to dignity and promotion
by indifferency, good demenours, prowess and virtue: should not now fowly
grow out of kind and degedre unto worse, but if they were come to worship by
ambition and extorcions, they should now yet frame them selfs to a better
kind of life. For so, said he, should it come to pass, that both they should
increase their glory, and these abolishe and wear out their blottes with their
well doings.

This prudent Senator Cato, the more he studied and traueled for the weal of
the city of Rome, the more the vnthanfull Romans hated and spyted him. Which
thing when he espied, he said openly to the people, that of his enemies he
was therefore enuyed because he continually rysynge every night, and setting
aside his own private affairs, traueled in the matters of the common weal,
notyng the ingratitude and unthankfulness of the people. Assuredlye this is the
nature of that beast af many heddes I mean of the people, for so the Poet
Horace calls them not without cause. England has at this day a Prince
incomparable Henry the eight, she has upon his majesty Counsailours attendant
not a few even the most prudent and grave parsonagies that could be pyked out
of the realm to give holsom counsel, she has bishops, she has teachers
a great many, both learned and godly, yet her ingrate chyldern have not
refrayned from treasons, from sedicions, from both preuie and aperte grudges
and furies, from sklaunderouse reapportes, from blowyng abroad and brutynge of
most shameful and detestable lesynges and things never done, spoken, nor yet
ones thought upon, as they were ymagined to have been. O ingrate England. O
eroked and paruerse generacyon. But I return to my purpose.

This Cato very wyttyly also said that fools bring more utility and profette
unto wise men, than wise men to fools. For the prudent and wise persons,
while they sone espy the errors and misedemenors of fools and eschew the
same: they become the warer, but fools not so, for the things that they se
well done of wiseme^, they have not the wit to follow.

A certain person which studied for nothing else but to fare well, coueted
much to be familiare with Cato. But Cato refused him utterly, saying he could
not live with him that sauered better in his palate the^ in his heart.

A lovers mind, he said, lived in an others body, agreynge to the eo^mo^
proverb that says. Anima illie potius est, vbi amat qua^ vbi animat. The
soul or mind of man is rather there where it loves, then where it lives.

Of three things done in all his lyef he said he repented him, first, if he
committed any his secreates to a woman, second, if to onye place he were carried
by water, whyther he moughte have goon by land. The third, if any day had
eskaped him by negligence without fruit.

This Cato for all he was one of the chiefest lords of Rome, yet his chief
delight and pleasure was in husbandrye, in so much that he wrote also books of
husbandrye. For he said that of husband men be engendered most strong men,
most hardy soldiers and parsonnes least replete with gyle and malice. And
when he was demanded what gaynes was most certain and best, he answered, to
grease or pasture well, what next, to pasture metely well, what third, to clothe
well what fourth, tyllage. Why, quod one that stood by, what is it to gain by
vsaunce or lone of money? what is it quod Cato, to kill a man?

A certain person which rose erly in the mormynge and found his hose knawn and
eaten of the rattes being troubled with this sight, thinkyng it a
pronosticatio^ and toke^ of some misfortune: He comes to Cato to ask his
counsel and to know of him what evil this thing portended and sygnified. Cato
makes him this answer. Certes my friend, it is no mo^struouse sight to se
rattes eat men's hoses, but if thy hose had eaten the rattes that had been a
monstrucuse sight.

The Table of the first book of the gardeyn of wisdom.
Agasicles Fo. ij Ageselaus Fo. iij Agis Fo. iiij Lycurgus Fo. v Socrates Fo.
ix Aristippus Fo. xvij Philip king of Macedonie Fo. xix Aleaudre the great
Fo. xxij Antigonus Fo. xxiij Augustus Lesar Fo. xxv Phocion Fo. xxviij
Demosthenes Fo. xxix Dionysius Fo. xxx Agathocles Fo. xxxij Archclaus Fo.
xxxiij Themistocles Fo. xxxiij Aristides Fo. xxxiij Diogenes Fo. xxxviij
Aristotle Fo. xli Thales Fo. xlij Solon Fo. xliij Pittacus Fo. xliiij
Antistherres Fo. xliiij Anacharsis Fo. xlv Seno Fo. xlvi Cleanthes Fo. xlvij
Isocrates Fo. xlvij Philoxenus. Fo. xlviij

The Table of the second book.
Achilles Fo. ij Alphonsus king of Aragone Fo. iij Athanasius Fo. vi Sigismuno
Temperour. Fo. viij Plotinus. Fo. x Cyrus the elder Fo. xi Artoxerxes Fo. xiij
Orontes Fo. xv Duke Memnon Fo. xv The Egyptians Fo. xvi Cambyses Fo. xvij
Darius King of the Persians Fo. xxi Semiramis Fo. xxvi Serxes Fo. xxvi
Artoxerxes with the long hand Fo. xxix Cyrus the younger Fo. xxix Cresus Fo. xxx
Amyntas and Alexander his son Fo. xxxij Scilurus Fo. xxxiij Belo Fo. xxxiiij
Dieron Fo. xxxv Demetrius the son of Antigonus Fo. xxxvi Demosthenes Fo.
xxxviij Cato Fo. xlij

FINIS.
Prynted at London by Richard Banks.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


