To his friend John Tailor, the ingenious Poeta Aquaticus, and the Author of
this most wholesome following Blackmouth'd biting Satire.
NOr speech nor silence now a days protects
Men from the Critticks Bolt, he spies defect^
(At least pretends so) in the thought of man
As well as in his actions; shall I than
That have a freeborn spirit balke the way,
Because a Dog barks, or an Ass does bray?
Or cause some rash fool, such an one as he
That late reviled the Prince of Poetry
Shall rip up thy beginning, and shall rail
And find exceptions out (Sans head or tail)
Shall this I say deter me from bestowing
An approbation where it is justly owing?
No, I have read thy Fancies, and desir^
Whilst others censure thee, I may admire
How the Castalian Flood should swell so high
To drench thy Skull, and raise thy Poesy
To such a pitch; while many a Learned brain
Spoke only prose, short of thy weakest strain:
Mean while thy Books and these salute ^hee, all
Thy friends here do the like in general:
And this thy harmless and just Satire shall
Make thee and it; be loved in general.
W. Gainsford
Allandro pasqueto Mallatrumpa entantrino liuroe.
Il vento Chioli, Mauritambull Tella fulg^e,
Antro della campo il Danto Cordi sublima
Pantatbos, stremo standina eschine vandri
Been in shendo, tercia penthe dissadi.
M^crops, Sans fida vocifera Randa Bavinea,
Allatendrea quanto, Eltrada Pizmin^ venta,
Mega Pollimunton, Theorba quasie quicunque
Triptolina Tiphon, Quabacondono sapho.
Terra trag^us sophye, sunt di^calcitheo Geata.
A vostre Obserdandi Zhean De FA vostre Obserdandi Zhean De Fistye cankie De
sallamanca Andalowsia.
Or thus you may English it, in the transcending praise of the Author, and his
following Book.

Till Phoebus blustering blasts shall cease to blow,
And Aeolus shall hide his radient Rays,
Till Vulcans Forge be framed of Scithian Snow,
And Neptune like a Shepherd spend his days;
When Satuane shall sell Mouse-trapps, and allow
Mars to sing Madrigalls, and Round-delayes:
Then shall thy Book and thee be out of Date,
And scorn the fu^ry of consuming Fate.
To your Worthiness in all Observance Devoted John Defistie Cankie of
Sallamanca in Andalusia.
A most Horrible, Terrible, Tolerable, Termagant Satyr:
Most fresh and newly made, and pressed in Print,
And if it be not liked, the Devils in it.

1 Satyr. The Proud man.
WHat in the World does true contentment give,
That Man should have desire therein to live?
Yet is it not so full of sinful stains,
But he does make it worse that most complains.
Pride does for Hamans Honor madly hope,
But never minds his Ladder, or his Rope;
So Elephants are mighty Beasts, but when
They fall can hardly ever rise again:
And it is a sign that honor is extorted,
And basely got that is with pride supported.
That cannot mount men to eternal Bliss,
Which cast the Angels thence to Hells Abisse:
It is a Fabric that on Sand is builded,
A feigned glory with damnation gilded.
Ambition deemes the world not transitory,
And Flattery blows the Bladders of Vainglory,
Which makes the ambitious swim to honors brink;
Until Time pricks their Bladders; then they sink.
By fools he may be valued at high rate,
A Bugbeare, or a Skar-crow in a State,
A Mountebanke of Honor, or a Thing,
That may in Post-hast to Promotion spring:
And may with whimsies milch a Commonwealth
And purchase, by his Universal stealth,
Gods curse and man's, and more; he may do this
Be way of Change, or Metamorphosis; (need,
Turn men to Silke-wormes, forcing them through
From out their bowels spin his gaudy weed.
Consider this thou new made Mushrom man,
Thy Life's a Blast, a Bubble, and a Span;
And thou with all thy Gorgeous trappings gay,
Art but a Mouldring lump of gilded Clay.
Thy outside may be Rich, thy inside poor, (door
Worse than the wretch that beggs from door to
What though thy Coat be richer Stuff than mine?
And that thy Linen be more pure and fine?
Or that thy Periwig be sweetly scented,
Most neatly Keam'd, slick'd, curled and indented?
What though I be nine days behind the fashion
Or that my Breech be of the old Translation?
Not to be drawn on with a shooing-horne
As Quaile-pipe Breeches are, and wise men scorn
What though with points I am not Trust below
My small unto my anckle? (Oh rare show)
What though that I observant be to thee,
And stand before thee bare, with bended Knee?
Will my Hat off, cause thy head cease to ache?
Or my Leg make the Gout thy Limbs forsake?
Or does not my poor duty puff thee higher,
And swell thy too much hateful Pride t'aspire?
Then is my manners quite misplaced, for I
Have no mind to commit Idolatry;
Unto a thing that is out of Relics made
From Drapers, Mercers, and the Silk-mans Trade
I Will bend no Knee, nor shall my Bonnet Wagge,
To Velvet Remnant, or a piece of Shagge;
A Plush Plus ultra man in scorn and pride,
Such Joys, such Popping-joyes my Lines deride:
His Tailor made, and shaped, and trimmed, and tricked him
And (like a young Bear) into fashion licked him:
He put his Corpse insuite, and brave Array,
And after puts his Bill in (...) for pay,
Such Things as thos^ ^
Nor will I give ^
For though man ^
Of all the trea^ ^
^t has he not these gifts to man allowed,
^at he should be thereby ambititus, proud.
^ere must be neat distinctions of Superiors
(...) Habits; to be known from their inferiors:
^t he is a Cinnick, and a stupid Stoicke
^at will not Reverence such as are Heroicke;
^odnesse with Greatness, Merits, Dignity
^ost gracious gifts of Heavens Benignity)
^r Honors due, where Honor does belong;
^d those that yield it not their souls do wrong.
^d gorgious Garments may be justly worn,
^t yet not lined with pride, contempt, and scorn.
^od does hate Pride, the gate of Heaven is low,
and all that enter there must humbly Bow.
^alew no man for that which he does wear,
^or value any man for what they were:
^is inside being good, I care not which,
^hether his outside be or poor or Rich;
^or Tarquin 'twas unkingly, most unfit
^or him a Rape on Lucrece to commit;
^et though the fault were foul, it is understood
^was done by lustful youth, and heat of blood:
^o doubt, but Tarquin (in those Heathen Times)
(...) that fact (...) (...) other crimes;
^,
^;
^ to Riot,
^;
But all these Vices were not in him seen,
They seemed in him as if they had not been:
For they (like Vermin) all did hide and shrow^
In th'odious Title of Tarquin the Proud.
Thus though man's Life to sundry sins is thrall,
Prides gaudy Ca^opy does hide them all.
2. Satyr. The Avaricious or Covetous Man, and Projector.
WHat Title best befits that cursed Wretch,
That daily makes his Cheverell Conscienc^ stretch,
His mucke unto his Neighbors mucke to join,
And be a Bawd to his engendring Coin;
Whose soul to damned Avarice is sold,
And (like an Atheist) knows no God (but Gold)
And pale-faced Silver is his Goddess pure,
To gain whom, he all slavery will endure;
Do any villainy with hand or Brain,
(Provided that the end of it be gain)
Live like a Rascal, beggarly and bare,
Lie down in sorrow, and rise up in care;
Rake, and rack Tenants to the very Bones,
Respecting neither Tears, or sighs, or m^anes;
And keep (...) House (as Hunger-starved as Hell)
^ith whom the Mice and Rats disdain to dwell;
those Christmas Dinner (in a Pipkin dressed)
^e counts a costly and Voluptuous Feast.
^t let him be invited once abroad,
^he tiranizing Wolf will lay on load
(...) if he never in his life did eat;
^r that he never after should see meat:
^us often his ung^ily Guts are crammed,
^ot at his own charge, he will first be dammn'd;
^hus Beggered in his m^d insatiate
^e looks on ^idas State, forgets his Fate;
^e will not wear the Asses Ears in vain,
^e once (perhaps) may wear a golden Chain:
^r if not so, he^le serape what wealth he can
^o make his Lack-wit Son a Gentleman,
^or whom (more Mad than any man of Goatham)
^ee'le dive to Tagus Sands, or Hels vast bottom?
^ll that he does possess he counts it none,
^is Neighbors State he daily dotes upon;
^midst his Mass of Riches he is not rich,
^is Achans Wedge that does his soul bewitch:
^hus like a Fiend of Hell he neither cares
For Orphans injuries, or Widows tears;
His ears are deafned to their lamentations,
His Coffers filled with Coin and execrations;
Himself grows old and Gouty, Rhumaticke,
Most loathsome Coughing, Wayward, Chollerick,
Noisome to all, and stinkes above the ground,
Despised and slighted like a mangy Hound.
His Wife, his Children, Kin, and Family
All look upon him most disdainefully; (ratt
He coughs, spits, spawles, and in the throat do^
And death and him are in a mortal Battle:
His people pity him, and altogether
They wish him dead and gone, they care not whith^
He would say somewhat but he cannot speak,
He fumbles with the Sheets, his Eye-strings brea^
Within his mouth he mumbles, champs and chaw^
These 12. next following lines shall show the ca^
A Mole's a Mole, whose food is only Mold, (...)
And best of mold is but refined gold:
God Mammon is of such high Eminence,
It makes man love Dame Tellus Excrements,
It Is vices glory, Virtues Laughing stock,
The Misers honor, and true Bounties mock;
And he that lives a slave, and dies a Knave,
Is most unworthy of a Christian Grave.
He hides his wealth, and at his dying day,
He in his Dying chopps does hide the Key;
And in those hidings he is quite bereaven
Of Keys and Locks, and entrance into Heaven.
He dies and stinkes, and every one is glad,
(Although for fashion sake some must seem sad:)
He must be buried, and a Banquet spent,
Which if he knew it would his mind torment;
^e in his life never kept a Feastivall,
and grieves to have one at his Funeral.
^or ought I know, his Son the head hangs down,
^A merry living for a mourning Gown)
^hen in the Grave the fragile Corpse are put
^here, till the Refurrection closely shut;
and on his Monumentall stone, or Tomb,
^is good Deeds are Insculpt in little room.
Epi^ph.
^ere lies a wight interred beneath this Stone,
^ho was of Age near fourscore years and one^
^e with all hidden virtues was possessed,
And kept them; for he few or none expressed:
^n all the time which he did here survive,
His holy care was to live long, and thrive;
At last Death struck him down, and laid him flat,
He died, and gave ^he poor no man knows what.
^he Funeral tears are quickly dried and done,
And now behold his long Eclipsed Son,
From th'obscure Clouds of baseness rushing forth,
To show his Father left him something worth;
He lets those Angels fly to sight external,
His Dad had long kept dark, like Fiends infernal;
He roares, and Revells, drabs, and drinks and Dices,
Wears and sees fashions, and most strange devices;
Marries at last into a Stock of State,
Maintains her, as befits a Ladies Rate
And more; because her joys shall full be Crown
He buys a Knighthood of five hundred pound:
Her Ladyship will quickly have a care
To be as proud as other Ladies are;
For though of wealth they have the Devil and (...)
Her pride shall make their Charity so small
That she will make her Knight to scrape and gathe^
And keep a base House like the slave his Father;
That e're a year or two be gone and past,
A man may sooner break his Neck then is fast.
And as the Ocean's bounds are largely bounded,
So Avarice, is measurelesse unsounded;
The Sea has many branches, that do keep
Their Tributary course unto the Deep;
As fountains, springs, brooks, make mighty River^
Those Rivers all into the Sea delivers
All these disbursments: yet for all the store
The Insatiate Ocean has no jot the more:
So Avarice, though it be still supplied
With aids, or helps, like a perpetual Tide
It swallows all, and yet, it is Dropsy thirst
Is as unquenchable as 'twas at first.
And now (most pertinent) I will express
Th'attendance that do wait on Covetousness.
Mistake me not, it is not my aim or drift
T'enveigh against honest gain, or Lawful thrift;
Inhumane Lucre, Spawne of Avarice,
Which wretched men esteem at so high price;
^at they (above all virtues) seek and choose it,
^d will lose Heaven it self before they will lose it.
^ucre is cruel, in an Anagram
Which does express the Nature of the same;
(...) there be any thing more cruel, then
^or greedy Lucre, men should Murder men?
Wolves in their Kind amongst themselves agree,
^or Lucre men each others Bane will be.
^here are a swarm of, old Gehezies Tribe,
that for the love of Lucre love a Bribe:
^wish that they and their posterity,
^light likewise have Gehezies Leprosy:
^ites stoop to Carrion, Beasts to grass and Herbage
^o will these Mungrells do to golden Garbage.
A Bribe may spin a Suite in Law, so long
That he whose cause was right, may have the wrong.
A Bribe may have that force and powerfulness,
To make the greater Thieves hang up the less:
A Bribe, the Scales of Justice often has swayed,
And made a Whore pass current for a Maid.
My Satyr might an endless Journey run,
To search what villainy Bribes has not done:
What mischief still it does, and more would do,
But that the eye of Justice looks thereto;
Yet many times and often, I hear it sed,
That Justice long ago to Heaven is fled:
And that by her, our faults cannot be seen,
So many Clouds are interposed between:
But I would have all vain surmisers know
True Justice sees, and notes what is done below.
No Bribe, that Court of Conscience tollerates,
Nor no Bribe-taker enters in those Gates.
There comes no Lawyer thither that plays booty,
Th'oppressors soul's kept out, all smutch'd and sooty.
The feared, the flaw'd, corrupt gal'd conscience,
Are all eternally exiled from thence.
But as all Trees are Wood, yet every Tree
Is not to burn; some fit for buildings be,
For Fruit or Physic some, and some for shade,
For diverse uses diversely are made:
Yet men's opinion all in this agrees,
That they are all in general called Trees.
I have heard Broomes called Beesoms, and I have
Heard honest Titles put upon a Knave:
Yeast is called Barme, or Ryfing, but it is known
That Barme, and Yeast, and Ryfing all are one.
Even so a Bribe, though it can make a shift
To turn the Name unto a friendly gift,
A kind Remembrance, or a Courtesy,
A Fee, a Present, or Gratuity;
A Thanks, or a Reward, or what you will,
Yet it is a Bribe, if given or taken ill.
The sundry Names cannot the Nature alter,
The name of Rope's often put upon the Halter;
Yet he is a Block, a senseless Stock or Stone,
That thinks for naught to have his business done;
He may as well expect meat, drink, and clothing;
House-rent and Land: and all things else for nothing.
If I will have my Lawyer plead for me,
It Is just that he from me should have his Fee;
For be I either Plaintiff, or Defendant;
And that my cause is difficult, dependant;
If my good Lawyer do with pains and cares,
Free me from out the Laws entangled Snares,
That he, or any other whomsoever
Shall do me good, or use their best endeavor,
I would requite them any way I could;
And such Requitalls for no Bribes I hold.
It Is being forced to give, or to subscribe
Before the business done, that makes a Bribe;
But he that for a good turn is ungrateful,
I wish him live accursed; and dye most hateful.
Thus Bribery is a Member of great price,
And chief supporter unto Avarice.
The Highway Thief that robs by day or night,
Does Covet that which is not his by right.
The filching Rogue (as every where it is known)
Does Pilfering covet, what is not his own;
The Gamesters that play deeply, soon or late,
Are covetous to win each others state.
The perjured Slave is courteous, for he
Will pawn his Ears unto the Pillory;
And purposely (another goods to gain)
Hazard his soul to everlasting pain.
The Cheater, Pickpocket, and Cutpurse Knave,
Are covetous another Coin to have;
Nick Froth the Tapster with his curtall Kan
Most courteous courteous Cheates every man,
False Weights or measures, be they great or small
Are Avarices Slaves, and Servants all.
Mounsieur Projector Monopollitan
A Well composed, ill disposed Gentleman;
That for his good deservings, night and day
Is prayed for often, (the clean contrary way)
The Sea of Avarice is his maine Ocean (motion,
Through which he swims, and struggles for Pro-
Which being long in gaining soon is lost,
Upon the waves of Envy heaved and tossed.
The winds of sighs and curses raise a storm,
(And in the conscience lies a gnawing Worm)
That hurles him too and fro, from place to place;
(That he can scarcely at his meat say Grace)
He splits upon the Rock of scorn and spite,
And just disgraces Quicksands sink him quite.
Thus have I showed that covetousness is
The very Root of all that is amiss;
All men, (as men) are subject to offending,
My Satyr bites such, as are quite past mending.
May not that man be justly called a fool
That thinks to make good March-pan of a stool,
Or of a Sowes ear frame a Velvet purse,
Or of a She-Beare make a good meltch Nurse,
Drink Aquofortis, and sustain no harm,
Or take the Town of Dunkirk with a Charm:
The way to do all these I Will sooner find,
Then satisfy an Avaricious mind;
A hungry Jade the World can never fill,
Still feeds, still leaves, still empty, hungry still;
And so I wish all men away to beat him,
Or knock his brains quite out and let dogs eat him:
But he that willingly will entertain him,
I wish an old house may fall down and brain him.
3. Satyr. The bragging Rogue.
ANother Coxe-combe boasts of ex'lent parts,
How he has practiced Arms, and studdied Arts;
His Travells to write down would Volumes fill,
Beyond our famous Sir John Mandivill:
And to his reputation 'twere a blot,
To put him in the rank of Don Quixot.
He past the Zones, Phrygia, and Torrida,
Surveigh'd the South World, called Incognita,
And there he saw Great Gorgons empty Scull
So big, four Bushels scarce could fill it full.
At Stamboloya, (a most stately Port,)
Where the Emperor great Robombo keeps his Court:
There in a Shamaranguah, (which we call
A Chapel) was a building round and tall,
Where as the huge Gargantuas corpse were laid,
The-Tombe is full a Furlongs length it is said;
Built of a polisht stone like Crimson jet,
(Surpassing far the Tomb of Mahomet)
Enchac'd with precious Stones that dims the sight
That none can look on it, it does shine so bright.
From thence he past the streights of Magellan,
And feasted was by mighty Pouhatan,
Where amongst a world of dainties to be brief,
A Phaenix stewed in white-broath was the chief.
Tut, it will tire a man to hear him half
He has seen Miloes Bull, and Walthams Calfe;
The Monmouth Cap of famous Owen Glendor,
And three eye teeth of th 'ancient witch of Endor:
Ischartots Lantern, at Saint Dennisis,
The Ephesian Dian, at the Louure is:
The Amphitheater that is at Ulismos,
The Pirramids of Egypt, or the Isthmos
That parts Utopia from fair Thessaly,
Or lofty Atlas that does prop the sky.
If all be true he says, we may him call
The God of Wars Lieutenant General:
No Turk, or Tartar, Moore, or Mirmidon
Such valient exploits has under-gone:
He learned Wars Horne-booke first, and did not stint
But past his Grammar Rules was perfect in it;
He first began with Trayning, Mustring, Drilling,
Before he came to fighting, or to killing;
To March, to put his men in Files, and Ranks,
To order a Batalia, wings, or Flanks,
To lead the Vaunt-guard, or bring up the Rear,
To be here, there, (and almost every where)
To guide and manage men, and make them stout,
Double your Ranks and Files, faces about:
He served the Turk nine years, a Renegado,
Where oftentimes he felt the Bastinado;
And though he wore a Coat of Bare-freezado,
Yet there he learned the Art of a Soldado,
'Taffront an Enemy with a Brav^ado,
To make a Battery, and to use Sealado;
To use Petards, Engines, Wildfire, Granado,
'Tintrappe the Foe by secret Ambuscado;
To Raise, Mount, Parrapet, or Camisado,
To make a strength more strong with Canvasado;
With his good Sword to use the Imbrocado;
The Punto, the Roverso, the Stockado:
And for Land Service, or the Sea Armado,
He knows a roll of Match from Trividado.
His Music, drums, Guns, Cannons, thundering rore,
As if the Welkin were in torters tore;
The Harquebuz and Muskets go pit pat,
Towers, Castles, Forts, and Ciradells laid flat;
Mines, Counter-mines, Assaults, Repulses, Sallies,
Whilst Horse and men shine strew the Field^ and
Battalias, battries, breaches, armies, arms, (valleys
Broils, Garboy les, hot encounters, fierce Allarm^:
Fortifications, Camps, Redoubts, and Trenches,
Va^dres, and Counter-mutes, walls, sconses, fences,
On-set^ and On-slaughts he has been upon,
He blow up Tauris, conquered Babylon:
He stood Pordu^ beneath the frozen Zone
Turned to a man of Ice, or Crystal Stone.
The same day Mars his valor did inspire
And thawed him brave, with Sulphur, smoke, and fire.
He in the Battle seemed a man all flame,
In smould ring Powder, he that day over came
The Tartar Chrim, and near to Samere and,
He with Mackougly Shangh, fought hand to hand.
The Leaguers, and the Sieges he has seen,
The dread full dangers where he often has been;
He has daunc'd Antiques in a Crimson Flood,
And swom Lev^aes in a sea of blood:
In greatest perrills he would bravely on, (geton,
His throat belched fogge, and flames like Phle-
Thus Sallamander like, he often has been
In scorching flashes, and three winters in
An Icye coat, like Armor shining bright
He sorv'd the Pole, against the Moscovite.
He has lain down to sleep a Man, in show,
And rose a Snow-ball, or a Ball of Snow:
Like the Ca^lion (not to food inclined)
He lived by sucking the cold Northern Wind,
^ain'd by the blast of Fame, that swiftly flies,
Compounding and confounding truth with lies.
He has (...) Blade, (if his report be true)
Wherewith he sixteen desperate Corporalls flew;
And eight Leiuetenants he outright has killed,
Four valiant Serjants he has slain in Field:
Two Noble Captains and one General,
His fury, force perforce did force to fall.
Blades broake, and battered Hilts, he has had more
Then any Castle can contain the store;
He had a Rapier, sharp, pure Castilliano,
With which he gored and killed a great Umbrano,
For guided with an Arm and courage fierce,
It quite through double Cannon proof will pierce.
He Will Guard himself from any Bullets fall,
His Sword's his Racket, and the shot the Ball,
Which though it swiftly come, he is so quick-ey'd
That with his Morglay he would turne't aside:
With the same Bilbo, once he madly strikes
And crop'd the tops off, from a Grove of Pikes:
Thus fighting often in Winter, and in Summer,
He had more wounds than holes are in a Scummer.
A thousand blows and bruises, knocks, and cuts
He has received; eight times shot through the guts:
He was in Leagure late before Breda.
Associate with the Marquess Spinola:
And being in a Boat upon the water,
A Musket shot run through his Piamater,
It pierced his Perricranion, that his brain
Was taken out and washed, put in again.
Yet all these wounds, and all his desperate matches,
He calls them petty hurts, or simple scratches:
He was so mawl'd once at Berghen ap Zone,
Boys called him Raw-head there, and Bloody-bone.
From thence he took his Journey into Flanders,
And so to England where he cants and maunders;
Where though he be not now the man he was.
For an old beaten Soldier he may pass.
4. Satyr. The Mountebanke, or Quacksalver.
SIgneur Gonsalvo, come from Naples late,
Has in the Curcumclusion of his Pate
Ingrost all Learning, and can teach the way
To speak all Tongues; (excepting truth) they say;
There Is not a Pissing-post but wears a Bill,
That does Proclaim his admirable skill.
In Grammar, Logic, and in Rhetoric,
Music, Geometry, Arithmeticke;
Bright Star surmounting rare Astronomy,
Life-saving Physic, starving Poetry:
Invisible Gold Creating Alchimie
Extracting, and distracting Chimistrie:
These Arts perfection are exceeding rare,
And are (me thinks) too much for one man's share:
But yet this Mountebanke has often swore
That he is perfect in all these, and more.
I will say nothing that may him deprave,
But I will think he is a cheating Knave.
Grammer's the ground of Speech, though all men
Without it; it is rude, simple harsh, and weak: (speak
For though all speak by Nature, I can tell
By rules of Grammers Art, men may speak well:
Logick's a Speech, that seems by disagreeing
To make things be, or not be in their being;
To whet men's wits, to try and toss conclusions,
And learnedly to reconcile confusions.
Rhetoriq^e, I call the Embroyderick, or the Varnish,
That does (with Eloquence) a Language Garnish:
It decks speech, with style, phrase, and illustration,
And method; and is Crowned with Admiration.
Arithmatique can show by Numeration,
How many Minuits past since the Creation:
And how by finite Numbers, and by Fractions,
Allusions may be made to all our Actions.
Astronomy does search the Pl^nnets courses,
Their Influences, their Aspects, and forces;
The revolutions of Time, Days, and years,
And how the Sun and Moon pass their Car^ires.
Geometry shows, squares, rounds, eranes and sins,
Miles, engines, ovalls, quadrats, trappes, and grins;
The Sea-mans Compass, Clock and Dyalls, all
Houses, and Ships built Geometrical.
Music consists of Airs, of Sounds, of Voices,
Of Time, space, measure, which the heart rejoices:
Of Concord, Discord, Unity, Division,
Which none but Affes hold in base derision.
Physic does labor, study, search, and try
The hidden secrets of Philosophy
And every simple, for man's preservation;
The learned Physicians know their operation.
But Poetry must know much more than these,
It scales the Skies, it dives into the Seas,
It Is fire, earth; water, air; It Is sickness, health
Probatum est: It Is any thing but wealth.
And Mounsieur Quack-salver, I tell thee plain
Thou lie, to say these Arts are in thy brain.
Thou have perhaps the Theory of prating,
And Iesuitticall Equivocating:
But for the Practique, thou as much do know,
As he that said that Corn on Trees does grow:
What madness has possessed our Nation here,
That take delight to buy their deaths so dear:
Can not our Doctors we in England have,
Send us as cheap as Strangers to our Grave:
Or do not our Physicians well deserne
To kill men, but they must Frenchmen learn,
Of Germans, or Italians, oh base,
And insupportable most vile disgrace:
I dare presume that we know every way
To help, hurt, kill or cure as well as they.
But al things strange are rare, all is good that is dear
I muse we have no foreign Hang-men here.
It Is miserable comfort, poor relief,
More danger's in the Physic than the grief:
Diseases often are of such strange conditions
They kill not, if not helped by strange Physicians.
Like Conjurers, they give their Pagan drugs,
The fearful name of the infernal Bugs:
A Bitter Devil, Collaquintida,
A Stinking Devil, Arsefetita;
A Pockey Devil, called Zarsaperilla,
A mortal for the Morbus Gallica:
Elaphoboscon, bane Cantharides,
Aureum Pomona, of the Hesperides.
With these (or such like Bug-beare words as these)
They Will fright a sound man into a disease,
And often put a sick man in such fits,
That he falls quite besides his little wits.
But leaving such impostures as these be,
The scorn of Physic, and Chyrurgery,
A swarm of Vipers, of so vile desert,
So empty of experience, wit, and Art,
That all their learned and over-boasted skills,
Th'affore said posts do wear in Printed Bills.
And when unto the World it does appear,
They can do half the Cures they promise there;
I for my writing will Repent, and mourn,
And beg forgiveness; and my Satyr burn.
5. Satyr. The Alchimist
NOw shall my flagging Muse a while persist,
And blaze the Honor of the Alchimist;
Fire, Water, Air, Earth, to us presents,
The Names and Natures of four Elements:
But Alchimy (prepoiterously) does strive
To Multiply those Elements to five:
From Jove's and Mercuries quick influence,
The Alcimist will draw a Quintessence;
With which extraction he a Stone will mould,
That shall turn Tin, Brass, Steel, and Lead, to gold.
He does profess that Stone shall lengthen health,
Prolong our lives, give us abundant wealth:
But diverse wealthy men his skill have tried,
And as they fools did live, they Beggars died.
Could he help others he would help himself,
To that impossible never purchased pelf;
For commonly he is in a greasy Coat,
Old Hat and Boots, and cannot change a Groat:
Yet promises with more gold to possess us,
Than Roman Cressus had, or Lidian Cressus.
But yet from these his golden hopes to feed,
He borrowes money still to serve his need:
He daily tries newfound experiments,
Soape, Stibium, Salt, and such ingredients
As is Argentum vive; Ordure, Urin,
Coals, Crusibles, Lead, Allom, poisonous Vermin,
For he has Guelded all the Philosophers,
And with their only Stone he will fill our Coffers.
The Ridling and sophisticated Names
Are most mysterious Dog-tricks, or May-games;
For when the Furnace, or the Crusible,
Begins to work, or seem conducible,
He calls it the Green Lion, and anon,
As soon as that first foame is Presto, gone;
Then bubbles up the Fleeing Heart apace,
To whom the Fleeing Eagle straight gives Chase:
Next Master Alchimist puts in his Tool,
And then amain huffs up the Dancing Fool.
The Dragons Tail mounts next in Fog and froath,
And next the swollen Toade, in a Bumble-broath:
Last comes the Crows head, (ugly black to see).
More black ten times than any black can be.
Then mounts the fume unto the Azure Sky,
And straight drops down the Seal of Mercury;
And presently the golden work is done,
(Almost as near as when 'twas first begun)
For then the Stone invisibly does fall,
Which (if he could but see) would make us all.
But least we chance to see it and not know it,
What private marks it bears I Will plainly show it;
The substance of it is nor Fire, nor Water,
Nor Earth, or Air, nor Elementall matter;
It has no shape or color, nor is framed
Like any thing that is unnam'd, or named:
It Is neither light, or heavy, soft, nor hard,
Nor sharp, or blunt, flat, ovall, round, or squared:
It is not sweet, nor does it stink outright,
It Is not unpleasing, yet gives no delight.
This is the Stone which many men desire,
And he that finds it shall have for his hire
Twelve Hogs-heads filled; and 24. Buckets,
Of Pieces, Royalls, Nobles, and of Ducats:
Thus to its own and unknown worth alone,
I leave this Sterrill (Gold begetting) Stone.
6. Satyr. The Hypocrite.
ANd now my Muse has got an appetite,
To touch a little of the Hypocrite;
But let not any Reader think that I
The name of knowing Zeal do villifie:
For these my lines shall not touch any man,
That (wrong) does bear the Name of Puritan;
No doubt, but many people well affected,
(Are with that Ieering Title much dejected)
Who will not swear or lie presumptuously,
And when they err, they err unwillingly;
Who would be just in all they do or say,
And know the Sunday from a common Day;
Who are conformable to Church and State,
And have no minds to change or innovate:
Who in their Callings labor, and take pain,
And will do no man wrong for earthly gain:
Who do (for Conscience sake) obey command,
And deal no further then they understand;
Whose faiths are known by works, and doing good,
Such men are of a blessed Brotherhood.
Some such there are, whose number is too small,
And happy were all men to be so all.
For when the Ruffian, or profane wretch swears
Abusing God and man, with scoffs and Ieeres
If one that is Civil mildly do reprove them,
The Devil their Tutor presently does move them
To be in Choler; straight to swear and ban,
And call an honest man a Puritan:
And thus some Rascals hold no man in price,
Except he be excusive given to vice;
But those I mean are such, whose holy fits,
Approves them to be haire-brain'd Hypocrites:
Who with a heaved up hand, and white of eye
Will do a man a mischief zealously:
They Will pray for Pardons for sins done and past,
Praise temperance, yet will sooner hang than fast;
And on Religious points will stand most stoutly,
And in conclusion cozen men devoutly.
Their best Opinions are like Weather-cockes,
Their wits are vapors, and their heads are blocks;
Their Brains are puffed, and stuffed with windy bubbles,
Their Concord's discord, and their peace is troubles.
Caine Sacrificed, and Iesabell did fast,
Prince Absalom some silly fools embraced;
So Judas kissed, when as to kill he meant,
So Pilate washed, yet was corruptly bent:
So Annanias brought his feigned gift,
So Satan alleged Scripture for a shift.
These were all Hypocrites, and so are they
That wrest, to serve God the contrary way.
For many a soul (by them prevented) wanders
In misty Laborinths, and crook'd Meanders:
One would have this, and the other would have that
And most of them would have they know not what
For were we bound unto their approbation,
We should have a mad fashioned Congregation.
Nor do I think it meet the Church should crave
Their wisedoms counsel, what is fit to have,
Their long Tantologie, extemporary prating,
Their babbling repetitions, often repeating,
Are but mere froath, without Pith, weak, ungrounded,
And these have many a Conscience pricked, and wounded;
For they will turn a Windmill to a Cow,
And of a rotten Cloake-bag make a Plow.
Ixion, so his time in vain did wast,
When (stead of Juno) he a Cloud embraced;
Upon which Cloud the Centaures be begot,
And such strange Monsters breeds their zeal so hot:
Or like the fellow in a Moone-shine Night,
Saw in a Pond or Poole, her likeness bright;
And Riding in to give his Mare some drink,
The Moon behind a Coale-black cloud did shrink:
He (being drunk) began to storm and stare,
And swore the Moon was swallowed by his Mare.
Such are their real Arguments, and such
Are all their points wherein they stand so much:
They most dispute whereas their cheer is b^st,
And (in Plum-broath) they Church and State detest:
Of sacred Scriptures (bet wixt every bit)
They Coin interpretations with their wit;
These seperatists, the Alchimists would play,
And turn our golden peace to Dross or Clay.
It Is not their Organizing in the Nose,
Their hate to Verse, or love to tedious Prose:
Their seorne, like dust that is cast against the Wind,
Which in their blind eyes falls and makes more blind
For Envy's like an Arrow shot upright,
Which on the Shooters heads with danger light.
Thus they by Owle-light still do miss the mark,
And like poor Currs against the Moon they bark:
For sure small credit to that man belongs
That can be wronged, with bablers Pens or tongues.
Awake my Muse, shake off this filthy scum,
These dreggs, who altogether are a sum
Of many Simples and ingredients;
Of innovating disobedience.
I wish them all with holiness endowed,
To be more knowing zealous, and less proud:
And as for their good sakes these lines are pend,
I leave them either to amend or end.


7. Satyr. The Whore.
I Will tell thee who is a Whore; that thing's a Whore
Which whilst men most embrace they most abhor,
Prized in the heat of Blood, at costly rate,
A Dish we feed on, surfeit, and then hate:
They Traffic for diseases, wast their youth
In woeful Riot; without wit, or truth.
They sell their souls an heritage to win,
An Heritage in Hell, dear bought with sin:
Put case they compass age; what is their reward?
They Are old, poor, scorned, and beg without regard.
They would repent them, then know not the way;
Such are all Whoores, who wilfully do stray:
There has bin Whoors much honored, Whoores of State;
Who bought Damnation at a dear, dear rate:
And it is a difference, which offends more,
Either a Coached, or a Carted Whore?
^omprous whore may rustle some small time;
^t State and Pomp extenuates no Crime.
8. Satyr. Of degenerate Honor.
Honor is not compiled in Rank, or File,
Or Measure, for no man has reached that Style
But by supernall favor; and from thence
True Honor has it is only influence:
For S^rdanapulus was mighty once,
Yet by Voluptious frailty was a Dunce:
Then what an Ass is he that has a State
Either by his Inheritance, or Fate,
And squanders it, and dribbles it away,
To be his Honors and his House decay:
He that would be a Gentleman complete,
Should every way seek to be good as great;
And he that is not so, himself does plunge,
And is the curse of man, and Satan's sponge:
Of Fatterers he may have a mighty shole,
And in the World may boar a mighty hole;
And when he sinkes into that hole he bore^,
He dies unpittied; no man him deplores.
God is true Honour-giver, and will still
Defend it with his Eviternall Will.
And let the sacred Sisters all fore-fend,
That any word should from my Muse be pend
That may be took a miss; for I persuade
My self, that none will kick, except a Jade:
I know I play the fool in every line,
But no wise man will set his wit to mine;
Nor let a Scholar to a Sculler be
An opposite, though different in Degree;
For though I touched at damned pride before,
Perhaps I should be proud if I had more.
I blame the man that is covetous, but why?
Because I want his precious Treasury.
I jeere the Quack-salver, and Mountebanke,
Alas I cannot reach unto their Rank.
I scoff the maund ring Knave, and Alchimist,
Yet I (perhaps) would feign do what I list.
I mock the Hypocrite, yet I confess
I (Hypocrittically) still transgress:
And I am stark naught, so that Tongue nor Pen,
Can make me better than the worst of men.
FINIS.

