Heavens Blessing, And Earths Joy.

OR A true relation, of the supposed Sea Fights and Fire-workes, as were
accomplished, before the Royal Celebration, of the al-beloved Marriage, of the
two peerlesse Paragons of Christendom, FREDERICK and ELIZABETH.

With Triumphall Encomiasticke Verses, consecrated to the Immortal memory of
those happy and blessed Nuptials.

By John Tailor,



Imprinted at London for Joseph Hunt, and are to be sold (...)

To the illustrous Lamp of true worth, the noble, Ingenious, inditious, and
understanding Gentleman Sir James Muray Knight.
Unto the prospect of your Wisdoms eyes
I Consecrate these Epithalamies.
Not that I think them worthy of your view,
But for in love my thoughts are bound to you:
I do confess my self unworthy far
To write, in such high causes as these are,
Which, Homer, Virgill nor the fluent Tully,
In fitting terms could scarce express them fully:
But since the Muses did their bounties show,
And on me did poor Poesy bestow,
I hold it best to play the thankful man,
To spend their guiftes the best ways that I can,
And not like pedling Bastards of the Muses,
That Like to Lawyers live on Times abuses.
Thus unto you I give it as it is,
Desiring pardon where there is ought amiss.
Your Worships ever to be commanded in all integrity: John Tailor
.


Epithalamies. OR ENCOMIASTICK TRIVMPHALL VERSES, CONSECRATED to the Immortal
memory, of the royal Nuptials, of the two Paragons of Christendom, Frederick
and Elizabeth. With a description of the Sea Fights, and Fyre-workes, with
other royal occurrences which were accomplished at the Princely Celebration.
I Did not write nor publish (this description of fire and water triumphs) to
the intent that they should only read the relation that were spectators of
them for to such (perhaps) it will relish some what tedious like a tale that is
too often told: but I did write these things, that those who are far remoted,
not only in his Maistties Dominions, but also in foraine territories, may have
an understanding of the glorious pomp, and magnificent domination of our high
and mighty Monarch King James: and further, to demonstrate the skils and
knowledges that our warlike nation has in engines fireworks and other
millitary discipline, that there by may be known, that howsoever war seems
to sleep, yet (upon any lawful ground or occasion) the command of our dread
Sovereign can rouse her to the terror of al malignant opposers of his royal
state and dignity. But to the purpose.

In this representation of a Sea Fight there were 16. Ships, 16. Galleys and 6.
Friggots: of the which Navy, the Ships were Christians and the Galleys were
supposed Turks, all being artificially rig'd and trimmed, well manned and
furnished with great ordinance and Musquettiers: one of the Christian fleet was
a great vessel or a supposed Venetian Argosey, and another was a tall Ship, as
it were appointed for the safe Conuoye of the Argosey. And for the avoiding of
the troublesomnesse of Boats and Wherries, and other perturbatious multitudes,
there was a lists or bounds made with Lighters, Hayes, and other great Boats
to the number of 250. or there abouts: the one end of the Lists was as high
(almost) as Lambeth bridge, and the other end as low as the Temple stairs,
and so fastened to the sowth shore, or the upper end of the bancks on sowthwarke
side, in the form of a half Moon or Cemicircle, So that Boats might pass
up and down the river betwixt London side and the Lighters any way. The
aforesaid Turketh Galleys lying all at an Anchor ever against Westminster, in a
haven or harbor made artificially with Masts and other provision, 60. yards
into the River, which harbor or haven was belonging to a supposed Turkish or
Barbarian Castle of Tunis, Algeirs, or some other Mohammedan fortification,
where the Galleys might scowt out for purchase, and retire in again for
safeguard at their pleasure. About 2. of the clock on satterday the 13. of
February, the aforsaid Argosev and the other Venetian ship her conuoy, sets
forward from ward the Temple, and driving up with the wind and tide til they
came as high as York house, where 4. Galleys met and encountered with them:
where upon a sudden there was friendly exchanging of small shot and great
ordinance on both sides, to the great delectation of all the beholders: the
Drums, Trumpets, Fises, Weights, Guns, showts, and acclamations of the
Mariners, Soldiers and spectators, with such reuerberating Echoes of joy to and
fro, that there wanted nothing in this fight (but that which was fit to be
wanting) which was ships sunk and torn in pieces, men groaning, rent and
dismembered, some slain, some drowned, some maimed, all expecting confusion.
This was the manner of the happy and famons battle of Lepanto fought betwixt
the Turks and the Christians, in the year of grace 1571. or in this bloody
manner was the memorable battle betwixt us and the invincible (as it was
thought) Spanish Armado in the year 1588. but in the end, in this friendly
fight) the ship and Argosey were encompassed round by the Galleies, and
surprizde and taken: whereupon, the whole Fleet made toward them to rescue
them, and revenge their received injuries.

Then there was a Eeacon flered by the Turks which gave warning to the Castle
and the Galleyes, of the coming of the Christian Fleet: Then all the Ships
and Galleyes met in freindly opposition and ymaginary hurley-burley battalions:
then the lofty instruments of Wars clamorous encouragements sounded: the
thundering Artillary roared, the Musqueteirs in numberles volleys discharged on
al sides, the smoke (as it were) ecclipsing Titans refulgent Beams, filling
all the Air with a confused cloudy mist. The Castle and the Land adjacent,
continually dischardging great shot in abundance at the Ships, and the Ships
at them again: so that after this delightful battle had doutfully lasted
three hours, to the great contentment of all the beholders, the Uictorie
inclyning to neither side, all being opposed foes, and combyned friends: all
victors, all tryumphers, none to be vanguishd, and therefore no conquerors. The
Drums, Trumphets, Flutes and Guns, filling the air with repurrussiue
acclamations: upon which, for a Catastrophe or Period to these delightful
royalties, command was given that the Retreat should be sounded on both sides.
And thus these Princely rocreations were accomplished and finished.

THese things could not conveniently be printed in order as they were done, by
reason of the diversity of them.

For here I was feign to describe the fight of the ships and Gallyes first,
which was performed last. For the Fire-workes were performed on Thurs-day night
the 11. of February, and the fight was upon the Saturday following.

At the which fire-workes the master Gunner of England, on the shore did
perform many skillful and ingenious exploits with great Bumbards, shooting up
many artificial balls of fire into the air, which flew up in one whole fiery
ball, and in their falling dispearsed into diverse streams like Raine-bowes in
many innumerable fires. After all which, was discharged a great peale of
Chambers, to the contentment of the royal spectators, and the great credit of
the performers.

The true description of such part of the Fire-workes as were devised and
accomplished by Mr. John Nodes Gunner, and servant to the King; most excellent
Majesty.
THe Imperial and Beauteous Lady Lucida Queen of the Feminine Territories, of
ye man hating Amazonians, with whose bright eye dazeling Coruscancis, and whose
Refulgent feature, the Black-sould hell commanding Magitian Mango (A Tartarian
borne,) was so ensnared and captiuated, that for her love, and to be assured to
enjoy her, he would set all Hell in an uproar, and pluck Don Beelzebub by the
beard: assuredly persuading himself, that without her he could not live, and
for her he would attempt any thing: but she having vowed her self ever to be
one of Vestaes Usataries, always kept Cupid out at the arms end: and bad
Madam Venus make much of stump-footed Vulcan, and keep home like a good
huswife, for she had no entertainment for her.

Whereupon this hellish Necromancer Mango, (being thus repulst) conuerts all
his love to outrageous rigor, and immediately, with his Charms, erorcismes, and
potent execrable incantations, he raises a strong impregnable Pauilion, in the
which he immures, and encloses this beautiful Amazonian Queen with her
attendant Ladies, where (though they lived in captivity and bondage, yet) they
had variety of Games and pleasant sports allowed by the Magitian, in hope that
time would work an alteration in her fair flinty breast. And for her sure
Guard in her absence, he had erected by Magic, another strong Tower, as a watch
house, wherein he had placed a fiery Dragon, and an invincible Giant: (of whom
I will speak in another place hereafter.)

Now to this aforesaid Pauillion wearyed with toil and travail, the Great
irresistable Champion of the world, and the uncontrollable Patron Saint George
comes: and seeing so bright and luculent a Goddess, (according as his
necessity required) demanded entertainment, whereby he might be refreshed
after his laborious atchiuements, and honorable endeavors.

The courteous Queen (although the cared not for the society of man) seeing his
outward or external feature and warlike acouterments, did presently resolve
with her self that so fair an outside could not be a habitation for foul
Treachery, and with most debonayre gesture, admits his entrance into the
Pauilion, where after he had feasted a while, she relates unto him the true
manner and occassion, of her unfortunate thraldom: Saint George (ever taking
pleasure in most dangerous attempts, holding it his chiefest glory to help
wronged Ladies) vows, that as soon as Rhoebus rowz'd himself from the
Antipodes, he would quest the burning Dragon, Conquer the big bon'd Giant,
subvert the enchanted Castle, and enfranchise the Queen with her followers, or
else die in the enterprise thereof. After which promise of his, the Queen to
pass away the time, delights him with these pastimes following, being all
fire-workes.

First, the Pauilion is beleagerd or inuirond round about with fires, going out
of which, many fiery balls flies up into the Air, with numbers of smaller
fires ascending, that cemicircled Cinthia is (as it were) eclipsed with the
flashes, and the stars are hud-winckt with the burning exhalations.

Secondly, is seen a royal hunting of Bucks, and Hounds, and Hunts-men,
flying and chasing one another round about the Pauilion (as if Diana had lately
transformed Acteon, and his ignorant dogs ready to prey on his Carkas) from
whence continually is flying many fires dispearsed every way: The lower part of
the Pauilion always burning round about, giving many blows, and great
reports, with many fires flying aloft into the Air.

Thirdly, there does march round about the Pauilion Artificial men, which
shall cast out fires (as before) as it were in skirmish: another part of the
Pauilion is all in a Combustious flame, where Rackets, Crackers, Breakers, and
such like, gives blows and reports without number.

Fourthly, the Queen of Amazonia with all her train of Virgin Ladies, with
fires, marches round as the men did before, with the fire flying despearsedly
diverse ways: the whilst another part of the Pauilion is fired, with many
blows and reports, and fires flying aloft into the air, from whence it comes
down again in streaching flakes of slashing fire.

Fifthly, aloft with the Turret, shall runns (whirling rownd) a fyerie Globe,
with the Turret and all on fire, with many more greater blows then before had
bin heard, and diverse and sundry other sorts of fires (then any of the former)
proceeding from thence, and flying into the air in great abundance.

All which things being performed, and the undaunted Knight Saint George taking
his leave of the Amazonian Queen Lucida, he mounts upon his Steed, and
aduenterously rides toward the enchanted Tower of Brumond.

Now these disports being ended, wherein Saint Georges entertainment was only
expressed, with the Queens relation of her bondage, this brave Champion was
seen to ride over the bridge to combat with these aforesaid Monsters, the
Dragon and Giant: all which was expressed in the next devise of Mr. Thomas
Butler: and so I end, with my hearty inuocations to the Almighty to send the
Bride and Bridgraome the years of Methushalah, the fortitude of Joshua the
wisdom of Solomon, the wealth of Crefsus, and last of all an endless Crown of
Immortality in the highest heavens.

FINIS.
John Nodes.
A true description of the Platform of a part of the fire-workes, devised and
made by Mr. Thomas Butler Gunner, and servant to the Kings Royal Majesty.
THis enchanted Castle or Tower of Brumond is in hight 40. foot and 30 square,
between which and the Pauilion of the Amazonian Queen, is a long Bridge, on
the which Bridge, the valiant and heroicke Champion Saint George being mounted
on horsback, makes toward the Castle of Brumond, which being perceived by the
watchful Dragon, (who was left by Mango the Coniurer as a Centenell) is
encountered by him, where as Saint George (being armed at all points (but
especially) with an vnrebated courage) having in his Helmet a burning flaming
Feather, and in one hand a burning Lance, and in the other a fiery Sword, with
which weapons he assailes the dreadful Dragon, with such fury and
Monster-quelling streakes, as if the Ciclops had bin forging, and beating
Thunder bolts on Vulcans Anuile: where in conclusion, after a terrible and long
endured Combat, with his Lance he gores the Hellehound under the wing, that he
presently aftermost hideous roaring, and belching of fire, is vanguished and
slain: at which the terrible shaped Giant rises (who having sat as a
spectator of this bloody battle upon a great stump of a tree at the Castle
Gate) and adresses himself toward Saint George, meaning to revenge the death
of the Dragon, and to swallow his enemy for a modieum: but at their first
encounter, the blows on both sides fell like Thunder clappes, enforcing
lightning, and fiery exhalations to sparkle, from whence their powerful
strokes lighted: at last the Monstar gaping wide, as an Arch in London Bridge,
runs furiously, intending to swallow his adversary at a bit: which Saint
George seeing, upon the sudden thrust his Sword into his greedy throat and
ouerthrewe him: at which the Monster yelles and rores forth such a terrible
noise, as if the Center of the earth had cracked, that with the uncouth dinne
thereof, the Neighboring hills, woods, and valleys, seemed to tremble like an
earth quake.

The Gyane lying at the mercy of Saint George, entreats him to spare his life,
and he will show him the way how he shall conquer the Castle, and bring the
inchanter to his everlasting downfall.

Upon which promise, Saint George and the Giant walk into the Castle together,
where he tells Saint George that there is an enchanted fountain, and whosoever
can attain to drink of it, shall be he whom the Fates have ordained to be
the conclusion of the Castles glory.

In the mean space, whilst these things were doing, the Magitian Mango, having
intelligence of the dangerous estate of his Castle, and fearing the loss of
his Lady: suddenly mounts him on a flying inuinsible devil, and in a moment
alights within the Castle, upon whom St. George makes a prosent conquest.

The Castle has on the top thereof a fiery Fountain, which burns and sends
up Rackets into the air, with many reports and blows: some great, and some
less, and fire dispearsed many ways in great abundance with innumerable
lights round about.

Secondly, the Magitian is taken with his Coniuring Scepter in his hand, and
bound to a Pillar by Saint George and burned, with store of lights (as before)
with fires and. Rackets ascending and descending too and fro in the air.

Thirdly, the four squares of the Tower are stered, with abundance of lights,
with Rackets flying into the air, with hers dispearsed, and scattered diverse
and sundry ways, and with reports and blows, some great, and some less,
according to their making.

Fourthly, the fours Turrets are fyred with fire, and innumerable lights, with
abundance of Rackets flying to and fro in the air, giving diverse reports, as
before.

Then the maine Castle is fyered, and upon two of the corner Terrets are two
Globes fyered, and betwixt each Globe at two other corner Turrets, are two men,
catching as it were at the Globes which still turn from them, and they
chassing and following the Globes, still burning and turning till all be
extinguished with fire: always Rackets flying and reports thwacking, and
lights burning.

Thomas Butler.


William Bettis his invention, of such part of the fire-workes as were
performed by him at the Royal Celebration: which he had contrived in such
sort, that if the weather had bin Rainy or Windy, yet his dessignments should
have bin accomplished.
A Castle with diverse fier-workes, representing and assuming diverse variable
shapes, and immagiary forms: which continued the space of an hour or
thereabouts: the nature and quallity of which fire-worke, was performed as
follows.

1 First, there was seen 13. great fires, to fly to and fro round about the
Castle, whereby it seemed to be beleagerd or Circumuolu'd with fires, which
yielded a most pleasing object to all the spectators.

2 Secondly, a flight of great store of Rackets was seen to ascend into the
air, and descend again, which in their descending were extinguished.

3 Thirdly, the whole Castle was all on fire, wherein was seen many things
very delightful.

4 Fourthly, was seen many Buttons fly, dispearsed diverse ways from the
Castle, with great crackes, blows, and reports, in great number.

5 Next that, was seen a Stagge or Heart, hunted and chased with dogs, all
their bodies being artificially made, and preportiond in one flame of fire,
where the following Hounds were plainly seen, to pull down and vanguish the
Stagge which they before had chased.

6 Sixthly, there was seen a great flight of Rackets, with two or three fires
piece.

7 Seauenthly, were seen two or three hundredth fires flying from the Castle,
and then flying to and fro in and out, many ways all together.

8 Next which, was seen a great slight of Rackets, with many great fires, some
of the said fires breaking into many parts, diverse ways dispearsed in
abundance, which fires were seen to fall burning into the water.

9 Ninthlyt, was seen many Rackets flying into the air in great abundance,
giving many blows, Crackes or reports, numberles.

10 Tenthly, was seen diverse other Rackets flying aloft into the air, which
Rackets did assimulate the shapes or proportions of men, women, fowls,
beasts, fishes, and other forms and figures.

11 Last of all, was heard 100. blows and reports as loud as the report of a
reasonable Chamber is able to give, and so with fires, lights, Rackets, and
such like, (to the delight of all the beholders, and the great credit of the
inuentor of this fire-worke) all was extinguished and concluded.

William Bettis
Mr. John Tindall Gunner and servant to the Kings royal Majesty, The true
description of such part of the Fire-workes, as were by him devised and
performed at this Royal Triumphs.
A Castle, old and very Ruinous, called the Castle of Envy situated and
erected on a Rock (all ragged and horide to behold) called the Rock of Ruin,
encompassed round and drenched in a troblous Sea, called the Sea of Disquiet:
the Captain of this Castle name was Discord with his Liettenant Lawles,
ancient Hatred, Sericant Malice, Corporal Contention, with his Lancsprezado
Hellhound. The Rock or foundation of this Castle being all replenished with
Adders, Snakes, Toades, Serpents, Scorpions, and such venomous vermin, from
whose throats were belched many fires, with Crackers, Rackets, blows and
reports in great number.

To the subversion of this maleuolent Edifices, there came three Ships, the
one of them being called Good Will, in whom Loyalty was Captain, and Zeal
was master.

The second Ship was named the True-loue, in whom Trust was Captain, and
perseverance was master.

The third Ship was called Assurance, in whom Circumspection was Captain, and
Providence the Master.

These three Ships and Captains, with their valarous and confident assotiates,
assaults this Castle of Envy, where after half an hours fight, or
there-abouts, (by the invincible prowess of the assaylants) the Hell-borne
defendants were vanquished, their Castle utterly raced, demollished, and
subverted, with Rackets, breakers, blows and reports innumerable.

The description of such part of the Fire-workes as were devised and
accomplished by Mr. William Fishenden Gunner, and servant to his Majesty.
A Piramides or lofty Plat-forme, in the form of a Triangled spire, with a
Globe fixed on the top thereof, the whole work turning and burning, the space
almost of half an hour, or near thereabouts: from whence proceeded many
Rackets, fires, blows and reports, in great numbers, to the great delight and
contentment of the King the Queen, the Prince, the Princess Elizabeth, the
Prince Palatine, and diverse others, the Nobility, the Gentry and Commons of
this Kingdom.

FINIS.
Epithaleamies.

OR ENCOMIASTICK TRIVMPHALL VERses, consecrated to the immortal memory of the
royal Nuptials, of the two Princes and Paragons of Christendom, Frederick
and Elizabeth.

With A description of the Sea Fights, and Fire-workes, with other royal
occurrences which were accomplished at the princely Celebration.

By John Tailor.

Printed for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold at his shop on London Bridge.
1613.

Epithallamies. OR ENCOMIASTICK TRIVMPHALL VERSES CONSECRATED to the Immortal
memory, of the royal Nuptials, of the two Parragons of Christendom,
Frederick and Elizabeth. With a description of the Sea Fights, and Fyre-workes,
with other royal occurrences which were accomplished at the Princely
Celebration.
HHe God.
that upon the Poles has hing'd the skies
Who made the Spheres, the Orbs, and Planets seven
Whose justice dam's, whose mercy iustifies,
What was, is, shall be, in earth, Hell, or heaven:
Whom men and Angels lauds and magnifies,
(According as his laws command has given)
The poor, the Rich, the Beggar and the King,
In several Anthems his great praises sing. There are some that think scorn
that I being of mean degree should write of such Princely occurrences. But I
make hard shift to shoulder into the press in despite of envy

Then as the meanest do their voices stretch
To lawd the sempiternall Lord of Lords:
So I a lame Decreppit-witted wretch,
With such poor phrases as my skill affoords:
From out the Circuit of my brain did fetch,
Such weak invention as my wit records.
To write the triumphs of this famous I Will,
On which both heaven and earth with joy does smile.
My Genius therefore my invention moves
To sing of Britains great Olympic Games
Of mirth, of heaven and earth beloved loves.
Of princely sports, that noble minds enflames
To do the utmost of their best behoues;
To fill the world with their achieved fames.
TO ataine eternities all passing bounds,
Which neither Fate, nor Death, nor Time confounds.
Gunnes, Drums, and Trumpets, Fireworks, Bonfires, Bells,
With acclamations, and applausefull noise;
Tilts, Turneyes, Barriers, all in mirth excells,
The air reuerberates our earthly joys.
This great triumphing, Prophet-likefore-tells
(I hope) how The lake or gulf of forgetfullnes of the wc I hope our griefs
have sufficiently carrowsed,
Leathes lake all grief destroys.
For now black sorrow from our land is chased,
And joy and mirth each other have embraced.
How much Ichouah has this Island blessed,
The thoughts of man can never well conceive:
How much we lately were with woes oprest,
For him Prince Henry.
whom Death did late of life bereave.
And in the midst of grief, and sad unrest,
To mirthfull sport he God.
freely giu's us leave:
And when we all were drenched in black despair,
Joy conquered grief, and comfort vanquished care
Thou high and mighty Frederick the Fifth,
Count Pallatine, and Palsgrane of the Rhine:
Bauares great Duke, when God on high does lift,
To be the tenth unto the'Worthies nine.
Be ever blessed with thy beloved The Princess Elizabeth.
Gift,
Whom God, and best of men makes only thine:
Let annually the day be given to mirth,
Wherein thy Nuptials gave our Joys new birth.
Right gracious Princess, great Elizabeth
In whose Heroic, pure, White, Iuory breast,
True virtue lives, and living flourishes,
And as their Mansion has the same possessed:
Beloved of God above, and men beneath,
In whom the Goddesses and graces rest.
By virtues power, Jehovah thee has given,
Each place does seem, (where thou remain'st) a heaven
The Royal blood of Emperors and Kings, By this happy marriage, great
Britain, France, Denmark, Germany, and the most part of Christendom are
united, either in affinity or consanguinity.

Of Potent Conquerors, and famous Knights
Successively from these two Princes springs:
Who well may claim, these titles as their rights:
The Patrons Christendom to Union brings,
Whose unity remoted lands unites.
And well in time (I hope) this sacred work,
Will hunt from Christian lands the faithles Turk.
Since first the framing of this worlds vast Room,
A fitter, better match was not combinde:
So old in wisdom, young in Beauties bloome,
And both so good and graciously inclinde.
And from this day, until the day of doom:
I doubt succeeding ages shall not find:
Such wisdom, beauty, grace, compact together,
As is innate in them, in both, in either.
None (but the Devil and his infernal crew) That wc God lou's most, the
Devil hates most: and I am sure that none but the blackcrew are offended with
these Royal Nuptials.

At this beloved heavenly match repines,
None (but such fiendes, which hell on earth does spue:)
Will wish Eclips of their illustrous shines,
The Gods themselves, with rare inventions new,
With inspiration man's device refines:
And with their presence undertakes these taskes,
Devises, Morions, Reuells, plays, and Maskes.
The thund'rers June.
Bride has left her heavenly bed,
And with her presence this great Wedding graces;
Himen in Saffron Robes inuelloped:
Ioynes and accords these lovers loved embraces:
Yea all the Gods down to the earth are fled,
And among our joys their pleasures enterlaces.
Immortals ioynes with mortals in their mirth,
And makes the Court their Paradise on earth.
Where the plannet Jupiter has sole predominance there is all Royal mirth and
Iouiall Alacrity.
Maiestick Jove has left his spangled Throane
To dance Leuoltoes as this Bridal feast:
Infusing Iouiall glee in every one,
The high, the low, the greatest and the least.
Sad minds to sable melancholy prone,
Great Jove their vital parts has so possessed:
That all are raped in sportfull ecstasies,
With showts and Clamors ecchoing in the skies.
Soll.
Apollo from two topt Muses Pernassus.
Hill
Light of the The muses.
Sisters nine has brought from thence,
(Leaving A tragical mournful those who has been here already, but I hope
now she is lame of the gout, that she will keep home for ever.
Melpomena alone there still
To muse on sad and Tragical events)
The rest all stretching their all matchles skill
To serve this Royal Princess, and this Prince.
Thus Sol descended from his Radient shrine,
Brings Poesy and Music down divine.
The wrathful God of Wars
War in Burnished Arms
Lays by his angry all-confounding mood:
And in the lists strikes up sweet loves Alarmes,
Where freindly wars draws no unfriendly blood,
Where honors fire the noble spirit warmes
To undertake such Actions as are good.
Thus mighty Mars these triumphs does increase
With peaceful war, and sweet contentions peace.
The Queen of Venus.
love these Royal sports attend,
And at this Banquet deignes to be a guest:
Her whole endeavors, wholly she does bend,
She may in loves delights outstrip the best:
For who so ere does Hymen's laws pretend
If Venus be but absent from the feast,
They may (perhaps) be merry in some sort,
But it is but painted All, worth nothing.
mirth, and ayery sport.
Bright Mayas Mercury.
son, the God of tricks and sleights
Has opened the treasure of his subtle wit:
And as a servant on this wedding waightes
With masks, with revels, and with triumphs fit,
His rare inventions, and his queint conceits
(Twixt heaven aloft, and hels infrerall pit)
He in immaginary shows affords
In shape, form, method, and applausfull words.
Old sullen A dogged melancholy planet, a maleuolent opposite to all mirth.
Saturn hid his moody head
In dusky shades, of black Cimerian night:
And wavering The moon, who does never continue at a stay, and therefore she
absented her self from those delights which I hope will be permanent.
Luna closely cooch'd to bed,
Her various change she knew would not delight
The loyal minds where constancy is bred,
Where Proteus t thoughts are put to shameful flight.
These Saturn and Luna for in deed the nights, were dark at the wedding
because the Moon shined
two (by Jove's command were straightly bound
To stay at home (as better lost then found)
Cupid descended from the Crystal skies
And leaves behind his golden fethered darts:
In steed of whom he makes fair Ladies eyes
The peircing weapons of true loving hearts.
And be amongst these high solemnities,
His awful presence freely he imparts,
To all in general with mirthfull cheer,
All sports the better if lou's God be there.
The offspring of the high celestial Jove
His braine-bred Minerus, whom the poets fame to be the Goddess of wisdom,
borne and bred in the brain of Jupiter.
daughter, and his thigh borne son
Bachus, whom his father Jove saved from Abortiue birth from his mother Semell
and sowed him upon his thigh till the time of his birth was come to a period
Ovid Lib. 3.
One with advice of wisdom showed her love,
And the other bounteously made plenty run:
Where wine in streams against one another strove,
Where many a caske was bankrout and undone,
Deprived the treasure of the fruitful vines:
By Bacchus bounty, that great God of wines.
Thus Jove, and Juno, Imps of aged Ops
With wise Minerua, Mars and Mercury:
Resplendent Sol with musicks strains and stops
Fair Venus Queen of loves alacrity,
Loves God with shafts betip'd with golden tops
And Bacchus showring sweet humidity,
Gods, Goddesses, the Graces and the Muses,
To grace these Triumphs al their cunnings uses,
Amongst the rest was all recording Fame
Insculping noble deeds in brazen leaves:
That meagre Envy cannot wrong that name,
Where brave Heroic acts the mind vpheaues:
Fames golden Trump will through the world proclaim
Whom Fortune, Fate nor Death nor Time bereaues.
Thus like a Scribe Fame waited to record.
The Nuptials of this Lady and, this Lord.
All-making-marring Time that turns never
To these proceedings, still has bin auspicious,
And in Times progress.
his progress will (I hope persevere
To make their days and hours to be delitious.
Thus Fame, and Time affords their best endeavor
Unto this royal match to be propitious:
Time in all pleasure through their lives will pass
Whilst Fame records their fames in leaves of brass
You sons of Judas and Achitophell
Whose dambd delights are treasons, blood, and death:
The almighties power your hawty prides will quell,
And make you vassals, vessels of his wrath,
Let all that with these Princes worse then well,
Be judged and doomed to everlasting scath,
For it is apparent, and experience proves
No hat preuailes, where great Jehovah loves.
To whose Omnipotent eternal power,
I do commit this blessed beloved pair:
Oh let thy graces daily on them shower,
Let each of them be thine adopted Heir:
Raise them at last to thy Celestial Bower,
And seat them Both in lasting glories Chair.
In fine, their earthly days be long and blessed:
And after, bettred in eternal rest.
A Sonnet to be Imperious maiestick mirror of Kings, James, great Britains
Monarch.
GReat Phoebus spreads his Rays on good and ill,
Dame Tellus feeds the Lion and the Ratte,
The smallest Sails God AEol's breath does fill:
And Thetis harbors both the Whale and Spratte.
But as the Sun does quicken dying Plants,
So thy illustrous shine does glad all hearts:
And as the earth supplies our needful wants,
So does thy bounty guerdon good deserts.
And like the ayrie Eoll's pleasant gales,
Thou filst with joy the Sails of rich and poor,
And as the sea does harbor Sprats and Whales,
So thou to high and low, yeald'st harbors store.
Thus Sea, Air, Earth, and Titans fiery face,
Are Elementall servants to thy grace.
To Life.
SInce that on earth thou wondrous wandering guest,
Arithmeticians never number can
The several lodgings thou have taken in man,
In Fish, in Foul, in tame, or brutish beast
Since all by thee from greatest to the least,
Are squared (and well compared) unto a span,
Oh fleeting Life take this my counsel than,
Hold long possession in the royal breast:
Dwell ever with the King, the Queen, the Prince,
The gracious Princess, and her Princely Spouse,
In each of these thou have a lasting house:
Which Fate, nor Death, nor Time cannot convince.
And when to change thy lodging thou art driven,
Thy self and they exalted be to heaven.
To Death.
TO thee whose auaritious greedy mood,
Does play at sweepe-stake with all living things:
And like a Hors-leech Quaffes the several blood,
Of Subjects, Abiects, Emperors and Kings:
That high and low, and all must feel thy slings,
The Lord, the Lowne, the Catife and the Keasar,
A beggars death as much contentment brings
To thee, as did the fall of Julius Ceasar.
Then since the good and bad are all as one,
And Larkes to thee, no better are then Kites,
Take then the bad, and let the good alone,
Feed on base wretches, leave the worthy wights.
With thee the wicked evermore will stay,
But from thee, Fame will take the good away.
To Eternity.
THou that beyond all things do go so far,
That no Cosmographers could e're suruay,
Whose glory (brighter then great Phoebus Carre)
Does Shine, where night does never eclipse the day:
To thee I consecrate these Princes acts,
In thee alone let all their beings be:
Let all the measures of their famous tracts
In thee begin, but never end like thee.
And when thy servant Time, gives Life to Death.
And Death surrenders all their lives to Fame:
Oh then inspire them with celestial breath,
With Saints and Martyrs to applawd thy name.
Thus unto thee (as thine own proper rights)
I consecrate these matchles worthy wights.
FINIS.
John Tailor.

