THE MUSES MOVRNING: OR, FUNERAL SONNETS ON THE DEATH OF JOHN MORAY ESQVIRE

BY JOHN TAILOR.



To the whole and Entire number of the Noble and Ancient name of Morayes; John
Tailor dedicates these sad Funeral sonnets.
Sonnet. 1.
WHen King Corbredus wore the Scottish Crown
The Romans did the Britain land afflict:
But Corbred joined confederate with the Pict,
By whom Queen Woadaes foes were overthrown.
The Morayes then, to have their valor known,
Did first the Roman forces contradict:
And made them render up their lives so strict,
That horse and foot, and all were beaten down.
Lo thus began the Morayes honored Race,
Of memorable Ancient worthy fame:
And since the five and fiftith year of Grace,
In Scotland has suruiu'd that noble name.
To whom alive, and to my dead friends hearse,
In duty here I consecrate this verse.
He that is ever obliged to your noble name: JOHN TAILOR.
Sonnet. 2.
Weep everlastingly you Nimphs divine,
Your very Quintisence is waste and spent:
Sigh, groan and weep, with woeful languishment,
Dead is the life that made your Glories shine.
The heavenly numbers of your Sacred nine*
He tuned as an Aetheriall Instrument,
So sweet, as if the Gods did all consent
In him their Consort wholly to combine.
Weep Muses, everlastingly lament,
Ecclipsed is your Sire Apolloes shrine:
Grim Death, the life has from your Champion rent,
And therefore sigh, groan, weep, lament and pine:
And let the Laurel rot, consume and wither,
Dye Muses, and be Tombd with him together.
Sonnets. 3.
FRom two strong Iayles thy corpse, and soul's acquite^
The one compact of flesh, and blood and bone:
The other unrelenting senceles stone,
By God to one, by man to one committed.
I ever did expect a happy time
When thou should shake thy bondage from thy ba^^^
I ever hoped that thy unwilling crime
Would be forgot, and thou securde from wrack.
For this I wishd, and prayed both day and night:
I only aymde to have thy body freed,
But Heaven, (beyond my Reason) had decreed,
Soul, body, both at once to free thee quite.
Thou in thy life have past a world of trouble,
But Death from double Iayles has freed thee dou^^^
Sonnet. 4.
COrruption, Incorruption has put on,
Immortal, weak mortality is made:
Earths woe, has gained A happy heavenly throne,
By death, life dies, by life deaths force does fade*
Though death kill life, yet life does conquer death,
Death but putts off our Rags of shame and sin:
When for a moment's an eternal breath,
Life (passing through the door of death) does win.
This thou well knew'st (my much beloved friend)
And therefore thou did dare death to his worst,
But he (much busied) could not thee attend,
Or durst not, till thy cares thy heart had burst.
And then the slave came stealing like a thief,
And against his will, did give thy woes relief.
Sonnet. 5.
THou Fortunes football, whom she vsd to toss,
From wrong to wrong, from woe to woe again:
From grief rebounding back to pinching pain,
As't pleased the blindfold Dame to bless or cross.
But thou, unmoved with either gain or loss,
Nor joy, or care, could vex thy constant brain:
Thou smild'st at all her buffets with disdain,
And all her favors thou esteem'dst as dross:
Her and her Favorites thou still did deem
Just as they are, not as they seem to be:
Her Minions all as fools thou did esteem,
And that is the cause she would not favor thee:
Then since such reckning she of fools does make:
Would thou had been one, for her favors sake.
Sonnet. 6.
It Is written in the everliving word,
(the Rule and Square that men should live thereby)
Afflictions are the tuch-stones of the Lord,
By which he only does his servants try.
Then Noble Moray, thou had many a tuch,
And still thy patience good and current proved,
Thy manly carriage in thy griefs were such,
Which made thee (more then much) admird and loved.
What year, what month, week, day or fading hour
Wherein some mischief did thee not befall?
Yet had Afflicton over thee no power
To conquer thee, but thou did conquer all,
Unnumbered times thou wast both tucht and tried,
And in thy makers fear and favor did.
Sonnet. 7.
WE^pe heart, weep eyes, weep my unable pen
In tears of blood of water, and of Ink:
With bread of sorrow, and afflictions drink
I live, for I have lost a man of men.
Yet heart, eyes, pen, dry up your tears again,
He is not lost, he is rather newly found:
Enfranchisde from a doleful theeuish den,
And with a rich Immortal Crown is crowned.
Then heart, eyes, pen, no more with tears be drowned*
Weep not for him that does rejoice for ever:
Yet this again my comfort does confound,
He Is lost to me, and I shall find him never.
Then weep Muse, heart, eyes, pen, lament and weep
My joys are buried in eternal sleep.
Sonnet. 8.
Sleep gentle Spirit in Eternal rest,
Free from all heart tormenting sorrow sleep:
Whilst I do vent from my care crazed breast,
Hart-wondring sighs that there their mansion keep.
And let my Groans from out that Cauerne deep,
With lamentations and cloud cracking thunder
And let mine eyes an Innundation weep,
Let sighs, groans, tears, make all the world to wonder
I mean my little Microcosmo world,
sigh storms, groan thunder, weep a flood of tears:
Through every part of me, let grief be hurld.
That whosoever my lamenting hears:
May moan (with me) the cause of this my Ditty,
Or if not moan with me, vouchsafe to pity.
Sonnet. 9.
SInce cursed fates have fatally decreed,
To toss and tumble harmles Innocence:
And all the crew of Hells Abhortiue breed
Have glutted Enuies maw, by laws defense.
Yet God whose knowledge knows the least offense,
Who all things sees with his all-searching eye:
Does with his glorious great omnipotence,
Right wronged wrongs, and hears his servants cry.
His mercy's not immured within the sky,
But freely he does power it down on earth:
He with afflictions scorge his sons does try,
And when he pleases turns their moan to mirth.
And though man lives in care, and dies in sorrow,
A heavy evening brings a joyful morrow.
Sonnet 10.
Well have thou Run in this thy weary race,
Well have thou fought with Satan hand to hand:
Thou Have won the Goal, and gaind the blessed Land,
That Is neither limited with time or place.
There thou attendest on the throne of Grace,
There Angels, and Archangells sweetly sing:
Eternal praises to the eternal King.
And see the Glorious brightness of his face.
All this (I doubt not) but thou well have don,
Not of thy self (with shameful sin poluted)
But thy Redeemer has the conquest won,
And unto thee the victori's Imputed.
He paid the score, and canceld all thy bands,
And gave thee to his blessed Fathers hands.
Sonnet 11.
NOw may you theeuing Poets filch and steal,
Without controulement breaking Priscians pate:
For he that whilom could your theft reveal,
Your Critic, and your H^ppercritick^ late.
Now may you cog and lie, and swear and prate,
And make your idle verses lame and halt:
For by the power of Euiternall fate,
He Is gone that could and would correct each fault,
But you have greatest cause to moan his want,
You sacred heavenly Sisters (three times thrice)
He from your Gardens, could all weeds supplant.
And replant fruits and flowers of peereles price;
He kept (vnbroake) your Numbers, Tipes and Trop^^
But now he is dead, dead are your only hopes.
Sonnet. 12.
AS Solon, to rich haples Cressus said,
No man, is happy till his life does end:
The proof in thee so plainly is displaid,
As if he thy Nativity had kend.
What mortal miseries, could mischeife send,
But thou therein have had a treble share:
As if Calamities their powers should bend,
To make thy Corpse a treasure house of care.
Yet fell Adversity thou did out-dare,
And valiantly against storms of woe resisted;
Love of the world thy mind could not ensnare,
Thou knewst wherein the best of best consisted.
And as old Solon said, so I agree,
Death makes men happy, as it has done thee.
Sonnet. 13.
NO Monumentall Trophe, virtue needs,
And good Report a marble Tomb out-weares:
Fame plays the Harrold and proclaims men's deeds,
Her^ Trump's shrill sound the spacious world hears.
And such a universal Tomb have thou,
Borne on the tops of thousand thousand tong^:
Thy living merit does thy name allow,
A Monument for ever, which belongs
To none but such as whilom was thy self,
Who vsd the world as if they vsd it not:
And did acknowledge misbegotten pelf,
Must (like the getters of it) Rust and rot.
And such a living Tomb thy Corpse inherit,
A good Report, according to thy merit.
Sonnet. 14.
HAd I the skill of Homer, Maro, Naso,
Or had I that Admired ornated style:
Of Petrark, or the brave Italian Tasso
I could not overmuch thy praise compile.
But as I am (Alas and woe the while)
A poor unlearned silly simple swain:
At whose attempt the world with scorn will smile,
And flout (...) th'unshapen issue of my brain.
But duty bids me launch into this Maine,
Though my performance be but weak of store,
Yet worthy minds this goodness does retain,
Not to despise the service of the poor.
I loved him living, and my love to show,
My least and last poor love I here bestow.

