THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD, TO HIS BRIDE, UPON her Creation. A SPIRITVAL LEGACY
for the Right Honorable, the Lord STRANGE.

WRITTEN, By Augustine Tailor, Preacher, and Minister, at Hawarden in
Plint-shire.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JAMES, Lord Strange, etc. The most hopeful Heir, of
the Spotless, Ancient, and Illustrious House of DERBY.
My good Lord:
THere is a Royal marriage to beheld,
In the Mount Syon (that God loves so well,)
It was determined in the days of eld,
And now is at hand, and I am charged to tell,
Some noble friends, to the end they may provide,
To Attend the nuptials of the Lamb and's Bride;
To be made members of it: therefore I
My office and my service, both t'approue
Toward God, and you gives this to testify,
In chains of duty, and unfeigned love,
I Am bound so fast (It shall be understood;)
I cannot, move (except to do you good,)
I come t'inuite your Honor to a feast,
That Is heavenly, holy, happy, and never ends,
You are elected as a proper guest:
Nobillity, virtue, honor, are those friends
Must grace the nuptials, the bad must be gone,
"Good will have good associats, or else none.
My Lord I know you, and I know you are stored,
With wisdom, learning, bounty, beauty, love,
Humillity, piety, grace, a complete Lord,
Your merits vow to build your seat above,
Your foes on earth with grace; and (says the story)
Mercy will build your seat in Heaven with glory.
I have a license from the greatest power,
To build a lantern for the Kingdoms sight,
And upon stately Lathams eagle Tower,
I thus presume to place it, to give light
Unto the present, and the future time,
Of the true worth of Derbyes Prince-like line:
Keep you it in repair, and you shall prove,
I owe you life, although I pay but love.
A servant, at your Honorable disposition, Augustine Tailor.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL Sr. John Hanmer Knight, and Baronet, etc.
Right Worshipful:
EAch other blast brings misery or death,
These nether-lands nurse naught but discontent,
No good that happens rises from beneath,
Pleasures indeed that are not permanent,
Are borne, and buried hear, and perfects sight
No more then lightning does in darkesome night.
Now that your aim may be at better things,
I only aim, and do beseech you seek,
That Heavenly quire where David sits and sings.
The Master as 'twere in Gods second week,
Which is an endless world to gain that glory,
Observe these lines, they are from the sacred story.
Your Worships truly devoted, Augustine Tailor.

Peter Moss his Lenuoy to the Author. A.T.
Kind friend, behold a hopeful mystery,
In both thy names inwrapt, there seems to be,
For as S. Augustine with pious love,
In former time, (men's ignorance t'reproue)
Did teach and preach the Gospel and did turn,
The hearts of Kings, (fair Britains Isles adorn)
To become Christians: And behind his deeds
In print are left, to help us in our needs.
Now I thy friend the boldlier divine,
Because thou art another Augustine,
Or rather in the word that strengthn'd lies,
Tailor which is, and which so much implies:
For thy discerning judgment has discride,
Oracles of truth, not ought is left aside;
But is produced; and for the nuptial feast
Has shapt this garment, worthi'st for the best,
And as it is framed all by thy curious hand,
Everlastingly a monument shall stand,
That neither time, nor envy, can deface,
Out lasting life, and to thy life a grace.
Your most assured, Peter Moss.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sr. Roger Mostin, Knight, etc. *
Right Worthy:
AS it did please your most religious ears,
To hear me lately, I do now entreat
Your gracious eyes to view my labors fears
And pious passions in me are grown great,
Because I see times bark so fraught with woes,
The world is not so full of men as foes.
T'auoyd the worst that woes and foes can do,
Climb Jacobs ladder with Caelestiall thoughts
Now only study to ascend unto
The Lamb in Syon that so dearly bought's
My prayers shall be for your blis above,
"And for my service, I entreat your love.
Your Worships to be commanded, Augustine Tailor.

IN LAVDEM OPERIS ET AVthoris, Amici mei Augustini Tailor.
SAint Augustine, thou here do immitate,
Moving our minds on God to meditate;
(Tailor) a Tailor divine, for thou have wrought
Thy work so faultlesse, that there is not ought
Correction worthy: Not a critticke tongue,
Dares belch a word against thy Hymen song,
Sung as by Christ, muiting to his feast
And Nuptials him, who lists to be his guest.
(Reader) our Tailors full reward is this,
That to thy soul, his labors add a bliss;
And with a wedding garment fair to cloth thee,
That th'Bridegroome say nor, friend begone I loath thee:
He seems here as'twere to take a measure,
Of Heavens high incomprehended pleasure:
The worlds obstickles he, here presses down,
And cankred sin cuts off; wherefore let none
That reads, but cloth his mind, that The Author know,
His works do make us more and more to know,
Encouraging his free and painful quill,
To pen our more and further profit still;
And worthy Author, let this be a mean,
That in another harvest we may gleane,
This being so liked, praised, allowed, graced, loved,
Accepted, honored, thanked, read, and approved.
IOANNES RVSSELL.

THE ARGUMENT.
Isr'ells forgetfulness is showed,
Her first estate discry'd;
The bounties of the Lord bestowed,
The beauties of the Bride.
ONce more, from Heaven to earth, from me to thee,
From God to Jacobs great posterity.
Oh that thy greatness were with goodness mixed?
Thy sins are so continued, that betwixt
I see no virtues placed, what if there were
Of twenty days together, no day clear?
But stuffed with stormy weather? Earth would be
Bold to tax Heaven with mere Tyranie:
Shall not I then complain against Israel,
That spends so many days and not one well?
It Is grief to me, that I have understood,
So many acts together, and none good:
Open thy ears to hear, thy heart to heed,
My eyes are full of dew, my locks does bleed:
Could drops that night's accustomed to distill,
Upon despised lovers; yet my will,
Wills thee no punishment for this neglect,
I only wait to see thy more respect,
Unto my patience, for my long attending;
My eyes are filled with tears at thy offending:
I would not see thy faults, I would not strike,
Nor show my Justice upon her, I like
Vengeance I sent to Egypt, there to dwell,
Peace I prepared to stay in Israel;
Judgment I doomed to dye with Caine, in Nod,
Mercy I meant should live with Sem in God:
I wish It so, regard, and thou shall prove,
My actions all do manifest my love;
Man's lou's unstable, like to man's estate,
But where I once affect I never hate.
Think on thy past, thy present, thy future tense,
And tell me who has been thy best defense?
Who is it? or who will be? Abram's dead,
Isaac and Jacob, left the field and fled,
So did thy friends, so did thy father and mother;
As death does fetch one, nature brings another,
To keep earth in repair, until there come,
The members of my Bride all knit in one.
Thou Art now ship-like, still flitting, restless, and
Floting in miseries on this nether-land,
And cannot anchor yet, but shall land at
The Mount above the Armenian ararat.
I know thy poor Bark is in danger still,
Betwixt the promised good, and present ill;
My Bethels plenties, and thy Babels wants,
Draws thee as Iron, cast amongst Adamants.
Yet know if thou like Lots wife waver do,
Thou'll loose the City and the Mountain too.
Fergetfull love, I must first send to thee,
That thou shows these signs of disloyalty:
I do not take it well, thou art so slow,
That thanks for all the blessings I bestow,
Is yet untruly paid. Now I could chide,
But it becomes not me to use my bride
Discurteously; I Would not be angry yet,
My love to thee, commands me not forget
My patience; therefore arm thy self with have,
The days of peace, will soon be ouer-past.
Hearken my spouse, I have some things to tell,
Concerns the health and wealth of Israel;
I do remember thee even from that day,
Thou lay unshapen in a lump of clay,
Void of form, life, and beauty, I begun,
Then to behold the works that I had done,
In number many, and in fashion fair,
T'adorne the earth, and beautify the Air:
I blessed them all with order, then I meant
To make some precious piece more excellent
Then all the rest, and to place that above,
And make that chief, and that should be my love;
And that I would prefer, and raise to honor,
And that should be my bride, and still upon her
Angels should wait: And this is my decree,
What wrongs are done to her, as done to me,
Shall be revenged. Thou art this Bride I say,
"And all I promise I have power to pay;
Let all thy enemies think on it, my intent's
"That all like faults shall feel like punishments.
Thee (precious piece) when I did mean to make,
With care, and love, I thus in hand did take:
Let us make man, of other things I said,
Let there be such, and they were formed and made;
The Earth, the Seas, the Air, the Fire and all,
That Is made in or upon this neather-ball,
The Stars, and Lights above, the Moon, and Sun:
I did but speak the Word, and these were done,
And they were well done; but when I applied,
My power and skill to frame my self a Bride,
I made thee matchless thus, pure, fair, and free,
The blessed Heir of Immortality:
I Have made thee wise, because true wisdom should,
Show like a Ruby in refined gold,
And lodge in Princes breasts: I Have made thee strong,
To vanquish all thy foes, that thou a long,
Through Iordans flood to Syloes stream may pass,
And that as far as Diamond does glass:
Thou may exceed the rest, Truth did entreat,
That in thy breast she might possess a seat,
And she shall keep it, for to, keep thee free,
From flattering, lying, and hypocrisy,
From envy, error, and the worst, that so
Thy substance may be better then thy show.
The clod I made thee of, was clay, the time
When the earth was in her nonage, in her prime,
When water, earth, and air, were stored with plenties,
With several sorts of many several deuties.
The place where thou received thy first estate,
Was near to Eden, yet without the gate:
But I did bring thee Inn, and did decree,
What I had done should be to honor thee,
And thou shall rule as chief, thy rule shall stand,
I have commanded all for thy command.
Consider, thy state does all else excel,
To have a being and a being well,
Both argues power and mercy in the hand,
Of the great worke-man; thou may understand,
In this last act apparently does rest,
The difference between the man and beast;
Powerful, and pitiful, thou shall me prove,
Sure I think, thou thinks I deserve thy love,
Do not mistake my love, it is pure and free,
And thine's deffectiue both in quality,
And in condition: If the price were laid,
In balance against the purchase, 'twould be said,
That I have made a loosers match, but still
"Power may perform, and want may only will.
What ever faults are thine, if thou repent,
My pleasure is in mercy, my intent
Intends thy joy, my love is settled so,
"I had rather give ten blessings, then one blow.
FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, upon her Election. A Caelestiall legacy,
for the use of the Honorable Sr. Thomas Savage, and his noble Lady.

Written, By Augustine Tailor Preacher at Hawarden.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

TO THE HONORABLE, Sr. Thomas Savage Knight, and Barronet, one of the Prince
his highness Privy Council, etc. AND TO HIS MOST NOBLE Lady, the Lady Sau^ge,
Daughter, and heir to the Right Honorable, the Lord DARCY, etc.
Truly Honorable,
AS two great rivers, when in one they meet
Makes fair and fruitful, all the neighboring lands,
Even so our Country (when you too did great)
Felt strength and comfort by your clasping hands,
Your bounties, plenties, beauties, wit, and love.
Makes both your Honors, to slane wondrous bright,
In Court and Country; and me first did moan,
At your fair lamps, to give my candle light.
And since you love the pious life of grace,
I Am bold to bring this sacrifice to you:
It is divine and therefore claims a place,
In your great bossomes. Truth says it is her due,
To lodge in the best rooms of every breast,
Yea even in Princes, for because it brings,
Th'externallioy, and the internal rest,
Truths life, and Honor, and rewards makes kings
Of mean men; and this part which I present
Unto your Honors, is Iehouahs voice,
Descending to our terrence continent:
Upon th'election of his Bride, (his choice;)
Wonder not why I write, you are the sun
To Chesters neighbors, amongst whom I Am a star:
(Though dim) and therefore I should have begun,
To tender my affection sooner (far)
Since your fair Country is my friendly nurse,
I owe this love unto your Noble nest,
What treasure I entoy, I will disburse,
To make both love and service manifest:
For you if I can write, or Preach, or pray:
Command me freely, for indeed you may.
At your Honors Command in the service of GOD. Augustine Tailor.

THE ARGUMENT.
The Soul's the Bride, and least she swerue,
Or err in any act:
The Lord his Syon (to conserve)
Does to his son contract.
MY dearest love, Oh that thou had the wings
Of true affection! Love that is fit for Kings
Ought to be pure and lasting; then be wise,
Provide to offer, since the sacrifice,
I manifest unto thee, man provide,
Or loose, the honor to be called my Bryde:
I called thee Bride, stay! Did I not mistake?
Did I not err, a man a Bride to make?
No, no, I did not, I did fall in love,
With my own Image, and I must approve
My proper seat is in the soul confined,
My Image in the beauty of the mind,
And in the upright heart did first appear:
Some seek me in the flesh, I am not there,
But in some little measure, for to show,
Man is the principal of things below:
And whereas other Creatures view the earth,
In mourning wise, yet man with joy and mirth,
Beholds the Heavens, by which it does appear,
He Is but a traveler, and has no home here.
My Image in the soul does fairest shine,
Thy better part is made a spouse of mine,
Therefore my Prophets have baptized thee thus
In Scripture, islia, not filius,
For Isreal's offspring must a daughter be,
A marriage was foretold 'twixt thee and me;
And thou and I must make the match, because
No part must perish of my Fathers laws,
But with my will his will shall still be done,
I will discharge the duties of a Son;
It was his will I should wed in the line
Of Abraham, and it is only mine;
His gracious eyes delights in lowly objects,
"A King may choose his Queen among his subjects.
He has done so, and anima credentis,
Is now created, sponsa redimentis:
Rejoice in thy estate, for thou art rich,
Thou has no equal, there is no other such,
Although the Queens and Concubines be many,
And daughters numberless; yet there is not any,
Can boast to be Iehouahs only love,
But only thou, his undefiled dove.
David did think it was a matchless thing,
To be a son in law t'an earthly King,
Being by birth so mean, by office poor;
Have thou forgotten thy estate before,
I made a room for thee in my affection,
My pity mixed with love made an election,
Of thee amongst many millions: I Will tell thee,
Thou may not boast thee of thy pedigree,
Thy birth was poor, and base, but I Will speak low,
I would not have thy enemies to know:
But thus I found thee truly to recite,
The wretched child of a poor Amorite,
An Hittite to thy mother, and in thy kin,
No spark of innocence, but shame and sin;
Thou lay contemned in the field unknown,
Laughed at by strangers, left of by thy own:
Distilling tears on desolations lap,
No nurse but sorrow from whose cold dry pappe,
Nothing but misery issued, thou was found
Lapt in the rags of woe, and well-nie drowned,
In thy polluted, finfull, filthy blood:
Thy friends were fled, and all that stayed but stood,
To witness thy disgrace, and view thy shame;
When I saw this I meant to come, and came,
And found thee striving in a fearful trance,
Sick to the death of finne and ignorance,
And when, I saw thee thou begun to tell,
I change thy name from Jacob to Israel,
And promised thee preferment, it is most true,
And though thou ever left undone thy due,
My promises shall stand, in my compassion,
A pardon's out to free thee from transgression;
I washed thee white, and with the oil of grace,
I filled thy heart, and beautified thy face,
Thy ears with jewels rich, I did adorn,
A chain of gold about thy neck was worn:
Thy breast with pearls was decked, thy back with silk,
Thy soul with oil was cooled, thy mouth with milk,
With finest flower, thou wast most prince-like fed,
With purest gold thy head was honored:
Thy fame (throughout the spacious world was blown,
Who sought thy ouer-throw was ouer-throwne.
And so it shall be still, since I did choose thee,
I will not suffer any to abuse thee;
For thy advancement I have done great things,
I Have Sceptered Shepherds and uncrowned Kings:
My love have caused all lands t'ring thy renown,
I Have set up Lazars, and thrown Caesar's down,
To make the heathen know, I did elect,
Her that from all their rage I could protect;
And can, thou art my choice, and as it is mere,
I Will force thy foes to worship at thy feet.
The scarlet Ocean shall it self divide,
And thou shall go, where Pharoh cannot ride,
That king shall know he has a King, that shall
Command him, and his Egypt, and his all.
I said thou should come home, I meant no less,
In spite of waters, and of wilderness,
Thou came, and thereupon a public voice,
Filled every ear, and said thou was my choice;
Report said true, for by my free election,
There Is noe room, but for thee in my affection.
So graciously I Will use thee, thou shall say,
"Both Heaven and earth smiled on our wedding day,
Angels shall joy to think on it, Saints shall sing,
Such songs as best may please thee and thy King:
Consider well how dearly I thee won,
Remember all my love and service done,
That thou in holiness might kiss my lips,
I served (like Jacob) several prentiships,
I got my Rachel, Laban took his lea
And tota pulchraes amica mea:
To make thee such consider what it cost,
My time and toil, I know shall not be lost,
For thou art wise, the heathen and the rude,
Shall bear the burden of ingratitude.
I told thee what I Have done, not to vpbraid thee
With any benifits, but to persuade thee:
I think all well bestowed that I have given,
And in my storehouse, (by my throne) in Heaven
I have such store, I Will send thee to the earth,
To serve thee to thy burial, from thy birth;
And after both (believe my sacred story)
I Will Queen thee with a Crown of life, and glory.
FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, upon her Vocation. A Holy legacy,
bequeathed to the Right Honorable, the Countess of Mountgomery.

Written, By Augustine Tailor Preacher at Hawarden.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

TO THE MOST NOBLE LADY, A BRANCH OF the ancient and illustrious house of
Oxford) the Right Honorable, SVSAN, Countess of Mountgomery, Grace, and Glory.
Thrice Honorable Lady,
VEre ever loved veritas so well,
And to all virtues gave such countenance,
That sacred truth for ever vows to dwell,
In your Breast to be safe from ignorance,
Envy, and error; and has warned me,
That where I find vere, challenge there to be
A lodging due to her, (I'dmir'd) and then
She said to me (as Christ did to the men
He sent to fetch the ass) if they refuse,
The favors I entreat, make thou but use,
Of my name unto them with mild regard,
And thou shall find my lodging straight prepared.
Great Lady with great reverence I present,
To your Religious view, and gracious eyes
A legacy, a Heavenly or nament,
With the Messiah pleased to sacrifice,
And send unto his spouse, to move her, come
To warn her, call her, and command her home,
Unto his Heaven; I wish you would accept
My love and service, and this offering take,
As Princes do Imbassadours respect,
Not for their own, but for their masters sake
I am ordained Gods messenger, t'intreat,
His chosen number to his Heavenly feast.
And you both being truly good and great,
Has a fair seat prepared among the blessed,
Your pious bounties, princely beauties, and
Religious wisdom, (which is honors nurse.)
Are guides to lead you unto Gods right hand;
And likewise motives caused me disburse,
My love and service in this measure: take it,
My worke's Diume, and my free will does make it
A perfect offering, t'helpe gamst death and doombe,
Regard this frame, for it will out-last your toombe.
Willing and ready to do your Honor the best service, that is in the power of
Augustine Tailor.

THE ARGUMENT.
The Bride is called from all the Isles,
To come and escape her woe;
And hears the curses and the smiles,
Belongs to come, and go.
IF my affection would thereto consent,
I would be silent, thou art so lewdly bent,
And shows so little reverence to my word:
That justice tells me silence will afford
Me more content; and her it will appear,
That I still speak to her, that scorns to hear.
But yet be not too deaffe, least vengeance cloud
Descend upon thee, and then speak so loud:
It change thy deafness into death, then hear,
And if thou can not love it is good to fear.
Now thy creation and election done,
My only care is to procure thee come:
Even as a wiseman does, (that wants a wife)
Seek up and down where beauties are most rife,
And after seeking, finds, and finding loves,
And loving, bids her home, and daily moves,
Till she be moved to come, then suite does cease,
And they together live in love and peace:
So I did seek thee first, and found thee then,
And liked and loved thee woundrous well, and when
All this was done I did entreat thee home,
And used the meekest means to cause thee come;
Solemnly I have bidden thee, do not stay,
Arise, my love, my fair one, come thy way:
Remember who inuites thee, he that brings
Honor to beggars, and contempt to Kings.
Unto thine enemies, and the heathen foe,
A woeful portion falls, a cursed go:
In mercy and love I come and send to thee,
With mildness, meekness, and much clemency;
I call thee friendly in these days of peace,
I prithee arm thy self, these calmes will cease,
And storms will follow: thou should understand,
Pleasure and sorrow still goes hand in hand.
The Sun will leave thee, and run out of sight,
War chaseth peace, as darkness chaseth light:
The time shall come that man and beast shall mourn,
Mountains shall tumble, and the seas shall burn,
The morning shall look red, as if it wooed
Tell us the evening should be dyed in blood:
The moon shall view thee with a searlet face,
Dabl'd in clouds, and stumbling in her pace;
The glistering stars shall cease and perish all,
For some shall be put out, and some shall fall:
The Sun in sable shall come sadly forth,
A greater plague them from the bitter north,
God did e're send, shall from each coast appear
Far worse then Egypt when the plagues were there.
These lower-lands shall look, each blast shall bring,
Shot or else powder, toward the ruining
Of new built Babel's, for it must be known,
" Bethel's her owners, Babel's but her own:
She sits above now, (thou knows if thou know her)
But all her pomp shall end, none shall sit lower.
A time shall come, (come love before it come)
Each harp shall silent be, each David dumb;
Both Heaven and earth together shall conspire,
To send out vengeance lapt in balls of fire,
And they shall bust, and utter from within,
Death and destruction, due rewards for sin.
Millions of days thy God for mercy made,
And in those days my care is to persuade,
And work my loves return, before it be
Too late to save thy self, and honor me.
One day I have appointed for to bring,
All kindreds of the earth t'a reckoning,
The Monarch, and the King, the Prince, and Peer,
The Stats-man and the Trads-man shall be there:
All sorts and sects I Will call, and bring as far,
As shines the arcticke and th'antarcticke star,
Not one shall fail to come at my command,
Whether they died upon the sea, or land:
Yea every one shall that one day appear,
And amongst those all not one shall want one hair;
Then I my self will come, in the eyes of man,
As like a Lion, as I was a Lamb,
With more attendants glorious and bright,
Then Heaven shows stars in a clear freezing night,
Then Michaels trumpet shall command the dead,
To rise and come, and leave their drowsy bed,
T'appeare before a righteous Judge, for then,
Then he shall fit to Judge, that can condemn,
And justify, the outward, and the inward man,
According to deserts, I will, and can:
But these two parts in men do not agree,
Therefore they wrong themselves, and iniure me;
But I will come, and I will have regard,
To all that ever loved me, my reward
I will bring with me, and it is most true,
I will bestow on all estates their due.
Unlike to earthly Princes; void of measure,
They deal their bounties only for their pleasure,
And turns deserts a begging: But look to it,
Peasants now ride, and Princes go on foot,
This order I will alter, and I Will give,
All good things unto all that purely live.
Consider thou must meet a Judge, that brings
Life to wise Beggars, death to foolish Kings:
Come (and thy time to come to please me spend,)
O come before the days of mercy end:
For in the days of war, there is peace for them,
That loves my Syon, my Jerusalem;
Provide thy lamp and oil, for it may be,
I Will come at midnight for to call on thee,
It may be at the first, or second cock,
Or in the morning, or at noone, or not
Until the evening, when I will not tell,
It Is not for want of love, I love thee well;
And I conceal this from thee in regard,
Thou may expect me still, and be prepared:
For come I will, and when I will, and how,
And sudainely, and gloriously, look thou
To Attend my coming in thy beauty stand,
And I will lead thee home with my right hand,
And bring thee in, but shut without the gate,
All those that lamplesse come, and come too late.
I have collected thee from many parts,
From Europe, Asia, and the wild Desarrs,
Of Sunburned Affricke, from the plains and woods,
From fields, and valleys, from the seas, as floods,
From north, and eastern coasts, from east, and west,
From th'hauen of troubles, to the haven of rest:
I have called long, for my love thou art in debt,
Come for it is late, O come! and welcome yet:
For fear thou be benighted have and run,
I do beseech thee, I command thee come:
Either for fear or love I hope to see,
Thee seek in season for my company;
Regard who calls, thy Lord, then do not stay,
"A faithful lover does dislike delay.
FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, upon her Preservation. A Divine legacy,
belonging to the Honorable, Sr. Henry Salusbury, and his Noble Lady.

Written, By Augustine Tailor Preacher at Hawarden.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

TO THE HONORABLE Sr. HENRY SALVSBVRY, Knight, and Barronet, etc. And his Noble
Lady ELIZABETH, Sister to the Right Honorable, the Lord Vaughan, etc.
Truly Honorable,
IF your great bounties toward (...) may be quit,
With love, and service, I have some such coin,
Impresse thus with you names; make use of it,
It does the souls of Saints together join;
And Syons preservation does express,
And treats of naught but bliss and happiness.
Profane adulterous plots I do detest,
I aim to please the soul and not the soil,
To call and summon every Holy ghest,
To the Lambs nuptials, is my pleasant toil.
My Patrons glory my pen only seeks,
And moves no blushes in most modest cheeks.
Right noble Henry, I do know your breast
Contains a spirit, that is not cantain'd
In ordinary limits; Honor's best,
Approved and honored, and her worth explained,
Being clothed with robes of purity most fit,
Lined with mercy, valor, grace, and wit:
You Are Lord of these, I flatter not I know you,
And your good parts, I honor and admire,
For all your love and favors more I owe you;
And what I do not do, I do desire,
I could do for your good: But I note still,
Imperfect acts may rise, from perfect will.
And (best deserving) Lady you have been,
The Patroness of my (yet infant) pen,
If these more mature works you do esteem,
And countenance: I Will urge both times and men,
To keep your name alive, free from the dead,
So long as English shall be spoke or read:
My pen, my sacred muse, and sweetest breath.
Shall honor Henry, and Elizabeth.
God guide, protect, direct, and love you still,
And send you good, until I wish you ill.
Your Honors, in all holy duty, and Human love, Augustine Tailor.

THE ARGUMENT.
Thelpe Isr'els faults, some good men strives
But cannot make amends:
Justice and truth her fall contriues,
Then mercy makes them friends.
Hear more my choice, and thou shall more conceive,
Go not, for her I love I would not leave,
Why should we part? no, no, it must not be,
And if we ever do it is long of thee,
No fault of mine: thou ought to understand,
I mildly do entreat that may command;
But rigor fits not Princes, (hateful thing,)
"Base cruelty did never become a King,
Mild patience, potency has ever loved,
The Monarch would not, Momus will be moved,
Meek clemency with Princes ever rides,
Dauid's at Music, devilish Doeg chides:
So some may do, and may undo and does,
"Some things at once are done and undone both:
Compassion should in greatness bear great sway,
"Mercy in Kings shines like the Sun in day,
My mercy thou have found, It has found thee,
And brought more blessings then dim eyes can see,
Or hearts of men conceive, not thy creation,
Choosing collection, troublesome vocation,
Was all the charges I for thee disburst;
Thy limbs were soundest, but thou trauel'd worst;
And left my ways to wander in thy own,
Thy heathen neighbors that have scarcely known,
Thy beauties by report, much wonder still,
To see so fair a creature do so ill:
When I saw thus thou had thy self forgot,
And other nations that I loved not,
Rejoice in th'disgrace, I knew some pain
Must be performed, to wash thee white again,
So foul was thy complexion, some did see,
That the whole piece of black impurity,
Was all Employed to make thy coast; sad Job
Desires to wash thy spotted sinful rob
In his snow-water, and he brings it in,
But 't was not that could send away thy sin:
So Job mistaken his endeavors rest,
He Is worthy thanks (good man) he did his best,
But could not make thee better, Aaron then,
The first and chief of (earthly) holy men,
Puts on his rich attire, and means to bring,
A sacrifice unto his Lord and King:
Prouides his alter, and with reverent fear,
Calves, goats, and pigeons, he does offer there;
And to make an atonement for thy good,
My priest, and alter, were both di'd in blood,
Actions that in some measure did persuade,
But there was other offerings to be made,
Of better value and of greater price:
Good David friendly brought his sacrifice,
And that was Isop water, and with that,
His meaning was to wash away thy spot;
He did his best, but's best did not remove
Yuy sin, but only manifest his love,
Aaron, and Job, and David, loved thee well,
Yet notwithstanding they did (partly) dwell
At the vaine-labour, their works went to wrack,
"They washed the Moore, and he was still more black.
Angels descend and moves Bethesdas lake,
And yet the long-sicke man no shift could make,
To make his sorrows cease: these are but toys,
Or rather types of price, of better joys:
A fair oblation must amend these foul,
"A spotless blood, must make a spotless soul.
No other offering can disolue offense,
But luke warme-blood of harmeles Innocence;
When man had sinned, and sin had wrought the fall
Of Adam, Heuah, and their seed, and all
Borne between the worlds birth and funeral,
God granted a Commission to these two,
Justice and Truth, and these should say and do:
And in the high Court, on this high Commission,
These two were set, and making inquisition,
How man that was so good became so ill,
And finding that he fell by his own will,
Affirmed no punishment could be too much
For's voluntary trespass, and begins,
"To whip man willingly for willing sins;
And by decree in that high Court consents,
That wilful faults, with woeful punishments
Shall be rewarded. Is the law so sore,
For tasting but one apple among such store?
"The smallest faults done willingly are great,
"Sins done at unawares shall pardon get.
Sins worthy pardon mournes, and knows no mirth,
And but begins conception after birth.
Sins worthy death are those that mourning scorn,
Those that are first conceived, and after borne,
When Truth and Justice doomed thy death for sin,
Mercy came sorrowful and sadly in;
Her body trembled, and her head hung down,
Upon her back she wore a long white gown,
Her hands were lifted up, her eyes were weeping,
Her woes were waking, and her joys were sleeping,
Her knees were bended begging thy offense,
They would judge hers and with such reverence,
She spoke in thy behalf (with such respect)
That (as I live) a Tyrant would have wept:
She had a palm, but bore it very low,
And carelessly, because she did not know
How she should speed, and humbly thus preferres,
Her plaint before the high Commissioners.
The just Commissioners something moved to see,
So fair a Princess beg so earnestly,
Another pardon: sadly answered thus,
That one must die, it is decreed by us:
If thou can make amends for Adams fall,
His faults we'll bury at thy funeral:
And yet we cannot thus the man forgive,
For if thou should die he cannot live;
But this we'll tolerate if thou can get,
A Prince to loose his life for subjects det.
Our God is pleased to Eden he shall come,
And thus the lost son may be welcome home.
Think with thy self, speak with thy Prince and try,
Thy Prince must fall, or man and men must dye.
Mercy being answered, sat her down and wept,
And being full of sorrow would have kept
Her self unseen, I see her stepped in,
And for her comfort I did thus begin:
Sweet Lady be not sorrowful, I am he,
Will pay the debt and end all misery,
Be not amazed the great Kings son am I,
A Prince that will not let his mercy die:
I Will dye to give thee life, and thou shall rest,
Henceforth for ever, in a Princes breast;
And this I Will do to make an end of strife,
With my own death I Will purchase thee a life.
FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, upon her Redemption. A Spiritual
legacy, for the Benifite of the Honorable Lady, the Lady Gerreard.

Written, By Augustine Tailor Preacher at Hawarden.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

TO THE NOBLE Lady Ellenor, Lady Gerrard, wife to the late Honorable, Gilbert,
Lord Gerrard, etc.
Honorable Lady,
When sorrows nights are ouer-past,
There follows joyful day,
Hapless extremes can never last,
But styes and posts away,
To bring glad tidings in sad times,
I hold it wondrous fit;
And so does all our best divines,
"And you may think of it.
I do present you with a gift,
Fit for a Princes hand:
Pray take it, it is the means to lift,
Souls to the holy land;
The full redemption of mankind,
I offer to your view,
A subject to translate the mind,
From the old man to the new.
I know you seek Gods holy place,
And clothes you for his feast,
With pious love, pureness, and grace,
True zeal, and all the rest,
Of those rich garments fair and meet
For such a Princes Court;
And doubtless you shall one day see it,
Though now my by report,
Imperfectly you are but told,
Yet quickly you shall see,
In Syons City, (walled with gold,)
The Lamb in's Majesty:
Advance your thoughts to heavenly things,
And you in the end shall soar
Unto that Court, where is none but Kings,
Rejoicing euer-more.
Your Honors devoted, in any Christian office, Augustine Tailor.

THE ARGUMENT.
The promised Messiah birth,
Conquers hell, death, and sin;
And to Eden back with mickle mirth,
Brings Adam and his kin.
Immortal soul, and my elected Queen,
Though hitherto thou have most careless been
T'obserue my will; yet now incline thy neart,
Or thou and I for evermore shall part:
See this epistle truly understood,
Read it with tears for it is writ with blood:
A precious price is found to pay thy det,
A sacrifice not ordinary to get,
For thou had but one God, God but one son,
That son one life, that life to death was done,
To bring old Adam back to Edens blis,
And now learn what it cost to finish this.
I (being promised) came, man did disdame me,
The world was proud and loft to entertain me:
My earthly mother had so poor a kin,
She was denied a lodging in the Inn,
When night, and pain, and tears, and travel tooke-her,
poor Mary was alone, and all forsooke-her.
Sighing and seeking, to find place for rest,
And at the last a stable was the best,
That could be spared, this I had power to mend,
But I came rather like a lowly friend,
Then like a master, and so caused it tried,
"I came to show my love, and not my pride:
My paths were plain, my cradle was a cratch,
I had no friends, none showed such love to watch
For my arrival, the worlds love was small,
Mary was mother, midwife, nurse, and all:
No costly robes, nor silks, nor cloth of gold,
Provided was to keep me from the cold,
Nothing but poor attire, and homely things,
Thus Princeps Regum terrae (King of Kings)
Begun his Lambe-like reign: yea my pretense,
Was only peace, my armor innocence:
I did not many nights in safety nappe,
Upon my loving mothers lowly lap,
But warning came, I must to Egypt flee,
Herod was moved, and making search for me,
And I must run or die, for his intent's
To wash his hands in blood of innocence,
The time wherein he did the infants slay,
Shall still be noted for a dismal day,
He aimed at my fall, but he fell (we see)
And murdered many to have metwith me,
But he mistook himself, and missed his aim,
And I to Bothlem safe returned again;
In spite of Herod, prophecies did ring,
That David's son was borne to be a King:
I did sustain temptation for thy sake,
Much toil and travail I did undertake,
To make thy burden light, I dare presume
To swear, between my cradle, and my tomb,
I knew no perfect rest, I had no bed,
Foxes had holes, and birds were furnished
With nests and lodgings, but my head had none,
Mine was like Jacobs state when he left home,
And his old parents, to procure his rest,
From angry Esau with his kin in the east,
He was benighted in a strange land, where
He neither found friends nor companions, there
His pillow was a stone, his bed was earth,
A natural musician made him mirth,
(Surmis'd the Nightingall) he could not get,
Wherein to wrape himself from nights could sweat:
His uncouth room was all with green be spread,
And rouing clouds were curtains to his bed;
His canopy was heaven, where he might view,
Millions of Stars fixed in the blackest blew.
He went to bed as mildly as a lamb,
And slept as moderatly as a man,
And rose as early as a Lark, and fed
With more content then e're he went to bed:
Then toward his uncles, he does post amain,
To prove if Rachels love he may obtain,
And at the last his prentiships and pain,
Winnes his fair bride, and he comes home again,
With His Lady in his hand, his slockes before,
His seed about him, and his Princely store,
Comes after with his servants, and thus he
With beauty, riches, health, and dignity,
Comes home attended. I with Jacob may
Compare my travails, so that by the way,
I make some difference, by the difference gather,
I left a fayrer home, a better father;
To tread strange paths where I was never known,
I sought for strangers love, and left my own:
Jacob was never in such miscrie,
I was both worser clothed, and lodged then he,
I went to fetch my bride, from amongst those,
That dwelt far further off, and were my foes.
He paid but love and service for his bride,
I paid my service, love, and life beside,
He brought his home with riches and renown,
With joy and gladness unto Sichem town;
And for her moving tents, he has her given,
Fair fixed temples, stately types of Heaven:
His bed was on the earth, mine was within,
He slept for sorrow, but I slept for sin,
I rose more early to prepare thy way,
For I saw sunrise, before he saw day:
I Will bring thee home, adorned with better things,
The power and honor of all earthly kings;
(And let their powers together lincked be,
All cannot make one worthy t'waite on thee:
I spent my days in sorrow for thy good,
I sailed to th'Cradle in tears, to th'graue in blood;
And more then this I was content to do,
My middle time had mickle sorrows too.
I lived releeuing poor, healing, and feeding,
I wipt those eyes that wept, wounds that were bleeding
I cured, and cared for all that were in woe,
None can complain that they away did go
Without a pardon for the great'st transgression,
All those that brought repentance found compassion.
I have been thine, thine both in word and deed,
My tongue did preach, and pray, my flesh did bleed,
From my fresh wounds the smallest drop that fell,
Is price sufficient to save Israel:
I promise thee (believe my promise then)
One drop may save more worlds then this has men,
It is sufficient: Know I did not come,
To plead defficience, and pay half the sum;
Let him that is poor, and needy, and that must
Confess his poverty, and take on trust,
I have no such occasion, let him score,
That Is grown disable, beggarly, and poor.
Thy ransom all is paid, and thou art rich,
And still within my storehouse there is so much,
It never can be empti'd, do not want,
My bounty cannot make my blessings scant:
Desire and I will give thee more, (and more)
"Thou can not make the stock of mercy poor,
Presume not neither, for I will express,
My Justice on presumptuous sauciness;
The meek and lowly I delight to guide,
"I owe the greatest punishments to pride,
My Israel, my death has bought thy life,
Forget not then the duties of a wife:
The office of a husband I have shown,
In greater measure, then the world has known,
The grave is conquered, death has now no sting,
All foes are vanquished by thy Lord and King;
And now thy Christ as chief aloft does reign,
And Edens gates are now vnbarr'd again;
The Lamb being slain, the fity sword, by him
Is taken from the angry Cherubin,
And my fair bride may come (and welcome) in.
FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, upon her Sanctification. A Heavenly
legacy, properly for the use of the Honorable, Sr. Richard Mullineux, etc.

Written, By Augustine Tailor Preacher at Hawarden.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

TO THE HONORABLE Sr. RICHARD MVLLINEVX, Knight, and Barronet, etc.
Worthily Honored:
THere is a sumptuous feast prepared,
Upon Gods holy hill:
Of dainties, and of plenties, shared
Amongst all those that will,
With reverence, and loving fear,
Attend to be the ghests:
At the Lambs nuptials, to be there
The Lord (by me) requests,
Your worthy self, therefore provide,
Your wedding garments fit;
And you by Gods-sonnes-sacred side,
In glories seat shall fit:
Peruse these lines, and though they be,
No measures that excel,
Yet they are divine, and comes from me,
That knows and loves you well:
Yet for my knowledge and my love,
Accept it not, but for
His glorious name that fits above,
And is the all governor.
I know you will give this meet respect,
And for your Noble name,
Time shall preserve, and still protect,
With the sweet lips of fame:
To all posterities to come,
When this short life is past,
These lines shall live, and when your tomb
Shall perish, these shall last.
Your Honors, in the sernice of the Lamb, Augustine Tailor.

THE ARGUMENT.
Least nation (rude) should spy some spot.
In the Messiah Bride,
By's spirit and (...) begot
A new, and Iustifi'd.
BEcause I Am earnest, and an urgent mouer,
Do not thou take me for a doting lover;
Why I Am so loath to leave thee, thou may know,
"From her I love, I do not love to go?
Somethings are wanting yet, the prophet sings
That holy men are served with holy things;
And know I will be sanctified in all,
That shall come near me every one that shall,
Into my Temple come by my command,
Shall put their shoes off, for it is holy land:
I love this holiness, it is a kind of beauty,
And to express thy love and show thy duty,
Thou may do well to learn it, and thou so
May be Queene-like in substance and in show,
Beauty, or majesty looks well alone,
But ten times better if these two be one:
One beauty's honored, served, and praised too,
And then for many what would many do?
They could not do so much, and so I thought,
When with so great a ransom I thee bought,
Thy spots and freckles all I washed away,
And made thee such that there is not one may,
Compare to be thy equal, thou art that one,
Whom all does like, but can be-alike none:
Each tongue tells forth thy praise, each pen thy fame,
A peerless Princess, and a matchless Dame,
Chief of thy kind, and fairest of thy sex,
A work that makes admired the Opifex:
Conceive thy own estate, and thou will tell,
God is a loving God to Israel.
I made thee happy, yea and holy too,
For all that earth and earthly kings could do,
Thou has been carried safe on Eagles wings,
To th'prayse of thine, to th'shame of other kings:
With blood and water I have washen thee,
Thy spots of sin, and thy infirmity,
Are changed for honor, strength, and purity;
And thou so fair in holiness art seen,
Thy heathen neighbors wonder, and do seem
To envy thy estate, and marvel so,
They make dispute, if thou be flesh or no:
Thee of more precious mettle they define,
Some small part mortal, but the most divine,
Thy pleasant beauty countenance and grace,
They think composed of no piece so base:
They know thy beauties from the Heavens are,
For the earth cannot afford a frame so fair:
Nature amazed does her self submit,
To her own work, and loves to worship it,
And seeks to find the author of each object,
And finds but one for all, and that one's subject
She willingly becomes, and does record
Her self a servant, and thy love her Lord.
And thus my grace to sanctify my creature,
Path blessed thee with all helps of art and nature:
Hut of thy coat, it is the old man's wear,
Filchy, polluted, noy some, graceless, gear,
Made of a web, in disobedience frame,
Stained with the spots of infamy, and shame,
'Twas cut out by ambition shapen by pride,
And stitcht together by that Homicide,
Impiety, and lined throughout with sin,
Unclean without, but more unclean within,
Butten'd with fear, guarded about with woe,
And spotted with a thousand plagues; and so
By flattery sold, and bought by arrogance,
And daily worn by doting ignorance.
The old man wears it, (such a one I say)
Whose sins are green, and yet his hairs ar gray;
I mean him old in vices, him eschew,
Old things are worn away, all is become new,
And so must thou, the coat that is made for thee,
Is cut out of the web of purity,
Made large and long, the image of excellence,
Of color white betokening innocence,
In-layde with joy, the skirt with safty bound,
And with true honor treble-garded, round:
Clasped with comforts, furnished with content,
Ornated with each seemly ornament,
Framed by desire, perfected with good will,
Seame-sow'd with love and perl'd with holy skill:
Set thick with stars, attended on with day,
Composed with care, and shall look fresh, and gay
For evermore; I have thee so attired,
As thou cannot be equaled, but admired;
And it must needs be so, since thou art wife,
T'a Lord in comprehensible, thy life
Must be incomparable, to express,
Thy love is holy, and in holiness,
The service he admits of, must be done,
Now thou art perfect it were best to come,
And seek a fayrer habitation, for
So fair a Princess me thinks should abhor,
So foul a dwelling: David much laments,
That 'twas his lot to dwell in Kedars tents,
Those moving cabins only but remains,
To Ismaels issue on The Arabian plains,
Goodly great buildings I have made for thee,
Where woods, and meades, and springs, and rivers be,
Now seek thy Lord, thy lodging's furnished,
"A holy Bride, should find a holy bed.
FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, upon her Justification. A Holy legacy,
for the use of the Right Honorable, William Earl of Northampton, etc.

Written, By Augustine Tailor Preacher at Hawarden.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Earl of Northampton, Baron Compton, Lord
President of Wales, etc.
Right Honorable,
NVrst in the limits of your Lordly power,
I line, and therefore boldned to present
Unto your view, this holy news, this hour,
By Heavens King's gracious commandment,
Amarriage feast is gloriously begun,
'Twixt Jacobs Daughter, and Ichouahs Son,
To call to it noble ghests there is many sent,
And I am one, and I am sent to you:
Right worthy Earl put on your ornament,
Such as may give the Nuptial day it due,
Your seate's prepared, decked with victorious bays,
And shall stand more years, then this world has days,
My Lord I Am placed upon the mount of peace,
To profit Syons friends and not to please
The reeling multitude, such as would ken,
The path to paesse to new Jerusalem,
I have Commission to direct theretoo.
With all the remnants, I have naught to do:
Your honor of that body's a chief part,
Of which Christ Jesus is the supreme head;
Unto your hand (therefore) withal my heart,
I offer this, praying your Honor read,
It is the word of truth, and does afford,
The fairest gilding for your Prineely sword.
It is the latest Honor great men wish,
To leave their memories in leaves of brass,
Or let, or marble: this mere weakness is,
Because it shall consume, perish, and pass,
Away with ruining time; Therefore I give
This frame to you, where in your fame shall live,
Till men, and time, and English cease: give me
Your gracious countenance, and I have my fee.
At your Honors service, submissiuely devoted, Augustine Tailor.

THE ARGUMENT.
Pollution, must be laid aside,
For holy garments gay,
The Lamb has shapen for his Bride,
T'adorne the marriage day.
STay! yet more Jewels must adorn my love,
Before she can be fit to fit above,
Upon a Princely throne, none shall deride
At thine estate, thou shall be iustifi'd:
The great Kings daughter must be fair within,
"She Is blessed to whom the Lord imputes no sin,
Then blessed shall thou be, mine shall be the blame,
And I will bear the burden of thy shame;
And I will answer those that railes on thee,
They do mistake themselves, and iniure me:
If thou find enemies that do begin
To blaze thy faults, and publish all thy sin,
Bid them behold themselves, and learn to mend,
Tell them thou have a father sent a friend,
To plead thy cause, and that Prince is content,
To take thy sins, and bear thy punishment;
Bid them remember in the days of old,
My Prophets, and Apostles truly told,
That sinners souls should die, and every one,
Should bear the burden of's own sins alone:
So they must do, be mindful of it will-them,
Say thou that I said so, so thou may still them.
They may object then, thou shall answer thine,
For God loves right, and will to right incline:
He will indeed, for the most precious sum,
Did satisfy for sin, e're pardon come;
That sum I paid, and paid in thy name too,
The debt was thine, but who has ought to do,
Against this satisfaction to exclaim,
For thou art just, if I suppose the same,
To whom the Lord imputes no sin, they are just,
And so art thou, and only by thy trust:
There Is other adherent helps, but faith extends,
As the chief instruments that apprehend,
My satisfaction to be others share,
My merits by thy faith thy merits are,
Even as a woman does that is far in debt,
If she a wealthy husband chance to get
And he discharge it, and then some demands,
If the bond woman forfeited her bands,
Or satisfied them? Creditors ensue,
And iustiffies, she paid them all their due.
The feast was hers, the charge her husbands lot,
"And thus she paid it, though she paid it not,
So thou art iustifi'd, justice of mine,
That Is uncreated has created thine:
Thou was the woman, husbandlesse and poor,
Millions in debt, and at the prison door,
To be deliner'd to the Iaylors hands,
And with thy death thou should discharge thy bands^
I was the man that spent none of the sum,
Yet in my love thy husband I Would become,
Examining my estate, I treasure found,
To pay for every penny debt, a pound:
Then I did undertake to set thee free,
And what I did, I counted done by thee;
Such was my love, thou do thy all inherit
From me, and by my mercy not thy merit.
If any ask what moved me to fill
Thy lap with blessings, say it was my will:
I can do what I will, so can no other,
Iacocb I Will justify, but for his brother
Esan, I cannot love, for it was he,
That first used weapon to contend with thee,
And fares the worse for that. Know I have given,
All things a being, between earth and Heaven:
And unto some a perfect being well,
The bad I caused not to fall, they fell
By their own will, I left them, being not tide,
To take directions where to choose my bride,
The understanding may the rest persuade
The maker, is not subject to the made:
Even as the Potter may dispose of's clay,
So the chief Lord of all his Creatures may.
Thou art my choice, thou art my (sole) elect,
To honor thee I did all else reject;
And in contempt of all thine enemies pride,
I Will plead thee just, thou shall be iustifide.
And now if Satan (thy grand-enemy) come,
And to affright thee gather all the sum
Of thy black sins together, still affirming
Thy sins are such he comes to give thee warning,
Thy soul is sick, and thou art doomed to die,
And that for mercy 't is too late to cry,
Judgment has past: Believe him not, say thus,
Thy Lord's a live, and good, and gracious;
And did not the Cross so freshly bleed,
To leave thee drowned in misery and need:
Tell him thou washed (when I was nayl'd on wood,)
My feet in tears, and I thy soul in blood,
And say I never will forgetful be,
Of two such tokens between thee and me:
Yet tell him more, that thou art bound to be
At new Jerusalem to suppe with me,
Upon a sudden warning, then away,
And if he move, or would procure thy stay,
Say thou art warned on my pleasure to attend,
So loose thine enemy, and come love thy friend,
Yet stay to tell him thou art betrothed to me,
And being so debts that are due by thee
To any whosoever, I must pay,
For so I promised at thy wedding day:
If he make any claim to thee or thine,
Plead ignorance, and say the matter's mine;
And he must take my answer, he will deny,
To deal with me because he seeks to try
His strength with weakness, which shows cowardice still,
"He makes no combat, but he means to kill;
And if this serve not to send him away,
Tell him thou sever all times has heard me say,
No suite in law is good against the wife,
Whilst it is known the husband has his life,
And thine is living: testimonies store,
Says Syons God, indures for evermore:
Then part for ever, since thou art iustifi'de,
Travail to me-wards, and I Will be thy guide:
Thy feet in order in my way I Will set,
And I will lead thee safely step by step.
From strength to strength forward, from grace to grace,
To see thy God in glory face to face.
FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE LORD TO his Bride, upon her Glorification. A Spiritual
legacy, for the benefits of the Honorable, Sr. James Whitlocke, Knight, Lord
Chief Justice of Chester, and of His Majesty's Council, established in the
Principallity of Wales, etc. And Sr. Marmaduke Lloyd, Knight, His Associate,
etc.

Written, By Augustine Tailor Preacher at Hawarden.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

TO THE HONORABLE Sr. JAMES WHITLOCKE Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the County
Palatine of Chester, and of his Majesty's Council, established in the
Principallity of Wales, etc. And to the Right Worshipful, Sr. Marmaduke Lloyd
Knight, etc. His Associate. *
Most Worthy:
YOu that sometimes pleased graciously t'accept,
Th'imperfect offers of my tongue, I pray
This service of my pen you would protect,
I wish no more then you with honor may
Confirm and grant, therefore I hope to speed,
My desire is divine, and so's my deed.
The Law without the Gospell's too severe,
Without the Law the Gospel is too mild:
Therefore I'ntreate you with a reverent fear,
To be the gossips to this divine child,
And in the forehead of it men shall read,
Your names and worth when you are lapt in lead.
You that so well affect the life of grace,
Are here invited to the life of glory,
The Lamb ands Bride in holy love embrace,
And of allioyes named in the sacred story,
Possess the fullness, thither you are bidden,
To share those beauties that from earth are hidden.
I Am confident, these poems will come fit
For your survey, at your most proper leisure,
I know you dearly love, both art and wit,
And by a heavenly muse, receives both pleasure,
And holy profit. Thus my love commands
My book with reverence t'kisse, your noble hands.
At your Honorable, and worthy dispose, in God service, Augustine Tailor.

THE ARGUMENT.
The world's proved worthless, and the Bride,
The Prince intreates to come,
Tells her she shall be glorifi'de
And bids her have her home.
MY Royal love, since I have showed to thee,
The paths of pleasure and of piety,
Prepare to travail, and to walk in them,
They lead to Syon, to Jerusalem,
My chosen dwelling, where in love and fear,
Both Saints, and Angels sing, and worship, there
A place to be thy rest, I have assigned,
And if thou will come, thou shall welcome find:
Remember life, or death, thou art free to choose,
The good I wish thee take, the bad refuse?
As David sung thou have just cause to sing,
Thou Art but a stranger under a strange king,
Far from thy father house, far from thy friends,
Far from all true delights, with joys that ends,
In t'houre they are begun, thou art poorly fed,
Sorrows are boundless joys are limited,
Comes but to go again, who ever could,
Protest he knew one, pleasure, one day old,
And did not disconitnue? none can say,
Amongst his millions h'ad one perfect day,
Wherein he will swear a minute was not spent,
Either in cares, or griefs, or discontent.
No joys and woes are mixed, and thou have tried,
Like to the swelling waves in a rough tide,
They chase each other, to be plain and short,
The worser things are still the greater sort,
The earths condition (by man's lewd dispose)
"Produces twenty hemlockes for on rose:
View earth at fairest in her springing mornes,
"And for ten Lillies, there is ten thousand thorns;
Joys comes but seldom, and comes slowly too,
And winter undoes all the spring can do.
Contents depart from man and leaves him weeping,
Then fearful death disolues him, leaves him sleeping,
And brings him thither whence there is no returnings,
Yet joyful euenings follow careful mornings;
I have decreed it so, because that I
Will suster thee to faint but not to dye,
Yet death has made thy bed, and filled thy cup,
And drink thou must, and down thou must, but up
In tune, and time, I Will call thee, thou shall try,
Thou shall but sleep, thy enemies shall die:
Thou art on sorrows seas where dangers frown.
But fear not though thou swim, thou shall not drown,
Thou shall sing in a happy heavenly strain,
"Day went, night came, day comes, night goes again,
Remove thy thoughts, place them on things above;
Soar to my Syon with the wings of love,
The gates are open, and the guests are coming.
Fair trees are springing, and sweet rivers running,
My fruits are gathered, and my wine's abroach,
My table's covered, and I wait the approach
Of my beloved, for whom I paid so dear,
All things are ready, and all Princely cheer
Is there prepared, and on thee I Will bestow,
A cup that evermore, shall ouer-flowe:
The lamps do burn so bright, blackness is banished,
The music sounds so loud, that mourning's vanishe:
Thy good old father's anger's past, and gone,
And the lost child may come and welcome home,
My father sent for's robe, and thou must wear it,
He called for a crown, thy head must bear it,
There is shoes for thy feet, rings for thy singers,
To please thine ears, there is a quire of singers,
And Dauid's master of them; for thy food,
Thy father's calfe, that was both fat and good,
Has suffered slaughter: Come, the feast never ends,
The brother's pacified, and all are friends;
Thy adversaries having plainly seen,
In spite of Ismaell, Israel must be Queen:
Cease contradiction, and to strive giueso're,
Have sheathed their swords, and sworn to fight no more
These nations that, but wished to see thy fall,
I either turned, or ouer-turn'd them all,
I Have made thee Conqueror, and in good time,
The combat's ended, and the day is thine;
And it is a day that is not pursued with night,
My rooms are furnished with a lasting light,
That never shall be extinguished, and for thee,
There Is seamelesse suites of endless purity:
Thy heavenly state from earthly differs thus,
Thou Have found my best, and lost thy pessimus,
Thy seat's ordained and fixed firm and sure,
And shall in blis, and endless time endure;
And empty stays thy leisure, come in time,
These lights below will quickly cease to shine,
Seek those above and seeking thou shall find,
The joys and glory that is for thee assigned:
Until thou come (to show thou means to come)
Apply thy hand and tongue and be not dumb,
Send daily sacrifice, thou ought to learn,
"Earth should send thanks to heaven for each good turn,
It Is all I look for, therefore let me see,
Some signs of love, ascend from thee to me,
And I Will expect thy coming, make it known,
Thou Art wholly now thy owners, not thy own.
Let thy succeeding carriage be so good,
That by thy acts it may be understood,
Who is thy Lord; and let there be expressed,
In thee those things that fits a Princess best,
From th'hauen of sorrows, to the heaven of bliss,
Unto my holy hill, from thine abisse,
Mount with the wings of love, and thou shall be,
Partaker of my throne, and royalue,
Let all the gracelesle nations grudge and tell,
To their great grief, the daughter of Israel
Has married a Prince, that euer-more shall reign,
Her health, and life, and honor to maintain:
Be not in love with earth, nor earthly things,
Though for a time thou art troubled with the stings
Of death, and sin, and hell, for thy offenses,
Yet there is a camp wherein is none but Princes,
And joy, and blis, and peace, and to that place,
I will translate thee from thy life of grace,
Unto my life of glory: thy protecter,
Will give thy head a crown, thy hand a scepter,
Thy mouth a song to sing, truths excellence,
Thy back a robe as white as innocence;
Thy soul both life, and comfort, thou shall see,
More perfect absolute felicity,
In one days length, in heaven, then if thou were,
To live on earth a king, ten thousand year,
Thou could obtain, and therefore in a word,
To manifest how Paradise is stored:
As things beyond thy knowledge, I will leave,
I must conceal, since thou cannot conceive,
That thou may fully know them; have and come,
"Millions of blessings waits thy welcome home.
FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE BRIDE TO her Lord, expressing her Gratitude. A Spiritual
legacy, bequeathed to the protection of the Right Honorable, the Earl of
Cumberland, etc.

By, Augustine Tailor, Preacher, and Minister, in the Church of God.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE FRANCIS CLIFFORD, Ealre of Cumberland, Lord CLIFFORD
Westmerland, and Vescy, etc.
Most Noble:
REligion joined with valor, looks as well,
As a fair Diamond, set in purest gold,
These man-like, God-like parts in you excel,
And shall to after ages be inrold,
In leaves more lasting then the sheets of brass,
And in the forehead of my divine verse,
Your name with fame and honor forth shall pass,
Into all coasts of this fair universe:
I do present to your inditious view,
The pistles 'twixt the Lamb and's holy Bride,
A very proper present it is for you,
That wears a sword to cause, her deside,
Strike still in truths defense, and you shall see,
Your evening crowned with glorious victory:
Great Lord, my native place neighbors your north,
Then since my soul inhubits in that soil,
And since my muse bath wing, and will fly forth,
She Will tell you of more joys then life has hours,
And looks for welcome, in your fairest towers,
Your floods and fords are fair, your swans but few,
But if you please with gracious eyes to view,
My divine verse; and therein take content,
I Will build your trophies between tweed and trent.
Your Honors truly obseruant, Augustine Tailor.

THE ARGUMENT.
Glad Isreal's offspring tunes her voice,
Of gratitude to sing;
Accounts her self an unfit choice,
To Queen so great a King.
IF earthly kin may send t'a heavenly King,
Or if thy greatness will hear meandness sing,
Accept the sacrifice I now bestow,
My heart is high, although my voice be low;
And since thou understands my thoughts, before
They be transformed to breath, and pass the door,
Of my unready lips, my confidence
Is that thou will maintain my innocence,
And make my work according to my will:
I know thy mercy and power continue still,
And since I share of both, let it be seen,
Such qualities as does become a Queen
I do not want, and then the world so wide,
Shall bless thee for thy bounties to thy Bride
My gracious Lord I have a great desire,
To sing thy praises in the sacred quire,
And will upon condition I may find,
Thy heavenly graces unto me assign'de,
In so great measure, that I may approve,
My bounty, and thy duty, and my love:
Ten thousand thanks, that it has pleased thee,
With mercies eyes to view my misery,
My griefe's forgotten, and my joy grows full,
My crimson spots are changed to whitest wool,
My soul's content my breast can scarce contain,
My guilty garment, that was died in grain,
Past alteration, is restored by thee,
From sinful red to perfect purity:
Thy day dissolved my night, thy cares, my fears,
Thy drops of blood, has stanch'd my drops of tears.
When I remember my estate at first,
Griefs bitterness threatens my heart shall burst;
Fear keeps possession, and that fears leads pain,
And pain brings death, and thus I Am partly slain,
With thinking on my miseries. After these,
Sad thoughts are past (which I do pay as fees,
For my offenses) joy comes in again,
When I consider my king does remain,
A glorious conqueror of all my soes,
Now that I may my thankfulness disclose,
Assist me Lord, and lend such grace to me,
As may prefer a sacrifice to thee,
Lapt in a sacred song, that I Am indu'd,
With the poores payment, perfect gratitude,
Take this succeeding witness: my good Lord,
For all thy blessings all I can afford
Out of my borrowed store is only praise,
It does become the just, (thy Prophet says?
Daily to render thanks unto thy name,
I being just through thee must do the same,
Or show my self forgetful: I would be,
As far from that as I wish that from me.
For my creation, that it was thy will,
To show thy love, and grace, and power, and skill,
In making nothing something, and in that
Placeing such beauty, as is wondered at,
By heaven and earth, and that of all, this all
Thou have made me thy Princess principal,
And to adorn my state made all thy store,
I give thee thanks, and I can give no more.
For my election I do much rejoice,
Thou would vouchsafe to make so mean a choice,
And was so mighty, but each David sings,
"It fits The Almighty to do mighty things:
When out of Eden I forsaken fell,
(Set in the open fields my shame to tell,)
I grew in nature, and in number great,
The earth was spacious, yet had never a seat,
Wherein the sons of Adam never sat,
Then since it pleased thee t'illuminate
All nations, and the best of all to choose,
To make thy one, let that one never loose
The beauty of thy son, let me boast ever,
Where my Lord, Lord loves once he loses never;
That I am thy elect and that I may,
Unto my enemies, and the heathen say,
(As day does night) my state does theirs excel,
And that my Lord called my name Israel,
Crowned me with Isaacks blessings, did decree
Prophanest Edom servant unto me,
That this is thus. I can but praise and pray,
"My thanks my Punce is all I have to pay,
I do remember when by thy command
I multipll'd, and into every land,
My members were dispersed, yea it was I
The Caldean Priest beheld so strangly lie
Shapelesse, and liuelesse in the valley, sown
As thick as hail, which some great blast has blown,
Into the lower-lands, my bones once lay
Dis-ioynted, broke, and scattered, till the day
It pleased thee (most graciously) to make
A perfect union, for thy chosen sake:
For my vocation, that I was by thee
Reformed, and knit in happy unity;
And called by David's Cimbals, Aarons bells,
Esayes loud trump, th'Euangellists, and cls
What music men and Angels could deliver,
Sounded so loud, my parts joined all together,
Erst being dispersed in t'all parts as far,
As lights the arcticke, or th'antarcticke star,
And now collected only for to be,
A marriage for the Trine-vne-maiestie:
By these Caelestiall motions that I am
Called out of Egypt into Canaan,
I give thee thanks and it is all I can:
My Lord I do remember my estate,
When in the open field so desolate,
I lay contemned of all, when passers by
Scorned at my life, and laughed to see me die;
And I do likewise carry in my mind,
The great compassion that I then did find,
Flow from thy breast, when I was fallen so low,
The seas of miseries did ouer-flow,
My aerie substance and my earthly show;
And when with these sad thoughts my heart is full,
Passion comes in and makes each sense as dull
As ignorance: then do I'gin t'admite,
What was the occasion such an ardent fire,
Of holy love was kindled in thy breast,
To me-wards, knowing that in me did rest
No good, I thus my Princes thoughts did measure.
My Lord chose not for merit, but for pleasure;
I had no beauty, my poor soul within,
Was like an Ethiop, wrapped in clouds of sin,
My flesh impressed with ulcers, in worse state
Then Lazarus, dispis'd at Dives gate.
My wised ome was but folly, and my health
Was deadly sickness, all my store and wealth,
Was store of woes and poverty, in me
Was the true image of all misery;
And what was I (most vile, and wretched thing)
That I should be the daughter of a King?
What Is my descent, or what is my fathers house,
That I should we are a crown, and be the spouse
Of Gods eternal son? My Lord, my tongue
Shall still confess thy mercies, even among
The greatest congregations; I Will make known,
Thou Have set a beggar, on a Princes throne,
And altered her condition; and I Will sing
"Th'vnworthi'st bride, has Queen'd the worthi'st King.
FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE BRIDE TO her Lord, containing her Thankfulness. A Legacy,
beneficial for the Right Honorable, HENRY Lord Clifford, etc.

By, Augustine Tailor, Preacher, and Minister, in the Church of God.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY, LORD Clifford, Son and Heir to the Right
Noble, Lord Francis Earl of Cumberland, etc.
Worthy Lord:
I Must entreat you to provide
Your self with proper speed,
To Attend the Nuptials of the Bride,
Our kin, it is a (greede,)
'Twixt Isr'els offspring and Gods soon
A marriage must be made,
And messengers abroad are run,
All good men to persuade,
To come, to see it solemmiz'd,
And I am one of those,
That have some worthy friends advised,
To free them from these woes:
That times and men are subject too,
And it is become my lot,
By Gods Commission t'inuite you,
And I know I shall not
Want audience, nor place, nor time
To tell my Embassy:
Embrace it (Lord) for it is divine,
And the best legacy
I can bestow, I know you are
Religious, learned, and wise,
And noble therefore I shall share,
Your favors, I surmise.
Your Lordships in all humble love, Augustine Tailor.

THE ARGUMENT.
Isr'els infirmitte's confessed,
Her gratitude's proclaimed,
The bounties of her Lord's expressed,
And her best love's explained.
MY Lord I know thou knows before I speak,
What I would utter: since I Am wondrous weak
And of my self deficient teach thou me
To publish pious pleasant harmony,
Such as thou will vouchsafe to hear that, when
My pensive soul with miseries of men
Is guarded round, my voice to thee may come,
And find some grace to help the graceless son,
To help my sinful sorrowful soul, in time
Let the bright sun, of mercy freely shine
Upon my guiltiness, that thy bride may,
Be white as innocence, and as bright as day:
For all thy blessings, though I be but poor,
Yet both of praise and thanks I have such store,
As shall record me debtor unto thee,
In songs and himnes to all posterity:
I must confess, but cannot pay thee due,
For my redemption, that thou pleased to view
My state so poor with mercies eyes so pure,
My soul reioy ceth, and I Am very sure,
The price of my redemption's paid so well,
Sin has no strength, death has no sting, and hell
Has now no victory: I am not so
Blinded with ignorance, but that I know,
My self both as I am and as I was;
As different as the Dyamond from glass,
So is my former, from my latter state,
Thou did repair what I did ruinate,
From gyues and fetters thou have loosed me,
To tread the paths of life, and liberty;
From hellish endless sorrows thou have quit,
My captived soul out of the lowest pit:
Even as a Lilly ouer-growne with thorns,
That is not benific'd by the springing mornes,
Until the careful husband do devise,
To rid the thorns, to help the Lilly t'rise;
So 'twas with me, my soul suppressed with sin,
Knew naught but sorrow, till thou did begin,
To undergo my burden, and since then,
I have found grace with God, and peace with men:
For this great freedom, and for all my blis,
In esse and in posse I Have but this
Toward recompense, my gratitude's my store;
Thanks, it is a proper payment for the poor.
And yet I Am bound for greater favors such,
For which I cannot manifest so much,
Affection as they challenge, therefore still
Lord when my action fails, regard my will.
Since it did please thee to make me thy bride,
It seems thou pleased I should be sanctifide,
For that I Am now reformed like to thee,
In hollinesse and perfect purity,
And that so inwardly and outward fair,
Thou have made me that I Am without compare;
And since my spots and wrinckles are disolu'd,
And that in holy white, I Am now inuolu'd,
It rests that I sacrifice my best,
And what I offer's but the interest
Of what I owe: I Will thank thee whilst I live,
And Lord thou knows I have no more to give;
But I Am for more, far more indebt, yet trust
Since thou will justify me (so unjust)
Thou will regard my nothing, nothing breeds,
"He that possesses all things nothing needs,
That thou accepts my faith for righteonsnesse
I can no more do, and I will no less,
In words and actions then show thankfulness:
Since it has pleased thy greatness to admit,
My poor defective impotence, (unfit)
To be a bride for thee, I Will hence forth strive,
T'extinguish all my illness, and deprive
Those vices of their lodgings that have been,
My welcome guests before I was thy Queen;
What I have been, I Will cease to be, and frame
My self to bear the beauty of thy name:
True modesty, and loyalty shall rest,
To wait upon thy spirit in my breast:
Assist me with thy grace, and thou shall see,
All th'ornaments proper for Majesty,
Prepared for thy service, I confess
Thou might have had thy spouse' among princesses
Of greater honor, and of nobler race
I know poor Ruth (my grandame) had no place
Whereinto rest, but by permission; yet
Because she is fair, and lowly Boaz will let
Her gleane amongst his reapers, and withal
Strictly commands his servants that they shall
Not offer once to blame her, tells her rather
It is his pleasure, that she stay and gather
In his, then go t'an other field, and thus
Changes small favors, into Maximus:
And at the last, this fruit his love does yield,
Takes her and makes her mistress of the field:
Sure she was fair, being honored with such store,
That looked so lovely, when she was so poor,
Even such was I a Ruth, on whom no Ruth,
The word bestowed, until the word of truth
Came to survey his vineyard, and gave me,
Commission to work there, and liberty,
To claim a sacred penny? and in the end
Supposing that the office of a friend,
Was not grace great enough, he chooses rather,
To manifest the affection of a father,
And builds again of a poor wretch (undone)
A blessed bride, for his eternal son:
My Lord I do not utter this to thee,
For thou art sensible, of my misery,
I tell the neighboring nations; least they guess,
I Am prone to ill, but too proud to confess:
I know my faults, and between griefs and fears,
My body's like a bark, that sails in tears,
Made to transport (thy choice) the soul from the earth,
Toward the fair land of euer-lasting mirth;
And on these seas of sorrows Lord vouchsafe,
To be my Pylate, and conduct me safe,
Unto the shoares of peace, and thou shall see,
My love so beautified with constancy,
That thou 'll be pleased to say, I do approve,
The price of life is paid, with coin of love.
Great Prince I Am very poor, infirm and weak,
Disable (without thee) to think or speak,
The smallest good: therefore I Will still entreat,
That as my dignity thou did create,
Thou would maintain it, though the cause be mine,
Thou knows it honors thee to honor thine,
As the Kings honor's made of subjects duties,
So are thy glories made of thy Queens beauties:
I take it, such are thine, no I mistake,
Thine are thy own, since thou did please to make
Me free t'inioy them, when I thee adore,
I but repay what I received before:
Since by thy bounties I in plenties live,
Give thou me more, and more, that I may give
To others, that to all it may be seen,
Of beauty, and bounty, thou have composed thy Queen,
With hands that never erred, blessed with the senses
Of plenty, the meet'st mettle to make Princes:
Lord lend me all thy graces, till I rise
From earrh to glory in thy Paradise;
In the mean time accept my sacrifice,
Which Baptist-like, I send (before) above,
"My soul flies after, with the wings of love.
FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE BRIDE TO her Lord, declaring her Confidence. A Heavenly
legacy, for the use of of the Right Honorable, JOHN Earl of Bridg-water, and
his most Noble Countess, the Lady Francis.

Written, By Augustine Tailor Preacher at Hawarden.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN, EARL OF Bridg-water, etc. And to his most noble
Lady Francis, Countess of Bridgewater: The issue of the Ancient, and
Illustrious House of Derby. *
Right Honorable:
IF you admire wherefore I bring,
This offering to your hands,
My reason's this, I saw day spring,
The first upon those lands,
That was your birth-plot, and for that
My heart and hand this gives,
And know your Honor die shall not,
So long as English lives:
Another reason's, I confess
I live under the wing
Of your good mother, Patroness
Of Syon where I sing,
And Preach, by Gods commission, I
Am sent to call, in ghests
To see the Lamb in's Majesty,
Where peace, and plenty rests.
And dearly, humbly I entreat,
Your Honors to that place,
Where you shall sit in glories seat,
And see God face to face.
Your Noble dispositions be,
So generally approved,
That for your true Nobility,
You Are both, both praised and loved:
And so God grant you may be still,
It Is that I wish to see,
And if you please t'approue my will,
Fear God, and favor me.
Your Honors to be Commanded, Augustine Tailor.

THE ARGUMENT.
The faith of Isr'el's here expressed,
Her disobedience done,
Humility's by her professed,
And all her good begone.
GReat King of Israel may I be so bold,
To speak a few words more? some part's untold,
Of that I meant to utter, vouchsafe t'heare,
My speech preferred, with a reverent fear,
Thy ancient servants, prudently foreseeing
Him, men deny, or doubt to have a being.
They can do no true service, do express,
The first good that man does, is to confess
The being of one God, and Scripture says,
The Honor thou admits, is built on faith:
Lord I believe, and thou may show thy might,
To help my unbelief, that in thy sight
I may be perfect, and I will approve,
My haruest's from the seeding of thy love:
My Lord this is my faith, I sted-fastly
Believe all things delivered of thee,
'Twixt th'Alpha, and th'Omega of thy book,
And I Am persuaded all the pains thou took,
Tends to my rest, thy promises of grace,
Are th'euidence I keep for glory's place.
The poorness of thy coming, birth, and kin,
As I conceive was only for to win
The love not praise of men, thou did agree,
T'ore come temptations, that we might be free:
Thou washed their feet, that did attend on thee,
(I take it) to teach me humillitie,
And as a friend that is to take in hand,
A long and dangerous voyage, does command
His kinted, and acquaintance to be fit,
To share of's friendly farewell, and being met,
They sole mnize it sadly, and then parts,
With discontent and heaviness of hearts;
And this last token ties their loves to attend,
Even so my Lord, my husband, and my friend
Did institute a supper, that I might
Keep him (though absent) evermore in sight,
And then he took his journey with great pain,
But with far greater Honor came again.
My Prince I know thy day disolu'd my night,
Thy heavy burden made my burden light,
Thy purple robe di'd red with my offense,
Bought me a coat as white as innocence,
Thy thorne's my crown, thy reeds my scepter, and
Thy death's my life, (my faith does understand)
Thy blood's the fountain washed my soul from sin,
Thy wounds the gates, to let me enter in,
And that wound in thy side does this impart,
That thou intends to lodge me in thy heart,
And made thy passage ready, the vailes rent,
Makes me despise the earth for I Am consident,
Thy cities gates wide open I behold,
And who'ill be pleased with lead, that may have gold?
My Lord I will not, heaven is my home,
And I Will not let thee go, before I come,
To share part of thy glory; I am thine,
And my faith tells me that thy kingdome's mine,
I know and do believe this, and I trust
My seat's made, in the mansion of the just,
And for that place I Am bound, in the mean time,
That I, in all my actions may show thine,
I Am furnishing my self, and I will aim,
To wear my robes for th'honor of thy name,
I Will first put on obedience, and apply,
My self to attend upon thy Majesty.
With diligence and with religious fear,
Thy law I Will study, and thy world I Will hear,
Stife-neck'd rebellion I will never know,
My power shall be bestowed for to bestow,
Loves legacies on thee, at thy command,
My inward heart and my external hand,
Shall purpose and dispose, and to thy throne,
I Will offer both my owners and my own:
Thy messengers and ministers, I Will give
Their honor and respect, and strive to live
So carefully, and free from all offense,
As one that never knew disobedience,
Although whilst my poor soul is lapt in flesh,
It Is clothed with sorrow, and with sinfulness:
Yet with such holy fear, I Will spend my time,
Thou 'll please to say, my sins are none of mine.
They shall be done s'vnwillingly, my flesh
I know well is betrothed to guiltiness,
But not by my consent, I do much ill,
And Lord thou know I do it against my will:
Sin dwells in me, and muah'ill contriues,
To Effect much mischief, and (unkindly) strives,
To burden me Lord, how shall I 't prevent?
Since I am both guilty, and innocent.
The flesh being mine, the sins say so are they,
Yet since my will never willed to disobey
Thy ordinances, do thou plead my cause,
And if I perish under, Moses laws,
Let me appeal to my Messiah grace,
And there find comfort. I will seek thy face,
But not presumptuously, as Mary came
(Poor woman) burdened both with sin, and shame,
Into the house where once thou sat to eat,
And well considering that her sins were great,
Presumed not to behold thy face, but kept
Behind thy back, and there kneeled down and wept,
And for a sinners sacrifice, most meet,
Dropped pearle-like tears upon thy precious feet,
And gladly washed them, and with her heads-haire,
Carefully wipes them dry to leave them fair,
And with th'imbraces that best fits a friend,
And many loving kisses makes, an end.
Even so my gracious Lord, I come to thee,
With many faults, and much humility,
Knowing my blemish I Am afraid of blame,
And being laden both with sin, and shame,
Willing to bide my face, wash, wipe, and weep,
Or any measures sinners ought to keep;
Wishing (with Mary) my release to win,
I crave my love might cover all my sin,
My Christ, my love is true, and as it were,
Joined and mixed with a reverent fear,
To make it perfect, lend thy gracious skill,
To make my work as proper as my will;
Vouchsafe to mend what is in me amiss,
It is both for thy honor, and my bliss,
The old man's crucified, and I Am newborn,
I Have left my chafe, and I expect thy corn.
FINIS.
THE EPISTLE OF THE BRIDE TO her Lord, containing her Petitions. A Legacy,
spiritually composed for the gracious survey of the Right Reverend Father in
God, JOHN Lord Bishop of Chester, etc.

By, Augustine Tailor, Preacher, and Minister, in the Church of God.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT REVERENT FATHER IN GOD, JOHN, by Divine Providence, Lord Bishop,
of Chester. etc.
Most Worthy Lord:
IF for your gracious favors unto me,
My love and service can e're make amends,
Both are at your dispose, and you shall see,
I Will rank your name, amongst my noble friends,
And no dishonor to your Honor, for
I bring not th'offring of a monitor,
But of one that wonld be admonished,
At your dispose (you are as'twere my head.
Learned Prince of Preachers, whose celestial voice,
Contracts a King to willing audience,
Accep't these lines, and I Will maintain my choice,
Is the true Image of true excellence:
It Is inward joy to me, to see men note,
Me clothed in a sh^ed of Chester scoate,
It is a robe of honor, and maintained,
By Chesters Lord vnwronged, and unstained,
My gracious Lord mistake me not, I do
Present with reverence, and humility,
These to your Lordsh^p, they belong unto
Your Honor only: Not presumptuously,
I eternize your name, but with regard,
And your free Patronage, is my reward,
Bestow it then, and for your share does rest,
Both all my all, and of my all the best.
Contracted to your Lordship, with the bands of true affection, Augustine
Tailor.

THE ARGUMENT.
As harrowing after sowing fits
So the Bride wraps her will,
In prayers, and her plants commits,
There Lord, in Syon hill.
LOrd, be not angry that I stay so long.
I would (I will) not leave thee, if I wrong
Thee, or my self, with troublesome attempts,
Since mercies laws poor weakness still exempts
From punishment, for commonly we see,
Weakness acts none, but her own injury;
Then since she punishes her own transgression,
To chastise her again, were mere oppression:
Pardon me Lord, for I am forced to speak,
Channells over charged with water, needs must break,
Into the neighboring lands, and cooles the plains,
With the moist land-blood, of their too full veins:
My heart's the fountain, and my tong's the brook,
Wherein flows all my passions: Ouer-looke
Her fruitless inundations I request,
Conceive the baser, but receive the best,
They both proceed from love, and can love cire,
I know she may, but what man will prefer
Complaints against (unfeigned loves) offense,
None, for 'twould argue hate to innocence?
I know thy nature's gracious, and Entreat,
Since thou art better pleased to bless then beat,
Say not my sins are sins, make good of ill,
Although they be my works, they are not my will,
My God thou know it well; and since I have
Promised thee some good service, I must crave
Thy favors to perform it, thou must breed,
The Original in me of will and deed,
For any good, and first I humbly pray
Increase my faith, that the foundation may
Uphold and honor all the upper, parts
Of all my buildings: thou do know my hearts,
Desire is only t'entertaine those things,
That my salvation, and thy honor brings,
Furnish me so with faith, that my grand-foe,
Attempting to effect my ouer-thowe,
May fail, and fall, and vanish, give me that
Faith that set Noah upon mount Arrarat,
That which removed Henoch from of the earth,
And without death a gave caelestiall birth:
I do but wish that sword to vanquish sin,
Which David brought against th'vgly Philistime.
When woes be set me round, and sin and death,
Then let my faith, advance me from beneath,
To thy abiding City'mongst the just,
Lord of thy mercy change my faith to trust,
Faith does confess Christ but trust does persuade,
The spotless offerings that my Jesus made,
Were mine, and for my sin, and souls relief,
This I believe, Lord help my unbelief.
Another thing I crave, is patience to,
Accept contentedly, and undergo
Afflictions that may happen, grant to me
Such store of patience in all misery,
That my deserts may cause report to spread,
" Jobs dearest daughter lives, though he be dead:
Teach me to welcome sorrow amongst the rest,
Of other passions that possess my breast,
Make patience power the greatest, that I may
Pass the worlds nights, to heavens glorious day:
Next furnish me with strength make me of might,
To maintain combat in thy Gospells right,
And to my strength, add valor, for these too,
Being divided can no service do,
To merit thanks or praise, the foes intent,
Prevails when my valor's impotent,
And when my strength wants valor, I am like
To loose the field, because I dare not strike:
Therefore I sue, for both they are fit'st for me,
Because I but desire them t'honor thee.
Then make a sword of both to cut off strife,
Venture thou it, and I will venture life;
And yet I venture nothing, for I know
I have nothing but what thou did bestow,
And as thy own command it, thine I rest,
',The best of servants can but do her best.
Yet gracious Lord, direct me how to make,
(Even for thy passion, and compassion sake,)
My prayers more complete, because I have,
Great need of many things, and cannot crave,
So as I may obtain, except the most
Powerful assistance of the holy Ghost,
Help to prefer my sacrifice: if thou
Will some more patience unto me allow,
To temper all my passions, in such measure
That neither sorrows nor deluding pleasure,
Possess me with excess: then I shall do,
Thee (sovereign) honor, and me (subject) too:
To make thy Bride victorious, I do pray,
With reverence, love, and fear, that I still may,
Enjoy that patience, which can bring me past
The blew-red veil, with victory at last,
Into thy holiest holy: here beneath,
Afflictions, miseries, cares, fears, doom, and death,
Fills all my days so full of discontent,
That till I see that ladder thou once sent,
Unto my Father Jacob, set for me,
T'ascend I look for noe felicity,
My Lord, by all the gracious promises,
Of thine, between the first of Genesis,
And the Omega, of thy sacred book,
And by the pains that my Messiah took,
By his vnualeu'd merrits, and by all
He said or did from's birth to his funeral,
Free me from all my sins, and now remove,
The clouds of sin, and vengeance from above,
That my voice may come to thy sacred ears,
And fetch my pardon, from these cares, and fears,
Lord quit me out of hand, and let me see,
The glorious state of immortality.
I Am weary of these nether-lands, and would
Come see my dowery, that with purest gold,
Thou have so richly walled, and pau'd so fair
With Berill, Topaz, and such stones as are,
Most fit in form, and beauty; I entreat,
That as thou have provided me a seat
In Syon thy most holy, heavenly hill,
Thou'll place me in it, O let it be thy will,
To help me home in have, that now I may
Change my black night, for thy bright endless day.
FINIS.
AN EPISTLE OR A Legacy, for the use of the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN,
Lord Bishop, of the Isles of Man, etc.

By Augustine Tailor, Preacher, and Minister of the Lord, our God, at Hawarden.

LONDON, Printed, by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT Reverent Father in God, John by the Divine Providence, Lord
Bishop of the Isles of Man, Rector of Hawarden, etc.
MY Lord you know a heavenly muse, should be
Esteemed as men prize eternity,
I know your breast contains a muse divine,
And therefore will not undervalue mine,
Of all that live I dare a favor claim,
But those (whose all shall perish with their name.
Right Reverend Phillips, Phillip the great King
Of Macedon did cause a child to bring,
Quotidian warning thus, (for him to scan)
" Phillip remember thou art but a man:
A fairer title, I deliver can,
Phillis consider you are Lord of Man,
Both men and man approues it in that I Will,
You have sat graciously, a happy while,
Unto man's makers glory and your praise,
Among'st most reverent Bishops, all your days
Shall be accounted happy: many aim
At profitable Lordships, and for gain,
Are Lords of more but baser mettle far,
As far as does the Sun, exceed a Star:
(Men should believe it, because God has said)
Man does exceed all works that e're God made,
Stay, man the soil? no, man the soul is blessed,
I grant that truth, and then it needs must rest,
You Are Lord of both, others but of the soil,
Their covetous carfulness, and temp'rall toil
Affirm; no less, whereas your Lordship may,
With much content, with Princely David say:
"The place wherein my lot to me befell,
"Is passing fair, and like me wondrous well.
You might have bathed in a greater fountain,
But a small Dyamond's worth, a mighty mountain,
Some lesser things are prized, the great'st above,
"The quality not quantity breeds love;
Happy was man to have the man of God
Find out her port, he has removed the rod
Of wrath and fury out of all her coasts,
And how to call upon the Lord of Hoasts,
In her own language he has taught her know,
Such benefits good Bishops do bestow,
Upon their flock: Now babes and sucklings can,
And do extol the Lord of Heaven, and man:
Pitty't had been you should have left the I Will,
For your preferment better many smile,
Then one, and it is better that one loose,
Then many, I have known your Lordship choose,
To prefer general before special good,
Your pious learned care it is understood:
Has truly (newly) settled all the land,
And taught the ignorant to understand
The holy word of God, and it is thought fit,
You honor God, your King, and self by it,
In seeing that established yo'aue begune
Joy in it Lord, you have more honor woone,
By making th'ignorant intelligent,
"Of God and men, then ever shall be spent.
My friends (the cause I praise) this Lord's to me,
As near and dear as Paul to Tymothie.
What erst was ruined by the great neglect
Of's predicessors he does re-erect,
In sumptuous stately wise, and whereas they
But only sought the land to fetch a pray,
And having found it would be blown away,
If but a side wind came: this does not so,
But with the hand of bounty does bestow,
Upon the land what it affords to him,
He does not teach her plenties how to swim,
From her, and leave her poor: a true report
Says he has made a cottage in a Court,
That well may lodge a Prince, and seated so
Sit on the Towers, and turn thee too and sro,
And all the Kings dominions thou may see,
England, Cambria, Ireland, Albanie,
And in his Lordly house he daily spends,
Great pious plenty among'st all his friends:
Man was a woman (before he came there)
And plucked the fruit forbidden, but now fear
Of that sins punishment, by him made known,
Has set the man up, and cast the woe down.
Long may Gods blessi^gs, and my Lord together,
Transport from h^nce to man, and from man hither;
And Lord be pleased that I both long and well
M'attend the steps of my gamalie.
My Lord take this in token of my love,
And when your better part is soared above,
And left the rest for earth, these lines shall last,
When earth, and men, and times and Toombs shall wast,
Truly affected to see duly effected, my office (unto your Lordship) in Gods
service, AUGUSTINE TAILOR.

TO HIS WORSHIPFUL, AND WORTHY, Faithful Friends, and Lovers, in the
(Episcopal Jurisdiction) Parish of Hawarden, in Flint-shire. *
Truly beloved:
MY faithful service, and my purest love,
Shall wait on you, till love and service fails,
(I speak in earnest) next those joys above,
I love your Syon, love (^od says) preuailes
To cover many faults, I do desire,
My love that is kindled (now) with holy fire,
May purchase your affections, and my best,
And all my all, at your dispose shall rest.
Yet I beseech you, not mistake me much,
If from the first to th'last any one does
Affect me truly my free nature's such,
Those shall command my love, and service both:
I Will do my best for all, yea even for those,
(If there be such) that strive to be my foes,
I love, but does not fear these earthly powers,
There is a will above this will of owers,
That can do what he will. It is with him
That you and I must reckon for our sin,
And not amongst our selves, true Christians must
Endeavor still to make each other just,
And seek the shame of none, which blessed act
Will men together unto God contract,
"Take this it comes from him that still will prove,
Yours both in duty, and unfeigned love.
Augustine Tailor

A VVATCH, COMPOSED FOR, AND DEDICATED to the service of the Right Honorable
WILLIAM Earl of DERBY, Barron Stanley, Lord Strange of Knockin, and of Man:
Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, Leiutenant, and Chamber-laine, of
the Counties Palatines of Chester, and Lancaster, etc.

By His Honors most obseruant servant, Augustine Tailor, Preacher, and
Minister, at Hawarden, in Flint-shire.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

THE ARGUMENT.
The times are spid'e to go on crutches, and
Goes very fast, and therefore very ill:
Heaven is proved the best haven where to land,
Respect of faithful friendship's wished still.
Honor's examined, and those parts made plain,
Which best befits her breast to entertain,
Black Enuy's challenged, and her force defide,
Nobillity rides by Derbyes Loraly side.
STay Derbyes Earl and pause a little, for
It Is fit each Phillip have his monitor,
As duly as his day, only to know,
Himself as well in substance as in show:
The time means mischief, and her plots to smother,
Promises one thing, and pretends another,
Gain says the will of the great legislator,
And gives to Esau wine, to lacob water,
Contemnes the best, and does the base adore,
Feeds the fool fat, and keeps the wiseman poor,
Honors the bad, and does the good disgrace,
Looks upon merit, but with half a face,
Keeps true worth fasting, yet deals out of measure,
(But thus) pence for desets, and pounds for pleasure.
T'auoyde the worst, that time and men can do,
Man's and times God appoynts us here unto,
To alter our affections, and remove them
From earth to dwell where is naught but God above them.
Watch noble Lord, for I fear we shall see,
The times so sick with mutabillitie,
They will entreat a purge, and you shall try,
The good shall be restored, the wicked die:
My Lord we have a warrant lets us know,
There Is many things are done in earth below,
And all aut amissi, aut permissi from,
A power that rules all but's ruled by none,
We are at his dispose, when his decree,
Will break the neck of Casars royalty,
Rome cannot piece it, therefore him to fear,
(That is impartial and that scorns to bear
Corrupt affection) it is our best (to honor)
Grace should have measure, still to wait upon her;
And constancy, experience makes it known,
Favors do never spring, that are not sown:
Upon the soil of merit: I did dream,
Minnions too mighty makes Monarcks too mean,
As sparing graces never pravse could win,
So favors out of measure are mere sin,
The great King gives his graces t'all so true,
That none has less, that none has more then due,
And his affection's lasting. Even so
I know you learn at him, since you bestow
Your graces upon goodness, do so still,
And blessed shall be your actions, and your will:
Long may you live to fill your noble seat,
"A few such great men, would make good men great.
Therefore I wish your life, and that you may,
With much content, tell many a happy day,
Of grace, and one of glory t'euer last,
That your true honor, never be ouer-cast;
And that you ever may stand fast, and fair,
A pillar upon earth, a star in th air,
Consider what these following lines afford,
"The servant may (sometimes) direct his Lord.
There Is one thing necessary it is said,
And ipse dixit who has all things made,
And that is a summum bonum, where at man
Should only aim because he never can
Be satissi'd, until have understood,
The glorious fullness of this sovereign good,
I know your ayme's at that so let it be,
The first foundation of nobillitie,
Was faith in God, the building fear and love;
Kings wills are powerful but that will above,
Proceeding from Jehovah, all of them
That would change vana spe for certam spem,
Must reverently obey: those cutsed be,
That only trust in earthly majesty,
And you shall see them perish, he that would
Reap houor to fetch home pure Ophir gold,
Scorns to return with baser mettle: so
He that, to Magnus Rex may freely go,
And's promised entertainment, does disdain
To spend's best time and treasure in the train
Of an Inferior Prince, man should delight,
"In things that yields both God and Caefar right
Therefore I say it is good, and I Will say still,
"It Is best serve him that can do what he will.
This daily duly done, the next you do,
Every attendant that belongs (...)
Your Honor, either fastened by the linckes
Of love or duty, wisdom 'twere me thinks,
And policy, and honor to respect,
All loves and duties with such meet respect,
As prudence may proportion: some there are
Knows you but by report, that would not spare,
Their lives and treasures to express Derbyes worth,
To keep the Eagle famous in the North:
Pity it were that those that loves you best,
Should loose their loves, and be regarded least;
And pity 'twere that those that loves you not,
Should be respected, and the rest forgot,
That peace and love within your walls may stand,
Resolve like David when he took in hand,
The government of Israel, these things,
He vowed t'obserue unto the King of Kings,
"Mercy and justice I will sing to thee,
And in my house, with such integrity
I do intend to live, that men shall tell,
The Lord bestowed his crown and scepter well.
I will attempt no wicked thing at all,
The faithless and the froward never shall,
Possess my smallest favors: I do hate,
The proud and haughty, and I Will ruinate,
The slanderer, the flatterer, and the proud,
Neither my court nor kingdom has allowed
A resting place; all those that makes ties,
And loves deceit I utterly despise:
The charitable, faithful, meek, and free,
Are only chosen servants unto me.
Right Noble Earl, let David's Princely mind,
Lodge in your Lordly breast, let all those find,
Protection from your Honor, that maintain,
Public and private Stanleys, Stainlesse name.
Do not guild Parasits praise, it is but a blast,
But guild that frame in which your name shall last,
Defend those that defend your Honor, and
Those that give you their hearts give them your hand,
Your countenance shining as it ought and may,
Comforts your followers as the Sun does day.
It is examined and it is understood
The Isles are peopled with more bad then good,
Since enemies do spring, as thick as weeds,
The shrub's the saffest, it is the Cedar needs,
Supporting to withstand the furious winds,
It Is only my affection that me binds,
T'aduise my Lord, although Idare not bet,
That super senes intellexi, yet,
I know what is fit, to boast I Am not allowed,
"I Am proud of nothing, but that I Am not proud,
I Will tell some things I know, and some I doubt,
There are some setches, their best treasures out,
Of Derbyes Earldom, thence they cloth, and feast,
And gains most by you, and yet loves you least?
Trust but a few let not those that delights,
To steal your Eagles feather, t'imp their kits,
Steal both your gain, and Honor. Moses sings,
God carn'd Israel once on Eagles wings,
From Pharaohs sury, and so did express,
His power and love, in seas and wilderness;
Those he loved he delivered all the rest,
He restless left: to learn at him it is best,
And charge your Eagle, as she does respect,
The favors of her Lord that she accept
None, neither under, nor upon her wings
But friendly ones, that is only those that brings,
Pledges of love and duty: then shall those
That (public dares nor) be but private foes,
To Derbyes Honor quickly proved be,
And this a pious course, and policy:
Scorn all base mettle, and as Solomon would,
Have all his vessels made of purest gold,
And counted silver base, do you like him,
Shut up your Lordly breast, and let none in
But choycest, chiefest men, and look they be
All truly furnished with some quality,
Worthy an Earls respect, for says the stery,
The Moon among the clouds loses her glory,
But if sh'attended be with Stars of light,
"Shows as she meant to make a day of night:
He his own goodness seals, and's greatness saues,
"That keeps himself unstained with fools and knaves,
Maintain your state, and those that truly love it,
"And all shall stumble, that would step above it.
For too much lowliness and clemency,
None should be blamed, yet there is some vice we see
Proceeds from these virtues, some repent
Their humbleness, because it breeds contempt,
Virtues may be mistaken, blessings used,
"Are blessings still, but cursings being abused:
Your gracious clemency has been to all
So largly showed, that my pen freely shall,
Record it to the times to come. Who can
Not tell and testify, a noble man
Should be both Lamb and Lyon-like the first
To match the best, the last t'ore match the worst,
So a Lambs meekness, and a Lions might,
In great men claims a dwelling as their right,
Both lodge in you, and I do smell a savor,
Proceed from Derby, both of force and favor,
Which your crest claims in your rights defense,
The Eagle shows power, the child shows innocence:
Your spirit's Princely like the Eagles, and
It Is as the infants meek, (but understand)
Least childishly you construe, I Will tell thee
That comprehends not his no billitie,
And wonder not thou art not intelligent,
The earth is thine, the ayre's his element,
He Is witty, wise, and valorous, knows his measure,
He smites not Lazarus, and he sooths not Caesar;
The good he nourishes, and the bad he spares not,
The lowly he loves well, for the proud he cares not,
Mercy did never find a human breast,
Allowed her better lodging, amongst the rest
Of's virtues, Justice sits (true Princess like)
She will lift up the sword, but's loath to strike:
Because she knows God list not justice try,
By's threatening Isacke, when the ram did dye.
Bounty adornes his hand, and sacred love,
Guids both his words and actions, the white dove
Of innocence has brought him Manna t'eate,
And nursed him so well he is as good as great,
If any ask in whom this wealth is stored,
I say in Derbyes Earl, my loving Lord:
They say in Courts men longest keep their places,
If they can patiently receive disgraces,
And tender thankee: but it were better dwell,
With Lot in Bela, where no dangers swell,
Then in the fayrer plains, that lies too low,
"Which Iordans streams has leave to ouer-flow.
The Eagle's wise, and between tweed and dee,
Inioyes such store of happy liberty,
As well might please a Prince, tweed speaks your fame,
Ribl's your servant, mercy knows your name,
Commands his fruitful shores, fair dee does mean,
The treasures, in or by his holy stream,
To tender as your due, and as his duty,
And in a word examine but what beauty,
The North contains, and in love as it is fit,
Both are at your dispose, the North and it.
God that does all things well, has order given,
To beautify the earth, (as well as Heaven)
Veiwe the aetheriall region, and there see,
The glorious frame of that great canopie,
Seems to be nayl'd with stars, and in such wise
They are asign'd their places in the skies,
By admirable skill, the Heavens express
About each greater light, millions of less,
Do still attend, by love together knit,
Both to add honor, to themselves and it:
Men are so placed on earth, the earth does afford,
Thousands of servants to attend one Lord;
You are made strong by them, they strong by you,
If there be any dim lights they are untrue,
And means to add no honor to your name,
They live with envy, and shall end with shame.
Now let pale envy, (whose ill tutored tongue,
Is hourly vtt'ring infamy, and wrong)
Spit all her poison, upon Derby's name,
She cannot add a spot: the lips of fame
Have sworn, and kissed the book neither be
Silent, nor subject unto flattery,
My Lord my muse did vow your worth and name,
To register, and chose this lasting frame,
And has made truth her witness, any come
And catch me with a lie, and I Will be dumb
For ever after, know I scorn to prove
A parasite, either for for fear or love:
Live to augment your Honors, still to be
Beloved of God, King, state, land, men, and me.
Your Honors already, and only ready, to be yours, Augustine Tailor.

THE DEFENSE OF DIVINE POESY, Committed to the Protection of the Right
Honorable; William Earl of Pembrooke, etc.

By, Augustine Tailor, Preacher, and Minister, in the Church of God.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, William Lord Harbert, Earl of Pembrooke, Barron
Harbert of Cardiffe, Lord Parr Roos of Reudall, Marmion, and St. Quintin,
Chief Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household, Governor of Ports-mouth, and
Warden of the Stauneries, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one
of his Majesty's, most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
Most Honorable:
KIng Solomon did choose to have his Throne,
Borne up with Lions, and admitted none,
Of baser beasts that should employed be,
In office near unto his dignity,
Accounting wolves, and asses beasts too base,
To be imployd about a Throne of grace.
Your greatness being goodness does affect,
The best supporters, because you protect,
Both art, and wit, and grace, I wish to be
Preserver of your pious dignity:
Great Earl, a Divine muse unto you brings,
A sacrifice worth the respect of Kings,
Not for my merit, by whom now it comes,
But for his merits that has brought the sons
Of Adam back to Eden, give to me,
Such favors as befits the ministry;
And for requital God give you, I Will pray,
Many good years, and then one lasting day.
Willing to do your Honor any Christian service, in the power of AUGUSTINE
TAILOR.

THE ARGUMENT.
The season's poisoned with abusiue wits,
Fair poesi's used to serve the basest use,
Wit guilt with grace, the subject best befits:
No musicke's equal to a Heavenly muse,
Wit choosing the best subjects to work on,
Shall find glory with God, and grace with man.
Our Physicke-Doctors say, the times are sick,
But I say no, the times are lunaticke:
Yet madness is a sickness, but I know
It is not in their el'ment to bestow
Remedy on it, God has said wisedom's mine,
They meddle with things carnal, not divine:
If God do not in time some help apply,
Unto these times, both times and men must dye,
He that can well conceive may much admire,
To see unto what hight men's wits aspire,
T'aduance the Towers of Babell, and to see
So few strive to maintain the dignity
Of blessed Bethell, base, vile god-lesse, wits
Counts it more grace to passionate the fits,
Of damned adultry, murder, blasphemy,
Deceit and lying, then it is to be,
A careful student in Divinity,
So many breasts sends forth vnhallow'd breath,
The very ayre's infected, clouds of death,
Are shapen in the sky for vengeance, and
Shall be dispersed abroad, by the left hand
Of God in's anger to kill and condemn
Nations, and people, that do him contemn.
I do wish those that so abuse their times,
A dulterers-like conceiving graceless rimes,
To humor earth, those that delude the season,
With pounds of wit, but not half drammes of reason,
T'reforme themselves, for better harmony,
And seeming men, be as they seem to be.
A creature reasonable, God did make man,
And he ought daily to do all he can,
To raise his glory, and his acts to tell,
That gave him's being, and his being well:
Reasonlesse I esteem, those that do spend,
Their adle brains on idle things that end,
In th'houre they are begun, and do not praise
The acts of days of life, but acts of days,
Of death, and desolation pray you scan,
There is a man, and a thing like a man,
It Is plain, that every like, is not the same,
So some have the inward fruit, some the outward frame,
Some have the substance, some have but the show,
Some bad are set above, some good below,
Some divine wits still sings of things above,
Some (foolishly) breaths naught, but earthly love,
Some loves the temp'rall, some the spiritual food,
For some are framed for ill, and some for good:
Some poets sings of love, and some of hate,
Some loves the common, some commends the state,
Some flatters greatness, some contemnes the poor,
Some men have fewer faults, and some have more,
But all have some, and some have all, for still,
Some sparks of enuy's mixed with good will:
Some loves unfit speech, some words most meet,
Some have a stinking breath, and some a sweet:
Some lives in fear of men, some fears but God,
Some seeks the staff, and some deserves the rod,
Man is enriched both with art and nature,
To Express the glory of the all Creator,
Weapons of Honor God gives man to use,
And with those weapons they do him abuse:
God gives us art, and wit, and reason (...),
And grace to will, and likewise grace to do,
If we entreat so much, you never find shall,
From the first day unto the funeral,
Of this old world did e're deny,
His mercy unto men in misety,
If begged with faith and meekness: whither has
His fond affection led him? T'a wrong path,
That he forgets so good a Lord so long,
And with his own weapons seeks to do him wrong,
All man's good parts are sent him from above,
And man to manifest his makers, love
Should set them all to work, it is understood,
God does require but thanks for all the good
That he bestows on all, regard therefore,
His wage is potent, though your work be poor.
Man's tongue should preach and pray, his heart believe.
The care must hear, the eyes see, the hands relieve;
Each member must remember the head of all,
And all, and each must serve the principal.
I Am t'old (and I believe it) from above,
Gifts are descending from the God of love,
Some with some gifts are blessed, some with other,
But no man ought his gifts of grace to smother,
Or wrong apply them for the Lord has showed,
Gifts be applied to the end they are bestowed,
Some sings with David, some with Job laments,
Some sins with both, and some with both repents,
Some fights like Iosuah, and like Iosuah winnes,
Some flies the field when th'honor but begins;
Some shuns the danger, those loose the renown,
Some bears the cross, and those shall wear the crown
Some like the chafe, before the winds are gone,
Some like Cedars on mount Lebanon
Prosper and flourish, fair, and free, and fast.
Comely, and seemly both to like and last:
Some bidden come not, some unbidden come,
Thus some prove wiser (far) then other some.
Some like the driven dust are parcht and dried,
Some like the branches by the river side,
Are fair and fruitful, and do cause the stream,
Draw beauty and plenty with her silver teame,
Unto the good all good shall happen still,
And unto the evil ill, because they are ill;
Such thing desires it like, and so it comes
That Caine's at odds with all his fathers sons,
For hating's brethren, and contemning's God,
He ran a vagabond to the land of Nod;
And lived vnlou'd, vnpiti'd, unlamented,
And (some think) di'd untimely, unrepented,
For so shall all that do the Lord despise,
Or offers him a broken sacrifice.
So our lewd poets do, God makes a poet,
And the thing made forgets, or does not know it:
A special good God meant unto the earth,
First when he did intend a Poets birth,
Gods perfect image catch it those that can,
Is heavenly measures in an earthly man.
When Moses troop, had passed the scarlet flood,
His inward joy we had not understood,
But by his Hebrew song, and only that,
Makes the man praised the master wondered at:
Iordans obedience at brave Iosuahs feet,
When it showed him a passage fair and meet,
When walls of water, stood like walls of glass,
Upon both hands to suffer him to pass,
And bring his army in at Cana'ns door,
The land Jehovah promised long before.
These things had been unknown, and been vnsung,
But for the music of a sacred tongue:
With Baraks victory, and Sis^raes fall,
We had not been so well acquainted all,
But for the heavenly muse of Debora,
That Barak won the honor of the day,
That ancient Kishon washed mount Tabors feet,
And all our enemies away did sweep,
That Heaven sent aid to earth, and all the Stars,
Behau'd themselves like soldiers in those wars,
That men intended mischief and God crossed it,
That Iaell won the day, and Iabin lost it,
We had not known, these had been wronged with death
But that they are infants of a muses breath.
That God does justice love, but mercy rather,
And that although man's feeble earthly father
Forget him and forsake him, God will not,
This had been untold, or told and forgot,
But that the sacred breath of holy man,
Preserves more then Brass or marble can:
That Iesses son was fetched from following sheep,
An host of men to lead defend and keep,
That he once wore a sheepe-hooke in his hand,
And then a royal scepter did command,
That he sat in the field upon a stone,
And after in the palace on the throne,
That he was capt with wool against the cold,
And after crowned with purest beaten gold;
That of a Shepherd God thus made a King,
And turned his fasting into banqueting,
That he that (sometime) ^llow'd ewes with young,
Did leave that labor, and applied hi^ tongue,
To praise Jehovah in an Hebrew song:
Gods greatness, goodness highneste, works, and wonders,
We know, and had not known, but for his numbers,
David I mean, he that in word and deed,
Both did and said, for God and Jacobs seed:
Thanks be to Solomon, we are not to search,
A sacred muse betwixt Christ and his Church,
To sing the nuptials, it is already done,
By Isr'els King, and David's sacred son:
Asaph and Ethan well deserned thanks,
For placing th'Arke of God on Sylos banks,
With triumph and reioyceing, Amos son,
Seeing his Lord his Vineyard has beguine
Upon a fruitful hill, said I will sing,
To my King; Vineyard, of my Vineyards King;
And so proceed, and all the world yet hears,
When great Jehovah fell a dealing years,
To Hezekiah Iudahs holy King,
To gratulate his Lord, no better thing,
Had of his own to give, then freely trips,
A heavenly measure from his princely lips;
Praising the God of life, death, night, and day,
"The scripture warrants what you hear me say,
That Mary's soul so greatly did rejoice,
To hear the tidings by an angels voice,
That she should be a mother and bear a son,
That should redeem a wretched world (undone)
We had been ignorant of these good things,
But that glad Mary had amuse, that sings
Unto this day, and by her muse we know
The Humble are set above, the proud below.
That Simeon in the Temple sung (to all)
His Saviors lullaby and's own funeral,
That his old arms so happy, were t'imbrace,
The Prince and heir of glory, and of grace,
His own tongue testifies; and thus I choose,
The sacred script of many heavenly muse,
T'exhort wits that are bearing and do breed,
Choycest inventions, henceforth to proceed,
More regularly, religiously I mean,
Leave Babels partched commons, seek the stream,
That keeps the skirts of Hermon ever green,
The on's a strumpet, the other is a Queen,
And those that strive her beauties to express,
Shall know her matchless, endless happiness;
God said, all those that sought her honor, should
Be fed with Manna, and be clothed with gold,
And led with Angels, and have Saints society,
Jerusalem to dwell in, and variety
Of those delights, and joys (both all and some)
That God provided, for the world to come.
But Esaus timelesse, hapless, graceless, seed,
Shall lucklesse live in misery and need,
And be in bondage still, a voice divine
Says, " Esau must not drink of Jacobs wine:
Then since there is due rewards laid up for merits,
And like deserts, like punishments inherits,
We'll idolize no more, nor men, nor treasure,
Let him that has a muse can tune a measure,
To the worlds ear, bestow it in such wise,
To Have life and honor by his sacrifice,
Leave all rediculous fictions, take advise,
Learn either properly to similize
The truth or tell it plainly, you should ken,
"What Is unlike truth, should ever dislike men,
Make your proceedings perfect, and then prove,
By outward actions, your true inward love:
Lascivious voices, but makes deaf the season,
They Are stuffed with mickle rhyme but little reason,
That poesy may be honored l^^'d, and praised,
And (like to him that (...)) with glory raised,
Out of the dust of ignorance and death,
Refuse your subjects, and refine your breath,
By sucking sweeter air, study to bring,
Such songs a, Saints may sing before their King:
Like towers well built your works shall last, and then
Both purchase grace with God, and love with men.
FINIS.
AN EPISTLE, Dedicated to the Right Worshipful, Sr. Thomas Smith Knight,
Mayor of Chester, and High Sheriff of that County Palatine, etc. To the Right
Worshipful Sr. Randall Manwaring, Knight, etc: Edward Whitby Esquire,
Recorder, William Gamwell, John Ratcliffe, Robert Whitby, William Aldersey,
Charles Fitton, Hugh Williamson, etc. Esquires, late Majors of that ancient and
Honorable City; And to the Worshipful Mr. Nicholas Ince, Mr. Thomas Whitby,
Mr. Brereton, Mr. Peter Drink-water, Mr. Andrew Gamwell, Mr. Robert Berry, Mr.
Humphrey Lloyd etc. Alder^^n of the same, etc. All temporal, and eternal
happiness
Right Worshipful:
THat I thus Register your worthy names,
It Is no dishonor, for my gift's Divine;
You are fair Chesters pillars, and maintains,
Her royalties, since you do all combine,
In such a perfect union, that I find
Though you seem many, yet y'haue but one mind,
You being at one I would your one prove
Accept my service, and give me your love.
Your Worships in Gods service, AUGUSTINE TAILOR.

TAILORS EPISTLE to the Honorable, and Worshipful So^ieties of the well
Governed City of West-Chester, etc.
GOD that of nothing has so great things made
So many and so glorious may persuade,
The created, the Creator intends,
Some special good, whereto the final ends,
Of every creature leads, which act discouers,
Nothing was made to serve it self but others:
As nothing made it self, it must needs be,
Nothing was made to serve it self, we see
A power that sends and suffers good, and ill,
"The made is subject to the makers will,
The Heavens (it seems were made) to serve the air,
The air to serve the earth, the earth does share,
Her store to serve the beasts, and fowls, which feed
(Although to them unknown) to serve man's need:
The Sun does serve with light, the clouds with rain,
The fire with heat, the cooling springs remain,
To serve the swelting soul, all things that move,
Are tokens manifest the makers love,
Which both submit and serve at man's dispose,
The question is man being Lord of those,
By license given him from the only king,
(Let him bear rule) if he bound to bring
His service as a subject or if he,
Being served by others may claim sovereignty
And only served himself. I answer thus,
God did make all things good, man optimus,
Iudu'd wrth reason, only to express,
His makers glory and's own holiness:
But was not made to serve himself for God,
Teaches subjection both with staff and rod,
The good the staff supports, to flourish still,
The bad the rod corrects, to punish ill:
Man is Gods Image, and in that is shown,
God did make man that man should make God known
Gods power and praise, should every where be spread,
For what is not known, cannot be worshipped.
Then aim to do your office, that you may
With much content tell many a happy day,
On earth of grace, and one in Heaven of glory,
Observe the stature's in the sacred story;
Honor the Lord, fight in his truths defense,
Cloth you and your in coats of innocence,
Ever support the good, suppress the ill,
"This the means to keep your station still:
Believe, relieve, and as you love the Lord,
Maintain such ministers as give his word
A perfect true construction, have a care,
The self conceipted Schismatickes, that are
Not pure in life, but in opinion do,
Not only wrong themselves, but others too.
Since there is but one God, and that one has,
But one truth to direct us in one path,
That leads to endless bliss, it fits your place,
To give the Preachers of it so much grace,
As bounty, and affection can afford,
As you have grace by the incarnate word,
And promises of glory, ever see
Such honor given to the ministry,
As God himself commanded and among all
Th'Embassadors made Euangellicall,
Cut out rewards according to their merits,
And know thus much those that some gifts inherits,
Above the rest, are worthy more respect,
Because those gifts are signs they were elect,
By Gods divine decrees, for we should still
Far more by heavenly then by human will,
Enter the Temple, th'alter to embrace,
Not with the arms of nature but of grace,
Truth should have trumpets to divulge her will,
Not such as sounds too often, but sounds shrill,
The Church is injured by a number such,
As keeps silence, or else speaks too much,
Truth's sick, and like to dye, unless she do,
Find special friends both good and great ones too,
As Naomi is alone, without a Ruth,
A sad forsaken widow, such is truth,
Without'n true supporters, be you then,
(As you are principals among many men:)
Of David's perfect mind, when he did sing
Of mercy and justice, to his Lord and King;
Oh imitate him with a free consent,
You are the Cities stars, whose government
Commands millions, and your houses be,
The Cities schools where all the rest should see,
Peace, pyety, bounty, love, and decency,
Cherish the virtuous, and all goodness grace,
Look on th'offenders but with half a face,
Banish the bad, and do the good adore,
Favor not Parasites, rather feed the poor,
Seek for the love of all, because it is proved,
The strongest man is he, that is best beloved,
What you may do to learn, do not request,
But strive to know what will become you best:
Your places are both great and worthy, and
Unfit for those that do not understand,
Your City's free and ancient, and may boast
Of better Laws then those that glory most,
Your orders and proceedings, all are such,
I know no City that may speak so much
Of her own praise so justly; there is not any,
Has had so worthy governors, so many
So generous, still may fair Chester be,
Blessed with such heads, that true prosperity,
And peace, and plenty in your walls may dwell,
And that your charge you may discharge as well,
As David's worthies did in Israel,
Jacobs good God protect and keep you still,
And make you Citizens on fair Syon Hill.
FINIS.

