ENCOMIASTICKE Elogies.

Written by AUGUSTINE TAILOR.

LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1614.

To the Reader.
LEt me entreat (where e're these come by chance)
Them silent, whom's betrayed by Ignorance.
A. T.

HIS BOOK.
A Handful I present: no more because
Such reverence, serves my Patrons: Order draws
These labors, in these limits: Being first,
My actions forme's a stranger; and vnnurst
By whether censure should, or good, or ill;
Doubting (how e're it is needful) that my skill
Produces in this kind. Suffice the frame
Keeps concord in the time, More does remain
My store shall after publish: But suppose
A discord; Then this little I disclose
Is more, too much: then if it were the best,
Too little: only for because does rest
To lawful heights, a staire. When no amends
Can escape a fall, where rude neglect ascends.
I see times errors, and dares not accord
To wade by Starlight where the Tide and Ford
Are strangers to me: Venturing when the Sun
Daignes to discover passage, then what is done
May see to do in th'action, I Will refrain
After he, takes a cloud-maske, seems to blame
My entrance. This comes to the best of men
To borrow true light. Never shall my pen
Proceed without commission; and obscured
Under not covering wings: I am assured
That I expect, there, is not. If to whom
My budding labors go; be turned. At home
I not reserve my after times, to spend
But forraging, mourn disability. Lend
Best able, here some grace. Censure my rhyme
To the vnripenesse of my thriuing time,
That grant; and prove my merit how it must;
I must, and would embrace it: and it is just.
Your names, speaks your own worthes. How ere I Am made.
By his chief servant love may be betrayed.
Encomiasticke Elogies.
ENCOM. 1. TO BRITAIN.
T'Admire these appositions when them stand
By are judicious; not to understand
Will force thy wonder censured. Properly stand
Who ere would greet a King, should with his Land
Proclaime's acquaintance. Britain I may sing
The fairest Land ruled by the worthiest King;
Altissime: super-Ela. Nearest dumb
Speak of thy praisers praise; not sing't but hum
T'aland so worth, vnequal'd: should my Muse
(Charged with loues-duties-zeale,) the speech refuse
The land and nature ownes? and others use?
That were to publish. But them cannot choose
Speaks English. This contempt to strangers known:
They Will find just cause to disesteeme our own
After we catch at theirs. Who did digress
Grecian? or Roman? Homers worthiness
Got wing in Greece, he did not's country scorn.
And Virgil; all grant famous'd first, and borne
In Mantua. Britain, we may be bold
To speak thee well as Greek, or Roman could,
Speak Greece, or Rome. And if be lost, thy part
Of glory: The defect comes to our Art
And claims the original. O I spy the cause,
Defection it is, that th'imperfection draws
To be our share: This time amend might bring,
To make them leave to hum, that cannot sing.
Silence to discord; worthy'st Sonneting
Might entertain her value: length her wing.
Our language gives, as best: it is Sidneyes friend,
And he its more: Sweet'st Daniell (as unkind)
My better dear respect, respects. There be
Praiseworthy others: But great'st throng I see
Nor sense, nor accent holds. Thus Poesie's slain!
He that thinks to be heard, must strip the strain
Of the time iangling discords: best, complain
And pity; Abell, to be killed by Caine.
To build yet, glory; and make Britain stand,
Is t'make our Language famous: So's our land:
Since our best, King; best Muses favors, thus.
Shal's change a melior, to an optimus.
ENCOM. 2. Consecrated to the worthiest of men, JAMES by the Grace of God, King
of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc. Truest Defendor of the Truest
Faith.
COmmemorable most, by such that can
With true fair course, know how to lift a man
Above the men: Who can so, may relate;
Thy virtues further do precede thy State
In glory; then thy state is seen excel
Degree of low'st compare: And aptly well
Excited to express a share in which
A poor m'acquire acceptance as a rich:
So, th'action brings. To thee I joy to sing:
My Judge is Europes, (Poets) chiefest King.
EN BRITANNIA.
Behold a stranger sight, nor strange because
Expected, and desired; it is action draws
The admiration on's: When for a flight
To see, we stored our Turrets: then not might
Preiudicate the form: 'Gaine; tops be storing;
(You saw the iourneing) but to note the soaring
Of a most Princely Bird: When from the North
Of Albion, did Princely enter forth
An Eagle, and along by's Lordly side,
Accompanied, the fairest, worthiest Bride
As could her Sex prefer; And next to them
Came the next worthiest, of that royal Stem.
This Princely Worthies Leader, onward came
Imperiously: Whose Style and happy Name,
Fame's Trumpets notic'd. Glad (for that he is,)
Conceive him comne: Not hear from Tuesis
His progress needs conscrib'de. For how ere so
My Horology could, it may not show
To them Testators: that they better know.
To Thames, there holds his course; Th'Eagles on wing,
Not highly spher'd since comne: He was the King
Of all his kind, and richest in renown,
Before the time gave to him Englands Crown;
'Twas Englands custom that her crowned still King'd
Th'vnking'd, before receiver; he has bring'd
Another Crown to hers. A fruitful Queen.
Made's happy with an Aciry to keep green,
Our (when change) dying court; so erst, sed non
The time shows grants, a blessed union
To command foreign good; by him is joined
Our joys to Guard. Nor stamp nor impresse coined
By powerfull'st foe, can iniure's, etc.
We serve the best example; peace has done
Britain more grace, then ever sword. And won,
And wears more: and the old freedom. Such a Bird
Our Eagle's known, the low'st voice is heard
That humbly craves admittance; and respected:
He soars not so past call, as sees neglected
Oppression. Neither low but that his height,
Sees virtue truly honored, with her weight
In all that is to advance her. Keeps a hold,
Nor high, nor low: but as an Eagle should
Observe, to be observed. This matchless object
Approues himself true King, and loyal Subject.
Subject to virtues, to all ills, oppressor.
All Rights maintainer, and all wrongs redressor.
He Is best. Think him (then I speak) better, etc.
More knows this, then knows thee: It can be found
That is not hear, but for it so true a ground
As truth. And being so, this little frame
Comes singularly but to attend thy name,
For large ones, live thy virtues.
To thy most sacred Majesty, comes thus
Conjoined love and duty: not solus
Appear can either: from a new rise Muse,
Of years scarce twenties-teller: Not in use
With the times strain so early. For this first,
Great Majesty daigne grace. What if the worst,
Because then borne? Yet after shall my swan
Prove; Britains Sovereign is above a man.
Immortal, more then humane. Time shall sing,
Of but one King; above James, Great Britains King.
In altissimo Coelo.
Your Majesty's humble, and true-faithfull Subject. Augustine Tailor.

ENCOM. 3. To the great and hopeful CHARLES, Prince of Great Britain and
Ireland, etc.
TOp-spring of Britains hope, as to the Sphere,
Whence dearest expectation waits, to hear
The voice of her content. To thee I mean,
That on the sluice of Englands Hippocreane
Ascends in good, to grace the land, and stream.
More do admire, then understand the state
Of virtues thine; could them admire, relate
Thy Princely true proportion in all parts:
'Twould urge those can but meanest part of Arts
Advancement; offer such true notes to thee,
Would force admired, thy good, their loyalty,
Through every knowing clime; that understands
What Prince, and Subject means. To all those lands
That whilome called Rome Mistress; Caesar's to
Stood seruants-like, vncapt, I give to kno:
Romes Triumphs can but boast, to have been times preter
Britains but late begun, therefore times detter.
Our Thames (then) Tyber equals. Our Swans be
Known public sprung from so great Royalty
As then was hers. The difference can but this,
Such was on Tyber; is on Thamesis.
Not Europe-ruling- Caesar's, thus had lived
Famous'd by infants breath; had they not giu'd
A life to Poesy: Fairest Tombs will break,
Rust, and consume; not Poesy whilst any speak,
Of any Language spoken. Know great Prince
The wortrthi'st ornaments that Princes, since
They took the name, was left, and only framed
By Poesy: and is. Who is there named
That Is well accounted worthy, would not use
Before a dead seen picture, what a Muse
(Well able) can produce? Nesciunt.
The One a short time endures, and honors never
Them it presents: The Other continues ever
Whilst virtue's good: and honors. Being men,
The best of Natures fabric: Why should then
Pictures be thought so worth? as if he died
That did not leave his equal. If not tried
To be in substance; yet in show it is known:
He never was known depart, that like his own
Left no proportion: For some worth (indeed)
Death leaves not life example, I do heed
By accidents. Then, such parts to express
Nature and Art, confirms tru'st tuteresse
From Poesy. All worth and every action
Re-acts in noting thoughts; thence. Yet give faction
Of painting even course: but grant it so
That Poesy stand to publish: Every show
Being substanc'd, better's honored, virtue's like
To live thy age, in thee: Then be to seek
New shelter, leave her not: still in thy name
Thy worth, and she shall share great'st pars of fame.
In Arts and Virtues ripe; thy actions show
Now when thy years but green: All hope to know
Both mature; both exceed. Now Melior est,
Altior, ascendens: Thriuing to the best;
And thought fame, breath to lend. This harmony
(Played by an active Muse) does wait to see
From thee repair; and from thee fetch a strain
For a tenth worthy; Englands Charlemaigne.
Thou Art in the fairest path, for rule best Rules,
When Princes Courts turn Academicke schools.
Proceed great Prince, and shall thy time, thy seed,
Summon best Trumpets at fames lips, to bleed.
Your Highness obseruant, AUGUSTINE TAILOR.

ENCOM. 4. To ANNE, the sacred Queen of Great Britain, etc. Her most
excellent Majesty.
NOt loved Pandora, when her Thessaly
Persuaded; not a Queen so worth as she,
The world did, nor could nurse. Deucalion
To see his mother; gloried. Studied on
Her several gifts, alow'd: and did persuade,
So true perfection Nature er'st not made,
Nor after would: and she was cause alone,
That some have little beauty, and some none.
The chief of natures store, Deucalion
Sufficed was his mould. Great Britains Anne
Is better worth to King, State, Land, and me:
Then e'rst Pandora was to Thessalie.
Virtues were there, but better now is here
Men now are more judicious, then they were
Then: and more this confirms? Nature no more
Expects thought can demand; then is in the store
Of the impresse she gave thee. Art to that
Conioines such right, as knowledge wonders at:
And may become a Queen. Not that I know,
Can give least grace to woman, but to show
This virtues Patroness can. But by thy worth
Never in thy sex. My thoughts had noted forth
The difference what might be. In that does shine
Matter immortal, greater part divine.
To speak thy every worth is more to do
Till (numbered some) I thought on. Coming to
A curious frame, to see it all that come
Their sights hold it like dear: but when to some
The worth and how it is done, the Architect
A stranger comes to view; it is s'indirect
To censure, yet right famous: He will tell
He must have time to note it, it seems well.
The more he speaks it betters't: grants it such
As he not knew, neither can praise so much
As it deserves. But then to grace the deed,
And end his task, he swears it does exceed.
I leave thee so imperfect; it is so when
One man has made a work that n'other men
Nor understands, nor frames: T'admire is all
The vnconceiuing can; and so I shall
As such, my charge effect: and nearer break,
They do admire and's dumb, I'dmire and speak
Pandora's super-equal'd. Pallas gave
Not so much wisdom as thou art seen to have:
Venus not so much beauty. And for skill
In heavenly numbers not Apollo will
Disclose he better graced her. Mercury
For breath-sweete numbers the like strain to thee,
To her allowed not. These were all her store:
These all be thine, and better. Others more:
Chastity, every virtue. Thou art known
Past her in number: past her in her own.
Past my comparison. Time thy Style shall bring;
The Daughter, Sister, Wife unto a King:
And mother in future. Thou art only Queen
Of spacious Britain; where two late has been,
And where not long since many. Long remain
Blessed mother; to another, Charlemaigne.
And I shall live to see the them enjoy
Another Illion in another Troy.
So Noble spirits set her breast upon
As were the grand sons of Laomedon,
And much more happy.
There shall thou be recorded by the Muses
So long as Them keeps her opposed sluices
From kissing either other.
Educere vtinam potuero!
Your Majesty's freely devoted servant. AUGUSTINE TAILOR.

ENCOM. 5. TO TIME.
SVbiections nurse; nor subject but to attend
The Soul. The course of thee to apprehend.
Not to our part belongs: nor that is my aim.
Time past leaves what he was, nor I to gain
What part's to come, affect; nor should: but that
A safety thence derived. I wish but at
The present to conioine: suffice I do.
How that is spent past, them past have witnessed so
I do retain some forms. How now it is
Most see, but few can censure: Some say this,
Age, as the worst is known: This may be scanned,
Dispraise sits hud-wink'd; Some may mean this land
That discommends another. All lands ill:
I speak to flattery ignorant; But will
My speech (for that) b'alow'd? I know it may.
He that can free it, reels not in the sway;
Of them, that is now unwieldy. He Is above
In strength, as in his virtues: Those that move
Spher'd in the basest element; and keep
No duties to good frame: The time does weep;
(From them) to take the wrongs. And can express
Our land the best; and worst: best, to possess
Such treasures, such a King; and worst, because,
Not these superiors, the possessours draws
To gratefulness; and change: A change is meant
From the abuses ripe. More does exempt
Our actions here, bad acted; From the hope
Of absolutions, then there is in no scope
Of government. We have examples tell
In that we do; in that we do not well.
And what is well done's distinguished: And with those
That good intreates, good actions may repose
And th'Authour strength'd to do. We cannot say
We know not what is to do, for we betray
Our selves that to allege: The truth is so,
(I know we may) I know we will not know.
To right belong the charge! but stay; I said
To see the form of times Encomion made.
And shall; his wrongs, described; assist the part
I promised. Nor I Will run int' a desert
Confusedly, of all his wrongs to say,
I make my charge, but part: to give a way
Of understanding t'all. He is so clear
As innocence: His subjects do appear
Many deformed, in manners; not in shape:
Whence grows this strange effect? Another rape
Must time in sable plain, and 'gaine before
The offender see the offense? must all our store
Admitted for our good, dure this neglect?
Sad desolation shall again effect
Confusions end? More chaos present like,
The more my thoughts attend: it seems to strike
I fear when not expected. What Is the use
(Unmannerly) should these effects produce?
Ambition. All mistrust confirms the same
For primate agent. Ill! behold the frame
Of times-disorder-breeder: first a man
Grounds my description: does attire but scan
In substance, as in show. We have of those
Whence as the vulgar deemes; most strangely groes
A more then mortal state. Nor this effect
Makes this, thus censured for any respect
Of inn, but outward show. Poor ignorance
(Decayed in self, and censure.) In a trance
Stands, painting, idolizing. It is so
Substance lives (much) vncensur'd: men not know
Its being in this Mask. My self have been
In The neighboring lodge to Gallants; with them, seen,
I shall not boast to say: Nor I agree,
Nor glories, that such should be seen, with me:
Yet thus much I conceived; some are within
Deaf, as unfurnished wainscoate; and begin
A serious Discourse, falls in a trance
The all they can is pace, and countenance:
And but, by seasons, them, and yet be these
Attired as the not-knowing a disease
Of humane course. Here; if all them attends,
Attained construction. Noting, well the ends
Thy would be harshe, as tedious. That ambition
These times wins thus, advancement: the permission
Gives not s'vnciuill freedom. It Is admired
Ambition t'enter where nothing's acquired
To glory in. Admit the best that can;
Or birth, or fate, attributed to man:
And he to whom it is lent, discretly know,
(And use) humility; he observes so
But as he should. And this I have discerned
Out of the time, in worthiness best learned
Who ever be: makes not his habit such
As can betray his worth, he doubts so much
His own debility. I do ever note
Them inly poor seek honor by their coat
To purchase. But all the conceiving will
Conceive how things are done; and to them, ill;
Reserve a pension fit. Proud ignorance
May pass, past all the vulgar; and advance
Her form above their conceit: but (surely) shall
By th'able be distinguished; and then fall
From the improper height, to one more true:
Merit must enjoy right, unright have due.
Our Rector, recte grants. Longer to run
In Meeter on these Odds, procures not done
The part that is undone. The Enemy to time
Ambition's proved; a monster, cannot clime
T'her height alone; but by all ills ascend:
To other sins, sins want: but do contend
In her together, which shall stuff the chair
Excess is crowned in. Time, now to declare
His wrongs and not be tedious; speaks ambition,
In whom the rest are nursed; with this petition
Intreates amends: That she may loose her foot.
The branches cannot wither, whilst the root
So largely can command. This ruining crime
'Has men betrayed: and now is betraying time.
But I have much digress'd: I vowed to time
An Apotheosis, in panygiricke line.
And may what is said observe: What Is said's observed
In proving him injured. A time's reserved
To Authorized due castigations on
Them ever time abused. How ere upon
His course we do complain: Right understood;
Subjects, offend most where their King is good.
Them t'ill inclined. A good and virtuous King
Desires; expects a change; and lothes to bring
Confusion to the vnreform'd. Is not
That pilgrim to b'vnpitty'd, that forgot
The path he present trod. And like a child
When It feeds the affection; and's drawn on, beguiled
By some smoth wanton way. But in the end finding
The path turned, crooked, indirect, and winding:
Falls unto running; runs and gives not ore,
And running's further then it was before,
From thither it was sent. This, like his part
That toward the Suns decline in a desert
Is lost, and caught by night: and e're't be day
Is wearied so, and so far out the way:
He lives strange t'a return. Says, the Sun shall
Set, and then rise. And rise before he fall.
All Is hope's in custom. Still the careless son
To do his own; his father's errand's undone.
The Time's on crutches, and to show we falls
Presents us daily with sad funerals.
Never more was to reform's; the time, the King
Betters, and were it not that he did bring
Great safety on's. I could not find to say
Encomions to time. Our King's, our stay,
Whose actions we may imitate; secure.
He ventures nothing that to win's so sure;
Safty, as he that second. Ever rest
This Land, this King, Queen, Prince and Council best.
These give the time all glory. And these give
Best fame to time; that to best time, shall live.
ENCOM. 6. TO VERTVE.
IF now so worth, as in the ages past
Why now not so much honored? is the taste
Of them (be fits) retain thee: so decai'd
They not conceive thy full? how was betrayed
Thy first all-ruling course? Cannot the time
Retain thy good perfection? Is the clime
By ignorance bereaved? I know it is not:
Thou Art knowingly exiled, most have forgot
Thy custom, with their will, Yet is thy rest
Assured with him, and them that can the best
Manage thy form. And but to them estranged
That from the vulgar elements, are changed
To reele in fortunes sphere: Such that esteems
Not man for what he is. But what he seems
To be. To these degrees I do exempt
My Muse from speaking their, etc. Contempt
Shall after times attend the sort: and death
Shall spend all memory of them, After breath
Concludes the funeral Sermon, not a tongue
Deliver shall their names. Except among
The infamous to rank them. If man so
Intreates his fame may after ages kno
As truth allows. What more is virtues friend
Then Poesy, if will the Muses tend
Clearly, to what they should? Ciuillity
Is now disproper censured in th'agility
She can at best perform. And ruder notes
Fills, times infection: breathed from the throtes
Of impudence. To serve no virtue, these
Not, selfe-applauding pens; the worthless please
With others worthy labors: and apply
A part unto their Patrons; placed awry
Directer aims approve. And gathered thence
Where as the ground is free (as innocence,)
From any service, from them. These have naught
But borrowed ends to offer. Nothing bought.
But Bastard ill-made issues. And these do
So cloud the truer borne, makes virtue go
Attired, not like her self. Did not the times
Give ignorant worthless patrons, to these crimes,
It would be as it should be. Yet the times
Has won a master that neglects these crimes,
And's a repairing virtue. And I hope
To see her limits have so large a scope,
As whilome, ever. It Is our turn to bring
Now, if ere Britains fame. Times-poets-king
Accords to the design. And we have leave
His virtues, passed. Exceeding; now to heave.
Them properly, our store may take in hand.
But stay. Another part to our fairest land.
Mount-seated Atlas reares him up to see
His traded skye-course; all is arts agree
Our clime the happi'st: seeing it so clear,
(Banished by females) would inhabit here.
For these be grateful, artfull. True proclaim,
Now virtues aid: can perfect virtues aim.
ENCOM. 7. To the right Honorable Robert, Earl of Sommerset, etc.
HIm this attends that may to me give grace,
Though I not him. Thy truly honored place
So worthily's respected. Amongst which all
My zeal; profession looked for: though so small
A part be put to published: This attends
To Attend thy Lordly name. My Art extends
Not to that high commission, as can give
More fame then that which does already live
Thy names attendant, and not more apt use
Thy stare needs from the service of a Muse
Then he that is self supporter. Yet for that
Past worthies, in past times, have reuerenc'd what
A Muse freeborn preferred. To thy true worth
My Muse in her own colors, sends forth
A part proclaims thee Lord on it. The time can
Show, better lines attends a worser man:
But therefore his Muse taxed him; did agree,
To tie her course to servile flattery:
So, wrong produced to both. I am too short
Of what thy merit claims; and more report
Reports, then I have said. Did but thy acts
Bear outward signs like some. I could contract
(That not the best do do) to thy desert
A column; greater much, yet true a part
As this, that all confirm. Thy virtues are;
To many, strange; and precious as they are rare
So worth, their merit paid may duly rank
Thee in the Sphere of worth. Nor needs thou thank
Fortune: thou art not her Subject. I rejoice
Our virtuous King will make so truly choice
Of virtue, and advance her. These times be
Stuffed full with sons sprung from Nobility
But they be sons ecly s'd. I Have vnd rstood
Some sons are worthless that had f^thers good.
Men give not virtues, where they give their blood.
Thou Art by blood, worthy; and by virtues so
It Is evident, an understanding foe
Speaks not against thy state. The envious sum
Knowing not dispraise, will to praise be dum.
Judgment commends thy course: Thy course not needs
Of worthier ornaments. If of thy deeds
My Muse b'alow'd to sing; and can have place
Of liked acceptance, in thy able grace:
No welcome's more desired. And my next frame,
Better shall speak thy worth; then this thy name.
Your virtues true obseruer. AVG. TAILOR.
ENCOM. 8. To the right Honorable, WILLIAM Lord Mounteagle, etc.
IReuerence more; the more I understand
The customs thou observed. Unto the land
Thriuing I see thy state, to do all right
Such power could ere acquire. Not by the sight
Of feasting eyes thy nobleness can be
Truly distinguished. For I could not see
When first I saw thee, any gorgeous sign
Like them, some great men use to make them shine
In show, where substance is the most unsound.
Yet at first sight I did perceive the ground.
Of good consist in thee; with all that can
Know what aduanceth and becomes a man
The best. Will grant it thine. I see in thee
The best form of (rich-stor'd) humility
Possess a comely scope. When such a part
I saw thee, patronize: Thy great desert
I censured as it is proved. And being so
As King and Country loves, I do besto
This emblem truly thine: Nor drawn for fear,
But only love, and merit. It is clear
(And I Am but last that spyd't) thy countries friend
Thy Country will confess. Should I commend
The good that all approve? admit the rest
(I Will speak against my self) those love thee best
That wants an Art to publish. This I do
For that thou art truly loved, and my love to
Make evident as theirs. Thy name, thy state,
In meetest order well does celebrate.
But here too short my Muse thy worth has said:
I doubt, of great-things, I have small-things made.
Aug. Tailor.

ENCOM. 9. To the Truly-Honourable and right worthy, Sir THOMAS GERRARD of
Brinn, Knight Barronet, one of his Majesty's Honorable Privy Chamber, etc.
I Cannot leave to write unless thou leave
To be what now thou art. Nor death bereave
Can thee from out my verse. Only a change
From thy best worthy form, but makes me strange;
The grave not shall. My labors on thy name
Shall long attend, as English can feed fame.
Though young my Muse; yet not for that for thus:
Suffice she peior claims, sed pessimus
I know her merit passed. How ere I know
This gift's, to him that can, and will bestow
Me right. And from the time if be my fate
To gain a sober gray I shall thy state
Leave in directer colors. The art so true
By birth and action worthy: to thy veiw
My better part I send. My Muse had wing
From thy protection: and a voice to sing
From out thy bounty. Shall I tell thee what?
I would ^ot give thee this, but only that
I know thee worthy more. In speaking thee
This part conferres not all that ought to be.
The times, what thou have been, I can approve
Can witness: 'twas, thy action, won the love
And grace of late Eliza. All her Court
Not yielded, to maintain a Princely sport,
A worthier Gentlemen. Admit it so
Thy age were undeserving; I do kno
Thou are the worthiest of the best esteem:
If not for that thou art, for that th'has been.
Thou art for past admired; for present loved:
And with the best respects. In thee has moved
Delight, and wisdom. This reward does fall;
Thou Art loved of God, King, State, Land, me; and all.
A. Tailor.

ENCOM. 10. To the Lord Arundell of Wardor, etc.
I, said; to give a Lord my love; to one
That nearely knew him; he said ever none
So formed, his Lord accepts; and did advise
Me to be silent. I to him replies
(Seeming my friend) to such a worthless Lord
Were I's director he should not accord
To do him service; and I told him, I
Wished not to know his Lord, neither would ty
(To write) my Muse to flattery. For my part
I deem him worthless that esteems not Art
Clothed in this ancient vest: so that it be
Passed the rude common strains society.
To thee, as not of them that to a Muse
Freeborn gives no respect; I know to use
Both word and sword thou can, and art so far
From Poesie's neglect, as thou art from war
Dispraising. Caesar, Muses 'greed unto,
And did himself the part they could not do:
Because vnknowers to it. Thou that took pleasure
To form a March; daigne now to ree de a Measure.
More, had my Muse to send, and only to
Thy true renown; then I do here besto:
This graced, more's bound to attend. To one more fit,
Then to the master both of war, and wit;
I do not seek to fly to. Thou being so,
All virtues worthy patron; I do own
Thee truly what I give. If some do say
I give a book to thee, thee the other day
I did not know by sight. More famous then
Thou needs art proved: From knowing fame, I when
Have all confirmed I give; and but this comes
T'vnite part of thy praise; that so the sums
Vngather'd, plains imperfect. This, thee to
Concurres, that worthily can say, and do.
Augustine Tailor.

ENCOM. 11. To the Renowned Knight, Sir FRANCIS BACON his Majesty's Attorney
General, etc.
ARts strong supporter, should I fail to bring
My Swan to shore, and brought a shore; her wing
Not perfectly advanced, I shall repent
I, took a task too great. Too insolent
I Will grant my self to have been. I much do care
To place thy worth; which, may with best compare.
Bounties great Patron, nor extends that part
Of generous nature; but where true desert
Has done; or's hoped to do: Thou unto those
Art bounties patron; not that daily grows
To give thy lap their actions. But to such
As of good service gives the smallest much
To King or Country. Thou Art a worthy friend
To King and Country. Who will strive to bend
His power with all his strength, when he to whom
His action, gathers form lies far, ot's gone
From th'actor dilligent? and not any stays
To give the doer, nor reward, nor praise?
Who could forsakes to do; when no respect
Sees merit kept vntomb'd. Thou art the man
Assigns deserts, rewards: Such worth, that wan
The longest Fame, From time; what graced more true
Augustus Caesar, then his granting due
To merit? I amongst, them wits so ripe
That 'bout thee lodge, presents a witnessed type
Of thy true being, who can censure right
Thy worth, and how too short this all I write
Stands of thy best. I wish that all, the all
I give, be truly censured: as this shall.
Retain my love how ere attired it goes
A worthier Knight I know him not, that knows.
A. Tailor.

ENCOM. 12. To the right Worshipful Alexander Presscott, Alderman of the
Honorable City of LONDON.
BEst of thy place, beloved: by me admired:
Why so, I shall diuulge: thy State's acquired
So worthily; as shall exalt thy fame
To merits height; and there stand with thy name
An unknown times-progression. Not as theirs
Thy worth's obtained, that houer in the spheres
Of greatness: and for no desert's made great,
But servile flattery; or resuming shapes,
Ridiculous observations: Knaves, turn apes.
Singularly attained to where now set
By virtue not by fate; thou art indebt
To thee, for thy advancement: else to none
But unto him that merit sets in throne.
And being as thou art so well becomes
Thy actions, thy authority; as these somes
I ably can produce: Thou Art loved for love;
Reuerenc'd for justice; virtue's set above
Thy will; and thou allowes't. Never whilome was
Thy sphere so graced, but honored. Now does pass
Rewards to like deserts: and now presents
My Muse her love. Though her vnskill exempts
From public veiw some parts that shoud attend
Conioin'd; with these on thee: yet do befriend
My Muse, with thy acceptance; if nor I
Nor she can gaine't: yet may thy country try
Thy native love to hers; much then to her
Who will not grant thou grants. I do confer
Thee ranked with best deserts. Though my course rare.
Clear'st Stars serve Cinthia; when the night's fayr'st fair.
A. TAILOR.

ENCOM. 13. To the worthy Gentleman Mr. THOMAS STANDISH, (son and Heir to
the right Worshipful ALEXANDER STANDISH of Duxbury, Esquire) of Graies-Inne.
ONce can my toyling Muse, contest to know
Virtues, in tender years. So true a show
Of all that hopes expect, (I note) begin
In thee ground deriuation: I had bin
Ungrateful to my womb, if not to thee
I had conferred my love: Nor love from me
Attends, but where true merite's. Thou art borne
The best as generous; and of store t'adorne
Thy self in times quaint habits: and so do,
And when so done, more store belongs unto
Thee innly, then thy outward 'tyring can
Express. Thou Art a true-worthy Gentleman.
Patron of Arts. In other tongues, and lands;
Speaker, and knower: them that understands,
My (this-peece) Patron: Nothing does accrue
To thee in this; but underneath thy due
A Swan keeps near thy Spring: nor that delays
My love to take a form. Although his rays
Fayrer then mine: yet this hence axiom grows;
Varietas delectat. So thou knows.
A. Tailor.

THE AUTHOR.
PArdon, how ere these ranked: for w'haue this sway;
A Herald cannot, what a Poet may.
An argument? approved, try by our names;
Th'on's tytles Servant, and the other fames.
A. Tailor.

ENCOM. 14. TO POESY.
O! that but at the rate, thou should be bought,
Prized by the true-iudicious! Time has brought
Such store to bounties lap, as now is the name
Of bounty turned illiberall, and her frame,
That while-ere spread so large each he that could
Confer; had it retained: did it but hold
What did confirm a Muse. What should produce
The alteration? Will no more the sluice
Give the Swan leave to prune, but in the stream
Despect her sad confusion? Whose's so mean
In what to worth belongs, would not apply
A life (if in his power) before she dye,
On her that sings? ill tutord's not that he
In's education, that to harmonee
Lends no affecting-eare? none was; but o!
Past times were good; these times not being so
Must needs be ill. But (surely) some cause brings
This mirthlesse desolation. With twelve strings
Apollo gaue's a Lute, and did prefer;
Those would make Music, but above would err.
Since then he left's, since then some do betray
His prou'd-decree trying how more will say:
To what is said then all is strangers. Th'vntrue voice
Retains more Patrons, more will (if anoice
They can make) patronize. And it is now
So with Diuiner Poesy; These times, how
Those sing that care not: and too, in these times
Not sense, but words composeth most their times
Now Poetizing. In this rude age-latter
More stands to make the Meeter, then the Matter
Rightly to tell. Th'authours (strange) 'gree unto
Of three parts; one to say, and two to do;
But what? judicious censure! times rude rape
Growing from rudest, lets the rudest escape
Yet, their due castigations: does infect
Breath of celestial air; and harsh neglect
Procures to them bestowes't; from generous spirits
(Such throng presents the Patrons) best who merits
Is scarce distinguished; these being the crimes
Of these right-worthy, yet unworthy times:
To grace thee and thy Muse; them, here surueies
The form I hold, that have the perfect keys
Of understandings entrance; and can give
Right to the all I give. I did not strive
In this to build a frame, that might contain
Large-place in the sellars-stall; I did but aim
At freedom for my next, which as my hope
In forms, shall be my share. Me-thinkes much scope
These labors did possess; no Muses first
Works should be tedious, because (ever) worst.
I know thy power retains the ancient powers
It ever could: But it is thought the hours
Have numbered near their date, and that the time
Spares not our fame a time. o it is the prime
Our hopes affect best motions: ciuillizes
Who er'e rightly attempts; and simpathzies
The form of fairest times. Yet more belongs
To do our clime more right; t'impaire these throngs,
And out of all, give best power to proceed
Divinely more, then th'ages past agree
To celebrate. Men worth in ruder times
Aspired their titles; not these worthy climes
Shall memoriz'd be? Tha'are the truest fair
Of past, and present, Knowing-Arts declare
Our happiness; best Poesy, Britain, friend;
Actions be worthi'st, that do worthi'st end.
Time a chief part conferres, this, thee I send:
That may be, Britains worthies (and my) friend.
FINIS.

