THE NEEDLES EXCELLENCY A New Book wherein are diverse Admirable Works wrought
with the Needle. Newly invented and cut in Copper for the pleasure and profit
of the Industrious.

Printed for James Baler and are to be sold at the Sign of the Marigold in
Paul's Church yard 1631

THE PRAISE OF THE NEEDLE.
TO all dispersed sorts of ARTS and TRADES,
I write the Needles praise (that never fades)
So long as Children shall be got or borne,
So long as Garments shall be made, or worn,
So long as Hemp or Flax, or Sheep shall bear
Their linnen-woollen fleeces year by year;
So long as Silkworms, with exhausted spoil
Of their own Entrails, for man's gain shall toil:
Yea, till the world be quite dissolved and past;
So long at least, the Needles use shall last,
And though from Earth, his being did begin,
Yet through the fire he did his honor win:
And unto those that do his service lack,
He Is true as steel, and mettle to the back.
He has I perse eye, small single sight,
Yet like a Pigmey; Polipheame in fight:
As a stout Captain, bravely he leads on,
(Not fearing colors) till the work be done.
Through thick and thin he is most sharply set,
With speed through stitch, he will the Conquest get.
And as a Soldier (Frenchefyde with heat)
Maimed, from the wars is forced to make retreat:
So when a Needles point is broke, and gone,
No point Mounsier, he is maimed, his work is done.
And more the Needles honor to advance,
It is a Tailors Iauelin, or his Lance.
And for my Countries quiet, I should like,
That Women-kinde should use no other Pike.
It will increase their peace, enlarge their store,
To use their tongues less, and their Needles more.
The Needles sharpness, profit yields, and pleasure,
But sharpness of the tongue, bites out of measure.
A Needle (though it be but small and slender)
Yet is it both a maker and a mender;
A grave Reformer of old Rents decade,
Stops holes and seames, and desperate cuts displayde.
And thus without the Needle we may see,
We should without our Bibbs and Biggings be;
No shirts or smockes, our nakedness to hide,
No Garments gay, to make us magnifyde;
No Shadows, Shapparoones, Caules, Bands, Ruffes, Cuffes,
No Kerchiefes, Quoyfes, Chin-clowtes, or marry-Muffes,
No Cros-cloathes, Aprons, Hand-kerchiefes, or Falls,
No Table-cloathes for Parlours or for Halls.
No Sheets, no Towels, Napkins, Pillow-beares,
Nor any Garment man or woman wears.
Thus is a Needle proved an Instrument
Of profit, pleasure, and of ornament:
Which mighty Queens have graced in hand to take,
And high-borne Ladies such esteem did make,
That as their Daughters Daughters up did grow,
The Needles Art, they to their children show.
And as 'twas then an exercise of praise,
So what deserves more honor in these days,
Then this? which daily does it self express,
A mortal enemy to idleness.
The use of Sewing is exceeding old,
As in the sacred Text it is enrold:
Our Parents first in Paradise began, Genesis 3.7.

Which has descended since from man to man:
The Mothers taught their Daughters, Sires their Sons,
Thus in a line succesfiuely it runs
For general profit, and for recreation,
From generation unto generation. Embroydery ancient.

With work like Cherubims Embroidered rare,
The Couers of the Tabernacle were. Exodus 26.1.

And by the Almighties great command, we see, Chap. 28.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

That Aarons Garments broydered work should be;
And further, God did bid his Vestments should
Be made most gay, and glorious to behold.
Thus plainly, and most truly is declared
The Needles works has still bin in regard,
For it does ART, so like to NATVRE frame,
As if IT were HER Sister, or the SAME.
Flowers, Plants, and Fishes, Beasts, Birds, Flies, and Bees,
Hills, Dales, Plains, Pastures, Skies, Seas, Rivers, Trees:
There Is nothing near at hand, or farthest sought,
But with the Needle, may be shaped and wrought.
In clothes of Arras I have often seen
Men figurde, counterfeits so like have been,
That if the parties self had bin in place,
Yet ART would vye with NATVRE for the grace.
Moreover, Poesies rare, and Annagrams,
Signifique searching sentences from Names,
True History, or various pleasant fiction
In sundry colors mixed, with Arts comixion,
All in Dimension: Ouals, Squares, and Rounds,
Arts life included within Natures bounds;
So that Art seems merely natural,
In forming shapes so Geometrical.
And though our Country every where is filled
With Ladies, and with Gentlewomen, skilled
In this rare Art, yet here they may discern
Somethings to teach them, if they list to learn.
And as this Book, some cunning works does teach,
(Too hard for mean capacities to reach)
So for weak learners, other works here be, I say here are the grounds and
directions for many more works then are in this Book.

As plain and easy as are A B C.
Thus skillful, or unskillful, each may take
This Book, and of it, each good use may make.
All sorts of works, almost that can be named,
Here are directions how they may befram'd:
And for this Kingdoms good are hither come,
From the remotest parts of Christendom.
Collected with much pains and industry,
From scorching Spain, and freezing Moscouye,
From fertile France, and pleasant Italy,
From Poland, Sweaden, Denmark, Germany,
And some of these rare Patterns have bin fet
Beyond the bounds of faithless Mahomet:
From spacious China, and those Kingdoms East,
And from great Mexico, the Indies West.
Thus are these works, far fetched, and dearly bought,
And consequently, good for Ladies thought.
Nor do I derogate (in any case)
Or do esteem of other teachings base,
For Tent-worke, Raisd-worke, Laid-worke, Frost-worke, Net-worke,
Most curious Purles, or rare Italian Cut-worke,
Fine Ferne-stitch, Finny-stitch, New-stitch, and Chain-stitch,
Brave Bred-stitch, Fisher-stitch, Irish-stitch, and Queene-stitch,
The Spanish-stitch, Rosemary-stitch, and Mow-stitch,
The smarting Whip-stitch, Back-stitch, and the Cros-stitch:
All these are good, and these we must allow,
And these are every where in practice now;
And in this Book, there are of these some store,
With many others, never seen before.
Here Practice and Invention may be free,
And as a Squirrell skips from tree to tree,
So Maids may (from their Mistress, or their Mother)
Learn to leave one work, and to learn another.
For here they may make choice of which is which,
And skip from work to work, from stitch to stitch,
Until in time delightful practice shall
(With profit) make them perfect in them all.
Thus hoping that these works may have this guide
To serve for ornament, and not for pride:
To cherish virtue, banish idleness,
For these ends, may this book have good success.
Here follow certain Sonnets in the Honorable memory of Queens and great
Ladies, who have bin famous for their rare Innentions, and practice with the
Needle.
I
King David by an apt similitude Psalm. 45.

Does show, with Majesty the Church her worth:
And to a Kings fair Daughter, does alude,
Where to her Spouse, he bravely brings her forth,
In Garments wrought of Needle-worke and Gold,
Resplendent and most glorious to the eye:
Whose outside much more glory did infold,
The presence of th'ternall Majesty.
Thus may you see Records of holy Writ
Set down (what Death or Time can nere deface.)
By these comparisons, comparing fit,
The noble worth of Needle-workes high grace.
Then learn fair Damsels, learn your times to spend
In this, which such high praisings does commend.
2
Katharine first married to Arthur Prince of Wales, and afterward to Henry the
8. King of England.
I Read that in the seventh King Henry's Reign,
Fair Katherine, Daughter to the Castile King,
Came into England with a pompous train
Of Spanish Ladies, which she thence did bring.
She to the eight King Henry married was,
And afterward diuorc'd, where virtuously
(Although a Queen) yet she her days did pas
In working with the Needle curiously,
As in the Tower, and places more beside,
Her excellent memorials may be seen:
Whereby the Needles praise is dignifide
By her fair Ladies, and her self, a Queen.
Thus for her pains, here her reward is just,
Her works proclaim her praise, though she be dust.
3
Mary, Queen of England, and wife to Philip King of Spain.
HEr Daughter Mary here the Scepter swaide,
And though she were a Queen of mighty power:
Her memory will never be decaide,
Which by her works are likewise in the Tower.
In Windsor Castle, and in Hampton Court,
In that most pompous room called Paradise:
Who-euer pleases thither to resort,
May see some works of hers of wondrous price.
Her Greatness held it no dis-reputation,
To take the Needle in her Royal hand:
Which was a good example to our Nation,
To banish idleness from out her Land:
And thus this Queen, in wisdom thought it fit,
The Needles work pleased her, and she graced it.
4
Elizabeth Queen of England, and Daughter to King Henry the eight.
When this great Queen, whose memory shall not
By any term of time be ouercast:
For when the world, and all therein shall rot,
Yet shall her glorious fame for ever laft.
When she a Maid, had many troubles past,
From Iayleto Iayle, by Mary's angry spleen:
And Wood-stocke, and the Tower in prison fast,
And after all, was Englands Peerless Queen.
Yet howsoever sorrow came or went,
She made the Needle her companion still:
And in that exercise her time she spent,
As many living yet, does know her skill.
Thus was she still a Captive, or else Crowned,
A Needle-woman Royal, and renowned.
5
The Right Honorable, Virtuous, and learned Lady, Mary, late Countess of
Pembrooke.
A Pattern and a Patroness she was
Of virtuous industry, and studious learning:
And she her earthly Pilgrimage did pass,
In Acts, which were high honor, most concerning.
Brave Wilton-house in Wiltshire well can show,
Her admirable works in Arras framed:
Where men, and beasts, seem like, trees seem to grow,
And Art (surpassed by Nature) seems ashamed.
Thus this renowned Honorable Dame,
Her happy time most happily did spend:
Whose worth recorded in the mouth of fame,
(Until the world shall end) shall never end.
She wrought so well in Needle-worke, that she,
Nor yet her works, shall ere forgotten be.
6
The Right Honorable and religious Lady, Elizabeth Dormer, Wife to the late
Right Honorable, the Lord Robert Dormer deceased.
THis Noble Lady imitates time past,
Directs time present, teaches time to come:
And longer then her life, her laud shall last,
Works shows her worth, though all the world were dumb.
And though her Reverend self, with many days
Of honorable age is laden deep,
Yet with her Needle (to her worthy praise)
She Is working often, ere the Sun does peep.
And many times, when Phoebus in the West
Declined is, and Luna shows her head:
This ancient honored Lady rests from Rest,
And works when idle sloth goes soon to bed.
Thus she the Needle makes her recreation,
Whose well-spent pains are others imitation.
To all degrees of both sexes, that love or live by the laudable employment of
the Needle.
IF any ask to whom these lines are writ,
I answer, unto them that do inquire:
For since the worlds creation none was yet,
Whose wants did not the Needles help desire.
And therefore, not to him, or her, or thee,
Or them, or they, I do not write at all:
Nor to particulars of he or she,
But generally, to all in general.
Then let not Pride look scuruily a-scewe,
Without the Needle, Pride would naked go:
Nor yet let Scorn cry pish, and tush, and mew,
Scorn is forgetful much in doing so.
Nor yet let any one presume to prate,
And call these lines poor trifles, by me pend:
Let not opinion be preiudicate,
But mend it, ere they dare to discommend.
So fare-thou-well my wel-deseruing Book,
(I mean, the works deserts, and not my lines)
I much presume that all that on it look,
Will like and laud the workemans good designs.
Fools play the fools, but it is through want of wit,
Whilst I to wisdoms censure do submit.
FINIS.
John Tailor.
LXVII
XXXVII
VI
XXX
XXXVIIII
XXIII
XXX
XXXXIII
XXXXIII
XXXXI
XXXXI
XXXXV
XXXXV
XXXXV
XXXXI
LXXXI
XXII
XII
LX
XXXV
VIII
XXVI



