A Godly, zealous and learned Sermon, upon the 18.19.20.21. verses of the 10.
Chap. to the Romans.

Wherein is set forth unto us the great mercy of God in the calling of the
Gentiles, and his just judgment in the rejecting of the unbelieving Jews, and
us also, if we with like obstinacy contemn his proffered mercies.

By Frauncis Tailor Preacher of Gods word.

Jmprinted at London by T.D. for Thomas Woodcocke. 1583.

Romans 10. ver. 18. But I demand, have they not heard? No doubt their sound
went out through all the earth, and their words into the ends of the world.

19 But I demand, did not Israel know God? First, Moses says, I will provoke
you to envy by a nation that is not my nation, and by a foolish nation will I
anger you.

20 And Esaias is bold and says, I was found of them that sought me not, and
have been made manifest to them that asked not after me.

21 And unto Israel he says, all the day long, have I stretched forth my hand
unto a disobedient and gainsaying people.


FRom the beginning of this Epistle, but chiefly from the beginning of the 9.
Chapter, where ye Apostle began to handle Gods eternal predestination, which is
the first cause of our salvation, we have heard, how many ways Paul's
adversaries (but chiefly ye Jews) have set themselves against him: but above
the rest the Jews are grieved with that which Paul had written of the
reieccing of the Jews and calling of the Gentiles, and to show that his
doctrine herein can not stand, they examyne his last argument, and thereout
they gather (as they think) sufficient matter for them selves, to prove that
they are not cast off from GOD, nor the Gentiles chosen to be Gods Church.

The last argument or reason which the Apostle has used, is from the beginning
of the 13. verse, it does stand upon certain degrees, and may be laid forth
thus: To serve God rightly is a testimonye of true faith, to believe truly is a
deelaration of an effectual calling, to be called effectually does well prove
a certain election: but the Gentiles do serve GOD aright and therefore they
believe, they believe, and therefore are called, they are called, and therefore
elected unto salvation.

Now upon this argument of Paul, the Jews do think to prove their own
election more certain then the election of the Gentiles, and one thing they
lay for themselves, whereupon all these degrees see down by Paul in part, do
stand, and which above the rest does seame to be very manifest on their side,
and that is this that they have had the word: as if they should say unto
Paul: Thou will prove the election of the Gentiles by that they have faith,
the service of God, and calling to the knowledge and grace of GOD, and thou
do tell us that all those do come by bearing the word preached: and why
then do thou say that the Jews are reietted? Have they not heard? Yes Sir
the Jews had the law and the use thereof above fifteen hundred years before
it was published to the Gentiles: the Jews had Prophets to expound the law
unto them, and to plant in their hearts faith in that Savior which was to
come, the Gentiles had no prophets unless at a time some one were sent unto them
extraordinarily. The Jews had the savior of the world borue not only among
them, but of their own flesh, he did preach among the^ much more then among
the Gentiles: yea, and the disciples themselves did first preach unto ye Jews,
and were much more careful to make Christ known unto them, then they were to
make him known unto the Gentiles.

For Christ himself being a minister of the circumcision, Romans 15.8.
did at the first forbid his disciples to go unto the Gentiles, Mat. 10.5.
and commanded them to go to the lost sheep of ye house of Israel, which were
the Jews, which commandment they did well observe and keep? Act. 13.46.
as may appear as well by that that Paul and Barnabas do confess they were
first sent unto the Jews, and for that cause had first preached unto them, as
also by that all the Apostlee at Jerusalem were grievously offended with Peter
for that he went and preached the word to Cornelius and his family which were
Gentiles: Act. 11.2.
thinking indeed that Peter had done a thing unlawful, and which might not
possiblye stand with Gods will and lyking.

To bring now yt which the Jews do object against Paul into few words, thus
they say in effect: Where God does send his word to be preached, there God has
a Church and people whom he will call to the knowledge of his will, to faith in
him, and to his true service and obedience: but God has sent his word to be
preached to the Jews, more then to the Gentiles, as is proved, and therefore
God has his among the Jews, rather then among the Gentiles: yea and will be
known, believed on, served, and obeyed of the Jews rather then of the
Gentiles. And this argument the Jews think that Paul can by no means avoid,
but either he must deny his own words going before, to be true, or else he must
needs say the Jews have not heard, and because they suppose he will not deny
his own words, therefore this is the only question they ask, as the Apostle
himself in their person does set it down? Have they not heard?

Thus then we see the occasion of this objection of the Jews against Paul, and
where upon it is grounded: now let us see Paul's auswere. No doubt their sosid
went through all the earth, and their words into ye ends of the world. These
words are truly eited out of the Prophet David. Psalm. 19. ver. 3. The words
are two ways to be considered. First, in what sense ye Prophet David did
speak them, and secondly to what end the Apostle Paul does cite them.

1 For the Prophet David, he going about to move the people to a deep
consideration of Gods benefits, that thereby they might the better promote gods
glory, does set before them the workmanship of yt heavens and the world, and
does cell them that the line, square, or proportion thereof does set forth
unto them the woorthines of the Creator, and for as much as this proportion and
frame is seen of all men, therefore it ought to stir up all men to a greater
setting forward of Gods glory: this frame and proportion the Grecians call a
sound, because the excellency of so great a work does preach, and as it
were, speak in the ears of all men, the knowledge of God to the better
setting forth of Gods praise and glory: So then the words of David tell us
thus much: that GOD has set forth the certain government, preservation, and
order of all the world to all men, Jews and Gentiles and whatsoever, to the
end that in these things God may be known and glorified according to his
will: as for example. The erection of these things does teach us that GOD is
omnipotent, and therefore must be obeyed. The disposition, order, and
government of these things do tell us that God is wisest, and therefore we
must be content to be ruled by his laws and statutes.

The wonderful preserving and defending of them does let us see that he is
merciful, and therefore we must trust in him. The many and strange
punishments which God does send among men, whether it be upon their own
bodies and minds, upon their goods and cattayles, or otherwise howsoever,
does preach unto us the justice of God, and tell us that he must be feared.
And generally, the inuistble things of him, that is, Romans 1.20.
his eternal power and godhead are seen by the creation of the world, being
considered in his works. And this it is that GOD will ceache us when telling us
how we shall put difference between the true God and false gods he ^aith: Lift
up your eyes on hye, Esaias 40.26.
and behold who has made these things, and brings forth their armies by
number and calls the^ al by their names: as if he should say, if you will
discern betwixt the true God and your cou^terfet gods, and if you will learn to
know the true God indeed, look upon his works, the heavens, the earth, and all the world, see in them his power, wisdom, mercy and justice, and learn by
th^se to perform unto him that service and obedience which is due. But it may
be said, what if the Gentiles will not? Or what if any other will not learn to
confess and fear the true God by these things, what is the danger? Verily the
danger is this, It does make their condemnation without excuse, so that now if
they would say, we could not serve ye true God, because we did not know him,
their own conscience shall tell them that the invisible things of god are
manifested in his works, for their sound went out into al ye earth etc. I say
not that this knowledge of God by his creatures is sufficient unto salvation,
for to salvation there is required such a knowledge as does bring faith in
Christ, and teach us obedience to his will, and this knowledge is only by his
word: but this I say, that we have by Gods creatures so much knowledge of God
as is fufficient to condemn us by very justice if it be abused, so that if the
wicked would presume and seek to reuerse Gods judgments as unjust, Psalm.
51.4.
yet even by this should God be found just in his sayings, and pure in his
judgments. And least I should barely affirm this as mine own opinion without
proof: the Apostle Paul does teach us the same use and end of this doctrine:
for when he says that his power and godhead are known by the exeation of the
world, he adds that it is to this intent that they should be without exeuse.
Romans 1.20.


And to this does agree that which is written in the book of wisdom: Sap.
13.8, 9.
They are not to be excused, for if they can discern the world, why do they
not rather find out the Lord thereof? I might bring this from the heathen and
such as have no knowledge of GOD but by his creatures to our selves which have
the use of his word, and it would very well meet with the opinion of the
wieked, which think to plead ignorance against Gods judgments, for when
they have no taste of gods mercies, no feeling of Christ, none assurance of
their salvation by faith: the^ they seek to go to heaven by bywayes, and they
will be saved (forsooch) by prayers to Saints, by pardons from men, by
treneales, and such like things as insideliry hach devised for inan vainly to
flatter him self in: and when these things are found to be devices of men,
then they must be justified by their good works, and when al other shifees
fail, yet at woorst they will not be punished, for they say ignorance shall
excuse them, but see how herein they are deceived. For if ignorance cannot
ercuse those which have none other knowledge of God then by his creatures, but
that their comdemnation shall be without excuse, much less may it be an excuse
to those which have not only yt sight of his creatures, but also ye use of his
word. And yt sins committed of ignorance, are not therefore excusable, because
they are done ignorantly, it may thus appear. Leuit. 5.17. Number. 15.22.
There were in the law sacrifices appointed to be offered for those sins which
were committed of ignorance. Habacuck does pray for such sins. Haba. ^.1.
And Christ himself does tell us, yt as well those which are blind in the
knowledge of his word, Mat. 15.14.
as those which see shall fall into the ditch of destruction, (if they continue
in sin.) When Paul had preached at Corinth a year and a half, and had
written unto them one Epistle, he sent them word in the next epistle, that they
should not think it a sufficient excuse, that they could say we are ignorant,
but he does tell them that if now they be ignorant, it is a manifest proof
that Satan does rule in them, 2. Cor. 4.2.
but for as much (says he) as we now handle the word of God truly, and for
proof thereof we appeal to every man's conscience in ye sight of God,
therefore, if our Gospel be now hid, it is hid in them that are lost, in whom
the God of this world has blinded the mynds of the Infidel^es that the light
of the glorious gospel of Christ which is the image of God should not shine
unto them.

Let us not then think to plead ignorance, it will not serve: if the
Corinthians were so far from being excused by ignorance, that it was a
testimony yt they were under the government of Satan when yt Gospel had been
published among them but a small time, much more shall it testify the same unto
us which have had the Gospel preached amongst us a great deal longer time:
well then take these words as ye Prophet David did speak and mean the^, and
they teach us thus much: That the beholding of Gods creatures does preach unto
us the power, wisdom, mercy, and justice of him that made them, and therefore
now if we do not acknowledge him to be God and worship and obey him as God,
we are without excuse: but much more inexcusable we are if we do not ye same
when we have the word preached, yea, and the more the word is preached among
us, ye greater and more just is our comdemnation, if we do not believe and
follow the same word. And thus much of these words us they are to he
understood in the Psalm.

2 The second thing which I said was to be considered in these words is, to
what end the Apostle does cite them. And when I make difference betwixt the
meaning of David and Paul in these words, I mean not that there is any
contradiction or contrary meaning in them: but only that Paul taking the
words of David, does cite them as it were to a larger sense then David did
speak them, as very well he might. And the difference is but this, that David
does say that the creatures of God, have preached God unto al men, and Paul
does affirm in the same words, that God has been manifested by his word to
the Jews, and to very many other countries beside: as if he should say, even
as David in his time did affirm, that God had been then preached to all
people by his creatures: So I say of this time (says Paul) that God has been
published and taught in all places by the preaching of ye Gospel. And therefore
where ye ask me this question: Have they not heard? I easily grant that they
have heard, for no doubt their sound went out through all the earth, etc. This
the^ is the end whereunto Paul does cite this testimony of David, to show
that the Jews have hard the word: and he does prove it thus, the gospel
has been preached to all nations, ergo to the Jews: or thus, The Gospel has
been preached unto the gentiles, I cannot deny it, but much more must I
needs confess, it has been preached to the Jews. This then is Paul's answer
if we take it largely as he does speak it: The gospel has now had such
good success, that it has been preached in all Countries: and the sound of
the Apostles has been heard almost every where.

In the general words of this answer we have first to note, the great
increase of the gospel in the time of the Apostles, when although it was not
received by (...) like authority of the Roman Empire, yet although it was
almost every where (not only spoken against, but also persecuted) yet Paul
does confess of himself. Romans 15.19.
that he has preached the gospel plentifully from Jerusalem to Illyricum, and
the story of the Acces of the Apostles does deelare that in that time the
gospeli was preached as far as from Italy to the Medes and Persians one way,
and as far as from Egypt to Pontus, an other way. And this was nothing else,
but that which Christ himself had told them before, when speaking of the
signs that should go before the destruction of Jerusalem, he says: Mat.
24.14.
And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in the whole world for a
testimony to all nations, and then shall the end come. There be some which
gather upon this place, that the world shall not have an end until the
Gospel be preached in all Countries: But they deceive themselves in putting
no difference betwixt those things which are spoken of the end of the world,
and those which are spoken of the overthrow of the City and temple of
Jerusalem: as for this place it is evident, it is meant not of the end of the
world, but of theend and destruction of the City, and chiefly, of the Temple.
For of those the question was chiefly motied, as may appear. Mat. 24. ver. 3.
Mat. ^4.^.
There fore when it is said that the gospel shall be preached in all the world,
and then the end shall come. It is as much as if he should have said, it shall
be preached not only to the Jews, but also to the Gentiles, yea, and to a
great part of the Gentiles, and then shall come the end and destruction of this
Temple. And this it is which Paul does tell the Collossians: Collos. 1.6
That the Gospel is come unto them, even as it is unto all the world. And unto
Timothy, God is manifested in the flesh, 1. Tim. 3.16.
justified (...) the spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the world. All these things were done in the Apostles time,
and so it is both fulfilled which Christ did foretell, that the Gospel should
be preached both to the Jews and Gentyles, and to a great part of the world,
before the destruction of Jerusalem: and also found true which the Apostle
Paul here does tell us, that in his time the sound of the Gospel by the
preaching of the Apostles, was gone out through the most part of the world.
Behold here one of the greatest miracles that God has wrought: namely, that
(in the space of twenty two years or there about) the Gospel should be so
far published, that Paul might truly say, the sound thereof went through
out all the earth, etc. And that by men of no great account in their own
country, but fisher men, or of some handie craft: such as were generally (and
as it were) naturally hated in all other countries, because they were Jews:
And for the better manifesting of this miracle, let it be added, they did
preach nothing but Christ crucified, which before was not heard of, and (as
the Apostle himself does testify) was an offense to the Jews and mere
madness to the Gentyles. Let us here learn for our instruction and comfort:
that the planting or continuing of the Gospel in any country is not in the
authority of man, but in the will of God: and though we see the Pope, the
Turk, the Devil, and all his friends bente against the Gospel, and laying
their heads together to stop the course thereof in all places, yet let us
not think that it is in the power of these to do it. It is the only work
of God to prosper or to stay it: and therefore in this case let us not fear
man whose breath is in his nose thrils; and in who^ there is no strength (in
comparison of God.) But let us pray unto God for the continuance of his
word, and now that we have it, let us receive it thankfully, hear it
diligently, and obey it duetifully. Always knowing this, that the continuing
of the gospel is the work of God, and not of man: the staying and taking away
of the same, is the work of GOD, and not of man, and God will continue it
until he be compelled to the contrary by our unthankfulness, and then he
must and will take it away. And if the Pope and his holy conspiracy will vow
the banishing of the Gospel out of all Realms and Countries, where it is now
preached, and the planting of Idolatry in the same Countries, this universal
publishyng of the Gospel in Paul's time, will tell them that in rowlyng of
this stone they labor invayne: For though they make accounte that they be
Princes, and great Peers of the world, yet in as much as they consulte
against the Lord and his anointed: Psalm. 2.4.
He that dwells in heaven will laugh them to scorn, yet the Lord him self
will have them in derision: yea, and in despite of them the gospel must
storysh where, and as long as God shall think good.

The doctrine of gods word is compared to a storm or to rain, Deuteronomy. 32.2.
Esaias. 55.10. Heb. 6.7.
not only because it does water and make fruitful the hearts of men, as
rain does the earth, but also because as it is not in man to forbid a shower
to fall where GOD has appointed it. no more is it in man to stop the course
of the gospel, where God has appointed that it shall be preached: It may go
for an old wives Fable, and (as it is) for an unwritten untruth, that they
tell us: that Thomas Becket stood so far in our Ladies favor, that if he
had lived but a little longer, he had obtained that it never should rain in
the high ways in England. Thomas could not do it, it is a lie, no if all
the world would take this matter in hand to stop rain yt it should not
fall in any place, they can not do it: and even as impossible it is that by
the authority or policy of man, the course of Gods word shall be stopped,
but that it shall go forth and prosper in that where to it is sent: to the
great comfort of us and all others, where the gospel now is preached, and to
the manifest bewraying of their great folly, and wickedness, which set
themselves against God in this point.

But from the general words, let us come a little nearer to the very purpose
of Paul. His adversaries ask of him, Why do thou say, that the Jews are
rejected? Where have they not heard the word preached? Yes in deed (says
Paul) they have heard, it cannot be denied, for the sound went forth
through all the earth etc. The Gentiles have heard much more, the Jews
amongst whom the word began first, and was continued until the Jews
lived in such contempt of the word that the Disciples were in a manner
compelled to go to the Gentiles, as they them selves confess. Act. 13.46.
The Apostle then does confess, that the Jews have heard the word, but yet
it must stand that they are rejected? And so his very purpose is to give them
secretly to understand, that the cause why the Jews were rejected, was, not
because they had not the use of the word, but because they conte^ned the same
word which they had, as if he should have said: the Jews in deed had the
word, it was preached among them, but yet God has in justice cut them off,
because they despised the word. And here the Apostle will have us to learn not
only what was the cause of the cutting off of the Jews, but also he will lay
before us a great cause of gods anger, and of many plagues which in all ages
fall upon men, and that is the contempt of his word. There is nothing does
more argue a child to be disobedient and careless to do his Fathers will,
then when he has no mind to know what his Fathers will is, nor to hear his
admonitions: And there is nothing does more euidentlye prove a rebellious and
disobedient mind in mast, then when he has no care to hear Gods will
revealed in his word, nor to know what it is. There is nothing that God has
more care of, then that his word shall not be despised, neither any sin
which god has more severely punished at all times, then the contempt of his
word, as the stories of all ages will tell us: This needs no great proof,
this present example, which the Apostle here has in hand will make it plain
enough.

The Jews had the law given unto them, they had Prophets sent to preach and
expound the law, they had Christ and his Apostles to preach and work
miracles, to call them to salvation in the Messiah which was come, they
despised the Law, they persecuted and killed the preachers of their salvation.
And therefore the Apostle here says: (notwithstanding that they had the word)
yet god has cast them off, because they were contemners of the word, and
would not willingly obey it, no not so much as hear it.

But that this may be prositable to us, let us bring it from the Jews to our
selves, and let us not deceive our selves by promising our selves, that the
hearing of his word is either a matter that God does make small account of,
or else, that in that slack hearing which we use, we do sufficiently answer
Gods expectation herein. For in few words it is thus with us and no better:
there is nothing that God does more esteem then his word, there is nothing,
which we more contemn. Say to a man, sir ye ought not to live in this or that
sin, it is wicked, it is contrary to Gods word, your usury, your travailing on
the Sabbath day, your blaspheming of gods name, and such like, they are
forbidden by the scripture, his common answer is: can you she we us any
statute against these things? is there any law in force, which does forbid
them? if there be a statute that may be some stay, if not, Exodus 5.2.
though al his life be directly against gods law, he cares not. And is not
this to say with Pharao? What is the Lord that I should hear his voice, and
set Israel go. I know not the Lord, I will not let Israel go.

Again, tell another of his negligence in hearing the word, it is an ordinary
answer, if we had preaching but according to the Queens Injunctions, one
Sermon in a month, or in a quarter of a year, then we should be the more
diligent to hear, but now it is two days in a week, that makes us weary.
Is not this to say with Israel: Our stumack does loath this light meat? Number.
11.
But Pharao had his reward for contemning of the word, and so had Israel, and
no doubt so shall we, if we continue in the same contempt, wherein we have
begun, and of long time have gone forward. Let us learn in what state we
stand, by the example of the Jews, of whom Paul here speaks: compare our
time and manners with theirs, and so it shall best appear: They were Gods
Vineyarde, so be we, they were dug, pruned and dressed by the preaching of
the word, and good government, so be we. they were despisers and negligent
hearers of the word, so be we: For this cause they had this judgment: Math.
21.43.
The kingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and given to a nation, which
shall bring forth the fruits thereof: and I pray GOD the like fall not upon us.
Act. 13.46
And when Paul and Barnabas had preached to the Jews, and they had no care to
hear, at length they take their leave thus: It was necessary that the word of
God should first be spoken unto you: but seeing you put it from you, and judge
your selves unworthy of eternal life, behold we turn to the Gentiles. Thus it
was with the Jews, this was their contempt of the word, thus God did
threaten them, and thus it came to pass. Let us learn by their example to
avoid the like contempt of his word, least the like punishment fall upon us.
God is the same God now that he was then, justice is the same thing now that it
was then, the contempt or neglecte of Gods word is now the same sin that it
was then. And therefore if we continue in the contempt of God and his word, as
they did, no doubt we shall have the like punishment as they had: that is, to
have the word taken from us, and given to a nation, which will bring forth the
fruit thereof: for mine own part, I pray God I may not see it, but God
knows, I look for it: And I doubt not but (when this time shall come, which
God defend) a number of those which now loath the word will then lack it: we
feed now at the full heap (God be thanked for it) we have his word at will,
yeaeue^ til we be weary of it, especially in towns hereabout, we have time
given us to assemble our selves in prayer to God, and to receive the Sacrament
of the Lords supper, a great deal more then we will bestow that way: these are
the days of joy and happiness, if we well use them. But alas how miserable
shall our frate be, if that come to pass, which Christ does threaten to the
contemners of his word. Luk 17.22
The days will come, when ye shall desire to see one day of the Son of man,
and shall not see it: Then one Sermon would be pleasant, but you shall not
hear it: Then one day to assemble in prayer unto GOD, and other good exercises
of Christianity shall be wished for, Amos. 8.11.
but hardlye found: yea, then says God, I will send a famyne in the Land,
not a famyne of Bread, nor a thyrste of Water, but a famyne of hearing the
word of the Lord, and they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North
to the East, shall they run to and froe to seek the word of the Lord, and
shall not find it. A wise man (says Solomon) does see the plague coming,
and does avoid it. Pro. 22.3.
We see the greeuousnesse of this sin of the contempt of Gods word, we know
the justice of God in punishing the same sin. And we can imagine before it
come to pass how miserable the days will be, if it please GOD to punish us
with the loss of his word: Then if we be wise, let us take heed, that by
our wickedness we draw not this plague unto us. Let us turn unto GOD now
while he may be found, let us kiss his Son before he be angry, let us
receive his word thankfully now it is offered, let us hear it dutifully, and
follow it obedientlye, yea, and let us not forget to call upon God
diligently and earnestly, that it would please him to continue and increase
his word among us, and to thrust forth such laborers into his harnest, as
may not seek their own wealth and pleasure, but Gods glory, and the
salvation of his people. Always having in mind how miserable our days will
be, if it please GOD to punish us with the loss of his word, which no doubt
is Gods just judgment for the contempt of the same. But me thinks I am past
doubt, that when Christ, the Prophets and Apostles do teach, that the taking
away of the word is a just punishment for the contempt thereof, the worst part
of the Jews, whom chiefly it should touch do like it well enough: Yea and
with us a number of Papists and Atheistes are not grieved when they hear of
the loss of the word: no they say this is that which they look for: for they
make account, that then they shall live at pleasure and sin without
controlment: But know they whatsoever they be, that God has other
punishments in store for such as contemn his word, and take it not for a
punishment to be deprived of the the same word, as that which Elihu does tell
us: If they will not hear, Job. 36.12.
they shall pass yt sword, and die without knowledge: As if he should say unto
us, you are conte^ners of the word, and you care not for the loss thereof: no
you account it gain rather then loss, well. God has yet an other punishment
in store, the Pope has a sword, Spain has a sword, France has a sword,
the wicked every where have a sword ready prepared for your blood, to that
you shall go, and upon that you shall die without the knowledge of God. Yea,
but you will say we be Catholics, and if this come to pass, we will take their
part: But I say, think not to escape the better for that: For there is no
people so simple, but they can tell, that those which are not true to their
own native Country, nor obedient to their own natural Prince, they will never
be true nor obedient unto strangers: And this it is that experience has taught
in all ages: Whenever any country was by the inhabitants thereof delivered by
treason or treachery, into the hands of the enemy, for the most part, those
which were the delyuerers were first put to the sword: And I am fully
persuaded, that, if that day should come, which a number of our Papists do
look for, that they them selves should first taste of the sword: It does
stand with Gods Justice, that as they have most despised the word, so they
should first feel the sword: It stands with pollicye not to trust the
untrusty: And let them think of this, as God shall put in their minds: for
mine own part, if I were a Papiste, and an enemy to God and his word, as
they be, and did bear a traytorous mind toward my prince and country, as
they do, I should surely look for this reward. Elithu here would tell me,
policy would persuade, and the consideration of Gods Justice would bind me
to confess, I am one of those which despise the word of God, I must therefore
be one of them which must taste of that whipp which God does keep in store to
punish this sin.

But let it be that we have a way to escape this rod, yet let us imagine, if
we will that Gods word in this point is not true, and that God either can
not, or else will not punish us this way: yet let us know that God is just, and
as he did severely punish this sin in the Jews, so he will also surely be
revenged of the same sin in us: for either God will send strong delusions,
that we should believe lies to our confusion, 2. These. 2.11.
which would not receive the truth to our salvation, as Paul does threaten the
Thessalonians: or else he will give us the spirit of slumber, eyes yt we shall
not see, and ears, that we should not hear, that is, god will take from us
his spirit and grace, and then we shall neither believe his word. nor have any
desire to be obedient to his will, no not if we would desire: But howsoever
it is, or howesoeuer it please God to punish this sin: most assuredly it
shall stand, which the holy Ghost has spoken by the mouth of Solomon:

He that despyseth the word shall perish for it: Pro. 13.13,
but yet we think we have one shifte to escape this punishment, which we
persuade our selves will deliver us, when all other helps fail, and that is
this, we will pray unto GOD, and he will deliver us out of all adversity: he
has promised he will surely perform it: Psalm. 50.15.
And true it is. God has promised to hear and deliver all those which call
upon him in their trouble: for he is nygh to all such as call upon him, Psalm.
145.18
so it be done in truth. But if we will have our prayers heard, there be
diverse things which we must observe in prayer, among which this is not the
least: We must take heed that we be not despisers of his word. For he that
does remove his ear from hearing of the Law, Pro. 28.9.
his prayer shall be abhommable, says Solomon.

And this is a grievous plague, when we are not only in Gods displeasure, but
also he has deprived us of those helps, whereby we should again be restored
into his favor. Well, it is but thus much that Paul will have us to learn in
this point: The Jews had the word preached among them, but this did not
prosit them, because they regarded not, to hear or follow the same: If we
make this our own case, it is thus with us: We have the word preached, God be
thanked for it, and I pray God continue it, as no doubt he will, if our
wickedness do not compel him in justice to take it from us: But if we be
despisers of his word, and that either we be not careful to hear it, or
diligent to obey it: This word God will take from us, and give it to some other
nation, which will bring forth fruit worthy of the preaching of this word: And
not only this, but he will punish us either by the sword of our enemies, by
hardness of heart, by falling into heresies and false opinions against God, or
some way as shall seem best unto him: And then al our shifts shall not help:
No, if we will say with the Jews, we have heard the word, we shall have
this answer: It is nothing to hear, unless we be obedient and faithful:
Yet if we could say: We have prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have we
cast out deuilles, and wrought miracles: yet if this be not joined with faith
and obedience, it has but this reward: Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity, I know you not.

It follows in the xix. verse, and so forth to the end of the Chapter (for I
must go over it with speed.) But I demand, did not Israel know god, etc.
Paul has granted, that Israel had the word, and yet they were rejected,
because they contemned the same word: but this will not satisfy the Jews,
but they will yet have an other fling at Paul, and that is this: Thou tellest
us (say they) that notwithstanding we had the word preached, yet are we
rejected iustlye, because we heard not with fruit. But tell us this now: Did
not Israel know God? Did not Israel hear profitably? if thou will deny it,
Psalm. 76.1.
and say Israel did not know, David will convince thee, who says God is known
in Judah, his name is great in Israel: but if thou will confess that Israel did
know god, then how can thou say truly, that we are cast off of God, because
having the word, we brought not forth the fruits thereof: And here they think
they have driven Paul into a strait: but Paul answers this very well, and in
many words. The sum of his answer is, that there were a few in Israel which
did he are with fruit and knew god, and they were not rejected, neither does
ye Apostle here speak of them. But for the most part the Jews were wicked and
rebellious, despisers of god and his word, and therefore were justly cast off.
So then Paul does answer thus: the nations of the Jews is now cut off by gods
justice, that they should not be the visible Church of god as before: but not
every particular man cut off: for god has still reserved unto him self a number
according to ye election of grace, which (no doubt) shall be saved: I may not if
I would, nor I need not if I might, to stand upon the substance of this
answer: namely, to show how it is said, that Israel is cut off, and yet god
has his Church in Israel: it has been handled at large in this Chapter
already, but will fall out more plain in the Chapter following, as will well
appear in the next Lecture.

For the manner of his answer, Paul fearing least by telling ye reieciting of
the Jews, he should grow in misliking and hatred with them, will not answer
in his own words, but in the words of Moses and Esaias: his first place is in
Deuteronomy. 32. ver. 21. second and third in the beeginning of the 65. Chapter of
Esaye. There be diverse things herein to be considered, which I must but
name.

Of the Gentiles he says, first that they were not a nation, or his nation,
doubt less they were a great people, and such a people, as had great
authority, large dominions, and great wealth: And yet because they had not the
knowledge and service of God, Moses says they be not a people. To teach us
what it is that chiefly is to be commended in cities, towns and countries, it
is not larg borders, great dominions, ample privileges, much wealth, and such
like: no these were in the heathen, and yet Moses says, they were not a
people, or not Gods people. David does commend Sion not for ye strength thereof,
Psalm. 15.1.
or much people, or great privileges (which things were ple^tiful in ye city)
but he does commend it, because there was yt tabernacle, there men did
assemble the^ selves to hear ye law read, and expounded, and to do unto god
such service as he required. I deny not but those things be good, and creacted
for ye great benefit of gods children, but comparable to the having and use of
gods word, and therefore howsoever we do for these things, our chief care
must be that we may enjoy the use of Gods law, for without that we are not
worthy to be counted the people of God. And let this drive us to be thankful
unto God, who has bestowed upon us this benefit most inestimable, and has
denied it to other nations, but I may not prosecute this.

Secondly, he says of the Gentiles, yt they were a foolish nation, doubtless
the Jews were never comparable to them in worldly wisdom, their wit is
wondered at every where, both for finding out what was good and ill in man's
life: For looking so nearly into the secret works of god, for making of very
exquisite laws, and also for many other excellent things wherein they were very
wise: and yet because they had not the knowledge of God by his word, therefore
does Moses call them a foolish nation. To teach us not to stand too much upon
our wisdom, if it be but fleshly, for all the wisdom in the world if it be
separate from the knowledge of god in Christ Jesus, it is but foolishnes, as
Paul does affirm. 1. Cor. 3.19. Sapi. 9.6.
And though a man be never so perfect (says Solomon) among the children of
men, yet if the wisdom of God be not with him he shall not be regarded.

Thirdly, of the gentiles it is said by Esaias, yt they sought not after god etc.
They knew there was a God, and in their wisdom they were very diligent to
seek out yt knowledge of that God, but they sought him not as they ought, they
sought him not in his word, where only he was to be found, and therefore it is
said they sought him not: and in deed whosoever will seek the true knowledge
of God any other where then in his word it is but labor lost: and therefore it
is a necessary lesson, which Christ does give to his adversaries, and to us
all, Search the scriptures, John. 5.39.
for in the^ ye think to have eternal life, and these are they which
testify of me. These things I pass over lightly, as not directly pertaining
to the Apostles purpose, and yet I touch the^, because they lie in my way, and
hereafter I shall apply them. And unto Israel he says, All the day long have
I stretched forth my hand, etc. ver. 21. Of the gentiles he has said, they
were not worthy the name of a people, they were foolish, and they sought not
God. Now for Israel he says, That God has stretched forth his hand unto
them, all the day long, etc.

When he says God stretched forth his hand, he does set forth the great
care that God had to bring them to salvation, when he says (all the day long)
he does tell us how great diligence God did use to bring this to pass. And
when he says (that Israel was a disobedient, and a gain saying people) he
will set before us the great negligence and backewardnesse which was in them.
Now draw all these together, and make one doctrine of them all, it is thus:
The negligence and dullness of man in well doing is great: But such is the
mercy of GOD toward man, and so careful and diligent is God for man, that all
the day, he does stretche forth his hand, that is, continually his mercy
does strive and wrestle with our backewardnesse (if it be possible to
overcome it. As we see in Ada^, in Cain, and in many others, who when they were
fallen from God, they sought not to God to be reconciled again, but God
sought unto them: yea, and when they hyd themselves, yet God found them out.
But above the rest it is notable to this purpose, that is written in the 19. of
Genesis, where it is said, that the angel does charge Lot and his family to
depart speedily out of Sodom, Genesis 19.16.
and yet they lingered: and the text says, That as they prolonged the time,
the men caught both him and his wife, and his two daughters by the hands (the
Lord being merciful unto him) and he brought him forth, and set him without
the City. See here the backwardness of man's nature in Lot: but chiefly
behold the forwardnes that is in god to strive and wrestle with man, that by
his mercy he may overcome man's wickedness. So here the Jews are fallen from
god, they are rebellious and unbelieving, and yet God does still offer the^
salvation, he stretches forth his hand unto them, he continues his mercy,
he does it all the day long. Now (of all this that the Apostle here sets
down, both of the untowardness of the Gentiles, and backwardnes of yt Jews)
let us conclude with that which the Apostle does here drive unto, which is the
justice of God in rejecting the Jews, and the mercy of God in calling the
Gentiles, and that does appear thus. The Gentiles are no nation, or not Gods
nation, a foolish people, and such a people as seek not after God, and yet
they are saved by gods mercy. To the Jews God does streth out his hand, and
offer salvation still, and yet they continue unfaithful and disobedient, and
so are cast of by Gods justice. So then that which we have here to conclude,
and which Paul would have the Church of Rome to learn of all this that he
says of the Jews and gentiles is but this: that the gentiles were called to
be partakers of gods graces, not of their merit, but of gods mere mercy:
and therefore all the praise and glory of their salvation is to be given to God
alone, and nothing to them selves: the rejecting of the Jews is of gods
justice, for their own wickedness. And therefore all the blame of that to be
laid upon themselves, and nothing at all upon God. If I could or might make
of this a general doctrine, it would teach us all thus much, yt the salvation
of all Gods people is of Gods only mercy without any deserving of man: and that
the condemnation of all the wicked is of their own desert only without any
fault in God: according to that which God says by the Prophet: Hose. 13.9.
Thy destruction O Israel is thine own, but thy salvation is of me alone. Thus
then we see that Israel did hear, that is, had the word, and yet they were
justly rejected of God, because they heard not with fruit, but contemned the
word: and where they think they can allege for themselves that they were
profitable hearers, because it is said the knew God, Paul says, that some of
them knew God, and they were not cast off, but the most part knew not, and were
rejected: and for the salvation of the gentiles, and whosoever else is saved, it
is of Gods mercy without man's deserving, as also the condemnation of the wicked
is of gods justice through man's wickedness, without any injustice or fault in
God. God (for his son Jesus Christ's sake) continue amongst us the use of his
word, make us not idle hearers, but profitable doers of the same, give us
faith and eternal salvation in the death and merits of Christ Jesus the
son of God: To whom, with God the father, and God the holy ghost, be all
honor, glory, praise, and dominion for ever more.

Amen.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, for
Thomas Wodcock. 1583.


