THE Subjects Joy, For the Parliament.
IACOBVS REX.


SVch and so great, all man's Corruption is
In shunning Good, and running to Amiss:
That the Almighty, did long since ordain
Laws, that should our rebellious wills restrain.
And from that Parliament, of highest Heaven
A Statute, and an Ordinance was given,
That from those Laws of the Eternal King,
All other Laws (that govern men) should spring.
And as the Sea in Rivers, Creekes and Bays,
Flows, and disperses many several ways:
So does Gods Acts in many Branches run,
To show us what should be undone, or done.
For this cause did the power of Heaven ordain,
That Kings (like Gods) on Earth should Rule and Reign:
To Judge, to be a Refuge, and Defense
With Right, of too much wronged Innocence.
And for this cause, God does a King command,
That he his Laws should Read Deu. 17. 15
and understand.
And sure, of All the Kingdoms that there are
Beneath the Heavens, none may with us compare:
To us the Almighty, graciously did grant
Freely his Sacred Gospel here to plant,
Making Great Britain an Admired mirror,
(When other Nations blindly live in Error.)
For us a matchles King, he out did pick,
Defendor of the Faith Apostolic,
Who all his Laws and Statutes does incline,
Conformable unto the Laws Divine.
Gods Law in every faithful heart Heb. 8. 10.
is writ,
And our Kings Government does witness it.
And now these Eighteen years a blessed Peace,
Has made our sins (more then our thanks) increase,
That breach of Laws, has sown neglected seeds,
Being almost grown unprofitable weeds:
Our Gracious King, these evils to prevent,
Assembled has a Royal Parliament.
The high Creator, made this Kingly Creature
His Steward, by his Office, Name, and Nature,
And he does guide and Rule this happy Land,
As he is guided by the Almighties hand.
And though a King has Honor and Renown,
Yet many Cares attend upon a Crown:
And though a King a Royal port does keep,
Yet does he wake, when Subject; often sleep.
And had not our dread Sovereign, bin protected
By the Almighty, who has him directed,
We could not have enjoyed such Peace and Rest,
Wherewith so many years we have bin blessed.
And as he now has caused a Parliament,
God still be present there, and President:
Let the Kings heart as it has done persevere,
That God may have the Glory, now and ever.
(Like David) let him not from goodness start,
But be a man according to Gods heart.
Let Salomons great Wisdom ever be
In him, that Good from Ill he may foresee:
Let him with Iosua's courage (Constantly)
The Devil, the world, and eke the Flesh defy.
And let him (like to Moses) ever write,
And ordain Laws that may be Just and Right.
Like faithful Hushaies 2 Samuel 15.
be his Counsel still,
To give Advice according to thy will.
Guide thou the Reverend Bishops, and the Peers,
The Judges, and elected Knights, of Shires,
And Burgesses of Towns within this Land,
Do thou (O God) amidst their Counsel stand.
Let all their Consultations, still depend
To beat down Vice, and Virtue to defend:
Thy Gospel to increase and propagate,
And for the Good of Commonwealth and State.
The Pride of Haman, far from them expel,
Confound the Counsel of Ahitophell:
Pluck Heresies up by the very Root,
And tread proud Antichrist quite under foot.
Banish (...), leaprous with base Bribes,
Papisticke Pharisees, Sophisticke Scribes:
And those that wholesome Laws can wrest and wring,
For gain against Conscience, Country, and their King.
Thus being guided by thy blessed Spirit,
They will accomplish Statutes worthy merit:
That after Ages gladly may Receive
The Acts, and Orders, which our times must leave.
Let Prince, and Peers, and people thus Combine,
The profit will be ours, the Glory thine:
And as thy Blessings has bin multiplyde
Upon our Kingdom, let them still abide:
Let not our Sins as a partition be,
Or make us be as castawayes to thee.
Let not our Crimes thy Indignation move,
Whereby they may us separate from thy Love:
But as thy favors to Us have bin such,
As never any Kingdom had so much,
So let our thankfulness to thee therefore,
Be every day expressed more and more.
Protect the King with thy Almighty Arms,
Save him from Foreign and Domesticke harms:
At all times with thy heavenly Grace relieve him,
And after Death a Crown of Glory give him.
Preserve for evermore, our gracious Prince,
And strength him, his and thy Foes to convince,
The Prince and Princess Palatines high Grace,
With all the Royal and the hopeful Race:
Defend them Against all that them oppose,
And fight their Battles still against their Foes.
Grant that of this Seed we may never want one,
To magnify thy Name in Britains Throne:
Until our Savior, and thy only Son,
Shall come in Judgment, and the world be done.
To whom with thee and with the Holy Ghost,
Be rendered (every where from Coast to Coast)
All Honor, Glory, Power, Might, Praise, Thanksgiving,
To thee three Persons, one GOD, everliving.
FINIS.
John Tailor

Printed by E All-de for H. G. and are to be sold by Edw: Wright.


