GREAT Britain, all in Black.

FOR The incomparable loss of HENRY, our late worthy Prince.

By John Tailor.

LONDON Printed by E.A. for I. Wright dwelling in Newgate Market, near unto
Christ's Church gate. 1612.



HENRICUS PRINCEPS


SEe here the portraite of that matcheles wight
Whose valor paralel'd the God of fight:
At Tilt, at Barriers, both with sword and spear
He made his hopeful prowess often apeare:
His shadow's here, the world his substance misses
That was this Isles Achilles and Ulysses.
His soul's inthroan'd above Heauen's spangled frame,
And earth's adorned with his resounding fame.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND MY MVCH ENDEERED FRIEND Sir Robert Dowglasse
Knight.
TO thee I consecrate these mourning lines
Of Royal Henry's sad untimely hearse,
For want of whom this Kingdom weeps and pines,
With sighs and groans and eye-bedewing verse:
I know his loss thy manly heart did pearce,
And among thy woes, this woe exceeds the worst:
I know thou rather had (death's Iaueline fierce)
To save his life, thy loyal heart had burst.
But it is our fortunes and our fates accursed,
Amid'st these days of sorrow to survive;
And life's vnpermanent all trustles trust
Is fled from him who kept our hopes alive:
But let sweet patience subiugate your sorrow
A heavy eu'ning brings a joyful morrow.
Your Worships ever most obseqiuous. John Tailor.

GREAT Britain all in Black.
NOt any Poets all-reuiuing pen
Can write vnparalel'd Prince Henry's praise:
Nor can their Muses call him back again:
Whose living virtues shine (like Titans rays)
Had I a quill of that Arabian wing
That Is hatched in embers of Sun-kindled fire,
Who to her self her self does issue bring,
And three in one, is Young, and Dam, and Sire.
Oh that I could to Virgills vein aspire,
Or Homers Verse, that golden languag'd Greek,
In polished Phrases I my lines would tire
Into the depth of Art my Muse would seek.
Mean time she among the linguist Poets throngs,
Although she want the help of Foreign Tongs.
To King JAMES.
Since such great praise is due unto the Fruit,
There Is greater laud belongs unto the Tree:
Then in thy Glory how can men be mute
That knows such Glorious Branches sprung from thee?
For if such honor to the Fruit we owe
The Tree deserves more whence this Fruit did grow.
To Queen ANNE.
Thou fruitful Vine, thou blessed-bearing Queen,
From whom these Olive Branches sprouts and springs;
Thou that by Heaven so Royaliz'd have been,
To be Child, Sister, and a Wife, to Kings:
Long may thou live, that all the World may know
Thou art the Stock whence Majesty does grow.
To Prince CHARLES.
Great Son of Greatness I the Heavens implore
That here thou may have long, and happy days,
That ere above the Skies thy Soul shall sore
Thou may atchiue thy famous Brothers praise,
And when among Saints thy Father takes his seat,
God make thee then great Britains Charles the Great.
To the Princess ELIZABETH.
Thou whom this I Will, and Nations near and far
Admires for Angell-forme, and Saint-like mind,
Whose Virtues shine as does a fixed Star,
From Thames unto the farthest part of Inde.
All Heavenly blessings rain on thee on Earth,
And make thy fortunes Great as is thy Birth.
To the Count PALATINE.
Most mighty, all-beloued lovely Lord,
Wars pattern, and a Patron unto Scholars:
Great Britain does a Jewel thee afford,
More rich in price then all the Germane Dollers,
Live ever happy with thy joyful Gem
In Earth, and in the new Jerusalem.
TO GOD.
Last unto thee that art both First and Last,
For his dear sake that conquered Death, and Hell,
I do beseech thee headlong down to cast
All Traytors' against these Princes that rebel:
Blott from thy Book of life their impious Names
That seek subversion of Monarking James.
AEquinoques on the deceased Prince HENRY.
To write Great Britains woe how am I able?
That having lost a peerless Princely Son,
So wise, so grave, so stout, so amiable,
Whose Virtues shined as did the mid days Sun,
And did illustrate all our Hemispheare,
Now all the world affoords not him his pheare.
His Royal mind was evermore disposd,
From virtue unto virtue to accrue:
On good deserts his bounty he disposde,
Which made him followed by so brave a crew,
That though himself was peerless, many a Peer,
As his Attendants, daily did appear.
In him the Thundrers braine-borne daughter Pallas
Had taken possession, as her native Clime:
In him, and his terrestrial heavenly Palace
Was taught how men by virtuous deeds shall clime,
So that although his years were in their spring
He was true honors fount and valors spring.
So firm, so stable, and so continent
So wise, so valiant, and so truly chaste:
That from his Microcosmos continent,
All Heaven abhorred hell-hatch'd lust was chased:
He ran no vicious-vice-alluring race,
To stain the glory of his Royal race.
His soul from whence it came is gone again,
And earth has taken, what did to earth belong:
He whilome to this land was such a gain,
That memory of his loss must needs be long.
All states and sexes both the young and grave
Laments his timeles going to his grave.
Man murdring death, blind, cruel fierce and fell,
How durst thou gripe him in thy meagre arms?
By thy rude stroke this Prince of Princes fell,
Whose valor brau'd the mighty God of Arms:
Right well in peace, he could of peace debate,
Dreadles of dreadful danger or debate.
Robustious rawboand monster death, to tear
From us our happy hope we did enjoy:
And turn our many Joys to many a tear,
Who else might joyfully have lived in joy:
As wind on thousands all at once does blow,
By his deaths stroke so millions feels the blow.
Well could I wish, (but wishing is in vain)
That many millions, and amongst them I
Had sluc'd the bloods from every flowing vein,
And vented floods of water from each eye:
To Have saved the life of this Maiesticke heir,
Would thousand souls had wandered in the air.
But cease my Muse, thou far unworthy art
To name his name, whose praise on high does mount:
Leave, (leave I say) this task to men of Art,
And let his soul rest in sweet Sions Mount.
His Angel spright has bid the world adue
And earth has claimed his body as a due.
Epitaphe.
Here under ground great HENRY'S corpse does lie,
If God were pleased, I would it were a lie.
John Tailor
GREAT BRITAINS GREATEST WOE. OR AN Elegeicall Lamenting Poem, for the
incomparable Loss of losses, of HENRY our late hopeful PRINCE.
SIghs, groans, and tears, assist my Muse to mourn
His death, whose life all virtue did adorn:
Whose aged wisdom, and whose youthful age
Was second unto none, that is wise or sage:
So old in sapience, so young, so grave,
To be transferred unto his timelesse grave.
Melpomene (thou sad'st among the Muses)
Possess my soul, and make mine eyes like sluices,
(Or like the restles torrents of the Thames)
To gush forth floods of neuer-ending streams
For this magnanimous heroicke Prince.
Let every one their mournful faces rince,
With brinish tears and bitter lamentation,
And drown their visage with the inundation.
Let sighs, and groans, and tears this I Will o're-flow,
And ouer-whelme our hearts with floods of woe:
Let scalding sobs of this lamenting land,
Raise storms and tempests, universal, and
In this confusion make the world to droope,
And highest hearted honored minds to stoop,
And with deploring languor, hang the head,
For loss of him that lives, and yet is dead.
Let Britains gronings, drown Oake-cleauing thunder
And fill the vaulty air with fear and wonder;
For he that was the worlds admired Lamp,
The life of Peace, of War, of Court, of Camp,
The Expected hope of blessed ensuing time,
Fell in his spring, and did in golden prime.
Thou happy I Will, ordained to hapless cross,
Thou never can enough lament his loss:
Thy hopes, and haps, were never less, nor more,
A better good, or worser ill before,
(Then was the life or death of this dear Lord)
No memory, nor story does record.
Black valiant Edward that war-breathing Prince,
Whose proved prowes did all France convince,
And in the jaws of death his foes did quell,
Our Henry would have been his parallel.
Jove, Mars, and sweet Adonis were combinde
In Henry's form, his force, and Royal mind.
But now deaths Cloud eclipsed great Britains Sun,
His rays extinct, our springing hopes are done.
Ye Esculapian Doctors, now give over,
Honor is dead, and never will recover:
Your Simples are but simple, and your drugges
Are weak, when life and death for mastrie tugges:
Despite your Antidotes and stone of Bezar,
Death kills the Catife and the mighty Keisar.
Your Vomits, Cordials, Euacuations,
Your Bathes and your humidious Fomentations,
Are forcelesse opposites, against greifly death,
And all unvalued, in exchange of breath.
But pardon me (you famous men of Art)
I Will not impeache your high esteemed desert,
Who are ordained by God to keep men's lives
In health and vigor with preservatives.
We ought to honor the Physician still,
And hold in reverence his admired skill.
But yet if you by wit, by Art, or Nature
Had had preserving power to save a creature,
You should have showed it in his preservation,
Who was the life and soul of this sad Nation.
But there is no power external nor internal,
That can resist his will that is Supernall,
Who rules and reigns, above the azur'd skies,
And all things sees with his all-searching eyes:
From his omnipotent Maiesticke Seat
He saw the sin of man was grown so great,
That he audaciously dares spurn against Heaven,
And therefore from us has this Prince bereau'n:
Depriving him of a Terrestrial Throne,
Exchanging it for an Immortal one:
Where Kings, and Princes, Saints, and Martyrs sings
Continual Anthemes to the King of Kings.
Thus God (accounting him too good for Earth)
Has given his Soul a glorious second birth:
And as his state and virtues here were great,
He Is greater now, in his triumphant Seat:
In that blessed Kingdom of eternal rest,
Where he for ever lives among the blessed.
Great Britain, think not but Almighty God
Does threaten Vengeance, with his awful Rod:
And that from us this Prince he has bereft,
Before he draws his sinne-consuming Shaft.
He takes the good to his great Mercies dome,
And leaves the wicked till his vengeance come.
But all our hopes are yet not in despair;
For though the heavens contain great Britains heir
(As knowing Earth unworthy such a gemme)
Yet are there branches of that Royal stem,
That till the consummation of all things,
I hope shall be this Islands Queens and Kings,
In true succession always to persevere,
To Rule and reign for ever, and for ever,
Not only here, (where pomp is transitory)
But in the heavens in never ending glory.
Unto which prayer, with heart, with tongue, and pen,
Let all that love salvation, say Amen.
FINIS.
John Tailor.
Epitaph.
LIu's there a heart that could not riue in sunder,
To see what all-deuouring Death has done
Unto that lou'ly Majesty's Great Son,
Whose stately Corpse lies here enclosed under.
His fame that whilom like Iehouahs Thunder,
Was mounted on the Aires all-filling Wind
Agreeing well with his Heroic mind,
Who Comet-like made all the world to wonder.
Lo what Grim Death untimely has destroid:
Cursed be the Planet governed at his Birth
Who (Traitor-like) conspired to rob the earth
Of such a hope as never men enjoyed.
O could our tears, or bloods recall this doom,
Millions would wash thee from thy Marble Toome.
Ri: Leigh.
Lament. Heu, heu, mortuis Lachrymae non prosunt.


To the public Reader.
IN have, thus, I now confess these following Poemes were of my making: but I
was condemned to be pressed, before I would confess. They are few: (I would
there had been none) the good subject too soon offered the ill occasion.
(Heavens pleasure still put before) Had I determined them for public view,
there had been more, but being so little, I hope it cannot offend much: it is
more healthful to rise vnsated then too much gorged, especially, at a funeral
banquet. I profess divinity, but no teacher, therefore I write not divinely:
the florishes of high styled Poesy I likewise hold unfit for so familiar a
Christian subject, therefore I forsake that only in a smooth and low-bred
method I have couch't these few verses (in mine own judgment most proper,) if
it be not so, judge you otherwise: they are vnpolish'd and I have no time to
correct them: read them the more distinctly, and that will somewhat better
them; how ever, take them. If they dislike thee, I much care not, since they
have in private pleased some good ones: and there is one whispered even now in
mine ear, and told me, Male opinentur de te homines, sed mali.

William Rowley.
To Prince CHARLES.
PArdon (dread Prince) that I omit thy praise
Amongst these driery, sad, and funeral lays:
In stead of praise I Will pray; stand noble Stem
Successor to a fourfold Diadem.
And may the Chronicle of thy great Name
Triple old Nestor: take thy Brothers Fame,
His Honors, titles, Virtues, and renown,
And multiply their luster with thine own:
Above all take this; may thy Age never see
An Epicedion insculp't for thee.
When e're thou front thy foes, let thy Fate run
In Caesar's line, that never fought but won:
Inherit all his glories, (not his fall)
Heaven shield thee from the Roman Capital.
Whilst I have breath, thus shall my duty sing,
Be long a Prince before thou be a King:
But being throned, thy Reign have ending never,
Long Crowned with Gold, and then with Stars for ever.
To Grief.
Grief give me leave now to dis-bosome thee,
Since all in vain I keep thee in my breast,
Let some in smokie sighs condensed be
And with the winds be hurried in unrest:
But then divide that part in moisture lies,
Let half fall from my pen, half from mine eyes.
To Life.
Why did thou leave a house, so fair, so sweet?
Earth has no more such earth to lodge thee in,
Such a Tent Royal, such a Royal seat,
As if thou never should have weary bin.
Shall I say (life) unkind to leave us so?
O had thou stayed, but to be bidden go!
If honor could have won thee, thou were right;
If youth, thou had a lovely mansion;
If Beauty, mixture of the Roses might,
That kept all Britain in an union.
Could none of this? pardon, I had forgot,
Thou flie'st to Heaven, 'cause we deserved thee not.
To Death:
THou great Monopolist, that all the world
Engrosest to thy self, will thou spare none?
Shall still thy mortal Iauelings forth be hurld
With careless flight? a million for one
Thou might have had: but (Tyrant) thou did know
To wound four Kingdoms, at one deadly blow.
Thou might have had a sacrifice of tears,
To stay thy cruel dart, the blow to break:
So many Seas, to buy so many years
When sickness first did thy first sommons speak:
O when that fearful blaze began first to fly,
I knew a loyal subject by his eye.
To Death.
Foe to thy self (rash fool) had he lived still,
Thou might have marched with him into the field,
And by his Royal side sated thy fill,
(Gods foes, and his, falling before his shield)
And being done, with triumphs in thy sting:
Thou have deposed a Prince, to crown him King.
To the Grave.
Unclasp thy womb, thou mortuary shrine,
And take the worst part of the best we had,
Thou have no harborage for things divine,
That thou had any part was (yet) too bad.
Graves, for the grave, are fit, unfit for thee
Was our sweet branche of youthful Royalty.
Thou must restore each Atom back again
When that day comes, that stands beyond all night,
His fame (mean while) shall here on earth remain:
Lo thus we have divided our delight.
Heaven keeps his spirit stel'd amongst the Just,
We keep his memory, and thou his dust.
An Epitaph.
DId he dye young? oh no, it could not be,
For I know few that lived so long but he,
Till God and all men loved him: then be bold;
That man that lives so long, must needs be old.
To N^^^^^^
IN Brazen records shall thy Fifth day stand,
Bad Scholar was the sixth, to learn to spill
What once the Fifth had saved, yet heavens command,
Both wrought, one good, the other (we say) ill.
When life had six days labored in his breast:
He kept his Saboth and lay down and rest.
To S. Iamses.
STand like the ruynes of old Ilion,
Loose thy canonized name in our complaint,
Be no more James: for we will adore but one,
Who long must be a King, at length a Saint.
Be now called nothing, but a heap of stone,
Thy good name's lost, for why thy Saint is gone.
To the King.
THou Royal Tree from whence the Roses spring,
Under thy shades may Britain ever sing:
Right great and good, show now thy Royal might,
Though thy top branche be lop't, still grow upright:
Under thy grief Britiane lies sick in pain,
But when thou ioy'st, they will all sit up again.
FINIS.

