THE EIGHTH VVONDER OF THE WORLD, OR CORIATS ESCAPE from his supposed drowning.

WITH HIS SAFE ARRIVAL AND entertainment at the famous City of
Constantinople; And also how he was honorably Knighted with a sword of King
PRIAMS.

WITH The manner of his proceeding in his peregrination through the Turkish
Territories toward the ancient memorable City of JERUSALEM.

By JOHN TAILOR.

Printed at (...) near Coleman hedge, and at are to be sold at the sign of
the nimble Traveler 1613.

To the Mighty, Magnificent, Potent, and Powerful Knight, Sir Thomas Parsons,
( alias) Pheander, ( alias) Knight of the Sun, Great Champion to Apollo,
Palatine of Ph^ebus, Sword Bearer to Sol, Tilter to Tytan, Housekeeper to
Hiperion, and heir apparent to the invisible kingdom of the Fairies: your
devoted Votary, JOHN TAILOR, wishes your Worshits wisdoms Longitude,
Latitude, Altitude, and Craslitude may increase above the Ridiculus multitude
of the most en^ment Stal^^^^ of this latter age.
TO thee brave knight, who from the Delphian God ^^^e
I ^on^^^^ate these famous Acts of Odcomb:
To thee alone, and unto none but thee,
For Patronage my toyling Muse does flee.
I gave my drowning Coriat unto Archy,
And with his ^ure escape to thee now march 1,
Not doubting but thou will in kindness take
These lines thus writ, for his, and thy, dear sake.
If thou in kindness wilt accept this task,
Hereafter I will better things vn-caske,
And make the world thy worth to glory at
In greater measure then at Coriat.
I Will mount thee up in ^urse past Charles his Waine,
I Will make the Mocue Endimion to disdain,
I Will write in euer-deering lines thy fame.
As far as Phoebus spreades his glorious flame.
I Will make thee pluckestorne Saturn by the Chaps,
And brave great Jove amids his thunder-clappes.
I Will cause thy praises t'eclipt the God as Arms,
I Will wake Donia Venus yield to loves alarmes.
The nimble Mercury shall be thy ^oot-mad,
Is thou will grace my lines: therefore lo i^too't man.
But if to patronize into thou do scorn,
'Twere better then thou never had been borne:
For against disdain my Muses oneli p^t^s.
To write with Gall, com^^^t with Aqua-lottis:
And Vinegar, and Salt, and Sublimation.
Which where it falls will'c^rtch and s^all: probatum.
Then at thou love the Fairy Queen thine Aunt,
Daine to touchsafe this poor and triuiall grant:
Then I thy Poet will with how Subjection,
Proceed to write Tom Coriats Resurrection.
Yours ever wh(...) shall persevere in your (...), JOHN TAILOR.

To the knowing Reader.
NOw sir, it is a common customary use in these times, to salute you with
somewhat; as Honest, Kind, Courteous, Loving, Friendly, or Gentle: but all
these Epithites are ouer-worne, and do, as it were, stink of the fusty garb
of Antiquity. Besides, if I should come upon you with any of these
claw-backetearmes, I might chance to belie you. But if your kind disposition
do merit to be called kind, I pray let me find it in your favorable
censure. Some will (perhaps) dislike that I do dedicate my books to Archy, and
Sir Thomas, and such like: To them I answer, that my subject being altogether
foolish, I were very absurd to think that any wise man would be my Patron: And
it were mere folly for me to make a hotch-potch, in seeking to compound
wisdom and folly together. But howsoever thou esteemest it, it thrusts it
self into thy view; wherein (if thou be not too much drowned in Melancholy)
thou will show thy teeth (if thou have any) with laughing. And as my lines are
somewhat defective in their shape, so I pray thee, do not hacke them, nor hew
them with thy stammering, to make them worse, nor Buzzard-blast them with thy
calumniating mewes, tushes, and scuruyes. Thus leaning thee to thy self, and
my self unto thee, I remain thine as thou respects me,

John Tailor.
The cause of the contention betwixt sir Thomas the Scholar, and John the
Sculler.
A Pamphlet printed was the Sculler named,
Wherein Sir Thomas much my writing blamed;
Because an Epigram therein was written,
In which he said he was ^^pt, gal'd and bitten.
He frets, he sumes, he rages and exclaimes,
And vows to rouye me from the River Tham^^.
Well, I to make him some amends for that,
Did write a Book was called Laugh and be fat:
In which he said I wronged him ten times more,
And made him madder then he was before.
Then did he storm, and chase, and swear, and ban,
And to superior powers a maine he ran,
Where he obtained Laugh and be fat's confusion,
Who all were burnt, and made a hot conclusion.
Then after that, when rumor had him drowned,
(The news whereof my vexed Muse did wound)
I writ a letter to th'Elizian coast,
T'appeale his angry wrong incensed Ghost.
The which my poor invention then did call,
Odcomhs Complaint, or Coriats Funeral.
But since true news is come, he escaped that danger,
And through hot Sunburned Asia is a ranger.
Has raising from the dead I thought to write,
To please my self, and give my friends delight:
The Worlds eighth Wonder, Or Coriats Reviving.
LO I the man whose Muse did lately forage,
Through wind, and sea with dreadlesse dantlesse courage,
And to the life, in hodg podge rhyme expressed,
How Odcomb Coriat was great Neptunes guest.
How Thetis sweetly lul'd him in her lap,
And (at her darling) fed the Barn with pappe,
How big mouthed AEol stormed, and puffed, and blew,
And how both wind, and Seas with all their crew
Were pleased and displeased, tumbled, raged and tossed,
The Gamers glad, and mad were they that lost.
These tedious taskes my toyling Muse has run,
And what she did, for Coriats sake was dun.
She has transported him to Bossoms Inn,
Where in a Basket he has hanged bin:
She has inuoul'd him in the hungry deep,
In hope to leave him in eternal sleep:
Yet having hanged him first, and after drowned him,
My poor laborious Muse again has found him.
For it is her duty still to wait and serve him
Although the Fates should hang, or drown, or sterue him.
The fatal sisters serve his turn so pat,
That sure he has more lives then has a Cat.
Alcide^ never past so many dangers
As he has done, amongst his friends, and strangers,
Her ^^, through all his actions with such ease,
As Hogs eat Acorns, or as Pigeons Pease.
There Is nothing in the world can him disgrace,
Not being beaten in a lowzy case:
Nor Trunks, nor Puncks, nor stocks, nor mocks, nor moes,
Not being made an Ass in Rhyme and Prose:
Nor hanging, drowning, casting, nor the blanquet,
These honors all are his, the God^ be thanked.
But now me-thinkes some curious itching ear,
Does long some sportiue news of him to hear.
For being in the Ocean buried under,
And now alive again, it is more then wonder:
But how these wondrous wonders came to pass,
I (as I can) will tell you how it was.
When first this mirror amongst a world of Nations,
(This great ingroser of strange observations)
Was bound for Constantones brave noble City,
Then he (who is Wit-all, or else all witty)
Whose vigilance lets no advantage slip,
Embarked was in a tall proved Ship
Of London, the Samaritan she hight,
Now note the forecast of this famous wight
The Ship he only for her name did choose
In detestation of the faithless Jews:
For why the Jews and the Samaritans,
Did hate as Christians, Anti-Christians.
Yet I suppose his spite to them did spring,
For I think what, and now I Will name the thing.
In his full five months strange perambulation,
He was in danger of that perverse Nation.
For they by wrongful force, would have surpised him,
TO excoriat Coriat, and to have Circumcised him.
This dreadful terror of his Lady ware,
I guess the cause the Jews he hatred bate.
How-euer was his intricate intent,
In the Samaritan to sea he went:
And eare-abusing false intelligence,
Said he was drowned in Neptunes residence.
Thus false report did make me much mistake:
For which a fair recanting mends I Will make.
My greiued Mine has ever since his drowning,
Been ve^e with sorrow and continual swowning:
But now she is all attired with mirth and gladness,
The Lie was good that made her sick with sadness.
KNow therefore Readers, whatso'ere you are:
That this great Britain brave Oucombyan star:
Was tossed on Neptunes rough remorcelesse waves:
Where each man looked for timelesse brinish graves:
For Eolus vnlock'd his vaulted Center,
And against the Sea-God did in Arms aduenter
With winds vniayled came at unawares,
And greene-fac'd Neptune with defiance dares
With all his watery Regiments to fight
Or yield this matchles, worthless, wondrous ^^ight.
The great humidious Monarke, tel's him plain,
'Twere best he iog'd from his commanding Main:
And with his troops of homelesse, rouing slaves:
Go hide him in the earths imprisoned Caves:
And not disturb him in his Regal Throne,
For he would keep Tom Coriat, or else none.
Then Eol began his windy wrath to vent:
And swore by Stix that Neptune should repent
This balky high audacious insolence,
Against his powerful great magnificence.
Then Triton, sounded, the alarm was given,
That from bells bottom to the skirts of heaven:
The repercussiue echoes of his sounding
With dreadful relaps back again redounding,
Then, then Robustious swollen cheek'd Boreas blasts,
Tears, riues, and shiuers, Tacklins, Sails, and Masts:
In tottered fragments all in pieces shatred
Which here and there confusedly lay scattered.
These hurly burly storms and tempests tumbling
With dire amazing Thunder-thumping rumbling.
The mounting billows, like great mountains rise,
As if they meant to drown the lofty skies.
Then down they fall to the Tartarian deep,
As if the infernal Fiends they meant to steep:
That sure (I guess) a greater gust was never,
Since Inna did AEnea's ruin endeavor.
The Kingly Sea-God (to avoid more harms)
Caught Coriat (the cause of these Alarmes.)
And so his boisterous windy foe deprived,
And home through worlds of floods amain he diu'd.
But awful love to his Imperial sphere
These grievous garboiles chanced for to hear:
And to his brother Neptune down he sends
The wing heel'd Mercury with these commends:
To thee thou watery great commanding Keasar.
I come from heavens Maiesticke mighty Caesar:
Commanding thee by thy fraternall love,
That from thy Coasts thou presently remove
The man thou lately took'st, the worlds sole wonder,
Or else hel'e rouse thee with distracting Thunder:
And therefore, as Jove's friendship thou do tender,
To safe arrival see thou do him render:
Whilst Mayes son his message thus did tell,
A fury, like a Post-knight, came from hell;
And from the infernal King of black Auer^^,
These words he vtter'd (which does much concern us)
From Acheronticke, Phlegetonticke waves,
Thy brother Pluto thus much friend-ships craves:
Thou will send Coriat down with him to reign,
And he will send thee as good a thing again,
For Proserpins his illustrious Pheare,
Of him, and his adventures chanced to hear:
Because a Gentleman vshe^d she does want,
To have him Pluto begs thy friendly grant.
The Marine Monarke answers, thus it is:
You Nuntius from our Brethren Jove and Dis:
Know such a mortal is within my power,
Imprisoned close in ^hetis silver Bower:
I did surprise him midst a thousand toiles
Of wars; of iarres, of bloody banefull broiles:
My high-borne brother Jove has hither sent,
Commanding sue that I incontia^nt
Do safely set this newfound man a land.
And I from Pluto further understand.
That he would have him ^o Creuan Coast,
Where he and C^ne^ daughter rules the coast.
First therefore I in wisdom hold it best
To yield unto the mighty Jove's request:
And on the Grecian coast I Will safely place him,
Where he may wander where his fortune trace him.
These messengers thus answered were dit^^^ist,
And Neptune did to land his guest persist:
But now all hell was in an expectation
For Coriats coming making preparation.
The Stigian Ferri-man on S^xes shore,
Did wait with diligence to wast him over,
And hels three-headed Porter sweetly sung
For joy, that all the Coasts of Limbo rung
With howling Musickes, dambe despightfull notes,
From out his triple Chaps, and treble throats.
Ixion from the tortring wheel was eased,
And pining Tantall was with Iunkets pleased,
And further, 'twas commanded, and decreed;
The Gripe no more on Titius gu^^ should feed.
The nine and forty wenches, water filling
In Tub^ vnbottom'd which was ever spilling:
They all had leave, to leave their endless toiles,
To dance, sing, sport, and to keep revel coiles.
Three forked Hecate to mirth was prone,
And Sisiphus gave over the restless stone.
All, in conclusion had free leave to play,
And for Tom Coriats sake make holiday.
Thus all black Barrathrum is filled with games,
With lasting bone-fires, casting sulphur-flames.
In Vse'rers skuls the molten gold they quaffe,
And skink, and drink, and wink, and stink, and laffe.
But when the Post was come and told his Tale,
Then all this sport was turned to banefull bale.
Grim Pluto stormed, and Proserpina mourned
And tortured Ghosts, to torments were returned.
THe Sea-God (careful of great Jove's high hest)
To great Constantinople brought his guest:
Where (nothing that may honor him omitting)
His entertainment to his slate was fitting:
There in all pleasure he himself disports
Conuersing daily with such brave consorts.
As Turks, and Tartars, Englishmen, and Greeks,
That he thinks ages years, and years but weeks
That Is wasted in this rare time stealing chat,
All his delight's in nothing else but that.
But his high honor further to relate,
I Will sing the new advancement of his state.
Some English Gentlemen with him consulted,
And he as nat'rally with them constulted:
Where they perceiving his deserts were great.
They strived to mount him into honors seat:
And being found of an unmatched spright,
He there was double dubbed a doughty Knight.
Rise up sir Thomas, worshipped may thou be
Of people all (that are as wise as thee.)
Now raped with joy, my Muse must needs record
How he was knighted with a royal sword:
But into what a puzzell now got I am?
They say it was the Bilbo of King Priam.
The fatal blade which he in sury drew,
When in revenge the Mirmidons he slew.
Impell mel vengeance for great Heclers bane,
Who by Achiles fair foule-play was slain.
That sword that mowed the Grecians like a sith:
That sword that made victorious Troyans blithe.
That sword, that through so many dangers rubbed,
That famous sword has Monsieur Coriat dubbed.
What though 'twas rusty? spite of cankerd rust,
The memory of honor lives in dust.
'Twas no disgrace it was so rusty shipped,
It had (like Coriat) many a scow^ing escaped.
But amongst the rest, this must not be forgot,
How he did from Constantinople trot,
And how a solemn counsel there decreed,
That he should travel in a Grecian weed.
To this (for his own safety) they do woe him.
Because the language is so natural to him.
And then besp^ke a sober sage wise fellow,
(When wine had made them all, in general mellow)
Take heed quoth he, I counsel you beware
That of your self you have a special care
You be not taken for a Frenchman, for
The Turks in these parts do the French abhor,
Since Godfrie^ time, that brave bold Bullen Duke,
Who put them all to shame and rough rebuke.
And made the Sarasins by Millions bleed
And holy Toombe, from faithless fiends he sited.
Wherefore (quoth he) in friendship I advise you
T'auoid suspect 'twere best we Circumcise you:
And then you freely may through perils pass
Despite the Turks, so like a Grecian Ass
No man with Lonxes eyes will deem you other,
And thus you safely may suspicion smother.
Sir Thomas gave this fellows speech the hearing,
But told him 'twas too heavy for his hearing:
For why, fall back, fall edge, come good, come all.
He vowed to keep his fore-mans foreskin still.
This resolution was no sooner spoken,
The friendly counsel was dismissed and broken.
Where after leave was taken twixt him and them,
He took his journey toward Jerusalem:
And what he can observe twixt morn and night,
With due observance he does daily write,
That, if my judgment be not much mistook,
An Elephant will scarce support his book.
For he in five months built a paper hulke,
And this must be ten times of greater bulk,
^^ Paule-Church-yard, lonely pity thee,
Thou only thou, shall most encumbred be:
Thou from the Press art pressed to be oppressed:
With many a fat-fetch'd horne-brought Odcomb jest.
But yet I know the Stationeri are wise,
And well do know wherein the dangers lies:
For to such inconvenience they will not enter:
But suffers Coriat to abide th'aduenter:
Because his Giant volume is so large,
The'le give sir Thomas leave to bear the charge.
That man is mad who changes gold for dross,
And so were they to buy a certain loss:
Let him that got and bore the Barn still breed it,
And nurse, dis burse, and soster, cloth, and seed it.
THus has my Muse (as fortune her alloted)
Both run and tid, and gallop^, ^^ble^, trotted
To skies, and seas, and to black hell below
In servile duty that my love does owe.
My captive thoughts like trully servants to him,
Strive how they any way may service do him.
To serve his turn like Prentices they gree,
love send Sir Thomas home to make them free.
Epilogue to Sir Thomas Coriat upon his name.
Why have I spent my time thus Coriat?
Wherefore on thy lewd lines thus pore I at?
Why like an Idiot fool adore -- I at
Thy works? which wisdom will not glory at
At no place ever was before -- I at
Where wonders upon wonder more -- I at
With pen, instead of Lance, now gore -- I at
Thy Odcomb foppery now hoar -- I at
At thy prides altitude, now sore -- I at
Thou art the Theme I write my -- story at
If ought besell me to be -- sorry at
Hard-hearted fate against thee then rore -- I at
Upon his books name, called his Crudities.
TOm Coriat, I have seen thy Crudities,
And, me-thinkes, very strangely brude it is,
With piece and patch together glude it is,
And how (like thee) ill-fauour'd hu'de it is,
In many a line I see that lewd -- it is,
And therefore fit to be subdew'd -- it is,
Within thy broyling braine-pan stude -- it is,
And twixt thy grinding jaws well chewd it is,
Within thy stomach closely mude -- it is,
And last in Court and Country spude -- it is,
But now by wisdoms eye that viewed it is,
They all agree that very rude -- it is,
With soolery so full endu'de -- it is,
That wondrously by sooles pursu'de it is,
As sweet as gals amaritude it is,
And seeming full of Pulchtitude -- it is,
But more to write but to intrude -- it is,
And therefore wisdom to conclude -- It is,
A Simile for his Learning.
THe lushious Grape of Bacchus heating Vine,
When it to ripe maturity is sprung,
Is pressed, and so converted into wine,
Then closed in Caske most tight at head and bung:
For if by chance, it chances to take vent:
It spils the wine in color, strength, and sent.
Even so thy Latin, and thy Greek was good
Till in thy musty Hogges-head it was put:
And Odly there Commixed with thy blood,
Not wisely kept, not well nor tightly shut:
That of the Caske it tastes so, I assure thee,
That sew (or none) can (but in sport) endure thee.
My Farewell to him.
Now Curiat, I with thee have ever done,
My Muse unto her iournies and has won:
My first Inventions highly did displease thee,
And these my last are written to appeal thee:
I wrought these great Herculean works to win thee,
Then if they please thee not the soole's within thee:
What next I write, shall better be or none,
Do thou let me, and I Will let thee alone.
But if thou seem to rub a galled sore,
Vindict^^ vengeance makes all Hell to rore.
FINIS.

