A IVNIPER LECTVRE.


A Juniper Lecture.

With the description of all sorts of (...), good, and bad.

From the modest to the maddest, from the most Civil, to the scold Rampant,
their praise and dispraise compendiously related.

The second (...), with many (...)

Als^ (...) advi^^ (...)

(...) Printed (...), and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, (...)

To as many as can Read, (though but reasonably) it makes no great matter
whether they understand, or no.
Here Is a strange Lecture toward, (my towardly, or untowardly Reader) for here
shall be found many things worthy your observation. I know you have heard of a
Curtain Lecture before now: and shall very shortly hear of a Crab-tree
Lecture also: But for a Juniper Lecture (although the phrase or style be
ancient, yet the matter is new:) And because it does take, and is liked so
well, I have enlarged it in many places, with many new Lectures to it: But why
is it called a Juniper Lecture? Marry for sundry small reasons; why a Lecture,
partly in Verse, indeed for no reason at all.

But as the gagling tongue of a scold leapes and skippes (like a Squirrell from
one twigge or branch to another, observing neither Method or Measure) so does
this various discourse and description of the good and bad qualities of women,
skip from the vicious to the virtuous, and back again from the best to the
worst. It is said that Juniper being on fire is the most lasting wood in the
World, and that if the fire of it be raked up in the Embers, or Ashes, it will
not be extinguished in a year or more, which may be alluded to some
revengeful women, who being once offended, the fire of their malice will hardly
be quenched in their Ashes, or Graves. Juniper is hot and dry in the third
Degree, (as Galen says) and the tongue of a scold is altogether combustible:
It is full of prickles, so are a cursed woman's words very piercing to the ears,
and sharp to the heart. Juniper has also some qualities and virtues of good
women, for as it may be used, it is a Counter-poison against any one that is
envenomed; so a virtuous woman is the honor and preservation of her husbands
person and estate: the Berries and Gum is likewise good against gripings and
gnawings in the stomach; so is a good wife a comfortable help to a man's aching
heart: It has a good savor, and so has the good name of a worthy woman, the
Gum of it is called Lachryma, or Tears, and for Tears, women (for the most
part) have them at command; but the best is, they are like April showers, wet
and dry in a moment. But as every woman is not a patient Grissel, so she is a
rare Wonder amongst women, that neither has the skill, or the desire to scold.
Vale.

To the Reader.
I Sing the praise and dispraise of that Sex
That gives men cause of comfort, or to vex:
His joy or care, his blessing or his curse.
His weal, his woe, his Saint, or Devil, or worse.
You virtuous worthy women (few that be)
I know you will be so good to pardon me;
And yet what pardon need I crave of them,
Whom I will not offend, nor yet condemn.
If women that are bad I do offend,
It is the cause why these my lines are pend.
And if they be not angry, I dare say,
That all my labor's lost, and cast away.
Thus (free from fear or flattery) on I run,
To please or displease, when my task is done.
Our Grandam Eve (in reverence) I omit,
(But yet she played the fool, for want of wit)
And her weak follies incredulity,
She left unto her frail posterity:
It is the earthly portion that we have:
From womb, to tomb, from cradle to the grave.
A woman was sins mother, but another
Most blessed woman was a Saviors mother.
And therefore it may well be understood,
As millions may be bad, there is thousands good.
As some are Furies, that do men torment,
So some are Fairies, that gives some content:
As some are Destinies, and fatal shrowes,
(Like Clotho, Lachasis, and Atropos)
To spin and reele our lives with ^ares and moanes.
And cut our threads at last with sighs and groans
Yet for our comfort there are Graces three
T'affront those Fates ( faith, hope, and charity.)
As there are witches that in mischief swell,
And Sirens, Furies, Harpies, Hagges of Hell:
Yet Prudence, Temperance, Justice, Fortitude,
Are virtues with such mighty force endu'd,
That those that do possess them are so armed,
They cannot be by Hell, or Hell Hounds harmed.
Margery Quiet of Tame, in Oxfordshire, to her Ingenious friend, the Author,
she acknowledging him to be a well-wisher to all good women.
MEn have the Art of flattery, to commend
That most, whereto their vain affections bend.
Our beauties they extol unto the skies,
In prose and verse, with many thousand lies;
With tongue and pen our praises they repeat.
How fair, how fine, how proper, and how neat:
How handsome, and how bony, and how gay,
How delicate and dainty every way
We silly women are, with tooth and nail:
Men's flattery still our weakness does assail.
And we (alas) believe them too too much,
And what they say, we strive still to be such.
For cause they praise us for those things we see,
We give our whole endeavors so to be.
To paint, pounce, frounce, kemb, curle, purle, powder sleeke,
And all new fashions to search out and seek,
To please our praysers: But if men could find,
What 'twere to praise the virtue of the mind,
What honor does belong to chastity,
What merit does pertain to modesty:
If goodness with men's praises were but graced,
We should be then more modest, and more chaste.
But thou (the Author of this following book)
Ingenious, just, impartial pains have took:
Thou do commend the good, condemn the ill,
For which all women, of all sorts shall still
Remain thy friends and foes. M.Q.

The Table.
1. LEcture by a Mistress to her Apprentice, as soon as she rises in the
Morning, with new additions. p. 1 2. Lecture by a woman to her husband, that
has been married three or four years. p. 5 3. Lecture by a young gentlewoman
being a widow, to an old man, who offered to be a suitor to her, with new
additions. p. 14 4. Lecture by an old rich widow to a young Gallant, who came a
woing to her, that had little or no means. p. 18 5. Lecture by a Country
Farmers wife, being a shrew, to her husband, for being abroad late at night,
with new additions. p. 23 6. Lecture by a wife who was very jealous of her
husband. p. 28. 7. Lecture by a widow, which was newly married, to a widower,
with some additions. p. 23. 8. Lecture by an old woman, to her young husband,
whom she had newly married. p. 3^ 9. Lecture by a proud dame, because her
husband would not allow her all the new fashions that are worn. p. 37 10.
Lecture by a mother to her daughter that was to be married forthwith. p. 52.
11. Lecture a Dialogue between the scold rampant, and her patient Husband,
with some additions, p. 71 12. Of a woman to her husband after a ramble, with
new additions. p. 99 13. Of a loving wife to her husband, to persuade him from
drinking, and ill company, with new additions. p. 105 A. Dialogue between
three Gossips, over a cup of Sack, tutering one another how to domineere over
their Husbands. p. 157 Lastly, the Authors advise how to tame a shrew, with new
additions. p. 170
A Juniper Lecture.
1. A Lecture of a Mistress to her Apprentise something early in the Morning,
and thus she begins as soon as she awaked.
HEy ho, what the Sun so high already, and not the Boy up, nor the Shop open?
Arise you Rogue, you sleepy rogue; can you sleep so soundly, for all the Sun
shines in your face? Arise, or else I will so belabour your lazy side, that I
will make your ears ring Noone: you will be calling for your Breakfast
as soon as you are up; I Will warrant your stomach is up already, but I will
keep you short you idle Rascal, I will make you leap at a crust, so I will;
you learn of your Master to lie a bed; the Proverb is true, Trim tram, like
Master, like man: But I Will take another course with you, I will make you be
glad to eat any thing; you are a dainty Rogue, you scorn this thing, and that
thing, you were not so well fed when you were in the Country; then a little
Barley-bread, and Oaten-Cakes would serve your fine chops with a murrin: Now,
since you came to London, you are grown so dainty, it passes: I am sure we
had not so much money with you, that you need take so much upon you, to scorn
the worst meat that comes in my house; nothing but Plum-pudding will please
your fine chops, but in faith I will bring you a hole lower, or else I will make
you kiss Bridewell, and there you shall serve out your time: Out you
stomackefull Rogue, nay, for all your pouting and lowering, I will make you know
what it is to be an Apprentise, I will hereafter make you earne your
Breakefast before you eat it; Run away if you will, and complain to whom you
please, I will answer them, for I will never keep such an idle lazy Rogue
under my roof: Therefore amend your manners, and follow your business, if you
mean ever to have a quiet hour in my service; and I will make you learn to
say, if I say the Crow is white, you shall say so too; whether it be right, or
wrong, you must say as I say, and then all shall be well: Never was poor woman
troubled with a man and a maid as I am; a couple of lazy Varlets. Nay Huzy, I
come to you now in the Kitchen, I think you agree together to break my heart,
but I will break your heads first: All my work is done by the halfes, even
from your Master to the poorest servant I keep in my house, but I will not
talk any longer, for my words are not regarded: I will talk less, and do
more, I will now put on blows, and give you something, but it shall not be any
money: I will be revenged on some of you, though I cannot be of your Master,
and I will make you all know me to be your Mistress, and will bear sway
without control. Nay, Huzzy, grumble and mumble as long as you will, I care
not; what is it you say, tell me, or else I Will make your bones rattle in your
skin: Talk to me? talk to your companions at the Bake-house. I give you
warning now to look to your business by fair means, for if you do not, you
shall do it by foul.

The Servants Speech to themselves.
We are poor servants, the Lord God does know,
We have a good Master, but our Mistress is a shrow.
2. A Lecture of a Wife to her Husband, that has been married three or four
years.
IN troth Husband, I can hold no longer, but I must speak: I see you still
follow this vein of ill Husbandry, never keep at home: Is the House a
wild-kat to you? here I sit all the day long with the Children, sighing, and
looking every minute when you will return home: in faith this course of life
must be left; Do you think I can sell your Wares, or know the prizes of them
when your Customers come? Let them look to your shop that will, for I will
not: keep your shop, and then it will keep you: I say, keep home with a
wanion to you, or else let all go at six and sevens. You begin the week well,
for this day, and no longer, so soon as you were up, and ready, then to the
Alehouse to your companions, to some Game or other for your Mornings Draught
of strong liquor: when I (poor wretch) must sit at home with a cup of small
Beer of four shillings price, and be glad of it too, or else I must drink
water: I dare say, and put a Warrant to it, that I may sit at home long enough
before you will send me a cup of good drink, which you guzle down, making
your selves beasts, and not men; for a man, if he had or bore any love to his
Wife at all, which has brought him so many Children, would some time remember
her, and say, carry this home to my Wife, and remember me to her: but your
children and I must be content with any thing: I would I were dead, that you
might have another wife, and then you should see it, she would not be made
such a fool as I am by you; I am sure I take no pleasure at all like my other
Neighbors Wives, for they can go abroad with their Husbands every day, but I,
(poor I) once in a year, and glad of it then too. I would I had been made a
man, for Women are nothing but your Drudges and your Slaves, to make you
clean, and to wash and starch your clothes: when you go whither you please,
and take no care at all for any thing. A woman's work is never at an end, and
never done, but like a wheel, still turning round, and has no end. I am
forced as soon as I rise in the Morning, to make a fire, sweep the house, and
get the childrens and your servants Breakfast; no sooner that done, and they
out of the way, think upon Dinner; then no sooner Dinner eaten, then I must
make all the dishes clean again, and sweep the House: Then because I would
be thought a good Huswife, I sit me down to spin, then think upon your
Supper, and study what will please your dainty chops, and make it ready against
you come home, when you are half fox't; then the children must be straight way
thought upon, or else there is nothing but crying and brawling, which makes my
brains ache again. Then all being satisfied, put the children to sleep, then to
bed my self; and thus a woman's work is never done.

The Husbands answer.

I do verily think, when you are a bed, you do wish that work were never
done.

These Lines were presented to a young and rich Widow, by an ancient
Gentleman, hoping to obtain her love.
Eye-dazling beauties best accomplishment,
Whose form al frames of nature does outstrip,
For Nature's struck into astonishment,
In viewing her o're-beautied workmanship:
Her hair like to a curled Golden flame,
Disheveled, spreading over her comely shoulders;
Her Brow Loves bed, her Eyes the Graces claim:
Her Lips Loves Altars, charming the beholders,
Upon which Altars Cupid made his heart
A easelesse never ceasing sacrifice,
And vowed from them he never would depart,
Until she grant no more to tyrannize.
To gain her Love, ten thousand lovers swears
To offer Hecatombes of sighs and tears.
And to this purpose he enlarges himself, thinking to gain her love and
favor: After she had read them, she charms him for his insolency in this
manner.

3. Her Answer both in Prose and Verse to the old man that gave her the verses.
AGed man, with what face dare you ask a young Gentlewoman the question? me
thinks you are burdened with such years, that you should now be past dreaming
on a Wife: Old age to match with Youth? it is monstrous; fie, fie, it is Lust in
doting age: what makes within your thoughts such wanton fire? you are void*of
all good action, but in your own opinion: Go home, go home and rest your aged
head: do you think that I can give consent, where I doubt so much before
hand? or do you suppose that I will wedde a Statue, or lie in a Bed of Snow? or
play with old Antiquity? When I should take my rest, then you will be a
coughing and spitting, groaning and sighing, able to turn a young woman's
stomach from lying with you. Do you think that I shall love a man that shall
lie calving a bed, and have his breakfast brought to him, to cherish his
appetite to perform his office and due? No, I will have a Husband that shall
be always provided like a Soldier, never not with standing, but in a
Centinell posture, with his Match lighted, and cocked bolt upright, and ready
to do execution: not like a Dormouse, always sleeping; or like a Droane in
the Hyve, live idly: but I will have a man active and nimble, and lively like
the Spring, that can come off and on bravely, without the word of command, and
not be forced by Art to do that which Nature has taught him; like a Bear
pulled to the stake by the Ring in his Nose, whether he will or no: Go to
your Orizons, and tell your Beads, when I have a mind to wed old age, I will
send for you: a Candle is more fitting for you than a Wife, and a Faggot with a
Chafing Dish of coals, than a young bedfellow. Go think on your place of
Burial, and set your mind on other things, than on young women; I will be no
old man's Darling. Thus she sent him away, and gave him this Copy of Verses,
and bid him read, and peruse them well.

Like cheerful May, and frozen January,
A fair young Maidan aged man did marry:
And though she was his wife, and lay together,
Yet he had very little to do with her.
At board and bed he loved her in such sort,
As his good will could reach to, although short
Of what he would do, and in loving parling
He calls her Duck and dear, sweet heart, and Darling.
On her his lands and state he does confer,
Thinks all he has too small to pleasure her:
And she unkindly, with a kind of loathing,
Esteems all as too little, or worth nothing.
4. Another Lecture of an old rich widow to a young Gallant, who came a wooing
to her, that had little or no means.
BAse fellow, that dares be so bold to ask a Gentlewoman to thy bed; I scorn
thee; I like my self the worse that thou should hope the gaining of my
affection: dare thou aspire to such a height, to think that I would wedde so
poor a Groom as thee, who wears all his wealth on his back: I scorn my
Chamber-maide should honor thee so much: you may prevail, I make no doubt, in
the Kitchen, for I think by thy thin cheeks thou wantst a meals meat:
sure thou art some Cubberd-wooer, and so farewell; but when I want a Groom, I
shall remember your name in my Catalogue, and if my Letter or word may serve
you in any stead, I may perchance spare so much time as the running of an
Houre-glasse for your better Preferment. I do marvel who durst be so bold as
once mention me in that way in your company, or who encouraged you to be so
impudent, to make such a salley on such a rich widow as my self: if it were
any neighbor I knew, he should not hereafter set a foot within my doors; or
if it were any of my household, they should not lodge within my roof, but
instantly would I thrust them out of my service, and send them to look new
Mistresses. I wish you forbear, and let me have your absence: you have your
answer, be gone.

An advice for some.
A Widow that is rich, and wondrous old,
Woo her, and stew her tender in her gold:
If she be cold, a young man's flame will toast her,
Or else his fire of youth will rotten roast her:
But let him day and night himself apply
To please her still, and she will the sooner dye.
On a woman's tongue.
THings that be bitter, bitterer than gall.
Physicians say are always physical:
Then women's tongues, if into powder beaten,
And in a Potion or a Pill be eaten,
Nothing more bitter is, I therefore muse,
That women's tongues in Physic they near use:
There Is many men who live unquiet lives,
Would spare that bitter member of their wives.
Then prove them Doctor, use them in a pill,
Things often help sick men, that does sound men kill.
5. A Lecture of a Country Farmers wife, being a shrew to her husband, for
being late abroad at night: and thus she begins.
What, good man Clown, do you think to make me still your drudge to sit up
late, and rise thus early every day, to work like a horse, and you to ride a
hunting, gentleman-like, every morning, and none but I left at home to look
after your horses in the stable, your kine in the field, your swine in the
yard, your poultry about the house, your cramming of your Capons, your brewing
and your baking: you a Husband? you a Coxecombe; a mere Lubby, a Moone-Calfe,
one that has more hair than wit: I am sure you were never brought up to take
your pleasure in this manner, I know that: you were brought up at the plough
and the Cart, and to cry Hy, Gee, Ho: out you brown bread crust, you know not
how to use a woman as you ought; you know better how to Cart a woman, than to
Court a woman: Go to, thou thou art an Ass, I am ashamed of thee when we are
abroad together in any company; how thou standst a tip-toe to drink to a
Gentlewoman, with your hat in your hand, and makes such a scraping leg, that
the print of thy Hob-nailes is in the Board where thou stoodst, as if a horse
had been beating his hoofes, the scratches are so plainly seen: I never saw
one more resemble a fellow they call the Lord of Portsmouth, that has a party
colored Coat, than thou; if any one did see you but stand together, they would
take you for brothers, you are so alike: thy gray eyes show that thouart a
greedy gut; Francis is your name, do you remember how you filled your Guts so
full of Furmatry that day you were married that you were ready to bust again,
and how the company were glad to cut the points of your britches, and to bathe
your belly against the fire with Capous grease, or else you had burst in
sunder; and now you are mocked ever since with the name ver since with the name
of Francis Fil-gut Furmitry. Sure I was betwatled when thou camst a woing to
me, that I should love thee, for I see since that thou had no humanity or
breeding in thee, but down right, as plain as Dunstable High way; for all thy
Discourse, I still remember, was nothing but of thy Teame of Horse, and thy
Hogs, Calves, Geese, and other poultry ware; and in the conclusion, said, you
were glad of the fine season of the year: Oh it was brave weather for your
Fathers Lambs: neither can thou read one letter in any book: thy Horses
are better Scholars than thou art, for they understand G and O: Go, thou art
a blockhead, a Dunce, a Dullard, and can understand nothing: I will make you
hereafter learn to read in your Horne-booke, so I will: I was told since I
was married that when you were a little one, that your Mother sung Loubby to
you, and ever since you have been an untoward Vrchin. Out you Slabber Choppes,
go trudge with thy fellow Hob, and drive the Cart; Thou art a course Clown, a
mere Coridon, thou art not able at any time to say boo to a Goose, unless it
be to a bowl of pottage that holds a Gallon; and a Barley bag pudding of a
yard long, and some Bull Beef, there I confess thou will, and can show thy
self a man: thou art good at nothing else, unless to play before the Bears
with a Taber and Pipe: I see that Egg and bird thou will never be the better,
but still lie roving up and down from Alehouse to Alehouse, and then to come
home at this time of night, and so late as it is, which thou might be
ashamed of: I do marvel how you found out the way, for you are not able to
stand, nor look up with your eyes, nor yet speak a ready word for lisping and
clipping the Kings English: I see your horse had more wit than you, you may
thank him, or else you had never found the way home; he can tell when he has
enough, but you, you drunken sot, you pisse-pot, know not when you have
sufficient; thus to come home reeling and staggering, it is a shame for you, it
were a good deed to shut you out of doors all night, and make you cool your
Heels, now your brains are so hot: out you Dosser head, shallowbraind
companion: In the morning then you cannot rise, then your head aches, and are
sick, and are untoward to do, or go about any thing; then you promise never
to drink so much again: Then you say, Wife give me a little Whay to cool my
stomach, of else entreat me to make you a posset; but in faith you shall lie
long enough before I will pity you, or before you have have thing from me: I
would that the next time thou drinkest in this manner, and stayest out so late,
that thou mighest meet Will with a Wispe, or some Fire-Drake or other, to
lead thee over Bushes and Briars, Ditches and Watery places, that you may be
so hampered by such furies, that yon may hereafter take warning for being from
home so late.

6. A Lecture of a Wife which was very jealous of her Husband: and thus she
goes forwards.
Husband. GOod morrow wife, how do you this morning?


Wife. As many evil morrowes may thou have, as I have words to speak, or
tears to vent: I have heard of your joviall meetings with your Queanes and
Sluts abroad: what do you think to cast me off, or else to kill my heart by
this your lascivious doings? is this your madding month? I thought you had not
been so loosely given, was this the reason that you did forsake my bed, to
breath your self for your whoors abroad? I thought it had been your modesty
and your remperance when you told me you would lie alone because of the hot
weather, and by reason of the Dog days I but let me tell you, though there be
Dog days, yet there are no dogs nights: You shall lie no more alone I will
warrant you, no, I will be no such fool, I will be no more deluded by your
fair tongue and smiling looks: I do marvel what occasion I have given you,
or what madness it is that moves you thus to wrong your marriage bed. When I
was first wedded to you, you know what vows you made to love none but me: did
not I forsake many a good match only for thy sake, when all my friends and
kindred were utterly against it, and do you thus requite me, to make me a
look out now in my old age, and when gravitie appears on your cheeks? you
should rather give good example and instructions to your houshold-servants, to
live honestly and well, but you are quite contrary from any good rule: thus by
your lewd course and company you are made a laughing-stocke to your Neighbors,
and I poor woman to be pointed at as I go along the street, for bearing it so
patiently: if I had given you any cause thus to slight me, you might have had a
just plea; but I was ever willing to obey you in all your demands: I little
feared this when I was first married, but now I find it too true in an
unconstant husband, but I will not endure it any longer; You shall not stir a
foot out of doors, but I will be at your heels, and I will so watch you,
that you shall have little joy in any woman's company but your wifes. Therefore
have a care now I have given you warning; look to it I bid you.


7. A Lecture of a Widow which was newly married to a Widdower, and thus it
follows.
Wife. What, do you mean to take me down in my wedding shoes? No sir, you
are deceived: I had a Husband that loved me before I knew you sirrah, and gave
me better content when I was first married, than you can: I come far short
of what I did expect from you, but I will never believe a man by his looks for
your sake, you white-liver'd slave: I had a man before, but now I have a fool:
You shall find that I will not endure it at your hands, you shall not think to
break my heart, as you did your other wives, no sirrah, I Will warrant you, I
will cheer uh my heart, and spit in my hand, and take better hold. Though you
have got all my estate into your hands by your fair words, yet you are
deceived; I have a bag in store that you shall never know of, nor be a penny
the better for it, no nor any of yours neither, for using me in this manner: my
estate has made you a man; before you had my estate, which my dear loving
husband left me, you were a beggar, and not worth a groate before you met with
me, but I will give them no thanks which made the motion to me, the next time
I meet them: I Will warrant you I will not be mealy-mouthed, you shall know that
I am a woman, and was maintained like a woman, before I knew such a poor
conditioned fellow as thou art: Your betters sirrah, shall know how you have
used me, where I will relate it to your disgrace. I Will warrant you, I will not
be fed with a bit and a knock, as they feed Dogs and Apes in the
parishgarden, no marry will I not, I will have better diet and better apparel
too if it be above ground: for I brought you good means, and means I will
be allowed. Little do you wastfull fellow know, how my dear husband did save
it together, and went many a step for to get it, with the sweat of his
brows: Ah poor husband he is dead and gone, I shall never forget his
kindness to me: he was the best conditioned man to me that lived: he was
so kind and loving, that he never came home empty handed to me, but still
brought me home one knick knacke or other: oh he was the sweetest husband that
ever lay by a woman: for if ever he had an occasion to break wind backwards
when he was a bed, he would lift up the clothes, and let it out so sweetly, so
sweetly; and thou, thou carest not who hears the report, nor is any whit
ashamed of it, thou art a very sloven, and a nasty beast to him, and art not
worthy to carry guts to a Bear; but I must be content, it was my lot: yet I
have some body will take my part, know it; nay, for all your knitting your
brows, and threatening of me, I will not suffer it any longer at your hands, I
have put up too much already: tread upon a poor silly worm, and it will turn
again; I will haunt your ghost, and make your companions, which give you this
ill counsel, weary of your company, and the Tavern too hot to hold you: what
is spent there, is not thought much on; but every penny, every half penny that
you spend upon me, comes from you like so many drops of blood: but I will
have money some way or other, I will have it by hook or by crook, or else you
or I will travail as far as the King has any land.


8. A Lecture between a jealous old woman, and her young husband, and thus she
begins.
I, I, follow these lewd courses still, and see what will come on it: Alas,
alas, yongster, I can see and perceive day at a little hole, as well as another
can, and as far into, a Millstone as another woman whatsoever I take notice,
to my hearts grief, how every day more and more you slight me: you regard not
my company, neither at home nor abroad, neither at bed nor board: you are
ashamed forsooth, that I (because I am somewhat old and ancient) should walk
along with you in the streets, but I Will warrant you, if any of your old
acquaintance, those young gill-flurts, who trick up themselves like a
Bartholmew-faire Babie, or any other light Gossips entreat your company, oh
the requst is no sooner made, but it is granted; on goes your Cloak, and out
of Doors you go with speed, with any of these; I have marked it, with what
willingness you have gone, as if you went to receive a thousand pound: But if
I speak to you, nay desire you, and woo you, as 'twere for my life, to walk
with me into the Town to visit my kindred or acquaintance, or but into the
fields or Sub-urbes to be merry, and recreate my self, O what business is
pretended, what excuses are framed, what Letters we have to write, what men
we have appointed to meet about earnest occasions, just at that very time: Or
if I do chance to get you once in the mind to walk with me, then presently
you begin, who would be troubled with such a Wife that can go no faster,
nor keep company with the rest: then you say you cannot be merry because you
have such a clog at your Heels, and what should you do with these women in
our company? you cannot be so jocund as you should: And when you do go
abroad with me, do not I perceive how you march before after four Mile an
hour? If I can limpe after you, or be within your sight, well and good; if
not, I may lose my self, for any care that you take: and why's all this sir,
(think you) but because I poor old wretch should not be taken notice of for
your Wife: and cannot I observe what noddes and winkes you use to other women
in the Streets, as who should say, take warning, the old woman's behind,
therefore pass by, and take no acquaintance; but I tell thee, sirrah boy, that
when I was young, as now I am old, I would not have given my head for the
washing, with never a wench you keep company with: for I was brought up well,
and did keep good company, and was as much made of by young men, as you can
do possible for your heart: I have observed it from time to time, that when
we are in company to make merry, not a smile nor a cheerful look shall we
get from you, no, you are then in your melancholy dumpes, behaving your self
rather like an Hermit in his Cell, or a Monk in a Cloister, than a merry man
at the Tavern or Alehouse: And thus in my company you will sit as if Butter
would not melt in your mouth, but I would have you know that I can hear what a
merry companion you are in my absence: Oh then, especially if such a one, or
such a handsome woman be in your company, you will sing, dance, tell merry
Tales, kiss, dally, complement, drink healthes to this Mistress Fart, and this
Mistress Fiddle, if the time and place be suitable. Well, well, I Will say no more
for shame, and in faith, in faith, He turn away that fine Mistress Minks your maid,
for something that I have taken notice of within these few days: your nose
bled forsooth the other day, and you must needs throw your bloody
handkerchiffe to her, and she with a wanion to you both, must hold the Basin
while you wash your hands, marry gip with a murren: But for that matter let me
alone, I Will remedy that, or else I Will want of my will. I Will keep no such
^ine-snouted Minions as she is, I Will have a homely huswifely wench, that has
more honesty than beauty, and a better heart than a face; I Will not be thus
plagued long, out upon it, an old woman that has out-lasted the Date of four
Husbands, and now come to be slighted by a Boy of four and twenty? Well, thy
unkind dealing with me will be the death of me before nature has appointed
it. I took thee to be the staff of my age, but I doubt shortly thou will
prove a rotten one with the pox. You marry an old rich widow for a comfort?
well, I have done, it is but folly to speak any more now, but I wish all old
women never to marry a young man for my sake.

9. A Lecture of a proud Dame to her husband, because he would not allow her
all the new fashions that are worn, and thus she begins.
Why you whoreson raskally fellow, did thou marry me to disgrace me, and
make me a shame to my self, and all my Kin? Oh it is accounted very poor and
bace, to have a Cotton wast-coate laid with Statute-lace: no, I will have no
such garment; other men's wives forsooth of an inferior rank to you, can go
gallant and brave, and have money in their purses at command, and buy what
fashion stuff is in wear, and never let their husband so much as know of it,
till they see it on their backs, nor once question them what it cost: I go
like a very drudge, nay, almost as bad as a dung-hill-raker: He warrant there
is such a one, and such a one can change their Gowns, as often as the earth
does her Livery, that is, twice in a year; Hats, Aprons, sweete-Gloves, and
newfashioned Gorgets, and Hand-cherchiefes answerable to them, nor must I have
any new fashioned dressings to my head, or a Lawne Crosse-cloth, with a good
lace, but with an ordinary Lace which cost not above twelve pence a yard; when
every durty draggletaile Ioane, that came with nothing to their husbands but
their clothes on their backs, can bestow twenty or thirty shillings on a bare
Lace, and they can have such things as they please, and I must not, or at the
least can alter them without any contradiction, and Saturday night sets not a
period to the week more certainly than the Shooemaker brings them new Shoes.
But I poor wretch, which brought you as good a portion as any of them, must
go like Ioane Hold my staff, with a Gown and a Hat of the fashion which was
worn in Eighty eight, and a pair of hose and shoes at Easter; I am sure I
have had none since, and now it is almost Christmas: I have never a pair of
gloves worth the drawing on upon my hands; thou never bestowest above eight
pence or ten pence at the most of a pair for me, and not worth the throwing
at a Dog: Well, to be brief, mark what I say to thee, I have complained so
long in vain, that I am weary of that way, but I Will another way; in faith thou
had been better to have been a little more freer of your purse, and not
have pinched me so; for I know what I know: well, there is enough said for this
time; go to, I will want no apparel, or any thing else, good man Rascal, I
will not in faith, pick English out of that if thou can: if thou will not
bestow a new fashioned Hat on me, I Will bestow an old fashioned Cap upon thee,
in troth I will, and that quickly too, there is more, crack me that Nut sirrah.

10. A Mothers Lecture to her daughter concerning Marriage, and thus she
begins.
DAughter, quoth she, you are now of years and size sufficient for marriage,
or merry-age as you may make it, if you will be ruled, and your father and I
have taken great care for the providing of a husband for you: and not to hold
you long in suspense, it is young Master Oliver Little-good, the son of old
Ralph Littlegood, the Usurer, the Mother had no sooner named the party, but her
daughter was ready to fall into a swowne, and after she came to her self, she
earnestly besought and begged, that of all men in the world she might not be
teoubled with that fellow, and that she had rather to be married to her grave,
than to be yoaked with such a brainelesse lump of ignorance. The old man
replied that he was very rich, and withal heir to a mighty estate of Lands
and money, and that Matrimony is matter of money, and without money marriage is
a marage, and not merry age: The maid replied again, that she knew he was
rich, and in possibility of great possessions, but (quoth she) but what but
said the Mother, I know what you mean by your but, you would say that for all
his wealth he is but a fool; you have hit my meaning right said the Daughter,
and I think there is no greater torment on the earth, than for a woman to be
matched to a fool: Nay, quoth the Mother, now I perceive you are an idle
foolish baggadge, and do not know what is good for your self; I pray thee but
mark and consider, whether it be not a great deal better to marry with one
that is a fool already, naturally made to your hands, or to be wedded to one
that has wit, and after that to take a great deal of care and pains to make
him a fool: do but no^e the merry lives that the wives of fools have, for
they suffer them to say and do what they list, they make them their Masters,
they wear what apparel and what fashion they please, they eat and drink
what they have a mind to, they go to bed and rise at their pleasure, they
walk abroad, and come home again at their will: when they are disposed, they
may have Horse, Coach, Sedan, or Boar to convey them either by Land, or by
Water, either to see public shows, or to visit and be merry with private
friends: they may be liberal and bountiful of their husbands estate, money,
or goods; they may snap, snarle, and give them taunting and harsh speeches, and
they may be entreated and su'd to, to be quiet; they may be scolding,
clamorus, proud, lascivious, voluptuous, high-fed, rich clad, commanding all,
not to be commanded by any; nay, if you have but the virtue and volubility of
the tongue with the help of lowering, pouting, frowning, disdainefull scorning,
taunting, slandering, scoffing; or if all these fail, you may use many words
to no sense or purpose in the way of defaming your husband; and if it be his
fortune to be a Cuckold, do you cry whore first, and tax him with
incontinency: call him Whooremaster, (though your Conscience tell you that you
lie) ifever you did him any good deed, either by your self, or your friends,
let him be continually cast in the teeth, and upbraided with it; and for your
last remedy, you must stamp, tear your hair, curse, ban, play the devil,
and cry with counterfeiting tears, and then presently the relenting tame
fool (the Husband) will woo, and sue, and beg, beseech, cogge, give gifts,
and make large promises, and all for a little quiet life; for it lies in you to
vex him to the very heart, and not to suffer him to take any rest day or
night, but with the Clapper of your tongue to ring him a perpetual peale,
(worse than sixteen funeral knelles) you may hunt and course him from bed to
bed, and from one chamber to another, and as wild Haggard Hawks are tamed of
manned with being kept hungry, and continual waking, so you must noise him,
rowze him, torment and torture him with your tongue, that he shall have no
mind either to eat or sleep; and though you have a private friend in a
corner, yet by these harsh and discreet Documents and doings a woried or tired
husband may be made an engine or warlike Ram, to batter and bear down all
Bulwarks or Sconces of scandalous defamation: For take this of me as an
infallible truth, though the charge of new fashions may vex a Husband, the
cost of diet may trouble him, to wear a Cuckooes feather may molest him, to
walk or go early or late may, disturb him, to spend or waste his goods
vainly may grieve him; yet all these he will be content to suffer with
thanks and patience, if his Wife will be but pleased to be quiet with her
tongue: For I tell you daughter, if you can make such use of your tongue, as
the most part of wise women do now a days, you may awe the good man with his
goods and family like an Empress, and if you have never so many faults, they
will never be seen or thought of, if your tongue be sharp, quick, nimble,
and can hold out untired. For the which purpose you may whet your wits with a
Cup or two extraordinary of nappy Ale, strong waters, Sack, or some other
kind of Huffe-cap drink, that may quicken your spirits, elevate your brain;
for I was wont to do so often, and then I would talk to thy father beyond
reason and measure and therefore it is not amiss to liquor your tongue, it
will go with the more ease, (like a new oiled Jacke) for it will run so
nimble, that you shall hardly know what it says, or to what end it runs so
fast. Moreover, it will be a great point of policy in you, to show your self
very precise and religious abroad, as if you were a Saint, for by that means
you may blind the world, and play the Devil at home the more securely, and
then the rest of your Gossips will pity you, and revile your husband. Indeed
your tongue may (as you may use it) make your house your earthly Paradise, your
Husbands Purgatory, and your servants Hell; and all these several sorts of
happiness are yours, if you marry with a fool, and have the gift to use your
tongue as a wise woman should do.

Ah Daughter, did thou know the toil and torment that I had with thy father
so long as he was a wise man, thou would pity me; I endured eight years
most miserable slavery with him: my habit no other but old and unfashionable,
my diet no other than such as he did eat of, and I bound to no bodies bed but
his: but at the last it was my hap to be at a Gossips Feast, where other
good women began to talk of many matters, (which concerned them not much)
for it is no right Gossipping where they flatter not one another to their
faces, and back-bite their husbands and neighbors behind their backs: Amongst
them was an ancient Matron, that with an eye of pity looked on me, saying,
Mistress Smalworth, me thinks by your Countenance and attire, you are grieved
in mind, what is the matter? I pray you impart your cause of sorrow to me, and
I will give you such motherly Counsel, as my weak ability can afford; what,
is your husband unkind to you? or what other disaster is the cause of your
heaviness?

Whereupon I (fetching a deep sigh) began to tell her, that I had been more
than seven years married to a wise discreet man, but all the fault he had was
to be a good husband, and look to every thing so narrowly, that I could not
have my will in all that I desired, that I was restrained of that freedom and
liberty which I had a mind to have, and debard of that predominance and
command, which women are ambitious to aspire to, though they know themselves
altogether unworthy, and incapable of it; for indeed Gossip (quoth I) I do
want nothing that may suffice any reasonable body; nor do I in word or deed
offend him; only the maine rule and command of all I would have: for I would
feign control, and not be controuled.

With that I began to weep, and the good women all pittyed my case: so that
at the last the old Matron said that she was in the same predicament as I was
when she was first married, until at the last she met with an ancient
experienced creature, who gave her counsel to make her Husband a fool, if
ever she hoped to live a merry life: and further, that she presently gave her
the same Counsel which she offered unto me, which I so well practiced on my
Husband, (thy Father) that with my vexatious verbosity, fluent loquacity, I
brought my good man to my bow, that I could bend him which ways I listed, I
hammerd him, and made him Maleable, I turned him, wrought him, and Wire-draw'd
him: and thus after I had lived long in a hard and miserable estate with a wise
man, I, with a little good Counsel, and an apt capacity to follow it, in a
year and a halfes space, with the ingredients, of pride, scorn, and scolding
made him a fool, so that now (in good time be it spoken) I thank my Stars,
there is not a Lady within the Walls of Europe lives a more pleasant life than
I do. And therefore (daughter) I charge you on my blessing never entangle your
self to be married to a wise man; but for your own quiet and delight, be
sure, if you can, to marry one that is a fool already; for there are many
stubborn fellows as thy Father was, that are very hard to be made so; and so
if you embrace my counsel herein, you shall (doubtless) have greater
pleasure, and live at more ease and liberty.

11. A Lecture Dialoguewise between a man and his wife, which is the scold
rampant: and thus they salute each other.
Hus. SWeete-heart, me thinks I find a great alteration in you, that you are
not the woman that you have been toward me, can you show any reason for it?


Wife. I pray do not call me sweetheart, till such time as you use me as a
wife; for I am persuaded that your lips hang in your light, that you do hardly
know me from another man's wife: but woe be to thee for an ill-bred fellow,
that ever I saw thy face, but you must be wandering; Change of pasture makes
fat Calves, but it is certain that change of wenches make lean knaves; and
all Cats be gray in the dark, and Joane is as good as myLady.


Hus. I pray thee good Duck, do not play the devil with me, for I protest
this jealousy of thine is without cause, and sure some malicious tatling
Gossip or other has been prating to thee, and put these foolish lies and toys
into thy head.


Here the Lecture begins.

Wife. DVcke? thou art a dissembling Viper to call me Ducke: Call me Whore and
Queen, as you do at home, and give that name of Ducke to your Gilflirts, that
you consume your estate on, and sent you home the other day drunk in a Porters
Basket, and another time reeling up and down the street, and making
Indentures, as if you had served seven years an Apprentice to a Scrivener: but
such as you, that are given to be drunk and to play the whoremasters, hold an
opinion, that store is no sore: but thou wicked Caitiffe, thou will know one
day, that store of Pox and other diseases will be sore: but I was bewitched, I
might have looked before I had leap't: there is no Mungrill Curre will keep a
woman so unfashionable as thou do me, but as the Proverb says true, In
love is no lack, so I should not lack what I would have, if thou did love
me. Besides, I would have thee know that I will not live by love; do but take
example of my neighbor Master Gregory Animal how he maintains his wife,
(who, as the talk goes, is no better than she should be) a suspicious loose
Gossip; and Master Innocent Gandergoose likewise is a pattern for all kind
husbands to imitate; for though his wife be a very devil to him, and a
perpetual vexation, yet (good man) he takes all patiently, like a Coxecomb,
swallows all like a Gudgeon, and like a Woodcocke loves her the better. But I
poor unfortunare wretch am out of sight, out of mind. What hard hap had I to
be matched to a Dogbolt, Caterpiller, Curmudgeon, that cares not for me; but if
I were wise, I would make thee drink such as thou brewest, as the good man of
such a parish, honest Mistress Hold-up does, she makes her husband a very
Ass, an Abram, and a Ninnihammer; she will rail and scold at him, that all
the house shall ring again: and though she be counted a Whore or a light
woman, yet by making a noise and clamor, the silly Owlyglasse (her husdand)
does not only suffer himself to be a Cuckold, but is contented to be a
foolish Wittall, so that now he cares not who lights his Candle at his
Lantern. Also there is Mistress Minks, that is an inch broad in the heel, a
proud Trull, abominable high in the instep, she has the world at will: for
her loving John a Nods lets her say and do what she list, she will call him
all the base names that can be reckoned, as Clown, Buboone, Nonsense, Widgeon,
(...), Slabberchaps; and then (to stop his mouth) he gives her any
New-fangle, or fashion in the world, that his purse can reach to: But I am
married to a grumbling Maultead, a Boore, a Dunghill, a Cullion, a common
Towne-Bull: (o^^ upon thee Varlet) I defy thee, I spit at thee, and I may
curse the time that ever I saw thee: thou keep'st me like a drudge, there is
not a Bawd, Queen Punke, Tib, Trash, Trull, or Trully-bub, Oysterwife, or
Kitchen-stuffe Slut, but lives a merrier life than I do: I am scorned and
slighted by every Durty Drabbe, I protest, rather than I will live this life
with a mizerly Hoyden, I will take a Knife and drown my self, or a Halter and
out my throat: I would thou had such a wife as Mistress All-the-world, and
then thou might make Hay with thy head, as well as with a Pitchforke: And
there is Mistress Brawler, an understanding Woman, she makes a mere Noddy of her
husband, she rules him as if he were a young Puppy: and do thou think that
I (to the ill example of all women) will be an underling to such a
Blockeheaded fool as thou art? nay, I will make thee know that I am no Goose
to be Crow-trodden by such a Buzzardly Gull as thou art: Sirrah, if you be the
head I Will be the Cap: if you will be the Cap I will be the Button; I will be
master and rule you, seeing you cannot rule your self, nor know what is
fitting for a woman without so much asking for it: Tut, I was not hatched under
a Hen, nor will I be Mealy-mouthed, though thou be flap-mouth'd, thou
Dunce, thou Dolt, thou Sotte, I will have my will, or I will vex every vein
of thy heart, thou Logger-headed ^^^by: As I am a sinner I am ashamed to walk
abroad with such a Lubberly Lout: Thou do know, thou mi^erly base Patch, that
almost every Cobbler maintains his wife in her Black Bag, and I did but ask
thee to give me one, (as fits my calling) and thou, like a greedy Growtheaded
Looby, denyedst me, but hereafter take it as thou will, and mend thy self as
thou can, I will be my own Carver, and not stand to the allowance of such a
Beetleheaded Cuckoe: And now thou know my resolution, I wish thee no more to
trouble thy foolish Jolthead with studying to curb or bridle me, for I scorn
to be commanded by any dogged-divelish Crabbed Knave, or confined in any
compass of Reason by such a Hungarian Twyerpipe; and if any way these Words of
mine have troubled your mind, or do stick in your stinking stomach, you may
go and make your moan to any of your Companions and Consorts, Drunkards,
Bawds, Whoores, Fanders, Pimps, Rogues, Rascals, Vagabonds, Runagates, Slaves,
Villains, and Varlets, your old Comrades, and Company-keepers, and so woe be
to thee, and let sorrow be thy sops.


The Husbands speech to one of his Neighbors, out of his wives hearing.

MY Wife sure, good neighbor, was born at Billingsgate, and was certainly
nursed up there, she has such a vilde tongue: and therefore I have made these
Lines to that effect.

It is a school, where shamefaced women may
Hear impudence anatomi^'d so right,
That she, who scarce in the morn knows what to say,
May learn the Art of scolding all by night:
They jeere, they fight, they swear, and curse like Roisters
I Would never abide the place, were it not for Oysters.
Within a year or two after his wife dyed, and he gets a Poet to make this
Epitaph of her.

MY Dame and I full twenty yeare's
Livd man and wife together,
I could no longer keep her here,
She Is gone the Lord knows whither:
Of tongue she was exceeding free,
I purpose not to flatter,
Of all the wives that e're I see,
I vow I Will never come at her.
Her body is disposed well,
A comely Grave does hide her
And sure her soul is not in Hell,
The Devil could never abide her;
Which makes me think she is soared aloft,
For in the last great Thunder,
Me thought I heard her very voice,
Rending the Clouds insunder.
This Lecture may seem strange to as many as are Batchellours, for with them
the married life is admitted, and wished for; but I would have them to consider,
that after Marriage Huney-moone is but short, and before the Black Ox has
trod on their foot, they will wish they had tasted the Grape, before they
commended the Vine: Beware left instead of Sugar you do buy Ratsbane. There Is
many a man has angled for Fish, and caught a Frog: He may be thought to be
very unwise that will change his free liberty for fetters of gold, or Manacles
of Silver; grief and torment of mind is better lost than found; there belongs
to marriage more than four bear legs in a bed: So likewise It is hard to wive
and thrive both in a year; for though good matches are made in Heaven, yet
some men perhaps have few or no friends there at the matchmaking: There are too
many who are more forward in seeking their Banes, than the Minister is to ask
their Banes in the Church; for though in some cases it is good to take Time and
Occasion by the fore-top, yet too often Haste and Wisdom do vary. Indeed,
All is gay that is green, and a new Broom sweeps clean: Therefore it is a
wiser part of a provident man to be more careful in the Choice of his wife,
than of any earthly thing whatsoever; for though it be fit that every man
should be at his own Wedding, yet many times the marriage were the better if
the Woman were away. It is a hard case, that when there are but two, yet there
is one too many. And I heard a fellow say, that his wife had but one fault,
which was, that she was naught.

A man may fast bind, and fast find, but he cannot unbind that which he has
bound so fast: he may strike whilst the Iron is hot, and he may wish that the
Forge had been burnt to ashes, and the Anvile sunk in the sea, before he
struck a stroke, he may shoot nigh the mark, and aim well, and hit the
mark, which had been better for him to have been a thousand miles out of his
reach: The best Wine will in time be the sharpest Vinegar; and the sweetest
Sugar may be turned into Salt Peter.

Suppose a young man, that is but of mean estate, do marry with an old rich
Widow, he shall be sure to live in a continual Purgatory with her; for either
she will be jealous of him, or covetous, casting him always in the teeth, how
she with her estate has made him a man, or raised Jack for to be a gentleman,
that she has set a beggar on Horseback, and (if he were her servant
before, as many widows do often marry with their men) then will she daily
upbraide him, that she has made her foot her head.

If an old rich man do Match with a poor young woman or maid, that has
kindred as poor as her self, there the Devil sets in his foot of jealousy
and suspicion that his Wife does waste his goods to help her Kindred, and if he
has any children, they will love their mother in law, and she will love them
again, (al alike) so that the house will be more unquiet than hell.

He that does marry with a whore (although his lot be bad) yet age and time may
make her turn honest.

He that weddes a drunken women (as there are too many of them that are most
liquorishly addicted to Wine, strong waters, Ale, and the like) there may be
some hope of her mending, or ending.

He that is matched to one that will steal and pilfer, there may be hope that
she may be taken, and by admonishment or punishment reformed; or else that in
the end the Hangman may take such order with her, that her husband may be
eased of his trouble.

It is better for a man to have a fair Wife, that himself and every man else
will love, (provided that she be not a scold withal) or a deformed wife,
that would hire others to make much of her (for foul water will quench fire as
well as fair) or a drunken Wife, that would make much of her self, or an old
wife, that were bedridden of her tongue, or a theevish wife, that should steal
from himself and others, or a proud one, that would waste all his state in
fashions, or a liquorish wife, a daily feasthunter, or a lazy wife, like Joane
Easy, that loved her Bed better than her Distaffe; or a sluttish wife, that
would poison him, and end all his miseries: I say, it were better for a man to
marry with any of all these forenamed wicked kind of women, than to be
matched and over-matched with a scold, for a scold will be all these, and
worse: she will be melancholy malicious, and her most study shall be, to be
illconditioned: she will mumpe, hang the Lip, swell, (like a Toad that has
lain a year under a wood-pile) pout, loure, be sullen, sad, and doged: she
will knit the brows, frown, be wayward, froward, cross, and untoward on
purpose to torment her husband: her delight is chiefly to make debate abroad,
and to be unquiet at home; in her house she will be waspish, peevish, teasty,
tetchy and snappish. It is meat and drink to her to exercise her spleen and
envy, and with her twittle twattle to sow strife, debate, contention, division,
and discording heart-burning amongst her neighbors. I have heard a husband
ask a wife such a mild question, and she has snapt him up so disdainfully
with an answer, that no Mistress would have used her prentise boy so scomfully:
The pride of such a Jade is not to be endured, her coyness is to be jeered
at, and her contempt to be derided, and such of them, are most to be despised,
that do make a seeming show of Religion, and a good life abroad, and when they
are at home at dinner or supper; whilst the Husband is saying Grace, sitting on
one stool, his virtuous vexatious wife has sat upon another stool by him,
cursing and swearing. Therefore I advise all men, young and old, rich and
poor, to marry any woman, of any bad condition, rather than a scold.

There was an old fellow once, that was not only married, but almost
overmatched with a shrew, or a most excellent Hypocritical scold, for abroad
she seemed a civil devout creature, as if Butter would not melt in her mouth,
but at home she would play the Devil, so that the man was amazed at her
strange and uncivil behavior, (and indeed a very little wine or strong
waters would make her tongue gallop, and her hands walk) her Husband not
giving her any cause, did marvel at her unquietness, and gently persuaded
her often, but all to no purpose, for the more he entreated, the more proud and
furious she would be, calling him all the names that are mentioned before in the
Lecture, all which he did most patiently endure: but at last she so much trod
upon his forbearance, she presumed that it was his duty to suffer.

At last (he being loath to beat her) he conceived to tame her another way, so
perceiving that her delight was to have her house kept clean and neat, with
her Brass and Pewter always shining, and brightly scoured and set up; one
time as she was in her mad fit, he tumbled all the platters and kettles about
the house, which with the falls from the shelves, were somewhat bruised and
battered, but that trick would not do; so the next time she abused him, he
began another course, and made her believe that he would cut and tear her best
wearing clothes, both linen, and woollen, but did small hurt, he having wit in
his anger, yet still all was to no end; insomuch that she grew more insolent
and used him worse, reviling him beyond all reason and never snffering him to
have one quiet day or hour: and at last she grew to that height, that she
would strike him over the face, either at bed or board, or any where in the
house, as the mad fit came on her; so that his patience being tired, he would
forsake his house, and lodge abroad at some friends house, sometimes a week,
and sometimes more; but at his returning home, he found her too often the same
mad woman she was wont to be, and he knowing no fault in himself, and that
neither fair means nor foul will reclaim her, (as I did hear him say) he
does purpose to leave her to her divellish disposition: because he is utterly
desperate that she is quite past mending.

And now again I will treat a little of some few good women.

12. A Lecture of a woman to her husband in the morning as s^^ne as he awakes,
for a ramble ^'re night: and thus she begins.
What, are you awake good man Foxe-catcher? are you in any better humor than
you were last night tro? then you had your base Songs and Catches you devised
when you were among your Drunken companions: and no sooner come home, than to
me you had all the ill names that you could invent to bestow upon me: Well
Kit well, I see thou will never leave these idle courses, till thou bring
all to ruin: thou do well, do not, think thou? to go out so soon as
you have dined so well, and had such good company at home, and never think
of coming home again, till eleven of the clock at night, and in this pickle,
more like a beast than a man? Thou should be ashamed, if thou had any shame
in thee, that thy Neighbors should take notice of thy folly: You would come
home in two or three hours at the most, you told me when you went out: I am
sure all the business that thou had to do, might have been done and
finished in an hour at the most: What, have thou no measure, no reason, no
government in thee, when thou art in company, and a drinking Wine, to give over
until thou art overcome with Drink? no care at all left to forbear spending
thy money, but thus idly to waste thy goods? Me thinks if thou had no love,
respect, or regard of me, yet for thy Childrens sake thou should have some.
I marvel whither you went, or in what new hole you had entertainment, that
you could not be found out: That little meat I had in the house I dressed it,
and got it ready for your Supper, expecting your coming home, and here it
stood slopping before the fire, till it was hard and dried to nothing; and so
it remained till the Clock struck seven, eight, nine, before I touched a bit of
it: Nor could I eat any part of it then for thinking on you: and let me tell
you, I cannot eat my meat so alone, and without company; I was never used to
it. Then I went with my Child in my arms all about, and did look in every
Alehouse and Tavern, where I could imagine you might be: but no finding of my
Gentleman: You were sure lost in a Fog, or else you met with some new
companions that gave you better entertainment than either I, or any of your old
consorts can do: Well, where did your Worship Sup I marvel? would I were so
happy as to know your new Ordinary; in faith it should cost me a few cold words,
but I would be meet with some of your new Hosts and Hostesses; but it is no
great matter, keep it so close as thou can, I Will warrant thee before it be
long I shall have notice of all: if thou had been in any honest company, or
any that wished you well, or me well, or your Children, thou would not be
loath to tell me: Well, well, I shall think on it, when you least think I
will.

13. A Lecture of a kind and loving Wife to her Husband, and thus she begins.
SWeet Husband, I am sorry to see you are so vainly given to drinking, and to
company: I pray consider with your self what injury you do me, and your own
credit by it, and that diverse ways. First, you lose your time that is so
precious, which you and every man ought to regard, and make use of while they
have health and ability so to do; I am sure you have seen how Time is
pictured with a Lock of Hair before, and Bald behind; the meaning is, we must
take hold on times fore-locke while we have it, for when he is past, there is
nothing to hold by, all bald behind; for when it is gone and past, it is not to
be recalled again: It is good to make Hey while the Sun shines, it is an old
Proverb yet worthy your observation. Then secondly, you spend your money,
which is the marrow of the Land, and makes you to be so respected and beloved
of all; for without money you cannot have anything, with your money you may
command all things. It is your money which makes you so welcome when you go
into the Tavern, it is for your money that they be glad to see yon, and bid
you farewell. If you were in necessity, and wanted money, trust me sweet
Husband, there is none of all those places, where you have spent it so idly,
that will scarce give you ten Shillings, nay, scarcely lend it you without a
sufficient pawn: and if you should make your complaint to them, what will they
say do you think? Alas good Sir, or goodman such a one, I am sorry that you
are come to this pass, and driven to this urgent necessity in your old age;
you were always free, and very kind-hearted, I pity your case, alack aday, I
have not so much money to spare at this time, for I have newly paid the Brewer,
or the Baker, or the Merchant, and I was forced to make bold with one of my
Neighbors to borrow of them to make up the sum; This is the comfort and
entertainment you shall find when you have need of their help. I pray
remember my words good sweeteheart, for while your money lasts, you shall not
want company, or good liquor, but once gone, then good night LandLord; for a
man without money is like a Pudding without sewet, dry meat; and as old Hobson
said, it is money which makes my Mares to go, so it is with them; for without
money there is no abiding there: trust you they will not, though (perhaps) they
may make you drink, and so bid you farewell; and thus you have Jack Drums
entertainment for all your money. Then thirdly, consider again my loving
Husband, how you abuse the good Creature of Wine, Beer, or Ale by your
extraordinary drinking, and how sick and ill you are the next day, and how
incapable you are of your affairs and business, and can take no true delight
in any thing you eat or drink, whether you walk, or sit still, for two or
three days after; it is such a bewitching thing, that you cannot leave it when
you would: you must think you have not a body of Brass to hold out still; no,
you will in time find the inconvenience of this drinking overmuch: it
shortens your days, and makes you look ill, as if you had bin buried in a
Grave, and taken up again; do but consider what detriment to your health, the
abundance and superfluity of Wine, or any other liquid stuff does; for you
must conceive, your stomach is the receptacle for all sorts of meat and
drink, and the best of the wine does disperse it self through little veins,
into all the parts of the body for its nonrishment; then the remainder of those
dregs and grounds, which are left behind in the stomach causes Vapors to fly
up into your brain, makes your head ache, and there injures the Pia matter and
Dura matter, and so stupifies your Penicranium, that all your vital parts and
ventricles are almost suffocated, and your life in hazard also: then some
dangerous diseases or other follows; as Fevers, Agues, Inflammations,
Consumptions, and such Distillations from the Brain, that it will for ever
after impare your health; then in this extremity you must be constrained to
take Physic, to quallifie and refrigerate the extraordinary heat in you; and
moreover, if your Physic be not good, and well clarified, the dregs which
remain in your body, will too much cool the Natural heat, and destroy the
Radical moisture; and when those decay, then life farewell: Then if need
require you must breath a vein, and be let blood, and it may be, happen upon
an unskilful Surgion that cannot do it handsomely, but mistake the vein; and
perhaps when his hand shakes, prick an Artery; and so lose the use of your
arm; or else perchance make such an Orifice, that he cannot stench the blood,
or else so butcher your arm by often striking, that you faint and sound in the
act, and so lose your life: and all this insues by your ingurgitating and
excessive drinking of Wine, or such like liquor: for Wine and Tobacco being
both hot, does so heat and burn you within, that it weakens and impaires your
strength very much; and especially, Tobacco weakens you; for you may read
these ensuing lines which I dare say an honest man writ them, and they be true,
and he was a Woman's friend I will assure you.

TObacco that Outlandish Weed,
Weakens the body, and spoils the Seed;
It hurts the Brain, and dims the sight,
Truly Husband, if you understand your self aright, you must needs confess
this to be true; for you must know, Nature cannot do no more then it can; it
helps to evacuate the superfluity, and purges the Brain when it is
overcharged and oppressed; as much as in her lies: but if you lay too much
upon her, the ruin will be your own in the end, and with loss of life.

Fourthly and lastly, indeed I speak to you and tell you this for your good;
you know I have never fallen out with you, nor given you any ill language,
though you came home late, and have bin disguised in drink; but entreated you
to have a care of your self, and to come home sooner. To conclude, because I
would not be too tedious in relation, I hope these words of mine you will give
care unto, and will better your understanding to remember them: you shall ever
find me a loving and a kind wife to you in all things; you men are the Head,
and must govern us women; we must be guided by you in all things: you are the
Sun to me, and I am your Mary-gold, to shut and open when you please: your
sweet company, good Husband, joys me more than all the World besides; if you
would but keep home, I should think nothing too much that I did for you, and
by your fair words I would even let out my heart-blood to do you good.
Therefore dear Husband, if you will take a Woman's counsel, be wise, and
keep your money for better uses, than to spend where you shall have no thanks
in the end: for the oftener you use to visit these Alehouses or Tavernes, the
more they will slight you, and dis-respect you; any new company shall be spoken
to before you, nay, they will make bold with you, and you shall stay their
leisure, when others shall be served with the best Wine they can draw, and you
with the worst.

The Husbands reply.

In troth sweet Wife, I find it very true, and for thy sake,

I will drink strong Beer no more, no more;
But ever hereafter I will drink cold water,
And keep my money in store, in store.
But as I have written of virtuous and modest women, so must I ever, and I wish
all other men and women to hold and esteem them in a good and reverend regard;
and I am sure their wisdom and discretion is such, that they will take no
distaste at any thing that either touches or concerns them.

For it is too well known (by woeful experience) daily, that some husband and
servants are so wicked, and basely inclined, that they will give too much cause
to make a wel-dispos'd and quiet woman speak, as I was minded shortly to set
forth a Book to that purpose, concerning the bad courses and misbehaviour of
such as go in the shapes of men, but indeed are Beasts, or rather worsethan
beasts, Heathens, or Infidels, but I shallbe prevented in writing of it; for I
do here that there are diverse women set their helping hands, to publish such a
Book themselves in their own praise, with an answer to this Book: called by
the Name of Sir Seldom Sober, or The woman's sharp revenge against the Author.
Yet the many incombrances of Marriage does make some men and women often wish
themselves single: for Argus his hundred eyes are not sufficient, Briareus one
hundred hands will not serve, Croesus wealth will not supply, Hercules
performance will not satisfy, Salomons wisdom cannot prevent, Sampsons
strength cannot prevail, nor all the wit, power, strength, or policy of man
can restrain, or keep his wife within the limits of reason, if Heavenly grace
guide her not.

Now for the Readers better satisfaction, hereafter follows a relation of
what degrees and callings, and of what Countries and Nations those women were,
whose names are Recorded in History for good or bad, as also of what qualities
and conditions the most part of them were of; with the manner of some of their
lives and deaths.

Hellen is said to be Jupiters Daughter, and that she was so faite, that for
her beauty she was ravished twice: The first time was by Thesius, the tenth
King of Athens: after that she was married to Menelaus, King of Sparta, or
Lacedemonia, from whom she was stolen by Paris, the son of Priam, King of
Troy; for which second Rape of Hellen, the Princes of Greece combined together
in Arms, and after ten years siege of Troy they took it, sacked, and fired
it.

Hellen (another of that name) was the happy mother of the Illustrious and
famous Christian Emperout, Constantine the Great; which Emperor restored, and
gave full freedom to the Gospels preaching, after it had bin three hundred and
odd years suppressed and persecuted under the ten bloody persecutions: He
repaired old Bizantium, and named, it Constantinople; His mother Hellen was
likewise the Religious foundresse of a magnificent Chapel upon the Mount
Tabor: (where our Savior was transfigured) she was a most virtuous Empress,
and as some writers say, she and her Son Constantine were borne in London.

Also there was another Hellen, the Mother of the unfortunate Constantine, the
last Emperor of Constantinople, who was overthrown by Mahomet the Great,
Emperor of the Turks, May 29, 1453. On which day Constantine Paleologus lost
the City, with his Empire and life: so that one Hellen and Constantine built
it, and two others of the same name lost it, as aforesaid.

Lais was a famous Grecian or Corinthian whore; she was so haunted with the
Princes and Nobility of those times, that she was exceeding Rich, and she was
at so high a rate, that when Demosthenes (the admired Orator) demanded of her
the price of a nights Lodging with her, she told him that she would not take
less than 10000. Drachmas, which in our money is two hundred pound Sterling:
but Demosthenes (not liking such a Bargain) answered her, That he would not
buy Repentance at so dear a rate. She was stoned to death by whores for her
too much over-valuing of her self.

Thais was also another famous whore of Corinth, and that of such singular
beauty, that she would entertain none but Kings and Princes. She mightily
befooled the wise Philosopher Aristippus, and held him (in a near degree)
under a slavish command.

Livia was the light Empress and Wife to Augustus Caesar; it is related that
she made him wear a Cuckoes Feather in his Cap.

Semiramis was Empress and wife to Ninus, the grandchild of Nimrod; she was
left a Widow, with one Son, whose name was Ninias, who was so effeminate a
Prince that he suffered his Mother Semiramis to reign 42. years over him:
She was valiant and victorious, but in the end she was so overcome with a
lustful inordinate affection to her own Son, that he slew her with his own
hands in Babylon.

Pasiphae was the wife to Minos, King of Crete, (now called Candi) it is said
she was in love with a Bull, by whom she had a Monster called Minotaurus; but
it is more probable that a Courtier named Taurus, did use such familiarity with
her, that she brought forth a Son more like the said Taurus, than to her
Husband King Minos.

Hermia was a Strumpet of that excellent feature, that Aristotle (the famous
Philosopher) was so besotted on her, that he adored her with divine honors,
and offered sacrifice unto her.

Messalina was Empress and wife to Claudius Caesar; she was a Monster, rather
than a Woman, and of such incredible insariablenesse, that is unfit to be
rehearsed.

Olympias was wife to Philip King of Macedon, and Mother to Alexander the
great, she was a woman of a haughty mind, and bloody nature, and so
revengefull, that she murdered Cleopatra, (the former wife to her Husband) and
her two children; the one she killed in the arms of the Mother, and the other
she caused to be broyl'd alive in a Copper-bason: it was suspected also that
she poisoned her Husband King Philip, At last she was slain by the commandment
of Cassander, one of the successors of Alexander.

Mirha was the incestuous daughter of Cynare, or Ciniras, King of Cypris, upon
whom her own Father begot the fair and beautiful youth Adonis, the
delightful Darling of Venus.

Medusa, a fiction, Fury, or Hellish Hagge.

Progne was one of the Daughters of Pandion, King of Athens, and wife to Tereus
King of Thrace: her Husband ravished and cut out the tongue of her Sister
Philomela, in revenge whereof Progne murdered her own Son It is, and caused
him to be baked, boiled, and roasted for her Fathers (her Husband Tereus
supper, and because her revenge flew so swift, it is feigned that she was
turned to a Swallow. For further satisfaction, look Ovids Metamorphosis, Lib.
6.

Media was daughter to Ceta King of Colchos, she was a most beautiful Witch
(or Sorceresse) she was so enamoured on the goodly personage of lason, that she
showed him the way to shun the dangers in the winning the Golden Fleece, which
after Jason had accomplished, she ran away with him into Thesally

Circe is feigned to be the Daughter of Sol, and that by the Mothers side she
is Grandchild to Oceanus, the Sea-god; she was also a cunning Witch, the wise
Ulysses had something to do with her, as you may read in the 14. book of
Ovids Metamorphosis.

Agripina was the Mother of the bloody Emperor Nero, she poisoned her Husband
Claudius, with his Son Brittanicus, and lastly she was murdered by command of
her Son Nero, who was formerly suspected to have incestuously strumpitted her.

Flora was a beautiful Whore in Rome, who by her Trade had heaped up great
treasures, which she gave all to the common people at her death, for the which
they built a Temple to her, and worshipped her, calling her the Goddess of
Flowers.

Clitemnestra was wife to Agamemnon, King of the Micenians; he was the valiant
General of the Greeks at the ten years siege and sacking of Troy, but
returning home to his Wife, he was most wickedly murdered by her procurement,
and by the hands of one Aegisthus, who had long lived in Adultery with the said
queen, Queen Clitemnestra.

Pandora was a Woman so in favor with the gods, that Pallas gave her wisdom,
Mercury gave her Eloquence, Apollo Music, Venus Beauty, also they gave her a
Box, wherein were hidden, and secret things enclosed, (as they said) and
withal commanded her straightly that she should not dare to open the said
Box, which nevertheless she did open, and suddenly thence flew out of it
all the griefs, pains, maladies, and diseases that do afflict miserable
mankind. This Fiction is an Allusion or Emblem, that women can hardly keep
Counsel, and that they have a desire to do that which they are forbidden.

Xantippe was a most famous, delicate, dainty, devilish Shrew, or Scold; she
was the wife to the wisest of the Philosophers, Socrates; she hated nothing
more than peace and quietness: On a time she hunted her Husband to and fro
scolding, from one room to another, that he to be rid of her, went and sat
in the street at his door, which she perceiving, went up into a Chamber above
him, and threw the pisse-pot on his head, whereat when Socrates perceived
people to laugh, he patiently said, that he expected some rain would fall
after so many claps of Thunder.

Saphira was an hypocritical woman, and the Wife to the dissembling Ananias.

Rhodope was a beautiful Strumpet of the Country of Thrace: She was once
fellow servant with Aesop, the Phrygian Fabulist: she was so notable in her
Art, (as Cornelius Agrippa says in his vanity of Sciences) that she got so
much wealth, that therewith she paid for the building of a Piramis, or
Piramides, which was a work esteemed one of the Wonders of the World.

Deianiera was Wife to Hercules, whose causeless jealousy was the death of
Hercules; before which time he so much doated on the beauty of Iole, the
daughter of Errytus, King of the Aetolians, that for her sake he laid by his
Arms, and Monster-killing Clubbe, and like a servile Handmaid, in woman's
apparel, practiced to spinne with a Distaffe, to please his fair Mistress.
Love overcomes all things.

Briseis was a fair Lady given to Achylles, at the siege of Troy, she was
taken again by Agamemnon, for the which there was great strife between those
two great Princes, but at the last she was restored again to Achylles.

Arlotta, or Harlot, was a Skinners daughter of Cane in Normandy, whom Robert,
the sixth Duke of that Province, was so bold as to beget on her Willians the
Conqueror, King of England: since which time, most of such used women as are
called Shefriends, are in memory of Arlot (or Harlot) called Harlots.

Fair Rosamond Clifford was the unfortunate Paramour to Henry the second King
of England: she was poisoned by the jealous Queen at the Manor of
Woodstocke, in Oxfordshiere.

Jane Shore was the wife of Matthew Shore, a Goldsmiths of London, she was
taken from the City to the Court by K. Edward the fourth, with whom she lived
merrily, and dyed miserably in the reign of K. Richard the 3.

And thus a world of Histories are fraught
With all degrees of women (worse than naught.)
But for the good ones, to gain their good will,
To them I humbly now direct my quill.
Lucretia, was the wife of Tarquinnius Collatinus, a Noble man of Rome, which
Noble and chaste Dame (the proud and lustful King) Sextus Tarquinius Ravished
violently; for the which indignity she slew her self.

Portia was the Daughter of Cate, and wife to Junius Brutus, her father slew
himself to save his honor, her husband killed himself to escape the hands of
Octavius Caesar, and she (being taken prisoner) being debarred of weapons,
Knives, Garters, and all other things whereby she might misdoe her self,
nevertheless, though she were carefully and diligently watched, she suddenly
went toward the fire, and caught up hot burning Coals, and swallowing them
dyed to preserve her honor.

Dido, some called her Elisa, was the famous foundresse of the mighty City of
Carthage in Africa; she was the Daughter to Bellus; she was married to
Sichaeus, who was Priest to Hercules, (A man of such mighty wealth, that
Pigmalian, Dido's brother slew him) so by that means, Dido being a Widow, one
Hiarbus, King of Getulia (or the Getes, which some hold to be Norway, or
Gothland) made Suite to her for marriage, which she refusing, he made War
against her; and she finding her self too weak to withstand his forces, and
withal not being minded ever to Marry, (the love of her first Husband had
taken such deep root in her heart) she killed her self. Virgil does frame in
his Aeneades, that she slew her self for the love of Aeneas; which cannot
possibly be so, for Aeneas came from Troy 350. years at the least, before Dido
was borne, or Rome or Carthage built.

Artemisia was a Queen, replenished by beauty and chastity; she was the Wife to
Mausolaus, or Mausolus) King of Caria, she loved her Husband so entirely, that
when he was dead she caused him to be embalmed, and his heart to be taken out
and dried to powder, which every day she drank a part of, till all of it was
drank: she said, that whilst he lived they both had but one heart, and that
she held no Sepulehre so worthy for the interring of his heart, as was the
living Sepulcher of her body. Also she caused a Monumentall Tomb to be built,
wherein she laid the Corpse of her beloved Lord and Husband: The Tomb was of
that magnificent and stately structure, that it was accounted one of the
Wonders of the World; the stone of the said Tomb was of an excellent and rare
kind of Marble: it was in compass 411. foot, in height 37. foot, and it was
circled about with 36 Marble Pillars, most curiously carved with Corinthian
work.

Pheadra was too loying to cast her self away for the love of Hippolitus.

Phillis did as much for Demophoon, and Thisbe for the love of Piramus: killed
her self with a sword. These three or four last named, were overaboundant too
to loving Creatures.

St. Vrsula was the daughter of a British Prince, named Dionetta; she, with
(...) Virgins more who were under her command, were assailed by the Barbarous
G^^^es and Vandals, and because they would not yield their bodies to
prostitution, and their souls to Heathenish Idolatry, they were all put to
deathby their inhumane enemies. There is a Monument in the City of Colleine of
St. Vrsula, and the said eleven thousand Virgin Martyrs.

Leodice, the Wife to Ariathres, King of Capadocia, did unnaturally murder
five of her six sons, for the which the people violently fell upon her, and
killed her, which being done they crowned the surviving son that was left.

Dominico Silvio, Duke of Venice being deposed from his Dukedom, because his
Army was discomfited by Robert, Duke of Puglya, and Calabria, his wife in her
greatness was so daintily proud, that the Dew was often gathered from Roses
and flowers, to make Baths to bathe her in with costly perfumes and other
devices; yet before she dyed her flesh did rot, and stink in such a noisome
manner, that none could abide to come near her, and in that miserable fashion
she dyed.

When the Emperor of Germany ( Conradus the third) had overcome the Faction of
the Guelphes, and taken their chief City called Monake in the Canton of Berne
in Switzerland, the Emperor commanded his soldiers to cut all the men in the
City in pieces, but he granted the women so much mercy and favor, as not only
their lives and freedom, but also to carry away as much as they could on their
backs, whereupon the Womenkind consisting of Maids, wives widows, or other
Females, took every one of them a boy, a Lad, or a man, (their fathers,
Brethren, Uncles, friends, and the Town soldiers) upon their backs, and bare
them out of the City, and so saved their lives from the Emperors fury: which
he, perceiving, was so moved with pity, that in love to the woman's worthy
acts and true affection, he was pacified, and gave them all free pardon of
their lives, with their Town and goods.

As there have been good women, whose honors and virtues are as famous and
memorable as men, so likewise there has been, and are too many whose lives
are abominable, live and dye detestable: for the height of the Firmament is
found by the Staff or Astrolobe, the depth of the Sea may be sounded with the
Lead and Line, the farthest Coasts are discovered by the Chart and Compass,
Art and Wit find out the secrets of nature, Man's Anatomy is known by often
dissections and experience: But Instrument, Plummet, Line, Compass, Wit, Art,
or Experience, cannot find out or shun the deceits of a wicked woman, for
though all women be women-kind, all are not kind women; and as they are weak,
and subject to the temptations of men, so are they stronger temptations to men,
than men can withstand: and it is to be noted, that the most or greater number
of them do love and take delight to be su'de and sought to, although they are
determined never to grant that which is su'de for.

They commonly are very forgetful of good turns, and concerning injuries,
they have memories that will out-last Brass or Marble, they are so like the
Courtiers in ^^land, that if they should promise me a dourtesie, I would not be
so foolish as to expect to have it: It is natural for them to despise what is
freely given to them, though they need it; and it is a cruel vexation to them
to be denied any thing that they ask, though it be but needless and
impertinent toys and bables.

Huldovina, wife to Paleologus, the second Emperor of Constantinople, which
Emperor was afflicted with the Gout, and other diseases in such grievous
manner, that for the space of nine Months every year, he could not stir out
of his Bed, or Chamber; at which times there was no Physic that could help or
ease him but his wives scolding: (which medicine was taught him by a Witch) I
wish I had a wife endued with such virtue, I would let her out to hire at what
rate or price I listed.

Infinite were the number that might be named, that have been famous for their
virtues, or infamous for their vices, but they are recorded in other Histories,
and therefore I hold it impertinens to proceed further this way.

As women diverse are, I change my Pen
From good to bad, from bad to good again:
One with the other J have mixedhere,
For Virtue, shines more bright when vice is near.
An old man asked a young Maid this Question: If I should take thee to be my
Wife, I pray thee tell me, will thou be honest? she answered him presently,
what I might be, if I were married to you, I know not, but I do mean to be
honest if you take me not.

There is nothing more vexing to a Scold, than when she perceives the party she
scolds at not to be vexed; for they cannot be angered worse than not to answer
them: therefore a wise man will not set his wit to one of them, as either to
regard, or give her an answer, for an Answer is encouragement, and indeed it
is too much Honor for a man either to descend so low as to take notice of what
they say, or to stoop lower to afford them any Reply, but to shame them with
their mortal enemy, Silence.

Cancer (in Latin) It Is a Crab of the Sea; there are also Crabs of the Wood,
and he that marries a woman that was home when the Sign was in Cancer, is
likely to be matched in one of a (...) disposition: and of a crooked nature,
and then the old (...) will prove the best Cure, as thus:

The Cr^b of the (...) is a Sauce very good
For the Crabbe that does swim in the Sea.
But the wood of the Crabbe is good for a Drab,
That will not her Husband obey.
A strange familiar daily and hourly Lecture, most rare and ordinary very
easy and extreme hard to be understood, pronounced by an Ancient Grand Gossip
over a Cup of Sack and strong Waters.
Mistress Jane Twittle, Mrs. Sicilly Twattle, Mrs. Dorothy Small-worth, Mistress
Few-words, and Mistress Many-better, went all a shroving one a good Friday to
old Mistress Little-goods; where after the expense of half an hours time in
impertinent and unnecessary courtsies, how dee's and welcomes (the young Woman
having brought a fat Capon and Conies, with a Gallon of Canara (in Bottles)
they all sat down, where after a while that the Jack, the Spit, and the Cups
had gone round, they began to talk of many things, whereof they had nothing to
do, but the old Mistress of the House prayed them to be merry and wise, and
that Pitchers had ears, and therefore (to avoid danger,) she entreated them to
clamor their tongues, and to have a care to speak no more then they said, and
with that (good Creature) she called for her Hum Bottle, and kindly drank to
them, desiring that it might go about, saying, it was the spirit of
whorehownd, and a rare preservative to drive away Melancholy; That Bout being
past, they began to change their discourse, as the inspiration of good drink,
and the Vollubility of their tongues gave them utterance; some talked of their
Husbands, some prated of the fashions, some back-bite their Neighbors, some
commended the Sack, some extolled the Hum Battle, and all drank round still:
Well, well, (said Mistress Twattle,) All this Corn shakes no Wind, nor does any
of our Husbands know what great pains we poor women take: with that word
Husband, old Mistress Little-good began to start, saying, In good time be it
spoken, I have not been troubled these 32. years with so grievous a burden as
a Husband, I tell you (loving Daughters) I am threescore and fifteen Winters
old, (at the next Grass or Hock-m^nday) and before I was forty I had buried
four. I remember the first was a Tailor, (as honest a man of a Protestant as
need to beyand as true a man of his Trade, as ever broke Bread; and indeed
Bread was his Bane, for he was choked with eating fourteen Pennyworth of
hot Bunnes upon a Goodfriday morning, his death was very grievous to me, for
he was a man of fair behavior, and his credit was so good every where, that
he might have been trusted with untold Milstones; he got more (by half) by
his Shieres, than by his Needle (for he was a large Cutter) his Bodkin was one
of his Military Weapons, but for his Yard it was somewhat scant, and very
short of London measure.

I had not bin a Widow above five days, but a Shoo-maker would needs know the
length of my foot, I remember he came to me upon a Monday, persuading me it
was one of St. Hughs Holy Days, by whose Bones (with the aid of Saint
Crispian) he swore he would have me: and (alas) I being a weak woman,
seeing his boldness, I had no power to hold out, so the next day we got a
License and were married, out to see what a sudden alteration was befalne me,
think a Woman could never have chanced upon two husbands of such different
qualities; for as the Tailor was adicted to Bread, the Shoo-maker was
altogether for Drink; the one was a pint of small Beer, and 3. penny loaves,
and the other was a dozen Pots and a Halfe-penny crust. Indeed I think he got
our House-rent, and part of our bread by stretch ing and gnawing his Leather
with his teeth, but for his drink he could hardly bring both ends together at
the years end: Truly he was a very proper man (but for his face) and for the
King of Good-fellowes, he was worth his weight in burnt Silk; but within 2.
years Death came upon him, and (with a Habeus Corpus) brought him from his
Aule to his Last; but before he dyed he was as lean as any Rake, for he was a
small eater, and you know that all drink, or swill and wash, and no Grains,
will never fatten a Hog. He being laid sa^e in his Grave, I was almost a
forenight before I could perceive any wooer, or Lovestruck Suitor to make
toward me; I mused and grieved, at such a neglect at that time (for I tell you
daughters) I then thought my self as fine as the proudest, and I am sure I was
as proud as the finest, and esteemed my penny to be as good Silver as the best
of them: at the fortnights end of my second Widow-hood, to drive away grief, I
would sometimes see a Play, and hear a Beare-baiting; whereas a handsome
formal Bearded man made room; to sit down by him, and he took such good
notice of my Civillity, in laughing at the sport, that indeed Love struck him
to the heart with the glaunces of mine eyes, in such sort as within short space
we met at a Tavern, where with a Contract we made our selves as sure as Sack
and Sugar could tie us; in a Word, the Marriage was ended, and Giblets were
joined, (as we thought to both our contents,) but all is not Gold that
glisters, and oftentimes a fair morning does usher a foul day; as it happened
with us) for my Husband being a Merchant, and Free of the Worshipful Company
of Haber dashers of Small Wit, within half a year after we were Married, he
appeared like a Venice Glass that had fallen from a Tavern Table in a drunken
Fray; for it is to be noted, that a Merchant and a Glass are much like in
quality, and altogether contrary to an Egg, or a Jest, for the Glasle or the
Merchant are stark naught when they are broken, and the Egg or Jest, are never
good so long as they are whole. My Husband being thus unhappily cracked, took
up a strong Lodging for his safe keeping, and became a Courtier to King Lud,
but after six Months Imprisonment, he made a shift to wind himself out by
compounding with his Creditors for seven groats in the pound; and being at
liberty, and most plentifully stored, with neither credit, Coin, means or
friends, he fortuned to be in a place whereas a Statute Book lay; negligently
behind a Curtain in a window, which he (without any leave or knowledge to the
Right owner) borrowed and closely carried away under his Cloak, upon which
book he would be continually poaring and reading, so that by his industrious
study he found how wickedly the penal Statutes were broken every day a
thousand times, whereupon he resolved (seeing all Trades failed) to turn
Informer, or (as ignorant fools term it, who know not what they say)
Promouter; in a word, my Husband was so witty by his practice in that good
Book, he made a shift to get a bad living; he was a terrible Termagant
against Tavernes, Alehouses, Cooks, and victulers, for dressing Flesh in
Lent, or fasting days, and they (being in his danger) would compound with him;
and give him money underhand, by which means they had that convenience, to
dress what and when they would; and frothy curtall Kans, bumbasted fomy Iuggs,
squirting black Pots, or any villainous unlawful measures, were winked at with
my good man's Cum Privilegio, but at last he was found out, and the reverend
Grave Judges for his compounding and winking, did so clear his eyesight, that
they made him look and see perfectly through an Inch Board, for he was mounted
on a Market Day on the Pillory, and part of his faults written in his
Forehead; and after he was degraded and made incapable, to be worthy to undo
anybody by Information; for his word was never more to pass for current. His
pains being past, I know not by what chance but he got a pocky blow with a
French Cowlestaffe, and gave up the Ghost in an Hospital.

He being Dead was much bemoaned (for indeed he did as much good here whilst he
lived, and was as necessary a member as the fifth Wheel in a Coach.) It was my
Fortune within one month to marry with one Achitophel Little-good, in which
match we were both cozened; for he took me for a rich Widow, and I was in
great hope that his Bags were linde with Gold and Silver Rubbish; but it fell
out otherwise, for he was as poor as any boasting Knave need to be; for
he owed for the very Clothes that he wore; and so we two (being both in one
case) had most plentiful store of hunger and ease; and yet though he had
neither means or Trade, he was so diligent to look out, that he would make
hard shift to be drunk almost every night, and then when he came home, he
would most familiarly, and lovingly kick me, calling me Whore, and many other
pretty Sirnames; and sometimes he would play with my hair, winding it about
his fist, and kindly draw me by it all about the house, and withal sometimes
he would embrace me in great affection (out of his own good Nature) with a
Wand, a Cudgel, or a Ropes end. I being as then not very old, began to take
these kindnesses to heart; and (to requite him) I would walk as well as he,
and stay abroad as late, insomuch (that for my better maintenance) I Traded so
well, and had such good commings in, that I made him wear an invisible
Cuckooes Feather in his Cap, and if occasion had been he could have made Hay
with his head, as well as with a Pitchforke; and I would raise my voice to him
in the chiding vain, that all the house and street would have rung of it, (for
I had a very shrill high voice) and I would talk on purpose to no purpose but
to vex him; for women are not bound to speak sense to senseless fools, nor
Reason to unreasonable drunken Beasts; our best knowledge (for the most part)
is not to be understood in any thing that we mean, say or do; and yet I
understand thus much, that a Crowing Hen is better than a Craven Cock; and
truly if I could have found out but where any good behavior was to be had in
England, I would have had my Husband bound to it as strongly as the Devil
mended his Breeches, when he sowed them with a Bell-rope: he had a Wife and
two Children before he married me, but (as I heard say) he was a better
Husband then to them than to me, for as his house was on fire once, he was so
careful that all should not be burnt, that he cast his Wife and Children into
a Well, saying he would save somewhat. Indeed he was a Melancholy, merry, sad,
malepart conditioned fellow, and I loved him so dearly, that it struck him
inwardly with such joy, that after eighteen months being married, he dyed of
the Pippe; and I hearing that a Projector was about to get a Monoppoly to have
all the Goods and possessions of all such Widows who dyed with grief for
their Husbands decease; I thought it the safest way to deceive the Projector,
not so much as to grieve or shed a tear: And for his sake I vowed never to be
married again. And so good neighbors and Gossips, I drink to you all, and
you are welcome all.

The Author's advice how to tame a shrew.
IF you perceive her to increase her language, be sure you give her not a
word, good nor bad, but rather seem to slight her, by doing some action or
other, as singing, dancing, whistling, or clapping thy hands on thy sides; for
this will make her vex extremely, because you give her not word for word: And
be sure you do not offer to go away, but walk still before her, or in her
hearing; for if you do think to avoid her clamor by going abroad, you are
deceived; for then you do but give her breath, and so she will have a Bill os
Revivall against you when you come in again, and so by that means will have
another fling at your Jacket: and if you must needs go forth about your
occasions, beware that she do not meet with you as Xantippe the wife of
Socrates, did meet with him: for after he had endured her railing and bitter
words for two or three hours together, and slighted her by his merry conceits,
she studying how to be revenged of him, as he went out of his house she poured
a Chamber Pot onhis head, which wet him exceedingly; whereupon he presently
said, I did think that after so great a clap of Thunder, we should have some
shower of rain, and so past it off merrily: but if all will not serve that you
can do, to stop her rage, but she will thus every day clamor, then I wish you
to buy a Drum into your house, and lock it up in some private room or Study,
that she may not come at it, and when she does begin to talk aloft, do then
begin to beat a loud, which she hearing, will presently be amazed, hearing a
louder voice than her own, and make her forbear scolding any more for that
time. And at any time if she do talk or scold, then sing this Catch,

He that marries a Scold a Scold,
He has most cause to be merry,
For when she is in her fits,
He may cherish his wits
With singing Hey down dery, with a cup of Shery.
Or thus:
What hap had I to marry a Shrew,
For she has given me many a blow,
And how to please her, alas, I do not know.
Another.
Dub a dub, kill her with a Club,
Be thy wives Master:
Each one can tame a shrew, but he that has her.
Another.
Never let a man take heavily
The clamor of his wife,
But if he do please to learn of me,
To live a merry life,
Let her have a swing
All in a hempen string:
Or when she begins to scold,
Do thou begin to sing,
Fa, le, ra, la, la, fa, le, ra.
If nothing else will do it,
'Twill keep her tougue in awe,
To sing, Fa, fa, la, la, le, ra.
It is the only way to tame a shrew,
And save a man the charg of many a blow,
Fa, la, la, la, fa, la, la, le, ra.
But if she persist, and will have her well,
Oh, then bang her, bang her, bang her still.
And thus having briefly showed you how to pacify a scolding wife, I will
only fall into a merry strain or vein for a few Epigrams, and so conclude.
Epigram 1.
I blame not lusty Doll, that strives so much
To keep her light heart free from sorrows touch:
Grief is a Corrasive, that would consume her,
And therefore she affects a pleasant humor:
She Is light of head, and heart, and light of heel,
And every way as nimble as an Eele.
She Will dance and sing, a hem boys, hey all six,
She Is steel to th'backe, all mirth, all Meretrix.
Epigram 2.
Kate very eagerly does still pursue,
To have Diurnall and Nocturnall Duc.
Epigram 3.
Nells Husband says, she brought him naught but toys,
But yet (without his help) she brings him Boys.
Epigram 4.
There Is no man looks on Lidia's face, would think
So fair a feature should so foully stink:
Wherefore, excepting kissing complement,
In other cases she can give content.
Epigram. 5.
Mall at first motion no mankind endures,
But make her drunk, she is everlasting yours.
Epigram. 6.
Megge lets her Husband boast of Rule and Riches,
But she rules all the Roast, and wears the Breeches.
Epigram. 7.
Madge by no means immodest pranke (...),
Yet takes delight to go exceeding gaudy,
To sport, carouse, and do such things besides,
As to report of, would appear too bawdy.
Epigram. 8.
Tib scorns be taxed for dearness of her Trade,
That takes for hire, but as your Hackney Jade,
Provided you depart e're Candlelight,
Or pay her Fees double if you stay all night.
Epigram 9.
Sib lets her Corpse out at uncertain prises,
Still as the Faires or Markets falls, or rises.
Epigram. 10.
Nans Husband cares not for the peoples chatt,
She brings him profit, and he knows what is what:
They by their prating show their wit but small,
He by his gaining shows all wit, Wittall.
FINIS.

