A WHIPPE FOR WORLDLINGS OR THE CENTER OF CONTENT

Vt Pau^su^s Viperam
Su P^^^s Vanitatem
engraved title page

To the Reader.
MY modest lines thy milder censure craves,
They kick not at authority, outbraves
No poor dejected soul, feign would they tell,
That greatness, goodness, should together dwell,
The rich, in spirit poor, the poor should be
Rich in all graces, with humility.
That Monarchs, Judges, Magistrates, yea all
The Civil as Ecclesiastical,
Should so discharge their places in love, fear,
As shortly to receive their loan else where;
That those of low degree themselves demean,
As may their blessed profession best beseem,
Giving all men their due, below, above,
So shall they die in peace, who lived in love;
That neither wise in wisdom, strong in might,
Rich in his riches glory; but as right
Give God the praise, so use those gifts him lent
As a good steward, Gods blessed instrument;
That the afflicted, those with tempests tossed,
Vncomforted, give not themselves for lost,
Although their drink be tears commix'd with gall,
He that did wound, can heal, can kill, recall
To life, affliction touchstone like does try
The reins, the heart; as fire does purify
The Gold, so they the Saints; though now they mourn,
Their sweet release to greater joy shall turn.
Right precious in his sight are all Gods Saints,
At rest, forgets not God, distressed, not faints,
Living, unto the Lord they live, and die
In him, to live with him eternally.
Good, gentle, peaceful Reader, I present
This mass thus dressed unto thee; my intent
Is good, if here be ought that is for thy use
If thou find profit by it, no abuse,
Receive it from thy friend in love, and say
Thou Art promised, if God will, an higher lay.
Thine STEPHEN TAILOR.

Ad Avarum O sorem huiusce libelli and rosorem.
FAsciculum (...) Florum (Diodore) paravit
Dic mihi, quid sentis? non probo. Sentis inest.
Dic, vbi te pungit? digitos. Mentiris inepte.
Non digitos pungit, pungit at hic animum.
Tu curas depone tuas, quae sunt mage sentes,
Et rosa tunc redolens, quod modo sentis, erit.
Authori Amico obtulit Mich: Edmonds.

A WHIPPE FOR WORLDLINGS OR THE CENTER OF CONTENT.
WHy should the boundles ill-disposed mind
Of brittle man, unconstant as the vvind,
With swelling pride, disdainefull arrogance,
Seek to himself the worlds sole governance?
Alas, so small a part would him suffice,
(If glory vain blent not his Reasons eyes)
That he should find that who possesses least
Has most content, which is that God-like Feast;
That only Summum bonum here belovve,
That myrrour clear through which we most things know;
That glass of glory, by whose help we see
Those secret mysteries of divinity,
That richest Jewel, which the Gods impart
To those that them adore with simple heart;
Whose powers; blessedness, no tongue can tell
Save that which dipped has been in th'living well.
Why are we puffed up? or rather why
(Knovving our weakness our deep misery,)
With humbled soul, heart thankful, cheerful grace,
Do'nt we his mercies bountiful embrace?
No, no, our natures are so prone to ill,
That little good we know; if know, not will.
Much like the daughters of the watery leach
By vvisedomes Magazine described, which reach
Out their vvide throats after the bloody prize,
The more insatiate they gulpe, the more their cries
Are, give, give; Such is our vvretched state,
Fretting our souls with cares intemperate,
With restles thoughts, and carkings pining seek
We Mammons pois'ned treasures, which to keep
Our minds are charged with doubts, and bloudles fears,
Our spirits all consumes, exciccates, seares.
We plunge our selves into the lowest deeps
With raving madness, where us nothing meets
But moaning sorrovve, grief remediles,
Heart-burning hate, vvasting disquietnes,
Squint-eyed suspect, foaming revenge, despite,
All-dreaded horror, shaking pale-look'd affright,
Blood-stained treason, faithles disloyalty,
Corrupted justice, self eating Jealousy
Deceit, whose fair filled tongue is ever found
To his heart discord, sharp, yet no true sound;
And after follows him that monster vilde
With gastfull looks, eyes hollovve, all defilde
About his chinne, his loathsome beard and breast
With filthy-colour'd stinking matter pressed
Through his black irksome teeth, that him to see,
Would turn a stomach strong; (called Perjury)
Then simonie, too vvelcome now a ghest
To greatest Prelates, and the surest rest
(In these corrupted times) to those that be
Poorer in parts than purse, in Arts than fee,
But murder lurkes this while, and vnespi'de
Would gladly escape our sight, and steal aside;
His color is too splendent, his path way
Too much is beaten, so that every day,
Nay every hour, where ever we be, report
Doleful is made of him in heavy sort.
Light-shunning shame with causes first and last
Make have to follow them before that past.
Then comes despair, in whose distracted look
Well may you read her lesson without book,
With speaking gesture, most unconstant gate,
With raving words still cries out, (all too late,)
Voice heavy, hollovve, hoarce, with a resound
Much like an empty cave far under ground;
Feign would she weep, to give her self some ease,
But cannot weep, nor grief in least appease,
The fountaine's dry, her brain the spring is spent,
All moisture gone, naught left save sad lament.
With leaden feet her numbered steps she treads
Sometimes where Fortune, not where Judgment leads,
When she augments her torments, tortures dire,
And adds light fuel to her flaming fire.
Now bends her brows against the sparkling sky,
And then cast down groueling in dust does lie,
Cursing the Fates, the Powers above, and all
That either made her man, or man let fall.
And then again as mildly does she bless
The state of men, (than Angels not much less)
That fly in time Satan's temptation,
And work with fear their own salvation!
But suddenly vpstarting from this Muse,
She flies as fast as if she vvings did use;
Or as the speedy post of heaven had lent
Her (for more have) the air cutting instrument.
All boots not thoe, she finds where ever she fly
Death, death eternal does within her lie:
The vulture, as on Tityus, so does gnavve
Her vvastles bowels, easeles pangs to dravve;
And with Ixion turned on a wheel,
Racked as Typhaeus, while each joint does feel
Worse than Perillus pains, (that did invent
The brazen Bull his own deaths instrument.)
Thus, vvretched earth worms, do we pull amain
Our souls loss on us for the slightest gain,
Gain did I call it? When no tongue can tell,
How great's the loss, when heavens exchanged for hell.
No matter what the man is, so has wealth,
How qualified in mind, if rich in pelf:
His Father died but lately, left him store,
His Uncle's sick, whose death shall bring much more;
Svveet daughter, give his first access some grace,
A pleasant smile from that thy lovely face,
No matter though his stiff benumbed joints
Have used the flaile, more than those nicer points
Of gentile exercise; can he not dance?
Nor curb the cornefed steed with couched lance
In hand? nor sing, nor court, nor play
On lute, or violl, or on that they say
Arion did repay the Dolphines love?
What then (my Doll) this must thy thoughts not move,
These complete youths, when they have spent their 'states,
May go and scrape in consort with their mates.
My pretty girl, thy mother well did know,
(O give me aqua vitae, else I go
To meet her in Elysium, for her name
Makes sudden cold to run through every vein)
I say she knevv, good Creature, how that I,
Though never instructed in such fopperie,
Could play my part, and frisking skippe about
The merry Maypole, till I her culled out
From' among the route, those were the happy days,
We were not then so nice, so coy; what says
My darling? how? gippe gossip, hoe
Are you so proud now grown, well, you shall know
That I your Father am, has he no wit?
He cannot speak, nor look, nor go, nor sit,
What though he cannot write nor read a letter?
Is not than all of these his means much better?
One casts her self away in best of age
Upon a cree ping goat merely for gage,
And daignes that rotten bulk to cull and kiss,
And smiling tells him he Adonis is.
When as his toothles gummes, his restles cough
She hates in heart and privately does scoff,
Is he not well at ease? O then she cries,
My dearest Lord, my all-delight, my joys,
Where is your pain? tell me where lies your smart,
I need not ask, I feel it at my heart.
So do we Symphathize. O I could rend
The hair from of my head, but to what end?
All will not help; good Sir, consider well
Be fore your death your poorer friends that dvvell
In the next village, for they have children small,
And little means (God knovves) to help vvithall,
For me there'l be enough, I am but one,
And when you die, with me the world is gone;
Or if, that care you do impose on me,
My love to you in them the world shall see.
Now has she vvonne him, straight he does enfeoft
Her in his whole estate, and nothing's left
Undone, but to enjoy; yet him recovered
In mind she cannot brook, but undiscovered,
Covers with veil of false died joy, and he,
Ravished therewith, seems now in heaven to be,
But yet for her, this vvind no haver shakes,
For more content some other shifte she makes;
Fall back, fall edge, man has no perfect power;
If not as wife, she will have it as a --.
Nor the endovvments rare of largest mind
In Ethicles, to virtues lore inclined,
Nor yet his personage, admired grace,
Nor honors due move Lycia fair an ace;
With the same sauce too is Melissus served,
Passius his dish delighted in has carved.
For he was rich, his father left him heir
Of all his goods, and baseness to an hair.
But those Heroicke spirits, right Noble breasts,
True glories darlings, Pallas delighted ghests,
The Muses favorites, base earth disdaines,
And all those tempting trifles from her veins
Sucked by her leane-chopd slaves, their eyes are bent
Upon the mind, not these goods contingent;
Nor painted weeds, big looks, affected gate
Of Pluto's gorgeous sons infatuate
Their sounder judgments, but where virtue clear
Or any parts deserving shall appear,
Though clad in rags, and coverd with the scorn
Of fortunes butterflies, seeming forlorn,
Them they will honor, and respect much more
Than thousand Braggadocho's named before.
Not means, but men; not state, but studies deep,
Not pride, but fruitful lore their favors keep.
What though the vpstart gallants of these times,
Mounted aloft by Parents damned crimes,
Spreading their tails as Peacockes, thee deride
With obscure house, base blood on either side?
Forgetting what their fathers were, and how
They purchased that of which they vaunt so now.
One by long suite, and some small feeling by
Unto the favored of his Majesty,
In foreign service, or last expedition,
Or else at home in one less-lou'd Commission,
Procured an office, when he so well did lick
His fingers, that his sons do find it stick
Still by their ribs. Another has sucked dry
Three better gentlemen, that dwelled him by,
Their charge was great, large debts they had to pay,
The times were hard, their tenants begged delay
In payment of their rents, so they much strained,
Made use of this their neighbor, when he gained
His hearts desire, then he himself does bless
Hugging his fortune, and vvish'd happiness.
With countenance composed, and long drawn speech
(After excuse) his money will not reach
Unto so high a sum, he lets them know;
But glad would be, if that he could but show
In that or any service, his affection dear
Which he to them and theirs did ever bear.
well, they will make shifte then with what he can spare:
And one upon his son bestovves a mare
In token of acceptance; Sr. forbear,
Your bountie's vnderseru'd, he shall not I swear.
well, I must rest your debtor; yet, Sr, I pray
That this your morgage may be sealed to day,
For we are mortal all, and know not when
Our living souls shall leave their fleshie den.
His will obtained by reasons large alleged,
All deemes he as his own, for surely vvedg'd
He finds himself in their estates, and plods
Now how to set them that were friends at odds.
He knovves that lawyers loadstones are, they will look
What fish there comes to net by hook or crook
To make their prize, than which he seeks not more
(He pays not great that cannot lesser score,
Nor can he much that is not world before.)
In fine, possession he has got and holds,
This is their glory, this their heart embolds.
Another was Protector to a child,
His kinsman near, of nature good and mild,
For love of whose great Fortunes he does send
To some part far remote, his days to spend,
Telling him travells much enrich the mind,
And the affections rude in order bind;
When counsel he has got of Doctors grave,
Who told him plainly, there is no hope to save
His life, if thither he his course do steare,
Which as his natures antype does appear.
If this trick miss, his brain affords one more,
Prosper not that, he finds out yet a score;
For die he must, his thoughts can have no rest,
Till of those goods and lands he be possessed.
Unnamed there rests one yet, who knevv full well
(For which he hovvles now amongst the feinds in hell)
To raise himself, and gain a noted name,
By being Author of his daughters shame:
She was a comely creature, in whose face
All men would say beauty sat linked with grace;
Too svveet a girl, so base a Sire to have,
Better for her if the womb had been her grave.
He plays the Pander, what is her part you will judge,
But this is to a Lord, that will not grudge
Nor stand to question his demands, but grant
What he in fevvest words pretends to want.
May not these outsides then well boast of blood,
Of honored stock, of house as old as Lud?
But let me leave such froathes, and shadows vain,
Leading my Muse to our digressed aim:
What though these heap upon thee bitter scorn?
Thy vvorth shall aye appear as brightest morn,
Or as that star days noted harbinger,
VVish'd comfort to the home-bent travailer.
A Pilgrimage thou knovv'st this life to be,
Pilgrims should fast, not feast in jollitie.
If great thy burden, slovver is thy pace,
How lesser laden, bettet is thy case:
The way is heavy, full of thorns and briars,
With doubt full vvindings many men that tires,
Have thou vvher with frail nature to suffice?
Thou have enough; thou art in happy guise,
And little her contents, why then should we
Needles with such great weights oppressed be?
Thou think thy share but small, thy lot too mean,
Thy part most matchles tragic in the scene,
Yet let not Passions raging tirannie
Rob reason of her due regalitie,
Then shall thou set the case is altered quite,
Thou art not miser, but an happy vvight.
Thou art not King, nor Keiser in degree,
Cares attend crowns, dire fears regalitie'.
Scarce can the charms of Morpheus black constrain
Their vvearied senses to obey his reign,
When others sleep in quiet, they oppressed
With ferall perturbations find no rest.
If eat, or drink, or ride, or sit, or lie,
In every place, and in all company,
Both day night and with restles thoughts and doubts
They cruciate their souls, yet nothing boots.
How many mighty Monarchs of the earth
Have lived in constant trouble from their birth?
How has Dame Fortune tossed them as a ball?
When at the height of glory then they fall.
Aged Priamus descended of high love,
Whom fifty sons did father call, that strove
With Greeces chiefest Champions, what more grief
Rained forth his bleeding life without releife
Just at the Altar? Why should I stand to name
That greatest Caesar by the Senate slain?
Or Cleopatra, Egipts queen, that di'd
By vvinding serpents poisoned stings, to glide
To her beloved Anthony, before
Who took his journey to the stygian shore?
Or yet that crafty King (Iugurtha named,
For policy, and feats of arms much famed)
Of Numidea great Commander; t'ane
By Marius, brought un to Rome there slain?
Or powerful Bellisarius, whose highs deeds
Rome, yea and all the world with vvonder feeds,
And yet constrained was through want to pray
For small releife to them that passed his way?
No Catalogue of this I seek to make
Of greatest Peires that share in Fates did take;
This is no Chronicle, my taske's not such;
(Only as fit) I give you but a touch.
Go further yet, and see those Princes rare
That (Atlas like) the world on Shoulders bare,
Whose Divine wisdom makes their neighbors quake
Those less in strength, whose very words do make
Those that were mortal foes to lay down arms,
And then (as Beacon) being fired them vvarnes
Unto Bellona's Court, which way he bends,
Observantly their resolution tends:
They humbly seek his counsel far and near,
And as an Oracle his sentence fear;
Yet for all this he murmured at shall be
By the rude sencesuall sense less Com'naltie.
O those most blessed days, that they have seen
Caused by the vvarres with such a King or Queen
Still yelpe they out; or hear they nevvs of vvarres
Their note is changed, what good is got by jarres?
Keeps he a Court magnificent? they cry
Such riot brings our land to beggerie.
Or is he frugall to increase the store
The treasury exhausted long before?
Then he is ignoble, then he seeks their shame,
He loves not honor, is no child of fame.
If young, he spends his time in dalliance
With his fair Queen, neglecting governance.
If struck in years, tush, then he is grown a sot,
Ne what of state or rule knovves he a jot.
Or have their crying sins with a strong hand
Pulled from the Lord a judgment on the land?
Whether by dearth, or war, or faintnes chill,
A coldness at the heart, a listles ill,
Which makes their looks more settled, bloodles, sad,
Than if an ague strong them shaken had,
Which takes away all charity and love,
(That only makes man like the Gods above)
All due respect, freindship, good neighbor hood,
Dries up affection even in nearest blood,
When we can see without relenting heart
Our brothers vvretched, woeful, easeles smart,
When we unmoved as sencles blocks can see
Subject of pity, depth of misery:
When traffic is blocked up within the land,
And money (life of trade) in misers hand,
When every one seeks to devour each other,
(Like ravening wolves) let him be friend or brother:
When these, and such like plagues are felt so soar,
They look not to the cause, but basely roar
Out bitter exclamations' against their King
For this their just deserved suffering.
Like as the Ichneumon (little beast) does steal
Into the belly of the Crocodile,
Beaking himself upon the sunny shore
Of fertile Nile, gorged till he can no more,
And there lies gnavving of his panch so vast,
Till he his life from monstrous corpse has cast.
Or as that living Mountain, natures vvonder,
That by his powerful passage causes thunder
In the Atlanticke sea, cutting with strength
The foamie waves, and floods does cast in length
Many a furlong with resistles finnes,
Which Triton much amazed, from revellings
And Courtly entertainment makes to rise,
Sending about to every part his spies
For quick advise, if any there should be,
That might in question call his soveraigntie,
Answer is brought, the vvhale strength of disdanie;
By the small svvord fish late received his bane.
The lofty Pine is subject to the ire
Of raging loud-tongu'd Boreas, all on fire
To hasten vvrackfull mischeife, and the fall
Of him aspiring and the Cedar tall.
When as the shrubbes, the lesser trees, that grovve
Under their shadovve, (shrovvded safely low)
Find no disturbance, but in peace do live
And kindly fruits in season due do give.
Is a slight Cottage blovvne unto the ground?
We take no notice of so dead a sound;
But when a tower, whose spire most eminent,
Threatening the Clouds by thunder bolt is rent,
Or cast to humble earth by kindled wrath
Of all-commanding Jupiter, dismai'th,
And makes with fearful cold their blood to freeze,
That dwell within the hearing, or that sees
Its roaring dovvnefal; so man of mean degree
Lives more at ease, and less in jeopardie.
Is not thy state so high? thy store so great?
Thy bags so stuffed with coin? nor yet thy seat
So pleasant or commodious? what then?
VVilt thou repine? O no, but think on them,
On them most vvretched creatures, slaves to vvoe,
That never fortune knevv but as a foe;
Who never savve an happy day or hour,
But always lived a prisoner in the tower
Of misery; the cheerful looks of joy
They seldom could discover; grief, annoy,
Sorrovve, laments, afflictions, heavines,
Tears, discontents, troubles, disquietnes,
Where ever they go, attendance strictly gives,
And follows them precise as relatiues.
Many a vvearie step they faintly tread
Without the sust'nance of a piece of bread,
When fiery Titan drives his scortching teame
Bet vvixt the glittering Cup and Diadem.
Nor house, nor shelter have they, to defend
Them selves from cruel blasts, and storms which rend
Strong Oaks up by the roots; the pinching cold,
And biting frostes they must endure, which old
Stern vvrathfull vvinter casts upon the earth,
By thee allayed and qualified with mirth;
When thou in bed of down thy limbs do stretch,
With peircing pangs their feeble breath they fetch,
Thou art encompassed with thy friends about,
With feeling words to answer every doubt,
That quickening counsel, tempred with svveet voice,
Will freely, in due season, in terms choice,
Administer to thy distracted mind,
Casting thy cares, fears, scruples, far behind;
Thrice happy were thou, if thou did but know
with what great good thy Cup does overflovve.
The Ape unto the Mole complaint did make
Of his tails want, (his ornament,) but take
Th'ansvvere, unworthy creature, thou should be
More thankful, when my blindness thou do see.
If all the world their greivances should bring
Of body, mind, and fortune, for to fling
In one place all together, would thou share
In their division equal? no, I fear.
with Eagles eyes, thou pry'st into thy wants,
But see not thine excess; vvhilest thousands vaunts
Of the bare hopes, they have for to enjoy
Some part of that thou slightest, make a toy,
A thing of naught; the grace and bounteous love
Of thy good God despising; do'nt remove,
O do'nt remove by thy repining cares
His svveet refreshinge favor, which he bears
To thee not vvorthie of thy blessed creation,
A man, a Christian, nor of preservation.
How many at this instant lie inthrall'd,
Their waste legs with massy irons galled,
That coursest bran for meat, and puddle drink,
And yet thereof are scanted, while they sink
Under their weighty burdens, taskes imposed
By Pagans cruelty, strictly enclosed
And pent in grisly Cells of bondage, slaves,
VVhilest naught they hope for, but their quiet graves?
How many in a moment are bereaved
Of all they had, by sodanie fire conceived
Through lightning, or neglect, or tyranny
Of rogues, bad neighbors, common enemy?
The same which we enjoying least regard
We more affect deprived of: 't is hard
Justly to value our felicity,
But when 't is clouded with some misery.
No man can have his will in all, but may
Restrain his vvishes from a fruitles stray.
If all should sleep together, tell me then
What difference 'tvvixt Kings, Lords and common men?
The day of dissolution is at hand,
That general day, when Gods wheat shall be fand,
And brought into his garner; or to thee
Thy day of death approaches speedily.
Then shall the tears be wiped from thine eyes.
Then shall thou clean forget thy bitter cries,
Then art thou freed from all disasters, pains,
Then have thou perfect cure for all thy maines.
Thou shall no more be servile, but in love
Be made Co-heire with Christ of heaven above.
Cast from thee then, thou Punie, those vain fears
Which shakes thy sounder faith, ignobly bears
Thy thoughts much lovver than the sordide ground,
And then again does catch them at rebound.
If constant be thy troubles, without doubt
Less violent, and time will wear them out:
And as for those that are more violent
They be but flashes, seldom permanent.
Thou art not vveake in body; say thou be,
Thou art in Spirit as strong as strongest he.
Thou art not poor; but yet suppose it so,
In gods love richer much than many more.
Come, art thou crooked or deformed? what then?
Thou may be right in heart toward God and men.
Thou bear no rule, enjoy'st no souveraigntie,
Thou rul'st thy lusts, that is chief regalitie.
Say thou were maimed, decrepite, vlcerous, blind,
Thy soul is sound, sees more than most we find.
Have thou no friends? alas, he that can raise
Of stones posterity to Abram, says
That he will be a father to thee, friend,
And never will forsake thee to thy.
END.

