Ihesus.

The flower of the commandments of god with many examples and auctorytees
extracte and drawn as well of holy scryptures as of other doctors and good
ancient faders / the which is much vtyle and prouffytable unto all people.

The.x. commandments of the law.
Thou shall worship one god only. And love him with thy heart perfytely God in
vain swear not wylfully Ne by nothing that he made verily The sunday keep and
halow holyly Hery^ge gods service on them devoutly Fader and mother honor thou
lowly And in their need help them gladly Slay thou no man malycyously Nor to
his death consent wytyngly Thou ne shalt commyt lechery But with thy wife in
wedlock only Thy neighbors goods stele not falsely. Nor nothing withholde
untruly Falls witness bear thou not slyly Nor falls record for none envy Other
men's wives take not flesshely Ne other women to know carnally Other men's
gods coueyt not lightly Nor hold from them vnryghtfully




The five commandments of the church.
The sondayes here thou mass and the festes of commandment. Of thy sins
thou the confess at the leest one time of the year. And thy creator thou
shalt receive / at Eester humbly. These feestes thou shalt halowe / that been
given the in commandment. The four ymbres vigyles thou shall fast / and the
lent entyerly.




INRI

depiction of the crucifixion of Jesus

The prologue of the translatour.
IN the beginning of this little work
Almighty god be my speed
Indewe me lord with some little sperke
Of grace and conning / my pen to lead
So that in nothing I excede
Following mine auctour / truly to endyght
To thy laud and praise in doing this deed.
And of thy blyssed mod / lord most of might
O maris stella / o sterre most bright
Shynynge in the fyrmament or sky
The which do guide ye maryners by night
And where thy help / should perysshe and deye
As thou in heaven / syttest right hye
Pray for those / unto thy blyssed son
That this to read will them apply
For their reward / may have salvation
Upon the pain / of eternal dampnacyon
To learn and know / ye commandments ten
We all be bound / without excusacyon
And in especyall / we christian men
The day shall come / we know not when
That unto account / called we shall be
For fere and dread / tremble shall we then
And know not for help whyder to fle
Wherefore in this world / blyssed is he
That in heart lives pure and clean
The devil / ye world / our conscience these three
Will cause our sins / to be known and seen
And what soever our life has been
Good of ill / it shall appear
Will we or nyll we / sooner than we wene
Before god / his saints / and his mother dear
Wherefore whiles we ben living here
Having time / oportunyte / and space
Serve we god / with heart entere
Making petycyon unto his grace
In humble wise / that in that place
Where he is we may ever dwell
Having the fruycyon of his blyssed face
And to be delivered from the pains of hell
These doctors dyuyne / done preche and tell
That ydlenes is a right peryllous vice
By the which our forne faders fell
Example we have of Salamon the wise
That when he was besyed / about the deuyse.
Of gods temple / and good operacyon
And in other virtues him did excercyse
He was never overcome by temptacyon
But as soon as he had delectacyon
In ydlenes / slouthe / and woman's company.
Of will dysposed / by delyberacyon
Renouncinge his faith / commyted ydolatry
Dauyd also lived in aduoutry
With Vryes wife / and caused to be slain
And ydlenes the rote / and cause of all their folly /
This story the bible reherceth plain
Right many in no^bre has be known and seyen
That ydlenes has brought unto perdycyon
By law and Justice / demed unto pain
For their demerytes / and transgressyon
And to avoid / the peryllous infeccyon
Of ydlenes slouthe / and other occasyo^s of sin
Has bo^ded me / under correccyon
Out of frensshe / this matter to begin
Entendynge thereby / no silver for to win
Ne yet none other temporal gain
But welthe of souls / escapynge the engyn
Of the devil of hell / his snares / and his chain
Who ever is besy / glad / and feign
Souls to dystroye / whom god has elect
Who give us grace / heaven to attain
Of my hole mind / this is theffecte
Explicit.
Tabula.
Here follows the table of this book.
MAn reasonable call the aid of god and of the vyrgyn Mary for to enlumyne
thin ente^dement to know thy self. That is to know what thou art / what
sins reygne in the / and how thou have dysobeyed unto god in brekynge his
commandments. Saint Bernarde says that thou shall be better and more to
allow if thou know thy self than if thou knew the course of the sterres / the
foundementes of ye earth the strengthes of herbs / the complexyons of men and
that thou had knowledge of the things celestyalles and infernalles. Vnde
bernardus. Studo cognoscere teipsum qr multo melior et laudabilior eris si
teiprem cognoscas / quam si teiplum negleto cognosceris cursus syderum /
fundamenta terraru^ / vires herbarum / complexiones hominum / et haberos
noticiam celestum et infernorum. Many persons there ben throughout ye world
the which will not believe of simple word that they the which transgress the
commandments of god gone unto dampnacion and pardycyon. And they the which
will not believe it / study they and seek they by this table their sins as
they ben declared in this book / and they shall find by the holy scripture
witness of certain by auctorytees yt they lose paradyse and desce^de in to
hell in the which they shall be eternally without ever to have aid ne
socoures in any manner. And for to find lightly the matters whereof this book
speaks him behooves to look what nombre and lettre is marketh and gooth and in
the nombre in the heyght of ye margen / and in those nombres and lettres shall
be found that yt a man demau^deth.

The perambule and dyuysyon of this book in the nombre.i. lettre.A. and the
lefe.i. To love god with all his heart and his neighbor as himself.i. B Folio.
i Wherefore a man should love god with all his heart.i. C. Fo. i Above all
things.i. D Folio. ii More than worldly goods i. E Fo. ii More than fader and
mother i. F Fo. iii More than his own body.i. G Fo. iii More than all
estates.i. h Fo iiii. Example.l. ii That the auarycyous love ye gold and
silver more than god.ix. B Fo. xx That the gloto^s love their wombes more than
god.ix. E Fo. xxi That this commandment compryseth under it ye three first
commandments and the three virtues theologalles.ii. A Fo. iiii That many
persons love other things more than god.ix. D Fo. xx To love his
neighbor.ii. E Fo. v The things esmoeuynges to love his neighbor.ii. F Fo. v
That he is commanded to love his neighbor as himself.ii. G Fo. vi That to
love his neighbor as hy^self co^pryseth ye works of mercy / ye.vii. last
commaundeme^ts and ye cardynal virtues.ii. h. etc That it is commanded yt we
love each other as god has loved us.iii. A Fo. v That god has loved us in
many manners whereof we shall tell.v. First he has loved us for to save and
socour us.iii. B Fo. viii Secondly he has loved the persons and hated the
vices.iii. C Fo. viii Questyon / if ye love of thieves and sy^ners ye love each
other be good.iii. C. eodem Thyrdly god has loved us of word and of operacyon
togyders.iii. D Fo. viii Fourthly he has us loved more tha^ his own body.iii.
E Fo. viii Fyfthly he has loved ye salvation of his enemies.iii. F Fo. viii
Questyon / how may I love those ye do me harm.iii. G Fo. ix Questyon / who is
it that is my neighbor.iii. H Fo. ix Of the virtue of charity the which
extends in all the commandments of god.iiii. A. Folio. x How god defends
in his commandments all evil words / thoughts / and operacyons / and
there commands all good operacyons.v. A. Folio.xi. Questyon under what
commandments ben defended ye.vii. deedly sins. And where ben commanded
the virtues opposytes and contraryes.v. C. Fo.xii. Of the condycyons of the
sinners after the branches of the seven sins mortalles.v. D. Folio.xiii.
Here follows the first commandment
THe first commandment of god defends many things / and commands
some.vi. A. Folio. xiii First it is commanded to believe in one only god in
trynyte / and to worship him soueraynly.vi. B. Fo. xiiii Secondly it is
defended to believe in ydolles and strange gods in errors and folysshe
credences.vi. C. Folio. xv Thyrdly all the artycles of the faith ben commanded
to believe in likewise as holy church holds and believes.vii. A. Fo. xvi
Fourthly of theffect of the.vii. sacraments the which ben comprehended under
yt the artycles of the faith. Credo sanctam ecclesiam catholica^. Scto^rum
communione^. Remissione^ pcto^rum.viii. A. Fo. xvii Example in eode^ loco.viii.
C. Fo. xix Fyfthly it is commanded to love god above all things. And how many
people loves other worldly things more than our lord god.ix. A. Folio.xx.
Syxtely the pride the which is against the dyleccyon of god is defended in
this commandment.ix. E. Fo. xxi That humylyte is commanded oueral and pride
defended.ix. F. Fo. xxi Seventhly that the sin of ydolatry and of infydelyte
noyeth in many manners unto the souls of them the which has broken this
commandment. Quere.xliiii. b / c / d / e / f g / h / i / k. Folio.Ciii.
Of the second commandment.
THe second commandment of god treats of them the which swereth
vnprouffytably.x. A. Fo. xxii That god defends al vain oaths and inutyles
under this word (vanum) / and all le synges and languages the which ben
against the dyleccyon of him or of his holy saints.x. B. Folio. xxii The
manners of forswerynge by the oath affermynge.xi. A. B. Folio. xxiii To be
forsworn by the oath promyttynge.xi. C Folio. xiiii That a venyall sin is
transmuted into mortal in four manners.xi. D. Fo. xxv That one oath is more
byndynge than another.xi. E. Fo. xxv The manners to blaspheme god / and that ye
blasphemers ben ill.xii. A. B. Fo. xxvi That the sin of blaspheme and of
periurynge noyeth in many manners unto ye souls of them the which has broken
this second commandment. Quere ad numeru^.xliiii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h
/ i / k / Fo. Ciii Questyon / if a man commit sin at every time yt he
swereth.xiii. A. Fo. xxviii What is requysyte to swear lefully without any
sin.xiii. B. Fo. xxix That a man should accomplysshe the vows made
Justly.xiii. C. Fo. xxix That things requysyte to a vow that is lefull.xiii.
D. Folio. xxx The things wherefore a man is not bound to acco^plysshe his
vow.xiii. E. Fo. xxx Remedy against swerynge.xiii. F. Fo. xxx
Of the third commandment.
THe third commandment commands to keep ye feestes.xiii. A. Fo. xxx The
causes and reasons wherefore the sondayes and feestes ben commanded to
sanctyfye.xiiii. B Fo. xxxi Questyon at what hour one should begin to keep the
feestes.xiiii. C Fo. xxxii Questyon wherefore men do keep an holy day in one
country and not in another country.xiiii. D Fo. xxxii How in.vi. manners men
sanctyfye the festes commanded / the which manners ben put by psalms / and
some ben necessaryes for the sanctyfycacyon of the feestes / and the other ben
Cerymonyalles for the augmentacyon of good operacyons and of virtues.xv. A Fo.
xxxii The first manner that men sanctyfyeth the feestes is for to abstain them
fro worldely operacyons.xv. A Fo. xxxii Questyon / if a man may work on the
holy day without committing of mortal sin.xv. B Fo. xxxii The second matter
is for to take heed to here the service and the predycacyons or sermons xv. C.
d. Fo. xxxiii The third manner is for to serve god and his saints.xvi. A Fo.
xxxiiii The.iiii. is to wake i^ orayso^.xvi. b. Fo. xxxv The fyfth manner is for
to yield graces and thanks unto god of his goodness yt he has done unto
us.xvii. A Fo. xxxvi Example of a good child the which yielded graces and
praysynges unto our lord in all the aduersytees the which came unto him.xvii.
B Fo. xxxvii The syxte is to wake in co^templacyon and to do ye works of
mercy.xvii. C. Fo. xxxviii That the reverence and sanctyfycacyon of all holy
things is brought in this commandment.xvii. D. Fo. xxxviii The manners how
men break the feestes commanded.xviii. A Fo. xxxix That those the which
breketh ye feestes commanded ben punysshed often times in this world and they
apperceyue not from whens such punycyon unto them proceeds.xix. A Folio. xl
Of slouthe yt god defe^deth.xix. B. Fo. xlii Example of a relygyous the which
would do no good deed.xix. C Fo. xlii Example of a man the which is dampened
for that / that he would do no good operacyons.xix. D Folio. xlii Example of a
curate the which tarried to admynyster the sacraments unto his parysshen yt was
seek.viii. C Fo. xix That the sin too break the feestes noyeth in many manners
unto the souls of them the which has dysobeyed this thyr-co^maundement.
Quere ad numeru^.xliiii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i / k / Fo. Ciii
Of the fourth commandment.
THe fourth commandment of god treats that a man should love his
parents.xx. A Fo. xliii Which ben the faders pryncypalles yt a man should
honor.xx. B Fo. xliii That in.vii. manners children do honor unto their
faders.xxi. A Fo. xliiii First for to salve them / to be bare heeded and to
bow the knee.xxi. B Fo. xliiii Secondly to speak unto them swetely and
humbly.xxi. C. Fo. xlv Thyrdly for to love the^ in sechynge their welthe and
health.xxi. D Fo. xlv Fourthly for to submyt them in to their subieccyon and
service.xxi. E Fo. xlv Fyfthly for to submyt them unto their obedyence.xxi. F
Fo. xlv Sextly for to help them with body and with goods in necessyte.xxi. G Fo.
xlvi Seventhly for to supporte them in their aege.xxi. H Fo. xlvii The things
that styreth for to honor their faders.xxi. I Fo. xlvii That the faders owes
unto their children four things the which ben nourysshynge / correccyon /
techynge / and to show good example.xxii. a / b / c / d / e Fo. xlvii That it
is also commanded to love his neighbor as himself as it is declared here
before. Quere.ii. G Fo. vi That the works of mercy ben here commanded to be
done toward their faders and neighbors indygentes and nedy.xxiii. A / b / c
/ d / e / f / g / h / i / k / l / m. Fo. l That pride the which is against the
dyleccyon of thy neighbor is here defended and humylyte commanded.ix. e / f.
Fo. xxi That the sin of those children the which dishonor fader and mother
and the which fail them at need noyeth in many manners unto their souls.
Quere ad numerum.xliiii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i / k. Folio.Ciii.
Of the fyfth commandment.
THe fyfth commandment defends homycyde unjust.xxiiii. A Fo. liii Of death
spyrytuall and corporal yt god defends.xxiiii. B Folio. liii That a man
commytteth homycyde both corporally and spyrytually in many manners.xxiiii. C
Folio. lv That homycyde is a sin that demands vengeance.xxv. A. Fo. lvii
A notable that these rauysshers ben deputed homycydes.xxiiii. D Fo. lvi When it
is that betynge is leful / and when it is defended.xxv. B Folio. lvii That
bety^ge is greter offense in one person than in another in eod. B. That god
defends all ire iniust against his neighbor.xxvi. A Fo. lviii Of ire in
heart.xxvi. B Fo. lviii Of Ire the which is showed bysygne or token.xxvi. C
Folio. lviii Of ire showed by word.xxvi. d. Fo. lviii Of ire the which is
showed in operacyon and deed.xxvi. E. Fo. lix That god defends Ire against
him self.xxvi. F. Folio. lix Of ire yt is against god.xxvi. G Fo. lx Of
vengeance yt god defe^deth.xxvi. h. fo. lx Questyon / when it is that Ire is
good / and when it is venyall sin or when it is mortal.xxvi. K Fo. lxii Of
remedies against the cursed sin of Ire.xxvi.L. Fo. lxiii Of hate that god
defends against his neighbor.xxvii. A Fo. lxiiii That the sin of have is
to dread and to fle for five things.xxvii. b / c / d / e. etc. Fo. lxv Other
ylles.xliiii. b / c / d / e / f. etc. Fo. Ciii That these haynours should
pardon and pacyfy togyders the iniuryes and offenses done if they will that god
pardon them their sins.xxvii. G. Fo.lxvi. Example of a knight the which
pardoned unto him the which had slain his fader and he had pardon for his
sins in eodem loco.xxvi. I Fo. lxvii Other examples.Cxii. l / m. Fo. CC. xlii
To love his neighbor as he does him self.ii. G Folio. vi That envy and al
her branches and dependaunces ben defended by this commandment.xxvii. K. Fo.
lxvii Of the virtue of charity the which is against the sin of envy.iiii. A
Fo. x Of the virtue of pacyence the which is against ye sin of Ire.xxviii. A
Fo. lxviii That the sins of homycyde / ire / hate and envy noyeth in many
manners unto the souls of them ye which has broken this fyfth. commandment.
Quere ad numerum xliiii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i / k. Fo. Ciii
Of the syxte commandment.
THe syxte co^maundemement of god defends theft and all the branches of
auaryce.xxix. A. Folio. lxix Of theft yt god defe^deth.xxix. B. Fo. lxx Of
sacrylege yt god defe^deth.xxx. a. fo. lxxi The examplary of those the which
well or ill pay their dysmes the which god commands to pay
cerymonyally.xxxi. a / b / c / d / e. Folio.lxxiii. A notable of
rauysshers.xxiiii. D. Fo. lvi Examples.Cix. e / f. Fo. CCxxxv Of usury yt god
defe^deth.xxxii. a. Fo. lxxv Than faint wrapped usury has.vii. ky^des the
which ben divided in many manners.xxxii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i. Fo.
lxxvi A notable of usury manifest.xxxii. K. Folio.lxxviii. Of Symony the which
is committed in byenge and selling the things espyrytualles.xxxiii. A. Fo.
lxxviii That man commytteth symony in many manners.xxxiii. B. Fo. lxxix Primo
when any gives for to enter in to holy ordres / or in to any b^nefyce.xxxiii.
C Secundo when any promytteth not to take any thing of his title to be priest.
D. Tertio wha^ that a man permytteth / or sells or byeth benefyces. E. F. G.
H Quarto when any gives for to enter in to relygyon. I Quinto when any sells
the sacraments of the church. K. L. M Sixtely when any sells ye gifts of
grace / or of virtues / or of conning. N. A notable yt these advocates should
not sell their scyences / but the travail of their bodies.xxxiii. O. Fo. lxxxi
Example.lxxxi. E Fo. Clxxxii Another example.Cvi. C. Fo. CCxxvii The matter of
restytucyon the which is in.v. questyo^s.xxxiiii. a / b / c / d / e / f. Fo.
lxxxii That the sins of theft / auaryce / usury / and symony noyeth in many
manners unto ye souls of those the which breketh this sexte commandment.
Quere ad numerum xliiii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i / k. Folio.Ciii.
Of the seventh commandment
THe seventh commandment of god defends all manners of lechery yt a man
co^mytteth in deed.xxxv. A. Fo. lxxxiiii Of ye sin of fornycacyon that god
defends.xxxv. B. Fo. lxxxiiii Of ye sin of aduoutry the which god
defends.xxxvi. A Fo. lxxxv Of things merytoryous / and of the offenses
lecherouses yt man co^mytteth with his own wife.xxxvi. D. Fo. lxxxvii Five
examples ben written here of some ye which has known their own wives
unduly.xxxvi. e / f / g / h / i. Fo. lxxxvii Of defloracyon the which god
defends.xxxvii. A. Fo. lxxxviii Of incest yt is defended.xxxvii. b. Fo.
lxxxviii Of sacrylege as unto lechery yt god defends.xxxvii. C. Fo. lxxxviii
Of things the which aggraueth the sin of the flesh in men of the holy
church.xxxvii. D. Fo. lxxxviii Examples in eode^ loco. e / f. Fo. lxxxix Of
the sin against nature and of sodomyte yt god defends.xxxvii. g. Fo. lxxxx
Of the virtue of chastyte in all sorts of people.xxxviii. A Folio. lxxxx Of
dronkennes and glotonny that god defends.xxxix. A Fo. lxxxxii Of fasting the
which god commands.xxxix. B. Fo. lxxxxiii That the sin of lechery noyeth
in many manners unto the souls of them ye which break the.vii. commandment.
Quere xliiii. b / c / d / e / f / g / h / i / k. Fo. Ciii
Of the.viii. commandment.
THe.viii. commandment of god deffendeth all words the which ben against
the dyleccyon of his neighbor.xl. A Fo. lxxxxiiii Of falls wytnessynge that god
does defends.xl. B Fo. lxxxxiiii Of cursed language that god does
defends.xl. C Fo. lxxxxvi Of lyenge yt god defe^deth.xli. a. Fo. lxxxxvii
Eight ky^des of lyenge.xli. b. Fo. lxxxxvii That a man should fle lyenge and
love veryte for many things.xli. C Fo. lxxxxviii
Of the.ix. commandment
THe.ix. commandment of god defends the lecherous thoughts and commands
clennes of heart.xli. a. Fo. lxxxxix The concupyscence of the flesh. How a
man commytteth lecherye in his thought.xlii. B Fo. lxxxxix The ylles and
domages yt the ill thoughts done.xlii. D Fo. C
Of the.x. commandment.
THe.x. commandment of god defends all ill thoughts of theft / couetyse /
auaryce the which ben against ye dyleccyon of his neighbor.xliii. A. Fo. C
That those the which have broken the commandments of god and the which ben
in mortal sin should not withdraw to do of good deeds though they should be
dampened.xliii. B Fo. Ci The dyfference between the good deeds the which is
done in mortal sin and that yt is done in the state of grace.xliii. D. Fo.
Cii The things esmoeuynges for to keep ye commandments of god.xliiii. A.
Fo. Ciii That many things ben noysaunts unto those the which breketh the
commandments of god.xliiii. B Fo. Ciii First the soul of the fractoure of
every commandment is put unto pouerte / for all inobedyence the which is
mortal sin makes to put inforgetfulnes the virtues and good operacyo^s
lately gotten in eode^. b Secondly inobedye^ce the which is mortal syn^e
noyeth unto ye soul / for if she reygne in any person she keeps and lets
it frogetynge of virtues and of good spyrytuall deeds yt ben
merytoryous.xliiii. C Fo. Cv Thyrdely In^bedyence noyeth. For she dyffameth the
persons the which it commytteth.xliiii. D Fo. Cvi Fourthly Inobedyence
noyeth. For she aueugleth and blyndeth the in wat de eyemof the soul.xliiii. E
Fo. Cvii Fyfthely inobedyence noyeth. For it is a lain yt holds ye
souls.xliiii. F. Fo. Cviii Syxtely inobedyence noyeth / for she sleeth
spyrytually the soul of the death of gylte.xliiii. G Fo. Cix Seventhly
inobedyence noyeth / for she makes to curse and too excommunycate.xliiii. H.
Fo. Cix Eyghtly inobedyence noyeth / for she puts from paradyse.xliiii. I
Fo. Cix Nynthly inobedience noyeth / for she by^deth to pain and
punycyon.xliiii. K. Fo. Cxi All these things beforesayd serves and also
appropryeth unto every commandment eight condycyons the which the pilgrim of
paradyse ought for to have. Que^.xlv. A / b / c / d / e. etc. Fo. Cxii Example
that the body the which is a fool draws the soul in to the way of
perdycyon of hell.xlvi. A Fo. Cxvi That the pilgrim of paradyse should
consider.iiii. things.xlvi. B Fo. Cxvi Of the reward eternal that they shall
have the which keep the commandments of god.xlvii. A Fo. Cxvii Item of the
reward of them the which well or evil have enployed their wits of nature
upon the holy commandments of god.xlviii. A Fo. Cxx The maledyccions and
excommunycacio^s of them the which have dysobeyed god and ye church.xlviii. B
Fo. Cxx Of the punycyon eternal that they shall have the which break the
commandments of god.xlix. A Fo. Cxxiiii Examples.Cvii. A / b / c / d / e.
Fo. CCxxx The deference of ye fire of hell and of that of this world.xlix. B
Fo. Cxxiiii Questyon / if the dampened shall have punycyon for every sin.xlix.
C. Fo. Cxxv The deference of the fire of hell and of ye of purgatory.xlix. D
Fo. Cxxvi
The table for to find the sins and virtues. And first.
QVestyon under what commandment ben defended the seven mortal sins / and
where ben defended the evil words / thoughts / and operacyons v. A. B. C.
Fo. xi The branches of the seven sins mortalles.v. D Fo. xiii Of theft and
auaryce.xxix. A. B Fo. lxx Of slouthe.xix. B Fo. xlii Examples.xix. C. D. Fo.
xlii Of envy xxvii. K Fo. lxvii Of hate xxvii. A Fo. lxiiii That these haynours
should pacyfy the^ togyders.xxvii. G Fo. lxvi Examples Cii. l. m Fo. CCxlii Of
ire.xvi. A / b / c / d. Fo. liii Of vengeance.xxvi. H Fo. lx Of glotony xxxix.
A Fo. lxxxxii Of lechery xxxv. A / b. Fo. lxxxiiii
The virtues.
Of humylyte.ix. F Fo. xxi Of charity iiii. A Fo. x To love god.i. C / D / e /
f / g. Fo. i To love his neighbor ii. e / f Fo. v Of faith ii. B Fo.v. Et.vi.
B. Fo. xii Of hope.ii. C Fo. v Of prudence / attemperaunce / Justice / and
force.ii. K Fo. vii The brau^che of ye.vii. virtues.ii. L. Fo. vii The works
of mercy.xxiii. A. Fo. l Et. ii H. I Fo. vi To serve god devoutly.xvi. A Fo.
xxxiiii Et.xxx. C. Fo. lxxii Of pacyence xxviii. A Fo. lxviii That god sends
of trybulacions for. v consyderacyons.xxvi. G Fo. lx Of fasting.xxxix. D Fo.
lxxxxiiii Of the virtue of chastyte in all sorts of people.xxxviii. A Fo.
lxxxx The pater noster.xvi. C Fo. xxxv The aue maria expounded.Cxix. B. Fo.
cclii The credo.vii. A Fo. xvi Of penance.viii. B Fo. xviii
A notable.

FOr to know / read / or write ye allegacyons of auctorytees of this book a
man should know that ouerall where he fyndeth math. that is mathei / and where
he fyndeth mar. yt is marci / and luc that is luce / and ioh. that is iohannis
/ also he shall find ad rom^. that is roma in epistola ad romanos. Et.i. ad
cori^. yt is in prima epla ad cori^theos / et primo ad thy. yt is in prima epla
ad thymotheum / et ad gal. yt is ad gallathas / et ephe. is ad epheseos / et
phyl. is ad philipe^ses / et thessal. is ad thessalonice^ses / et col. is ad
collocenses / et hebre. is hebreos. Also he shall find gen^. yt is genesis /
etexo. is exodi / et leui. is leuitici. et nu. is numeri. et deuteronomy. is deutonomi
/ and.i. vl. ii. re. is primi libri regu^l secundi libri regu^. ps. vel psalm.
that psalteru vel plalmi. et eccle. yt is ecclesiastes. et eccli. that is
ecclesiastici. et sapi^e. is sapientie. et prouer. is prouerbiorum. et ysa. is
Ysaie. et the. is iheremye. et ezchi. is ezechielis. and dan^. is danielis. etc.

Here follows the table of the examplary of this book.

MAn reasonable know thou yt god has given unto the ten commandments / the
which you sholdest put in thy heart and keep them and accomplisshe upon pain
of dampnacyon eternal. If thou have broken any of them / take heed of the
examples semblables unto yt by this table for to se how it shall happen the if
you put not in the correccyon and amendment. And for to fy^de those examples it
behooves to seche through the book on hye in the margen the nombre of the leaves
that it marketh gooth on / and after the nombres of the matters with the a / b /
c / and in that nombre and lettre ye shall fy^de every example. First the
examples of obedyence shall be written Secondy those of inobedyence. After to
here the word of god. Morouer ye examples of every commandment in partyculer
shall come afterward. etc.

Obedyence.
Examples of obedyence. Example that Abraham was obedyent unto god.li. A Fo.
Cxxvii That a monk kest his sone in to an oue^ brennynge by obedyence and he
was not burnt.li. B. Fo. Cxxviii Of ye obedyence of Noe.lii. c. Fo. Cxxviii Of
ye obedience of Joseph.li. d. Fo. cxxviii Of the obedyence of young Thobye.li.
E. Fo. Cxxix Of the obedyence of a man named Mathathyas.lii. A Fo. Cxxix Of the
obedyence of Ihesus and of his appostles.lii. B Fo Cxxix Of the obedyence of
saint Mor yt went on the water.lii. C Fo. Cxxix Of a relygyous the which did
bind a lion.lii. D Fo. Cxxix Of a relygyous the which aroused a busshe.lii. E
Fo. Cxxix Of the obedyence of a relygyous scryuener named Mark lii. F. Fo.
Cxxix That abstinence precedeth the other virtues in heaven.lii. G Fo. Cxxx That
relygyous folk obedyentes have great reward in heaven.lii. H Fo. Cxxx Other
examples.lv. f. g. Fo. Cxxxix Of a relygyous obedyent and of an obstynent.lii.
I Fo. Cxxx Of an abbot the which called again his relygyous deed / and he
came again and was obebyent. And of the glorious Joys or paradyse liii. A Fo.
Cxxx That a serpent was obedyent to a friar gardyner. Also of theft / and to
do good unto his enemies.liii. B Fo. Cxxxi Of him the which commanded unto
two dragons that they should keep ye door of his house.liii. C Fo. Cxxxi That
the water of a streme was obedyent unto a bishop.liii. D Fo Cxxxi That the
fire yt brent a house obeyed to a friar that prayed.liii. E Fo. Cxxxi That the
rain touched not two freres in walking. liii F Fo. Cxxxi Of the obedyence of
a relygyous named Poule.liii. G Fo. Cxxxii Of a another relygyous that bare
flesh all naked liii. H Fo. Cxxxii
Inobedientia. Examples of inobedyence.
That Adam and Eve dysobeyed the commandment of god.liiii. A. Fo. Cxxxiii
That for the dysobeysaunce of the man of god a lion strangled him in the way as
he rode.liiii. B Fo. Cxxxiii Of the dysobeysaunce of two nonnes ye which
demanded of ye pope yt they might confess each other.liiii. C Fo. Cxxxiiii
That the king Amalech resysted against the will of almighty god and evil came
unto him.liiii. D Fo. Cxxxiiii That king saul was dysobedye^t to god and ill
came to him.liiii. E Fo. Cxxxiiii Of the inobedyence of king Pharao and of his
punycyon.liiii. F Fo. Cxxxiiii Of the inobedyence of the prophet Jonas.liiii.
G Fo. Cxxxiiii That chore / dathan / and abyron and all their alyes descended
in to hell by their inobedyences and murmr. Also that the children of ysraell
gadred of ye manna against the commandment of will of ye prophet
Moses.liiii. H. Fo. Cxxxv Of a friar that was punysshed dyuynely for because
that he murmured against god.liiii. I Fo. Cxxxv And a man should note that all
ydolatres appostates / heretykes / and other sinners the which ben dampened ben
punysshed in hell and pryuate from the realm of paradyse for their
inobedyences.
Verbum dei. Examples for herynge the word of god and the prechynges.
That a great sinner repented him and was saved in herynge a predycacyon or
sermon.lv. A. Fo. Cxxxvi That a relygious converted in few words a man of ill
conscye^ce.lv. B. Fo. Cxxxvi Of a master dylycatyfe yt would not here ye word
of god ne do penance / and he was converted in few words.lv. C. fo. cxxxvii
Of an ill knight that in his life ne was confessed but ones and at one only
predycacyon he correcked himself and was converted unto god.lv. D Fo. Cxxxvii
Of an earl yt converted him un herynge the word of god.lv. E Fo. Cxxxvii Of a
chorle the which would not here ye word of god / and ye crucyfyxe stopped his
eeres unto him in tokenynge that he would not here the prayers that men made
for him.lv. F. Fo. Cxxxvii Of the parochyens of a curate the whi. che would not
here the sermons and commandments of ye church.lvi. A Fo. Cxxxviii Example
contrary.lxxxxviii. F Fo. CCx That a pastor was saved and correked hy^ herynge
a sermon.lvi. B Fo. Cxxxviii That to here the word of god is much
prouffytable though that a person retain it not.lvi. C Fo. Cxxxviii That some
freres slept in herynge ye word of god / and herkenynge idle words they were
much waky^ge.lvi. D Fo. Cxxxviii. Example against those the which flees the
sermons.lvi. E Fo. Cxxxix How the deed of a precher bare him unto the death /
and that Ihesu christ helped him and chased ye deuyls.lvi. F. Fo. Cxxxix That a
monk reknowleged his defawtes as he taught and showed his other bredren.Ci. A
Fo. CCxv That he yt precheth gods word shall have great reward in heaven.lvi.
G Fo. cxxxix That the devil might not strangle a knight for that / yt he
greted ye vyrgyn Mary / and for beyenge in will to here a predycacyon was
saved.lvi. H Fo. Cxxxix Of a rich man the which fled ye mass and the
predycacyons and occupied himself in mondanytees and ye devil bare hy^
away.lxv. A Fo. Clvi Of a man the which gave himself unto the devil to
the end yt he should enryche him / and after in a predycacyon he converted
him.lx. H Fo. Cxlvii That the commandments of god shall be forgoten in ye last
generacyo^.lvi. I. fo. cxl Of a rich man that served the devil.xl. years and
at a predycacyon he did repent him.lvi. K Fo. Cxl That an usurer correcked hy^
by ye admonycyo^ of his friends.lxxxvii. f. Fo. Clxxxx. ii Of a monk that ^he
devil drew out of the church when the other did wake in orayson.lxv. G Fo.
Cvii Of a lady the which herd often times the sermons and did not correcke
her self And of her chamberer that desired to here them.lxxxxix. B Fo. CCx
Primum preceptum

Idolatria. Examples upon the first commandment of god.
OF a priest prince of ydolles yt brent in he^l.lvii. A Fo. Cxl Of ye ydolatry
of king Nabugodonozor when he made.iii. children to be put in the furneys of
fire.xlvii. B Fo. Cxl That Egeas ydolatre was slain of the devil.lvii. C Fo.
Cxli That Dyascorus the which slew saint Barbara was ydolatre and deyed
myscheuously.lvii. E Fo. Cxli Of the death of Simon magus and other
enchauntours.lxvii. D Fo. Cxli That ye provost Tarquyn ydolatre dyed
myscheuously.lvii. F Fo. Cxli That the king of Perce Cosdroe that would be
worshypped as god had his heed smyten of.lvii. G Fo. Cxli Of the cursed death
of Dacyen and Valeryen ydolatres.lvii. H Fo. Cxlii Of the death of cursed king
Yrace ydolatre.lvii. I Fo. Cxlii Of the death of the tyrant Quyncyen
ydolatre.lvii. K Fo. Cxlii Of the death of the cruel emperor Neron the which
made to sle saint Peter and saint Poule.lvii. L Fo. Cxlii Of the death of
Maxymyen the enemy of god.lvii. M Fo. Cxlii
Apostasia. Examples of people apostates
That Iu^yan ye apostate the which left the crystendome and persecuted the
church dyed myscheuously by the punycyon dyuyne.lviii. A Fo. Cxlii Of
Theophyle the which was apostate renounced god / and the glorious vyrgyn Marye
/ and worshypped the devil of hell and afterward was saved by co^trycyon and
penance.lviii. B Fo. Cxliii Of a monk the which renyed god the creator and
his baptym and after was saved by penance.lviii. C Fo. Cxliii Of one the
which renyed god of heaven for to escape the tourments and after was saved by
penance.lxviii. D Fo. Cxliii That a christian man lost the crown of glory for
that yt he renounced unto the crystendome and a paynym did win the
same.lviii. E Fo. Cxliiii Of a man yt gave ill counceyle for to make ye christian
men to the end to renye ye faith and that counceyle redounded first upon
himself.lviii. F Fo. Cxliii Of a relygyous woman yt was apostate and open
harlot and after was saved by penance.Cxiii. A Fo. CCxliii How our lord
Ihesus appeared unto a relygyous the which left his order for to go in to the
world.Cxv. G Fo. CCxlvii That two relygyous were appost ^es / lecherous / and
after reuerted and did penance.lxxxxiii. E Fo. CCiii
Contra hereticos. Examples to confound heretykes.
That deuylles kept an heretyke from brennynge / but when the body of Ihesu
christ was brought thither they might not keep him.lix. A Fo. Cxliiii That an
heretyke was do^be by ye virtue of the faith.lix. B Fo. Cxliiii That a
cautelous heretyke was brent by a fool dyabolyke.lix. C Fo. Cxliiii That the
bishop of the heretykes feigned for to enlumyne and give sight to a blind
man.lix. D Fo. Cxliiii That a simple bishop vaynquysshed and overcame an
heretyke a right great phylozophre.lix. E Fo. Cxlv That by the patience and
good example of saint Domynycke he converted an heretyke.lix. F Fo. Cxlv
Contra fidem Example of mysbeleuynge people.
Of chermers yt in the time of mast charmed hogs.lx. A Fo. Cxlv That ye
devil lied to a noble man to put him in error for to deceive him at ye hour
of his death.lx. B Fo. Cxlv Of a man that gave his soul for a quarte of wine /
and the devil did beat him a way.lxxi. K Fo. Clxvii That a woman in error
believed in the song of a Cuckowe.lx. C Fo. Cxlvi That a relygyous in error
believed in ye song of a Cuckowe that he should have lived two and twenty years
/ and he lived but two years.lx. D Fo. Cxlvi That there is mo women dampened
tha^ men for their infydelyte.lx. E Fo Cxlvi That some prepayred the table unto
the deuylles to the end that they should enryche them.lx. F Fo. Cxlvi That king
Ochorias sent to seek counceyle of the devil and his messagers were burnt
with the fire celestyall / and he deyed myscheuously.lx. G Fo. Cxlvi Of a man
the which gave himself to the devil to the end that he should enryche him.lx.
H Fo. Cxlvii Of a woman yt renyed her faith / slew her child / and gave
herself to the devil and after had mercy.lx. I Fo. Cxlvii
Fides Examples of the faith
That a mountain was put from one place to another in conferminge the faith
catholyke.lxi. A Fo. Cxlviii Of a priest good catholyke the which entered wtin
the fire for to approve ye faith and was not brent.lxi. B Fo. Cxlviii That
Abraham and many other obedye^ts had great faith in god as it is said in
obedyence.li. A / b / c. etc. Fo. Cxxvii
Superbia. Example of proud folk.
That Adam and Eve committed pride when they appetyted to be as gods / in
knowing good and evil.liiii. A Fo. Cxxxiii That ill came unto ye king Roboam
to give proud answer unto the children of ysraell.lxxxxix. M Fo. CCxiii That
the devil bare away in body and in soul an earl proud / fyers / and replete
with sins.lxxxxix. N Fo. CCxiii Of the pride and blaspheme of ye king
Sennacheryb.lxii. K Fo. Cii Another example.Cix. F Fo. CCxxxv That ye king
Anthyochus was proud over humayne force.lxxxv. D. Fo. Clxxxix That the devil
was seen upon the train of a woman's gown pompeously aourned.lxv. D Fo. Clvii
That it dyspleased unto almighty god ye creator that a certain woman clothed
and aourned her daughter pompeously and gaye.lxxiii. F Fo. Clxx Of the cursed
rich man yt was pompeously clothed.lxxxiiii. A Fo. Clxxvi That the king
Cosdroe yt was proud had ye heed stryken of.lxvii. G Fo. Cxli Of an ypocryte
the which feigned to fast and eat secretly and he was choked of a dragon
infernal.Cv.C Fo. CCxxv That the deuylles gate the soul from the miserable
body of an ypocryte with an hoke.Ciiii. C Fo. CCxxvi That Nychanor had his heed
smyten of and his right hand the which raised him proudely against ye
prestes.lxix. A Fo. Clxii Of a woman dampened that aourned her heed.lxxx. C Fo.
Clxxxxvii
Humilitas contra superbiam.
Example that a holy nonne feigned to be a fool / and washed the pottes / wyped
the dysshes / and did all things meke and humble.lxi. C Fo. Clviii That
humylyte keeps a man from falling in to the laces and nets of ye deuyls of
hell.Cii.r Fo. CCxxiii That the princes the which prayed He lie humbly was not
brent as the other the which spoke proudely.lx. G Fo. CCxlvi
Secundum preceptum

Blasphemia. Examples upon the second commandment of god.
OF a sone of a woman of ysrael that was stoned for his blaspheme.lxii. A Fo.
Cxlix Of a child of the aege of.v years blasphematour that the deuylles did
draw out from his faders lap.lxxii. B Fo. C.xlix Of a player the which
blasphemed the womb of the vyrgyn Mary and ill came unto him.lxii. C Fo. Cl Of
an earl blasphemer.lxii. D Fo. Cl Of one of the burgeys of Paris ye which
had his tongue bored through for his blaspheme.lxii. E Fo. Cl Of a player
blasphematour the which brake the arms of the image of ye vyrgyn Marye / and
he was strangled of the devil his master.lxii. F Fo. Cl Of a blasphematour
that the devil did sle.lxii. G Fo. Cl Of a blind knight the which was
enlumyned for that / yt he struck a Jew ye which blasphemed the vyrgyn Mary
mother of god.lxii. H Fo. Cli Of.ii. players to whom there came ill for
blasphemynge.lxii. I Fo. Cli That there came ill unto king Sennacheryb the
which sent unto king Ezechyas words blasphemynges against almighty
god.lxii. K Fo. Cli That the king Nabugodonozor made a decrete yt all people
yt blasphemed the god of Sydrac / Mysaac and Abdenago should perysshe and his
house wasted.lvii. b Fo. Cxi That a dampened woman was tourme^ted for her
blasphemes. etc.lxxxx. a. Fo. clxxxxvi That the devil bare away a tauerner yt
permytted to blaspheme and to swear in his tavern.lxxi. I Fo. Clxvi
Periurium
Example that a tauerner lost the usage of speech for swerynge by the vyrgyn
Mary mother of god.lxiii. A Fo. Cli Of children ye swear / and in playenge were
drowned.lxiii. B Fo. Cli That the heed of a swerer was turned that / that was
before behind / and the cattes cried on his grave.lxiii. C Fo. Clii That two
merchants said unto their curate yt they might sell nothing without lyenge
and swerynge.lxxxxix. K Fo. CCxii Other examples of swerynge ben written in
ye.viii. commandment of god. Quere.lxxxxviii. A / b / c. etc. Fo. CCxix
Vota. Examples that a man should accomplysshe his vows.
That the children of ysrahel accomplysshed their vows after yt they had the
vyctory on their enmyes.lxili. D Fo. Clii Of a vyrgyn yt vowed chastyte and
after would be married.lxiii. E Fo. Clii Of a man the which had made a vow the
which was dampened. Also example of extorcyon and of the pains and tourmentes
of hell.lxiii. F Fo. Clii Of a doctor the which had vowed the which lost his
sight for that / yt he accomplysshed not his vow.lxiii. G Fo. Cliii That it is
great peril to fail to accomplysshe his vow.lxiii. H Fo. Cliii That a priest
the which would not accomplysshe his vow defyned ill his days also of his
Judgment and of his cruel punycyon.lxiii. I Fo. Cliii Another example.Cxiii. B
Fo. CCxliii Of a chorle the which vowed to saint Myghell a kowe and her calfe
and accomplysshed not his vow.lxiii. K Fo. Cliiii That some Jews made a
folisshe vow to sle saint Poule.lxiii. L Fo. Cliiii That a woman was blind
for that / yt she defayled to accomplysshe her vow as she had promised.lxiiii.
G Fo. Clv
Tertium preceptum.

Operatio. Examples upon the third commandment of god.
OF a man yt Moses made too stone for ye / yt he gadred wood on the day of the
feast commanded.lxiiii. A Fo. Cliiii That a woman was dyuynely punysshed for
that she enclosed her field on saint Iohans day.lxiiii. B Fo. Cliiii Of a man
the which wrought on ye sunday.lxiiii. C Fo. Cliiii Of a man the which carried
hey on the sunday.lxiiii. D Fo. Clv Of a man that bare his wheet on ye feast
day.lxiiii. E Fo. Clv Of a carle yt went to ye ploughe on the holy day.lxiiii.
F. Fo. Clv Of two women the which baked their breed in the feast of
sunday.lxiiii. G. Fo. Clv Of a woman that baked breed on ye feast
commanded.lxiiii. I Fo. Clv That god sent punycyon to them yt brake his
commandments.lxiiii. K Fo. Clv Of cordweyners ye one kept the feestes and the
other not.lxiiii. L Fo. Clv Of a mowyer yt ceased to mow on ye saserday at
euensonge time and his felawes would not.lxiiii. M Fo. Clvi That buyers and
sellers on ye feestes ought to be reproved.lxiiii. N Fo. Clvi Example that ill
came unto a rich man that fled the service and the predycacyons and lepte on
horsbacke and went unto mondanitees when they range to mass on the
feestes.lxv. A Fo. Clvi Of a woman that would have hanged her self / and as
she herd ring too the sacrynge she set her upon her knees and so was
delivered lxv. B Fo. Clvi That the devil bare a book wherein was written the
sins of men and women and in especyall a complyn that saint Austyn had
forgoten.lxv. C Fo. Clvi That the deuylles were seen upon the train of a
woman's gown pompeously arrayed in ye church.lxv. D Fo. Clvii That saint Bryce
saw the devil ye which wrote the ill words that were spoken in the
church.lxv. E Fo. Clvii That the devil gave in charge to a woman to let the
oraysons of other in ye church by her Ianglynges.lxv. F Fo. Clvii Of a monk
that the devil drew out of the church when ye other waked in orayson and
prayer.lxv. G Fo. Clvii Of a man dampened the which yode to play and to drink
at ye tavern when he should have been at the service wthin the holy
church.lxvii. D Fo. Clix
Somnolentia Examples of slepynge in herynge the service of god.
Of a monk indeuout the which slepte in orayson.lxvi. A Fo. Cviii Of a monk
the which was stryken with a knotte of straw in slepynge for because that he
was indeuout and weyke in speryte toward god.lxvi. B Fo. Clviii Of a monk
unto whom the devil gave unto drink of hot boylyng^ pytche in
slepynge.lxvi. C Fo. Clviii
Pigricia.
Example of a soul dampened yt wept the time yt it had lost.Cviii. B Fo.
CCxxxii Of a relygyous that would do no good deeds.xix. C Fo. xlii Of a man yt
was dampened for yt he would do no good deeds.xix. D Fo. xlii Of a curate the
which tarried to admynyster the holy sacraments unto his parochyen seek.viii.
C Fo. xix
Oration.
That a man should take heed to the orayson that he makes.lxvi. E Fo. Clviii
Of a devout relygyous that ceased not to be in yt orayson of the psalmody / and
good odor issued out of his mouth.xiii. years after his death.lxvi. F Fo.
Clviii That at the prayer of a sy^ple shoo maker a good man ferme in ye faith
a mountain was taken fro one place and transported in to another.lxi. A Fo.
Cxiviii That by the oraysons and fastings that saint Basyll made with his
college they were preserved from ill yt Iulyan the appostate would have done to
them.lviii. A. Fo. Cxlii That at ye prayer of the prophet Helye fire descended
from heaven yt brent an hundred men the which yede to seche cou^c^yle of the
devil.lx. G Fo. Cxlvi Of a sone yt prayed for his mother and did penance and
she appeared unto him at the end of.vii. years / and she was saved by his
prayers.lxv. F. Fo. Clvii That one of the relygyous of saint Gregory was
delivered from purgatory for to sing masses for him.lxxxii. E. Fo. Clxxxiiii
That the prayer of Balaam was unjust when he desired to deye well / and he would
not live well.lxxxx. D Fo. Clxxxxviii That the orayson of those the which be^
ill is sometime exalted to their shame and confusyon.lxxxxvii. D Fo. CCviii That
a knight deed would not the prayyer of them the which were in sin / but
desired the prayer of a good and holy hermyte.lxxxxviii. G Fo. CCx That the
prayer of Susan^e was herd and and she kept fro death.lxxxxvi. C. Fo. CCxvi
That the orayson of an holy fader was not exalted / for yt he for whom he
prayed delyted in the thoughts of fornycacyon with out resysty^ge thereto.
ho^dred. d. Fo. CCxiiii Of a man the which resysted not against the sins /
and therefore the orayson of ye heremyte was not exalted.C.e Fo. CCxv That the
request of ye cursed rich man was not granted when he demanded one drop of
water / and that the Lazare should go to his bredren.lxxxiiii. A. Fo. Clxxxvi
Gula. Examples of etynge and drynky^ge wha^ men should serve god.
That ill came unto Adam and Eve the which eat of the apple against ye
commandment of god.liiii. A Fo. Cxxxiii That the dragon infernal strangled a
relygyous the which eat secretly and feigned to fast.Cv.C Fo. CC.xxvi That a
nonne the which eat a letule before that she served god / and without maky^ge
the sign of the cross was posseded of the devil.lxvii. A Fo. Clix That a
conuers drank of wine without making the token of the cross and without
license / and he was posseded of the enmye the devil.lxvii. B Fo. Clix That
ill came unto a smyth the which used to drink and ete when other were at ye
service of the church.lxvii. C Fo. Clix That a servant saw by vysyon his
master tourmented in hell / unto whom the deuylles gave too drink of fire and
sulphre brennynge.Cvii. D Fo. CCxxxi That a rich man was put in to a chair of
fire the which was constrained of deuylles to drink of a lycoure right bitter
/ stynkynge / and foul.Cvii. B Fo. CCxxxi Of the cursed rich man that eat
and dra^ke delycatyuely lxxxiiii. A Fo. Clxxxvi Of a man yt slew his fader and
his mother when he was drunk.lxxvii. B Fo. Clxxv Of a servant yt served well
his master in his youth / and when he was drunk he slew him.lxxvii. C Fo.
Clxxvi Of a servant yt stale fygges from his master.lxxxi. B Fo. Clxxxi Of
some the which returned unto their glotonyes after ester.Cii. D. Fo. CCxviii
Of a man dampened yt yode to swear and to drink at the tavern with his felawes
when he should have been in the service of ye church.lxvii. D Fo. Clix Of a man
named Vodo yt yode unto the tauernes when he should have gone unto ye church /
and what drink and bed he has now in hell.lxvii. E Fo. Clx Of a pilgrim
that sold his gown for to drink wine.lxxxxiii. G Fo. CCiii That the deuylles
approached them at a dinner to those the which spoke evil words / and the
aungelles drew them backewarde.lxxxxix. H Fo. CCxii That ill came unto a
boucher yt mocked the holy ashes / and drank at ye tavern wha^ other were at
ye mass.lxvii. F. Fo. Clx That ill came unto a knight the which yode to vylyte
the tauernes when he sholvysyte the dedycacyons and pardons of ye
chyrches.lxvii. G Fo. Clx Of an holy man yt eat of breed and drank water
against the commandment of god / and a lion strangled hy^.liiii. B Fo.
Cxxxiii Of a woman dampened the which used her life in glotony / and lechery.
And her husband was unto the contrary the which lived sobrely.lxxxxii. A Fo.
CC Of a tauerner that the devil bare away in body and in soul.lxxi. I Clxvi Of
a man that sold his soul for a quarte of wine and the devil did bear him
away.lxxi. K Fo. Clxvii
Venatio. Examples of honters.
That lord the which honted on ye holy days had a child that had eeres
of a dog.lxviii. A Fo. Clxi That no man wist where a honter became yt honted
on ye feestes.lxviii. B. Fo. Clxi
Chorea. Examples of dauncynge on ye feestes
That the devil would have borne away a maiden the which daunced on the
sondayes.lxviii. C Fo. Clxi Of men and women the which dau^ced a year without
that any person might socour them.lxviii. D Fo. Clxi Of a woman
dauncer.lxviii. E. Fo. Clxii That a maiden was rauysshed in a dau^ce and vyoled
and after went and hanged herself.lxviii. F Fo. Clxii
Fudus Examples of players on the feestes commanded.
Of a player the which blasphemed the womb of the glorious virgyn Mary and
ill came to him.lxii. C Fo. Cl Of a man dampened yt yode to play at ye tavern.
etc. lxvii. D Fo. Clix Of children the which in playenge and swerynge were
drowned.lxiii. B Fo. Cli Of a player blasphematour that the devil slew.lxii.
G Fo. Cl Another example.lxii. F Fo. Cl Of two players unto whom there came
harm.lxii. I Fo. Cli That the heed of a player was turned yt that was before
behind in swerynge and blasphemynge.lxiii. C Fo. Cli
Ecclesia. Examples of the church.
That Nychanor was slain after yt he had thretened ye church.lxix. A Fo.
Clxix That Iulyan the appostate was slain dyuynely the which had persecuted
the church.lviii. A Fo. Cxiii How there came ill of a church the which was
made of vsuryes / rapynes / and evil gotten goods.lxxxvii. D. Fo. Clxxxxiii Of
a knight yt was tourmented in purgatory for that he vyolated the chyrchyarde
and slew a man in it.lxxvii. F Fo. Clxvi That Helyodorus was punysshed in
taking the treasours of the church of Iherusalem.lxxxii. B Fo. Clxxxiii That
many were dampened for that / yt they posseded unjustly an heritage the which
had been taken away from the holy church.lxxxii. A Fo. Clxxxiii That
haynours were punysshed diuynely for that / that they slew a man within ye
church.lxxix. B Fo. Clxxix That the king Ozyas became lepre in the church
for that / yt he took the encenser and presumed to do the dyuyne office of ye
priests.lxxxv. G. Fo. Clxxxix
Sepulchra. Examples of sepultures.
Of a sinner that deuylles drew out of the church.lxix. B Fo. Clxii That
people the which deye cursedly should not be buried within the
chyrcheyarde.lxii. G Fo. Cl That an usurer buried in a cloister of a monastery
kept the monks from sleep and rest.lxix. C Fo. Clxii That the cattes cried
upon the grave of a swerer.lxiii.C. Fo. Clii
Quartum preceptum.

Filii Examples upon the fourth commandment of god.
THat Absalon deyed myscheuously because yt he warred with his fader Dauyd. lxx.
A Fo. Clxiii That a sone the which defayled unto his fader and mother bare a
tode.iii. year in his face. lxx. B. Fo. Clxiii That ill came unto Cham yt mocked
his fader Noe. lxx. C Fo. Clxiiii Of two sons the which slew their fader.
lxx.D Fo. Clxiiii Of a sone the which did stryke his mother. lxx.E Fo. Clxiiii
Of a child that the devil did bear away. lxx.G. Fo. Clxiiii That a good and
a true child loved his fader and might not suffer yt a man did to hy^ any
ill. lxxi. A Fo. Clxiiii That the nature of birds techeth to remember his
friends. lxxi. B Fo. Clxv Of a daughter the which nourysshed her mother with
soukynge the milk of her bre. stes. lxxi. C Fo. Clxv Of a child that bote of
the nose of his fader. lxxi. D Fo. Clxv That the king Salamon honored his
mother. xxi. H Fo. xlviii That a man's berde grew long after as he hanged.
lxxi. E Fo. Clxv Of a man the which was fell and hard unto his fader and his
youngest sone repreued him. lxxi. F Fo. Clxv
Patres.
Example of a fader and of his sone ye which cursed each other in hell. And
of a good fader and his sone the which blyssed each other in heaven. lxxi. G
Fo. Clxvi Of a fader and his sone dampened for if gotten goods. lxxiii. A Fo.
Clxviii That a fader should love god more than his own children / parents /
and friends carnalles. lxxii. A Fo. Clxvii Of a fader yt badde his sone to
hold his finger in the fire till that he had said. Aue maria. lxxii. B Fo.
Clxvii That a fader should do good deeds why les that he lives without
trusting to his children and heirs. lxxii. C. Fo. Clxvii Other examples of
semblable matters and things. lxxii. D. E Fo. Clxviii Another example that a
man should do good deeds. And yt a fool taught well a wise man. lxxii. F Fo.
Clxviii Of a fader the which put an heavy malet in a coffre and took the keys
unto his children. lxxiii. B Fo. Clxix That a fader was put out in his aege of
his two daughters. lxxiii. C Fo. Clxix That a good mother loved naturally her
child and might not endure that he had any harm. lxxiii. D Fo. Clxix That a
mother cursed.x. children yt she had / and they trembled inco^tynent and were
punysshed deuynely. lxxiii. E Fo. Clxx That i^ dyspleased unto god that a woman
aourned her daughter and clothed over pompeously. lxxiii. F Fo. Clxx
Correctio. Examples of correccyon.
That soft correccyon prouffyteth more than sharp. lxxiiii. A Fo. Clxx Of the
soft correccyon that was done unto a child. lxxiiii. B Fo. Clxx That saint
Benet bette and correcked a monk yt the devil drew out of ye church when
other prayed. lxv. G Fo. Clvii Of the correccyon of two relygyous me^ whereof ye
abbot correcked ye one and spared ye other. lxxiiii. C Fo. Clxx That a man
should correcke him when he is admonested. lxxii. D. Fo. Clxviii. Et lxxvii. E
Fo. Clxxvi Of a woman dampened the which dyspraysed all they in that repreued
her of sins and ylles. ixxi. H Fo. Cixvi That a man should draw abacke and
correcke y^ sinners swetely. lxxiiii. E. Fo. Clxxi That Ysaac the sone of
Abraham was obedyent unto his fader when he would have sacryfyed him. li. A.
Fo. Cxxvii That many persons correcked them in herynge ye word of god / as it
is said in verbum dei. lv. A / b / c / d. Fo. Cxxxvi That Helye correcked not
well his children as apperteyned. lxx. F Fo. Clxxiii That Absolon was in youth
so ill correcked that he made war on his own fader Dauyd. lxx. A Fo. Clxxiii
Caritas. Examples of charity.
Of a cluster of grapes the which was sent unto many by charity / and unto the
weykest lxxv. A Fo. Clxxi Of the charity and love of.ii. men yt would deye ye
one for the other. lxxv. B. Fo. Clxxi That an holy man named Sa^ctulus
delivered himself to be slain for love and charity of his neighbor. lxxv. C
Fo. Clxxii Another example. lxxv. D Fo. Clxxii That the heart of a vyrgyn was
cut for the great love that she had unto our lord god. lxxv. E Fo. Clxxii Of
the charity of him yt wanne his brother that was fallen in to fornycacyon in ke
king him from sin and made him to do penance. lxxv. F Fo. Clxxii That one
^rere wtdrewe another from cursed will / not by force but by charity and
pacyence. lxxv. G Fo. Clxxiiii Of people the which have lived out of charity
as the cursed rich man Dyues. Quere in tenac^tas. in sexto precepto. lxxxiiii.
A / b / c. Fo. Clxxxvi Of a charitable man the which yode unto heaven after his
death before that his body was cold. lv. B Fo. Cxxxvi Examples of the works
of mercy. Que re. xxiii. C / d / e / f / g. Fo. l Of almesdede. quere post.
Quintum preceptum.

Homicidum iniustum Examples upon the.v. commandment of god.
OF Cayn that slew his brother Abell. lxxvi. A Fo. Clxxiii That king Achab and
his wife made to sle naboth to have his vyneyarde. lxxvi. b. Fo. clxxiii That
Herod ascolonita made to sle the Innocents lxxvi. D Fo. Clxxiiii That Ioab
slew the prince Abner malycyously and Amasam and evil came unto him. lxxvi. C
Fo. Clxxiiii That Herod antyppa made to sle saint Johan baptyst. lxxvi. E Fo.
Clxxiiii That Judas / Pylate / and ye Jews were homycydes of the death of our
lord Ihesu christ. lxxvi. F Fo. Clxxv That a man named Lucrece made for to sle
saint Beatryce. lxxvii. A Fo. Clxxv Of a man that slew his fader and mother
wha^ he was drunk. lxxvii. B Fo. Clxxv Of a servant yt slew his master wha^
he was drunk. lxxvii. C Fo. Clxxvi Of a daughter the which slew her fader
and her mother and after had mercy by contrycyon and confession. lxxvii. D Fo.
Clxxvi Another example of an archdeaken yt slew the bishop. lxxxv. I Fo.
Clxxxx That many ydollatres and tyrauntes has made to martyr and to sle of
crystiens I mustly as did Egeas / Dyascorus / the provost Tarquyn / Dacyen /
Valeryan / Hy race / Quyncyen / Neron / and the cursed Maxymyen. lvii. C / d /
e / f. Fo. Cxli Of the death of two cursed ancient prestes the which wened to
have made Susanne todeye. lxxxxvi. C Fo. CCvii That Dauyd made to sle Vrye
unjustly and committed aduoutry. lxxvii. E Fo. Clxxvi That a knight was gretely
tourmented in purgatory for that / yt he vy^led ye chyrchyarde and hurt a man
grievously within the same. lxxvii. F Fo. Clxxvi Of a none the which did slay
her child. lxxxxiii. F Fo. CCiii Another example. lxxxxiii. H Fo. CCiii That
the angel showed unto Tongdalus a valey repleny^shed with coals of fire in
the which were put the homycydes and murderers. lxxvii. G Fo. Clxxvii
Homicidium dubium. Examples of homycyde doubtful.
That saint Peter made to dye Anamye and his wife Saphyre for that yt they
detrauded ye price of a field. lxxviii. A. Fo. Clxxvii That Dauyd made to sle
the young man the which lied to him that he had slain king Saul. lxxviii. B
Fo. Clxxvii That Helye the prophet fell from his chair / and of his two
sons the which were slain. lxx. F Fo. Clxiiii
Homicidium iustum
That an archebisshop named Vdo was beheded within his church for his sins
and cursed living by the Just Judgment of god. Cvi. D Fo. CCxxviii That Achar
was Justly stoned and slain for he was a thief. lxxx. A Fo. Clxxx Of a man
that was stoned by the commandment of Moses for that yt he gadred and bare
wood on the day of the feast commanded. lxxiiii. A Fo. Clxx That Iulyan the
appostate was Justly slain. lviii. A Fo. Cxlii That Cosdroe was slain Justly
for his ill life. lviii. G Fo. Cxlii
Ira. Examples of Ire.
Examples of a woman dampened for the keeping of ire without being in will for
to pardon. lxxviii. D Fo. Clxxviii That a lady Impacyent and yracundyous
tourmented gretely her chambyrere / yt was vysyted of god. lxxxxix. B Fo. CCx
Of a man full of strife and dyscorde yt dyed myscheuously. lxxxxix. A Fo. CCx Of
a man yt said to his wife / goo in the deuylles name. lxxxxix. D Fo. CCx Of him
yt said to his servant / vnhose me devil. lxxxxix. E Fo. CCxi That god is
wroth with them yt break his commandments. lxiiii. K Fo. Clv
Impacientia. Examples of Impacyence.
Of a woman that the devil did bear away. lxxxxix. O Fo. CCxiii Of a man the
which commanded him self unto the devil of hell by his Impacyence. lxxxxix.
P Fo. CCxiii Of a clerk Impacyent yt wrothed him against god. lxxxxix. Q Fo.
CCxiii Of a woman Impacye^t for that her child wept. And of a man the which
did led an hog. lxxxi. C Fo. Clxxxi That a christian man lost the crown of
glory by his Impacience / for that he might not endure with the other the
which were martyred. lviii. E Fo. Cxliiii Of a woman i^pacyent. lxxxxix. B.
Fo. CCxx
Paciencia.
That a maiden had pacyence when her maystresse cursed her. lxxxxix. B. Fo.
CCxx That saint Machayre was pacyent as he was wronged and beten for a woman yt
had imposed upon him yt she had conceived of him. lxxxxi. A Fo. Clxxxxviii That
a seek man was vesyted of the angel of god. xxiii. G Fo. li That a thief was
taken and put to death / and the vyrgyn Marye made him to be buried honestly.
Cxx. F Fo. CCliii That a sinner bare unto his death his sekenes in remembrance
of the passion of our lord. Cxiiii. A Fo. CCxliiii Of the pacyence of a man
the which loved better to be slain and brent than to break the commandment
of god. No^ mechaberis. C.B Fo. CCxiiii Of the pacyence of a good child yt
praised god in all aduersytees. xvii. B. Fo. xxxvii Of an holy man that scorged
them that had taken his horse. lxxxii. H Fo. Clxxxv Of an old man yt had
pacyence when yt thieves bare away his gods and bare them a sack after them
the which they had forgoten. lxxxii. I Fo. Clxxxv That by ye pacyence of saint
Domynyk he converted an heretyke. lix. F Fo. Clxv
Inuidia. Examples of envy.
That Cayn did slay his brother Abel by envy. lxxvi. A Fo. Clxxiii That the
Jews made our lord to deye by envy. lxxvi. F Fo. Clxxv That Herod wend to
slay our Ihesus by envy. lxxvi. D Fo. Clxxvii Of envy. xxvii. K Fo. lxxiii
Odium. Examples of hate.
That a knave was dampened for hate / ye would be revenged. lxxix. A. Fo.
Clxxviii Of haynours the which slew a man in the church and they were
punysshed dyuynely. lxxix. B Fo. Clxxix That ye devil slew a man for keeping
or hate and would not pardon. lxxix. c. Fo. clxxix That ye devil would have
let saint Thybauit to pacyfye the barons of champayne yt were at debate.
lxxix. D Fo. Clxxix Another example. C.ii.Y Fo. CCxxiii Of a woman that put
dyuysion in good marriage. lxxxxix. E Fo. CCxi Of three persons the which hated
a patryarke and imposed falls crime upon him and they were punisshed. lxxxxvii.
A. Fo. CCvii Of a knight yt pardoned unto him that had slain his fader / and
he had pardon of his sins. xxvii. I Fo. lxvii That by ye name of Ihesus a
woman pardoned her enmyes. Cxii. G Fo. CCxlii That one obstynate perdoned his
enmyes for ye love of Ihesus. Cxii. H Fo. CCxiii Of a friar the which was
enflambed in hate against the procuroure of the said covent. Cxxii. C Fo. CClv
Of a noble man yt pardoned the homycyde of his brother / and the crucyfixe
enclyned his heed to him. Cxii. L Fo. CCxlii That Ihesu christ would not pardon
one deed till yt he had pardon of him that he had offended. Cxii. M Fo. CCxliii
That a servant was sent in to outward derkenesses for that / yt he ne would
pardon the little debt as ye lord had pardoned him the great debt. xxvii. H
Fo. lxvi Of detraccyon and of derysyon. Quere lxxxxv. ii. b / c / d / e / f.
Fo. CCix
Sextum preceptum

Furtum. Examples upon the.vi. commandment of god.
THat a thief named Achar was stoned and his substance brent by the
commandment of our lord god. lxxx. A Fo. Clxxx Other example. lxxvii. a. Fo.
clxxv Of a thief the which was fastened and holden with his theft upon the
buryell of a deed body. lxxx. B Fo. Clxxx That the deuylles slew a thief and
bare away his soul for that ye he had withholden the horse of a deed man yt
should be given to the poor folk. lxxx. C Fo. Clxxx That a child yt had
stolen an halfpeny from his cosyn was punysshed in the pytte of hell / and
after brought again unto his body. lxxx. D Fo. Clxxxi That a carle was
punysshed of ye devil for that yt he had stolen a stake of an hedge in his
neighbors field. lxxxi. A. Fo. Clxxxi Of a servant yt stale fygges from his
master. lxxxi. B Fo. Clxxxi Of a thief yt stale calstockes / and herbs fro a
relygyous man. liii. B Fo. Cxxxi Of thieves the which did ete the breed and
the sustenaunce of a good and holy her myte. liii. C Fo. xxxi Of a man in
pains that had taken away sheep skynnes fro a wydow and wthelde part of a
field. lxxxviii. A Fo. Clxxxxiii That the devil of hell did bear away in
body and soul a theuyl she coueytous advocate. lxxxi. E Fo. Clxxxii That a
fader did curse his sone being in hell. lxxi. G Fo. Clxvi Of a fader and his
sone dampened and put in a ponde of fire for that yt they had gotten and
withholden men's goods unjustly. lxxiii. A Fo. Clxviii Of a tailor named
Martyn the which did steel clothe in cuttynge gowns and other vestures.
lxxxi. F Fo. Clxxxii That four men of a lygnage were damned and hanged in hell
for ye they posseded falsely an heritage. lxxxi. G Fo. Clxxxiii Another example.
lxxxiiii. d Fo. Clxxxviii
Sacrilegium. Examples of sacrylege.
That an earl and many of one lygnage were dampened for that yt they posseded
i^iustly an heritage that had been taken from the church. lxxxii A. Fo.
Clxxxiii Another example. lxxxvi. A Fo Clxxxxi That Helyodorus was punysshed
dyuynely in taking the treasours of ye church of Iherusalem. lxxxii. B Fo.
Clxxxiii Of the punycyon of a man that denied ye silver of the church that
had been lend unto him. lxxxii. C Fo. Clxxxiiii Of thieves sacryleges the
which were punysshed for that / yt they had stolen the cross and ye gods of
ye church. lxxxii. d. Fo. clxxxiiii Of a relygyous of saint Gregory ye which
was buried in the donghyll for that / yt he withhelde three pyeces of gold of
the comunyte. lxxxii. E Fo. Clxxxiiii That a merchant was poor whiles yt his
brother yt was abbot gave him ye gods of the church. lxxxii. F Fo. Clxxxiiii
That a seculer was poor whiles yt his brother yt was monk gave to hy^ ye
goods of the church. lxxxii. G Fo. Clxxxv Of a holy man the which gave ye
whyp unto those that had take his horse away fro him. lxxxii. H Fo. Clxxxv That
thieves sacryleges revoked themself to penance and made restytucyon by ye
pacye^ce of an old man. lxxx. I Fo. lxxxv Of Iulyan the appostate yt
persecuted ye church. lviii. A Fo. Cxlii
Decime Examples to pay the tithes.
Of Cayn and Abel yt paid their tithes ye one well and the other ill. lxxvi. A
Clxxiiii Of a lord the which retained ye tenthe of the gods that he did
give unto his servant. lxxxiii. A Fo. Clxxxv Of a knight the which tythed
well and his vine did bear fruit. ii. times in one year. lxxxiii. B Fo.
Clxxxvi Of a simple man ye tythed well and he did miracle. lxxxiii. C Fo.
Clxxxvi Examples for them the which takes tithes. lxxxiii.D Fo. Clxxxvi
Iudices
That the king of Perce made to fley an evil Judge. lxxxi. D Fo. Clxxxii Of a
baylyf that corrupt Justice by gifts. lxxxi. C Fo. Clxxxi Of two falls Iuges
that conde^pned Susanne. lxxxxvi. C Fo. CCvii Of an advocate that lost his
tongue in his death. lxxxxix. G. Fo. CCxii Another example of a right cursed
advocate. lxxxi. E Fo. Clxxxii
Dona.
That saint Fortyn bishop was punysshed for that / yt he took a vestyment of
an usurer. Cvi.C Fo. CCxxviii That Gyesy was lepre and his lygnage for a gift
that he took of the rich man Naaman. lxxxv. B Fo. Clxxxviii That Judas was
dampened ye took. xxx. pence to sell our lord. lxxvi. F Fo. Clxxv. That those
the which kept ye tomb of our lord took money for to bear falls wytnes.
lxxxxvi B Fo. CCvi Of a baylyf yt took an ox. clxxxi. Fo. Clxxxi That Simon
magus offered gifts to the appostles. lxxxv. A Fo. Clxxxviii Of a prophet that
forsook the gifts of a king. liii. B Fo. Cxxxiii
Rapina.
That the deuylles bette a knight for that yt he took a cow from a poor woman
wydowe. Cix. E Fo. CCxxxv Another example. lxxxviii. A Fo. Clxxxxiii Of a
rauyssher in pains that took a wydowes got and did great oppressyons unto
his subgectes. Cix. F Fo. CCxxxv Another example. liii. C Fo. Cxxxi Another
example. lxxxvii. D Fo. Clxxxxiii That a myller saw a rauyssher payned in
hell. Cx. A Fo. CCxxxv That the devil might not strangle an harlot / for that
yt he served ye glorious vyrgyn Marye. lvi. H Fo. Cxxxix That saint Johan
converted the pry^ce of thieves. lxxiiii. E Fo. Clxxi That the king Cosdroe the
which pylled the chyrches had his heed smyten of by his sons. lvii. G Fo.
Cxli That a thief was saved by the vyrgyn Marye. Cxx. Fo. CCiii That king
Saull pylled the country of Amalech against the will of god and ill came unto
him. liiii. E Fo. Cxxxiiii That the devil posseded Lucrece that made saint
Beatryce to dye for to have her heritage. lxxvii. A Fo. Clxxvi Of a woman
dampened yt was nourysshed of things ill gotten. lxxi. H Fo. Clxvi That a
servant saw his master led in to diverse pains for that ye he had been an
oppressor and persecutour of the poor people. Cvii. D Fo. CCxxxi Another
example. lxxxii. H Fo. Cixxxv
Tenacitas et i^misericordia. Examples of people to much holdy^ge and
unmercifully.
Of the cursed rich man ye had no pity on the poor lazare the which dyed for
honger. lxxxiiii. A Fo. Clxxxvi Of our Durant the which lived without huyngepyte
ne mercy upon the poores indycentes. lxxxiiii. B Fo. Clxxxvii Of a rich man
unmercifully ye fled in the time of famyne for dread to give and to do
elmesse. lxxxiiii. C Fo. Clxxxviii That a monk saw rich men hanged in hell.
lxxx D Fo. Clxxxviii Of the death of a rich man / and or a pore woman. Cv. A
Fo. CCxxvii That two men were lepres for that / yt they had horroure and
indygnacyon of lepres. lxxxiiii. F Fo. Clxxxvii Of a man the which gave
himself unto the devil to the end yt he should enryche him. lx. H Fo. Cxlvii
That the devil charged a woman to receive poor folk on the day and to put
them out by night. lxv. F Fo. Clvii Of a carle ye gave unto the devil that yt
that he had to ete when. ii. clerks demanded alms. lxxxxvii. H Fo. CCviii
Of maryners ye forsware them of fere to give alms. lxxxxvii. F Fo. CCviii
Misericordia.
That god sent. xx. s. for one penny yt was given to a poor man. lxxv. D Fo.
Clxxii Of a ma charytable yt was drowned do y g^ y^ works of mercy. lv. B Fo.
Cxxxvi That Corne^us and saint Eustace were converted for the almesdedes that
they had done. x^ii. B Fo. Cl That a barley lofe the which a man kest furyously
unto a poor man prouffyted hy^ much. xliii. C Fo. Cii Other examples. xxii. e
/ f / g. Fo. li Of a man that was merciful and voluptuous. Cxxii. D Fo CClvi
That a relygyous gave colwortes to a there yt word have stolen. liii. B Fo.
Cxxxi That an he myte fed a thief that sto^e his substance. liii. C Fo.
Cxxxi
Symonia Examples of people symonyakes.
Of Simon magus yt would by ye grace of the holy ghost. lxxxv. A Fo. Clxxxviii
Of the punycyon of Gyezy that was symonyake. lxxxv. B Fo. Clxxxviii Of ye
symonyake Hieroboam ye sold the bysshopryches. lxxxv. C Fo. Clxxxviii That
king Anthyochus was symoniake and also proud over the pussaunce humayne.
lxxxv. D Fo. Clxxxix Of a man dampened that had many benefyces. lxxxv E Fo.
Clxxxix Another example contrary of a monk the which was chosen to be bishop
and he refused it / and after that he deyed well and was saved. Ciiii. G Fo.
CCxxvii That a man should not constytute any man in benefyces by their prayers
carnalles. lxxxv. F Fo. Clxxxix That a man seculer should not do the of fyce of
a priest. lxxxv. G Fo. Clxxxix Example in Alchynus that lords should not
constytute people of evil life in benefyces. lxxxv. H Fo. Clxxxx That he that
precheth shall have great reward in heaven / and that few curates ben saved.
lvi. G Fo. Cxxxix Of a man yt was bishop iniustly and he dyed suddenly. lxxxv.
I Fo. Clxxxx That a chanon was accused of ye patron of the church. lxxxv. K Fo
Clxxxx That a conuers would have been bishop by the inductyon of the devil and
he was hanged. lxxxv. L Fo. Clxxxx
Vsura. Examples of people usurers
Of the punycyon and dampnacyon of an usurer from whose womb there proceeded a
tree. lxxxvi. A Fo. Clxxxxi Of an usurer the which would not restore cried at
his death that he did brenne and broyle. lxxxvi. B Fo. Clxxxxi Of the
myscheuous death of an usurer the which said in his sekenes that he did eat
pence. lxxxvi. C Fo. Clxxxxi Of the horrible death of a meschaunte usurer.
lxxxvi. D Fo. Clxxxxi Of a woman vsuresse yt made to bury her money with her.
lxxxvi. E Fo. Clxxxxi Of an usurer the which demanded aid of his gold and
silver when he was in deyenge. lxxxvi. F Fo. Clxxxxii Of an usurer yt
commanded his soul to the devil for that / yt it would not abide with his
goods. lxxxvi. G Fo. Clxxxxii Of an usurer yt would not restore and he was
borne upon an ass to the galowes and there buried. lxxxvii. A Fo. Clxxxxii
That the devil did set him upon ye cofre of an usurer where as ye money was
put. lxxxvii. B Fo. Clxxxxii That a person should not pray for an usurer deed.
lxxxvii. C Fo. Clxxxxiii What befell of a church made of vsuries and
extorcyons. lxxxvii. D Fo. Clxxxxiii Of an vsuret the which would not restore
to other. lxxxvii. E Fo. Clxxxxiii Of an usurer yt confessed and restored in
his last days. lxxxvii. F Fo. Clxxxxiii Of an usurer ye deuyls plucked out of
his grave in the church and drew him out by the fete. lxix. B Fo. Clxiii That
a usurer buried in a cloister waked the monks. lxix. C Fo. Clxiii
Restitutio. Examples of restytucyon.
Of one named Frederyk tourmented in hell for that he restored not the things
ill gotten. lxxxviii. A Fo. Clxxxxiii Of a child yt was in pains of purgatory
for that yt he had not restored ye silver borrowed. lxxxviii. B Fo. Clxxxxiii
Of a man tourmented in purgatory for the defaute of payenge six pence that he
owed. lxxxviii. C Fo. Clxxxxiiii Of a relygious ye was in ye pains of
purgatory for an half penny that he owed unto a feryman. lxxxviii. D Fo.
Clxxxxiiii That two men were neclyge^tes to restore and to pay as they had
promised / and ye one was lepre and the other stryken with the fire of saint
Anthony. lxxxxvii. D Fo. CCviii That the deuylles does let for to restore.
lxxxviii. E Fo. Clxxxxiiii Of a fader and his sone dampened ye would not
restore. lxxiii. A Fo. Clxviii Of usurers the which would not restore lxxxvi.
a / b. Fo. Clxxxxi. and. lxxxvii. A. Fo xcii Of a player dampened yt restored
not his wynnynges. lxvii. D Fo. Clix That god gave charge unto a child yt he
should restore an hafpeny that he had stolen. lxxx. D Fo. Clxxxi Of an abbot
yt sent again the money given to his monastery for yt it was of ill
acquysycyon. lxxxvii. F Fo. Clxxxxiii Of an usurer the which confessed and
restored. lxxxvii. F Fo. Clxxxxiii Of a man that restored to other and put
himself in good operacyons for that / yt none of his parents and friends would
put their little finger in the fire a while for the love of him. lxxii. A Fo.
Clxvii Other examples of semblable matter yt a man should restore to other and
do good operacyons without taryenge to his parents after his death. lxxii. c / d
/ e / f. Fo. Clxvii Of a rich man the which restored who said unto his sone
yt he should hold his fy^ger in the fire till he had said one Auemaria. lxxii.
B Fo. Clxxvii Of thieves the which did make restytucyon. lxxii. H. I Fo.
Clxxxv
Excommunicatio Examples of excommunycacyon.
That a white lofe became black in the exco^munycacyon. lxxxix. A Fo.
Clxxxxiiii That storkes left their nest yt was in the house of a man incontinent
that he was excommunycate. lxxxix. B Fo. Clxxxxv That the sparowes yt made
noise in a church yode out incontinent that they were exco^munycate. lxxxix. C
Fo. Clxxxxv That the flowers of an apple tree fell and dried incontinent yt the
exco^munycacyon was drawn for a portos yt was in the said apple tree. lxxxix. D
Fo. Clxxxxv That a raven became hydeous and his feders fell fro him as soon as
ye bishop had excommunycate for his ring yt the raven had taken. lxxxix. E
Fo. Clxxxxv That excommunycacyon cast Justly or Iniustly is to dread as it
appeared in.ii. monks yt gelded the^ self. lxxxix. f. Fo. Clxxxxv Of a priest
the which was excommunycate the which deyed suddenly as he would sing.
lxxxxiii. D Fo. CCiii That the lyghtnynge consumed one excommunycate. lxxxix. G
Fo. Clxxxxvi That a gardyn excommunycate would bear no fruit till the time
that it was assoyled. lxxxix. H Fo. Clxxxxvi
Maledictio Examples of maledyccyon
Of the maledyccion the which came unto Adam for the breky^ge of the
commandment of god. liiii. A Fo. Cxxxiii That Cayn was cursed of god for that
/ yt he slew his brother Abell / and also for that / yt he tythed ill. lxxvi. A
Fo. Clxxiiii Of a woman yt cursed her.x. children / and they were incontinent
punysshed dyuynely horrybly. lxxiii. E Fo. Clxx That Noe kest maledyccyo^ upon
his neuew the sone of Cham / for that / yt the said Cham mocked ye said noe.
lxx. C. Fo. Clxiiii Of a fader and his sone yt cursed each other in hell. lxxi.
G Fo. Clxvi Of the maledyccyon of.iiii. monks that slew a beer. lxxxix. I
Fo. Clxxxxviii Of the maledyccyon yt saint Machayre vttred upon him that brake
ye commandments of god. lvii. A Fo. Cxl Of a lady the which cursed her
chamberere. lxxxxix. B Fo. CCx That ye sone of king Achab bare in this world
the punycyon and maledyccion of his faders sin. lxxvi. B Fo. Clxxvi
Dyabolus
Example of a man the which said unto his servant / vnhose me devil. And
incontinent the devil was ready and began to vnhose him. lxxxxix. C Fo. CCxi Of
a man that said unto his wife go in the deuylles name and the devil posseded
her incontinent. lxxxxix. D Fo. CCxi That the devil served to ye carte of saint
Thybault. lxxix. D Fo. Clxxix That ye devil struck a monk with a straw in
slepynge. lxvi. B Fo. Clviii Of an ill earl that the devil did bear away.
lxxxxix. N Fo. CCxiii Another example. Cx. A Fo. CCxxxv Of a woman impacyent yt
the devil bare away. lxxxxix. O Fo. CCxiii Of a man that the devil did drown
in a water. lxxxxix. P Fo. CCxiii That the devil bare away a tauerner in body
and soul. lxxi. I Fo. Clxvi That the devil took a man yt had sold his soul.
lxxi. K Fo. Clxvii Of a child that the devil did bear away. lxx. G Fo.
Clxiiii Of a chorle yt gave unto the devil that yt he had to eat. lxxxxvii. H
Fo. CCviii Of an advocate that the devil did bear away. lxxxi. E Fo. Clxxxii
That the devil wrote sins within the church. lxv. E Fo. Clvii That the
devil bare a book written of sins. lxv. C. Fo. Clvi That the deuylles were
upon ye tail of a woman. lxv. D Fo. Clvi That the devil gave a monk pytche
to drink. lxvi. C Fo. Clviii That the devil encharged a woman. iiii things.
lxv. F Fo. Clvii That ye devil made a woman to renye her faith and to sle her
child. lx. I Fo. cxlvii That the devil gave a pair of shone to an old woman
for too put dyuysyon in a marriage. lxxxxix. E Fo. CCxi Other examples of
decepcyons of the devil. lviii. B Fo. Cxliii. Et. lx. G Fo. Cxlvi That the
deuylles unburied a sinner in the church. lxix. B Fo. Cxlii
Septimum preceptum

Luxuria. Examples upon the.vii. commandment of god.
OF a woman dampened yt knew lecherously one of her pare^tes and did many
sins of whose mouth issued many todes and venymous bestes in her confession.
lxxxx. A Fo. Clxxxxvi Of ye punycion of a curyal yt habyted his god daughter.
lxxxx. B Fo. Clxxxxvii Of a woman dampened for tyrynge and aornynge of her heed
for showing of her pappes / for dauncynge / and vnshamefull enbracementes.
lxxxx. C Fo. Clxxxxvii That.xxiii. M men were brent with the fire celestyall for
ye sin of lechery / and Balaam gave ye counceyle. lxxxx. D Fo. Clxxxxviii
That by the occasion of ye lechery of Herod and his Herodyen saint Iohans heed
was smyten of. lxxvi. E Fo. Clxxiiii That Absalon knew his faders co^cubynes
as it is written in the.xvi. chapter of ye second book of kings / and soon
after was slain cruelly. lxx. A Fo. Clxiii Of a young man lecherous that
converted him. Cxv. F Fo. CCxlvii
Stuprum. Examples of deflourynge of vyrgyns.
That a vyrgyn was corrupt with a young man and by malice she imposed the sin
unto saint Machayre the which was pacyent. lxxxxi. A Fo. Clxxxxxviii Of a
knight dampened and tourmented in hell the which took the maydenheed of a
vyrgyn. lxxxx. B. Fo. Clxxxxix That Ammon the sone of Dauyd was slain of
Absalon for that yt he had deflored Thamar. lxxxxi C Fo. Clxxxxix That a
daughter was rauysshed in the dance and vyoled / and after hanged her self.
lxviii. F Fo. Clxii That Sychem the which deflored Dyne the daughter of Jacob
was slain and his fader Emor. etc. lxxxxi. D Fo. Clxxxxix Of him the which
enbraced the ketles and the cawdrons of ye kechyn wenynge to enbrace vyrgyns.
lxxxxi. E Fo. Clxxxxix
Concilium malum
That an old baude cou^ceyled ill a young woman. lxxxxi. F Fo. CC That Ionadab
counceyled ill Ammon to deflour Thamar. lxxxxi. C. Fo. Clxxxxix That Balaam
gave ill counceyle for to make to commyt fornycacyon with ye children of
ysraell / for there were.xxiiii. thousa^de brent with the fire that descended
from heaven. lxxxx. D Fo. Clxxxxviii That a wytche counceyled ill Theophyle to
renye god. lviii. B Fo. Cxliii That king Ezechyas sought counceyle of the
devil / and his messagers were brent with the fire celestyall. lx. G Fo. Cxlvi
Of a man yt gave ill counceyle to martyr the christian men / and that counceyle
redou^ded first on himself. lviii. F Fo. Cxliiii That the young men counceyled
ill the king Roboam to give proud answer to ye children of ysrael. lxxxxix.
M Fo. CCxiii
Adulterium. Examples of aduoutry.
That a woman used her life in lecheryes and glotonyes / and her husband was
unto the contrary the which lived right sobrely. lxxxxii. A Fo. CC Of ye
da^pnacion of a burgeys aduoutrer and of a woman wedded. lxxxxii. B Fo. CCi Of
an aduoutrer yt deuyls posseded at ye church door. lxxxxii. C Fo. CCi Of an
aduoutresse dampened yt two dragons tourmented. lxxxxii. D Fo. CCi Of ye pain
of a man yt knew ye wife of his neighbor. lxxxxii. E Fo. CCi That a man saw
a woman payned for her aduoutry. lxxxxii. F Fo. CCi Of a young man that sinned
with his wife married. lxxxxii. G Fo. CCi That.ii. aduoutresses bet each other for
a pyece of clothe. lxxxxii. H Fo. CCi That a queen rode on Arystotle yt was a
great clerk. lxxxxii. I Fo. CCii That Dauyd committed aduoutry and homycyde.
lxxvii. E Fo. Clxxvi Of a woman aduoutresse that bare an hot yren. lxxxxii. K
Fo. CCii
Deccatum in matrimonio.
That in the solempnyte a man should abstain fro his wife. lxxxxiii. A Fo.
CCii That the children of a man and of a woman might not have baptym for the
sin the which they committed together in marriage. lxxxxiii. B Fo. CCii That a
woman chylded.ix. children at a burden. lxxxxiii. C Fo. CCii Of this
matter.iiii. examples ben written in the flower of the commandments of god.
xxxvi. e / f / g / h / i /. Fo. lxxxvii
Sacrilegium. Examples of lecherous people of the church.
That a priest that was a fornycatoure deyed suddenly. lxxxxiii. D Fo. CCiii
That two relygyous were lecherous appostates. lxxxxiii. E Fo. CCiii Of the
dampnacyon of a nonne yt committed lechery. lxxxxiii. F Fo. CCiii Of two
lecherous prestes Iuges that coueyted Susanne. lxxxxvi. C Fo. CCvii That the
devil charged a woman to do lechery with prestes. lxv. F Fo. Clvii That a
relygious appostate and lecherous had mercy in requyry^ge ye sone of ye vyrgyn
mary on crystmas day. Cxiiii. A Fo. ccxliiii That a pilgrim saw a priest cast
in ye pytte of hell. lxxxxiii. G Fo. CCiii Of the punycyon of two prestes the
which received their creator and redemptour in sin. xxxvii. E Fo. lxxxx Of
a relygyous woman dampened that was a great almeswoman in her life / but she
conceived a child and secretly did sle it. lxxxxiii. H Fo. CCiii Of the
terryble Judgment and horrible punycyon that was done of an archebysshop named
Vdo a great harlot and of cursed life. Cvi. D Fo. CCxxviii Of a relygyous yt
covered his hands of dread to touch his mother in going over a water. xxxvii.
F Fo. lxxxx
Castitas et bonitas
That a vyrgyn saw a priest clear and fair in syngy^ge mass. lxxxxiiii. A
Fo. CCiiii That two relygyous vyrgyns were fro crystmas till the day of saint
John^ baptyst in speky^ge of god and wend to have be there but two hours.
lxxxxiiii. B Fo. CCiiii Other examples. xxxviii. E Fo. lxxxii That a bishop
chaste and pure saw on ester day some confessed ye which were black and other
white. lxxxxiiii. C Fo. CCiiii Other examples. xxxvii. F Fo. lxxxx
Peccatum sodomyticum. Examples of ye sin of sodomye.
Of the lechery and meruaylous punycyon of Sodom. lxxxxv. A Fo. CCv Of the
war and slaughter that was made upon the sodomytes Beniamyn for the lechery
that they committed in ye wife of Leuyte pilgrim. lxxxxv. B Fo. CCv Of a man
the which haunted his wife sodomytly. lxxxxv. C Fo. CCvi That a sodomytyke
deyed Impenytent and dyspeyred yt said that he saw hell / ye tourments and the
deuyls. lxxxxv. D Fo. CCvi That a woman sodomytyke was unburied horrybly.
lxxxxvi. E Fo. CCvi That the deuylles have horroure of the sin of sodomye.
lxxxxv. F Fo. CCvi
Octauum preceptum.

Testimonium. Examples of falls wytnessynge.
OF a crystyen yt forsware him cauteloussion ye auter of saint Nycolas.
lxxxxvi. A Fo. ccvi That they the which kept the tomb of Ihesu christ took
money for to wytnes falls yt ye dysciples had stolen ye body by night. lxxxxvi.
b. Fo. CCvi Of the false wytnessynge that two ancient prestes made against
Susanne and ill came unto them. lxxxxvi. C Fo. CCvii That the king Achab and
Iesabell made to make falls witnesses against the good man Naboth for to slay
him and to possede his vyneyarde. lxxvi. B Fo. Clxxiii
Periurium. Examples of periurynge.
Of three persons the which forsware them in imposynge falls crime upon a
patryarke. lxxxxvii. A Fo. CCvii Of a man yt forsware him and might not wtdrawe
his hand. lxxxxvii. B Fo. CCvii Of a man yt would forswere him for money
lend. lxxxxvi. C Fo. CCviii Of two men the which forsware them and the one
was mesell and the other was seek of ye fire of saint Anthony by dyuyne
suffraunce. lxxxxvii D Fo. CCviii Of a king and of many of his people the
which forsware them and they deyed suddenly. lxxxxvii. E Fo. CCviii Of
maryners the which forswore them of dread for to give of alms unto a poor
man. lxxxxvii. F Fo. CCviii Of him the which constreyned a man to swear and
knew well that he should be forsworn lxxxxvii. G Fo. CCviii Of a earl that
gave unto the devil that ye he had to ete when two clerks him demanded
alms. lxxxxvii. H Fo. CCviii Of a friar deane of Coleyne the which forsware
him for money that had be lend to him. lxxxii. C Fo. Clxxxxiiii
Mendatium Examples of lyenge / and it is to be noted that al falls witnesses
and periuryes ben lies.
That ye holy saint Iherom was belyed before god / the which commanded that
he were beten / and af er the said Iherom did penance. lxxxxviii. A Fo. CCix
That two merchants said unto their curate yt they could nothy^ge sell without
lyenge and swerynge. lxxxxix. K Fo. CCxii That the devil lied unto a noble man
to deceive hy^ at his death. lx. B Fo. Cxlv That the devil lied unto our first
mother Eve. liiii. A Fo. Cxxxiii Of a daughter the which did make a lie.
lxxxxi. A Fo. Clxxxxviii That the young man yt made a lie unto Dauyd was slain
/ for he said yt he had slain Saul and had not. lxviii. B Fo. lxxviii
Another example. lxxxxvii. A Fo. CCvii
Detractio Examples of detraccyon.
Of some relygyous the which made detraccyon of their brother the which was in
deyenge. lxxxxviii. B Fo. CCix Of a detractour dampened for his detraccyons.
lxxxxviii. C Fo. CCix Of a detractour yt had his tongue among todes.
lxxxxviii. D Fo. CCix Of a detractour yt bote himself and wasted his tongue.
lxxxxviii. E Fo. CCx Of a good fader yt slepte when herd detraccyon. lxxxxviii
F Fo. CCx That one deed apered to a knight as he detracted him. lxxxxviii. G
Fo. CCx Of.iii. detractours yt imposed falls crime to a patryarke. lxxxxvii. Fo.
CCviii
Derisio Examples of derysyon.
That ill came unto a boucher the which mocked the holy ashes and vngreaced
his tethe to drink at the tavern when other were at mass. lxvii. F Fo. Clx
That ill came to Cham yt mocked his fader Noe. lxx. G Fo. Clxiiii Of a rybaude
the which mocked his felawe for that / yt he yode to here a predycacyon. lv. A
Fo. Cxxxvi
Murmuratio Examples of murmr
That Chore / Dathan / and Abyron / and CCl. men descended in to hell all
quycke hosed and shodde for yt they murmured against god and Moses. liiii. H
Fo. Cxxxix Another example in eodem loco. Of a fr^xe the which was punysshed
dyuynely for that that he murmured against god. liiii. I Fo. Cxxxix That an
hermyte murmured ayest god for his divine Iugeme^ts. Cvi. b. Fo. ccxxvi
Loqui Examples of evil spekers.
Of a man full of bate and dyscorde the which said at his death yt all those
that he troubled apposed against him and enforced them to sle him. lxxxxix. A
Fo. Cx Of a lady full of wrath that cursed her maiden. lxxxxix. B Fo. Cx Of
him that said to his servant vnhose me devil / and incontinent the devil
vnhosed him. lxxxxix. C Fo. Cxi Of a man yt said to his wife / goo in the
deuylles name. lxxxxix. D Fo. Cxi Of a woman that put diuysyon in good marriage.
lxxxxix. E Fo. Cxi Of a woman that cursed her.x. children and they trembled
inco^tynent of punycion dyuyne. lxxiii. E Fo. Clxx That saint Bryce saw the
devil that wrote the evil words yt men spoke in the church. lxv. E Fo.
Clvii Of a woman yt had ye upper part of her body brent in the church after
her death for her cursed tongue. lxxxxix. F Fo. Cxi Of a man dampened of whom
Lucyfer demanded a song for them yt he had songe^ in the world. Cvii. D Fo.
CCxxxi Of a knight that spoke horcely for that yt he gloryfyed him in singing
sweet lecherous words. lxxxxi. B Fo. Clxxxxix Of an advocate the which lost
his tongue in his death / for that he had habounded in ill languages. lxxxxix.
G Fo. Cxii That the aungelles ben present when men speak good words / and
when evil words ben spoken the deuylles ben always present. lxxxxix. H Fo.
Cxii That a knight abstayned hy^ fro speaking to fle ill words. Ciiii. D Fo.
CCxxvi Of a man that sold his soul and the devil bare it away. lxxi. K Fo.
Clxvii
Audire. Examples of them ye harken ill words:
That the sister of saint Damyen was tourmented for that yt she had taken
pleasure to here songs. lxxxxix. I Fo. CCxii That a bishop was tourmented in
purgatory for that / yt he herd the detraccyons of his clerk. lxxxxix. L. Fo.
CCxiii Of a man tourmented in hell for his vain songs that he had used in
the world folysshely. Cvii. D Fo. CCxxxi Of a woman dampened yt had arowes wtin
her eeres / for that / yt she herd folysshe words. lxxxx. A Fo. Clxxxxvi
Nonum preceptu^ et decimum

Cogitatio mala. Examples upon the.ix. and.x. commandment of god.
THat Lucrece coueyted to have and to possede the heritage of saint Beatryce:
and the devil posseded and slew him. lxxvii. A Fo. Clxxv That a great alms
woman was dampened for the will yt she had to commit lechery. C. A Fo. CCxiii
That Arystotle sinned when he coueyted and prayed the queen to commyt lechery /
albeit that he performed not the operacyon outward. lxxxxii. I Fo. CCii That a
woman brake this commandment when she desired and prayed a clerk to use of
his enbracy^ges C. B Fo. CCxiiii That a noble woman brake this commandment
wha^ she desired her porter of lechery though yt she did nothing / for he
would not consent. C. C Fo. CCxiiii That ye auncyents the which coueyted
Susanne brake this commandment albeit that they did nothing as they
purposed. lxxxxvi. C Fo. CCvii Of a friar yt delyted him in thoughts of
fornycacyon without resystynge and therefore his aungel was sorry and the orayson
of an holy fader the which prayed for him was not exalted. C. D Fo. CCxiiii
That the devil had slain a yongman replete with ill thoughts if god had not
aided him. Cxv. F Fo. CCxlvii Of a monk unto whom god sent breed good and
fair / and after that he had lecherous thoughts and elacyon he lost the said
good breed. Ci. A Fo. CCxv Of a friar yt was tempted in his thought of the
spyryte of fornycacyon and god suffered that he saw it in the likeness of a
woman. Ci. B Fo. CCxvi That incontinent yt a man had of ill thoughts in
walking ye devil felowshypped with him and after that he was confessed ye
devil knew hy^ not. Ci. C Fo. CCxvi That it behooves to yield account at ye
day of the Judgment of evil thoughts Ci. D. Fo. CCxvi. and. Cviii. D. Fo.
CCxxxii
Cogitatio bona Examples of good thoughts
That a friar wanne.vii. crowns on a night for resystynge against ill
thoughts and temptacyons. Cii. A Fo. CCxv^ That a relygyous apostate repeated
hy^ it appears that the will is reputed for the deed. Cii. B. Fo. CCxvii
Another example. Cxv. F Fo. CCxlvii That a thief came unto an hermyte in good
will to amend him the which hermyte dyspraysed him / and a tree slew him and
he went to heaven. Cii. C Fo. CCxvii
Penitentia
Of Theophyle the which was saved by penance. lviii. B Fo. Cxliii Of ye
penance of a monk that had renyed god. lviii. C Fo. Cxliii Of the penance of
a bishop that renyed god. lviii. D Fo. Cxliii Of a man yt gave himself to
ye devil to the end to be enryched / and after he was saved by penance. lx. H
Fo. Cxlvii Of two relygyous men the which were apostates and harlottes and
after saved by penance. lxxxxiii. E Fo. CCiii That the prince of thieves yt
saint John^ converted was saved by penance and correccyon. lxxiiii. E Fo.
Clxxi That of thieves were revoked to do penance and made restytucyon by ye
pacyence of an old fader. lxxxxii. H. I Fo. Clxxxv That thieves repented them
and did penance by yt an holy man made to keep his door with dragons. liii. C
Fo. Cxxxi Of him the which wanne his brother yt was fallen in fornycacyo^ in
doing penance for him. lxxv. F Fo. Clxxxiii The goodness that penance and the
other sacraments done shall be found in ye flower of the commandments of
god in the nombre. viii. B. etc. Fo. xviii That a man should do of good deeds
in his living without to trust his friends after his death. lxxii. A b / c / d /
e / f. Fo. Clxvii
Contritio Examples of contrycyon
Of a sinner yt repented him at a predycacyon and at every teere yt he wept he
brake a lynke of the chain that he had about his neck. lv. A Fo. Cxxxvi Of
the contrycyon and correccyon of a relygyous ha^lot. Cxiii. A Fo. CCxliii Of a
thief yt repented him and was saved by contrycyon. Cii. C Fo. CCxvii That by
contrycyon a relygyous apostate was saved. Cii. B Fo. CCxvii That a woman the
which renyed her faith and slew her child was saved by the great contrycyon
yt she had / and for being in will to confess her. lx. I Fo. Cxlvii Of a
daughter that slew her fader / and her mother and had mercy by contrycyon and
confession. lxxvii. D Fo. Clxxvi Of the correccyon of a man of gross
conscience. lv. B Fo. Cxxxvi That a woman unto whom the devil gave in
charge.iiii. things was saved by great contrycion and her sone did penance
for her. lxv. F Fo. Clvii
Confessio. Examples of confession.
That by detaute to confess one sin ye daughter of a king was dampened ye
which had be a great gyuer of almesses to ye poores. lxxxxiii. H Fo. CCiii
That a woman a gyuer of alms was dampened by defaute to confess one
lecherous thought. C. A Fo. CCxiiii That a woman was dampened for yt she ne made
hole co^fessyo^. lxxxx. A Fo. clxxxxvi That a woman a giver of alms yt slew
two of her children was dampened by defaut of confession. lxxxxii D Fo. CCi
Another example. Cxxii. D Fo. CClvi That a man and a woman were dampened for
that / yt their confession at the death was made without charity and good
purpose And that a woman sinner was saved for yt that her confession was
salutary and well made. lxxxxii. B Fo. CCi That a bishop saw on Eester day some
men confessed / of the which some were all black and some white the which
denotes yt all they yt go to confession be not in the state of grace.
lxxxxiiii. C Fo. CCiiii That a black man bound with a great te chain of yren
went to confession and he came again more strongely bound and blacker than
before. Cii. Z Fo. CCxxiii That confession is the thing yt noyeth the devil
most. Cii. and Fo. CCxxiii That ye devil knew not a man after his confession.
Ci. C Fo. CCxvi Another example like. lxxxxv. f. Fo. ccxlvii Another example.
Cxxiii. F Fo. CClvii Of a myller dampened yt would not confess him at his
death. Cx. A Fo. CCxxx Of a clerk dampened for lack of confession / the which
yode to the tavern to play and to drink. etc. when he should have be at the
mass. lxvii. D Fo Clix Of an usurer yt confessed him and restored at his
death. lxxxvii. F Fo Clxxxxiii Of a detractour dampened yt co^tempned to
confess him at his death and yet he was warned. lxxxxviii. C Fo. CC^x Of a
woman yt bare an hot yren in her hand without having ill after her confession
and after that she returned to syn^e was burnt. lxxxxii. K Fo. CCii
Eucharistia. Examples of the sacrament of ye auter.
Of an abbot yt said that ye hostye consacred was not the body of Ihesu christ
but yt it was his figure. lxxxxii. D Fo. CCxviii That Judas received his
creator in mortal sin and evil did come unto him therefore. Cii. E Fo.
CCxix Of a woman yt laughed wha^ saint Gregrory admynystred unto her on Eester
day the which was incredule toward ye holy sacrament. Cii. F Fo. CCxix Of a
woman yt put the body god before hogs. Cii. L Fo. CCxx Of a maiden yt shed
the body of god up on colwortes. Cii. M Fo. CCxx That the vyrgyn Marye and many
other vyrgyns the which were at the death of a wydowe yode on knees and
worshypped ye body of our lord when it was brought to her. Cv. A Fo. CCxxvii
That the honey bees made to the body of our lord a chapel and and an auter in
doing him honor. Cii. O Fo. CCxxi That a horse / an ox / and an ass knew
Ihesu christ in the sacrament and honored him. Cii. I Fo. CCxx Of the horse of a
Jew the which knew Jesus christ in the sacrament of the eucharystye. Cii. K
Fo. CCxx That the oxes knew Ihesu christ in the field. Cii. N Fo. CCxx Of a
child of.ix. years ye was admynystred at his death. Cxxiii. A Fo. CClvi Of the
sone of a Jew the which was preserved from brennynge for that / that he had
received the body of our lord Ihesu christ. Cii. P Fo. CCxxi Of a man hanged
the which might not deye till that he had received his creatoure. Cxiiii. C
Fo. CCxlv That a vyrgyn saw a priest replenysshed with great clerenesse and
beauty in singing mass. lxxxxiiii. A Fo. CCiiii That a bishop saw on eester
day some men confessed the which were black and the other white. lxxxxiiii C
Fo. CCiiii Of a holy fader the which withdrewe ye sinners from receyuynge
their creator in mortal sin. Cii. S Fo. CCxx Of the punycyon of the
relygyous of saint Bernarde that received his creator in mortal sin. Cii. R
Fo. CCxx Of the punycyon of two prestes the which did receive their creator
in mortal sin. xxxvii. E Fo. lxxxx Of an evil priest syn^er the which
received the body of Ihesu christ with great dyffyculte. Cii. G Fo. CCxix Of a
priest fornycatour yt deye suddenly as he preprayred him to sing the mass at
the auter. lxxxxiii D Fo. CCiii Of the punycyon of a curyal that knew
lecherously a young daughter the night of Eester. lxxxx. C Fo. Clxxxxvii That
the day of Eester the body of our lord lept out of the mouth of a man / and
he might not receive it for that / yt he had known his wife on the vygyll of
the said Eester. lxxxiii. A Fo. CCii Another example. lxxxxii. G Fo. CCi That
the servant yt had stolen his masters fygges might not receive our lord of
saint Thomas. lxxxi. B Fo. Clxxxi That a woman yt would have hanged her self
was delivered in herynge them ring to a sacrynge. lxv. B Fo. Clvi That the
deuyls kept an heretyke from brennynge / but when ye body of Jesus christ was
brought they might no longer keep him. lix. A Fo. Cxliiii Of a man yt would
not leave his sin and came to receive his creator against ye defense of the
priest. Cii. Q Fo. CCxx That a woman appeared to a priest in sy^gynge mass.
lxxxx. C Fo. Clxxxxvii Of the punycyon of some the which returned unto their
glotonyes and sins after Eester. Cii. T Fo. CCxxii Another example. lxxix. C
Fo. Clxxxxv Of a man the which was delivered fro ye pains of purgatory by ye
saying of three masses. Cii. V Fo. CCxxii Of a friar the which should have
be.xv. years in purgatory / and he was delivered by one mass Cii. x Fo. CCxxii
That one of the relygyous of saint Gregory was delivered fro purgatory by.xxx.
masses. lxxxii. E Fo. Clxxxiiii
Perditio bonorum. Examples of them yt deye in mortal syn^e dampne themself /
lose paradyse and al good spyrytualles as unto the soul.
In likewise as ye water departs fro ye broken pot even so does all ye
virtues of a man by mortal sin. Cii. Y. Fo. CCxxiii Another example yt the
angel said to a vyrgyn / chaste / devout / almesgyuer / and charytable yt she
might not be saved but if she had pacye^ce / for ye sin of ire reigned in
her. lxxxxix. B Fo. CCx Of the daughter of a king a great almesgyuer the which
was dampened for one mortal sin. lxxxxiii. H Fo. CCiii That a woman a gyuer
of alms was dampened for the delyberacyon of will to do lechery. C. A Fo.
CCxiii Of a woman gyuer of alms dampened yt slew.ii. children. lxxxxii. D
Fo. CCi That a woman the which fasted and excercysed her in oraysons and good
operacyons was dampened for keeping of ire without will to pardon. lxxviii. D
Fo. Clxxviii That a monk lost ye breed celestyall after yt he had done sin.
Ci. A Fo. CCxv That a young man the which had lived lowably enough in Innocence
vyrgynall was dampened and lost by co^mytynge mortal sin. lxvii. D Fo. Clix
That ye sone of a rich man yt served god in fastings / orayson / and in good
operacyo^s was dampened for keeping ire in his heart and would be avenged.
lxxix. A Fo. Clxxviii That an earl was dampened for an heritage ill wtholde^
though yt he had done good operacyons. lxxxii. A Fo. Clxxxiii
Finis iniquorum est peccatum. Examples of mortal sin the which is ye line
whereby ye deuylles holds sinners
That the deuylles held a man bounden with a chain and led him with great
so lace and Joy. Cii. Z Fo. CCxxiii That saint Bernarde saw a sinner yt had a
chain about his neck ye which had mo than an.C. lynkes / and at every teere
that he wept there fell a lynke. lv. A Fo. Cxxxvi That the devil said to a
doctor that a man being in sin is so bound that he ne may do any operacyon
the which to hy^ is merytoryous. Cii. and Fo. CCxxiii That saint Anthony saw
ye world full of the deuyls nets. Cii. r Fo. Cxxiii That a monk saw of
rich men hanged wtin the fire of hell / hanged yt is to say by ye line of ye
devil. lxxxiiii. D Fo. Clxxxviii Of a woman dampened bound with chains in a
basket. lxxxx. C Fo. Clxxxxvii Of some auarycyous usurers hanged in the fire of
hell. lxxxvi. A Fo. Clxxxxi That four men were hanged in hell for that / yt
they did possede unjustly an heritage. lxxxi. G Fo. Clxxxiii
Mors bonorum. Examples of some the which has acco^plysshed the will and
commandment of god has deyed of good death and has had consolacyon of god
and of his saints.
That a holy fader saw at his death god and his prophets. Ciii. A Fo.
CCxxiiii That the saints of paradyse and ye angels and god came unto the
death of an holy fader. Ciii. B Fo. CCxxiiii That a woman saw Ihesu christ at
her death. Ciii. C Fo. CCxxiiii That a friar showed Jesus christ with his fy^ger in
singing. Ciii. D Fo. CCxxiiii That a holy bishop was comforted with saints
at his death. Ciii. E Fo. CCxxv That saints conforted an holy bishop at his
deche. Ciii. F Fo. CCxxv That saint Peter conforted a maiden named Gelyne.
Ciii. G Fo. CCxxv That a priest that fled the company of a woman was
conforted at the death of ye saints of paradyse. Ciiii. A Fo. CCxxv That by
the good correccyon the which was done unto a child he fynysshed well his
days. lxxiiii. B Fo. Clxx That a friar went to heaven as swyftly as an arowe.
Ciiii. B Fo. CCxxvi Of the death of a pilgrim yt was conforted of angels of
paradyse / and of ye death of a sinner. Ciiii. C Fo. CCxxvi That a knight saw
the death of an ill man yt the deuylles tourmented. And also he saw the death
of a good man yt angels bare to heaven. Ciiii. D Fo. CCxxvi Of an holy fader
yt deyed in the dread of god. Ciiii. E Fo. CCxxvi Of a pryour relygyous the
which said yt he deyed lawfully / faithfully / amyably and Ioyously. Ciiii. F
Fo. CCxxvii Examples of the inestymable Joys of paradyse. xlvii b / c / d. Fo.
Cxix Of a monk the which was chosen to be bishop and he refused it / and
after deyed well. Ciiii. G Fo. CCxxvii Examples of the death of many holy
persons of the which the bible makes mencyon. Ciiii. H Fo. CCxxvii
Mors malorum. Examples of some the which has not wylled to accomplysshe the
commandments of god and they ben deed of evil death in pains and dolours.
That the devil drew the soul from ye body of a cursed rich man with a hoke
and a woman wydowe was conforted of our lady and other vyrgyns. Cv. A Fo.
CCxxvii Of a monk ypocryte yt eat secretly and feigned to fast / and the
dragon infernal devoured him. Cv. C That the deuylles gate ye soul of an
ypocryte with an hoke. Ciiii. C Fo. CCxxvi That a knight saw yt the deuyls take
a ill man's soul. Ciiii. D Fo. CCxxvi Another example. Cvii. D Fo. CCxxxi
Another example. lxxxxiii. H Fo. CCiii That Cayn was cursed of god and deyed
impenytent. lxxvi. A Fo. Clxxiiii That the pyllars of sodom deyed impenytentes.
lxxxxv. A Fo. CCv That Chore / Dathan / and Abyron impenytences descended all
quycke in to the helles. liiii. H Fo. Cxxxix That Absolon impenytent deyed
myscheuously. lxx. A Fo. Clxiii That the harlot Iesabell was cast by a wyndowe
/ defouled with horses / and eten with dogs. lxxvi. B Fo. Clxxiii Of ye death
of judas. Cii. E Fo. CCxix Of ye death of pylate. lxxvi. F Fo. Clxxv That a
sodomityke deyed impenytent and dyspayred and said yt he saw hell ye
tourmentes and deuylles. Cv. B Fo. CCxxviii Of a rich man. lxxxxiiiii. A Fo.
Clxxxvi Examples yt many ydolatres deyed myscheuously. lvii. c / d / e / f / g.
Fo. Cxli Of a player blasphemer yt the devil did slay. lxii. G Fo. Cl That
Lucrece ended his days myscheuously. lxxvii. A Fo. Clxxv Of the horrible death
of a cursed usurer. lxxxvi. D Fo. Clxxxxi
Iudicia dei. Example that a monk required of god that he might se his secret
Iugementes the which saw them and knowleged that they ben right dyffycyle and
hard for to know. Cvi. A
That an holy bishop named Fortyn was punysshed by the Judgment of god for
that / yt he received a vestement of a rich usurer. Cvi. C Fo. CCxxvii That an
hermit murmured against god for his diverse iugementes Cvi. B
Iuditium. Examples of the Judgment.
Of the Judgment of many persons the which had done the works of mercy. Of a
man yt was merciful and lived voluptuously. Cxxii. D Fo. CClvi Of a relygyous
that was at his death in Judgment before god of whom he was demanded account
of all that he had done and said. Cxxii. E Fo. CClvi That ye devil accused
before god in judgment one of ye relygyous of saint Gregory yt was at his
death. lxxxviii. B Fo. CCix That the deuylles put in balaunce all ye euylles yt
the rich Peter had done / and ye good put a barley lofe on the other side of ye
balaunce. xliii. C Fo. Cii That saint Iherom was beten in Judgment before god.
lxxxxviii. A Fo. CCix Of.iii. deed men raised yt were put in Judgment before
god. Cviii. D Fo. CCxxxii That the deuylles accused in Judgment before god a
child the which had stolen but only an halfpeny from his cosyn germayne.
lxxx. D Fo. Clxxxi That a rich man unmercifully was cyted in Judgment before
god and there was iuged to death etnall. lxxxiiii. C Fo. Clxxxviii That a rich
sone said at his death yt he was sentenced. Cv. B Fo. CCxxvi Of the Judgment of
a detractour dampened. lxxxxviii. C Fo. CCix Of ye vehement Judgment of a
dronken smyth. lxvii. C Fo. Clix That a servant saw his master in judgment
before god. Cviii. D Fo. CCxxxi That a relygyous was presented in Judgment
before god and retrayed from glory for an half penny the which he did owe to a
passage. lxxxviii. D Fo. Clxxxviii Of a man letygyous and full of debate the
which spoke at his death of his Judgment and said that all those the which he
had troubled apposed strongely against him. lxxxxix. A. Fo. CCx Of a man
presented in Judgment before god / of whom the Judge demanded the reason
wherefore he had made a man to swear sith that he knew well that he should be
forsworn. lxxxxvii. G Fo. CCviii That our lady delivered a lecherous clerk
fro dampnacyon. Cxxi. B Fo. CClv That the glorious vyrgyn Marye and saint Peter
delivered a monk from damnacyon. Cxxi. C Fo. CClv That a young man the which
acco^plysshed not his vow was borne in Judgment before god. lxiii. H Fo Cliii
Another example of a priest that was Iuged. lxiii. I Fo. Cliii That a cursed
bishop was cyted in judgment before god. lxxxv. I Fo. Clxxxx That a chanone
was accused in Judgment before our lord god of the patron of the church.
lxxxv. K Fo. Clxxxx Of the Judgment and of the horrible and terryble punycio^
yt was done of an archbysshop named Vdo. Cvi. D Fo. CCxxviii
Peni inferni. Examples of the pains of hell.
Of a fader of household the which saw two pondes and the tourmentes that been
in hell. Cvii. A Fo. CCxxx Of a fader and his sone dampened yt burnt in hell.
lxxiii. A Fo. Clxviii That the dampened ben punysshed wtin the fire of hell.
lvii. A Fo. Cxl That ye cursed Dyues is punysshed in ye fire of hell. lxxxiiii.
A Fo. Clxxxvii That a monk saw rich men hanged in the fire of hell.
lxxxiiii. D Fo. Clxxxviii That a woman was dampened and punysshed terrybly in
hell for many sins that she had committed. lxxxx. A Fo. Clxxxxvi Of a woman
dampened the which showed unto the world her breasts and aourned her heed.
lxxxx. C Fo. Clxxxxvii Of a woman aduoutresse and dronken dampened. lxxxxii. A
Fo. CC Of a burgeys and of an aduoutrer dampened. lxxxxii. B Fo. CCi That a
woman dampened was tourme^ted with two dragons. lxxxxii. D Fo. CCi Of an other
woman that was also dampened. lxxxxii. F Fo. CCi Of the dampnacyon of a woman
for an ill thought. C. A Fo. CCxiii Of a nonne dampened. lxxxxiii. F Fo. CCiii
Of the three Herodes that were hanged in hell. lxxvi. E Fo. Clxxiiii Of some
auarycyous usurers hanged in hell. lxxxvi. A Fo. Clxxxxi That four men were
hanged in hell for yt / yt they posseded falsely an other man's heritage.
lxxxi. C Fo. Clxxxiii That an earl and many of his lygnage were dampened and
punysshed cruelly for that that they posseded an heritage iniustly the which
had been taken away from ye church. lxxxii. A Fo. Clxxxiii That a rich man
was put in a chair of fire. Cvii B Fo. CCxxxi That a man was tourmented in
purgagatory for that yt he vyoled the chyrcheyarde and hurt a man grievously
within the same. lxxvii. F Fo. CClxxvi Four examples of the pains of
purgatory. lxxxviii. A / b c / d Fo. Clxxxxiii That a woman saw the pains of
her husband and other. Cvii. C Fo. CCxxxi Other examples. lxxxxix. I. L Fo.
CCxii That a servant saw his master led in to diverse pains. Cvii. D Fo.
CCxxxi That a scoler of paris appeared unto his master after his death in great
tourment of fire. Cviii. A Fo. CCxxxii Of two men the which were in pains and
were raised by the prayers of saint Tauryn. Cviii. C Fo. CCxxxii Of three deed
men raised the which told of the pains of purgatory and of hell and how they
were in Judgment before almighty god. Cviii. D Fo. CCxxxii That the devil said
that the soul of an earl Wyllyam was terrybly tourmented in hell. Cviii. E
Fo. CCxxxiii Of a relygyous the which would more sooner enter in to the fire
of hell than to behold the devil. Cviii. F Fo. CCxxxiiii That the vysyon of
the devil is terryble and hydeous. Cix. A Fo. CCxxxiiii Of a man the which
considered if after a thousand years the dampened should be delivered fro hell.
Cix. B Fo. CCxxxiiii Of the daughter of a king dampened in hell. lxxxxiii. H
Fo. CCiii Another example. Cvi. D Fo. CCxxxv That it anoyeth to a person to be
in a base bed without to be departing therfro. Cix. C Fo. CCxxxv That a
master dylycatyfe correcked himself in thinking on the worms and pains the
which the unhappy dampened souls have. lv. C Fo. Cxxxvii Of a daunceresse yt
the deuylles bare in to hell and there brent her. lxviii. E Fo. Clxii Of a
knight dampened and tourmented in hell. lxxxxi. B Fo. Clxxxxix That a young man
made himself relygyous for thinking if his fair members should be the
pasture and matter of the fire of hell. Cix. D Fo. CCxxxv Of the punycion of a
knight the which rauysshed the cow of a poor woman wydowe / and how one
devil bette him more than the other. Cix. A Fo. CCxxxv Of a fader and his sone
dampened and punysshed in hell. lxxiii. A Fo. Clxviii Of a man rauyssher in
pains ye which took the got of a woman wydowe and did of great oppressyons
and dyseases to his subgectes. Cix. F Fo. CCxxxv Of ye punycyon and dampnacyon
of a man named Vodo. lxvii. E Fo. Clx Of a knight yt appeared to his daughter in
tourment. lxvii. G Fo. Clx That a pilgrim saw a prelate cast in ye fire of
hell. lxxxxiii. G Fo. CCiii That a vyrgyn was rauysshed slepynge upon the
mouth of the pytte of hell and saw the souls tourmented. lxiii. E Fo. Clii
Another example. lxiii. F Fo. Clii That a myller was borne to se the tourmentes
of hell and after was brought again to his body. Cx. A Fo. CCxxxv Of the
clerk of a bishop how he was dampened. lxvii. D Fo Clix That a knight deyed
and after was brought again in too his body that told of a bridge over a
stynkynge water where him behooved to pass. Cx. B Fo. CCxxxvi Of the vysyon of
Tongdalus yt suffered many pains in purgatory and saw of ye tourmentes of
hell / and after was brought to his body. Cx. B Fo. CCxxxvi
Jesus. Examples of the name of Ihesus.
That god delivered a man from many perils. Cxii. A Fo. CCxli That ye devil
was chaced fro a woman in the name of Ihesus. Cxii. B Fo. CCxli That ye name of
Ihesus abateth the temtacyons of the devil. Cxii. C Fo. CCxli That the name of
Ihesus gives many virtues. Cxii. D Fo. CCxli That by the glorious name of
Ihesus a clerk was delivered and a thief was converted. Cxii. E Fo. CCxlii
That a relygious was heled of ye axes by the name of Ihesus. Cxii. F Fo. CCxlii
That by the puyssaunce of ye name of Ihesus a woman pardoned unto her enemies.
Cxii. G Fo. CCxiii That a man obstynate and hateful pardoned his enmyes for
the love of the blyssed Ihesus. Cxii. H Fo. CCxlii That the temptacyons of the
devil was taken away by the token of the cross / and in the most sacred and
blyssed name of Jesus. Cxii. I Fo. CCxlii That in the namynge of Ihesus the
devil is repelled and his temptacyons taken away. Cxii. K Fo. CCxlii Of a
noble man the which pardoned ye homycyde of his brother / and the crucyfyxe
enclyned his heed unto him within ye church. Cxii. L Fo. CClii Another
example. xxvii. I Fo. lxvii That Ihesu christ would not pardon unto a deed man
till yt he had demanded pardon of his brother the which he had offended.
Cxii. M Fo. CCxliii
Natiuitas christi. Examples of the natyuyte of Ihesus.
That a nonne the which habandoned her in sin had mercy in requyrynge the
blyssed sone of the vyrgyn Marye the day of crystmas. Cxiii. A Fo. CCxliii
That the infancye or chyldehode of Ihesu christ delivered a relygyous from
temptacyon. Cxiii. B Fo. CCxliii That Ihesu christ appeared unto a woman in the
lykenes and semblau^ce of a right fair child. Cxiii. C Fo. CCxliiii That two
vyrgyns relygyouses were in good contemplacyon from the mass of crystenmasse
day till unto the day of ye feast of saint Johan baptyst / and they wend yt
they had not ben there but the space of. ii hours. lxxxxiiii. B Fo. CCiiii
That a vyrgy^ had so great love and devotion unto the child of the vyrgyn
Marye yt they appeared unto her on the day of crystmas. lxxv. E Fo. Clxxiii
Passio christi. Examples of the passion of our lord.
That a great sinner bare the death in his sekenes in the remembrance of the
passion of Jesus. Cxiiii. A Fo. CCxliii Of the swetenes of the passion of Ihesu
christ yt a man had the which said.v. pater nosters. Cxiiii. B Fo. CCxliiii Of
a knight yt might not deye on ye galowes for that / yt he had said every day
three times pater noster in the honor of yt passion of Ihesus. Cxiiii. C Fo.
CCxlv That well came unto a man yt made my^de of the passion of our lord in
his lyenge down and in rysynge again from his bed Cxiiii D Fo. CCxlv Of a
woman yt loved the passion of christ that chylded and deyed on the friday and
was saved. Cxiiii. E Fo. CCxlv That the oraysons the which ben made in the
remembrance of the cross and the passion of our lord Ihesus pleased him
gretely. Cxiiii. F Fo. CCxlv Of a friar yt honored ye passion of Ihesu christ.
Cxiiii. G Fo. CCxlvi That the passion of Ihesus styreth to have the virtues and
to resyst against the devil. Cxv. A Fo. CCxlvi That the sign of the cross
was found in a martyrs heart. Cxv. B Fo. CCxlvi That a conuers had the life
and passion of Ihesu christ for a lesson in the table when he dyned or souped.
Cxv. C Fo. CCxlvi Of a relygyous the which learned three lettres the which he
did record often times. Cxv. D Fo. CCxlvi Of an abbess yt made to read ye
passion when she deyed. Cxv. E. Fo. CCxlvii That our lord showed his wounds
to a young man. Cxv. F Fo. CCxlvii That our lord revoked an apostate for
shewy^ge his wou^des. Cxv. G Fo. CCxlvii Of a thief murderer yt repented hy^ /
made confession and had to penance to say a pater noster before any cross
that he should find. Cxv. H Fo. CCxlviii
Signum crucis. Examples of the tokens of the cross.
That the token of the cross appeared to the emperor Co^stantyne / and araysed
a deed man and heled a woman that was seek. Cxvi. A Fo. CCxlvii That saint
Iustyne had vyctory and resysted against the devil by the token of the cross.
Cxvi. B Fo. CCxlviii Of a man of war penytent that resysted against the
deuyls temptacyon by the token of the cross. Cxvi. C Fo. CCxlviii That the
token of the cross served unto a Jew against the deuylles yt held their
chapter Cxvi. D Fo. CCxlviii That a man showed at his death that he had
received the cross and ye devil fled away. Cxvi. E Fo. CCxlix That well came
to a man that made memory of the passion and of the token of the cross.
Cxiiii. D Fo. CCxlv That the oraysons the which ben made in the remembrance
of the cross and passyo^ please him gretely. Cxiiii. F Fo. CCxlv That the
sign of the cross was found in a martyrs heart. Cxv. B Fo. CCxlv That a
maiden did eat a letuse without making ye sign of the cross and sheet the
devil. lxvii. A Fo. Cxlix That a relygyous conuers drank wine without making
the sign of the cross and against his obedyence and he drank the devil.
lxvii. B Fo. Cxlix
Aqua benedicta Examples of holy water.
That the deuylles which were in a seek man's house were chased away by
casting of holy water. Cxvii. A Fo. CCxlix That the devil might not enter in
to a dronken man's mouth for a drop of holy water that was fallen therein
that same day. Cxvii. B Fo. CCxlix That as a knight sprynkled him with holy
water the devil cried that he should not touch him. Cxvii. C Fo. CCxlix That
when a sinner obstinate had dronken of holy water he repented and confessed him
and changed his life from evil to good. Cxvii. D Fo. CCxlix
Maria. Examples of ye glorious vyrgyn Mary
That ye vyrgyn Mary delivered an abbot and many other persons for singing
this responce. Felix namquees / to have her help. Cxviii. A Fo. CCl That
(salve regina) avails for to dye well. Cxviii. B Fo. CCl That the vyrgyn Mary
apeased ye thonders / and tempests of weder for saying of salve regina.
Cxviii. C Fo. CCl That the vyrgyn Mary restored ye hand of Johan Damascene
that made (salve sancta parens. Cxviii. D Fo. CCli Of the salutacyon angelyke
how a relygyous made the chapelet unto the vyrgyn Marye. Cxix. A Fo. CCli Aue
maria expounded. Cxix. b Fo. CCli Of hy^ that knew nothy^ge of good but Aue
maria. Cxx. A Fo. CClii Of him that kneled in the name of the vyrgyn Marye.
Cxx. B Fo. CClii Of a mother yt taught her child to salve the vyrgyn Mary. Cxx.
C Fo. CClii That the devil might not strangle a knight for that yt he saluted
ye vyrgyn Marye. lvi. H Fo. Cxxxix That ye virgyn Marye aided a woman that was
borne slepynge upon the pytte of hell. lxiii. E Fo. Clii That ye vyrgyn Marye
aided a woman to thylde in the sea of the mount of saint Myghell. Cxx. D Fo.
CCliii That the virgyn Marye kept a paynter from harm. Cxx. E Fo. CCliii Of
the good and honor that the vyrgyn Mary did unto a thief that fasted the
saterdayes in her honor and absteyned fro doing ill. Cxx. F Fo. CCliii That a
thief beheded might not deye with out confession for that / yt he fasted the
saterdayes in the honor of the glorious vyrgy^ Marye. Cxx. G Fo. CCliiii That
the virgyn Mary aided a thief at his death for he had fasted on ye saturday
in the honor of the glorious vyrgyn Marye. Cxx. H Fo. CCliiii That a thief
hanged might not deye with out receyuynge the sacraments / for he had fasted the
vygylles of the glorious vyrgyn Marye. Cxx. I Fo. CCliiii That a thief broken
might not deye with out confession for he had fasted ye vygylles of our lady.
Cxx. K Fo. CCliiii Of a monk dyspencer yt was drunk to whom the ennemy
appeared for to sle him and the integrate vyrgyn Mary did save him. Cxxi. A Fo.
CCliiii That our lady delyuerd a lecherous clerk from dampnacyon. Cxxi Fo.
CClv That the glorious vyrgyn Mary and saint Peter delivered a monk from
dampnacyon. Cxxi. C Fo. CClv Of some monks the which qrake their scylence.
Cxxi. D Fo. CClv Of him ye which brake the arms of ye child of the vyrgyn
Mary yt was choked of the devil. Cxxi. E Fo. CClv Of a knight with one eye yt
was illumyned for that / yt he smote a Jew yt had blasphemed ye vyrgyn Marye.
lxii. H Fo. Cli That the vyrgyn Mary was mean for Theophyle to have pardon and
salvation of that yt he had renounced god and the said vyrgyn Marye. lviii. B
Fo. Cxliii Of them the which slew a man in the church of yt vyrgyn Marye
the which had terryble punycyon. lxxix. B Fo. Clxix That a woman yt deyed in
mortal sin was brought again in to her body for to do penance at the
request of the glorious vyrgyn Marye for that yt the said woman served her.
Cxxii. A Fo. CClv How as a man should have be sentenced and dampened he was
delyuerd at ye request of our lady and his soul was brought again to his
body. Cxxii. B Fo. CClv That a fair daughter pompeously clothed and weary of
dauncy^ge on a sunday was delivered from ye devil yt would have borne her away
for that / yt she called ye aid of the vyrgyn Marye. lxviii. C Fo. Clxi That
the vyrgyn Marye aided a friar yt was enflambed in hate against ye procurour of
the covent. Cxxii C Fo. CClv That the vyrgyn Mary vesyted and comforted a poor
woman at ye death and assured a deaken. Cv. A Fo. CCxxv That the vyrgyn marye
aided in the Judgment of a man that was merciful and voluptuous. Cxxii. D Fo.
CClvi Of a relygyous yt was at his death in Judgment before god / and our lady
and the saints aided him. Cxxii. E Fo. CClvi
Innocentia. Examples of innocent people.
Of a child innocent yt kept the order of myneurs relygyous and would take no
money he lived debonayrly and deyed in good confi^macyon. Cxxiii. A Fo. CClvi
Of a scoler innocent yt chased the devil from a maiden. Cxxiii. B Fo. CClvii
That a little innocent gate pardon of god for an appostate. Cxxiii. C Fo. CClvii
That the oraysons of children innocents is much worth for the deed bodies and
ye quycke. Cxxiii. D Fo. CClvii Of a child innocent yt touched an hot yren.
Cxxiii. E Fo. CClvii Of a woman aduoutresse yt bare an hot iron in her hand
without having ill after true confession. lxxxxii. K Fo. CCii That the devil
knew not the sins of a sy^neresse after true co^fessyon and said yt she was
a good woman. Cxxiii. F Fo. CClviii
Virtus. Examples of virtuous people.
Of the virtues of five holy devout freres. Cxxiiii. A Fo. CClvii That four
virtues were in four holy hermytes Cxxiiii. B Fo. CClix Of the excercytees of
five contemplatyf freres. Cxxiiii. C Fo. CClix Of ye virtue of.iiii. freres.
lii. g Fo. Cxxx Of four other sorts of virtuous people. lii. H Fo. Cxxx Of a
relygyous obedyent and of an abstynent. lii. I Fo. Cxxx That a man and his wife
were se^blable in merytes unto saint Pafuncius the holy fader. Cxxiiii. D Fo.
CClix That a mynstrell was like in merit to saint Pafuncius. Cxxiiii. E Fo.
CClix That a provost and his wife were semblables to a^ hermyte. Cxxiiii. F Fo.
CClx Examples of people obedyentes. li. A / b c / d / e / f. etc. Fo. Cxxvii
Examples of people charitables. lxxv. A b / c. etc. Fo. Clxxi Examples of
people steadfast in and ferme in the faith. lxi. A / b. Fo. Cxlviii Example of
a nonne the which feigned to be a fool. lxi. C Fo. Cxlviii Of a relygyous yt
ceased not to be in ye orayson of the psalmody. lxvi. F Fo. Cxlviii Of
vyrgynyte and chastyte. lxxxxiiii. a / b / c. Fo. CCiiii. Et. xxxviii. C. Fo.
lxxxxi Of a friar yt wanne.vii. crowns in one night to resyst in his thought
to ye deuylles temptacyon. Cii. A Fo. CCxvi Of a relygyous the which bywrapped
his hands to the end yt he ne should touch his mother. xxxvii. F Fo. lxxxx
Examples of the death of virtuous people. Ciii. a / b / c. etc. Fo. CCxxiiii
That a bishop was.xl. years doing penance and ne ete but fruit. lviii. d
Fo. cxliii Of the fastings and abstynences of saint Germayne. Cxxiiii. G Fo.
CClx Of the austeryte of life of two holy women. Cxxiiii. H / I / Fo. CClxi Of
a monk unto whom god sent every day of good breed / and after that he had
committed sin he lost the said good breed. Ci. A Fo. CCxv
Another table.

HEre follows a table for to fy^de lightly in general all the matters whereof
the examples of this book treats and speaks. And first Of obedyence. li. A
Fo. Cxxvii Of inobedyence. liiii. A Fo. Cxxx To here gods word. lv. A F^.
Cxxxvi


Primum preceptum exempla.
Examples of ydolatry. lvii. A Fo. Cxl Of apostasye. lviii. A Fo. Cxlii Of
heretykes. lix. A Fo. Cxliiii Of people out of ye faith. lx. A Fo. Cxlv Of
people in the faith. lxi. A Fo. Cxlviii Of pride. Que^ an^ in pri^o precepto
per tabula^. Of humilyte against pride. lxi. C Fo. cxlviii
Secundum preceptum exempla.
Examples of blaspheme. lxii. A. Fo. Cxlix Of periuryes. lxiii. A Fo. Cli Of
vows. lxiii. D Fo. Clii
Tertium preceptum exempla.
Examples of them yt has wrought on ye holy days. lxiiii. A Fo. Cliiii Of
service. lxv. A Fo. Clvi To sleep in ye service. lxvi. A Fo. Clviii Of slouthe.
Quere i^ tercio precepto per tabula^ Of orayson. lxvi. E Fo. Clviii Of fedy^ge
in service time. lxvii. A. Fo. clix To hunte on ye feestes. lxviii. A Fo. Clxi
To dance on ye feestes. lxviii. C Fo. Clxi To play on the feestes lxii. C /
G. Fo. Cl. Et. lxvii. D Fo. Clix. Et. lxiii. B Fo. Cli Of the church. lxix. A
Fo. Clxii Of sepultures. lxix. B Fo. Clxii
Quartum preceptum exempla.
Examples of children. lxx. A Fo. Clxiii Of correccyon. lxxii. A. Fo. Clxvii.
Et lxxi. G Fo. Clxvi Of charity. lxxv. A Fo Clxxi
Quintum preceptum exempla.
Examples of homycyde that is unjustly done. lxvi. A Fo. Clxxiiii Of homycide
doutful. lxxviii. A. Fo. clxxvii Of homycyde justly done. Cvi. c. Fo. ccxxvi Of
ire. lxxviii. D Fo. Clxxviii Of impacyence and pacyence. Que^ pertabula^. Of
hate. lxxix. A Fo. Clxxviii
Sextum preceptum exempla
Examples of theft. lxxx. A Fo. Clxxx Of sacrylege. lxxxii. A Fo. Clxxxiii Of
tithes. lxxxiii. A Fo. Clxxxv Of rapyne. Quere i^ sexto precepto per tabula^ Of
people to much holding and unmercifully. lxxxiiii. A Fo. Clxxxvi Of mercy.
Quere i^ sexto precepto per tabula^ Of symony. lxxxv. A Fo. Clxxxviii Of usury.
lxxxvi. A Fo. Clxxxxi Of restytucyon. lxxxviii. A Fo. Clxxxxiii Of
exco^munycacyo^. lxxxix. A. Fo. clxxxxiiii Of maledyccyon. Quere per tabulam.
Septimum preceptum exempla.
Examples of lechery. lxxxx. A. Fo. clxxxxvi Of defloracyon. lxxxxi. A. Fo.
Clxxxxviii Of ill counceyle. lxxxxi. F Fo. CC Of aduoutry. lxxxxii. A Fo. CC
Sin in marriage. lxxxxiii. A Fo. CCii Sacrylege as to lechery. lxxxxiii. d.
Fo. cciii Of chastyte. lxxxxiiii. A Fo. CCiiii Of sodomye. lxxxxv. A Fo. CCv
Octauum preceptum exempla.
Of falls witness. lxxxxvi. A Fo. CCvi Of periuryes. lxxxxvii. A Fo. CCvii Of
liars lxxxxviii. A Fo. CCix Of detractours. lxxxxviii. B Fo. CCix Of derysers.
lxvii. f. Fo. clx. and.lxx. c. Fo. clxiii Of ill spekers. lxxxxix. A Fo. CCx Of
ill herers. lxxxxix. I. L Fo. CCxii
Nonum preceptu^ exempla et decimu^.
Of ill thoughts. C. a / b / c. Fo. CCxiii Of good thoughts. Cii. a / b / c.
Fo. CCxvi
Penitentia.
Examples of penance. Quere per tabula^
Eucharistia.
Examples of the holy sacrament of the auter. Cii. D Fo. CCxvii
Perditio bonorum.
Examples that the sinners loses ye spyrytuall goods. Cii. Y Fo. CCxxiii
Finis iniquorum est pctm^
Examples that the mortal sins ben lines or bonds. Quere per tabulam.
Mors bonorum
Examples of the death of good and Just men. Ciii. A / b / c. Fo. CCxxiiii
Mors malorum
Examples of ye death of evil and unjust men. Cv. A Fo. CCxxviii
Iudicia dei.
Examples of the secret Iugementes of god. Cvi. A / b / Fo. CCxxvi
Iudicium
Examples of ye Judgment of every man and woman. Quere per tabulam.
Peni inferni.
Examples of the horrible pains yt ben in hell. Cvii. A Fo. CCxxx
Jesus.
Examples that this name Ihesus does many goodnesses. Cxii. a / b / c / d Fo.
CCxli
Natiuitas christi.
Examples of the natyuyte of our lord Ihesu christ. Cxiii. a / b / c / d Fo.
CCxliii
Passio christi.
Examples of ye passion of our lord Ihesu christ. Cxiiii. A / b / c. Fo.
CCxliiii
Signum crucis.
Examples of the signs and token of ye cross. Cxvi. A / b / c. Fo. CCxlvii
Aqua benedicta
Examples of the virtues of the holy water. Cxvii. A / b. Fo. CCxlix
Maria.
Examples of the most glorious vyrgin Marye Cxviii. A / b / c. Fo. CCl
Innocentia.
Examples of people symples and innocents. Cxxiii. A / b. Fo. CClvi
Virtus
Examples of people virtuous. Quere ibi ante per tabulam. Examples that a man
should do of good deeds in his life without abiding his parents after his death.
lxxii. a / b / c / d / e / f. Fo. Clxvii
Finis.
The perambule and dyuysyon of this book.
Here begins the perambule and dyuysion of this present book called the
flower of the commandments of god.


GOd the fader / the sone / and the holy ghost ye which is one seul god in
trynyte whom it will like to give unto us, his love / his grace and his mercy.
And ye it would please hy^ to enlumyne the hertes and the thoughts of sinners
the which wyllen repent them / correct / and amend. And who so shall study
this book (ye which is named the flower of the commandments of god) / for
that it has been gadered among the books as the fair vyolettes ben gadered
among the rude and vile herbs through out ye feldes: in likewise as a man may
se by auctorytees and holy scryptures alleged and assembled for to know that /
that god wylleth and commands to the end for to go in to life eternal. And
in likewise as the honey flies gadren the swetenes of the little flowers for to
make ye wax or honey / or in likewise as men gadren the cream and the swetenes
of the milk for to have the fat and butter for to nourysshe ye body. Even so
has been gadered the flowers and swetnesses of the holy scryptures for to
nourysshe spyrytually the souls with virtues and goods spyrytualles in
accomplysshynge ye will of god for to have salvation / and to escape
dampnacyon. This book treats pryncypally three things. The first declares
that all the ten commandments and all the holy scryptures tenden and hangen
to love god and his neighbor / and how god defends in these two things
here all sin / and all evil words / thoughts / and operacyons / and he
commands al virtues and goods espyritualles. The second thing whereof this
book treats is of the.x. commandments / the which ben declared one after
another by chapitres as they ben here before in the table. The third declares
some things moeuynge for to keep the commandments of god / and many things
noysauntes unto them the which breketh them. Moreover the condycyons of the
pilgrim of paradyse / and of the reward eternal of them the which well or
ill have accomplysshed these commandments. Creatures reasonable study ye
this book / for it is much profitable unto all people as well clerks as
seculyers / and plant ye and rote the commandments in your hertes as if
they were written in a book and god shall give unto you paradyse the which is a
place replenysshed with Joys more sweet than any milk or honey Legitur in
libri moysi. Audi israel precepta domini et eain cord quasi in libro scribe /
et dabo tibi terram effluentem lac et mel. etc.

B. Here follows the first chapter the which treats in general that it is
commanded to love god with all his heart / and his neighbor as himself. i. c.
IF thou wylt do thy salvation benygnely thou shall obey unto god and unto his
commandments / as here after thou shall here. God gives unto the two
commandments so generalles that they comprehend under them all that / yt
thou sholdest do and fle for thy salvation. In likewise as sayen ye holy
scryptures in many places. Vn^ Mathei.xxii. Marci.xii. Luce.x. Et
deuteronomii.vi. Diliges dominum deum tuu^ ex toto cord tuo / et ex tota anima
tua / et ex tota me^te tua / and ex tota virtute tua / and hoc estmaximum
primum mandatum. Secundu^ autem simile est huic. Diliges proximum tuum sicut
teipsum. In hus duobus mandatis vniuersa lex pendet et prophet. That is to
say. It is commanded the that thou love thy lord god with all thy heart /
with all thy soul / with all thy thought / and with al thy strength / that is to
understand more than all things / and above al things This here is the
gretest commandment and the first. For it is of the dyleccyon unto god the
which comprehends the three first commandments: and the three virtues
theologalles / the which ben faith / hope / and charity The second
commandment is semblable unto that / for is dylection the which gives them
charge that thou love thy neighbor as thy self. This dyleccyon comprehends
under it the seven last commandments / all ye works of mercy / and the
four virtues cardynalles the which ben Prudence / attempraunce / Justice /
and force. In these two commau^dements before said to love god and his
neighbor all the law hangs and ye prophets. For to understand right
shortly all the faith / all the.x. commandments of god / and all the
scryptures of ye ancient testament and of the new / and all that / that the
prophets and saints of paradyse has spoken unto us and written for the health
of our souls / it is a thing certain that all tends and hangs in ye end
and co^clusyon for to love god and his neighbor as it is said. Saint Poule
says ad romanos.xiii. Dilectio proximi malum non operatur / plenitudo legis
est dilectio. The dylecco^n of thy neighbor does none ill / the fulfyllynge
of the law is dyleccyon. And therefore retain well in thy mind these two
commandments and them accomplysshe from point to point / in operacyon / in
word / and in thought / and thou shalt do none ill / but thou shall
accomplysshe all goodness / and thou shall be saved.

C. The second chapter assygneth.v. reasons wherefore a man should love god with
all his heart above all things.
IT is written in the.xiiii. chapter of the gospelles of saint John yt our
savior and redemptour Ihesus said unto his dysciples Qui habz mandata mea and
seruat ea^le est qui diligit me. That is to say after the exposytoure. He the
which has my commandments in the ere to here them and in the heart for to
think them / and in the mouth for to teache them / and in the mind and
volunte to keep them and to accomplysshe in operacion / he it is which loves
me. Many (...) should moeue us to love god with all our hertes and obey unto his
commandments more sooner tha^ to all things. D. First it is good reason to
love him with all our heart for the goodness infynyte the which is in him and
the which of him proceeds / the which is so great that it is innombrable.
That is say that he has so many that a man can find the end. Also it is
good reason to love him / for he has loved us more than all ye creatures that
he has made and create in this world / the which he has all create for to
serve us. When god made and create the heaven and the earth / the son and the
moon / the sterres / the fyrmament: the elements / and all the beestes each
of them in his kind / and all the birds every of the^ in his gree / he them
made for his honor and for to serve us and to govern / and without them wene
may live. Albeit of all the creatures that he has create in this world hene
has made none unto his semblau^ce and unto his image to be in his company
eternally but man and woman and the aungelles. And for as much as he has
loved us more than all the operacyons that he has create and for the goodness
infynytethe which is in hy^ as it is said it is good reason that we love him
above all things with all our thought Example. We read that the son of a
rich man loved in his youth the vanytees of the world. He loved first a
dog much curyously the which deyed. Secondly he loved right much an hawk
that he bare upon his fyst / and she deyed. Thyrdly he loved a little horse ye
which lept and turned honestly the which also deyed / and he was much wroth
and showed it to his mother saying. Alas my dog / my hawk / and my horse that I
did love so much ben deed / whom may I more love that I ne shall lose that
love / and his mother said unto him. Mine own dear child love god and thou ne
shall lose that love go in to the church and put the in orayson and pray god
that he give unto the his love and his grace. He was obedyent / and as he
perseuered in orayson he herd preche the gospel. Mathei.xix. Qui relinquit
domum vel fratres vel sorores aut patre^ aut matrem aut vxorem aut filios aut
agros propter nomen meum centuplum accipiet et vitam eternam possidebit. He
that leueth all his parents and friends and all his possessions for the love
of god / he shall have an hundred double of retrybucyon and shall possede the
life eternal. Than ye sone came unto his mother and said that he would leave her
and go in to relygion for to love god parfytely / for the said gospel that he
had herd preche / and his modersayd unto him. It is that thing that I
desired / for this world ne is but vanyte and full of decepcyon / love god
therefore parfytely. Than the child was relygyous and parfyte in holy life. E.
Secondly we shall love god with all our heart and thought more than all the
world / and above ye gold and the silver and all the goods the which ben in
the world. That is to say to love more sooner to lose the gods temporalles of
this world than to break one of the commandments of god / and the reason is
right euydent / for a man should love hy^ more that gives than the thing
given. God the which is full of bounte infynyte us has given generally and
partyculerly and unto every of us the goods of grace / of nature / and of
fortune that we have / and all the goods proceeds of him / and estudy well the
scryptures in the chapytres the which folowen and thou shall find that it is
so. Vnde legitur Mathei.xxv. Dominus vocauit seruos suos et tradidit illis bona
sua: et vni dedit quinque talenta: alii autem duo: alii vere vnum vnicuique
secundum propriam virtutem That is to say yt the lord calls his servants
and gives unto them his goods / and gives five talentes unto one / unto an
other twain / unto an other one / unto every of them after his virtue. By the
lord is understand god that gives unto his servants / that is that he
gives unto every of us his goods unto the one more than unto an other after
his will and after the faculte of every of them. Et legitur ad Ephesi. iiii.
Vnicuique nostrum data est gratia secundum mensuram donationis xprei. Grace is
given unto every of us after the measure of the gift of Ihesu christ. Et legitur
ad roma.xii. Habentes donationes secundum gratiam que data est vobis
differentes sieve propheticam secundum rationem fidei sieve ministerium i^
ministrando. Et legitur.i. ad Corin. xii. Vuicuique autem datur manifestatio
spiritus ad vtilitatem / alii datur sermo sapientie / alii sermo scie^tie /
alii fides alii gratia sanitatum / alii operatio virtutum, etc. Manyfestacyon
of spyryte is given unto every man unto his vtylyte / the word of wisdom is
given unto one / and unto another the word of conning / unto another faith /
unto another grace of health / and unto another operacyon of virtue. Et David
in psalm. Cantabo domino qui bona tribuit michi. I shall sing unto the lord
the which gives me of his goods. Et Job. i. ca. Si bona suscipimus de manu
domini / maia autem quare no^ suscipiamus. If we have received the goods of
the hand of god wherefore may we not in likewise take ye euylles. And sith that
it appears that god has given us all the goods that we have. It is good
reason yt we love him more than these goods and above them. That is to say to
those more sooner to lose all the goods of the world than to break one of ye
commandments o^ god and to lose his love. For it is written John.xiiii. Si
quis diligit me sermonem meum seruabit. Siquitur. Qui non dilig^ me sermones
meos non seruat. That is to say. Who so loves me keeps my word and he that
loves me not keeps not my words. Verba gratia. If thou were in turkey and
that men set before the an. C. busshels of gold on the one side / and the
ydolles on the other and yt the king of turkey said unto the. I shall give unto
the all this gold and retain the to be the first of my palace and do
sacryfyce unto ye ydolles / thou sholdest love god above the gold and honor
of ye world. For it is written.i. corin. vi. Neque fornicarii neque ydollis
serue^tes regnu^ m^um possidebu^t. Also who should lay an. C crowns in thy
hand for to make a false oath in Judgment or to work one day of a feast
commanded / or for to sle a man unjustly / thou sholdest love god and thy
neighbor better than the gold and the silver / and rather wyn^e nothing than
to break his commandment. It written Job. xv. Manete in dilectione mea si
precepta measeruaueritis manebitis in dilectione mea. Dwell ye in my dyleccyon
/ if ye have kept my commandments ye shall dwell in my deleccyon. Also if
thou know well yt mean to stele the treasoure of thy neighbor or to have
his heritage iniustly / it is defended / take it not upon pain of dampnacyon
and to lose paradyse. Vnde.i. corint. vi. Neque fures neque auari regnu^ dei
possidebunt. Also who so should put five hundred crowns in the hand of a
woman for to have her company she should refuse them upon pain of dampnaco^n
and to lose paradyse. For to make short tale better it is to obey god and to
lose all the goods of ye world than to da^pne his soul. For if any love the
goods more than god: and to leave to obey unto god for to have the goods he
by^deth himself unto dampnacyon. Example of a rich man the which loved to
much the world and brye fly he fell in to hell and all his goods. It is
written in the life of saint Ambrose yt as he yode on a time unto Rome he came
to lodge in the town of tuscie wherein was a rich man: and when he saw so
much of goods and of servants he axed the said man of his estate. The man
answered I am happy and glorious in all manners. I habounde in rychesses. I have
great company of servants / all yt ever I desired is well comen to me / ne
there came never unto me aduersyte. When saint Ambrose herd these words he
was much abashed and said unto those that were of his company. Arise and fle
we for god is not in this place / haste you children and make none abiding
lest the vengeance comprehend us / and that they ne wrappe us in their sins
/ and when they were a little thens ye earth opened suddenly and swalowed the
said rich man and all his goods and those things which unto hy^ apperteyned
sanke into hell in such manner that there ne abode no thing apparaunt. Another
example how the cursed rich man the which was clothed with purple and lived
delycatyuely is buried in hell. Quere.lxxxiiii. A. Another example of a man the
which gave himself unto the devil to the end that he should enryche him / and
the devil gave to him treasours and baptized him in the name of all the
deuilles.lx. Another example of a rich usurer the which loved his gods more
than god of whom he demanded aid at his death.lxxxvi. f. Another example of
an usurer the which loved to much his goods commanded his soul unto the
devil at his death / after yt he might no more possede them.lxxxvi. g. F.
Thyrdly we should love god with all our heart more than our faders and moders and
above all our children / cosyns / parents and friends / and the reason is
good. For god is our pry^cipal fader celestyall the which has made us and
create unto his image and unto his symylytude. In like wise as it is written
Genesis nono. Ad ymaginem quippe dei factus est homo. And of as much as ye
soul that he has create is more dygne than the body / of as much more we
should love god and obey unto his commandment more sooner than unto our fader
carnal. Saint barnarde says. Ecce domine quia me fecisti debeo me amori tuo
totum. Thou lord by cause thou have made me and create I ought to give all in
thy love. And it is written eccle. xxxvii. de David. De om^i cord suo laudauit
deum et dilexit dominum qui fecit illum. David praised god withal his heart
and loved his lord the which has created him. We require god every day our
fader in saying ye pater noster. Pater noster qui es i^ celis. Of good right
we call him our fader in as much as he has us made and created / and for as
much as he nouryssheth us with his goods that he makes to grow. For he is a
good fader ye nouryssheth / and in as much as we hope to possede his heritage
that is paradyse as his propre children. For these things here and many other
we should love god above our pare^tes. We should love our faders carnalles
naturally and by the commandment of god / but we should love god above them.
Vnde Augusti. Diligendus est genitor / sed prepone^dus est creator. Example of
saint Barbara the which loved god more than her fader Diascorus ye whi would
have her ydolatre / she chose more sooner to lose ye love of her said fader and
all her worldly goods and honors / and that her body were beten / cut / and
put unto death than (...) as commaundemen^ (...) Accu^. (...). I^ (...) man
(...) sy^^^^^ mortally and shall go unto dampnacyon. Vnd^^g^ur in (...) distin^
(...). St^^^m eni^u^ ^^^s f^^ capax precep^ de^^^^tur ad ^^^s (...) no^^^am et
obseruat^one^. I^ that ^^ge that a ^^^de is capable of ye commandment of god
it is commaunde^ him yt he keep it. And if the said children were not so wise
that they might ^nowe that they offend and that they did the said theft in
obeyenge unto their fader carnal they do not syn^e mortally but their said
fader shall bear the syn^e and punycyon. Example that a man should love god
more than his children and other parents. Quere in the examplary of ye
commandments.lxx ^a. Another example in Abraham the which loved well his
sone Ysaac / but he loved god above him in likewise as it appeared when god
commanded him for to do sacryfyce. Quere in the examplary of the
commandments.li. a (...). Another (...) and (...) good. And therefore they go
unto dampnacyon.

E. Fourthly we should love goo with (...) more than our own bodies and (...)
him and unto his commaundmentes more sooner than unto our own (...) The reason
is good for that that (...)? (...) is full of ^ou^^^ infynyte has (...) ^od
us more than his own body. For (...) ^^dured that his body has be beter
crucyfyed and put (...) does for to redem^ us from holle where all we defended
should have descended by ye sin of Adam or form fader. If thou he wylt
believe that (...) it true by simple word or speech yet stud^ the scryptures in
the chapyttes ye which folowen It is written.i. pe^tri.i. cap. No^er
corruptionibus au^o vel argento rede^p^ ^^^s de vana vestra co^uersatione
pater^^ tradi^ionis sed pre^^o so sanguine ag^^^^ macu^an christ. That is to
say. Ye be redeemed from your vain conuersacyon of the tradiccyon paternall
not of things corruptybles as gold and silver but by the precious blood of
the lamb Ihesu christ immaculate. Et legitur.i. petri.iii. Christus semel pro
peccaris nostris morruus est ^^stus pro frustus vt nos offerret deo. That is to
say, Ihesu Christ is deed one time for our sins the Just for the unjust to
then de that he offer us unto god. Et legitur ad Gallarhas.iii. Christus nos
redemit. Ihesu christ has redeemed us. Et Barnardus dicit. Ecce domine quia
redemisti me d^beo me amori tuo totum et tantum debeo plusquam qu a^to tu mayor
es me pro quo de disti teipsu^. My lord for that / yt thou have redeemed me I
should give me all in to thy love / and I should love the more than my self of
as much as thou art greter than I for whom thou haste given thy self. Sith
it is so that god has loved us more than himself / it is good reason that we
love him better than our self as it is said. Example in the appostles the
which has loved god more than their own bodies / for some has endured for
to be flayne / as saint Barthylmewe / some other to be heeded as saint Poule /
the other crucified as saint Peter / and saint Andrewe. And for all the pains
that the tyrauntes might do unto them theyne left the love and ye
commandment of god. Vnde ad to.viii. Quis separabit nos a charitate christi
tribulatio / an angustia / an persecutio / an fames / an nuditas / an periculum
/ an gladius Saint Poule says what is it that may separe us from the love and
charity of god. Shall it be trybulacyon / anguysshe / persecucyon / or honger.
etc. I am certain that death / ne life / ne deuylles / ne sygnouryes ne may
depart us from the love of god. And it is written.i. ad cori^t. xvi. how saint
Poule says. Who so loves not Ihesu christ be he cursed. Si quis non amat
cristu^ anathema sit. Also he says in an other epistle that god has
prepayred unto the^ great reward the which loves him. Vnde.ii. ad corin. ii.
cap. Quod oculus non vidit nec aures audiuit nec i^ cor hominis asce^dit que
preparauit deus dilige^tibus se. This auctoryte is declared toward the end of
this treatise.xlvii. a. Example we read that the heart of a vyrgyn was cut in
her body for the great love that she had unto god. Quere in the examplary at
the nombre.lxxv. e. Another example that Susanne loved better to be slain and
dyffamed than to break the commandment of god when the two harlottes did say
unto her Of two things choice which thou wylt either that thou consent that
we have thy company at our pleasure / or that we make the to be stoned and put
to death. Quere.lxxxxvi. c. Another example written in ye life of faders of a
good young man ye which was bound all naked in a fair bed and there was
put unto him a fair woman impudyke all naked for to make him to do sin with
her / but for to resyste unto the sin and to keep the love of god and to obey
unto his commandment he bote and ete his own tongue and spette ye blood in
the vysage of the said harlot the which fled of horror. Example that mary
magdaleyne loved much god / wherefore god pardoned her all her sins. Vnde
Luce.vii. Remittuntur ei peccata multa quoniam diliexit multum. Another example
of a duchess the which loved over much her body and lived voluptuously and
she did stynke. The dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye that a certain duke
had a wife the which lived so tenderly and so dylycatyuely that she dysdeyned
to be bayned in comune waters of ryuers and fountaynes / but her servants
gadered the dew of the sky and prepayred unto to her a bayne. Her meets and
drynkes were so delycyously dressed and made that marvel it was. Her bed
also smelled odoryferously and sweet / and as she lived so / by ye Judgment of
god she was stryken with so great stynche in her living days that none ne
might abide the foul air of her Al her gentylmen and servants left her
except one chamberere or maiden only / that served her the which ne might
pass by her without having the air of some spyces well smelling / and also
as in reny^ge admynystred unto her / and in such stynke she deyed. H. Fyfthly
we should love god with all our heart / and put our trust and hope in him more
sooner and above all ye kings / dukes / earls / lords / and other men of the
world / and the reason is euydent / for there ne is in all the world so
great a lord that may defend us at the death from our enmyes and keep us from
dampnacyon and give to us paradyse / there ne is none alonely but god the
which is replenisshed with goodness infynyte. And therefore the psalmyst says.
Bonum est confidere in domino quam co^fidere in homine. Better thing it is to
put confydence in god than too put confydence in man. Iteru^ pres. Bonu^ est
sperare in domino quam sperare in principibus. Better it is to trust in god
tha^ to trust in princes. Example. Saint barbara the which put her love / her
affyau^ce and her esperaunce in god / and not unto the lords temporal she was
comforted at her death of god / and the aungelles baren her soul in to
paradyse / and her fader Dyascorus the which beheeded her was brent with fire
celestyal and ye deuylles bare his soul in to hell / his rychesses ne his
sygnouryes aided him not at need. So it is better to put co^fydence in god than
in princes and men in whom is no health. Vnde David in psalm. Nolite confidere
in principibus nec i^ filiis hominum / in quibus non est salus. And ye prophet
Iheremye says that the man is cursed the which puts his trust in men and
puts his flesh / his arm / and his heart / and departs himself from
god. Vnde Iheremye.xvii. Maledictus est homo qui confidit in homine / and ponit
carnem brachium suum and a domino recedit cor eius. Helyodorus was punysshed of
punycyon dyuyne for that / that he obeyed unto king Scelenius more sooner than
unto god wha^ he yode to take the treasours of ye church of Jerusalem.
Quere.lxxxii. b. Another example how king Ezechyas sent to seek counceyle of
his sekenes unto belzabub and he deyed myscheuously / and his messageres were
brent with fire celestyall. Quere.ix. g. For to know the deference when love
is good or ylle / or when it is mortal sin or venyall thou shalt find it
in the ix. commandment. Quere.xlii. c. Example in Moses ye which loved god
parfytely and obeyed unto his commandments more sooner and above the will of
king Pharaon / and therefore god loved him so much that he spoke unto him face
to face. In likewise as it is written in the three and thyrty chapter of Exodi.

A. How the commandment of god co^prehendeth under it the three first
commandments / and the three virtues theologalles / the which ben faith /
hope / and charity.ii.
IT is written in the.xxiiii. chapter of the gospelles of saint Johan that our
lord said unto his dyscyples. Si diligitis me mandata mea seruate. If ye love
me keep my commandments. If thou love god with all thyn heart above all
things thou shalt believe in him / thou shall worship him and shalt give
him honor. the which is due unto him / not unto ydolles / ne unto things
create / for it is unto the creator unto whom such honor is due. Thus thou
shalt accomplysshe the first commandment of our lord the which is written
Exodi viscesimo. Non assumes nomen dei tui in vanum. More over if thou love thy
lord god above al things thou shalt sanctyfye / honor / and keep the
feestes commanded. And in so doing thou shalt fulfill and totally
accomplysshe the third commandment of god the which is written Exo. xx.
Sabbata sanctifices. And therefore the dyleccyo^ of god comprehends the three
first commandments the which us ordeyneth well toward the blyssed trynyte.
The first us ordeyneth anenst the puissaunce of god the fader the which is of
the mageste incomprehensyble. The second anenst god the sone the which is
veryte and wysdom sovereign. The third anenst god the holy ghost the which is
bounte and love infynyte. If we ben well ordained anenst god the fader / the
sone / and the holy ghost the which is one only god in trynyte we shall love
him above all things / and we shall accomplysshe the three first
commandments the which tends unto his dyleccyon as it is said. Also the
dyleccyon of god comprehends the three dyuyne virtues theologalles the which
ben faith / hope / and charity with their branches and dependau^ces. They ben
said dyuynes for that / that they do ordeyne dyuynely the heart of man anenst
god. Saint Austyn says in eucheridon. Fide / spe / et caritate colitur optime
deus. God is right well honored by faith / hope / and charity. Faith keeps
soueraynly veryte. Hope sovereign hyghnes / and Charity sovereign love. And it
is said charity of chere / unity / and love in god. We se god but by faith /
and by faith we believe in him and love him / and we keep his first
commandment ye which is. Vnu^ credo de. Also we serve god to have the good
to come / and therefore we put our trust in him / and we abstain us to swear by
him vaynly / and so we keep ye second commandment. Ne iures va^a per ipsum.
Also by charity / faith / and hope we love / serve / and honor god / and we
keep ye third commandment. Sabbata sanctifices. Also we love god for three
things. The first is for the great and infynyte goodness the which we have
herd say the which is in him and proceeds of him / and thereto we put faith.
The second is for the great good that we hope to have of him after our death.
The third is for the great goodness that he has done to us in our creacyon and
redempcyon / and that he does cotydyally to us of goods that he makes to
increase / and therefore we put our charity within him. By these three things we
have faith / hope / and charity with god and love him with all heart above all
things. The faith is the foundement of all virtues / for without faith it is
impossyble to please god. Vn^ paulus ad hebreos.xi. Sine fide impossible est
placere deo. B. Also we ne may be saved by good operacions without having
faith Vnde ad galath. ii. No^ iustificatur homo ex operibus legis / nisi per
fidem jesus xprei. Et ad gallat. iii. Iustus ex fide viuit. The Just man lives
by faith. Also for to believe in god after the faith and by baptym man is
saved / and by defaute of faith and baptym man is dampened. Vn^ Marci. xvi. Qui
crediderit et baptizatus fuerit saluus erit / qui vero non crediderit
condempnabitur. How men ought to believe in god and in the artycles of the
faith it is written after in the first commandment / of faith comes
obedyence / good desire / and innocence / relygyon / mundycyte / confyaunce /
and chastyte.C. Also ye sinners ne may be saved without having esperaunce or
hope that god unto them pardons their sins after the article of the faith
ye which is. Remissionem peccatorum / and therefore they should put their hope
in god. Cain and Judas ben dampened by defaute of hope. Also we should hope yt
god shall deliver us from our enmyes vysybles and inuysybles in likewise he did
our forne faders. Vn^ pres In te sperauerunt patres nostri sperauerunt et
liberasti eos. Iteru^pres. Quoniam in me sperant liberabo eum: protegam eu^
quoniam cognouit nomen meum. He has trusted in me I shall deliver him / for he
has known my name. Example when Job was tourmented he said that if god would
sle him yet would he put his trust in him. Vnde Job.xiii. Example that Dauyd
had good hope when in the name of god he slew ye proud puyssaunt man
phylystyen. Quere.lxxviii. Also we should have hope that god shall give unto us
beatytude and life eternal. Vnde pres. Beat omnes qui sperant in te domine.
Esperaunce is a fair virtue of the Which comes pacyence / moderaunce /
contrycyon / co^fessyon / joy espyrytuall / and contemplacyon. D. Also without
having charity we ne may be saved / in likewise as saint poule says.i. ad
Corinthios.xiii. Sili^guis hominum loquar and angelorum: caritatem autem non
habuero factus sum sicut es sona^s aut cimbalum timiens. This matter of charity
is written here after.iiii. ca. Of charity proceeds love / pity / grace / peace
benygnyte / and debonayrte. Example of charity. Quere.lxxv. A.

E. Here follows the commandment to love thy neighbor.ii.
IT is written in ye gospel of saint Johan that our lord said unto his
dyscyples. I give unto you a commandment of new / that is that ye love other
in likewise as I have loved you / all men shall know in that thing that ye be
my dyscyples / if ye have dyleccyon togyders. Vnde John.xiii. Mandatum nouum do
vobis vt diligatis inuicem sicut dilexi vos / i^ hoc cognoscent omnes quia
discipuli mei estis si dilectionem habueritis ad inuicem. Also the gospel says
that to love his neighbor as himself is more greter things than sacryfyces.
Vnde Marci.xii. Diligere proximum tanquam seipsum maius est omnibus
olocaustimatibus et seruictis. For to have paradyse and to escape the pains of
hell it is requysyte that thou obey unto god / ye which commands ye thou
love thy neighbor. When a king temporal makes to proclaim any thing within
his realm his subgectes thereto obeys of dread to have damage. And god the
which is king of kings made to preche throughout al ye world that we should
love each other upon pain of dampnacyon and to lose paradyse. It is written
Iohannis.xv. Hec man do vobis vt diligatis inuicem. Et legitur Mathei.xix. Si
vis ad vitam ingredi serua mandata. If thou wylt enter in to the life eternal
keep the commandments If thou dread the furour of a king temporal ye
which is transytory / by a more greater reason thou ought to dread ye
furour of god ye which may send the in to damnacyon eternal. F. Many things
ought to moeue us to love our neighbor. The first the which is most
pryncypal and fynall is for to obey unto god / the which commands it us.
When a good fader gooth out of the town he commands unto his children and
unto his servants yt they love each other. In likewise did our lord Ihesus
before yt he was crucyfyed / and when he shall come to the Judgment the matter
shall be dyscuted of those the which have done ill unto their neighbors / and
shall be sent in to the fire of hell if they be found i^penytents. Vnd
Athanasius. Q^^mala egeru^t ibunt in igne^ eternum. The second thing yt should
move us to love our neighbor is the fraternity natural tha^ ought to be
between us in as much as we ben descended of one fader and or one mother / that
is of Adam and Eve and that naturally the generacyon proceeds the one of ye
other / so nature moeueth us to love each other. The third thing is the
fraternity espyrytuall the which is between us in as much as we ben broders
and systers crystyens baptized of one baptym in one god only. The.iiii. is in
as much as we ben se^blables the one unto the other / made and create unto the
image of god. Vnde. genesis.ix. Ad ymaginem quippe dei factus est homo. Also
the dombe beestes loves their semblables. Vnde eccl. asti.xiii. Omne animal
diligit simile sibi. Also ye birds of one self semblaunce slyeth / eteth /
and keeps company togyders / as pygeo^s / sparowes cranes. etc. Vide
eccle.xxvii. Volitalia ad sibi similia conueniunt. Sith that these bestes
irreasonables loves each other by mote strong reason we should love each other
the which ben reasonables. Three things pleased unto the sage Solomon ye
which ben approved before god and man / that is concordau^ce between bredren
and friends / love between neighbors / and comentement in mar^age / that is to
understand the man and the woman. Vnde eccle. xxv. In tribus beneplacitum est
spiritui meoque sunt probata coram deo et hominibus concordia fratrum / amor
proximorum / viret mulier sibi consentientes. The.v. thing ye which should
moeue us for to love our neighbor is that we entende to go together in to
paradyse / and thither to come there to enjoy us. Vnde scriptura. Proximum
diligimus vt cum ipso curramus et cu^ipreo ad gloriam perueniamus. Et ambrosius
dicit. Sicut sine via nullus peruerut quo tendit ita sine caritate que dicitur
via non possimus recte ire. In likewise without love and charity we ne may goo
right in to paradyse. Also the aungelles loves us and keeps for to obey unto
the commandments of god / and to the end that we may come in to paradyse with
them / and that we may enjoy us togyders. And therefore we should love each
other and that love should not be in syn^e in likewise as it is written.i. ad
corin.xiii. Dilectio proximi malum no^ operatur. The dyleccion of thy neighbor
ne does none harm.

G. To love his neighbor as himself comprehends the seven works of mercy /
the.vii. last commandments / and the.iiii. virtues cardynals.ii.
IT is written in the.xxii. chapter of the gospel of saint Mathewe and in
the.xiii chapter of ye epystles of saint Poule unto the Romans. Diliges
proximum tuum sicut teipsum. H. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. To
love his neighbor as himself is understand and expounded in two manners. The
first is. All the good that thou would ye men should do to the as well unto
the body as unto ye soul if thou had necestyte) thou should do it to thy
neighbor if he had necessyte Vnde Mathei.vi. Omnia quecu^que vultis vt faciant
vobis homines and vos facite illis hec est enim lex et prophet. That is to
understand. If yt thou had honger and thyrste thou would well that men
should give unto the to drink and meet to ete. Or if thou were seek or sore
thou would well be vysyted. And if thou had not herborowe nor lodging as
the poor pilgrims thou would well that men should harborowe and lodge the.
Or if ye thou were a prisoner thou would be redeemed. And if thou were naked
thou would be clothed. Or also if you were deed you would be buried. Do in
likewise to thy neybour if he have necessyte as you would he did unto them
accomplysshynge the works of mercy the which ben corporelles / and well shall
come unto the. Example of a man the which was drouned in the accomplysshynge
the works of mercy and his soul went unto heaven before that his body was
cold.lv. B. Another example how freres gave a cluster of grapes and sent it
unto ye most of debilyte and weykenes.lxxv. A. Other example that a man should
do of good whiles that he lives without abiding unto his heriteres.lxxii. c.
d. e. f. Also if thou had necessyte of counceyle espyrytually or of
conforte / or to be chastysed and taught / or that men should pardon the thy
defautes / or that men pray for the or supporte the in thy perfeccyons. In the
things before said thou would have aid and socoures in thy necessyte. Do
thou in likewise to thy neighbor in his necessyte and thou shalt love him as
thy self / and thou shalt accomplysshe the works of mercy as he did ye
which drew again his brother the which fell into fornycacion. quere.lxxv. f.
Also you shall acco^plysshe the fourth commandment the which is written. exodi
xx. Honora patrem tuum and matrem tua^. I. The second exposycyon to love thy
neighbor as thy self is such. All the ill that thou would that men ne
should do unto the (as well unto body as unto soul) thou ne sholdest do it
unto thy neighbor Vnde thobie.iiii. Quod alio tibi odis fieri vide ne tu
aliquando alteri facias. Et Y so do. dicit. Quod non vis pati non facias quod
no^ vis tibi fieri alteri nunquam inferas. That is to understand. Thou would
not that men bette the: or slew the / ne do thou it to thy neighbor / and
thou shall accomplysshe the.v. commandment of god / ye which is written
Deutero. v. Nonoccides. Example that haynours that is hateful men slew a man
within the church were diuynely punysshed.lxxix. b. Another example of a man
the which bette his wife and she myscouraged herself and did much evil.lx.
I. Also thou would not yt men should stele thy goods / or rauysshe or take
it away by pyllage or otherwise. If you love thy neighbor ne take thou not his
goods iniustly / and thou shall accomplysshe the.vi. commandment the which
is written Exodi. xx. Non furtum facies. Also thou ne would that men should
commit lechery in thy wife / or with thy daughter If thou love thy neighbor as
thy self ne commyt thou it in his wife / and you shall accomplysshed the.vii.
commandment / ye which is written Exodi. xx. Non mechaberis. Also thou
would not that men should make the to lose thy goods or herytages / or thy
good reno^mee for false wytnes and report / ne do thou it to thy neighbor and
thou shall accomplysshe the.viii. commandment the which is written Deutero.
v. Non loquaris co^tra proximum tuum falsum testimoniu^. Example how three
persons the which forsware them for to impose a false crime unto a patryarche
were punysshed.lxxxxvi. A. Also thou would not that men should think ill
upon yt for to have thy goods iniustly / or for to deceive thy wife / ne do
thou it unto thy neighbor and love him as thy self / and thou shall
accomplysshe the two last commandments. Vnde deutero. v. Non concupisces
vxorem proximi tui. etc. Also if thou love thy neighbor thou ne shalt do him
none ill. Quia dilectio proximi malu^ non operatur. Vt dicitur ad romanos.xiii.
Two things ben requysyte for to keep the dylection of thy neighbor as says
Ysodore in his book of dyfference. Scz vt beneficii impensione foueatur et
nulla malicia ledetur. That is to say that a man do good unto his neighbor if
he have necessyte / and also that he hurt him not by any malice Do the things
beforesayd and thou shall accomplysshe the.vii. last commandments of god /
and the works of mercy ye which thou shalt find after in the nombre.xxiiii.
a. b. c.

K. Also for to love thy neighbor as thy self it behooves that thou have
prudence / attempraunce / justice / and force / they ben four virtues the
which ben said cardynalles for that / that they teache the man to govern him
in him self / and after his neighbor as ye pope governs holy church by the
counceyle of his cardynalles / and a man ne may love his neighbor without
these four virtues. For prudence keeps a man that he be not deceived of his
enemies by none engyn / and him counceyleth and ordeyneth that all that / that
he does and says be in the right line of reason after the ordenaunce of god
ye which all sees / iugeth / and knows. Also prudence counceyleth to weep
the sins committed and past / and that a man despise the prosperytees worldly
the which ben transytoryous / and that a man should coueyte to have the Joys
eternalles. Also prudence makes to ordeyne the things presents for to live
after god / and makes to provide for the things to come / and also to record
of the things past. Understand ye word of a wise poet the which says.
Prospice ve^tura / sic est prudens tua cura Cu^ quid vis agere / debes primo
bn^ videre An tibi conueniat / liceat simul vtile fiat. Om^a prude^ter / fac
finem cerne freque^ter Primo metire / que finis possit ante venire A prudent
man ought to be wyle or ware to look about on all parts that he ne be deceived
of his adversaries the which ben over all the world. Quia totus mundus in
maligno possitus est. It behooves to look about that a man be not deceived by
amyte carnal and socyall. Quia iam pater patrem iam filius fellit matrem: iam
socius socium: iam amicus decipit amicu^. Saint poule says take heed how ye
walk wisely. That is how ye live not as dombe fowls but as sages and redeem
ye time lost vnprouffytably spent and wasted for the days ben ylle / and
therefore be ye not imprudente but take ye head what is ye will of god. Vnde
Paulus ad Ephe. v. Videte quomodo caute ambuletis non quasi insipientes sed vt
sapientes redime^tis tempus quoniam dies mali sunt prorterea nolite fieri
imprudentes sed intellgentes que sit volu^tas dei. Attempraunce keeps a man
that he ne be corrupt by any cursed love / or for fere / or Joy / or swetnes.
For the man attemprate takes moderacyon to love that / that he ought to love /
how he should love / and as much as he ought to love. After he dredeth yt that
he should dread / how he should dread / and as much as he ought to dread.
Moreover he takes no Joy ne delight but in ye thing that he ought to have /
as he should have / and as much as he ought to have it. And also he ne takes
dolor but yt / that he ought to take / as he ought to take / and as much as
he ought to take. The man atte^prate ne coueyteth ne yet will do thing whereof
he may repent him in any manner ne passes the law without measure / and also
he puts himself under the yoke of reason and doubts all the coueytyses of
the world the which ben divided in.iii. things the which are / the
couetyses of ye desires of the body / the couetyse of auaryce / and of the
sin of pride. In these.iii. things there behooves to put attempraunce that a
man be not deceived. Of the which speaks saint John in the second chapter
of his first canonyque and says. Omne quod est in mundo aut est
concupiscentia oculoru^ aut superbia vite. Force makes the heart of the man to
be lift up on hye above the perils of the world and expels debylyte of
courage and makes him strong to resyste again the temptacyons and
aduersytees of the world / of ye body / and of the deuylles. Vnde Augusti.
Quod fortitudo est amor facile tollerans propter quod id amatur. Also the
virtue of force makes to dysprayse the felycitees and prosperytees wordely /
and not to dread any aduersytees. Facit prospera mundi despicere et nulla eius
aduersa formidare. Justice puts the man in order and right estate toward
his neighbor / for it yeldeth unto every man that ye which is his. after the
right line of reason. It wylleth prouffyte unto all and noyeth unto no man.
Justice is said of Just. Iusticia dicitur a iusto. For the Just man ne will do
but reason. Every virtue the which is well done in operaco^n is said Justice.
Also all right and reason is said justice / but all justice is not right. For
the cursed officers peruerteth justice / sometime by gifts / sometime by dread
of lords or by evil people / or by love or by hate. Prudence gives cou^ceyle
unto Justice for it aydeth it / and attemprau^ce amodereth it. Saint Austin
says that virtue is an equalyte of life soundinge unto reason. Virtus est
quedam equalitas vite vndique consonans rationi. Et ioha^nes crisostomus dicit
quod virtus animiest recte de deo sentire and recte inter homines agere. Et
hieromimus dicit. quod sola apud deumli bertas est non seruire peccatis et
summa a pud deum nobilitas est clarere virtutibus. For to love god and his
neighbor and for to live holyly in likewise as men should it behooves to take
the manners and condycions of men parfaytes the which here follows.

Here after follows the seven virtues.

Who so will know the good in lyuy^ge
The.vii. virtues with their branches also.
As ye shall se here after following.
In them ben retained with many other mo
Fides.
Who that believes is obedyent
Chaste / pure / clean / and confyaunt.
In desire good and innocent
Ferme in god / not varyaunt
Spes.
The man esperaunt / is pacyent
Having Joy in contemplacyon.
His sins also / he does repent
By contrycyon / and confession
Caritas.
The charytable has pity
Grace / peace / benygnyte
Debonayrte / humylyte
Pardon / clemence / lyberalyte
Prudentia.
The prudent loves god and dredeth
Menynge always well and truly.
By good counceyle when him needs
And dysposeth all thing goodly
Temperantia.
The man attemprate puts dyscrecyon
In mete / and drink / and clothing
All things done by moderacyon
Ne yet in speech is he exceeding
Iusticia.
The Just man has equity
Cyrreccyon / with seueryte
Law / judgment / and veryte
Not sweruynge from fydelyte
Fortitudo.
The man strong is ferme and suffraunt.
Constaunt / pacient in bounte
Great in courage / perseueraunt
Prompt and delygent in sayntyte
The auctour.
Who so these virtues shall learn and con^e
And them accomplysshe in word and deed
Unto perfeccyon they shall come
And have heaven for their mede.
It written in.ix. ethicorum. Virtuosorum beatissima est vita. Et in scdo
ethicorum dicitur quod virtus certior est et melior omni art. Item in eodem
capitulo dicitur quod oi^s virtus consistit in medio. In oi^bus medium est
laudabile.

A. It is commanded that we love each other in likewise as god has loved us
iii.

IT is written in the.v. chapitre of the gospelles of saint Johan yt god said to
his dyscyples. Hoc est preceptum meum vt diligatis inuicem licut dilexi vos.
That is to say. My commandment is that ye love each other in likewise as I
have loved you For to con expound this dyleccyon a man ought to know that god
has loved us in many manners / whereof we shall tell five. B. First god has
loved us ryghtfully before that we loved him / and not for his prouffyte ne for
to have our goods / but of his benygnyte for to socoure us and to save us. In
likewise should we love our neighbors before that they do us good / and not
for to have their goods / but for to socoure them in following god. Vnde.i.
Iohannis.iiii. In hoc apparuit caritas dei no^ quasi nos dilexerimus eu^ sed
quoniam ipse prior disexi nos / et misit filium suum propiciatorem pro peccatis
nostris.

C. Secondly god has loved us dyscretely. For he has loved the persons and
ye salvation of souls and has hated and persecuted the sins / and repreued
those the which did commytte them. In likewise should we do. For if our
neighbor be entached or spotted with any vice we should hate his sin and
reprehende him dyscretely. Vnde paulus ad galath. vi. Si preoccupatus fuerit
homo in aliquo delicto vos qui spirituales estis instruite in spu^lenitatis
considerans teipsum ne et tu temteris. Example that soft correccyon
prouffyteth more unto evil persons than sharp Quere in the
examplary.lxxiiii. a. Another example how saint Johan softly drew a thief from
sin. Quere.lxxii. e. Also dyleccyon ought to be without symulacion For who so
loves well chastyseth without fayntyse. Vnde paulus ad to. xii. Dilectione
sine simulatione odientes malum adherentes bono. Thou sholdest love thy
neighbors in god / and after the virtue of equity / and not in ill and sin.
These the which god loves he chastyseth discretely. Vnde apo. iii. Ego quos
amo arguo and castigo dicit dominus. Et pau. ii. ad thymo. iiii. Argue obsecra
increpa omni pacientia et doctrina. A questyon. Who so should demand if the
love of thieves and pyllars (were good) the which loves and susteyneth each
other / or of lechoures the which loves their folysshe lovers as them self.
The answer. Such love is nothy^ge worth / for they love not god / ne their
neighbor / ne their self. They love not god in brekynge his commandments /
ne they love not their neighbor ne themself / for they dampne them self.
Vnde psalmist. Qui diligit iniquitatem odit animam suam. He the which loves
iniquyte hates his soul. Et beatus iacobus dicit. Peccatum cum consummatu^
fuerit generat mortem. Incontynente that sin is consummed and done it
engenders the death. That is to understand that it mortyfyeth spyrytually the
goodness of the soul / by the death of gylte.

D. Thyrdly god us has loved fructuously / not only in voice but of word /
and of operacions. In likewise we should our neighbor in doing the operacyon.
For if a poor man the which has hunger and thyrst all to frosen demand the
alms. It shall not suffyse to say unto him. A poor man thou have hongre and
art frosen god help the. Saint James says in the.ii. chapter of his
epistle that faith without operacyon is deed and nothing worth. And saint
Johan says illud.i. Ioh. iii. Filioli: non diligamus verbo neque lingua sed
opere et veritate. Little children / sons and daughters / love not only by
tongue / and by word / but by operacyon and veryte. The tree the which ne
has but leaves and bears no good fruit is not good but for to brenne. In
likewise the person ye which ne has but words without operacyons is
nothing worth Our savior Ihesus first did and after showed it again by
word. Capit ihesus facere et docere. And in likewise should we do / for it is
written iacobi.i. Estote factores verbi and no^ auditores tm^ fallentes
vosmetipreos. Be ye ye doers of the will of god and not alonely ye herers
deceyuynge your self. The man yt is Iustyfyed by the operacyon of ye faith
and not alonely by faith. Some ben friends of the mouth / some of the table /
some of ye purse / and some of operacyon. The friends of the mouth promises
enough / but they do nothing in operacion. A fructibus coru^ cognoscetis eos.
The friends of the table loves each other whiles yt barell of drink and the
feast lasts / and says well one of the other / but when there is no more
meet nor drink the love defayleth and sayen / it is a myscheuous man yt has
all eten and wasted Vn^. eccle. vi Est amicus socius mense and no^ permanebit
in die necessitatis. He is friend and felawe of the table and he abides not in
the day of need. Et eccle. xxxvii. Est amicus solo noi^e. He is a friend
alonely by name Also the sage speaks of ye said friends. Ecclesi. vi. Est eni^
amicus scdm tempus suu^ and non in die tribulationis / et est amicus qui
conuertit ad inimicitia^ / et est amicus qui odiu^ et rixa^ et co^uitia
denudabit. The friends of the purse ben cosyns as to give or to lend / but
hate and the devil it is to yield again. The friends of operacyon fails not
at need and ben sorry of ye evil of their friend and glad of his welfare. In
need a man shall se what a friend is. Vnd eccle. vi. Amicus si permanserit /
fixus / erit tibi quasi coequalis / et in domesticis tuis fiducialiter aget /
sequitur amicus fidelis fortis protectio / qui autem i^uenit thesauru^ / amico
fideli nulla est comparatio. A faithful friend is a great and a strong
defense / he ye which fyndeth him fyndeth a treasour there is no comparyson
unto a faithful friend. Also the true friend ought to help and remember his
friend at his need as he should do unto himself. Vnde ligitur nono ethicoru^.
Amicus se debet habere ad amicum sicut ad semetipsum. God has us loved of
word and of operacyon togyders. And in likewise should we love our neighbors.

E. Fourthly god has us loved parfytely more than his own body as before it
is said. Quere. G. Also proarfyte men puts their bodies in danger of death
for to save their neighbors / as did a man named Sanctulus. Quere.lxxv. c.
Another example of two men that had so great charity and amyte together that the
one would have deyed for to save the other. Quere lxxv. b.

F. Fyfthly god has loved the salvation of all his enemies the which wronged
him / and bette him without that / that he defended himself nor that he
answered Injury against Injury he did not / but yielded the good against the ill
/ and he prayed for his enmyes Vnde luce.xxii. Pater dimitte illis non enim
sciunt quid faciu^t. Also perfect people should love their enmyes in following
god / and they shall have great reward in paradyse. Un. math. v. and. lu. vi.
Diligite inimicos vestros benefacite hus qui oderu^t vos et orate pro
persequentibus et calumniantibus vos vt sitis filii patris vestri qr benignus
est super ingratos and malos. That is to say. Love your enmyes / do good to
them that hates you / and pray for your persecutours and dyspysers to thend
that ye be the sons innytatoures of god your fader.

G. Questyon. How may I love those ye which has bette me or made me to lose
my goods or my good renown. The answer. Thou sholdest love the evil will of
thy neighbor: but for the love of god thou sholdest love the persons and
their salvation / and also if by Justice thou make them to yield to the thy
goods and to punysshe the sin of thy neighbor thou of tendest not. For
Justice is founded after god and unto god / and Justice appertains to do
punycyon and not unto ye. Wherefore thou ne sholdest venge the that god ne
wroth him against the. The great lords the which will not understand for to
do right and justice departs it with ye sword / and is suffered of god unto
those ye which has good right. Un. catho Pugna pro patria. The parfite people
bears al aduersytees pacyently and does good against ill for the love of god.
Example in saint Steven yt prayed for his enmyes yt god should pardon them the
sin that they did to stone him. And to the end yt his prayer were the sooner
exalted he set him on his knees Vn^ acti. vii. Positis au^t genibus clamauit
voce magna dice^s / dn^e ne statuas illis hoc petm^. Example yt Dauyd wept ye
death of his enmy Saul ye which persecuted hy^ Also he wept at the death of
his friend Ionathas in like wise as it is written in the first chapter of the
second book of kings Also we read in the.xviii. chapter of ye book of kings
that Ionathas the sone of Saul loved Dauyd as his own soul / and on a time he
dyspoyled him of his gown and gave it unto Dauyd Also Dauyd loved him as
himself. Also Dauyd wept at the death of his neighbor Abner. Vt habetur.ii.
regu^. iii. Also he wept at ye death of his sone Absolon yt did him war. Vt
habetur.ii. regu^.xviii. and.xix. Also Dauyd would do none evil to his enmye
Saul when he might have done it / in like wise as is written in the xxvi.
chapter of the first book of kings. This is an example here that we should
love our enmyes for the love of god. By these things aforesaid it apereth how
we should love our nyghboure.

H. Questyon. Who is my neighbor.
BY this that god commands to love his neighbor a man may demand. What is
it yt is my neighbor. The answer. That is every man and woman / for we should
love the salvation of souls and the well and vtylyte of all persons / and not
the ill. Saint Austyn says. Exte^de caritate^ per totum orbe^ quia me^bra
christi per orbem iacent. Extend charity over all the world / that is
dyleccion / for the members of Ihesu christ lies by the world. God will that
those of scotlond / of of france / and of spain be also well saved as them of
England if they deserve it: for all ben members of god tendynge to salvation.
He loves the little as ye great / he the^ has create and is their governor
and purueyour. Un. sapien. vi. Pusillu^ and magnu^ fecit dominus equaliter cura
est illi de omnibus. And therefore it behooves to understand that all ben our
neighbors / but for as much as we ne may do alms over all ye world it
suffyseth to do it unto those ye which ben among us after our power This
matter is given unto us by word. Luce.x. Homo quidem desce^debat ab iherusalem
in iherico qui incidit in latrones. And the euangelyst says that one of the
masters of the law demanded of Ihesu christ who was his neighbor / and he
answered unto him. A man descended from Iherusalem unto Iheryco the which fell
in to the hands of thieves the which dyspoyled him and bette him so much that
he was replenysshed with wounds and left him as half deed / and it befell
that a priest passed by and took none head. In likewise a deaken passed yt took
no head. After a Samarytane the which passed the country found him and had
pity and anointed his wounds with wine and oil and did bind him and after
yt put him on his mare and bare him in to a stable and gave two pens unto the
master of the stable and prayed him that he would heel him / and at his
return he should satysfye him at his will After these words Ihesus demanded
of ye master / which of them seems unto ye that has be most nere unto the
seek man of the three the which passed by him. He answered the Samarytan
estraunger. And god said unto him thou have said truly / go and do thou in
likewise. Saint Austy^ says. Omnem hominem oportet intellegi esse proximum
quia nemo est cu^ quo operandum sit male. A man should understand as it is
said yt every man is our neighbor. For to moralyse upon this eua^gelyst a man
should understand that when a person is baptized he is replenysshed with all
virtues and with goods espyrytuelles as if he descended from Iherusalem that
is paradyse in to Iheryco that is in to the field of battle in this world the
which is full of thieves those ben sins the which dyspoyleth him of his good
virtues and stryketh him with many mortal wounds yt which ledeth him unto
the death of hell / that is pride: auaryce / slouthe / envy / glotony / ire /
and lechery the which stryketh ye souls when they consent unto them / and by
the priest and deaken the which passed and took none head ben understand
those ye which have no pity ne compassyon of the pardycyon of souls / and by
the Samarytan myserycordyous ben understand these the which remedyeth unto
the health and salvation of sinners as after that Adam had sinned and was
fallen among the thieves god had mercy the which has so much done that he
has be heeled by the merit of his passion and by the holy sacraments. And
our lord as the Samaryta^ made to put wine and oil in his wou^des. Vinum qui
letificat cor hominis. That is by confession the which clarifyeth the
conscience of sinners / and the oil that is the last vnccyon the which
heeleth the sekenesses corporelles and espyrytuelles in likewise as says saint
James. And when the Samarytan put the seek man on the mare is Ihesu christ the
which bare our sins on his body at his passion / and said unto the master
of the stable that he should heel the said seek body. That is to understand
Ihesus gave unto saint Peter the keys of the realm of heaven and unto prelates
and pastures unto whom he said When I shall come again in Judgment I shall pay
you your salayres after as ye have labored. After the sense moral Ihesus has
be our neighbor / for he has heled our gostly sekenesses as the samarytan
did the corporelles. And those ye heleth ye sinners of their sin or
socoureth those yt have need ben said neighbors.

A. Of the virtue of charity ye which extends in all ye commandments of
god.iiii.
THe master of the sentences says in his third book yt charity is in such
wise dyffynyed. Caritas e^ dilectio qua diligitur deus propter se / et proximus
propter deum. Charity is dyleccyon by the which god is loved for the goodness
infynyte the which is in him / and the neighbor is loved for the love of god.
All the commandments of god tends for to love god and his neighbor as it
is said. And charity is none other thing but to love god and his neighbor.
So charity is commanded by all the.x. commandments and in every of them. If
thou wylt have of examples of charity ye shalt find in thexamplary.
Quere.lxxv. a. b Charity is so noble a virtue that it is cause and mother of all
good virtues / without it for nothing seche we other virtues. Un. aug. Caritas
est causa and matter oim virtutu^ q^ se disit frustra habentur cetera si au^t ad
sit habentur oi^a. Charity is cause of virtues / for when we fast / or when we
do alms / or wha^ we do any good operacion god is the cause and the same
good deed is done for the charity and love of him. in obeyenge unto his
commandments / to the end to be united and coniunct with him yt is that he dwell
with us and we with him. Vnde.j. john. iiij Deus caritas est: and qui manet in
caritate in deo manet: et deus in eo. Et john. xv. Qui manet in me et ego in eo
/ hic fert fructu^ multu^. qr sine me nichil potestas facere. Also when we love
our neighbor and yt we do hy^ good in his need god is the cause for it is for
his sake / and therefore charity is cause of virtues. The which charity is
contemned in all the commandments of god. Also charity is mother of virtues /
for in likewise as children proceeds of the mother and have their nourysshement
and and techynge / even in likewise ye virtues proceeds of charity and ben
done for ye love of god / wherefore it is said ye mother of virtues / and in ye
thing where charity lacks no goostly good is found / and where it is all
goodness there rests. Aug. Vbi est caricas quid est quoth possit obesse / vbi
au^t non est quoth est quoth possit prodesset. Without charity we ne may walk after
god. Vn^ amb. Si cut sine via nullus peruenit quo tendit / ita sine caritate q^
dicitur via no^ possimus recte ire. Also charity is ye fountayn of virtues.
Vn^fulge^tius epres dicit quod caritas est fo^s oi^m vtutu^et origo bonoru^
munime^ egregium via q^ ducit ad celu^ in caritate qui a^bulant nec errare
poterit nec timere / iprea dirigit / iprea protegit / ipsa perducit ad regnu^
eternum. Charity is the fou^tayne of all virtues for by it they ben aroused /
grow / fructyfy / and increase. It is the natyuyte of al goodness and the
garnysshy^ge of noblesse. For by it man is rich and full of goostly goods /
and lift up in noblesse fast by god / it is ye way yt ledeth unto heaven and
without it we ne may go thider He yt walks by charity can not go out of the way
ne dread. Charity adresseth / defends and ledeth ye right way. Also charity
is ye rote of al virtues. In likewise as says saint Austyn the words of the
appostle.j. ad thy.vj. Sicut radix oi^m maloru^ est cupiditas / ita radix oi^m
bonorum est caritas. The rote of the tree be it good or ill extend the humor /
her bounte / or malice by ye branches and boughs / and also makes them to
grow and to multyply after his nature. And in likewise as couetyse ye which
is rote of all evil extends her malice in all sins / in likewise charity
ye which is the rote of all goodness and virtues extends her bounte and
valor by all virtues and makes them to grow / to multeplye / and to bear
fair flowers / and good fruytes. For the beginning / the cause / and the rote
wherefore a person does good deeds as the works of mercy. It is by charity
for the love of god. And if any supporte the imperfeccyon and the pouerte of
his neighbor / yt is for the love of god by charity. Un ad gal. vi. Alter
alterius onera portate et sic ad i^plebitis legem christi. And if he counceyle
and conforte his neighbor that is by charity. Vn^.i. ad tessallo.v.
Co^solamini in inuicem et edificate alterutru^. And if he do justice in
yeldynge every man his own / and if he keep veryte without lyenge / and if he be
humble without pride / chaste without lechery / all is done for the love of
god in obeynge unto him. Vn^ gregorius. Amor dei nunquam estociosus / operatur
eni^ magna si est / si autem operari renuit amor non est. Every good deed ought
to be done in god / and for the love of him / for no virtue bears good fruit
before god if it be not done upon ye rote of charity. Vnge grego. Non habet
ramus aliquid viriditatis nisi maneat in radice caritatis. Et Iheronimus dicit
quod alia inter fructus spu^s debuit habere primatum nisi caritas sine qua
cetere virtutes non reputabuntur esse virtutes ex qua nascuntur omnia bona.

B. Charity is a tree that bears none ill fruit / but bears all fair flowers
and all fair fruytes so that it is much worthy to be praised / loved / and
hau^ted. That is to say He the which has charity declyneth from all evil and
does all good operacyons. Iuxta illud psalmus. Declina a malo and fac bonum.
We find no peers in an apple tree ne crabbes or medelers in a plomme tree.
for it is a good tree that bears good fruit. Vnde mathei.vi. Non potest arbor
bona malos fructus facere. Also there is no theft / lechery. etc. found in a
good person Also he the which has charity is not enuyous of the welthe of
his neighbor. For saint Poule says.i. ad corin. xiii. Caritas non emulatur.
Also he the which has the heart enroted in charity bears good fruit Vn^
luce.vi. Neque enim de spinis colligunt ficus / neque de rubo vindemiant vuam.
In a thorn men find no fygges / for it is a bitter tree / in likewise as is
envy. The fruit of a tree of envy is bitter and evil. For the enuyous ne
does but evil unto his neighbors. And the fruit of the tree of charity is
sweet and good / for he ye which has charity ne does but good / also he the
which has charity ne speaks none ill words / and the enuyous is to the
contrary. Vnde mathei.xii. et luce.vi. Bonus homo de bono thesauro cordis
profert bona and malus homo de malo thesauro profert mala. Also in likewise as
men know a tree by the fruit that it bears / in likewise does a man a
person by his operacyons. Vnde luce.vi. Vna queque arbor de fructo suo
cognoscitur. Et mathei duodecimo. Ex fructu enim arbor cognoscitur. Et mathei
septimo. A fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos. A man can not say that a person is
chaste when he is found in doing lechery. Vnde mathei duodecimo. Progenies
viperarum quomodo potestis bona loqui cum sitis mali. Also that man or woman
the which has charity enjoys and delyteth hy^ in all goodness / in all
welthe / in all beauty / and in all good operacyons and in veryte. Un.i.
corinthios decimotercio. Caritas concaudet veritati. Also he enjoys him for
to to se the goodness of his neighbor as humylyte / pacyence / chastyte /
devotion / sanctyte. etc. Also he is sorry and dyspleasaunt of the harm and
afflyccyon of his neighbors after the saying of the appostle ad to. xii.
Gaudere cu^ gaudentibus and flere cum flentibus. Also he the which has
charity has no Joy in him self that he have any sin: or if he go out of ye
way Vnde.i. corin. xiii. Caritas non gaudet super iniquitatem. And the enuyous
is unto the contrary. Also he the which has charity thinks non ill / for he
has good conscience. Vnde.i. corin. xiii. Caritas non cogitat malum. He loves
his neighbor as himself / and he ne wylleth evil unto hy^ no more than unto
himself. And therefore he ne does detraccyon ne mockery / and ye enuyous does
the contrary. Also charity ne may do none ill / for in it is nothing contrary.
Vnde.i. corin. xiii. Caritas no^ agit perperam / idest aliquid peruersum. For
it is all good as it is said. Non cogitat malum. Non est ambiciosa. He the
which has charity is not enuyous to have ye good of another / but yeldeth
unto every man yt the which is his. Also it has no dread seruyle ne worldly /
for he ne dredeth that ill come unto him for to sustain and to keep veryte and
bounte. He is not as the auarycyous that dredeth to lose his goods and to
offend the world. Vnde august. Perfecta caritas nec cupiditatem seculi nec
timorem Per istas duas ianuas intrat et regnat i^imicus. Et legitur.i. john.
iiii. Timor non est i^ caritate sed perfecta caritas for as mittit timorem: quia
au^t timet non est perfectus in caritate. Also he the which has charity
bears pacyently for the love of god aduersyte / sykenes / and pouerte. Vnde.i.
ad corin. xiii. Caritas non irritatur oi^a suffert / oi^a substinet paciens
benigna est. etc. Charity is benygne unto all in general / for it yield the
good against the evil. Secundum illud luce.vi. Diligite inimicos vestros
benefacite his qui oderu^t vos / benedicite maledicentibus vobis et orate pro
calumniantibus vos. Love your enemies / do good unto those the which hates
you / bliss them the which do curse you / pray for those the which
dyspyseth you. Et legitur ad to. xii. Benedicite persequentibus vos / bn^dicite
and nolite maledicere. Bliss ye those yt persecuteth you / bliss ye and curse
ye in no wise. Also he the which has charity is not proud for any good that
god unto him has given. Quia caritas non inflatur. The charitatyfe is humble /
sweet and replenysshed with all good virtues ye which ben kept by charity. And
therefore saint Poule says illud.i. ad corin. xvi. Vigilate state in fide
viriliter agite and confortamini et omnia opera vestra in caritate fiant. Wake
you and hold you in the faith / labor ye strongely and conforte you / and
all your operacyons ben done in charity. Et legitur ad ephe. iii. Caritate
radicati and fundati vt possitis comprehendere cu^ omnibus sanctis que sit
latitudo longitudo sublimitas et profundu^. Be ye enroted and founded in
charity to the end that ye may comprehe^de with all the saints what is the
longenes or length / or the largenes and bread / or the heyght and the depenes
of charity. The largenes of the tree of charity is to love not only god and
our friends but also our enmyes. Vnde pres. Tatum mandatu^ tuu^ custodire
nimis. The length of charity is perseueraunce in good operacions un the last
end. The hyghnes of charity is esperaunce to have remuneracyon in paradyse of
good deeds. The perfundyte and depenes is to believe that the goods that we
have comes of god occulte the which we ne may se.

C. Without charity no good espyrituel ne may prouffyte unto persons. For
saint Poule says.i. ad corinthi. xiii. Si linguis hominum loquar et angelorum
caritatem au^t no^ habuero factus sum velut es sona^s aut cymbalum timiens.
That is for to understand in english after ye exposytour, if that I should
speak as wisely as all the men in the world and the aungelles of heaven / and
that by my tongue I might convert all the nacyons of the Infydeles if charity
lack in me I may not be saved. My tongue is as he ye which stryketh upon an
here or on a clock / or as he that beteth the water / this prouffyteth
nothing as unto the salvation. The words that saint Poule speaks of himself
ben understand of every person. Sequitur. Et si habuero prophetiam. And if it
were so that I had the gift of prophecye as Balaam the which said. Orietur
stella ex jacob. Et si nouerim misteria omnia. And I knew all the mysteryes
and secrets of the new and of the old testament / and all the secrets of
god as did Lucyfer. Et si habuero omne^ scientiam et fide^. And if I had all
ye science of the books of the world / and all the faith of crystendome. Et
si distribuero in cibos pauperum oe^s facultates meas And if I should give unto
the poor all ye goods that I have from penny to penny and if I had an hundred.
M. pownde. Et si tradidero corpus meum ita vt ardea. And if I should give my
body to so many afflyccyons yt it should brenne as saint Laurence that was
roasted / and if I should fast breed and water every day. Caritate^ non habuero
nichil michi prodest. All these things beforesayd should nothing prouffyte as
to the salvation if I have not charity That is too know if the love of god or
of my neighbor defayled in me. That is to understand if I hated my neighbor
in desiring the loss of his goods / as to be stolen or rauysshed / or the
evil of his body as to be bette / slain / or other ill in brekynge any of the
commandments of god. If I should dye in such estate without correccion and
amendment I shall not be saved / for charity defayleth in me. Caritas non
cogitat malum. Charity thinks none ill. For it has an holy conscience. B^
these things aforesaid it appears that a^ the law and the commandments of
god depends of charity / the which is to love god and his neighbor.

A. How god defends in his commandments all evil words / thoughts and
operacyons. And there commands all good operacyons.v.
David the prophet says in h^ psalter. Declina a malo and fabonum. Declyne
from evil (...) is fro all evil words / thoug^tes / and operacions and do
goo^ that is all good operacyons. For god it the commands. If thou will
know vnd^^ What commandments all evil word^ ben defended. the answer. It
behooves (...) make dystynccyon if thy words be again ye dyleccyon of god /
or against yt of man If they ben spoken by delyberacyon aye^^ the dyleccyon of
god a man breketh one o^ the three first commandments. For y^ such words
ben blasphemynge or swer^ge vnprouffytably god them defends b^ words
express in the second commandment. Ne iures vana per ipsum. An^ if they
ben words berynge honor vnt^ ydolles god it defends in the first
commandment. No^ adorabis deos alienos And if they bear dyshonoure unto the
sanctyfycacyon of festes god them defende^ in the.iii. commandment. Sabbata
s^^fices. And if such words ben against ye d^lecco^n of thy neighbor. it
behooves to m^ke dystyncyon of them. If they ben of fals^ witness or lyenge
god them defends (...) viii. commandment. No^ loq^ris contra proximituu^
falsum testimoniu^. And if they dysh^nour fader or mother / god defe^deth the^
in (...) fourth commandment. Et venerare patres. And if they ben words of
thretenynge to beat or to sle his neighbor god them defends in the.v.
commandment. Non sis occisor. And if they ben of auaryce or pyllerye god them
defends in the.vi commandment. And if they ben lecherous words god them
defends in ye.vii. commandment. In likewise god defe^deth evil thoughts
in his commandments. For if they ben against the dyleccyon of god they ben
defended in one of ye three first commandments / in likewise as it is said of
ill words. And if they ben against his neyghour it behooves to make
dystyncco^n of such thoughts. For if they ben lecherous and that delectacion
and delyberacyon be therein of will for to accomplysshe the sin / god them
defends by words expres in the.ix. commandment Non concupisces vxore^
proximi tui. And if they ben of auaryce / theft / or couetyse god them
defends by words expres in the tenth commandment. Deutero. v. Non
concupisces rem proximi tui. And if such thoughts be against the honor of
fader and mother god them defends in ye iiii. commandment. And if they will
beat / slay / or do ill god them defends in the v. commandment. etc.
Morouer god defends all evil operacyo^s in his commandments. For in the
commandments where as he defends all evil thoughts and words / by a
greter reason he there defends the cursed operacyons / and by words expres
he them defends in four commandments. That is to understand in the first.
Non adorabis deos alienos. and in the.v. Non sis occisor / and in the.vi. No^
furtu^ faties / and in the.vii. No^ mechaberis. B. Also god commands all
good operacyons in his commandments / and by words expres in two
commandments yt is to understand in the third. Sabata setifices / and in
the.iiii. Et venerare patres And here a man should clearly understand and well
note that in all the commandments where god defends ne to de: ne to say ne
to think evil / he commands the opposyte / yt is to do / to say / and to
think good as men may se where he defends. Ne worship you no ydoles and
strange gods. Tha^ I commau^dethe yt thou worship one god only. Ne sle not
thy neighbor ne hate hy^ ne do him none ill. Than I command the to love him.
Ne do no lechery / than be you chaste. And be thou no thief: Than be you lawful.
Ne love not to much the goods of the world as done the auarycyous / and
keep not to much. Than be thou lyberall / and depart with them. Be thou no
liar / ne falls wytnes berer. Than be verytable. etc. Ne speak you none ill
words in swery^ge ne ne lyenge / than bring thou good words and true. Ne
think thou none ill by auaryce / or lechery / and than thy^ke well these good
things. Also thou sholdest note that where god commands the to do good
operacions he the defends the contrary / yt is to do evil operacyons. Verbi
gratia. Sanctifye and halowe the feestes commanded Than do thou no sins ne
operacyons whereby thou shall dishonor them / love thy faders and thy moders.
Than hate the^ them not / ne do them none ill. Honor the^ Than dishonor them
not. Socour them Than fail them not in their need. etc. By these things
aforesaid you sholdest understand than when you wylt not halowe the festes to go
to gods service / as even songs / matyns / and masses if it be feast
commanded or solempnel / or when you wylt not go to ye holy water / to the
sermons / and processyo^s or when you wylt not honor thy faders / or do
almesdedes and works of mercy to those the which have need / or when thou
will do ne say ne think ye good that thou sholdest do. Thou go against
some of the commandments of god / and offendest by the sin the which is
called obmyssy-yt is to leave a good deed undone by slouthe And therefore thou
shalt have correccyon and punycyon / and god shall demand of the account at
the day of Judgment / as it is written. Math. xxv. Esuriui et no^ dedisti michi
manducare. Sitiui et non dedistis michi potum. etc. Ite maledicti in ignem
eternum. I have had honger and thou ne have given me to ete. I have had thyrste
and thou ne have given me to dry^ke / and therefore accursed goo in to the fire
eternal. Those the which have not wylled to do the good operacyons / but unto
ye contrary have done the ill shall be punysshed as thou shall find by the
example of Cayn the which slew his brother Abell. Quere.lxxvi. a. Or of those
ye which has not wylled to bring forth good words but has blasphemed and
perjured shall be also punysshed as thou shalt find by example of the sone of
a woman of Israel ye which was stoned for his blaspheme. Quere.lxii. a. Or of
those the which have thought ill / as a woman the which was dampened for a
thought lecherous. Quere an ho^dred. a. For to abredge those the which
dysobeyeth unto god by operacyon / word / or thought shall be punysshed / in
likewise as thou may se by many examples ye which be written here after in
the examplary of the commandments of god.

C. Questyon under what commandments ben defended the.vii. deedly sy^nes:
and where ben commanded the virtues opposytes and contraryes.vi.
THe prophet Ysaye says in his first chapter. Quiescite agere perverse
discite benefacere. Cease you rest you to do peruersly and ouerthwartly the
sins and cursednesses / for god them defends. Learn to do well things
virtuous for god them commands. For to understand well the flower of that
thing that god wylleth and commands / a man should know that he defends
in his commandments the seven sins mortalles with all their branches and
dependaunces / and there commands the virtues opposytes and contraryes in
likewise as it shall be declared here afterward. And first for to know under
what commandment is defended every sin it needs to consider in bryef the
intencyon of god in gyuynge the said commandments / and the intencyon of
those the which go unto the contrary. First if thou demand where is defended
pride thou shall have answer general and after pertyculer. I answer ye
ge^rally that pride is defended in all and in every of the.x. commandments
of god / for when thou brekest any thou commytte^ inobedyence / and all
inobedyence is not (...) out pride. Also pride is defended generally in all
the.x. commandments of god. Ve^ba gracia. When thou worshyppest ye ydolles /
or when thou swerest vnprouffytably or when thou brekest the feestes / or any
of the.x. commandments thou show apertly that thou ne wylt so much low
the^ and humble the under god as to obey unto ye commandment that thou
brekest / so ye art inobedient and proud togyders / and therefore pride is
defended generally in all the commandments. Also all mortal sin and all
offense is committed by the sins of transgressyon or of obmyssyon And all the
sins of transgressyon or of obmyssyon be not without inobedyence /
inobedyence is not without pride as it is said. So every person the which
co^mytteth any mortal sin is proud and in likewise inobedyent and so
breketh some commandments / but specially pride the which is anenst god is
defended in the first commandment / and yt the which is anenst his
neighbor is defended in the iiij commandment. Secondely if thou demand
where auaryce is defended / it behooves to consider the entencyon and operacyon
of the auarycyous / for if he love ye goods more than god and above him he
ydolatryseth and breketh the first commandment. And if he work on the holy
day by couetyse in doing such operacyon he ne sanctyfyeth such holy day as
he ought to do and breketh the third commandment. And when he takes the
goods of another unjustly in any manner he breketh the syxte commandment. And
when he ne takes them in deed but by delyberacyon and consentement of reason
them would have he breketh the.x. commandment Thyrdly of slouthe is behooves
to consider that he the which is slothful to accomplysshe that / that god
commands / or delygent to do that that he defends he offe^deth in that
commandment where the said slouthe or contradyccion is made / as if he be
slothful to pray / to serve and to worship god after ye faith received in
baptysme he offends against ye first commandment / or if yt said slouthe be
a^enst god or his saints in the days of the feast commanded to sanctyfy the
said feestes he offends against the third commandment And if the said
slouthe were against the dyleccyon commanded anenst his faders and neighbors
he should offend against the fourth commandment. Fourthly ye sin of Ire and
yt of envy ben defended in the fyfth commandment / and all their branches
and dependences / as shall be declared in that commandment. Fyfthly of glotony
it is to consider the cause fynall of the excess / for when a gredy gloton
delyteth and loves his womb and body more than god and above him he
co^mytteth ydolatry and breketh the first commandment as in that shall be
declared / and if he break the fastes of the solempnytees / or that he excede
in drink or in meet in the feestes commanded he breketh the third
commandment. Sabbata sanctifices. And at all times that he nouryssheth his
body stro^gely in so much that it moeueth him to commit lechery he offends
against the seventh commandment / for glotoni and lechery ben systers.
Syxtely all ye sorts and manners of lechery the which ben committed in
operacyon ben defended in the seventh commandment / and those of the will in
the.ix. commaundment. And a man should note that in all the commandments
where god defends the sins he commands the virtues opposytes and
contraryes / as who would say. Be thou not proud / than be thou humble. Be
thou not slothful / than delygent. Be thou not to much holding ne
auarycyous / than yt thou be lyberall. Be thou not enuyous / tha^ charytable.
Ne yrefull / than pacyent. Ne gloton / than sobre. Ne lecherous / than chaste.
So it appears that god commands the virtues in his commandments and
defends the sins / the which sins ben too be blamed / and the condycyons
of those the which commytteth them that here follows.

D. Here after follows the.vii. mortal sins defended in the commandments
of god.
Who so will know the offenders
By the branches of the seven sins
I shall reherce them by orders
And first with pride that all ill begynnes
Of pride.
The proud man is dysobedyent
Ypocryte / and great in bostynge
Apt to every inconuenyent
Contemnynge and also presumynge
Of auaryce.
The auarycyous is a thief
Full of gyle / and great defrauder
Usury and symony to him is lefe
Sacrylege is he / and also rauyssher
Of slouthe.
The slothful man is also musing
Idle / neclygent / gyuynge no force
Vain / tydeous / delytynge inslepynge
Sluggysshe / unlusty / an unthrifty corce.
Of envy.
The enuyous is full of hate
A great detractour and full of ill
Dysposed ever to make debate
Full of malice and evil will
Of wrath.
The enuyous is a great thretener
Iniuryous and blasphematour
Also he is a murderer
Dysdaynous / crier / and full of murmour
Of glotony.
The gloton deliteth in drink and fedy^ge
Encombrynge his stomach with excess
Full seldon sobre / or yet fasting.
Putting his body to no dystresse
Of lechery.
The lecherous is a fornycatour
Aduoutrer / and defloratour
Sacrylege / and rauysshour
Sodomyte and incestour
The auctour.
Who so will do his salvation
Fle the mortal sins seven
In avoiding of dampnacyon
If he will enheryte heaven.
It is written ecclesiastici.xxj. Quasi a facie colubri fuge peccata si
accesseris ad illa suscipient te dentes leonis dentes illius interficientes
ai^as hominum. Fle the sins as from the face of a serpent / if thou approach
unto them they shall take the with lions tethe / ye which ben the tethe of that
serpent which is sin / the which tethe sleeth spyrytuall by death of gylt
the soul of man. There is not a worse heed than is the heed of a serpent as
says ye sage eccle. xxv. Non est caput nequius super caput colubri. For his
tethe / his tongue / and brethe ben venymous / the which enuenymeth and makes
the persons to deye. Also for to^ speak spyrytually there is nothing wor^
unto the soul than mortal sin / the company of it is nothing worth / for it
ledeth unto dampnacyon and perdycyon. Vnde Ezechielis.xviij. Anima que
peccauere ipsa morietur. The soul the which has committed mortal sin
shall deye spyrytually of death eternal without extynguysshement if it be not
medycyned by penance.

A. Here follows the first commandment of god.vi.
ONe only god thy creator
Thou shall serve / and in him believe
And love him best with all honor
As nere as grace will give the leave
Vno credo deu^. Believe in one god only and love him right parfytely. It is
evil taken to them that has done unto the contrary / in likewise as we may
find by examples. Quere.lvij. c. d. e. In this commandment many things ben
commanded and defended.

B. That it is commanded to believe in only god in trynyte and to worship
him.vi.
IT is written deutero.vi. Audi Israel / dominus deus vester deus vnus est. O
Israel your lord god is one god. Et legitur marci xii. Vnus est deus et non
alius preter eum. One god is / and there ne is none other but he. Of necessyte
of health it is requysyte to all persons for too put their faith and crede^ce
in god ye creature / and not in ydolles and things created. For it is written
that without faith it is Impossyble to please god. Vnde ad hebreos vndecimo
capitulo. Sine fide impossible est placere deo. And therefore he commands us
too believe in one only god in trynyte. That is to know in god the fader al
puyssaunt / in likewise as says saint Peter. Credo in vnum deum patrem
omnipote^tem. And in Ihesu christ his dear sone / in likewise as says saint
Andrewe. Et in iesum christum filium eius vnicum dominu^ nostrum. Also in the
holy ghost in likewise as says saint Barthylmewe. Credo i^ spiritum sanctum.
These three persons be^ one only god in one unity and symplycyte / and not
many gods / for they ben in one self substance and nature / in one self
might / dyuynyte / and glory. Anathase says. Fides autem catholica hec est /
vt vnum deum in trinitate / et trinitatem in vnitate veneremur. The faith
catholyke is that we honor one god in trynyte and the trynyte in unity. And it
behooves not to confound the persons ne to separate ye substance. Neque
confunde^tes personas neque substantiam separantes For they ben three persons
devised and dystyngued ye which ben in one substance and nature / in one
unity and symplycyte as it is said the which ben one only god. And therefore
it is here commanded to believe in him to worship / honor / and serve him /
and to give the dyuyne honor the which apperteyneth unto him and not to
ydolles. Our blyssed savior and redemptour Jesus gives it clearly by words
to understand the which ben written Mathei.iiij. Dominum deum tuum adorabis et
illi so li seruies. Thou shalt worship thy lord god and him alonely serve.
Also it is written deuterono.vi. Dominum deum tuum timebis et ipsi so li
seruies. Thou shall dread thy lord god and him all only serve. Examples to
worship one only god in trynyte and not many It is written in the xviij.
chapitre of Genese that as Abraham was at the door of his tabnacle he lift up
his eyes and saw dyuynely three angels in semblaunce of three persons the
which de notes the fader / the sone / and the holy ghost / he ran against
them and worshipped them in earth and said. Domine sun ueni gratiam in oculis
tuis ne tra^seas seruum tuum sed afferam pauxillum aque et laue^tur pedes
vestri. etc. Tres vidit and vnu^ adorauit. He saw three persons and worshypped
one only god in trynyte. Unto the example of Abraham we shall adoure and
worship one only god in trynyte. Another example written in ye.xxiiij.
chapter of Exody that our lord said vn-Moyses. Mount in too the mountain
thou and Aaron / and Madab / and Abyn / and three score ancient men of Israel
and ye shall worship a far of. Another example in Exody that the children of
Israel understood that god them vesited and regarded the tourmentes that
Pharaon did unto them / than they fell prostrate on the earth and worshypped
him. Vnde exodi. iii^. Audie^tes filij israel quod deus eos visitaret et
respiceret afflictionem eorum et adorauerunt prom in terram. etc. An other
example written in the first chapter of the first book of kings that a man
named Helcana departed from his cite on the days establysshed too the end that
he should worship and do sacryfyce unto god. Another example written in the.ix.
chapter of Neemie that after that ye children of Israel came again from the
captyuyte of Babylon they separated themself from people strangers / and also
put them in fastings / they cladde them in sackes / they put earth upon their
heedes and worshypped their lord god. Another example written in the first
chapter of Job yt when the said Job had herd the words of the messengers the
which came to tell him that his goods were lost and his sons slain / he
lift him up and fell prostrate unto the earth and worshypped god and said.
Nudus egressus su^ de vtero matris me / and nudus reuer^ar illuc. Another
example written in the.vi. chapter of Danyell the which was commanded of
king Dayre that none ne should demand any thing of god ne of man by.xxx.
days / but alonely of the said king Dayre. And Danyell ne did nothing and
bowed his knees three times on a day and worshypped his lord god. Another
example written in the second chapter of ye euangelyst saint Mathewe that when
the kings that came fro the oryent entered in to the house and found the child
and the vyrgyn Mary his mother they yode on their knees and worshypped him.
Another example in the.x chapter of the gospel of saint John that a man yt
had be blind from his natyuy^ was enlumyed of Ihesus and after wo^shypped him.
Another example write Mathei.viij. and marci.j. that when Jesus descended from
the mountain a mesel^ a lepre came to him and worshypped him and said. Domine
si vis potest me mundare. My lord if thou will thou may^^ heel me. Another
example written M^thei.xxviij. that when the appostles cam^ to our lord after
yt he was risen they wo^shypped him. Another example written in the.iiij.
chapitre of the gospelles of sayn^ Mathewe that our lord said unto Satan as
he tempted him. Thou shall wo^shyppe thy lord god. Dn^m deum tuu^ adorabis et
illi soli seruies. Another example written in the.xxij. chapter of the
Apocalypse that after that saint Johan ha^ seen the reuelacyons of god he fell
before fete of the angel that had showed their to him to the end that he might
worship him. And the angel said / keep the from doing yt. And afterward
follows wo^shyp god. Thou shall be right vnnatura^ to dysknowlege thy god the
which is t^^ creator of the heaven and of the earth / g^uerneth all the world
and purueyeth unto all creatures all things as to them be necessary. Also
thou sholdest be ydolat^ to give unto the ydolles and strange go^des the
honor the which apperteyne^ unto the fourmer and creatoure of us all The
scryptures says that the name (...) god is louable from the oryent till unto
occydent. Vnde psalmus. Asolis ortu vs^ ad occasum laudabile nome^ domini. A so
thou sholdest be without entendemen^ and natural reason for too think that
stone or a symulacre has puyssaunce f^ to give the health in thy sickness or
paradyse at the end of thy life. Also force or p^yssaunce proceeds of the
creator as it is written Iohannis.j. Omnia per ipsum fata sunt / et sine ipso
factum est nichil. And therefore believe in one only god in trinyte and if thou
therein be ferme and steadfast you shalt be worthy to do miracles as did a
priest the which entered within the fire for to approve the faith and was not
bre^t Quere.lxi. B. Another example how a good man steadfast in god required him
that a mountain might be remoeued and changed from one place in to another
for to conferme the faith / and his request was herd. Quere.lxj. a. Unto this
purpose it is written Mathei.xxj. Amen dico vobis si habueritis fidem et non
hesitaueritis et si monti huic dixeritis toll et iactare te i^ mare fiet.
Certainly I say you if it be so that ye have had faith without doubting / and
that have said unto this mountain take the away and cast the in to the sea /
it shall be done.

C. Secondly it is defended to believe in ydolles and strange gods / in
errors / and folysshe credences.vj.
IT is written in the ancient testament that god defends al ill operacions /
thoughts / and words of infydelyte the which these ydolatres speaks / and
thinks against the faith. Vnde exodi.xx. c. No^ habebis deos alienos coram
me. No^ facies tibi sculpile neque omnem similitudinem que est in celo desuper
/ et que in terra / nec oi^a eorum que sunt in aquis sub terra non adorabis ea
neque colles. That is to lay. Thou shall not have strange gods before me
Thou ne shall make ydoldes ne statues ne symylytudes what so ever it be in the
sky on hye as the son and the moon that many have worshypped unfaithfully /
nor in other things the which ben on the earth of the things the which ben
in / waters / ne under the earth. Thou ne shall worship those things ne give
unto them the dyuyne honor / that is that ye which is written before. One
only god with all thyn heart thou shalt serve / and in him believe. Thou
shalt love him with all thyn heart and also thou shall honor him. Maledyccyon
comes on those the which will not believe in god / and the which makes
ydolles unto whom they adiust and put their faith. Vnde deuteronomie.xxvij.
Maledictus homo qui facit scultilie et conflatile abhominationem domini opus
manuum artificium. And it is written Leuitici.xix. Nolite conuerti ad ydola nec
deos conflatiles facietis vobis: ego dominus deus vester. Convert you not unto
ydolles / conflatyles and sculptures / that is that ye make no gods by
blowynges and grauynges as did the children of Israel when Moses yode to
fetch ye commandments in the mountain / they wend to have made a god of
gold and of silver and they made a calfe the which they worshypped and
daunced about. Than Moses was wroth of the said ydolatryse and of the daunces
/ and he kest down the tables wherein was written the commandments and brake
the^ he made to cease the said daunces and called on his party all those the
which were not there to consenting unto whom he said that they should put
unto death al the^ the which had ydolatrised and daunced and that the son
ne should spare the fader ne other parent / for in so doing they should
consacre their hands in obeyenge unto god / and so it was done. For of the
people of god the which had so ydolatrysed and daunced there were.xxx.
thousand slain / and by the will of god as thou shall find. Exodi.xxxij.
Vocem cantantium ego audio dicit moses. Et cum appropinquasset ad castra vidit
vitulum and choreas Iratusque valde proiecit de manu tabulas et confregit eas.
Questyon. To know if that it be offense to make and worship the images of the
saints of paradyse for that before it has be said. Non facies tibi scultile /
nec omnem similitudinem que est in celo de super. etc. The answer. We should
not worship the images in like wise as the thing that we adoure / for that
should be ydlatrye / but we worship other thing that the image represents /
as so me saint. The image is alonely the token of the thing that we worship
/ wherefore we offend not. Many folks have broken this commandment and yet
does / as ben the ydolatres the which worshyppeth and serves unto ydolles
and gives unto them ye dyuine honor / their faith / esperaunce / and love
that they should give unto the creatoure. These ydolatres be^ excommunycate by
the sentence of right. It appears also by many examples that they deyed of an
evil death / as Egeas the which made to crucyfye saint Andrewe. Quere.lvij.
c. And Dyascorus the which beheded his daughter saint barbara.lvij. e Also the
prouoste Tarquyn / the king of Perse. Cosydore. Quyncyen. Maxymyen. etc. In
likewise as men shall find in ye examplary in the first commandment.lvij. f.
Also the Jews the which would not believe in our savior and redemptour Jesus
christ / and will not worship him / serve him / and honor him / and abides
the cursed Antechryste transgresses this commandment and gooth unto
da^pnacyon and perdycion perdurable. Also these sarazyns the which worshippeth
Mahoumet the which was a man false and heretyke the which is dampened breketh
this commandment. Also the apostates the which leueth their crystendome / or
relygious their relygyon / or other the which l^ueth any things that they
have promised to keep in crystyanyte breketh this commandment. Example of
people the which has been apostates.lviij. a. b. Also wytches and sorceresses
the which rides upon bromes / worshyppeth ye bucke / and have oyntementes and
things dyabolykes ben excommunycate of the sentence of right and synneth
mortally and the case is reserved unto ye bysshoppes. Example of a Jew sorcyer
the which mysse counceyled Theophyle. Quere.lvij. b. Those ye which uses
wytchcraftes should be gretely punysshe Vt habetur extra de sortilegijs. Ex
tua^ quod si imperfectiones sortilegas faciunt e^si ex celo and sole
simplicitate hoc faciunt g^^uissimum peccatum incurtum. Et si sacerdos ex
simplicitate hoc fecerit per annum debet segregari ab altaris misterio.
Laic^vero si hoc fecerit quadraginta diebus a ^^munione fidelium priuetur et
exco^icetur Clericus vero officio and beneficio priuari p^test vt pm i^
decreto.xxvj. Questione.v. with dr. Non licet cristiano gentilium tradi^^nes
obseruare vel elementa color. etc. Al^^ Inuocatours of the devil of hell and
those the which of him demau^deth help and aid and wylleth his alyaunce / or
the wh^che makes covenant with him / or tho^^ the which unto him makes
sacryfyce? honor / and those the which makes him images / or those ye which
of him demand answer of any questyon / such people ben excommunycate by
sentence of rygh^ and offends gretely. Also chermours the which gives
health and aid by words incredybles / dyabolykes and folysshe ^^^dences / or
dyuynours the which demands of ye devil by reuelacyon of any thing
secret / or ye truth of things to combreketh this commandment. And those
ye which gooth unto charmours for to be (...) led / or unto dyuyners to have
reuelacyon and leueth god unto whom such things apperteneth sy^neth mortally
and renyeth their faith / cresme / and baptism / for they had renounced the
devil in saying. Abrenu^tio sathane et om^ibus po^pis eius. And they thereto
return. After the old law the dyuyners were stoned and put to death. Vnde
legitur leui.xx. Vir sieve mulier in quibus phitonicus vl diuinationis fuerit
morte moriatur lapidibus obruent es / sanguis eoru^ sit superillos. Example of
charmours ye charmeth hogs in time of mast yt wolves neete them. Quere.lx. a.
Example of king Ochozyas that sent to seek cou^ceyle of his sekenes at
Beezebub / and evil came unto him / and his messengers were brent with fire of
heaven. Quere.lx. b. Raymo^de says that regulerly all such dyuynement is
defended and cursed of god and of holy church as is ydolatry and infydelyte.
Unto god alonely apperteyneth to know the things secrets and to come / and
such people labors to know them and also grau^teth the dyuyne things
which apperteyneth unto god. The prophet Iheremye says yt a man should not
here such sort of people Vn^ iheremie. Nolite audire prophetas vestros
diuinos and sonniatores and augures maleficos qui dicunt vobis / non seruietis
regibabilonis qr mendaciu^ prophetant vt long facia^t vos et pereatis. etc.
Also people of folysshe believe that puts and adiusteth faith in cry of
birds / or in the metynge of beestes or those that holds paynyms customs as
those the which keeps the days egypcyens or the kalendes of January in the
which they do make gifts the one to the other in the beginning of the good
year in having many folysshe credences contrary unto the faith catholyke /
such things ben contrary unto the health of ye souls and should be left. Vn^
aug. xxvj. q^re.vij Non obseruetis dies qui dicu^tur egyptiaci / aut kalendas
Ianuarij in quibus ca^delle et quedam co^messationes / et ad inuicem dona
donantur quasi in principio boni a^ni facti augurio aut reliquas menses et
tempora dies ve aut annos aut lune et mensis solisque cursus hora / et qui has
quascu^que diuinationes aut facta / aut auguria / aut tendit / aut contendit /
aut conse^tit obseruationibus / aut credit / aut ad eoru^ domum vadit / aut in
sua domo introducit vt interroget / sciat se cristianam fidem et baptismum
preuaricasse / et paganum et apostatam et dei inimicum / iram dei in eternum
incur re nisi penitentia ecclesia eme^datus deo rereconsilietur. Example of a
relygyous man and of a woman ye which put faith in the song of a cuckowe /
and ill came to them. Quere.lx. c. d. All manner of mysbeleuynge people should
dread temporal punycyon and eternal dampnacyon. It is written deuteronomie.xi.
Cauete ne forte decipiatur cor vestrum and recedatis a domino seruiatisque dijs
alienis et adoretis eos / iratusque dominus claudat celum et pluuie no^
descendant / nec terra det germen suu^ pereatis velociter de terra optima quam
dominus daturus est vobis. Beware lest by adventure your heart be deceived and
that ye ne depart you from the lord / and that ye serve not unto strange
gods / and that ye ne worship them for dread that your lord be not wroth /
and that he close not ye heuens / and that the rain descend not and the earth
ne give his fruit / and that ye perysshe not hastily from the land that
almighty god should give unto you. They the which has broken and froyssed
this commandment should not dyspayre the^ but they ought for to do penance
and they shall be saved how grievous so ever the sins ben the which they have
committed Example in Theophyle which renyed god and he was saved by penance.
Quere.lviii. b. Another example of a relygyous the which was apostate and
harlot and she was saved by penance. Quere.cxiiij. a. Also those ye which
desires to be saved should take the condycion of the pilgrim of paradyse the
which ben written after.xlv. a. b. c. Also people incredibles should dread to
be sent in to the fire of hell there to be bre^t eternally / the which is a
tourment most cruel as it is wryte^ afterward. q^re.xlix. b. Example of a
priest prince of the ydolles the which is in the fire of hell. Quere.lvij. a.

A. Thyrdly all the artycles of the faith ben here commanded to believe in
likewise as the church believes and holds.vii.
ANathasius says. Quicunque vult saluus esse ante om^ia opus est vt teneat
catholicam fidem Quam nisi quisque integram inuiolata^que seruauerit absque
dubio ineternum peribit. Every person the which will be saved it is requysyte
before all things that he hold the faith catholyke / the which if every one
ne keep hole without doubt he shall perysshe in perdurabylyte. Al good
catholykes should believe in one only god in trynyte as it is said before. And
who so believes in god steadfastly it behooves that he believe in all his
operacions / as in ye creacyon of heaven and of ertth and in his sanctyfycacyons
/ as in the holy church. Wherefore ye artycles of the faith ben here
commanded the which does follow.

Saint Peter says. Credo in vnum deum.

Who so will believe steadfastly
In the faith of crystyente
Believe in one god alonely
Three persons in unity.
Again saint Peter says. Patrem^^ potentem. And saint Andrewe says

Et in iesum christum filium eius vn^^^ dominum nostrum. And saint Barthylmewe
says. Credo in spm^ sanctum Vnu^ creed deum personis hunc fore t^num. Sunt
pater natus neuma sacer deus vnus.

That is in the fader all puyssaunt
And in the holy ghost also
And in Jesus his dear infaunt
As christian men should do
Also saint Andrewe says Creatore^ celi et terre.

And this only god in trynyte
The heaven the earth and the sea
And all other things made has he
For the conforte of our humanyte
Saint Mathewe says. Sanctam ecclesiam catholicam.

In holy church also believe
By steadfast faith and devotion
As nere as god grace the shall give
If thou entende to have salvation
Again saint Thomas says Scto^ru^ co^munionem. And saint Simon. Remissiomem
peccatorum.

And believe that all good crystyens
Have with the saints communyon
Of all good deeds by the sacraments
And of their sins remyssyon
Saint jude says. Carnis resurreccione^
And when ye angel his horn shall blow
All that been deed shall appear
Lie they in earth never so low
In body and soul enrere
Saint Mathewe says. Vita^ eternam

And those the which has lived well
In to paradyse shall ascend
The evil also great pain shall feel
In hell ever withouten end
Saint James the more says. Qui co^ceptus est de spiritu sa^c to natus ex
maria virgin.

Believe also by great veryte
In Ihesu crystes humanyte
Conceived of the spyryte holy
And borne of the vyrgyn Mary
Saint John says. Passus sub po^tio pylato crucifixus mortuus et sepultus. And
saint Thomas says. Descendit ad in ferna.

After this he suffered gretely
On the cross for us to deye
And than buried by Joseph the good
Straight in to the helles he yood
Also saint Thomas says. Vercia die resurrexit a mortuis. And saint James the
less says. Ascendit ad celos sedet ad dexteram dei patris oi^potentis.

On the third day he did arise
And in to heaven ye shall understand
He reascended in most goodly wise
And sytteth on his faders right hand
Saint Phylyp says. Inde venturus est iudicare viuos et mortuos.

He has promised as we read
On domes day to come again
To Judge the quycke and the deed
Some to bliss and some to pain
Hec est fides catholica quam nisi quisque fideliter firmiterque crediderit /
saluus esse non poterit.

Who so his soul thinks to save
Entendynge here after to come to bliss.
Parfyte faith must he have
In one article he may not mysse
THe person the which will be saved ought to be steadfast / stable / and
immouable in ye faith for it is the foundement upon the which men edifye ye
other virtues for to multyply them in goods espyrytuelles and for to mount in
to paradyse. Vnd ad collocenses.i. In fide sitis fundati stabiles et immobiles.
Be ye founded in the faith stable and immouable. Also we read of a wise man
the which edyfyed his house upon a steadfast stone / and the rain descended
and the winds and the waters struck against it and it fell not / for it was so
well founded. Vnde mathei.vij. Desce^dit pluuia et venerunt flumina / et
flauerunt venti et irruerunt in domum illam et non cecidit / fundamenta enim
erant super petra^. The raynes descended / that is ye tourmentes and
aduersitees the which descends from the heyght of the air. By ye waters the
which comes ben understand ye persecucyons of the rich puyssauntes. And by
the wyndes the which blows ben understand the favors of the world / or ye
Iniuryes / thretenynges / and unjust languages ye which stryketh against ye
house belonging to the Just by diverse temptacyons. And it fell not from good
purpose by delectacion / consentement ne good operacyon / for it was founded
upon a stone / yt is ye faith of god. Saint Poule says in his epystles. In
oibus sume^tes scutu^ fidei i^ quo possites oi^a tela neqissimi ignea
exti^guere. For to resyst against ye temptacyons of ye devil it behooves to
have steadfast faith And a man should note ye faith without operacyon is deed
and of no value / and as the body is deed when ye soul is departed. Vn^. Job
ii. Sicut corpus sine ai^a mortuu^ est ita and fides sine operibus mortua est.
Example of some yt has been sure in ye faith. q^re.lxi. a. b B. Much people
gooth to da^pnacion and perdyco^n for lack of faith as lollers and heretykes
that holds and believes some thing against ye artycles of the faith / and
instruteth ye sy^ple folk so to believe / such people ben excommunycate by
sentence of right. Vt habetur extra de hereticis. Exco^municamus. And is a case
reserved unto the bysshoppes. Also all those the which has put faith and
credence unto the said heretykes in reputing them to be good and to have good
faith / and all those the which defends them of deed and of word ben also
excommunycate. Also many heretykes have been ill reproved for that yt they have
erred against the artycles of ye faith First Manycheus erred the which said yt
there were two gods / the one good and the other badde / and that the good
had created the things inuysybles and the ill the things vysibles. Against
this error saint Peter says. Credo in vnum deum patrem omnipotentem creatore^
celi et terre. Secondely Arryanus erred the which said that Ihesu christ was a
creature created less after the dyuynyte than god ye fader. Against this error
Anathasius says. Filius a patre solo est no^ factus nec creatus / sed genitus.
Equalis patri secundum diuinitatem: minor patre secundum humanitatem. Thyrdly
some greeks have erred the which said that the holy ghoost was creature and
not god. Against this error was made in the symbol. Qui cum patre et filio
simul adoratur et conglorificatur. Fourthly Sabellius erred the which put the
confusyon of the persons without to dystyngue them and said that the fader
was sometime the sone and sometime the holy ghost. Against this error Anathasius
does say. Alia est enim persona patris alia filii / alia spiritussa^cti vna
est diuinitas. Fyfthly the Jews and sarazyns erred ye which believed not in
Ihesu christ and gooth against the artycles of the faith. Sextly Iacobyte and
Nycolayte erreth / for they believe otherwise in the sacrament than ne does ye
holy church Romayne: Seue^thly the Greeks erreth the which denies that the
holy church Romayne ne is the chyefe and the maystresse of al chyrches.
Against this error was put in the symbol. Apostolicam ecclesiam. Many other
heretykes have erred against the faith the which I leave by cause of shortness.
Examples of heretykes. And first example that ye deuylles kept an heretyke
from brennynge: but when the body of Ihesu christ was brought they ne might
keep him.lix. a.

Another example that a cautelous heretyke was brent of a fool.lix. c.

A. Fourthly of the effect of the.vii. sacraments the which ben comprehended
under the artycles of the faith.viij.
IT is written that our lord said unto his dyssyples that they should go
through out the world to preche ye gospel yt is all holy after our faith. He
the which has believed in god after the faith and has accomplysshed that the
which is written in the gospel and has been baptized shall be saved. And he
the which has not believed shall be condampned. Un. mar. xvi. Euntes in mundum
vniuersum predicate eua^gelium omni creature. Qui crediderit and baptisatus
fuerit saluus erit / qui vero no^ crediderit condempnabitur. After the law
catholyke and the holy scryptures we believe that these sinners have remyssyon
and pardon of all their sins by the grace and mercy that god has given and
instytued unto those the which worthily and holyly receives the holy
sacraments instytued and ordained in his church / the which holy sacraments
ben contained and hole comprehended under these artycles. Credo sanctam
ecclesiam catholicam / sanctorum communionem remissionem peccatorum. And they
ben seven the which folowen. That is to know Baptysme / penance /
confyrmacion / vnccyon / order of prestehode / eucarystie / and marriage. After
the scryptures these sacraments ben Instytued for to hele those yt ben seek by
the Infeccyon of sin. The church is an apotycary or as the house of a prudent
phesycyen the which is furnysshed with all good medycynes against all
sekenesses for to give health. The seek man is the sinner / the phesycyen is
Ihesu christ / the mynyster of the medycyne is the priest / the entrayte the
lectuary / and apotecareryes is the virtues of the sacraments. The sy^ner has
many sekenesses / the first that comes in to this world is sin orygynall /
against ye which is the sacrament of baptysme for to hele it. The second
sekenes is venyall sin against the which is instytued the oil of ye last
vnccyon. The third sekenes is mortal sin / against the which is instytued
the sacrament of penance. The.iiii. sekenes is debylyte or weykenes of faith
/ against the which is instytued confyrmacion. The fyfthe sekenes is
ygnouraunce of things verytables / against the which is instytued the
sacrament of the order of prestehode / for he the which receives it ought to
be a clerk and sage for to instruct. The syxte is the concupyscence carnal
of voluptuous people / against the which is instytute the sacrament of
marriage. The seventh is affection dysordynate in things blind and defaylynge
/ against the which is the sacrament of eucharystye. or body of our lord.
Also the seven sacraments gives great grace unto sinners / for they do bear
effect. By the great grace that almighty god has given within the effect of
the sacrament of baptysme well received all gylte is effaced and put away.
that is orygynall and all sin actual mortal / and venyall. And this
sacrament gives grace and also all virtues as well theologalles as moralles /
and if it ne gives them as unto the usage / yet it gives the^ as unto the
habyte. Si non dat quantum and vsum ad minus dat quantum ad habitum. Ista est
sentencia consilii generalis Vt habetur in constitutionibus domini clementis
extra de su^ma trinitate et fide. ca. c Fidei catholice. Also the effect of
the holy sacrament of baptysme gives an affynyte espyrytuall the which is so
right parfytely great that it lets marriage / so that the baptysant and the
godfaders and god moders and gosseppes ne may have in marriage ye baptized. Also
baptysme opens the gates of paradyse and makes him to possede / and makes
him to be perteyner in the passion of our savior and redemtour Ihesu christ.
Quia omnes qui in christo baptizati sunt christum induunt. Vt dicit paulus in
suis epistolis. This sacrament of baptysme is requysyte of ye necessyte of
health. For it is written Iohannis tercio. Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua and
spiritu sancto non potest introire in regnum dei. Who so has not be gotten
again / or newly borne / regenerate / or washed from sin orygynall by water
and by the holy ghost ne may enter in to the realm of god. Also as says the
holy euangelyst saint Mark It is requysyte that we be all baptized in likewise
as it has been said and declared here tofore.

B. The effect of the sacrament of penance well taken in contrycyon /
confession / satysfaccyon and purpose no more to return unto sin does many
goodnesses unto ye soul of every man and woman contryte for their sin. The
first is that it wassheth / puryfyeth / and makes clean the soul from the
fylthe of sin. The second that it effaceth / adnychylleth / and makes to
put in forgetfulness all venyall and mortal sins. The third that unbinds
and lowseth the lines of the devil and of sin / and takes ye soul from her
vile servitude. The fourth goodness that the sacrament of penance does is that
it makes the appoyntement of the dyscorde ye which was between god and man by
sin. The fyfthe that it makes man to be the sone of god and of grace that
was by syne the sone of ire and of the devil by Imytacion. The syxte goodness
yt penance does is that it recouereth and makes to come again the good
virtues and operacions ye which had been done in thestate of grace ye which
were put in forgetynge and lost by mortal sin. The seventh goodness that
penance does is that it makes a man to be the membre of god and of the
church and makes him to be pertener and gadred in the good deeds of saints /
for by mortal sin the man is separate from god and from his saints.
The.viij. goodness that the sacrament of penance does is that it unbinds and
dyschargeth man from da^pnacyon and perdycyon. The nynth goodness is that it
opens paradyse unto ye sinner and makes him to have the life eternal and to
reygne with god. All sinners should receive this sacrament in great faith /
humylyte / and reverence / for by ye great grace that is in it all sins ben
pardoned / in likewise as says holy scryptures in many places. It is written
Mathei.iij. Facite fructum dignum penitentie. Make ye fruit dygne of penance.
Et legitur Ezechielis.xviij. Si autem impius egerit penitenciam ab omnibus
peccatis suis que operatus est et custodierit vniuersa precepta mea et fecerit
iudicium et iusticiam vita viuet / et non morietur / omnium iniqu^tatum eius
quas operatus est non recordabor. That is to say. If the sinner will do penance
of all his sins that he has committed / and after that he has kept all my
commandments / and that he has done Judgment and Justice which is to
yield unto every man that the which unto him apperteyneth he shall live in
life eternal and shall not deye in dampnacyon / nor I shall never record ne
remember none of ye sins that he has committed. And it is written
Eyechyelis.xxxiij. Nolo mortem impii sed vt conuertatur a via sua and viuat.
Sequitur post iusticia iusti non liberabit ei^ in quacunque die peccauerit /
and impietas i^p^ non nocebit ei in quacunque die conuersus fuerit ab impietate
sua. That is to say. I will not the death of the evil sinner / bu^ that he be
converted from his cursed way and yt he live / and it follows. The Iust^ce of
the just shall not deliver him in o^^ day that he has sinned / and the sin
of the wicked man shall not noye him in on^ day that he co^uerteth him from his
euylnes: and therefore the sinners ben not to be despised. For such one shall
be this day evil the which peruauenture shall be t^morowe a good penytent and
of the nombre of the saved. Example in of the sinner publycan ye which in
short time was Iustyfyed and better than the pharasee which despised him / in
like wise as it is written in the.xviij. chapter of the gospeles of saint Luke.
Another example (...) the thief zacheus the which at the beginning was evil
and in short time wa^ converted and a good man in likewise as it is written in
the gospelles of saint Lu^ Also Theophyle. Thais. Mary magdalene in short time
converted them / and many other examples semblables shall be fo^de by the table
of the examplary in the ty^tre of penance. It is written in the.xviij. chapter
of ye gospelles of saint Mathewe that if a man had an hundred sheep and that
one of them were lacking / he would leave the.lxxxxix. too seche that one / and
if he may find him he will enjoy more of that sheep than of the other which
has not gone out of the way. Also Joy shall be made in heaven upon a sinner
the which has done penance. Vn^ Luce.xv. Gaudium erit in celo super vno
peccatore penitentiam agent quam super nonaginta nouem iustus qui non indigent
penitentiam. Also the publyke sinners and the manifest harlottes the which
comes unto penance and reknowlege their defautes shall be more sooner saved
than ye devout people that Iustyfyeth themself and reknowlege not their
sins. Vnde. Math xxi. Amen dico vobis quia publicani et meretrices precedent
vos in regno dei / venit enim ad vos johannes in via iusticie et non
credidistis ei / publicam autem et meretrices crediderunt ei. etc. By theffect
of the sacrament of confyrmacyon well taken the venyall sins ben pardoned.
The holy ghost fortyfyeth the person in the faith and assures him from fere.
Grace newly therein is given / and the ancient therein is augmented. By theffect
of the sacrament of vnccyon well taken the venyall sins ben forgoten / and
the mortalles ben pardoned. This sacrament gives medycine and health unto the
body and unto the soul / and perseueraunce in good operacyons / it multyplyeth
and augmenteth grace gotten and gives grace of new / also it defends from
the enemy. Of this sacrament it is wryte^ Iacobi.v. Infirmatur quis ex vobis
inducat presbiteros ecclesie vt orent super eum vnguentes cum oleo sancto and
alleuiabir eu^ dominus a languoribus suis et si in peccatis sit dimittentur ei.
If any of you be seek call for the prestes of the church to the end that they
pray over him in anoytinge hy^ with the holy oil and our lord shall light
him of his la^goures / that is of his sekenes And if he be in sins they ben
forgyuen him. And the psalmyst in the person of ye sinners says. Miserere mei
domine quoniam infirmus sum sana me domine quoniam conturbata sunt ossa mea.
Lord have mercy upon me which am dyseased heleme / for all my bones ben
troubled. The sacrament of order is of purete / clennes / science / prudence
given unto priests for to Instruct the people / for admynystre the sacraments
/ to bind and to unbind ye sy^ners. The sacrament of eucaristie that is ye
sacrament of the auter is god in form of breed and of wine the which gives
grace unto all folk and life eternal in likewise as it is requysyte. Vnde
john.vi. Hec est panis de celo descendens / vt si quis ex ipso manducauerit non
morietur. Here is ye bread descendynge from heaven to the end that who so eteth
of it shall not deye. Iterum legitur in eodem capitulo. Ego sum panis viuus qui
de celo descendi / si quis manducauerit ex hoc pane viuet in eternum / and
panis quem ego dabo caro mea est pro mundi vita. That is to say. I am the breed
of life that am descended from heaven / who so eteth of this breed worthily and
in such wise deyeth shall live in pardurabylite / and the breed that I give is
my flesh for the life of the world. Example that a vyrgin saw a priest
clear / fair / and shynynge in great glory as he song mass. que^.lxxxxiiij
a. Another example that a bishop saw upon an ester day some men confessed the
which were meruaylously white / and ye other black.lxxxxiiij. c. It is a
great thing to receive his creatoure in the estate of grace for it is unto the
salvation of the soul. And those ye which receives it unworthily it is to
their dampnacyon. Vnd. j. ad corin. xi. Qui enim manducat et bibit indigne
iudicium sibi manducat et bibit. Example Judas received it unworthily too his
dampnacyo^. Another example / two prestes received their maker unworthily and
they were punysshed dyuynely.xxxvii. E Another example of a priest fornycatoure
ye which deyed suddenly as he would sing mass.lxxxxiii. D. The sacrament of
marriage is the coniunccyon of man and woman for to multyply ye world / for to
avoid sin / and for to love and praise god in heaven and in the earth. Some
keeps their marriage and they shall have in paradyse retrybucyon / and those
the which breketh it shall have punycion / in likewise as men shall find by
the scryptures.xxxvi. a. And by examples.lxxxxj. a. b. The sacraments
beforesayd bears in them great effect / for without them these sinners ne may
be unbound of syn^e nor saved / and therefore we should receive them worthily
and holyly. The ben said holy also for by them these sinners ben sanctyfied in
like wise as we believe. etc. Example that a curate should not tarry to
adminyster the sacraments of the church when his parysshens ben seek and call
for them.

C. It is written in the end of the first book of the dialogue of saint
Gregory that a fader of an household was seek nygh unto the death and he sent
to fetch the rectour of ye parysshe a worshypfull priest named Seuerus the
which was found occupied in cuttynge his vine. And the messengers said to him
yt their master prayed hi^ yt he would come right hastily to him to ye end
that he might pray for him / that he might confess him / and that he might do
penance or he deyed. The which priest said to the said messengers. Go ye
before I will come after you / and he tarried a while or he departed to make an
end of a little thing the which was left of his operacyon when he had ended
he put him on ye wa^ to goo unto the said seek man / and in the way he found
the said messengers ye wh^che ran toward him: and unto hy^ say* A priest why
haste thou tarried so long travail the no more for he is departed: when he
herd them say so he was much sorry / and so all weeping he came to ye say^ body
that was deed and there he fell prostrate unto the earth in weeping and
wa^lynge and saying that he was homycyd^ of the said deed body. And as he wept
the soul of ye said deed man came again unto the said body. And when they the
wh^che were present saw that of great Joy and admyracyon that they had they
t^ke them to weep / the which him demanded where he had been and how he wa^
comen again. He answered the deuyll^ led me the which were as men right
^^deous and black from whom issued o^ of their mouth and nosethrylles fire
an flambe so that might not endure / and a they led me by derke places
suddenly fair vysyon an angel as a fair you^ man came against them the
which led^ me unto whom he said. Bry^ge him aga^ne for the priest Seuerus
has be wepth our lord has given him unto him (...) his teeres. Than ye said
man reuyued ar^se up suddenly from the earth / confess him / did penance by
seven days / a^ on the.viii. day Ioyously he departed o^ of this world.
After this example a pre^ should never deffer too admynyster the s^cramentes of
the church to any person^ that them needs. Also a person sho^^ not tarry to
confess him / to corecte / and mende till he be nere his death / when is very
aeged / and when he may no longer prolouge ne delay. Audi scripture Legitur
ecclesiastici quinto. Non tardes conuerti ad dominum et ne differas de die in
diem subito enim veniet ira illius and in te^pore vindicte disperdet te. Et
eccl. xvij. No^ demoreris in errore impiorum ante morte^ confiteri. etc. Et ad
romanos.xiiij. Abijciamus opera tenebrarum.i. opera peccati. Et ysaie.j.
Lauamini mu^di estote auferte malum cogitatione vestrarum ab oculis meis dicit
dn^s: quiescite agere perverse discite benefacere. Ecclesi. xvij. Viuus et
sanus confiteberis et laudabis dominum / and glorificaberis in miserationibus
illius. Et eccl. xviij Ante languorem adhibe medicinam et ante iudicium
interroga teipsum / et in conspectu dei inuenies propiciationem.

A. Fyfthly it is commanded here to love god above all things / and defended
to love other things more than him.ix.
IT is written in the.xiiij. chapitre of the gospelles of saint Johan Si quis
diligit me sermonem meum seruabit. etc. Sequitur. Qui no^ diligit me sermones
meos no^ seruat. Who so loves me he keeps my word: and he the which loves
me not keeps not my words. It is a thing right reasonable to love god the
creator and to obey unto him above all things created in like wise as it is
declared before. Quere i. d. e. f. For to understand this dyleccyon saint
Thomas of Aquin gives a rule general saying in this wise. In the thought of
man there is ever some thing that he loves soueraynly above all things / and
in it he ordeyneth his life. And that / that he loves in such wise is the
last end and intencion. If it be god he is in thestate of grace / and if he
deye in such wise he shall be saved. If it be a creature he is in thestate of
dampnacyon. Saint Austyn says. Peccatum mortale est libido sieve amor
voluptatis supra deu^ vel equaliter ei. Mortal sy^ne is lechery or love of
volupte above god / or egall unto him. Et peccatum veniale est libido sieve amor
voluptatis citra deum. Venyal sin is lechery or love of volupte under god.

B. Many sorts of people there be^ that loves other things better than god.
First these auarycyous men the which loves ye gold and the silver and the
other goods of ye world above god / and puts their love / fyaunce / and
hope more in the help of goods than in the aid of god / they break this
commandment and synneth mortally. Quia proponunt ceeaturam creaturi. They
love the thing created above the creator / the which is ydolatry. Vnde ad
ephe. v. Auaricia est ydoloru^ seruitus. Vn^ augustinus dicit. Hoc est homine
colitur / quod preceteris diligitur. That thing is honored of man the which
he loves above all things. Et psalm. di. Simulachra ge^tium argentum et aurum
opera manuum hominum. The ydolles of people is silver and gold / the
operacions of the hands of man. For to win an halfpeny the auarycyous
swereth and forswereth himself / breketh the feestes and leueth to serve god
and to say his service / for his heart is on the goods more than on god. And
he may not serve unto god and unto the devil. Vnde mathei quinto capitulo.
Nemo potest duobus dominis seruire. etc. Sequitur Non potest deo seruire et
mammone.

Example of an auarycyous usurer the which axed help of his gold and silver
wha^ he should dye. Quere.lxxxvi. F. Another example of an auarycyous man ye
which commanded his soul unto the devil at his gate for that / that it
would no longer abide with his treasoures and goods. Quere. lxxxvi. G.

C. Secondely these glotons the which loves their wombes more than god and
the which serves unto the preparacyons of meets for to nouryshe the belly
more sooner than to do service unto god in his church / or the which obeys
unto their wo^bes when they will ete more sooner than unto god when he is
commanded to fast and to abstain him / they break this commandment / and
make their god of their wombes the which is a manner of ydolatri whereof speaks
saint Poule ad philippe^.iij. Quorum deus venture est and gloria in co^fusione
eorum. Of the which glotons the belly is their god and glory unto their
confusyon / unto ye which belly or womb they make their oblacions and
sacryfyces. Their church is the kechyn where they say their matyns and
deuiseth of their service. Their priest is the coke the which makes the
sacryfyce for to give to the belly the which is the god / and the sacryfyce ben
the meases of the metes / the awter is the platter / the ensence is the odor
of wynes and metes. the lauds of the matyns that been said at the table where
the wyles / mockeryes / and detracco^ns ben reherced. For to make short that /
that a person loves and honors most is his ydoll or god. Vnde Isodorus.
Cuique quoth magis colit vel diligit hoc ydolum vel deus est illi. This sin of
glotony draws a man gloton unto apostasy. Vn^ ecclesiasti.xix. Vinum et
mulieres apostatare faciu^t sapientes et arguent sensatos. The wine and
lecherous women: bry^geth in apostasy the wise men / and repreueth ye wytty.
Also it ledeth in to dampnacyon. Vnde paulus and roma. viij. Si enim secundum
carnem vixeritis moriemini. If ye live after ye body or the flesh ye shall
dye. that is ye shall be dampened. Example of a woman dampened the which used
her life in glotonyes / dronkenesses / and lecheryes.lxxxxij. A. Another
example of (...) gloton named Vodo the which yode vnt^ the tauernes when he
should go unto the church.lxvij. E. The ydolatry of the paynyms is evil / for
they honor the ydolls and gives unto them the dyuyne honor the which
apperteyneth unto god. The ydolatrye of the auarycyous is wors / for they love
and worship gold and silver more than god. The ydolatrye of glotons (...) yet
wors and worst of all the which hono^reth their womb and makes it their g^^
as it is said. Thyrdly the lechours louet^ their folysshe lover more than god /
and obeyth more sooner unto her than unto go^ that is to say / they love better
to break the that god commands than to do ayen^ the will of their said love
/ and by yt the dampne their soul / and they neither lo^^ god ne themself.
Vn^ pres. Qui diligit in^tatem odit animam suam. He the which loves inyquyte
hates his soul. Example by that Sychen loved Dygne ye doug^ter of Jacob by
love lecherous he was slane and his fader also. Que. lxxxxi. d. Fourthly those
the which loves faders and ^^ders more than god breketh this commandment
and offends in it as it said be^re. Quere.j. F. Fyfthly those the which
l^ueth any person of an evil love as did Adam anenst Eve / for dread that
their anger such persons dyspryseth to do an to accomplysshe the
commandment god and does the pleasure and desire of the said person.

D. Syxtely those the which loves to rich people and great lords / as
kings princes more than god / and the which obeys unto them sooner than
unto go^ breketh this commandment in lykewy^ as it is said before. Que. i. H.
Finably the the which for dread of any person as se^uau^tes toward their
masters leueth to obey unto god and to do his commandment for to please the
said person breketh this commandment. Qr preponu^t creaturam creaturi. etc.
The remedy for those the which has broken this commandment is that they do
penance the which makes to put in oblyuyon the sins commysed in likewise
as it is declared here before.viii. B. And afterward to take the co^dycyons of
the pilgrim of paradyse the which ledeth all right in to ye life eternal in
likewise as thou shall find here after Quere.xlv. A.

E. Syxtely the pride ye which is against the dyleccyon of god is defended in
this first commandment / and that which Gayenst the dyleccion of his
neighbor is defended in the fourth / and humylyte is commanded.ix.
IT is written in the.iiij. chapter of the epistle of saint James ye god
resysteth against the proud men and women. Deus super bis resistit. For they
dysobey unto his commau^deme^tes and unto his will A man is much proud when
he gives or will have the honor the which apperteyneth unto god / or when he
says that the goods of nature comes of him / as is youth / beauty. etc. Or
the goods of fortune as gold / silver. etc. Or ye goods of grace as wit /
reason / memory / engyn / devotion. etc. Saint Poule says.i. ad cori^. iiij.
Quid habes quod non accepisti. What gods have thou in this world that you ne
have taken them of another. When thou was borne thou brought nothing with the
/ and all the goods that thou have comes of god and all the evil that thou
have proceeds of thy self. Also thou art proud and breketh this
commandment if thou love ye honors of the world more than god or if thou
take heed more gretely to have the^ and to get them than the love of god. Or
when dysordonatly you gloryfyest thy self of the deeds that you do / or of
the goods that thou have of god in saying that they come of the or by thy
merytes / or yt there is none but thou that is worthy too have it. By such
pride a man becomes appostate. Vn^ eccle. x. Initium superbie hoi^s est
apostatare a deo. Also a proud man appeteth to have the honors worldly / the
precious clothynges or orname^tes. He wylleth that every man praise him and
honor / bow under him / call him lord / and that he trede other underfoot /
and yt he be superyoure. Example how Dauyd slew the proud Golias. Que.
lxxviij. C. Another example how the devil drew the soul from ye body of a
cursed rich man with a hoke. Que. c. v. A. Also a proud man will not obey /
but wylleth that men obey unto him / he will not serve but he will be served /
he dredeth nothing and will be dredde / he will be reputed a good man and holy
and yet will he not do the operacions. etc. For to know a proud person a man
shall wete when he has an appetyte dysordonate to have honor / excellence /
dygnyte / noblesse / lordshyppe / domynacyon over and above the good that god
has him given and ordained / but a man should know that the noblesse of
abyllementes is not defended unto every man after his estate. It is the
superfluyte of the pride the which may be taken in those abyllementes the
which is defended. Also a man shall know a proud man when he will not put
him under god and his superyoures in obedyence / dread / service / and
reverence. Pride has many cursed branches the which ben / bosty^ge
inobedyence / ypocrysy / contempcyon / pertynacyte / dyscorde / presu^pcyon /
arrogaunce in pride / exceeding elaco^n. etc. The which branches shall not be
here declared because of shortenes / but note well that the sin of pride
noyeth in many manners unto those the which commytteth it. Quere post ad
numeum.xliiij. b / c / d / e / f / g. and cete. Example in the bible of some ye
which has been proud / and first Adam and Eve committed pride in as much as
they appetyted to be semblable unto god in knowinge the good and the evil.
Eritis sicut du scie^tes bonum et malu^. Alsoo in as much as they brake the
commandment of god in bytynge the apple. Quere in thexamplary liiij. A.
Another example of those of Babylon that committed pride willing to edyfye a
toure to reche unto heaven / and god resysted against them and changed their
languages. etc. as it is written. G. xi. Agar was proud and despised her
maystresse / but the angel of god meked her as it is written. Genesis.xvj.
Another example that Pharao was proud the which would not obey unto god and
unto his servant Moses / and he was drowned as it is written in Exode.
Quere.liiij. F. Another example that Chore. Dathan / and Abyron were punysshed
for their pride / inobedyence and murmr. Quere in thexampl.liiij. H. Another
example that ye king Anthyogus was proud over puyssau^ce humayne Quere.lxxxv.
D. Another example yt a man was so proud that he would that all men should
bow the knee before him and he was hanged on a gybet as it written /
Hester.vij. ca.

F. God alsoo does command humylyte in all his commandments where he
defends pride. Men knows a person humble when voluntaryly he obeys unto
god and unto his superyours / and yt he put himself under to serve / to dread
/ and to honor another. Of humylyte is somewhat spoken in the.iiij.
commandment in the first manner how children should honor their faders.
Quere.xxj. B. Humylyte does many good deeds. Primo^ makes to exalte the
oraysons of the meke folk. Vnde psalmus. Respexit in orationem humilium et non
spreuit precem eorum Secundo it makes god to abide with the humble folk. Vnde
Ysaie. penultimo. Super quem requiescet spiritus men's nisi super humilem et
quietum et trementem sermones meos. Et bernardus. Si maria humilis non esset
super eam spiritussanctus non requiesceret. Tertio humylyte delyuereth him from
his enmyes. Vnde psalmus. Humiliatus sum et liberauit me. Iterum psalm. In
humilitate nostra memor fuit nostri. Quarto humilyte makes to have grace.
Vnde.j. petri.v. Oi^s enim inuicem humilitatem insinuate qr dominus superb^
resistit humilibus autem dat gratiam. Example in the glorious vyrgyn Mary.
Luce.j. Aue gratia plena. Quinto humylyte lyfteth the person unto god / and in
gret^ goods espyrytualles. Vn^ luce.xiiij. and.xvi^ and mathei.xxiij. Omnes
qui se humiliat e^altabitur. Example of the sinner publ^can the which humbled
him was lift v^ and Iustyfyed. Luce.xviij. Descendit h^ iustificatus ab illo
scilicet phariseo. Sext^ humylyte makes to possede paradyse. V^
prouerbioru^.xxix. Humilem spiritu sus^piet gloria. Et Job.xxiij. Qui enim
humiliatus fuerit erit in gloria et qui inclinau^rit oculos suos ipse
saluabitur. et psalm. H^miles spiritu saluabit. Examples of humylyte / and first
of a nonne the which washed the pottes / wyped the disshes / and d^de all
humble things. Quere in thexamplary.lxj. C. Another example that t^ prince the
which humbled him before H^lye and prayed hy^ mekely was not bren^ with the
fire celestyall as the other were ye which spoke proudly. Quere in
thexa^plary.lx. G. Another example in the glorious vyrgyn Mary the which made
her self handmayden unto god. Luce.j. Ecce ancilla domini. etc. Another
example of the humylyte of Ihesu christ in his natyuyte and in his his his life
the which washed the fete of his dysciples and was humble as it is written
Math. xi. Discite a me quia mitis sum et humilis cord. etc.

A. Here follows the second commandment of god the which treats of
swerynges and blaspheminges.x.
The name of god thou shall not swear by
Nor yet by his saints in vain
For if thou do so certainly
Thou shall suffer eternal pain.
This commandment is written Exodi xx. ca. Non assumes nomen dei tui in vanum.
Thou shall not take the name of god in vain. And it is wryte^ deuterono. v.
ca. Non vsurpabis nomen dei tui frustra qr non erit impunitus qui super re vana
nomen eius assumpserit. Thou shall not usurp the name of thy god for naught.
For he the which has taken his name upon a vain thing shall not abide
unpunished Examples of them the which has been punysshed for their swerynge
cursedly. Quere in the examplary.xlij. A.B. And it is written Leuitici.xix.
capitulo. Non per iurabis in nomine meo nec pollues nomen dei tui ego dominus.
Thou shalt not forswere the in my name / and thou shall not soil the name of
thy god by cursed and vyolent words. etc. In this commandment many chapytres
ben written.

B. And first that god defends all swerynges vain and vnprouffytable under
this word / vanum.x.
NEiures vana per ipsum. Swear thou not without need and in vain of a thing
whereof thou art not certain. For to understand all this commandment in
few words it behooves to hold for a rule general that as many times and as
often as a man does make oaths / sermentes / and swerynges the which ben vain
and vnprouffytable / without necessyte / without cause good and vtylyte so
often takes he the name of god in vain. Or when a man makes lyenge oaths /
and vows without truth the which be^ evil or deceytfull / or execrables /
and detestables he takes also the name of god in vain and breketh this
commandment Or when a man makes Just vows and accomplyssheth them not
according to his promysse he takes the name of god in vain. And for because
that men do swear in so many of wise manners that it is meruaylous: and that
these generalytees suffyseth not unto the people of little entendement it
behooves here afterward to goo more largely to recyte and declare the manners
therein to offend. This word here vanum is said in scripture in three manners.
Vanum aliqua^do dicitur falsum: aliqua^do inutile / aliquando peccatum
iniustum. Primo this foresaid word vanum is taken for a false thing. Thou
shalt not take the name of thy god in vain / that is to know berynge record
in wytnessynge and testyfyenge for a false thing against thy neighbor whereof
speaks the psalmyst* Vana locuti sunt homines vnusquisque a proximu^suum.
These men speaks vain things every of them unto his neighbor when any will
deceive his neighbor by any falsenes / fraud or malice he makes serment and
oath in cally^ge god unto wytnes for to conferme his malice the which is to
take the name of god in vain / so he does Injury unto god. For forswerynge is
none other thing but to call him unto wytnes for to afferme and conferme that
that a man swereth / as swore saint poule Testis est michi deus. And to call god
unto wytnes for to conferme any false thing is a great injury done unto him /
for in yt manner there it is to believe that god ne knows the veryte ne the
falsenes of the thing that a man swereth / so man apposeth on him ygnouraunce
the which is against the holyscrypture. Vnde paulus ad hebreos.iiij. Omnia nuda
et apperta sunt ante oculos eius. Al things that been open and and naked ben
openly seen before the eyes of god. Et legitur ecclesia. Oculi dn^i multo plus
lucidores super solemn circu^spicie^tes om^es vias hominum et profundum abyssi
and hominum corda intuentes in absconditas parts terre. etc. The eyes of our
lord ben much more clerer than the son beholdy^ge all the ways of men and
the profundyte and depnes of the hertes of men beholdynge in the parties hyden
of ye earth. etc. Also when in swerynge any calls god to wytnes he imposes
on him that he loves lesynges / or that he is a liar the which is a thing
that he hates. Vn^ psalm. Dilexisti iusticiam et odisti iniquitatem. Thou have
loved Justice and have hated sin / also you have loved veryte. Vnde psalm. Ecce
enim veritatem dilexisti. So to impose unto god that he loves lesynge / or
that he is a liar is a thing yt much dysprayseth his bounte and imposes on
him great injury. And therefore a forsworn person is worthy of punycyon.
Secundo / this word vanu^ is taken sometime in ye scripture for a thyge vain
and inutyle. Vnde psalm. Dominus scit cogitaciones hominum quonia^ vane sunt.
Our lord knows the thoughts of men / for they ben vain and unprofitable /
as when a man confermeth a thing vain and vnprouffytable the which is
against the thought. God the which knows the thoughts as it is written prim^
regum.xvj. sees well that man takes his name in vain. In the ancient
testame^^ it was defended that men should not swear false. But Ihesu christ
defends in the new law that men ne swear but in necesyte for a thing
vtyle. And the reason (...) such / for that / yt the tongue is the memb^ and
party of the man or of the woman^ is most frail / tender / and light
applyege for to swear and to vttre language n^yenge unto his neighbor. Et qui
iura de minimo de leui cadit. He the which s^reth for a little thing falls
lightly / an^ who so lightly falls ryseth not again when he will. And
therefore swear not vanely against thy conscience in saying o^ thing and
thinking another for to deceive thy neighbor / and leave the accus^maunce of
swerynge by god and his say^tes that punycyon do not come upon the Example of
two young men the which forswore them and the one of them becam^ lepre / and
the other seek of the fire of sayn^ Anthony. Que. lxxxxvij. d. Tertio / the
word vanum is taken sometime for sin^ and for thing inutyle the which is
magnyte / or inequalyte or Iniustyce / where speaks the psalmyst. Hilij
hominum d^gitis vanitatem et queritis mendatiu^. S^nes of men wherefore love ye
vanyte and ^che lesynges. Those the which swereth they shall do evil and
sin unto the^ neighbors / as homycyde / robberyes. and for to venge them
they love vanyte the is sin / and seeks lesynges and swereth the name of god
in vain. Saint Austyn assygneth two parties of Justice / that is to declyne
from ill and to do good. And those the which swereth that they shall do evil
as homycide swereth against the commandment of god and against Justice / so
they take ye name of god in vain. In likewise he the which swereth that he
shall do no good / as not to do alms deeds he gooth against the
commandment of god and against Justice / so he takes the name of god in
vain / and he should not acco^plysshe such an oath as it is wryte^ here
after. God commands that all the words yt men speak of him or of his
saints be in his dyleccyon / in his honor and reverence / and that he ne be
called but in all veryte bounte loyalte / and vtylyte / or punycyon shall come
upon them the which does unto the contrary. Example that evil came unto
Chore. Dathan: and Abyron the which took the name of god in vain in speky^ge
ill words against the commandment of god / and sanke in to hell all quycke.
Quere liiij. H. Another example of a relygyous that spoke words murmuring
against the dyleccyon / loyalte / and reverence of god / and evil came to him.
Quere.liiij. I.

A. The manners of forswerynge by the oath affermynge / and by the oath
promettynge.xi.
THe wise man says. Let not thy mouth be accustomed for to swear / many
cases ben in yt accustomaunce / for who so often swereth often is forsworn
And who so lies often / often sy^neth mortally. The name of god ne be
accustomed in thy mouth as he the which says often by god I shall do thus /
or by god I shall not do thus. And entremet the not to swear often by the
saints of paradyse / for if thou swear by them in vain thou ne shall be quyte
toward them / they shall have matter to accuse the before god. Vnde.
ecclesiasti.xxiii. ca. Iurationi non assuescat os tuum multi eni^ casus su^t in
illa / nomi^atio vero dei non sit assidua in ore tuo et in nominibus sanctorum
non admiscearis: quonia^ no^ eris i^munis ab eis. This is that which is written
before. The name of god nor his saints for naught ne in vain thou shall not
swear by / thou dampnest thy self be thou in certain if thou in swerynge
forswere the. We find in scripture two general kinds of perjury or
forswerynge by the which men sin in contempnynge or despysynge wetyngly the
dyuyne veryte. The first kind is by the serment or oath affermynge. The
second is by the serment or oath promising. Nam aliud est iuramentum
assertorium vt quando iuratur de presenti vel preterito sic esse vel non esse
fuisse vel non fuisse. Aliud est promissorium vt cum jurat aliquis se daturum
vel facturum aliquid in tempore futuro. etc.

B. First a man forswereth him by the serment or oath affermynge when he
knows or believes steadfastly that any thing is false / evil / and dysloyall
/ and that by delyberacyon he swereth affermatyuely with intencyon to deceive
that it is good / he the which in such wise swereth synneth mortally and
right grievously as it is written.xxii. q. ij. Homines. Right grievously he
synneth for he affermeth his lesynge by oath. Quia periurium est mendatium
iuramen to firmatum. Et dicitur periurium quasi peruersu^ iuramentu^.
Periurement or forswery^ge is as to afferme a lesy^ge by oath. And it is said
periurynge also as peruers oath. Et scotus in tercio suo. d. xxxix. Quicu^que
scienter jurat falsum sieve iocose: sieve seriose peccat mortaliter. Also who so
should demand what it is of the servant the which swereth a false thing
unto his knowledge by the admonycyon of his master as if the said master had
cause or quarrel against any man and for to win that he makes the servant to
forswere him. Raymonde says that they ben both forsworn and synneth
mortally. Dominus quia precepit seruus: quia plus dominum temporalem quam deum
vel animam dilexit.xxii. q. v. Qui compulsus. The master is forsworn for that
he commanded / and the servant is also for that he loves his lord te^porall
more than god or his soul. In likewise if the fader and mother make their
children to be forsworn wyttyngly both twain shall be forsworn / if the said
children were capables of the commandments of god. That is if they
understood well that they should dysobey unto god / and that they should sin.
And if the said children were not capables of the commandments of god they
do not commit sin / but the fader and the mother the which commands them
synneth double / and double penance and punycyon unto them apperteyneth. Alsoo
a man may make a questyon to know if he ye which constreyneth a person too
swear synneth or not. Saint Austyn says that it behooves for to make
dystynccion if he know or understand if he should be forsworn or not. If he
knows nothing and he him co^strayne for to have certyfycacyon of the doubt
it is no sin / but it is humayne temptacyo^. But if he know well that he
shall be forsworn and he him co^streyn to swear. The answer after saint
Austyn and after a doctor named Galazius. Quod talis vi^cit homicidam. That
such a person vaynquyssheth and surmounteth an homycyde For an homycyde de
sleeth the body. And he the which constreyneth a man too swear sleeth the
soul of the death of gylte. Moreover it sleeth two souls / that is the soul
(...) him that is forsworn / and the soul of h^^ the which constrained him
to swear. As it is written.xxij. q. v. Ille qui prouocat hominem ad iurationem.
Et.xxii. q. v. qui e^git. And that the which is said that he surmounteth an
homycyde is to understand in the damage given. For it is greter damage of the
loss of one soul than of bodies Infynyte Magis damnum est in a^^^sione vnius
anime quam corpora infinita.xxxii. q. ij. Si habes. And so an homycyde synneth
not so grievously.xiij. di. Duo mala Example of a man the which constrained
another to forswere him / and ill cam^ unto him.lxxxxij. g. Also if a march
a^^swere affyrmatyuely unto any person yt he shall sell unto him his ware at
such (...) price / and if he have Intencyon too gy^^ it unto him for a less
price and swereth (...) in lyenge against his thought. Quia motire est contra
mentem ire. And afferm^^ his lie by delyberacyon he synneth mortaly by as many
times as he so swereth / ^^rehe an hundred times on the day. And he the which
byeth if he swear by god I ne shall give more than so much for the thing /
or I will give no more and if ye he have Intencyon to give more and the he speak
against his thought and swear i^ in lyenge by delyberacyon he synneth als^
mortally by as many times as ye case happens. Also after that the merchant
has sworn affyrmatyuely that he shall sell his ware for so much if he bye it
/ and after that the other withholdeth it and e^presseth him so much that he
makes him forsworn they sin both two. For in likewise as we ne would lose
paradyse and be dampened we ne should desire that our neighbor be harmed.
Mathei. xxij. D^peccat mortaliter. Also who so should ^^ges proximum tuu^ sicut
te ip su^. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Example that two
merchants said unto their curate that they could not sell without lyenge and
swerynge.lxxxxix. K. Also who so should demand if they yt swereth covertly by
words deceyuable synneth or not. The master of the sentences answers in
tertio libro. d. xxxviij. q. xv. when any person swereth by art or cautele of
words not ente^dables for to deceive that god ye which is witness in the
conscience takes in such wise the oath as he it entendeth or understands
unto whom a man swereth by such wise he is doubly culpable for he takes the
name of god in vain / and he deceyueth his neighbor by cautele ye which is
contra illd thobie.iiij. Quod ab alio tibi odis fieri / vide ne tu aliquando
alteri facias. The thing that thou hate to be done unto these that thou ne
do it at any time unto another. Such people that in such wise forswereth
them abides not unpunished as we may se by example of a christian man the
which swear cautelously upon the auter of saint Nycholas for ye silver yt a
Jew had lent to him.lxxxxvi. a Also what is it of him that hereth any swear
falls / and is certain that he shall be forsworn and holds his peace) to
understand if he synneth or not. Raymonde says that ye / and allegeth illud
Leuitici.

Amma que aud^erit voce^ iurantis fallum et testis fuerit quod aut ipse vidit
aut conscius est nisi indicauerit portabit i^iquitatem sua^. The soul the
which hereth the voice of one swerynge falls and has be wytnes yt he has seen
or that he is culpable he shall bear his sin if he show it not. But that is
to understand yt he him should reprehe^de they two being al alone without to
publysshe it and manifest unto all folk / or he it should tell secretly to hy^
yt is his sovereign for to correcke him if the sin be secret. Quia qui
crime^ occultum manifestat no^ est corrector erroris: sed proditor / sicut
dicit augustinus.ij. q. j. Si peccauerit. He ye which manyfesteth the sin
secret or hid he ne is correctour of the error but he is a waster or
proditor. Also if he manifest the perjury openly peradventure he should be
punisshed corporally or slain by the Judge or by the pare^tes of him against
whom he is so forsworn: or peradventure he ye which should publysshe yt said
case lightly might be slain. So it appears that he ye which hereth another
to be forsworn should hold his peace / and also he ne should publisshe it.
Also a man forswereth him by the affermynge when he swereth of a thing
doubtous / that is to say when he knows not if it be true or not / or if
such things apperteneth unto such one or unto such one / and so by
delyberacyon swereth affyrmatyuely yt it appertains unto such one he synneth
mortally. In such a case a man should speak of credence and not of certain
science. But if by lyghtnes of tongue without delyberacion he swereth / it
should be venyall sin / so that anon he repent him and be sorry. etc. Also
men forswere them by the serment or oath affermynge when they believe that any
such thing is true / and that it apperteyneth unto such one / and swereth
affyrmatyuely for true without intencyon to deceive / and al be it they ben
deceived for it is false. I put the case he the which so swereth and
incontyne^t after the oath made enquyreth of the deed and repents after that
he knows and apperceyueth the falsenes he synneth but venyally / but if he
were slow and give no force to inquire of his ygnouraunce how he has sworn
he synneth mortally / as it is written.xxij. q. v. qi periurat. Also a man
forswereth him by oath affermynge wha^ any swereth affermatyuely that any
thing is true and that it apperteyneth unto such one / the which thing
really is true / but he that swereth believes steadfastly that it is false and
swereth it for true upon intencyon to deceive / in such manner he sins
mortally as it is written.xxij. q^. ii. homines Periurium est ergo vel iurando
loqui fall sum cum intention fallendi / vel iurando loqui falsum sine
intention fallendi: vel iurandi loqui verum cum intention falle^di. Than
forswerynge is too speak false in swerynge with intencyon to deceive / or to
speak false in swerynge without intencion to deceive / or to speak true in
swerynge with intencion to deceive. It is written primo regum.xvi. ca. Homo videt
ea que parent dominus autem intuetur cor. A man sees and knows the things
the which appears / but the savior and redemptour beholds the heart and
the thought.

C. Secondly a man forswereth him by ye oath promising in many manners. And
first when any promyseth by oath voluntary that he shall give or pay unto
such a person such a thing at such a term / or within such a term / if
after yt he change his purpose or yt he pass the said term by reason
dysposed he synneth mortally and is forsworn. But if he change not his
purpose and that before the said term he fall in to pouerte or necessyte in so
much that he has not whereof to fournisshe and acco^plysshe the said oath /
and that he is dyspleasaunt that he may not accomplysshe it / in such wise
shall he be of forswerynge excused. Quia necessitas non habet legem. The
nedenes has no law. Also when any promyseth by oath that he shall pay within
such a term / and that in swerynge he has intencyon not for to pay for
peradventure he knows well yt he can pay for he has not whereof / so he is
forsworn. But if he swear I shall pay if I may he shall be excused of the
perjury. Also of reason natural it is too understand that as often times as a
man swereth that he shall do our thing if he purpose in that hour that he
swereth that he will not do it ne acco^plyshe / incontinent that he makes the
say^ oath he is perjured. Example of a man the which would forswere him for
mone^lent and he lost his speech.lxxxxvij. c. Also it is clearly to understand
that those and they the which gives their faith solempnely in the sacrament
of marriage yt the^ shall do loyalte of body and of goods the one unto the
other / If in making ye say^ oath / or after yt their will is changed and
they defayle unto their promise they be^ perjured and synneth mortally. Also
wha^ any swereth that he shall say or do any thing dampnable as theft /
sacrylege / ^^chery / to beat or slay / or when he swereth yt he ne shall do
thing the which is lefull^ prouffytable / as not to give alms / or n^^ to
love his neighbor / or never to pardon him / or that he shall never fast the
four times that is the ymbringe days or such things semblables lefull and
good. He^ those the which swereth against chary^ synneth mortally and in
swerynge and (...) accomplysshynge the deed / but if they repent them and that
they accomplisshe no^ the operacyon it shall be well done / for such oaths ne
should be accomplysshed as it is written.xxii. q. iiij. Isido. Quod inca^te
vouisti non facias impia est promissio^ scelere ad impletur. Example that He^de
sinned to slay saint Johan baptyst f^^ to accomplysshe his oath.lxxvi. E. Also
y^ a woman made an oath unto her lemma^ in gyuynge him her faith for to lie
wit^ him when he will / that should be an oth^^ full of sin the which she
should not hold. And if she should swear that she should swear that she should
not go unto another she should hold that oath / for if she should go unto
another harlot or ribaude she should be forsworn and that should be wors. Also
if a thief swear unto his felawes yt he shall depart lawfully the theft done
among them / if he depart it lawfully it is an evil oath and full of sin /
and if he depart it not lawfully it is yet wors. Also if any has sworn that
he shall never be bishop or that he shall never e^tre in to relygyon / if
after it befall that it were prouffytable unto the church that he were bishop
or to enter in to relygyon he should not be bound unto the first oath. Also I
put the case that some be seized and taken of his enmyes or robbers the which
by great fere makes him to swear or to promise to pay a thousand pound the
which he ne can pay / or to give or deliver a town or a castle / to know
if he be bound to acco^plysshe yt said serment or oath. Unto that says
Raymonde says nay / and takes ye words of saint Austyn the which says quod
iuramentum non potest esse vinculu^ iniquitatis. An oath ne may be the line and
bond of iniquyte as it is written.xxii. q. iiij. inter cetera. and.xv. q. vi.
c. Si sacerdotibus. etc. Et dominus per Ysaiam. Dissolve colligationes
impietatis. Unbind ensemblementes or gadrynges together of cursed impyete that
is wickedness. Howbeit these doctors make dystynccion between the oath
promised and ye oath affermed / and says that the feere excuses the oath
promised / and excuses not the oath affermed. For a person should more sooner
suffer all euylles than to afferme a false thing / as it is written.xii. q. v.
Iuramenti. Some other doctors says when he consents him unto an oath what
dread so ever he have if it be an oath the which may be done without mortal
sin and without losing of paradyse he is bound to accomplisshe ye said
oath. Also a man forswereth him by yt oath promising when he swereth that he
shall do or say any thing lefull the which is with solempnyte / albeit that he
do indyscretely and without necessyte yet ought he to keep it / or else he
synneth mortally if there be none excusacyon the which him excuses right
lefully as it is written.xxii. q. iiij. Si aliquod. Example that a doctor
accomplysshed not a vow like as he had made it lost his sight: lxiii. G. Also
a man forswereth him when he makes any oath that he shall do a thing lefull
the which is without solempnyte / as to swear by god I shall go to morrow unto
the church / or I shall fast / or I shall give atmesse / or to do any
semblable things. If such of propre delyberacyon do unto the contrary of his
promise when it is so that he may do it he is forsworn and sins mortally.
But if he has sworn to give alms and sone after he falls in to pouerte he
should be excused of perjury for ye necessyte. Also it behooves to make
dystynccyon of oaths quotydyens the which they make without solempnyte of
thing lefull by hastynes and lyghtnes of tongue and evil custom as many done
when they do swear they know not if they have sworn or not / when such oaths
ben made without delyberacion or dylectacyon / or consentement of reason they
venyall sins.xxv. di. c. Criminis. But when in swery^ge they apperceyue well
that they fail and repents them not and take pleasure therein such oaths
torneth them in to mortal sins. Vnde Augustinus.xxii. q. ij. Nequis. Nullum
peccatum a deo veniale quod non fiat criminale dum placet and ide^ si scientes
ducit in consuetudine^. No sin is venyell unto god but that it may be mortal
when it pleases him / and the same if if it be done wyllyngly in custom.

D. Four manners ben found in scripture that a sin the which of ye nature
is venyall may be transmuted and changed to be mortal. The first is when the
conscience Iugeth yt the oath is cursedly made and repents him not of the
said ill. Vn^ scriptura. Quicquid sit contra co^scie^tiam edificat in gehenna^.
What thing so ever be that is done against the conscience edyfyeth in the fire
of hell. The second is wha^ the conscience delyteth in it and takes pleasure
in the oath evil made as before is alleged. Nullu^ pctm^ a deo veniale. etc.
The third is by that / yt a man is fallen in delectacyon of venyall sins he
dysposeth hy^ often times to come unto mortal sins / whereof speaks saint
Gregory the which says. Vitasti gaudia / vide ne ebruaris arena. He says so
for that often times fro small sins men come in to great. In likewise as by a
little sparkle of fire there ryseth a great flambe. Whereof ye sage speaks in
his proverbs saying. Qui minima negligit paulatim decidit in maiora. He that
dyspreaseth the small things falls in to great. The fourth when yt venyall
sins ben not repelled comynly proceeds after the sins mortal. As it
appears in the first mouementes the which ben deputed among the venyall
sins when the delectacyon has conualescence in so much that the
consentement also approaches / so sourdeth incontinent mortal sin. Also the
accustomaunce to swear is dangerous for who so swereth often often him for
swereth / and who so often lies often synneth mortally. Therefore says the
holy Ysodore Vsus iurandi periuru^ ducit. The usage to swear makes
forswerynge. Et legitur hie remie.xiij. Si ethiops mutare po^t pellem suam et
pardus varietates suas: and vos poteritis benefacere cu^ didiceritis malu^. If
ye ethyopyen that is black might change his skyn^e / and the leoparde her
varyete^ yt is white and black / and ye may do well (...) likewise as ye have
learned and accustom ill. Also of little corns men may make^ great sum or
burden and lade an horse so much that he ne may bear it. Also of little venyall
sins men make great mortal sines the which ladeth and dampneth the pesones.
Vn^ mgr^ alanus. De minimis granis fit maxima su^ma cabali / de breuibus m^dis
non veniale malu^. So it appears th^^ the venyall sins and the accustomau^^
to swear ben to fle as it is said before.

E. To the regard of oaths a man should understand that some ben more
horrible / greter / solempnell / and byndynge the the other. For he the which
swereth gods well bound / but he yt swereth by god and b^ the euangelyst he is
yet more bound / and so of other swerynges when the solemp^^te grows the
oblygacyon grows. B^^ what is it of one yt swereth by god and ye oath by the
evangelist. John^ Crysostome say^^ that he the which swereth by god is mo^^
bound than he yt swereth by the eua^gely^^ against some yt believes ye
contrary. S^^ ti scripture proptur deum fcte^ sunt non deu propter
scripturas.xxij. q j. Aliqua. Foles scryptures ben made for god and not go^ for
the scryptures. Also the doctors sayt^ that ye one oath and other solempnely
m^de the one and the other egally byndeth / ^ be it if the one be solempnely
made and other not / that the which is solempne^ made byndeth more as unto the
church more penance unto him ought to be (...) joined the which transgresses
/ but as ^^to god they ben egally bound. extra. qu^ dei. vel vo. Yet again
unto the contrary the holyer that a thing is whereby a man swereth of so much
is he more worthy greter pain that so forswereth hy^ / th^^ says saint
Austyn. Than more bound xxii. q. i. Mouet te. If you be forsworn repent the /
do penance the which effaceth ye syn sins as it written before. que^
ante.viij. b Also keep the from swerynge vaynely and vnprouffytably or you shall
lose the Joys of paradyse ye which ben great / quere.lxvij. a Also thou
sholdest dread to be sent in to the fire of hell the which is a cruel
tourment as it is written after. Que^. xlix. b. Examples shall be found by the
table in the end of thexamplary. quere.C. vii. A.

A. The manners to blaspheme god / and that the blasphematours ben right cursed
and evil.xij.
IT is written eclesiastice.xxiij. ca. Vir multum iurans implebitur iniquitate
and non discedet a domo illius plaga. A man much swerynge as he the which
blasphemeth god / or the which forswereth him shall be replenysshed with
inyquyte and ye plage shall not depart from his house. To blaspheme god is a
right great sin and detestable the which a man commytteth in many manners.
First in gyuinge unto god any thing that apperteyneth not unto hy^ as to say
that god is a liar. Secondly wha^ a man takes from god that thing ye whi
apperteyneth unto him / as to say that he is not Just and good. Thyrdly when
man grants or gives unto any creature yt thing the which apperteyneth
unto god the creator / as to say such a man or such an ydoll is god. Or as
did ye servants of the king of Assyryens the which granted unto their
king that the which apperteyned unto god / for they said unto the king
Ezechyas. Which ben the gods of all the earth the which have power to
deliver their regyons from the hands of our king / there is none. And which
is the god that may deliver Iherusalem from his hand. etc. This blaspheme
dyspleased so much unto god that the angel of our lord stroke ye people of
the army of ye said king and slew an.C. lxxxv. M. as it is written in the.xix.
chapter of ye.iiij. book of kings. Fourthly when a man brings forth toward
god contumelous moeuynges to debate or strife. Vnde mathei.xii. Hic no^ ei cit
demones / nisi in beelzebub principe de monioru^. Et luce.xi. In beelzebub
principe demoniorum ei cit demonia. Some Jews said that they had found him
subuerty sy^ge the people / and defending to give the trybute unto caesar / and
they lied. Vn^ luce xxiij. Hunc inuenimus subuertante^ gente^ nostram et
prohibente^ tributa dari cesari. Also some wend for to have said Injury unto
him that he received the sinners and that he eat and drank with them. Vnde
luce.xv. Hic peccatores recipit et manducat and bibit cum illis. Also some said
that he was good / and other said that he was not good but that he seduced the
people in ill. Vnde John.vii. Quidam dicebant bonus est / alu dicebant non /
sed seducit turbas. Fyfthly in the swerynge cursedly / execrably / and
irreuerently as when any cursed crystyens ben angry anenst god / and by yt
manner of Injury and of vengeance swear by the virtue of god / by the blood /
by the guts / by the lunges / by the heart / by the fete / by the heed / the
eyes / the tethe / or any of his members. The person yt so swereth by
delectacyon and delyberacyon obstynatly if he be a clerk he ought to be
deposed / and if it be a lay man he ought to be excommunyed as it is
written.xxij. q. i. Si quis per capillum. We read that saint Poule thappostle
cursed some blasphemers. Of who^ were Hymeneus and Alexander whom he betoke
unto Satan to the end yt they should learn no more to blaspheme / as it is
written. thymo.i. ca. Also them the which swereth by the five wounds of Ihesu
christ / or by his death / his passion / and his blood / such oaths and
swerynges ben to fle and to defend / for they often blaspheme / and do
irreuerence unto god and unto his passion of whom is proceeded our health. Vnde
crysostomus super matheu^. Oi^s salus hominum in christi morte posita est. All
ye health of men is put in the death of Ihesu christ. Also to blaspheme god is a
sin much to dread / for it makes the blasphemers ill in many manners.

B. First they ben wors than the Jews for the Jews crucyfyed our lord but
one time / but a christian man blasphemer crucyfyeth him and beteth him with his
tongue as many times as he swereth. Vnde apostolus ad heb. vi. Rursum
crucifigentes semet ipreos filium dei. Et aug. dicit super john. Flagellatus
est christus flagellis iudeorum / flagellatur blasphemijs falsorum
christianorum Ihesu christ was whypped and scorged by ye Jews scorges: and is
now sore scorged by ye blasphemes of false crystyens. Also saint Austyn says
that the blasphemers sy^neth not less than the Jews the which him crucyfyed.
Vnde august. illud mathei.xxii. Blasphemauit. Non minus peccant qui deum
blasphemant regnantem in celis quam iudei qui crucifixerunt eum ambulantem i^
terris. Also in as much as they sin of very malice and science they offend
more than the Jews did that crucyfyed him ygnourauntly. Vnde paulus.i.
corint. Si cognouissent nunquam rege^ glory crucifixisse^t If the Jews had
known him they had not crucyfied the king of glory / albeit that their
ygnouraunce excuses them not / for he told them many times that he was ye
sone of god and they would nothing believe. But the crystyens blasphematours
the which him knows well and believes in him sins more grievously. Vn^
glosa s^^ psalm. Grauius peccat conte^nens sedenti celo quam qui crucifixeru^t
ambulante^ in te^ Et be^rnardus dicit. Plus peccant qui de blasphemant
regnante^ in celisquam illi qui pr^prus manibus eu^ crucifixeru^t pergentem
terris. Our lord prayed for the Jews crucyfyed him ygnoura^tly. Vn^ luce.
xxi^ Pater dimitte illis non ei^ sciunt quid fac unt. But he prayed not for the
blasphemetours the which swereth by him wyty^^ly of propre malice / and
therefore they sh^^ be more tourmented in hell than ye Iewe^ vn^ luce.xii. Ille
autem seruus qui cogn^uit voluntatem dn^i sui / and non se prepara^^ et non
fecit scdm voluntate^ eius plagis ve pulabit multis. etc. The servant ye which
has known the will of his master an^ is not prepayred and has not done
after his will shall be bete^ of many. Example that the false christian men ben
more, cru^^ burnt in hell than the Jews and paynym^^ Quere.lvii. A. Secondly
these blasphematours ben wors than dogs / for dogs byteth not their master
the which th^^ nouryssheth / but the blasphematours byteth their master with
the mouth ye which eteth and drynketh the breed and ye ^^ne that god unto
them has given. Vn^^ psalm. Retribuebant michi mala pro bon^s They reward me
again evil for good Also the sage says. He shall feed and gyu^ drink to the
unkind / and yet shall he he^ bitter things. Vnde in libro eccl. Pasce et
potabit ingratos and adhuc amara aud^^^ Thyrdly these blasphematours ben wo^
tha^ all creatures / for every creature loue^ his creator. Vnd psalm. Bestie
and vniuer^ pecora serpents et volucres pe^nate / reg^terre et omnes
ppliprincipes and oe^s iudiceterre / iuuenes et virgins senes cu^ iuruor bus
laudent nomen dn^i. Iteru^ psalm. A s^ lis ortu vsque ad occasu^: laudabile
nome^ dn^i And the said blasphematours loves him not / but despise him /
renounce him / beet him / and rent him with their intoxycate tongues replete
with venym mortal Vnde jacob.iij. Ligua inquinatu^ malu^ plena mortifero
veneno. The evil tongue without rest is full of venym mortal. All these
blasphematours has affyled their tongues as a glayue or sword / venym of the
adder is under their tongues. Et psalm. Exacueru^t vt gladium linguas suas
venenu^ aspidum sub labijs eoru^. Also god has not given speech unto beestes
as unto man and woman to the end they praise him. Vn^ Aristoteles dicit. Quoth
nullum animal naturaliter habm sermone^ nisi homo. And for as much as the said
blasphematours makes noise and irreuere^ce unto god of the speech that he unto
them has given they ben worthy of great punycyo^. Fourthly blaspheme is a
language infernal that these blasphematours learn in this world. For ye
dampened the which have spoken and vttred cursed speech / and has not wylled
to praise god with their tongues shall have so great doloure and punycyon yt
they shall byte and ere their said tongues of rage and anguysshe / and shall
blaspheme god for the vehement and intolerable dolours and wou^des yt they
shall have. Legitur appoc. xvi. Manducaueru^t linguas suas pre dolor et
blasphemauerunt deu^ pre doloribus and vulneribus sius. Also we read that the
deed bodies the which gone unto da^pnacyon by sin praise not god / ne all
they the which descends in to hell for to be there eternally. Vn^ psalm. Non
mortui laudabunt te domine neque omnes qui descendunt in infernu^ / sed nos qui
viuimus benedicimus deo. And therefore while that we live we should praise god
and leave the blasphemes for dread to descend with the said dampened. Also
blaspheme is a vice dyabolyke the which makes the tongue of the blasphematour
too speak / like as ye good and holy ghost speaks by the tongue of a good
devout person / of whom it is written. Math. x. Non eni^ vos estis qui
loquimini sed spu^s patris vestri qui loquitur in vobis. It is not you the
which speaks / but the speryte of your fader the which speaks in you. Also
ye devil speaks by the tongue of ye blasphematour And therefore when a man
sees a person the which blasphemeth god he may say surely that he is not
governed of the good and holy ghost / for it ne techeth but to say well / but
that he is governed of the cursed spyryte the which speaks evil. Legitur
mat. vii. A fructibus little cognoscetis eos. By their fruytes ye shall know
them. Et legitur luce.vi. et math. xii. Bonus homo de bono the sauro cordis sui
profert bonu^ / et malus homo profert malum. etc. The good man proferreth good
words / and the evil man proferreth cursed words. When a man sees smoke and
sperkles come out of an house it is a token that there is fire in it / also when
a person proferreth blasphemes it is a token that he is evil. etc. And for as
much as these blasphematours speaks ye language infernal of the dampened the
which is the language that the devil their master techeth them and makes
them to speak / they goo not in to paradyse with god / but in to hell with the
devil and with all the dampened Quia legitur Job.xxxvi. Quoth deus non saluat
impios. God saves not the evil / that is to know if they deye Impenytent and
without contrycyon / confession / and satysfaccyon. Vnde Luce.xiii. Nisi
penitentiam habueritis omnes simul peribitis. If ye do not penance ye shall
all perysshe. Fyfthly blaspheme is so great a sin yt it is against the goly
ghost / for it is against his bounte / and therefore it is irremyssyble as unto
ye pain. Vn^ legitur mat. xii. Spu^s blasphemy no^ remittetur in hoc sclo:
neque in futuro.i. vix remittetur. The spyryte of blaspheme shall not be
pardoned in this world ne in the other. Et legitur marci.iij. Qui
blasphemauerit in spm^ setm^ non habet remissionem in eternu^ sed reus erit
eterni delicti. He the which has blasphemed against the holy ghost has no
remyssyon in perdurabylyte. That is to understand that he has not plain
punycyon in this world or in the other as unto the pain / for his sin is
not committed by fragylyte or biygnourau^ce / but by certain knowledge and
malice / whereby he has none excusacyon in his sin / and therefore unto him
apperteyneth plain punycyon without remyssion / not yt one should understand
yt if the blasphematour would repent him that absolucyon to him should be
denied and that he ne may be saved and have grace and mercy as to the gylte.
But a man should understand that it shall be with great pain / for unto him
apperteyneth plain punycyon and plain penance as unto the pain but if he
have mercy. So it appears and note it well that the sy^nes against the holy
ghost be not pardoned in this world ne in ye other as to the pain as it is
said / but they may be pardoned as to the gylte / and therefore ye
blasphematours should not dyspayre them: but do penance and absteyne them fro
syn^e Vnde ezech. xviii. Si autem i^pius egerit penitenciam vita viuat. etc.
Men find in writing diverse sorts of penance ye which apperteyneth unto
blasphematours. First their penance ought to be of.vii. years in likewise as
for the other mortal sins / as it is written.xxii. Predica^dum. But a man
should consider the manner of ye oath / the qualite of the person and ye other
cyrcumstaunces for to give unto him penance / either sharper or lyghter and
easyer as it is written. R. i. De penitentijs et. c. sequenti.v. The oath the
which is made (...) delyberacyon is more to punysshe than (...) the which is
made by hastines. Also the p^naunce of a publyke blasphematour is ^^uen by the
bysshoppes / the which is such That he ought to be at the church door some
so^dayes or solemn feestes bare fo^^bare heded / vngyrded / with a tapre in
his hand. etc. Also the penance of the blasph^matours after the ancient law
was they should be put to death / as it appere^ Leuiti. xxiiij. Of one of the
sons of Israe^ the which had blasphemed god he was ^^ned and slain by the
commandments god. And it is written in the said chapyt^^ yt god commanded
Moses in shewyne him what punycyon the blasphematour shall have / saying.
Loqueris ad filios (...) el / homo qi maledixerit deo suo portabit pecatu^ suu^
/ et qui blasphemauerit nome^ dimorte morietur / lapidibus obruet eu^ oi^s
mu^tudo ppli Moses spoke unto the children of Ysraell saying. That man ye
which says ill unto his god shall bear his sin he the which has
blasphemed yt name our lord shall deye of death / all the multitude of people
shall stone him and sle him stones. And the gospel says. He ye which has
said ill unto his fader or to his m^der shall deye of death. Vn^ math^. xv.
Qu^mala dixerit patri vel matri morte mo^^ Syxtly these blasphematours be^
dys^sed to speak contumelyous words / inu^^ and rebuke unto their lord and
master And marvel is it none if they ben in h^te and lose his love / his
grace and his company. For in likewise as god dwells (...) grace in the
conscience of the good catholyke. Vt habetur.i. john.iiii. Qui maneth in^ritate
in deo manet: et deus in eo. Unto the contrary. God departs him from the
^^scyence of the blasphematoure the which is a right ill catholyke. Qui no^
manet (...) caritate deus non manet in eo. And also as men say of the good
catholycke. John.xiiii. Si quis diligit me sermone^ meum seruabit / and pater
meus diligit eu^ et ad eu^ ven^amus et mensione^ apud eu^ faciemus. Who so
loves me he shall keep my word / and my fader shall love him and we shall
come unto him / and we shall make our dwelling in him. Also a man may say of
ye cursed blasphematour. Apud eu^ non veniemus and me^sionem apud eu^ faciemus.
That is to say. that the blyssed trynyte shall not come to dwell ne rest by
grace in the conscience of the cursed blasphematour as in the conscience of the
good catholyke. Seventhly blaspheme chaseth the virtues / lets the good
deeds spyrytuall / and makes many euyls in the souls of the blasphematours
the which ben declared afterward. Quere.xliiij. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k.
Examples of ye blasphematours. Quere in thexamplary.lxii. b. c. d. h. i. k.

A. Questyon if a man commytte sin at every time that he swereth.xiii.
NOn assumes nomen dei tui in vanu^. Upon this commandment a man may demand
if any may swear without committing sin. The answer A man may swear without
sin when necessyte is / the which is verytable / Just / lefull / and for
good end / as when a man swereth for to afferme Innocence when any cursed
crime is brought up / or for to conferme ye alyaunces of peace / or for to show
or persuade unto ye herers that the which is vtyle for ye health of their
souls. To swear for these things it is none evil sin. for it is necessary
and lefull. Albeit that the swerynge of it self is not good / and nevertheless
it is not ill when it is necessary / and yet it is not to appetyte as is the
good. More over it is not to fle as an ill thing wha^ it is lefull / but he
defends the appetyte / ye dylectacyon / and the accustomau^ce to swear
vaynely and vnlefully / as a thing idle / vain / and peruers. Saint Poule the
appostle knew the commandments of god / and nevertheless he swear as it is
written in his epystles. Vestis est michi deus. By that it is to understand
that swerynge is lefull and necessary when by the same a man thinks unto yt
welfare of his neighbor after the commandment of god the which says.
Diliges proximu^ tuu^ sicut teiprem. And the psalm. Dn^e quis habitabit in
tabernaculo tuo aut quis requiescat in monte sancto tuo. Lord who shall dwell
in thy tabernacle / or who shall rest in holy mountain. The answer. Qui jurat
proximo suo et non decepit eum. He ye which swereth unto his neighbor and
deceyueth him not shall mount in to heaven. etc. Also the angel yt saint Johan
saw standinge on the sea as it is written in the appocalyps. Teuauit manum sua^
ad celum and iurauit per viuente^ in secula seculorum. He lift up his hand and
swear by the lyuy^ge in ye worlds. Also our lord says in ye gospel Amen /
amen / dico vobis. Also we read yt our lord swear in the old testament.
Iurauit dn^o et no^ penitebit eu^. and again. Iurauit dn^s vitate^. etc. Our
lord swear true yet he commanded in ye old law. Read dn^o iurame^ta tua.
etc. Yield thyn oaths to our lord. By these foresaid auctorytees a man may
swear without syn^e at a need. And for yt god says in the gospel that our word
should be / it is so / it is not so. Math^. v. Sit au^t sermo vr^ est / est /
no^ / no^ / quoth autem his abunda^tius malo est. The answer yt ye affyrmacyon or
negacyon yt is in the heart ought to be in ye mouth / but for yt malice is so
grown yt they will not believe by sy^ple word / and therefore god has put to
prudently. Quod amplius est malo est. That the which is more than enough is
ill / not evil unto those the which swereth for the welfare of their
neighbor / but ill unto those the which ne will believe without swerynge / their
incrudylyte is sometime of pain and of culpe / and therefore he says not
malum. Ill unto him the which hy^ uses much in swerynge. But he says a malo
/ from the evil of him the which otherwise believes not / that is of his
syn^e ne departs from him the which is sometime pain / and sometime pain and
gylte / tha^ god defends the oath the which is ill. He commands to speak
well in saying. Sit sermo vester est / est / non / non. It is so / it is not
so / and he grants the swerynge the which is necessary. Also when a man will
not believe the truth but by swerynge / he the which swereth in good and Just
cause syn^eth not / but he should offend if he swear not. For it should befall
sometime yt a good man should lose his good and Just cause if veryte were not
approved by good men. And therefore says saint Austin. Quisqis meru cuiuscu^que
potestatis veritatem ocultatiram dei super se prouocat: quia magis timet
hominem quam deum. If any hyde veryte by the dread of puyssau^ce he provoke
the ire of god upon him / for he dredeth ye men more than god. In such wise to
swear by necessyte is no sin as it is said. Also albeit that god has
defended oaths inutyles / nevertheless by especyall he defe^deth the swerynges
the which ben made by the creatures to the^de that man ne do honor unto
creatures the which apperteyneth unto the creator. Ne honorifice^tia
creatoris transferetur ad creaturas. Or yt man believe not that any dyuyne
thing be in hy^ whereby reverence unto ought to be done. And therefore after yt
god had said in ye gos. ( tild). Mat. v. No^ iurare oi^no. Hastily (...)
puts after. Neque per celu^ qr thronus d^ est / neque per terra^ qr
scabellum pedu^ eius (...). neque per hiero solimam qr ciuitas est reg^magni
neque per caput tuu^ quia non pot^^vnum capillum tuu^ facere albu^ vel nigri.
Swear thou never above all thing / neither by the heaven for it is the throne
of g^^ne by the earth for it is the stole of his fe^ne by Iherusalem for it is
the cite of ye gr^te king / ne by thy heed for you can not ma^^ one of thy
heeres white ne black. Also (...) read yt saint James defended that no^ should
swear. An^ oi^a fr^es mei nolite ^^^re The gloss says yt he defends not sy^
swery^ge / but he defends the will to ^^re. And therefore he said vygyla^tly
(no^^ for the affection and will should not dra^^ us to swear / but the
necessyte and oportum te should draw us there unto for ye helt^ and welfare of
our neighbors. And the yt saint James puts. Nec per celu^ / (...) per
terra^ / nec per quodcu^que aliud iuram^tu^iurare vetat. When need is to swear
man should swear by god in calling hy^ to witness / not by the creatures as
it said. In like wise as the wine is not y^^ of it self. And all be it saint
Poule defedeth men to drink superfluously / for it cures dronkenes and
lechery. Nolite i^e^^ri vino i^ quo e^ luxuria. Ad ephesians. v. Also s^^rynge in
superfluyte is defended. All the things beforesayd ben expounded and sp^^ken
by saint Austyn / and by Inno. and by many other.xxii. q. i. No^ e^ contra
deipreceptu^. and iiii. seque^tibus. Sipctm^ extra. e. si epres. A^ how be it
yt swery^ge is defended / not^^^dynge some ben except whereby a man ^^swere wha^
need is / yt is by ye euangelyst ye auter whereupon ye body of christ is
concrate. Also by ye relykes of saints / by (...) holy cross. Also a man may
swerein ye h^de of the bishop like as it is written. x^^ q. i. Si aliqua causa.
ca. Habemus.

B. What is requysyte for to swear lefully without any sin.xiij.
Three things ben requysyte or yt a man swear without committing any sin.
That is to understand / veryte / judgment / and justice. Vnde Hieremye.iiij.
Iurabis viuit dominus in veritate et in iudicio and in iusticia. Et
habetur.xxii. q. i. Et iura bunt. If these these three things defayle or any of
them it is perjury / as it is written.xxii. q. ii. Animaduertendum. The first
thing the which is requysyte or yt a man may swear without sin is veryte in
the conscience / that is that a man know the thing steadfastly for to be so
as he it swereth. For who so should think one thing and swear another should
be perjured. Or who so should believe that any thing were true / and knows it
not too be all true for certain: he should swear of credence and not of veryte
/ for that should be against yt the which is said (iurabis viuit dn^s in
veritate). The second thing requysyte to swear well without any sin is that a
man should swear by dyscrete delyberacyon / ye which is in the party of reason
/ that is that a man should dyscerne if there were any necessyte to swear or
not. For albeit that a thing be true yet he should not swear if there ne were
necessyte. As who so should swear by our lady I am in the church. etc. Howbeit
that the oath be verytable yet is there sin / for there is no necessyte to
swear yt. Iurabis in iudicio. When a man swereth it behooves that he there have
good Judgment / that is dyscrete delyberacion as it is said / to dyscerne and
advise if the thing be requysyte and necessary for to swear / as when a man
warns or counceyleth to believe some good thing the which is expedyent and
prouffytable unto some slothful and peruers persons the which would not
believe by simple words and speech he may swear in calling god to witness
that in such wise he should be without offense in swerynge. Iurabis i^
iudicio. Also when a man swereth by good dyscrecyon it behooves to regard.vi.
things / that is qua^do / quale / cui / quomodo / vbi / et de quo. First it
behooves too regard (quando) in what time it is that a man swereth / for in
seculer causes nor in other a man ne should swear / ne constreyne to swear in
the solemn feestes / ne to hold Iurysdyccyon. Secondly (quale iuramentu^) /
what oath it is that a man swereth / for some of them or one of them ben
greter than another and more to dread. Thyrdly (cui): to whom it is yt a man
swereth / for a person of the church should not be coarted to swear to
seculer / ne in court seculer but in some case / for there might follow
irregalyte / as in case of crime. Fourthly (quomodo) how it is yt a man swereth
/ by what manner / by what delyberacyon / by what constraynte / and by what
hastynes / or necessyte. Fyfthly (vbi) where it is that a man swereth / in what
place / in holy place / or in place not holy / as in the church or church
yard. Syxtly (de quo) / of whom / of what thing it is that a man swereth /
of a thing good or ill / if it be of an ill thing a man should not swear. The
third thing the which is requysyte to swear lefull is to regard yt the
thing wherefore a man swereth be just lefull and to do good and accomplysshe /
for the oath the which is not just should not be acco^plysshed. And for yt
offended Herod for the oath yt he had made unto his daughter when he made
saint Johan baptyst to be heded. Vn^ Ysodo. Impia est promissio q^ scelere
adi^pletur. The promys is ill ye which is accomplysshed by syn^e / if the oath
have these three things before said a man may swear without sin.

C. That a man should accomplysshe ye vows Justly made. xiij
DAuyd ye prophet says. Vow ye lefully by devotion. And after that ye have
vowed so yield ye and accomplysshe ye said vow to your lord god. Vnde daujd
in psalmo. Vouete and reddite dn^o deo vestro. And note well that after yt he
has said (vouete) there follows incontinent reddite). In this second
commandment god defends that a man ne break the vows the which has be
made Justly / and lefully by delyberacyon and by Just cause. They ye which
accomplyssheth them not and leueth them / and the which does unto the
contrary of that / yt they have vowed and promised / or the which them despise
takes the name of god in vain and does unto him irreuerence and unto his
saints. And they should understand that they be^ charged and bound to
accomplysshe the^ / or else they commyt mortal sin. Ysodorus dicit. Multum
deo reus eris si no^ reddas quid voueris / deo displicent qui vota sua non
i^plent. That is to say. Thou shall be much culpable unto god if thou yield
not / that is if thou accomplysshe not that yt thou have vowed. Those the
which acco^plysshe not their vows dyspleaseth unto god. Example of a woman
the which vowed chastyte and after would be married. Quere in thexamplarye of
the second commandment.lxiij. E. Also it is better done not to vow than
not to hold ye promysses after yt the vow is made. Vn^ eccl. v. Multoque
melius est no^ vouere quam post votu^ promissa no^ reddere. Et Ysodo. dicit.
Melius est eni^ non promittere quam fide promissio^is non soluere. That is to
say. Better is not to promise than not to pay the faith of ye promise. Also
it is great Ieopardy to tarry to accomplysshe the vow after it is made if a man
has time and space to accomplysshe it. Vnde deuteron^.xxiij. Cu^ votu^ voueris
dn^o deo tuo non tardabis reddere: qua requiret illud dn^s deus tuus et si
moratus fueris reputabitur tibi in peccatu^. That is to say thou ne shalt
tarry to yield unto thy lord god when thou have vowed a vow for thy lord god
shall require it of the / and if thou have made taryenge to accomplysshe it
unto the it shall be reputed in sin. And it is wryte^ ecclesiastes.v. Si quid
deo vouisti ne moreris reddere displicet enim i^fidelis et stulta promisso. If
you haste vowed any thing unto god ne tarry thou to yield promise / unfaithful
and folysshe promise him dyspleaseth. Example that it is a great peril to
deffer to acco^plysshe his vow. Quere in ye examplary.lxiij. H. Many other
examples of vows there shall be found and cete. Also a man should note that
those the which accomplyssheth their vow ben in the love and grace of god.
For they shows them self loyal and faithful in there promysses / and god
unto them accords in there prayers and oraisons. Example that Anne vowed unto
god that if he would send her a sone that she should give hy^ unto the service
of god all his life / she conceived Samuel the which was a prophet and
acco^plysshed her vow as it is written.i. regu^.i. ca. Another example yt the
king Aza acco^plysshed ye vow yt he made of his fader and bare him to gods
house: as it is written.ii. paral.xv. Another example yt after that ye children
of Ysrael had vyctory of Holofernes they yede to worship god in Iherusalem /
and al they kept their vows and promesses / as it is written. Judith.xvi. ca.

D. What thing is a vow how is it dyffynyed. Vow is concepcyon of ye best
purpose of delyberacion of steadfast courage to god or unto his saints with
ente^cyon him to oblege. Vnde secundu^ magistru^ in quarto di.xxxviii. and tho.
et alios theologos. Quoth votum est co^ceptio spontanea melioris propositi animi
deliberatione deo vel sa^ctis eius firmita cum intention se obligandi. And it
is to be noted that many things ben requysyte unto lefull vow and
accomplysshed the which ben touched in the said dyffynicion. First it is
requysyte concepcyon of some made in the entendement by the holy ghost.
Secondly it is requysyte that the vow be not ill. And therefore the dyffynycyon
says (melioris). Ill and sin desordoneth us toward god. Vnde legitur. Quoth
votum non est vinculu^ iniquitatis. Vow is not the lain and bond of inyquyte.
And therefore it is written. Dissolve vinculu^ iniquitatis. Unbind or louse the
lain of inyquyte. Et legitur.xxxij. q.iiij. Ysodo. In malis promissis resci^de
fide^ / in turpi voto mutu decretum / quod incaute vouisti no^ facias / impia
est promissio que scelere adimpletur. In cursed words rescyndeth ye faith
change thy will in that vow the which is foul and evil / do not the thing
ye which you have vowed unwisely. The promysse is evil the which is done and
accomplysshed by sin. Example written in the.xxiij. chapter of the deeds of
the appostles that.xl. Jews vowed that they should neither eete ne drink till
they had slain saint Poule / their vow was evil and in sin / and they
might not accomplysshe it. etc. Thyrdly it is requysyte yt he there have
concepcyon fre in as much as ye dyffynycyon says (spontanea) / that is that
every man may vow the things ye which ben in his lyberte and in his right
and not otherwise / and therefore servants / children / relygyous prisoners.
etc. in some things may not vow. Quia non sunt sui iuris. Fourthly it is
requisyte that he there have delyberacyon and therefore the dyffynycyon says /
animi deliberatione) unto the dyfference of those the which voweth suddenly
without delyberacyon and consentement of reason. Fyfthly vow ought to be made
unto god or to his saints and not unto men for many things the which abides
because of shortenes. Syxtely with entencyon to bind him for love bears
oblygacyon to do some thing or to love it. etc.

E. Vow the which is lefully made of right ought too be accomplysshed as it
is said / but in.ix. manners a man is not bound to accomplysshe his vow. The
first is when any has vowed under condycycyon as to say. I shall do such a
thing if such one have his health / or if he live not or if he deye not of
such a sekenes / when the condycyon has none effect a man is not bound to
accomplysshe ye said vow. The second is when it has be made suddenly and
without delyberacyon. The third is ye vow of them the which has lost their
wit / or ye which ben furyous. The fourth is when by infyrmyte / pouerte /
or other lefull lettynge a man may accomplysshe the said vow. The fyfth is
wha^ a man voweth by ire / or other passion so great yt they leave true
delyberacyon. The.vi. when it should be to the hurt of any great good or common
welfare. The vij. is when ye vower is subgect to another as young people / a
maid under.xiij. year / a man child under.xv. years / a relygious a wedded
woman / a servant if the vow should be lettynge of the service that he owes
when the souerayns beforesayd ben not so content / or gaynsayeth there unto ye
subgectes ben not bound to their vows

of saint Johan in the floode of Iourdayn Nono / on the sunday our lord made
his first miracle to change the water in to wine at the wedding. etc. Decimo
/ on ye sunday our lord Ihesu christ fed five thousand men with five loves
of breed / and with two fysshes. Vndecimo / on the sunday our lord Ihesu was
honored with palms the which is the sunday before Eester day. Duodecimo /
on the sunday the redemptoure of the world rose from death to life.
Terciodecimo / on the sunday the holy ghost descended upon the appostles the
day of penthecost or whyt-sonday. Quartodecimo / the clerks presupposes that
god shall hold his Judgment on the sunday / but for certain no person
knows any thing but all mighty god only. By these things beforesayd it
appears that the sunday is establysshed for to be kept / sanctyfyed /
honored / and laudably feested among all the pryncypall festes. Vnde
secundumius canonicum. Co^stat diem dominicu^ inter summas et precipuas
festiuitates contineri. and dicitur in decreto. In dominica die nichil est
agendum nisi soli deo vocandum. de consecratione distinctione. tercie. Ieiunia.
No thing is to be done on the sunday / but to be besyed toward god / him
for to honor and his glorious saints. And by this the which is before
written. Sabbata sanctifes). A man should understand that in the ancient
testament men kept and sanctified the saterdaye. But for the mysteryes
beforesayd the which has been done on the sunday / and to the end that we do
not as the Jews does the which keeps the sa-saterday we shall keep and
solempnyse the solempnyte the day of the sunday. Examples of diverse people
the which has wrought on the sunday. And first of a man the which wrought
on the sunday and his hands claue unto the wood. Quere in the
examplary.lxiiij. C. Another example of a man the which led hay on the
sunday and he was thretened dyuinely to be brent Quere in thexa^plary.lxiiij.
D. Another example of two women the which baked on the saturday after ye son
going down / and one of them became dry / and the pele of the oven cloue to
the hands of the other. Quere.lxiiij. G. Another example of a mowyer the
which left work on the saterdaye / and his felawes would not do so: and he
found some gold. Quere in the examplary.liiij. M. Secondly it is good reason
to sanctyfy the festes of god and of the glorious vyrgyn Mary for the mysteries
of their solempnytees the which should be long for to declare by the which
our redempcyon has been made. Thyrdly master Wyllyam of Anserre techeth.vi.
reasons in the sum of the office wherefore it was establysshed that we make
solempnyte of the saints of paradyse. The first is for the honor of the
dyuyne mageste / for when we do honor unto saints we honor god in his
saints / and we say yt he is meruaylous in them. He the which does honor
unto saints he honors specially him the which them has sanctyfyed. The
second for to have aid in our humayne fragylyte / for we ben so frail unto
sin that by our self we may not have health / and for as much as we have
need of the help and prayers of saints we do them honor in their feestes to
the end yt we may deserve their help. The third is for the encreasynge of our
suerte / for by the honor that is done unto saints in their solempnytees
our hope and suerte is increased so yt the mortal men semblable to us may be
in such wise raised in so great honor by their merytes / it is certain yt
so it it may be of us / for the power of god is not lessed. The fourth is for
the example of our following / for when ye feestes of the saints is recorded
every year we be^ called to follow them / so that by thexample of them we
dysprayse the things erthly and desire the celestyalles. The fyfth is for that
that the aungelles and saints of paradyse have Joy and exaltacyon when we the
which ben sinners convert us unto god. Vnde luce.xv. Gaudiu^ erit in celo
super vno peccatore penitentia^ agente. etc. And therefore it is reason sith yt
they make feast of us in heaven yt we make feast of the^ in earth. The syxte is
for the procuracyon of our honor / for when we honor ye saints we procure
our honor / their sole^pnyte is our dygnyte / when we honor our brother we
honor our self. Charity makes all thing to be common / and our things ben
celestyalles / erthly / and pardurables.

C. Questyon / who so should demand at what hour a man should begin to
celebre the feestes. The answer / regulerly men say that from the one
euensonge unto ye other euensonge the church makes solempnyte. It is written
extra de ferus and de consecratione distinctione.i. capitulo. Missas. Om^es
dies dominicos a vespera in vesperam cum omni veneratione decreuimus obseruari.
We have decrete to keep in all honor all the days of the sondayes from ye one
euensonge unto the other euensonge. For to cease on them for to do any work
and for to make holy ye feestes a man should consider the qualyte / and the
quantyte of the feast / what ye custom is of the regyon / and of the place
where a man is. And after the gretenes of the feast and custom of the place a
man should more sooner begin / and the more late for to make an end In
likewise as says the scripture in many places. Vnde quamuis scriptu^ sit a
vespera in vesperam celebrabitis sabbata vestra verumtamen initium festorum and
finis iuxta eorum qualitatem et regionum consuetudines seruari debent / and
sicut magnitudo eorum exigit prios incipere / et tardius terminati extra.e.
quoniam. This scripture repreueth the folly of some simple men the which
reputeth not to be sin to labor and work late on the saturday at night /
and weneth that it is sin to work erly on the monday in the morning. Of
this matter thou shall find many examples in the examplary.

D. Questyon / who so should demand wherefore is it that men make holy / and
honor some feestes more solempnely in some countrees than they of other
countrees done / or that some feestes in some bishop riches ben kept of whom
no mencyon is made in other countrees. Unto that it behooves to answer that a
man ought for to do after the custom of the regyon where as he is. For it is
written extra de ferrijs Quoth in festis celebrandis vel non / vel quis dicatur
esse festiuus vel non consuetudo regionis debet obseruare. Dicendum est etiam
cum hieronymo quod vnaqueque proui^cia abu^dat in suo sensu.
distinctione.lxxvii. Vtinam in omni tempore ieiunare possemus. Et augustinus
interroganti. Respo^. Ambrosius. Cum romam venio ieiuno sabbato / cum
mediolanum sum non ieiunio sabbato / sic et tu quamcunque forte ecclesiam
veneris eius mora serua si cuiquam no^ vis esse in sca^dalum nec quemquam tibi.
One and every prince haboundeth in his being. And therefore if thou come to
Rome and that they fast there on the saterdaye fast thou also in like wise as
they done. And if they have in custom to keep or sanctyfy any feast keep it
with them. And if thou aryue in any church keep their customs the which ben
not against god / or else they shall sclaunder the.

A. How in six manners men sanctyfye the feestes commanded / the which manners
shall be put by psalms / and some ben necessaryes for the sanctyfycacyon of
those feestes / and the other ben cerymonyalles for the augmentacion of god and
of virtues.xv.
First men sanctyfy the feestes commanded by abstynence / and to cease to do
operacions erthly and seculers / as to goo to the plough. Exodi vicesimo Non
facies omne opus in eo. And it is to the end that we cease and refrain the
auaryce and couetyse of the world / and for to take heed and entende unto the
vtylyte and prouffyte of the souls. If on the workinge days we take heed for
the labor of the bodies god will that on the holy days commanded we entende
unto the vtylyte of the souls. At the beginning of the world god created
spyrytuall things as aungelles / and corporal things as ye beestes and the
birds / and of these two things together he made man / that is of a thing
spyrytuall as the soul / and of a thing corporal as the body. In likewise we
have need of two refeccyons. That is of the refeccyon of the body the which we
do get on the werkynge days / and of the refeccyon of the soul the which we
seche on the holy days. How be it that every day we ought for to give
refeccyon unto the soul. For it is written in the gospelles how that a man
lives not only by etynge of breed for to mayntene ye body / but in every
word the which proceeds from the mouth of god / whereby the soul is
refeccyoned. Vnde Mathei. iiii. capitulo. Non i^ solo pane viuit homo / sed in
omni verbo quod procedit ab ore dei. And therefore god has ordained werkynge
days to labor on all holy to nourysshe the body. And also commands to
cease of operacyons worldly on the holy days for to sanctyfy them and for to
nouryssh the soul as before is said. Deuteronomie.v. Obserua diem sabbati vt
sanctifices deum / sex diebus operaberis et facies omnia opera tua / septimus
dies non facies in eo quicquam operis. etc.

B. A questyon to understand if a man may work on the holy day without
committing mortal sin. The answer. We find in writing that in four manners
some may do work on the holy day without committing mortal sin. Prima est
propter operis vel laboris modicitatem Secunda est propter temporis
necessitate^. Tercia propter cordis pietatem. Quarta est propter publicam
vtilitatem. The first is when a man does so little thing that the rest of the
thought ne may be let toward god / that is anenst the sanctyfycacyon of the
solempnyte it be not dymynysshed or lessed / as to hew a logge ye which is in
the court for to dress the dinner and not to lose the service. But who that
should do so great operacyon that the rest the which is commanded in the
said feast. Sabbati sanctifices were pertourbed and let should do mortal
sin / in likewise as says the gloss upon this word ye which is. Exodi
xxxi. Qui polluerit sabbatu^. Glosa. Turba^do quietem anime morte moriatur /
scilicet anime and corporis. Ex quo patet quod solum ille labor qui turbat
quietem and spiritus libertatem causat peccatum mortale. The second is for the
necessyte of labor ye which is in way of perdycion in such manner that a man
ne may defer it / or provide for the impetuosyte of ye rain time of August /
or for the great cold in ye time of winter. etc. When a man presupposes of
the perdycyon of the said labor the necessyte may be so great that a man
should be excused of mortal sin. Quia necessitas no^ habet legem / si malum
sequitur potestea de. con. distinc. i. Sicut etiam patet extra de
consuetudine.ca. iiii. A sure thing it should be to do by thexample of his
curate or prelate of the church. For it is written prouerbioru^.xi. and.xxiiij.
Quoth salus erit vbi sunt multa consilia. Health shall be where as ben many
counceyles or counceylers. To the which thing a man should understand that
the church may dyspence in these things here by one reason ye which is that
the church ne uses alonely of the puyssaunce humayne also as the reason
supposes / but also of the puyssaunce dyuyne. And therefore the church
dyspenceth by that puyssaunce in the commandment dyuyne that god has given.
Of the which thing it appears that who so dyspyseth the puyssaunce of the
church or the keys of the church he dyspyseth the puyssaunce of god. Vnde
luce.x. Qui vos audit me audit / et qui vos spernit me spernit. He ye which
hereth you hereth me / and he ye which dysprayseth you dysprayseth me. The
third is for pity / for in some feestes determined the church promytteth
without mortal sin that men labor for the love of god to help unto the
poor people / but so that it be the after mass and without hope of
retrybucyon. etc. The fourth is for to think and to aid on the necessyte of
the common welthe / as after the mass to help or repair a bridge / or an
evil passage / or a church dystroyed / and semblable things / so that a man
do it without coueryse of lucre or winning. Also it is well for to be noted
that it is extra de ferijs / that al be it that the sunday and many feestes
that been under ben commanded for to be kept How be it when the herynges also
enclyne them toward the lands in ye season that they ought to be fysshed a
man may fysshe for them on the sondayes and other holy days for the necessyte
of the common wealth So that they of that thing that they take they dystribute
and give unto ye poor chyrches and other good places by and over the dysme.

C. How a man should take heed to here the service and predycacyons on the
festes commanded.xv.
SEcondly for to sanctyfy the festes a man should go by devotion unto the
church to here the service the which therein is done. As mass / matyns / and
euensonge. etc. And for to here to deuyse of the feestes / of the fastings and
command me^tes the which there ben made. Also for to here ye predycacyons
and words of salvation / of the which proceeds all benedyccyon as it is
written Luce.xi. Beati qi audiuut verbum dei / et custodiunt illud. Blyssed be
they the which hereth the word of god and keeps it. In likewise as it is
declared more largely in the fyfth condycyon that the pilgrim of paradyse
should have.xlv. F. Many sorts of peope there be the which sanctyfyeth not
the feestes for that they take no head to here the dyuyne service the which is
done in the church / and the predycacyons. Some there ben ye occupies them in
the mondanytees and pleasaunces temporalles when they should take heed to the
service of the church / such people does break this commandment. Example of
a rich man ye which fled the service and the predycacyons / and lepte on horse
back and yede unto the mondanitees when men ronge to mass on the holy days
commanded / and the devil took him and bare him away Quere in
thexa^plary.lxv. A. Also some will not cease them of worldly operacions the
which werketh when they should take heed unto the service / such people
synneth mortally. Example how that a woman was dyuynely punysshed for that that
she cercled and closed her field on the day of saint Johan baptyst when the
other were at mass. Quere lxiiij. B. Also some there ben the which takes
head to drink and to ete during ye masses and the seruyces of the church /
and such people sanctyfye not the feast commanded but if they have excusacyon
lefull Example that evil came unto a smyth the which took head to ete and to
drink when the other people besyed them unto ye service of the church.. Quere
in the examplary.lxvii. C. Another example of a man the which went to play
and to drink at ye tavern with his felawes when he should have be at the
service of the church / and at last he was dampened. Quere.lxvii. D. Another
example that evil came unto a man named Vado the which went unto the tauernes
to drink and to ete when he should goo unto the church / and after his death
he had a foul drynk. Quere in thex. lxvii. E. Also some there ben the which
takes head to play on the feestes commanded when they should be at the
service / such people offends gretely. For they sanctyfy not the feestes and
dysobeyeth unto god. And also many times they commytte many sins in playenge
/ the which ben operacyons / not of sanctyfycacyon / but of dampnacyon.
Example that the heed of a sweter was found that that was before was behind /
and the cattes cried upon his grave. Quere in thexamplarye.lxiii. C. Other
examples there ben written in thexamplary of the second commandment of people
unto whom there came evil in playenge and blasphemyng. etc. Also some there
be the which slepeth in their beds or in the church when the dyuyne service
and predycacions ben in doing on the feestes commanded / such people
sanctyfyeth not the feestes. For the commandment of god says. Thou ought for
to dyspose ye to serve god all the sondayes and the feestes. Example how the
devil gave hot pytche unto a monk for to drink as he slept in doing the
service of the church. Quere in thexamplary.lxvi. C. Another example how the
devil smote a monk with the knotte of a straw as he slept in the service
time.lxvi. b. Other examples of these matters ben written in the examplary of ye
third commandment. Also some gone not to here the service and predycacyons
by slouthe / neclygence / and indeuocyon / and such people sanctyfyeth not
well the feestes. The realm of heaven is not promised unto iedeous / neglyge^t
/ and slouthful persons / but unto them the which wy^^eth to take heed upon
commandments of god / and the which them accomplyssheth virtuously. Vnde
scriptura. Non enim te pidis and negligentibus promittitur regnum celorum / sed
in mandaris domini vigilantibus atque strennue opera^tibus. Also note well in
especyall of the heedes of an house the which leseth the mass on the sunday
or on a feast solempnell by slouthe without excusacyon leful.. If reason were
dysposed to it such slouthe should be mortal sin / and breketh this
commandment / whereof it is written de consecratione distinctione.i. capitu.
Missas. And if a person that is chyefe of an house were three days without
going unto his mass perochial of his church and if he had not excusacyon
lefull he should be excomunycate in lykewyas he puts in a decretall. And
they the which keeps the house and the children that they perysshe not while
the other ben at the mass on the sunday and feast solemnell / if they ben
excused in serving god ye day of ye said solemn feast. The answer is such
/ that if they have excusacyon not for to be at the church corporally for to
serve god / where if they ben not they ben excused so that they serve god
within ye house in saying the good things that they can For the commandment
of god speaks unto every man and woman. And to serve god you sholdest dyspose
ye every sunday and the other holy days commanded in what place so ever it
be. Example of a maiden servant the which desired for to goo unto the mass
and unto the prechy^ge and her maystresse would not suffer her but our lord
appeared unto her unto whom he showed her health. Quere in the
examplary.lxxxxix. B.

D. And they the which ben enoyed to do well / and dyspyseth to say well and
to here it. As they the which leueth the congregacyon of the church / the
service / the mass / and the sermon without lefull excusacion for to go unto
the vanytees / as dau^ces / plays / tolyes / and dysportes / they ought for
to be excommunyed / as it is written De consecratione distictione.i. capitu. Qui
die solempni pretermisse ecclesie conuentu ad spectacula vadit exco^municetur.
etc. Of the which thing it follows that they sin mortally / for
excommunycacyon should not be given but for mortal sin Quia excommunicatio
non nisi pro mortali culpa infligi debet. Vt habetur.xi. question.iii. capi.
Nemo episcoporum. Those ye which ben of the party of god with good will they
here his service / and his word / and the opposytes it dyspyseth. Vnde
ioha^nis.x. Oues me vocem meam audiunt and ego cognosco eos / et cognosco me
me / et ego vitam eternal do eis et non peribunt in eternum / et non rapiet
eas quisquam de manu mea. My sheep those ben the good persons herynge my voice
/ and I know them and mine know me / and I unto them shall give the life
eternal / and they shall not perysshe / and none shall take them fro my hand.
Example that it has well taken unto many for herynge the word of god.
Quere.lv. A. B. C. And it follows after. Alias oues habeo qui non sunt ex hoc
ouili. etc. Other sheep I have the which ben not of this flock / those ben
the cursed persons the which have not wylled to here the word of god. And it
is written in an other gospel that on the day of Judgment god shall put his
sheep on the right hand Vnde Mathei.xxv. Oues suas statuet a dextris / hedos
autem et sinistris. And he shall put the kyddes or gotes on the lift hand the
which have despised his word he them has compared unto a kydde or got the
which is a be stynkynge / foul and unclean / whereof the company is
nothing worth. Also they ben compared to an ape the which sleeth the church
and loves gladly the tavern / for to go unto the church he halteth / and
toward the tavern he renneth. Also he loves better a quarte of wine than a
potell of holy water. Also these people the which ben enoyed to do well
resembles unto the devil in three propryetees. Primo the devil will never do
no good deed. Secundo he will never here no good. Tercio he perturbeth and
lets them the which would do any good deed. Example how the devil enemy
unto mankind gave in charge to a woman four things / of the the which the
one was that she should trouble and let those the which were in devotion and
prayers in the church / ye second was that she should not confess her. etc.
Quere in thexa^.lxv. F In likewise does these cursed people the which ben
slouthful to serve our lord god on the holy days and to do good ye which
gooth from the mass and will here no good thing and bring other in to
vanytees and out of the church / the which is a token of evil. Quia sicut
signum euidentissimum electorum est audire verbum dei ita signum euide^tissimum
reproborum est nole audire. etc. And also it is a token right euydent of the
chosen to here the word of god. In likewise it is a token right euydent of the
reproved to have no will to here it. Example of a monk that the devil drew
out of the church when the other waked in prayer. Quere in the examplary.lxv.
g. The good servants of god hereth with good will his service / his word /
and his commandments: and takes the co^dycyon of the pilgrim of paradyse.
Quere post.xlv. A. B. And god them shall reward in the Joys of paradyse in
likewise as it is written after.lvii. A. The cursed servants the which will
not go to here the service and to sanctyfy the feestes in likewise as it unto
them is commanded should dread to be sent unto the fire of hell the which is
a tourment right cruel. Quere.xlix. B.

A. How a man should take heed to serve god and his saints on the feestes
commanded.xvi.
THyrdly for to sanctyfye the feestes a man should serve god and his saints
with heart / with mouth / and operacyon. Saint Poule says in the.xvi. chapter
of ye second epistle to the corynthyens. In oi^bus exhibeamus nosmetipsos
sicut dei ministros. Show we our self in all things as the mynysters of god.
Et alibi seruire deo regnare est. To serve god it is too reygne with him. Every
good christian man should enforce him to serve god on the holy days after his
science and faculte / and should put him in devotion and orayson for to give
praysynges unto god and unto his saints / as Dauyd the which said. Semper
laus eius more meo. The clerks should sy^ge with heart / with mouth / and
operacyon for to serve god. Vnde ecclesiast. xxxix. In omni cord et ore
collaudate et benedicite nomen domini. Praise ye and bliss ye the name of our
lord in all your heart and mouth Also a man should serve humbly and reverently
unto the priest in things ye which unto him ben necessaryes / as to give him
the water / to torn the book / to bear ye paxe to light and to put out the
candell. etc. Dauyd says. Seruite domino in timore and exultate ei cu^
trimore. Serve ye unto god and unto his vycars in dread. To serve god in dread
is the beginning of wisdom. Vnde prouerbiorum.i. Initium sapientie timor
domini. Also the good and diligent servants have evermore the advantage /
and of good as well in this world as in the other / and they ben beloved of god
and of great lords before the slothful. Whereof speaks the wise man.
Prouerbiorum.xxii Vidisti virum velocem coram regibus stabit / nec erit coram
ignobiles. Et prouerbio rum.xxi. Cogitationes robusti su^t semper in abundancia
/ omnis autem piger in egestate est. The thoughts of a man boystous and
coueytous ben ever in habundaunce of goods / and all slothful people ben in
need and in pouerte. All the good servants shall be in paradyse with god
much honored and praised. Vnde in euangelium. Si quis michi ministrauerit
honorificabit eum pater meus qui est in celis.

Item euangilium. Volo pater vt vbi ego su^ illic sit et minister meus. Ihesu
christ says I will fader where as I am that my mynister be / that is that his
servants be with him parteners in his realm and his glory. Of the
servants the which ben good and faithful / and of those ye which ben evil
and unfaithful is somewhat spoken in the chapter of Sacrylege. Quere.xxx. C.
Also god called the good persons swetely his servants. Vnde Mathei.xi.
Venite me ad oe^s qui laboratis et onerati estis et ego reficiam vos. Also god
unto them shall give a great reward. Vn^ mat. xxv. Euge serve bone et fidelis
/ quia super pauca fuisti fidelis / supra multa te constitua^ intra i^ gauduim
domini tui. Good servant and faithful enjoy the / for that thou have ben
faithful upon a little thing I shall ordeyne the upon a great thing / enter
in to the Joy of thy lord. For to make short every person should enforce
him to serve and honor god and his saints each after as his science and
faculte is. And also should take heed unto the vtylyte of their friends and
they shall have great reward in the realm of paradyse. Of the which is
written toward the end of this present treatise.xlvii. A.

B. How a man should besy him in prayer on the feestes commanded.xvi.
FOurthly for to sanctyfye the feestes or holy days we should pray to god in
orayson and say all the good things that we can more besyly than on ye
werkynge days. Saint Austyn says quod oration est oranti presidium aduersario
ince^dium / angelis solacium / deo gratum sacrificium. Orayson or prayer is
defense unto him that prays against all evil / unto the devil aduersarye.
Joy and solace unto aungelles. sacryfyce unto god much agreeable. That orayson
keeps a person from all evil it appeared by thexample of a woman the which
would have hanged her self by dyspayre / and as she apparayled ye cord in
herynge a bell ring unto the sacrynge she went on her knees in orayson and
incontinent the temptacyo^ ceased and she was delivered. Also on ye feestes
commanded we should think on the euylles yt we have done on the werkyng days
/ and we should repent us and hertely cry god mercy / and put our self in
orayson for to require of him myserycorde. etc. Wherefore is it that god will
that we require him orayson. For four things pryncypally. First to the end
that we reknowlege him to be our god / lord / and master / creatoure / and
benefactour / the which for us has made and created all things. Vnde.
iohannis.i. appoc. Adorate eum qui fecit celum and terram mare et omnia que in
eis su^t. Et psalm. Quoniam deus magnus dominus et rex magnus super om^es deos.
It is good reason that a person worship and pray unto his god / lord / and
benefactour in reknowlegynge the good that he unto us has done. Secondly god
will that we him require in orayson to the end that we repute us to be his
servants and obedyentes unto hy^ It is reason that a servant obey unto his
master / serve / honor / and pray him. For as much as Lucyfer would not be
as a servant in praynge god but enpryded hy^ of the good yt his god unto him
had given in so much that he would have sytten by him and have been semblable
unto him. Vn^ ysaie xiiij. Sedebo in mo^ te testame^ti in lateribus aquilonis
ascenda^ super altitudine^ nubiu^ similis ero altissimo. And for yt he would
not pray god / ne reknowlege to obey unto him but would show himself as
master / so he lost all the good that he had and is now the foulest devil in
hell. And therefore we should pray unto god and confound the sin of pride
in us / in showing us to be his servants obedyent unto him. Thyrdly our
lord will that we require him in orayson in knowlegynge our poor fraylte as
of our self we may nothing do / and that all comes and proceeds of god.
Vnde iohannis primo. Omnia per ipsum facta sunt et sine ipso factum est nichil.
Item Iohannis.xv. Sine me nichil potestis facere. For to understand well when
we require one of the saints of paradyse that we may have health of our
sickness / it is not the saint of him self that heleth us / but it is god /
and the saint that ye do require prays unto god for you / and god heleth you
in exalting the request and intercessyon of the said saint. In likewise all
the good puyssau^ce that all the saints of paradyse have god it unto them
has given. And therefore we should pray god in orayson in reknowlegynge our
fragylyte that of our self we may nothing do / and that all proceeds of
him. Fourthely god will that we him require in orayson for too do him honor.
For orayson is a sacryfyce the which is much agreeable unto god. Also the
encense the which is put within the fire casts a good odor and a smoke the
which mounteth on heyght unto god. In like manner orayson enbrased upon the
coals of devotion casts a smoke and a sweet odoure the which mounteth up
before god / the which unto him is much agreeable. And therefore says the
psalmyst. Dirigatur domine oration mea sicut incensum in conspectu tuo. We read
thobie duodecimo. That Thobye was much devout the which occupied him self to
do the works of mercy. And on a time the angel of god appeared unto him unto
whom he said. When thou prayest god in orayson with teeres / and when thou
buryest the deed bodies I present thyn orayson before god. Also we read. Actuum
decimo / how Cornelius was on a time about the hour of noone in orayson the
which made his request unto god. And incontinent an angel of god in lykenes
of a fair young man clothed in white appeared unto hy^ unto whom he said. Thyn
orayson is exalted / and thyn almesdedes ben remembered before god. We ought for
to serve god in orayson for to do him honor and sacryfyce the which unto
hy^ is agreabled / and unto us vtyle and prouffytable. Also as a noble man
should do honor unto the king on his knees the which is called homage / in
reknowlegynge that he holds his sygnourye of him / and that he is servant
obeyssaunte unto him. In likewise we ought to do to god in orayson. Or in
likewise as the servant is bound for to serve his master / in semblable
manner ben we bound unto god the which is our master. Or in likewise as every
man should bear and pay his rent and his trybute unto the lord of whom he
holds. In like manner should we do honor unto god of our bodies and of our
goods unto our power.

C. A questyon / how should a man make orayson unto god for to have that the
which is necessary. Answer. Him behooves to say his pater noster / for he
requires of god that all euylles and sins ben put away and that he have
unto body and unto soul al goods temporalles and spyrytualles the which ben
necessaryes and vtyles / Our lord made the pater noster and said unto his
dyscyples that they should say it when they would pray unto almighty god In
likewise as it is written in ye gospelles Mathey sexto / et Luce vndecimo.

Here after follows the orayson domynycall or pater noster the which our
lord taught to his dyscyples / and the requests and fruytfull petycyons
contained in the same.
Our fader that art in heaven sanctified be thy name thy kingdom come to us /
thy will be done in earth as in heaven / our daily bread give us to day and
forgive us our debt as we forgive our detts. and led us not in to te^ptaco^n.
but deliver us from evil. ame^



PAter noster qui es in celis.
Our fader celestyall almighty.
Lord / god / and creator
Sitting in heaven potencyally
Exalte me thy seruytour
Sanctificetur nomen tuum.
Thy name be ever sanctyfyed
In our faith catholyke.
Above all praised and gloryfyed
Without error dyabolyke
Adueniat regnum tuum
More over lord we the require
That we may come and have salvation
Unto thy kingdom and empire
In the end and conclusyon
Fiat volu^tas tua sicut in celo and i^ terra
Thy will be also done
Of us in earth truly
As is of thy saints echone
In heaven right Ioyously
Pane^ nr^m cotidianu^da nobis hodie.
Give us lord our daily fode
Of soul and of body eke
Amend us all and make us good
In spyryte also to be meke
Et dimitte nobis debita nr^a sicut. etc.
Pardon us lord our sins and trespa^ces.
As we forgive our offenses and dettes
Louse us also out of the deuylles laces
And keep us from falling in his nets
Et ne nos inducas in temptatione^
And suffer us lord not to be led
In evil thoughts and temptacyon
Waking / ne slepynge lyenge in bed
By the deuylles persuacyon.
Sed libera nos a malo.
Deliver us from all ill
Of body and soul also
Give us grace if it be thy will
To overcome our mortal fo.
Amen.
Amen / amen for charity
Grant us lord our petycyon
Thy blyssed face for to se
And of thy goodheed the fruycyon
Explicit.
The requests that a man makes unto god in saying the pater noster.
THe petycyon of Sanctificetur nomen tuum takes away pride and puts in us
the virtue of humylyte / and requires the gift of dread / and the beatytude of
the gospel. Beati pauperes spu^. And the reward follows. Quoniam ipreo rum
est regnum celorum. The petycyon of Adueniat regnum tuu^ takes away envy / and
puts in us the virtue of charity / and it requires the gift of pity / and
the beatytude of the gospel. Beati mites. And the reward follows. Quoniam
ipsi possidebunt terram. The petycyon of Fiat voluntas tua sicut in celo and in
terra takes away ire and puts in us the virtue of pacyence / and requires
the gift of science / and the beatytude of the gospel. Beati pacifici. And
the reward follows. Quoniam filij dei vocabuntur. The petycyon of Panem
nostrum cotidianum da nobis hodie takes away slouthe / and puts in us ye
virtue of dylygence / and requires the gift of strength and the beatytude of
the gospel Beati qui esuriunt et sitiunt iusticia^. And the reward follows.
Quoniam ipsi saturabuntur. The petycyon of Et dimitte nobis debita nostra sicut
et nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris takes away auaryce / and puts in us
the virtue of largess / and requires the gift of counceyle / and the
beatytude of the gospel. Beati misericordes And the reward follows. Quoniam
ipsi misericordiam consequentur. The petycyon of Et ne nos inducas in
temptatione^ takes away glotony / and puts in us the virtue of abstynence
/ and requires ye gift of entendement / and the beatytude of the gospel.
Beati mundo cord. And the reward follows. Quoniam ipsi deum videbunt. The
petycyon of sed libera nos a malo takes away lechery / and puts in us the
virtue of chastyte / and requires ye gift of sapyence / and the beatytude of
the gospel. Beati qui lugent. And the reward follows. Quoniam ipsi
conselabu^tur.

A. How a man should yield graces and thanks unto god of the good and welthe
the which he unto us has done with out being unkind.xvii.
FYfthly for to sanctyfy the feestes we should goo unto the church on the said
days of ye feestes for to yield thanks and praysynges unto god for the great
goodnesses that he unto has done the which ben so many and great that it is
so Impossyble as unto us that we ne may yield nor give them again in any
thing that we may do. And every man ought for too understand that god unto
him has done more good and benefayte than he is worthy / ne than he has
deserved. Saint Barnarde says. Agamus fratres gratias factori nostro /
benefactori nostro / redemptori nostro. My brother yield we graces unto him the
which has made us / that is unto god our fader celestyall Vnde mathei.
xxiii. Vnus est pater vester qui est in celis. The which has created our
souls of nothing unto his symytude. Vnde gene.ix. Ad ymaginem quippe dei
factus est homo. And the psalmyst. Ipse fecit nos and no^ ipse nos. Yield we
graces unto our benefactour that is unto god the which makes the corns and
the fruytes to grow and to come / and all that whereof we live. Vnde johan.i.
Omni per ipsum facta sunt / et sine ipso factum est nichil. Yield we graces
unto our redemptour / that is unto the sone of god the which is borne of the
vyrgyn Mary the which has suffered death and passion for too redeem us from
hell where we should have descended Vnde ad gal.ii. Dilexit me tradidit semet
ipsu^ pro me nesim ingratus de gratie. God has given the thy body with all thy
members. He gives the thyn eyes to see / thyn eeres to here / thy fete to go.
etc. If thou had not sight ne herynge thou should not know what good it is
to here and too se. And if he give the light thou should thank him all thy
life / he the grants now sight and heringe and al thy members for nothing
without thy merytes. Moreover he gives the nourysshement / vestement house /
field / corns / oxen / kyen / sheep / and bestyall. Vnde paulus in epistola
and co. Quid habes quod non accepisti. What good have you of thyn own that
thou ne have first taken of another: when thou was borne thou brought nothing
with the / ye goods comes not of the / thou reknowlegest not the goods here
/ and so thou thankest not god. Saint Austyn says in the book de ciuitate
dei. Quisquis beneficia dei non vidit cecus est / nec laudat ingratus est /
qisquis in lauda^do reluctatur insanus est. He the which sees not the
benefaytes yt god unto him has done he is blind / and if he praise not god
he is unkind / and the which is worse he is not hole. He is seek ye which
impugneth god with his gifts / and uses of those gifts against the honor
of god and against his propre health / that is to understand wha^ he makes
folysshe lokes with his eyes / when he brings forth cursed words with his
mouth / and so of other members / or when he mysuseth the goods / that is to
understand when he takes clothes proud and pompous / when he eteth
excessyuely / when he drynketh unto dronkenesse / and so of other. And as often
times as any abuses in such wise ye gifts of god after true Justice / he
should be put from that gift / that is to understand from the sight or the
herynge. etc. And it is all for his unkindness. Vnde Bernardus super canti.
Ingratitudo inimica est anime / exmanictio meritorium virtutu^ dispersio /
benefactoru^ perditio. Such a man ye which is so unkind is indygne and
unworthy to take many gifts of god. Vnde bernardus. Non est dignus da^dis qui
no^ agit gratias de datis. That man is not worthy to have things given unto
him the which yeldeth no thanks of the things given / a man may know it in
him self. If thou had done good unto a person by three or four times /
and that at every time he were to the unkind thou would cease to do any more
good unto him. What shall thou than say of god the which has done good unto
the more than a thousand times / and thou unto have be evermore unkind
without reknowlegynge ye good that he to the has done. Example that the.ix.
lazers that our lord heled were unkind for they went not to yield him thanks
after that they had health. He had heled x. but there was but one the which
reknoweleged the good that he unto him had done / the which returned him to
yield thanks. Vnde. luce.xvii. Nonne dece^ mu^dati sunt / et nouem vbi sunt /
non est inue^tus qui reddiret et daret gloriam dei / nisi hic alienigena.
Another example how ye man unto whom the lord pardoned ten thousa^de talentes
was unkind for he ne would pardon the small debte / and for his unkindness he
was betaken to the hangman and put in prysone. Quere.xxvii. H. Another example
contrary of a knight the which pardoned him that had slain his fader / and
god pardoned him all his sins. Quere.xxvii. I. The scryptures us warns to
yield graces and praysynges unto god for to fle unkindness. Vn^ pau. i. ad
thessal. v. In omnibus gratias agite. Yield thanks unto god in all the things
yt ye do. Et ad colloscenses.iij. Omne quod cu^que facitis in verbo aut in
opere oi^a in nomine dn^i nostri jesus christi facite gratias agentes deo et
patri periprem. In every thing what so ever ye do in word or in operacyon /
do all things in the name of our lord Ihesu christ in yeldynge thanks unto
god. etc. Et legitur.i. ad corin.x. Sieve manducatis / sieve aliquid aliud
facitis omi^a in gloriam dei facite. Do ye all things in the glory of god if
ye ete or if ye drink / or if ye do any other thing. All the aungelles and
saints of heaven loves god / and yeldeth him graces of his benefaytes / and so
should we do. Vnde apo. vii. Vide hostium appertum in celo / dicit btu^s
ioha^nes ecce turba magna qua^ dinumerare vt nemo poterat. etc. Saint Johan
says in the apocalypse that he saw the door open in heaven / and so great
turbes of holy persons that no man might nombre them / and they cried with hye
voice. Salute unto our lord god the which sytteth upon the throne /
benedyccion / clerenes / and sapyence and accion of graces / honor / virtue /
and force unto our lord god in secula seculoru^. Ame^ Also all the creatures
gives praise unto the creatoure. That is to understand the beestes and the
serpents / the birds ye kings / the princes / the Iuges / the vyrgyns / the
ancient with the young prayseth the name of our lord / for his only name is
exalted. Vnde psalm. Bestie et vniuersa pecora: serpents et volucres pennate.
Reges terre et omnes populi: principes et om^es iudices terre. Iuuenes et
virgins senes cu^ innioribus laudent nomen dn^i: quia exalta tum est nomen
eius solius. Iteru^ psalmus. A solis ortu vsque ad occasum laudabile nomen
domini.

B. Example of a good child the which yielded graces and praysynges unto god in
all aduersytees that came to him. We find by writing that a child was so
perfyte that he said deo gracias in all things. And it be befell so that
after that his fader and his mother were departed men of war came unto his
house / the which tasted of a tonne of eygre sydre / the which a none they
brake and shed the said sydre / and when the child saw that he said. I yield
graces unto god I drank eygresydre / and now I shall well drink good water.
After that the men of arms brake his house and warmed them with the tymbre.
And when the foresaid child saw that he said Deo gracias. I yield graces unto
god. I was wont in fore times to be lodged in this great house: and now I
shall make me a little lodge and therein I shall abide. And the said men of war
yode in to his gardyn and brake and pulled up all the herbs as cooles / lekes /
borage / onyons / percely / letuse. etc. Than the child said again deo
gracias / ye have broken ye lekes and other herbs I yield graces unto god / it
me behooves to take wild leaves of the feldes / and to go and frye them with a
little pot of butter yt ye have left in such a corner. And when ye men of
war saw that they had done so much harm unto the said children said
unto themself / we ben right cursed the which have done so much harm to
this child the which is not wroth ne never evil word unto us he has said
/ and unto us does the best that he may in doing good against evil. For to
make short they repented them and converted them unto good by his example.

E. To wake in contemplacyon and to do the works of mercy at the feestes
commanded.xvii.
SYxtely to keep the feestes gardables or that been to be kept a man should
employe the time waking in operacyons spyrytualles / as to occupye himself in
the life contemplatyue the which belongs unto the dyseccyon of god / that is
to serve / to honor / and to worship him as it is said. And to think on
things celestyalles and spyrytualles to mount on heyght with god and his
saints / and to reygne with them eternally in the Joys of paradysethe which
ben so great yt they ben infynyte and inenarrables. This life contemplatyue
unto us is given in figure of the blyssed Mawdeleyne the which set her often
at the foot of our savior and redemptour Ihesus and herd his word as it is
written. Luce.xi. Sedens secus pedes domini audiebat verba illius. Another
example of the contemplacion of two relygyouses the which were fro crystmas
till mydsomer speaking of god without enoyenge them / and they wend to have been
there but two hours. Quere.lxxxxiiii. b. And after that the soul has taken
her refeccyon and the body his nourysshement it is good after dinner on the said
days of the feestes to take heed also to ye dyleccyon of his neighbors
indygentes and nedy / as to give alms to vesyte the seek / to counceyle the^
that lack counceyle / to comfort them that been heavy / sorrowful and seek /
and also to do all other works of mercy. This life actyue is given unto us by
figure in Mary marthe hostess of our blyssed savior and redemptour Ihesu
christ the which prepared him his meet and took head unto ye works of mercy
the which is the life actyue Also by this Marthe is understand ye devotion by
the which we ben acco^panyed by charity with our neighbor. And by Mary
magdaleyne is understand the intencyon relygyous of ye thought. The life
actyue gives the breed corporell unto hy^ the which has ho^gre / and
doctrine unto the ygnouraunt and unlearned. It correcketh the sinner errant /
and calls again the proud man unto humylyte. Also it mynystreth unto every
one yt the which is unto him expedyent. The life contemplatyue reteyneth the
charity of god and of his neighbor / but it rests it of the accyon
wtoutforth / and at the only desire of the conductour to Join so unto him.
And all hertes erthly fouled and put under foot is embraced to se the face of
the creator and desires to meddle / that is to be with the cytezyns of the hye
regyon enioyenge them in the beholdynge of god of the incorrupcyon eternal.
The life actyue unto the perturbacions of the world. The life contemplatyue
the which extends to god is most sure. And therefore our lord said to
Martha. Illud luce.x. Martha martha solicita es et turbaris erga plurima: maria
optima^ parte^ elegit que non auferetur ab ea.

D. How the reverence and sanctyfycacion of al holy things is brought in this
third commandment.xvii.
Saint Ysodore says in his book. Secundum dignitate^ read cuique honore^.
Yield honor unto every man after his dygnyte. Many things ben holy whereunto
we owe honor / for their sanctyfycacyon is contained under this
commandment. Sabbata sanctifices. Of yt which holy things we shall tell
four. First the time of the days of the feestes commanded should be
sanctyfyed in likewise as is before declared. Secondly a man should bear honor
and reverence unto the holy places / as unto the chyrches. Vn^ psalm. Domu^ tua^
decet sanctitudo. And of good right a man should honor the chyrches / for they
ben the places the which ben blyssed / the holy service is done therein / the
body of our savior is therein consecrate / the which there rests night and
day in the custode. Also in the church we ben baptized / confessed / purged /
and made clean of al our sins. Also we ben thither borne after yt we ben
dysceased and deed. It is the house of orayson in the which we make our prayers
and oraysons / and there ben made the good predycacyons. Also the church is
the saufgarde of the crymynalles and for banysshed people. It is the place
whereto they run the which them keeps from death / from evil and punycyon.
Also in ye church and in ye chyrcheyarde ben the holy bodies of our faders /
and moders / and friends departed and deed. And for these things here with
that / that god it will the holy places ought to be honored. Example of
hateful men the which slew a man in ye church were punysshed dyuynely.
Quere.lxxix. B. Another example how heliodorus was punysshed dyuynely in ye
church as he took the treasours.lxxxii. B. Many other examples ben written in
the third commandment of ye examplary how evil came unto them the which
have not borne honor unto the holy places / as unto the church and
chyrcheyarde / and how people accursed should not be buried there lxii. G. Our
blyssed sauyoure and redemer Ihesu christ showed right clearly yt he would that
the church be honored and reverenced when he put out the sellers and buyers
the which there made their marchau^dyses and seculer occupacyons / he showed
that it dyspleased him / for he did make a whyppe with the which he chased
them out rygorously / them and their oxen and kyen / and marchaundyse / and
kest and over threw their stalles unto the earth / and unto them he said. My
house shall be called ye house of prayer / and ye have made it a pyt or den
of thieves. Vnde mathei.i. Domus mea domus orationis vocabitur / vos autem
fecistis illam speluncam latronum. Sith that our lord said that they made a
den unto thieves / it follows well ye thieves were there within. Also a man
may say that those the which there makes such marchaundyse and negocyacyons
seculers ben thieves / or the which is wors they ben sacryleges / in as much
as they soil and hurt the place sanctyfyed and holy / the which is a
dependence the which proceeds of sacrylege. Sacrum ledens: sacru^ violans et
deturpans. This thing here was the most gretest rygoure that ever our lord
showed in this world / wherefore it behouth to say that it is great sin and
that there a man should not speak of taxes of process of detraccyon / of laws
and exaccyons / nor of any thing seculer. Again many persons the which does
the contrary / and the which gooth unto the church on the days of the said
holy feestes for to speak and to treat of such things more than for to pray
unto almighty god. The blyssed saint Austyn them repreueth the which says. In
oratorie nemo aliqid agat nisi ad quod factum est vnde and nome^ accepit. No
man ne does any thing in ye oratory but that thing whereunto it is made /
whereof it bears his name. The oratory is not made to do ne say the seculer
things beforesayd / but it is made to pray unto god / and for to do and to
say things salutaryes / the which ben of sanctyfycacyon. The collectours of
taxes and sergeauntes or other the which ben charged to puruey unto the
things seculers should go in to place profane not hallowed out of ye church
and chyrcheyarde / and there to provoke and to bring those with whom they
have besynes when they have long matters seculers to treat / for euyte sin
and offense of the holy place. For in spekyng of such matters there aryseth
sometime noyses and cursed words in aggreuaunt the sin for because of the
holy place / and it in less sin in unhallowed ground than in holy ground.
Also the gospel says that when two or three persons ben assembled in the name
of god for too speak good words yt god is in the myddle of them. Vnde
mathe.xviii. Vbi sunt duo vel tres congregatim nomine meo ibi sum in medio
eorum. Also a man may say that when two or three persons be^ assembled at the
church for to speak there evil words that the devil is in the myddle of
them / the which writes that / yt they speak. Example how saint Bryce saw
the devil the which wrote ye evil words that was spoken in the church.
Quere.lxv. E. Of this matter it is written in the decrete. Nemo debet in loco
orationis intendere fabulis ociosus. disti^ctio^e.xxv. Qui in aliud. No man
ought to take heed unto idle fables in the place of orayson. Et poeta dicit. Ve
vobis gentes in te^plo vana loquentes. Demone scribuntur / que in templo vana
loquntur. Maledyccyon unto you people speaking vain things in the temple /
the vain things ye which ben spoken in the church ben written by the devil
/ and those the which talks of vain things fableth with the devil. Vnde
poeta. In templo fari / diccum demone fabulari. Also after the right writing
men put out of the church people excommunyed the which ben not buried till yt
they ben assoyled and reabled. Also people the which ben homycydes and
manquellers of themself ne ben buried in holy ground / for that / that is
appears that they ben dampened. Also men find in scripture many examples how
the deuylles have unburied many cursed people out of the church and
chyrcheyarde. Quere in the examplary.lxix. B. By these things above said it
appears that every man and woman should bear honor and reverence unto the
holy places. Thyrdly a man should give honor and worship unto the bones and
relykes of the saints of paradyse. For since that god commands that their
feestes be sanctyfyed honored and kept for their holy and deuoutenes yt they
have led in this present life / it follows that he will that their bodies
the which have done ye good operacyons for his love be honored. The which
bodies shall be at the dredeful day of Judgment assembled and come again with
their souls / and shall live eternally in the Joys of paradyse with almighty
god. Legitur ecclesias.xliiij. Corpora sanctorum in pace sepulta sunt / et
viuent nomina eorum in generatione and generationem. Fourthly the
sanctyfycacyon of the seven holy sacraments is brought in this third
commandment / for we should bear unto them honor and reverence for yt they
ben holy. And for as much that the sy^ners by them ben purged and made clean
of the stynkynge ordure and fylth of sin and ben sanctyfyed and of the nombre
of saints of paradyse. In likewise as the time and places ben sanctyfyed /
also should the seven sacraments the which unto us be^ right necessaryes for
our health. Of these sacraments is spoken in the first commandment of god.
Quere.viij. B. And therefore it suffyseth of that the which is spoken unto
people of good entendeme^t and reason.

A. The manners how men break the feestes commanded.xviii.
IT is written Exodi.xxxi. ca. Qui polluerit sabbatum morte moriatur. Qui
fecerit in eo opus petibit anima illius de medio populi sui. Who polluteth or
soyleth the sunday / the feast commanded shall deye of death. The soul of
him the which thereon has wrought shall perysshe. The feestes ben evil kept
in many manners of ye which we shall say three generalles. The first is for to
do thereon operacyons worldly / manually / and by hand. And this also is
devised in many branches after the diverse sorts of people the which on the
days of ye feestes there done many operacions. First for to goo unto the
plough / or to mow / or to sow / or to make great works. Also the mysterys
of the persons the which does ye operacyons is defended as it is said.
exodi.xx. Non facies in eo opus. The feestes keep and honor / be thereon devout
and labor not. Evil comes unto them the which on them werketh. Example of
carle the which yode unto the plough on ye day of the feast commanded / and
ye wood claue unto his hand / and two years after was heled.lxiiij. F. Another
example of a woman the which wrought on ye day of saint Johan baptyst and she
was punysshed dyuynely Quere in the exampl. lxiiij. B. Secondly men break the
feast to carry on it / and to bear burdens in carts / or upon horses / for the
commandment of god says. From labor thou sholdest rest the / thy self /
thy household / and thy bestes. Vnde the remie.xvii. capitulo. Nolite pondera
portare in die sabbati et nolite eicere de domibus vestris in die sabbati et
omne opus no^ facietis in eo dicit dominus. Example of one of ye children of
Ysraell the which was slain and stoned by the commandment of god and of
Moses for that / that he gadred and bare wood on the day of the feast Quere in
the examplary.lxiiij. A. A questyon / if those the which bears corns unto
their lords on the days of the feestes offenden. A doctoure answers that
they ben not excused if other necessyte ne cause and constrayne them thereunto.
And more over the lords the which them commands or gives occasyon that to
do ben parteyners of their sins. And says afterward that they the which
bears lyuynges or vytayles far in to the country or marchaundyses and may
not do otherwise without great damage or hurt / such people ben excused as he
believes / so that they be first at the mass and at the service. And semblable
thing it is of pilgrims and vyagers. Example of a man the which bare wheet
in to his graunge or barn upon the day of the feast / and the said graunge
and wheet were brent. Quere in ye examplary.lxiiij. E. Thyrdly forgers or
smyths the which shoeth horse on the feast commanded by couetyse of winning
breketh the commandment of god. And if it be for to think on the necessyte
of pilgrims or vyagers they ben excused. Fourthly men break the feeste
commanded for to make thereon marchaundyses by auaryce and coueytyse of gain
without going to here mass and the service the church for to serve god and
to sanctyfy the feestes as done many merchants the which ben more waking
and erlyer risen on ye said festes for too run unto fayres and markettes than
they ne done on the workynge days Such people the which ne thinks but on
the goods temporal and leueth the gods spyrytuell sanctyfyeth not ne keeps
ye feast commanded / by ye which they syn^e mortally / and gone unto
da^pnacyon. But those the which after the mass and after the service bears
vytayles or other things necessaries for to sell / and the other the which
gooth thither for to bye their prouysyon of vytayles or other things
necessaryes may be excused. Quia necessitas no^ habet legem / nisi malu^ inde
sequeretur. de co^. di.i. Sicut. Necessite has no law / if evil should follow
after. Example of the bible how it is offense to do marchaundyse on the holy
day / for the merchants were reproved in Iherusalem. Quere in
thexamplary.lxiii. N. Fyfthly the feestes ben broken for to hold on them
pledy^ges / assyses and Iurysdyccions. Vnde legitur in decre. In festis diebus
a iudicijs et placitis est abstinendum.xv. q. iiij. Placita. And the gloss
says upon this that on the day of the feast men may treat of peace. And it is
written. Extra de ferijs et de co^. di. iii. Rogationes / in primo passu
dicitur. Quod omnes dies dominici sunt seruandi: and omnibus festiuis diebus
cessandum est ab opere servile neque placitum fieri ad mortam vel penam
sanguinis. etc. Syxtely the feestes ben broken for to do operacyons on the
vygylles of the the said feestes / as those the which work the saterdaye at
night. Such people sanctyfyeth not well the feestes / as thou may se by many
examples in the examplary. Also all sorts of people of what vacacyon yt they
ben also should cease to do worldly operacyons the days of the feestes for to
restreyne avarice / for to take heed unto their sanctyfycacyon / and also for
to obey unto god And it seems yt those the which them breketh have lost the
mind of them / and therefore techyngly it is written. Meme^to vt diem sabbati
sa^ctifices. Remember the. etc. All beestes appetiteth ye rest after their
labor. Also after that all things vegetables have borne flower and fruit and
labored in somer they rest them in winter. Also after that god had labored to
co^pose and make the world he rested him on ye seventh day. But ye auarycyous
forgeteth the rest / they labor.vi. days for to nouryssh etheyr bodies /
and they labor the seventh day for the dampnacyon of their souls / and so
remembers of it. Also many people dare not work on the holy day for ye
sclaunder and language of people: but if they have in some places to work / or
with some persons to speak / or if they will borowe corn or silver. etc. Or
they will find to to win in marchau^dyse / to sell or to bye or if they will
find means for to aduau^tage them. Such people puts their term on the
day of the feast for to take heed unto such things / and they leave or lose
their masses / euensonges / and the service of the church / they sanctyfye nor
the feestes / but breketh it. Also those the which does unto the contrary of
that thing that god the^ commands that is the which does operacyons on ye
said feestes by reason dysposed synneth mortally / and puts them from
paradyse as a man may se by many examples written in thexamplary. Quere.lxiiij.
A. B. C. Also these logycyens it preueth by reasons in form and arguments
thus. All they the which on the sondayes or feestes commanded go to ye
plough. etc to work dysobey this. Sabbata seti^fices / om^e opus. etc. The
sin mortally and by consequence they put them fro paradyse. For it is written
Mathei.xix. Si vis ad vitam ingredi serua mandata. Et psalm. dicit. Tu mandasti
mandata tua custodiri nimis. Vel sic. All mortal syn^e puts a man or a
woman from paradyse. For it is written Ezechiel. xviij. Anima que peccauerit
ipsa morietur. And they the which done ye great works on the feestes
commanded synneth mortally / for they dysobeye unto god / than they put
themself from paradyse. The solucyon is such. True it is that al mortal
sin / and al inobedyence puts from paradyse those the which in such
wise it trespasseth without penance. For it is written luce.xiij. Nisi
penite^ciam egeritis omnes simul peribitis. But those the which does penance
in their life and the which cease them of sin in obeyenge unto god. Iuxta
illd ysaie. Lauamini mu^di estote auferte malum cogitationum vestrarum ab
oculis meis quiescite agere perverse discite bn^facere. They shall have grace
and mercy and their sins shall be put in forgetfulness. Vnde ezechie.xviij. Si
autem impius egerit penitentiam ab omnibus peccatis suis. etc. Vita viuet et
non morietur omnium iniquitatum eius non recordabor etc. The second manner how
men breketh the feestes / is for to despise to go unto the service and to here
it / and the predycacio^s also as not to put him in devotion / and as not
taking head unto the health of his soul as is before declared. The third
manner general how men break the feestes is for to commytte the mortal sins
/ as dronkennesses / glotonyes / blasphemynges / lesy^ges / iniuryes / noyses /
stryues / murdres and so of other mortal sins. That is to say that at every
time that a man co^mytteth mortal sin on the feast commanded. It is not in
such wise sanctyfyed / but unto the contrary to dishonor by yt which it is
broken. Also the feestes ben often times broken by daunces unduly done / as
by pride / vanyte / or concupyscence carnal / or in the time of the service of
ye church / or in a place not conuenable / as ye church or the chyrcheyarde /
or with persons sclaundred / or when a person has not oportunyte to dance /
or when a man makes dyshonest signs / as to kiss / to wringe the fyngers /
to trede upon the foot. etc. Example of this matter of a maiden the which was
rauysshed in the dau^ce and after vyoled and hanged herself. Que. lviii. F.
Another example how the devil would have borne away a maid the which dau^ced
on the sunday. Quere.lxviij. C. Sith yt god defends on the feast to do none
operacyon vtyle as unto the body as to go unto the ploughe it follows well by
a more stronger reason that he defends operacyon evil and vnprouffytable as
to do lechery. If yt any went unto the plough on the sunday he should be
reputed ill / by more stronger reason he the which does lechery / for the
plough is a good operacyon of it self / ye which lechery is not: and therefore
men break the feast for to commyt on it deedly sin. They yt them have
offended let the^ be repentaunt in such wise to have offended god yt is full
of all goodness / and for fere to be sent to the fire of hell which a cruel
tourment as shall be declared here after.

A How those yt break the feestes ben punysshed ofttimes in this-worlde / and
they apperceyue not fro whens such punycyon proceeds. xix
THe prophet Ysaye says in the xvii. chapter of his book. Vniuersa mala
venerunt super te propter mltitudine^ malificioru^ tuoru^. All euyls shall come
on the for the multitude of thyn evil deeds. If you break any of the sondayes
or of the feestes commanded for to do any operacyons the which takes away
the sanctyfycacyons / or if thou dysobey unto any of the commandments of god
/ or if thou committee any mortal sin / be thou all in certain that thou
art bound unto pain and punycyon be it in this world or in the other. For
the psalmyst says. Iniusti punientur et alibi dicitur quia nullum malum
remanebit impunitum. The unjust shall be punysshed. Also all evil shall be
punysshed. And often times god punyssheth in this world those the which
breketh the feestes commanded by the same self operacyo^s that they do make
on the days of ye festes but they perceive not whereof the said punycyon
comes. Vnde Ysaie.xlvii.c. Veni et super te malum et nescies ortum eius et
irruet super te calamitas quam non poteris expirare / veniet super te repent
miseria quam nescies. etc. Evil shall come upon the / and thou shalt not can
tell whereof it shall proceed / and pouerte shall fall upon ye the which thou
may not avoid: and mysery that thou know not shall hastily come upon the.
etc. For to understand this matter it behooves to pertycularyse upon ye cases
the which happens. There ben some laborers the which gooth unto the
ploughe on the days of the feestes commanded for advance them and to enryche
in habundaunce of corns / and it dries sometime / when August comes their
corns ben full of drake / of deruell / and of myldewede / of stynkynge corn
or of other infeccyons. Who so should demand of ye said laborers whereof such
mysfortune or punycion comes / for their feldes has been well composted / well
sown with good sede / harowed and done in good season and fair wether. The
prophet Yasaie before alleged gives the answer in saying. Vniuersa mala
veneru^t super te. etc. vtsu. The said punycyon proceeds to you by adventure.
Nescio / deus scit. I can not tell / god knows for yt / yt ye made your said
corns on the feestes commanded. etc. Example of a punycyon the which came
upon ye corns of flies ye which devoured them / and in one of the wings of
the said flies there was written (ira) / and in the other wynge was written
(dei). That is to say the Ire of god the which was upon the people for their
sins.lxiiij. K. Vel sic. Thou labourer thou have in august good corns in thy
field / and do great dylygence the day of saint savior / or of saint
Laurence for to repe them / bind / and carry in to thy barn or peradventure
thou tythest evil ye said corn. etc. And for to punysshe ye of thy syn god
suffers that idle people as souldyers and hunters come upon thy ground and
devour and wast thy breed and thy corns with their hounds and horses. etc. Or
god shall send baylyfs / sheryfs / or comyssaryes yt which shall arest / take
/ or sell thy corn the which shall be given for naught / be it for taxes /
debtes / fortune or loss / and after thou shalt have honger or indygence.
Thou haste the eyes of thy soul blinded. Legitur in libro sapientie. Malicia
eorum excecauit eos. For thou co^syderest not that god the punyssheth for that
thou werkest and labourest to repe the said corn on the day of the feast
commanded. Vel sic. Or after that the said corn shall be ripe / reped /
bound / and engrau^ged the fire shall take within it / and enbrase it with
flambe and smoke till it be all burnt and consumed in to ashes. Veniet super
te maium et nescies ortum eius. vt supra. Example of a man the which carried
his corn on ye day of the feast / and the fire burnt all up. Quere in the
examplarye.lxiiij. E. Vel sic Or peradventure a^^^r that thou have labored on
the feast there shall come so great drought that thy said corn ne may grow /
or so great waters that it shall be drouned / or such tempest of hayle and
weder that it shall be shro^ken and wasted / and thou shalt not apperceyue
wherefore it shall proceed unto the as it is said. These things here ben written
in many places in scryptures. Vnde deutero. xi. Cauete ne forte decipiatur cor
vestrum et recedatis a dn^o ira tusque dominus claudat celum et pluuie non
desce^dant / nec terra det germen suum. etc. Beware lest peradventure your
heart be deceived: and that ye ne depart you from god / and that he wroth him
not against you that he ne close the heaven and that the raynes ne descend / and
that ye earth ne give ye bringing forth of fruit. Et leui. xxvi Si non
feceritis oi^a ma^data mea and si spreueritis leges meas vesitabo vos velociter
in egestate et ardore frustra feretis semente^ que ab hostibus deuorabitur
ponam facie^ meam contra vos. etc. If ye have not done all my commandments /
and if ye have despised my laws I shall vesyte you hastily in pouerte and
brennynge / ye shall bear for naught your corn and your sede the which shall
be devoured of enemies / I shall set my face against you. etc. Thou merchant
the which sanctyfyest not the feestes after ye commandment of god (sabbata
sanctifices) he shall permette that an evil thief or a knave shall by thy
marchau^dyse the which shall deceive and begyle ye and also shall not pay the
well / or you shalt lenne it him unto credence / and peradventure shall cost
the in process and debate ye value of the debt / where god the would have sent
a good merchant the which should bye well and pay well / but he will not do
that unto the / but he will do it unto hy^ the which has sanctyfyed the
feestes. Also he the which will bye marchaundyse and leave the sanctyfycacyon
of the feast for to run thither is often times begyled and deceived by fraud
and falshede. For if he bye oxen / kyen / sheep / or horse they shall be
peradventure seek or deye of moreyne. etc. by the which he shall lose all
such thy^g and he shall not apperceyue that it unto him proceeds for the
evil sanctyfycacion of ye feast. Veniet super te malu^ and nescies ortu^ eius.
vt supra. Example in the bible how the sellers on the feast day were reproved
and made cease. Quere.lxiiii. n. Also crafty people and werkers with their
arms the which lives by ye pain of their works often times breketh the
feestes for to get or win a thing of naught / as an halfpeny or a ferdynge.
And also god unto them sends some sekenes / for the which they muse and may
do nothing after in more tha^ xv. days. and puts that / that they have in
medycynes. Such people apperceyue not that god them punyssheth for brekynge of
ye said feestes / and how that god suffers men of war to pylle them for
their sins / ete their hens / and their bacon. etc For one penny that they
win on the said feast they lose mo than.xx. Also the punycion of this world
is nothing in regard of that of hell the which is eternal / in ye which
every man shall be punysshed after his deseruynge. Vnde psalmista. Tu reddis
vnicuique iuxta opera sua. Thou shall yield unto every person after his
operacyons. Example of two cordweners / the one yt which kept the feast and
yode to the service of the church habou^ded in goods / and the other ceased
not to work and was pore. Quere in the examplarye / and many other examples.
etc.

B. Of slouthe that god defends.xix.
THe wise man says in his proverbs. O ye slothful people go unto the ampte
or pysmyre and consider his ways and learn wisdom / the which ampte
prepares his meet in somer / and assembleth in heruest that that he will eat
in winter. How be it that he ne has leder / ne co^maunder / ne prince. Vnde
prouerbioru^.vi. Vade ad formicam o piger and co^sidera vias eius: et disce
sapientiam que cum non habeat ducem / nec preceptorem: nec principem parat in
estate cibum sibi / et congregat in miss quod comedat. etc. That is to
understand Labor ye in somer / that is do good operacyons whiles that thou
art living / and that thou have the time / the place / and the oportunyte /
and assemble in the fair virtues to the end that in winter that is after thy
death thou have to eete / that is to be refeccyoned in the glory of god. Vnde
psalmista. Saciabor cu^ apparuerit gloria tua. The prophet Ysaie says that
the servants of god the which have well labored in this world shall have
to drink and to ete. That is they shall be refeccyoned with the glory of god /
and the cursed slothful persons shall have hongre and thyrste. Vnde
Ysaie.lxv. Ecce serui mei comedent et vos esurietis / ecce serui mei bibent et
vos sitietis. etc. Also the dampened shall cry. Illud Iheremie.viii. capitu.
Transsijt messis sinita est estas et nos saluati non sumus. The heruestis past
somer is ended and wene ben saved. Man reasonable it is defended the by this
commandment that thou be not slothful to go unto the service of the church
/ and to sanctyfy and keep ye festes in likewise as they ben commanded If thou
have ben heavy to sanctyfy them / or to do the good espyrytual the which is
dyuyne what good deed so ever it be unto the which thou were holden of
necessyte / that is to understand if by consenting of reason thy body has
domynacyon and lord ship of thy soul in such manner that it has in hate
and in dyspleasaunce the dyuyne goods / and that he has eschewed and left to
do it and to accomplysshe it in such wise as it was commanded. It is here
against charity and mortal sin. Quia accidia secundum sanctum thomam est
tristicia de spirituali bono in quantum est diuinum ad quod quis de necessitate
tenetur Slouthe is to have trystesse of spyrytuall goodness in as much as it is
dyuyne whereunto some is holden of necessyte. To tarry / to withdraw or to fle
the going to euensonge / mass / matyns / predycacyons / processyons and all
other seruyces. If he sancyfy not well and honor god and his saints in their
solempnitees. And by this ben reproved the slothful late comers / neglygentes
/ people not carynge / forgetefull / idle / weyke in spyryte / soft / tender /
ennoyfull / sluggardes / and dyffaylers / in so much that they ne will obey to
serve god and his saints after the commandment ye which unto them is
given. Example how that god reproved the idle people the which ne did no good
operacyon. Vnde mathei.xx. Quid hic statis tota die ociosi: ite in vineam meam.
Also those the which ben idle and slothful to go unto service of the
solempnytees ben to be reproved as these beforesayd. Legitur luc.xii. Ille
seruus qi cognouit voluntate^ dn^i sui / et no^ se preparauit: et non facit
scdm voluntate^ eius vapulabit mltis. That servant yt knows the will of his
master or lord and prepares not himself / ne does after his will shall be
much beten. Also they shall be sent in to the fire of hell. Whereof it is
written luce. iii et math. vii. Oi^s arbor que no^ facit fructu^ bonu^ excidetur
and in ignem mittetur. That is to say. Every tree / that is every person the
which ne makes good fruit that is good operacyons shall be cut and sent
into the fire of hell / whereof it is spoken after Quere.xlix. b. A tree the
which bears no fruit ne does but occupye ye earth wherein it is / and
therefore men cutteth it and brenneth it. In likewise shall the slothful be
the which does no good deed shall be taken out of this world and sent unto
the fire of hell / in the which they shall be co^streyned to abide eternally /
and so to hold the^ will they or not without ever to have aid ne socoures.

C. Example of a relygyous that would do no goodnesses. It is written in ye
dyalogue of saint Gregory of a friar the which came unto a relygyon more by
necessyte tha^ by will unto whom it was grefe wha^ men spoke unto him of his
health / he ne would do ne here ye good / and to all goodness flouthfull he was
to do it. When he was seek and at ye death all his brethren came thither / and
as he labored at the last end he cried and said unto his bredren. Depart
you / go you he^s for I am given to a dragon for to devour me / yt which ne
may englout me for your presence / my heed is now plunged in his mouth / give
him place to swalowe me / and that he tourment me no more / and yt he do that
thing that he should do. If I be given unto him for to be devoured / wherefore
shall I suffer to tarry for you. Than ye bredren unto him said. Brother what
thing is that / yt thou spekest / make the token of the cross. He answered I
would make it but I may not for the scales of this dragon. Than his said
brethren fell flat unto the earth in orayson and weeping for ye aid and
delyueraunce of him / and by their prayers he was delivered. He thanked the^
and correcked himself / for he was no more slouthful but prompte and dylygent
unto all goodness / and after ended well his days / and if he had not
correcked himself he had be dampened and put from paradyse. Another example of
a man yt which was dampened for that he would do no good deed.

D. We find by writing how a holy man being in devotion herd by the
permyssyon dyuine the voice of a soul ye which cried horrybly alas / alas /
alas / and yt said holy man him demanded what he was / he answered I am a
soul dampened and he again demanded / what have thou done wherefore thou art
dampened. He answered for that / yt I was slothful to do good operacions /
said not the good that I knew / nor I yode not unto the church in time and
place / and and did not the good that I was holden to do / and therefore I am
dampened. By this example men should understand that it suffyseth not to
declyne from evil for to be saved / but with that it behooves to do good
deeds. Vnde psalmista. Declina a malo et fac bonum. The said man was not
dampened for the theftes / ne fornycacyons. etc. but for that yt he lost the
time of grace without doing of good deeds / and without confessyng hy^ and
after his death he might never confess him ne do good operacyons / for he
had lost ye time of grace / and also he was not in the place where he might
do it. Nichil preciosus tempore / sed heu hodie nichil vilius. Another example
of a priest the which tarried too mynyster the sacraments unto his parysshen
the which departed and deyed. This example is written here before in the first
commandment / quere.viii. c Dylygence is against the sin of slouthe for
good servants should be prompt and dylygent to serve god and his saints in
likewise as it is declared here before.xvi. A and they shall be praised / and
shall have great reward in likewise as it is written in the chapter of
sacrylege. Quere in ye.vi commandment.xxx. C.

A. Here follows the fourth commandment of god the which treats that we
should love our faders.xx.
Faders and moders thou shall honor
And them socoure in necessyte
To help thy neighbor in every hour
Be thou dylygent in all equity
THis commandment is written / Exo. xx. ca. Math. xix. and Marc. vii. Honora
patrem tuum et matrem tuam. Honor thy fader and thy mother or evil shall come
unto the / in likewise as it is comen unto many. Quere in thexam.lxx. b, d. And
it is written. Math. xxii. Et adroma. xiii. Diliges proximum tuum sicut teiprem
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. in likewise as it is written here
before. quere.ii. f. g. h. For to declare this commandment it behooves to se
and know many things. And first.

B. Which ben the faders that we should honor.xx.
VEnerare patris. Honor thy faders. Four pryncypall faders there ben unto
whom honor is due. That is to understand. Our fader creator / he the which
has engendered us / the fader spyrytuall / and the fader temporal. The fader
first that we should honor is god the creator that we require every day in
our orayson domynycall. Pater noster qui. etc He is said our fader for he has
created our soul unto his likeness. Also he loves us as a good fader does
his children / and nouryssheth us with his gods that he makes to grow. He is
the fader the which nouryssheth / he purueyeth us to that the which is
necessary. Moreover he wylleth that we have heritage and possession in his
realm that is paradyse / and therefore we should love him fylyally / that is to
say chyldely / for we ben his children in likewise as says the holy
scripture. Vnde dd in psalm. Dn^s dixit ad me filius meus es tu. Et paulus dicit
ad thessal.v. Om^es enim vos filii lucis estis et filii dei non simus noctis
neque tene braru^. Et ad roma.viii. Quicu^que enim spu^ dei aguntur hi sunt
filij dei. Et. i. ioh. iii. ca. Videte qualem caritatem dedit nobis pater vt
filij dei nominemur et simus. etc. Et math. xxii. Simile est regnum celorum
hoi^ regi qui fecit nuptias filio suo. etc. God so much loves his children
that obeys unto him / and unto them gives so much goods in paradyse that
they ben decored as gods. Vnde legitur in biblia. Ego dixi dii estis et filij
excel si om^es. The second faders that we should honor ben the fader and
mother that us has engendered / borne loved / given souke / nourisshed / and
socoured / or they ben those the which has not engendered us but have the
charge to nourysshe us / to clothe and to hose and sho us / and to puruey
temporally and spyrytually / wherefore men say in common language / he is a fader
that nourissheth. Unto these faders here we ne may yield the good that they
unto us have done / whereof speaks the phylosophre in (nono ethicorum) where he
says. Magistris dominis et parentibus non potest reddi equiualens. After that
thou were borne thy fader and mother have borne yt tenderly between both their
arms / for thou was feeble without any strength for to help thy self. When
thou cried and yt thou unto them did harm and anoye they supported thyn
vnwysenesse and shrewednesse / and voluntaryly pardoned the. When thou befyled
the in thyn own ordure and sylthe they made the clean and served unto thy
necessyte. When thou had honger they gave the souke / and the good morcelle^
out of their own mouths for to nourysshe and feed the. They have taken much
pain and travail / and thought for the as well by night as by day / and have
put themself in great danger for too get the goods and herytages. etc. For
to make short thou can not restore to them the good the which they have
unto the done. And therefore says the sage. Ecclesiastice. vii. Honora patrem
tuum et gemitum matris tue non obliuiscaris memento qm^ nisi per ipsos non
fuisses. That is to say. Honor thy fader and forgete not the way lynge of thy
mother / remember that thou had not ben if they ne had been. Example of the
daughter the which forgate not her mother in necessyte / and nourisshed her in
a toure with the milk of her breasts Quere in the exampl.lxxi. C. By this
present commandment god wylleth and commands unto children that they do in
likewise unto their faders and moders with heart and mind / and with operacyo^
wha^ time and place it shall require / as the said faders unto them has done at
the beginning of their chyldehode as before is declared. Example how the two
sons of Noe Sem and Iaphet mocked not their fader as did Cham / and they ben
praised. Quere in thexamplary.lxx. C. Another example of sone the which would
not shote at his fader as his bredren did. Quere.lxxi. A. By the which a man
should understand that a good child loves his fader and may not endure that
a man unto him do any evil / neither at death nor at life. Another example of
the sone of Abraham. Quere.li. A. The third be^ our faders espyrytualles or
goostly the which have the puyssaunce of god to regenerate and to reform our
souls spyrytually by the admynystracyon of the holy sacraments of the holy
baptysme and penance. etc The which unto us ben necessaryes and prouffytables
as it is written in the before in the first commandment. Quere.viii. a. b. Of
the which the pope is heed and sovereign fader of all christian people / ye
which has the puyssaunce that god gave unto saint Peter. The which is
written. mathei. xvi. Tibi dabo claues regni celorum et quodcu^que ligaueris
super terram erit ligatu^ et in celis / et quodcu^que solueris super terram
erit solutum et in celis. After our holy fader the pope our spyrytuall faders
be^vycares the which have prelacion and puyssaunce under god and under him /
every of them in pertyculer in the country lymytted where his said prelacyon
exte^deth and not in other countrees. As every bishop is the fader spyrytuall
unto them of his bysshopryche / every curate unto his parysshens. etc. As men
say / here is my fader of confession / or goostly fader / or god fader etc.
Also every master of the scole is a fader of doctrine unto his scolers. And
every precher of them unto whom he precheth for to do things salutaryes.
Whereof saint Poule makes compte the which says. Illud. i. ad. corinth. v.
Ego per euangeliu^ genui vos. Unto every of these faders here we should bear
honor and reverence after his dygnyte / as says saint Ysodore Secu^dum
dignitatem read cuique honore^. And unto them we ought to obey in that / that
we have promised in baptysme. Also in yt / that god and the church us
commands and in things the which ben after god / for the health and salute
of our souls touching good manners / and to fle and eschew sin. The fourth
faders the which we should honor / ben the mighty prynces-lordes chyeftaynes
and masters ye which have domynacyon and puyssaunce seculer upon other. As a
king in his realm is fader / heed / and master of them of his said realm as
unto the secularyte / and he and hye officers have the government as unto the
Justice seculer. Also every duke and lord in his duchy and sygnourye. Also
every man the which is master of his house is the fader of the household of
those of his said house / as well children as servants and is called in
scripture (pater familias) fader of the household. Whereof we read in the
ancient testament that the servants of a lord named Naaman said unto their
master. Fader if the prophet has told the great thing certes thou sholdest
do it. Vnde.iiij. regum. v. Pater si re^ gra^dem dixisset tibi propheta: certe
facere debueras. He murmured against ye prophet He liscus. etc. Unto these
faders seculers here every man should bear honor and reverence by this
commandment when ye time the place / and the oportunyte it gives / and after
the dygnyte of every man. Vnde.i. petri. ii. Omnes honorate fraternitatem
diligite deu^ timete / regem honorificate. That is to say / honor all folk /
love fraternite / dread god / honor the king. And it behooves them to obey
unto things ye which touches the government of their realm or sygnourye in
god and after him for the health of souls / and not otherwise. Legitur mathei.
xxii. Reddite que sunt cesaris cesari / et que sunt dei deo. Yield unto caesar
the things the which ben due unto caesar and yield unto god that the which
apperteyneth unto him. That is to understand that men should yield unto the
temporal lord such honor and the thing the which unto him apperteyneth.
And for to yield unto god ye dute and magnyfycence ye which belongs unto his
soueraynte. And saint Peter says. Be ye subgectes unto all humayne creatures
for the love of god or unto the king also as unto the superlatyfe the which
is above the other / or unto the dukes as sent of the king unto the vengeance
of the evil / and unto the praysynge and laudacyon of the good. Vnde.i. petri.
ii. Subiecti estote om^i humane creature propter deum / sine regi quasi
precelenti: sieve ducibus tanquam ab eo missis ad vi^dictam malefactorum /
laudem vero bonorum. And how be it that our lord commands that a man
honor / serve / and love his faders it behooves for to understand as it is
said that god is the sovereign fader. Vnde mathei. xxiii. Vnus est pater vester
qui est in celis. Unto god apperteyne the sovereign honor / for what person
that honors / prayseth / loves / serves / or puts his hope or trust in
persons / as in princes more than in god he offends in likewise as it is
declared before in the first commandment. Quere.i. H. Moreover ye scryptures
says yt ye auncyente people ben our faders in aege. Vnde paul.i. ad thimo. v.
Seniore^ ne in crepaueris: sed obsecra vt patrem. Thou shalt not blaspheme the
ancient / but praise hy^ also as fader. And it is written. Leuiti. xix. Coram
cano capite surge et honora personam senis / et time dominum deum tuum. That is
to say. Arise thou before the balde heed / and honor the ancient person /
and dread thy lord god. The ancient has seen passed / and can / and knows
/ wherefore a man unto him should bear honor and reverence. And when the young
presumes to speak / to know / or to do any thing before the ancient men
they ben proud presumptuous / and ought gretely to be reproved. Also it is
written. Ecclesiastice.xxxii. In medio magnatorum loqui non presumas / et vbi
sunt senes non multa loquaris. Glosa. Si vis interrogatus fueris habeat caput
tuum responsum / et multis esto quasi inscius et auditacens simul et loquens /
et pro reuerentia accedet tibi bona gratia. That is to say. Presume not to
speak among the great / and where the auncientes ben speak but little. If thou
be questyoned two times than answer. And be thou in many things as not
knowing and harken in scylence. And sometime speak / and good grace shall come
to the for to do reverence. Also this word here (pater) the which is here of
the masculyne gendre is taken in.iiii. manners after Grecisme. Est pater hic
cura / pater est alius genitura. Est pater etate / pater ille vocatur honor.
Ad summum regem facit illa creatio patrem. The first after Grecisme is he the
which has the cure to baptyse / to confess / and to admynyster the
sacraments. The second fader is he the which has engendered. The third fader
is the ancient of aege ye which is called the fader of honor. The.iiii.
fader the which ought to be the first is ye creator sovereign king. Of these
faders before said many examples shall be found in the fourth commandment of
the examplary. Quere ad numerum.lxxi. A. B. C.

A. The manners how these children should love their faders. xxi
HOnora patrem tuum et matrem tuam. Honor thy fader and thy mother. After the
commandment of god a man should bear reverence unto his faders in many manners
/ of the which we shall tell.vii.

B. First a man should do honor unto his faders when he passes before them
/ or that he speaks unto them / or that he bow the knee / and uncover and
bow his heed in humylyte / dread / and love. This manner of doing is comune in
all honest persons and much praised. For it is written luce.xiiii. and
mathei.xxiii. Omnis qui se humiliat exaltabitur. All men the which hu^bleth
them and boweth down shall be exalted. The more that a tree is charged with
fruit / or an ere with corn / the more they bow down and enclyne toward ye
earth Also a person the more that he is replenisshed with virtues and with
grace / ye more gretely he humbles him. Vnde iacobi iiii. ca. Deus superbis
resistit / humilibus autem dat gratiam. God resists unto ye proud people /
and to ye humble he gives grace. Also the person the which boweth down and
humbles him more low than he ne should he offends not as to pass in at a
door. And if he raise himself higher than he should he hurts him self and
offends. Our lord had humylyte in all manners. That is to understand in his
natyuyte / and when he washed the fete of his dyscyples / and when he put
himself under saint Johan for to be baptized. etc. Vnde mathei.xi. Discite a
me quia mitis sum et humilis cord. Learn of me / that is take ye example of me
for I am soft and humble of heart. If our lord has so much bowed down and
humylyed him under his dyscyples as to wasshe to their fete / by a more greter
reason we should humble us and bow under our fader and mother. Also it is
written that every man dread his fader and mother. Vnde leuitice.xix. Vnusquisque
patrem suum et matrem suam t^meat. And when that any ne humbles hy^ and boweth
down before his faders when time and place it requires it is pride and gooth
against thiq commandment. Secondly a man does honor and pleasure unto his
faders when that a man speaks unto them sweet words / good and curteys /
simple and amyable unto god and unto them. Whereof speaks the sage
Ecclesiastice.xx. capitul. Sapiens i^ verbis amabilem se facit. And the sage
makes him amyable in words. Et legitur ecclesia.vi. Verbum dulce multiplicat
amicos / et inimicos mitigat. That is to say / swear words multyplyeth friends
/ and asswageth or lesseth ye enemies. And the phylosophre says in the.ix.
book of ethyques. The amyte of the good folk shall be increased by ye good
languages. Et legitur prouerbiorum xxv. Lingua mollis confringet duriciam
cordis. The soft tongue breketh the hardness of the heart Et legitur
prouerbiorum. xv. Respo^sio mollis trangit iram: sermoduris suscitat furorem.
Soft answer breketh ire / and hard words reyseth furour If thou speak sweet
words unto thy parents they ne may be wroth against the and also thou do
unto them honor. Example how Ysaac the sone of Abraham spoke sweet words
unto his fader when he would have made sacryfyce of hy^ and slain him.
Quere.li. A. Unto the contrary if thou blame them or speak rigorously thou
do unto them dishonor. Also to curse them thereof follows terryble
punycyon. Whereof it is written. Marci. vii. Honora patrem tuum et matrem tuam /
et qui maledixerit patri aut matri morte moriatur. Honor thy fader and thy
mother and he that has cursed his fader shall deye of death / and his light
shall be put out in ye myddle of derkenesses. Vnde prouerbioru^.xx. Qui
maledixerit patri suo vl matri sue extinguetur lumen eius in medus tenebris. We
read genesis.ix. capitul. that one of the sons of Noe named Cham mocked his
fader as he lay and slepte uncovered / and therefore his sone was cursed and is
reproved evil / he and all ye lygnage of him. etc. Example how.x. children
trembled by punycyon dyuyne for that they had offended their mother. Quere in
thexampl.lxxiii. E. Another example of a child yt ye devil bare away. Quere
in thexamplary.lxx. G.

B. Thyrdly men do unto them pleasure and honor when men love them naturally
in seeking and desiring their health and prosperyte corporal and spyrytuall.
Valerian says. Quod prima lex nature est amare parents. The first law of
nature is to love his kynnesmen and parents. And god commands illud.
Mathei.xxii. Diliges proximum tuum sicut te ipsum. Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. The most nerest neighbor that thou have is thy fader
and thy mother / for thou art proceeded and comen of them. Love them than as thy
self in god / and after him and not otherwise. Example of a daughter that
nourysshed her mother in a prison with ye milk of her breasts / and by her
charity and love her mother was delivered the which should have deyed. Basilius
dicit / pare^tes nostros vt propria viscera diligamus si accedere nos ad
seruitutem christi non prohibuerint / si autem prohibueri^t ne sepulchra
illorum a nobis debentur aspici. Love we our pare^tes as our own bowelles if
they defend us not approach unto the seruytude of Ihesu christ / and if they
defend it us we should not behold their sepultures. Our lord Ihesus loved so
much his mother that he forgate her not at the hour of his death and
recommaunded her unto saint Johan ye euangelyst. Vnde john. xix. Dixit
discipulo / ecce matter tua. etc. And in deed the contrary when a child hates
his fader or his mother in requyrynge that they have an evil death or aduersyte
for to have their goods / honors / and herytages they ben right unnatural /
peruers / and evil wors than a be. Quia legitur ecclesiastice.xiii. Quod
omne animal diliget sibi simile. Eueri be loves his semblable. And of those
the which them tourmenteth it is written in this manner. Prouerbio.xxviii Qui
subtrahit aliquid a patre suo vel a matre et dicit hoc non est peccatum
particeps homicide est. And of those ye which them beteth it is written:
Exodi.xxi. Qui percusserit patrem suum aut matrem suam morte moriatur. He the
which smyteth his fader or his mother shall deye of death. Example of two sons
the which slew their fader. Quere.lxxii. D. Another example of a sone the
which dishonored his mother / and his children deyed shortly.lxx. E

E. Fourthly men do honor unto their parents when that wyllyngly and
benygnely they submyt them in their subieccyon and service to socour them in
their needs and necessytees corporalles and spyrytualles / whereof speaks saint
Peter.i. petri. ii. Serui subiecti estote in omni tempore dominis / non tantum
bonis and modestis sed etiam discolis hec est enim gratia. Be ye subgectes that been servants unto your lords and masters in all dread / and not alonely
unto the good and moderate / but unto the evil. And the sage says.
Ecclesiastice.iii. Qui timet deum honorat parents / et quasi dominus seruiret
his qui se genuerunt. etc. And here those that been proud should well
understand that their fader and mother them served swetely after that they
were borne / wherefore the children should humble them to serve them and honor
them. Also god them commands it. We read yt the good holy man Thobye
taught his sone that he should do service unto him / not alonely in his life /
but with that when he should be deed / and unto hy^ said. Illud thobie.iiij. Cum
acceperit deus animam meam corpus meum sepeli / et honorem prebebis matri tue
omnibus diebus tuis. When god has taken my soul bury my body / and thou shall
give honor unto thy mother al thy life. Also we read that our savior and
redemptour Ihesu christ humbled himself and put him under Joseph / and unto his
glorious mother the blyssed vyrgyn Mary / as it is written. Luce.ii Erat subditus
illis. Thou child wherefore seruest thou not thy fader and mother / and wherefore
shall thou not be in their subgeccyon. Art thou greter master than god the
which put himself under his parents and friends. Those the which ne will
serve and appetyteth that men them serve or those the which ne will be in
subgeccyen but appetyteth that other be subgectes unto them ben proud and
inobedyentes unto god their creator / wherefore it can not be well with them.
Example how a woman was blind for that she failed to goo to serve in the place
where the body of saint Martyn rested in likewise as she had vowed.
Quere.lxiii. H. Another example of a man the which served and did humble
things and fled vain glory.lxi. c.

F. Fyfthly a man does honor to his faders when that a man obeys unto the^
in things vtyles and lefull after god and good manners / and it is right
straytly commanded to obey unto fader and mother in the thing famylyer
prouffytable unto ye body or unto the soul. Whereof saint Poule speaks Ad
ephesi.vi. Filii obedite pare^tibus vestris in domino / hoc enim iustum est /
sequitur patres nolite ad iracundiam prouocare filios vestros. Faders provoke
ye not unto ire your children that they ne ben stryken of little courage. Sed
educate illos in disciplina et correctione domum. But led ye them in
dyscyplyne and in the correccyon of god. Also in eodem capitulo ad ephesi.vi.
Serui obedite dominis carnalibus cum timore et tremore et in simplicitate
cordis vestri sicut christo non ad oculum seruientes quasi hominibus place^tes
sed vt serui christi facientes voluntate^ dei. sequitur. and vos domini eadem
facite illis remitte^tes minas scientes quia illorum et vester dominus est in
celis et personarum acceptio non est apud deum. That is to say Ye that been
servants obey unto your lords carnalles with dread and fere and in ye
symplenes of your hertes in likewise as unto Ihesu christ / not as servants
with the eye also as pleasynge unto men / but also as the servants of Ihesu
christ in doing the will of god. And ye lords do ye unto them in likewise
forgyuynge al thretenynges in knowlegynge that your god and theyrs is in ye
heuens / and accepcyon of persons is not anenst god. Et legitur ad collos.iii.
Serui obedite per om^ia dominis carnalibus non adoculum seruientes / qua si
hominibus placentes sed in simplicitate cordis timentes dominum. A questyon
that is to understand if a man should obey unto his fader in all things. The
answer is that nay. A man should not obey unto them in things the which ben
against god as said the holy appostles when they were reproved for that / that
they kept not the commandments of the princes of the paynyms. They answered
to such reproues. Illud actuum.v. Obedire oportet magis deo quam hominibus. It
behooves to obey unto god more than unto men. In some things a man should
accomplysshe and obey unto his faders. Unto the prelate a man should obey in as
much as the right of his prelacyon thereto extends. The fader carnal has
prelacyon upon his children as in conseruacyon and keeping of ye house. The
fader of the household is in his house as the king in his realm. The subgectes
of the king owes unto him obedience in things the which apperteyneth unto
the government of the realm. Also in likewise the sons and the servants of
the household ben holden to obey unto ye fader of the house in things the
which apperteyneth unto the dyspences and costs of the household. The fader
owes unto his child correccyon and techynge / and ye children thereto should
obey humbly. As in other things the which should be against god they should
not obey. And when they unto them dysobey in such case they ne do unto them
none irreuerence: how be it that the appostle says. Ad colloscenses.iii. capi.
Obedite parentibus vestris per omnia / hoc est enim placitum domino. This word
here (omnia) intelligitur ad que se ius prelationis extendit et non aliter.
etc. That is to understand that a man should obey unto his parents in all
things where as ye right of their prelacyon extends / and not otherwise. For
if they commanded any thing the which were against god or good manners a man
should not obey as it is said. God wylleth and ordeyneth that we live in this
present world under obedyence / and we should clearly understand it. For as
soon as he had created and fourmed Adam he gave him commandment the which
he trespassed and transgressed and therefore he was punisshed / as it is written.
Genesis.ii. and.iii. Also we read in the book of Moses that if a child had be
stoborne and inobedyent unto his fader and mother that his said fader and mother
should led him unto the ancient men of the cite and that they wytnessed and
told unto them the sins of their said child and that he would not be
corrected by them ne by their admonycyon here follows ye punycyon of the said
child so inobedyent as it is written. Deuter.xxi. Tapidibus eu^ obruit pplus
ciuitatis and morietur vt auferatur malum de medio populi vestri / et vniuersus
israel audie^s pertimescat. Let the people of the cite cast stones at him and
let him be slain to the end that the evil be taken away from the mids of
the people and that all the people of Ysraell that shall here it be in dread.
Also we read that Absalon the ione of Dauyd made war and persecuted his said
fader and by punycion dyuyne he was hanged by ye here of his heed and had his
heart perced with four speres and was slain. Also relygyous people ought to
obey unto their prelates after the vow that they have made to keep relygyon
touching the rule and constytucyons of their monasterye / where if they go
unto the contrary they should be grievously punysshed. In things the which ben
not after god and good manners they should not obey. Saint Poule says ad
hebreos vltimo capitul. Obedite prepositis vestris vt subiacete eis / ipsi enim
peruigilant quasi ratione pro animabus vestris reddituri / vt cum gaudio hoc
faciunt et non gementes. Obey ye unto your prouostes / that is unto prelates
and be ye under them. Certainly they wake also as too yield reason for your
souls / to the end that they do that with Joy and not in wayly^ges. Also saint
Poule says / if there be any that will not obey unto our word by ye epystole
mark ye him and accompany ye not with him / to the end that he be confounded
Vnde.ii. ad thesall. iii. Si quis non obedierit verbo vestro per epistolam hunc
notate / and non co^misciamini cum eo vt confundatur. Also when these prelates
shows the health of souls as good doctrine a man should here them and learn
the good that they say / in likewise as if god it commanded from heaven. Vnde
luce decimo. Qui vos audit me audit / et qui vos spernit me spernit. He the
which hereth you hereth me / and he the which dyspreyseth you dispreyseth me
says our lord god. Also our lord says that a man should do that the
which the prelates ypocrites commands / and not to do their cursed sins
and operacyons Vnd mathei. xxiii. Super cathedram moi si sederunt scribe et
pharisei omnia quecu^que dixerunt vobis seruate et facite / secundum autem
opera eorum nolite racere / dicunt enim et non faciunt. Obedyence is the ladder
for to ascend in to heaven / and it is requysyte of necessyte of health. In
likewise as it is written in the beginning of the examplary where the examples
of obedyence ben written. Quere.li. A.

G. Syxtely a man does honor unto his parents and fader when a man helps
them by operacyon of body and of gods in their necessyte after their abylyte
and puyssaunce. Also it is written primo to hannes tercio. Filioli mei non
diligamus verbo neque lingua / sed opere et veritate. My children love we not
by word ne by tongue / but in wecke and in truth. Do unto thy fader and
unto thy mother in semblable manner as the have done unto the in thyn infancy
and chyldhode as it is said before. Quere before in this said commandment.xx.
B. And saint Ambrose recounteth in his book exameron in the fyfth chapter that
the birds the which ben called storkes puts their parents as fader and
mother when they ben fallen in aege into a nest and in deed them nouryssheth
and keeps duly and dylygently there / and if any of the said old fowls have
lost their feders by aege or otherwise / favorably and kyndely they cover
them and fail them not unto the time that they be deed. In ye the same manner
by greter reason naturally and of the commandment of almighty god we should
help / socour / and conforte our faders and moders and other pare^tes Be ye
not as the enfantes of serpents ye which byteth and renteth the womb of
their moders / and sleeth them. Example of a sone the which defaylled unto
fader and unto mother / and he bare a tode three years in his vysage. Que. lxx.
B. Another example of two daughters the which put out their fader in his age.
lxxiii.

H Seventhly men does honor unto their faders wha^ they the^ supporte in age
feebleness / in sekenes / and have no wit / and if they excede somewhat to
pardonne them. Whereof speaks saint poule ad gal. vi. Alter alterius onera
portate: et sic ad implebitis legem christi. Bear ye the burdens or deeds one
of another. And so shall ye accomplysshe the law of Ihesu christ Et legitur
eccle. tertio. ca. Fili suscipe senectam patris tui et non contristes eum i^
vita illius: et si defecerit sen^us veniam da illi. Sone receive the auncyente
of thy fader / and be not wroth with him in his life / and if his wit
defayle pardon him / Et legitur ad ephe. iiii. Estote autem inuicem benigni:
misericordes donantes inuicem sicut er deus in christo donauit vobis. Be ye
togyders benygne mercyful gyuynge togyders in like wise as god has given unto
you in Ihesu christ. Examples how a man should bear honor unto his fader and
mother and first. Example how the wise salamon honored his mother. It is written
in the second chapter of the third book of kings how the king Salamon
saw one time his mother Barsabe come unto him / and he rose up and came to mete
her and worshipped her / and set him upon his throne / and made his mother to
sytte on his right side by him / in doing her honor in like wise as a good
child should do unto his mother Again tho children the which sets fader
and mother when they ne may nothing more do / not at the hye end in doing
them honor / but at the corner of ye ch^neye. And if there be a boon it is
given unto the fair fader the which has no mo tethe. Another example written
in the fourth chapitre of the book of thobie / how the auncyente thobye said
unto his sone / When god has taken my soul bery my body / and bear honor
unto thy mother all ye days of thy life. And in like wise should good children
do. Another example. It is written that when the vyrgyn Marye departed Ihesus
forgate her not / and theder made to come and be borne all the appostles. And
he himself came theder for to do her honor and service. etc. And also set
her on his right hand in paradyse in doing her honor. Whereof speaks ye
psalmyst the which says. Astitit regina a dextris tuis in vestitu deaurato
circumdata varietate. Another example of a man the which was fell and hard
unto his auncyente and his sone him repreued and of good right. For a man
should bear honor unto his faders by commandment of god. Quere.lxxi. F.

I The things mouyng for to honor their faders. Ca. xxi.
IT is written ecclesia. tertio. Sicut qui thesaueim at / ita qui honorificat
patrem suum. In likewise as is he ye which wexeth rich In like wise is he the
which honors his fader and his mother with due reverence. Many things there
is ye which should cause and stere the persons of this world to honor
their faders and moders / of the which we shall tell. iiii. The first is to
have honor and preyse as well before god as the world and for to fle
dishonor. For the wise Salamon says in ye ecclesiastes. Gloria enim hominis
ex honor patris sui et dedecus filij pater sine honor. The glory of the man
is of the honor of his fader / and unto the dyshonoure of ye sone when the
fader is without honor / if the fader have honor or dishonor in likewise
has the sone / and the good or the evil of the fader redoundeth upon ye sone
It was none honor unto Absolon for to make war against his fader Dauyd.
Also evil came unto him. Quere.lxx. A. The second thing the which moeueth
us to honor our faders is to the end to have benedyccyon or blyssynge. Whereof
speaks the sage. Ecclesiastic. iii. Honora patrem tuum et subueniet tibi
benedictio a deo / and benedictio illius in nouissimo manet That is to say /
honor thy fader that benedyccyon come upon the from god. And the benedyccyon
of him abides in the last end. Example in Ysaac the sone of Abraham the
which had benedyccyon. Quere.li. A. The two sons of Noe Sem and Iaphet the
which honored their fader had benedyccyon. As it is written. Genesis. ix. c
Benedictus dominus deus sem sit chanaan seruus eius / dilatet deus iaphet et
habitet in tabernaculis sem: sitque chanaan seruus eius. The third is of dread
to have maledyccyon / for it does dyscende upon the children the which will
not honor their faders. Whereof it is written. Deuteronomie. xxvii. Maledictus
qui no^ honorat patrem suum et matrem suam / et dicet om^is populus. Amen. He
the which honors not his fader and mother shall be accursed / and all the
people shall say. Amen. Example of Cham the sone of Noe the which mocked his
fader / and called his two bredren Sem and Iaphet for to mock him also / for
that that his natural things were uncovered and he had maledyccyon in his
lygnage. Quere in thexamplary.lxx. C Another example of children the which
had the maledyccyon of their mother. Quere in the example.lxxiii. E. Another
example of a fader and of a sone the which cursed each other in hell.
Quere.lxxi. G. Another example of a child that the devil bare away.
Quere.lxx. G. The fourth is to the end to live the more longely / and of dread
to shorten the life and to deye cursedly. Whereof it is written. Exodi. xx. et ad
ephesios. vi. Honora patrem tuum et matrem tuam vt sis longeuus super terram
qua^ dominus deus tuus dabit tibi. Et deuterono. v. Honora patrem tuum et
matre^ tuam sicut precepit tibi dominus deus tuus vt longo viuas tempore et
been sit tibi. Et eccclesiastic. iii. Qui honorat patrem suum et matrem suam
vita viuet longiore. For as much as Asolon honored not his fader he abreged
his life. Quere in thexamplari. lxx. A. Many other examples shall be found in
thexamplary of the commandments of god. As of a man whose berde grew long
after that he was hanged. Quere.lxxi. E.

A. The things that a fader owes unto his child. xxii.
IT is written prouerbiorum vice simoseptimo capitulo. Diligenter agnosce vultum
pecoris tui: tuosque greges considera / non ei habebis iugiter potestatem. etc.
Know thou dylygently the face / the manners / and condycyons of thy people /
and consider the defautes of thy subgectes / for thou shalt not have evermore
puyssaunce upon them. A good fader owes duly unto the child four things /
the which ben nourysshynge correccyon / techynge and good examples showing.

B. First the fader should nourysshe his child / for god him commands to
love his neighbor as him self / and the nerest neighbor that a man may have
is his child the which he should love and it puruey after his puyssaunce or
else he should be unnatural and inobedyent unto god. Example of a good mother
the which loved naturally her child and might not endure yt he were slain ne
that he had evil. Quere. lxxiii. D. The birds nouryssheth their young ones
/ and them purueyth till that they may purchase for them self / as the hen
her chekyns / and the other every of them in their degree. In likewise should
the fader do unto his children / for if they de fail to give them drink and
meet in their necessytees / or if he let them deye of honger / of cold / of
pouerte / or of other thing by defaute of keeping / he should be deputed
mankyller / as it is declared in the fyfth commandment where as is spoken the
manners of manslaughter. Quere post.xxiiii. D.

C. Secondly the fader owes unto his child correccyon / for if he se that he
be inobedyent and rebel against god and good manners / or that he habandon him
to commytte sins and cursednesses he him should reprove and correcke and
punysshe wisely and dyscretely in taking example at god our fader celestyall
the which loves ye persons and reproves the vices. This thing is declared
before in the first commandment. Quere.iii. C. Also take example at the fader
spyrytual the which reproves and correcketh the vices and sinners in
predycacyon and confession / and in gyuynge penance for punycion after ye
counceyle of the appostle.i. ad thessal.v. c. Corripite inquietos / consolamini
pusillanimes suscipite infirmos / pacientes estote ad oe^s. Correcke ye them
the which have no rest / comfort ye them the which have little courage /
receive ye the seek be ye pacyent unto all. And a man should well note that
correccyon is one of the works of mercy that god commanded. And sometime he
defends that men beat not. Quere.xxv. B. Also correccyon is one of the parts
of Justice that the Just should ever have in them and do it unto other. Iustus
dicitur a iusticia. The Just is said of Justice. Thou fader thou sholdest
desire the health of thy child / and he shall not be saved if he ne be
correked of his sins. The sage says. Illud. prouerbiorum. xxiiii. Noli
subtrahere a puero disciplinam si enim percusseris eu^ virga non morietur. Tu
virga percuties cum et animam eius de inferne liberabis. Keep the from
withdrawynge dyscyplyne from thy child / if thou stryke him with the rod he
shall not deye. Thou shall stryke him with the rod and thou shalt deliver his
soul from hell. And saint Poule says. ad titum.ii. Loquere et exhortare and
argue cum om^i imperio. Speak and exhort and reprove with all sygnoury. Example
of two relygyous of the which the abbot corrected one incontinent that he
failed / and ye other he spared. When they were departed and deed he that was
corrected yede into the Joys of paradyse / and ye other unto the pains of
purgatory. Quere in thexa^plary.lxxiiii. C. Also thou fader if thou love thy
child if he be in sin you sholdest threten him / and thou sholdest afferme
unto him that he shall be beten if he correcke not him self. Vnde
ecclesiastice. xxx. Qui diligit filium assiduat illa stagella. Also it is
written in the said chapter Curua ceruice^ filii tui iniuue^tute et re^de
latera eius du^ infans est ne forte induret and non credat tibi et erit tibi
dolor anime. Bow down the heed of thy child in youth and smite his sides
whiles that he is a child that he wax not hard unto the / and yt he believe
the not when he shall be great. The wande boweth and wryeth when it is young /
and when it is old a man may not twyne it / no more may men the children
Wherefore they must be plied and daunted in youth. Example by the good
correccion that was done unto a young child he yode in to paradyse
incontinent yt he was deed / as it is written in thexamplary.lxxiiii b. Also the
fader that loves that his child be wise / prudent / and fulfilled with good
manners him beteth and chastyseth / for ye rod gives wisdom. Vnde prouer.
xxix Virga atque correctio tribuit sapientiam. Alibi legitur. Sepe facit pueros
aspera virga bonos. A sharp rod makes often times good children. And
master Alayne says. Currere cogit equum sub milite calcar actum. Et puerum
studio virga vacare suo. That is to say. The sharp sporre constreyneth ye
horse to run under yt knight And the rod constreyneth the child for to
take heed unto his study. And it is wryte^ prouer. xxii. Stulticia colligata
est i^ cord pueri / et virga discipline fugabit eu^. Folly is in the heart of
the child / and the rod of dyscypline chaseth it away. Example of a monk
that the devil drew out of ye church and led him unto vanytees wha^ the
other waked in orayson / but incontinent that saint Benet had beten him and
chastysed the devil fled / and after the said monk was devout. Quere.lxv.
G. Also when the fader is not curyous of the salvation of his child and to
correcke hy^ of his sins and defautes it is a token that he loves him not.
Vnde prouerbioru^.xv. Qui abijcit disciplinam despicit anima^ suam. He that
puts away dyscyplyne dyspreyseth the salvation of his soul. Also if by
defaute of correccion the child commytteth sins the fader is deputed an
homycyde spyrytuall of the soul of his child of death of gylte as says saint
Gregory / and in likewise as it is wryte^ distin. xliii. Pastor qi non corrigit
ouem occidit. The herdman ye which does not correcke his sheep: that is his
subgect / sleeth him spyrytually. Example of a child blasphematour of the aege
of.v. years that the fader ne corrected and the deuylles slew him in his fader
lap, Quere in the examplary.lxii. B. Also in ye house where defaute of
correccion is ye children and the servants behave them ill / for every of
them will be master / and between them aryseth noyses / and dyuysyo^s by the
defaute of the superlatyfe. Vnde seneca. Iudex qui dubitat vlcisci multos
improbos facit. The Judge the which douteth or draws back to venge or to
punysshe the malefactor does many cursednesses And here should be noted by
the fader of the household that he shall yield account before god of all his
children / servants / and subgectes the which ben remaining in his house /
if he teache them not / correcke / and think on their health. In likewise as
wrote saint Austyn unto an earl his friend. Vnde augustinus. Que somi frater
omnibus tibi subiectis in domo tua a maiore vsque minimum amorem et dulcedinem
regni celestis amaritudinem and timorem gehenne annuncies et de eorum salute
sollicitus ac vigil existas / quia pro omnibus tibi subiectis qui i^ domo tua
sunt rationem reddes. Example of Hely the which corrected not well his
children of their sins and therefore he is blamed in scripture and in doubt of
perdycyo^. Quere in thexamplary.lxx. F. Some children ben wise ye which loves
the fader that them correcketh / and the other ben foles proud and inobedyent
the which will not be corrected ne reproved / and they ben wroth when men
them correct. Vnde scriptura. Corripe sapientem et amabat te / stultus si
corripitur irascitur. Example of a woman dampened the which dyspraysed those
that reproved her of her sins and defautes. Quere in the examplary.lxxj. H.
The wise man says in his proverbs. Qui diligit disciplinam diligit scientiam
/ qui autem odit increpationes insipiens est. That is to say. He the which
loves dyscyplyne loves science / and he the which hates blames is a fool.
Also the wise man says in ye xxviii. chapter of his proverbs / that he the
which corrects any man shall find grace and love toward him more sooner
than he the which him deceyueth by flaterynges. Also the fader and the mother
ye which corrects not their children in yongthe shall find them in aege
rebel / stoborne / proud and inobedyent / and also shall confound fader and
mother in language or otherwise. Vnde prouerbioru^. xix. Puer qui dimittitur
voluntati sue confundit matrem suam. Et seneca dicit. Qui nutrit puerum suum in
inuentute nimis dilicate indubitanter in senectute ipsum inueniet contumacem et
superbum. Example of a child the which bote of the nose of his fader at the
galowes as men would have hanged him. And for as much as they yt were present
blamed he answered. I have well done / for if my fader had corrected me in my
yongth I had not ben hanged now. Quere in thexamplary.lxxi. D. Also the wise
man says that he the which nouryssheth his servant dylycatyuely in yongthe
shall apperceyue him afterward stoborne and boystous. Vnde prouerbiorum.xxix.
Qui dilicate a puericia nutrit seruum suum.i. corpus vel seruum postea
sentieteu^ contumacem. Example it is written in the bible that Helye suffered his
sons to live dylycatyuely / and he apperceyued afterward that they were
sinners. Moreover evil came unto them for they were slain in battle. Quere
in thexamplary.lxx. G. Other examples shall be found in ye fourth
commandment of thexa^plary. Quere.lxx. G.

D. Thyrdly the fader owes unto the child techynge / for he ought to
instruct him in ye faith / in scyences / and good manners. Also he should learn
him the commandments of god. Vnde ecclesiasti. vii. Si filij tibi sint erudi
illos / et curua illos a puericia illorum. If thou have children teache them /
and bow them down in their infancy and chyldehode. Et legitur prouerbioru^
xxix. Erudi filium tuum and refrigerabit te et dabit delicias anime tue. Teache
thy child and he shall refresshe and give dayntyes unto thy soul. Et legitur
ecclesiastice. xxx. Qui docet filium suum laudabitur in illo et in medio
domesticorum in illo laudabitur. He the which techeth his sone shall be
praised in him of his household and shall say this is a good child / also he
has a good fader and patron. If thou learn him science and good manners thou
shalt be Joyous in this world and in the other / And to the contrary if thou
learn him nothing thou shall be sorrowful and dolent therefore. Example of a
sone the which cursed his fader in hell for that yt he had taught him
nothing but evil. And of an other sone the which was saved and praised and
blyssed his fader for the good that he had him learned. Quere.lxxi. G. Another
example how Cathon gave good instruccyon unto his sone. Also Thobye taught his
children that they should obey unto him. The poet says. Disce puer du^
tempus habes euo iuuenili. Ne doleas si pauca scias etate seuili. Child learn
whiles that thou have time in the aege of yongthe that thou repent the not in
aege wha^ thou shalt conne but little thing. etc. Also the faders
spyrytualles as prelates / curates / and prechers should instruct their
subgectes. Vnde.ii. ad Thymotheum.iiij. Predica verbum / iusta oportune /
importune argue / obsecra / increpa in omni patie^tia et doctrina / erit enim
tempus cum sanam doctrinam no^ sustinebunt / sed ad sua desideria conceruabunt
sibi magistros prurientes auribus et a veritate quidem auditum auertent ad
fabulas autem conuertentur. That is to say. Preche unto sinners and maynteyne
thou it opportunatly / unportunately repreue / pray / blame in all pacyence and
doctrine / the time shall come that they ne shall sustain / that is they ne
will have wholesome doctrine. They shall assemble prechours and masters for to
tell them pleasant things for to here / they shall take away the herynge
when a man shall speak of the truth / and they shall approach to here fables
/ toys / and mockeryes. It is a great thing unto a fader curate or precher to
show the word of god and to convert a sinner / and to put him from the error
of his way / for he saves his soul and covers the multitude of his sins.
Vnde iacobi. v. Scire debet quoniam qui conuerti facerit percatorem ab errore
vie sue / saluabit animam eius a morte / et cooperit multitudinem peccatorum.
Examples of many the which have been saved for their word of god. Quere in
thexamplary. And unto the contrary it is a great danger unto curates and
superlatiues to let the souls of their subgectes be lost by defaute of their
showing of good doctyne / for they ben deputed as homycydes of their souls.
Vnde Ezechielis.iii. Si no^ annunciaueritis impio neque locutus fueris vt
auertatur a via sua impia / et ipse impius in iniquitate sua morietur sanguinem
aute^ eius de manu tua requiram. etc. Et legitur prouerb^. xi. Vbi non est
gubernator populus curruet. The people falls where as is no governor / that
is of capytayne or of master. Also the curates the which precheth not ne
corrects their parysshens shall answer before god of all their synes Vnde
johannes chrisostomus dicit. Vnusquisque enim christianus pro suo peccatored
det rationem / sacerdos autem non tantum pro suis sed et pro omnium subditorum
peccatis. Also they ben called dombe dogs the which can not bark ne baye /
that is they can not preche ne show the word of god. Vnde Ysaie.lvi. Canes
muti non valatrare videntes vana dormientes et ama^tes somnia. etc. Example
that he yt precheth the word of god shall have great reward in paradise / and
that many curates gooth unto dampnacyon for that they govern them evil.
Quere.lxvi. g.

E. Fourthly the fader should show good example unto his children. Saint Poule
says. Ad titum.ii. capi. Inomnibus teipsu^ prebe exemplum bonorum operum / in
doctrina / in integritate / in grauitate verbum sanum irreprehensibile vt is
qui ex aduerso est vereatur nichil habens malum dicere de nobis. Give thyselfe
example of good operacyons in all things / in doctrine / in integryte / in
grauyte / thy word be hole with out reprofe to the end that he the which is unto
the contrary have shame / and have not any evil thing to say of us. A man
should note that the fader is deputed homicyde of his child spyrytually of
death of gylte when he does operacyons of sy^nes before him / and that by his
example he habandon him unto evil and syntull works. The blyssed man saint
gregory says in his pastoryall. Scire debent prelati quoth tot mortibus sunt
digni / quot perditionis exempla ad subditos transmittunt. Et legitur mathei.
xviii. Ve homini per quem scandalum venit. Woe unto that man by whom sclaunder
comes. Example of a man and of his child the which cursed each other in
hell / and said by the I am dampened. etc. Quere in the examplary.lxxi. G. Also
in this fourth commandment a man should understand that god there
commands that a man love his neighbor as him self. This dyleccyon is
declared largely in the beginning of this present book. Quere.ii. e. f. g.

A. Here follows the works of mercy the which ben here commanded to
accomplysshe ane^st our faders and neighbors indygentes and nedy. xxii.
Who so with god will make his accord
When he shall come unto the Judgment
The works of mercy commands our lord
The to accomplysshe unto the Indygent.
Saint Poule says in his epistle that he writes.i. ad Thymotheum.iiij. capi.
Pietas ab omnia vtilis est promissionem habens vite: que nunc est et future.
Pity is prouffytable in all things having promise of the life the which now
is and of that for to come. Also these scryptures says. If thou wylt be in
the love and in ye grace of god / and that thy case be well borne unto the
Judgment partyculer and general the which shall be done of the it behooves
that thou be merciful to give and to lend unto the poor indygent. That is to
understand. If any of thy bredren christian men be comen to pouerte thou shalt
not harden thyn heart ne withdraw thyn hand / but thou shalt labor and give
unto him the lone in the thing the which you see that he has necessyte.
Vnde deuteronomie.xv. Si vnus de fratribus tuis ad paupertatem venerit non
obdurabis cortuum nec contrahes manuum sed apecies eam pauperi et dabis mutuum
quo eum in digeri prospexeris. And if thou do unto hy^ any alms and charity
thou shalt have way and ouerture for to come surely before god. For the gate
of paradyse shall be opened unto him the which has done mercy and alms /
in likewise as men open ye gates and make way unto hy^ the which brings a
fair present or gift unto a lord / and if he bring nothing men shytte the
gates against him. Vnde ecclesiastice. xvi. Omnis misericordia faciet vnicuique
locum secundum meritum operum suorum et secundum intellectum peregrinationis
illius. All almesdedes and good operacyo^s that the Just has done shall
appear upon him before al at the Judgment. Vnde Ezechielis.xviii. Iusticia
iusti erit super eum. The Justice of the Just shall be upon him And the sage
says that in the end of the man his operacyons shall be made open. Vnde
eccle. xi. In fine hominis denudatio operum illius. Et legitur Ysaie.xxix. Erit
vobis visio omnium sicut verba libri signati. The vysyon of all things shall
be unto you in likewise as the words of the book written / and god shall call
with him the good people the which bears upon them the works of mercy that
they have acco^plysshed / the which he shall put on his right hand / and
shall led them with him into paradyse. And the evil shall be put on the lift
hand and sent unto the fire of hell. It is written prouerbiorum.xxi. Qui
obturat aurem suam ad clamorem pauperis clamabit ipse et non exaudietur. He ye
which stops his eeres unto the clamours of ye poor / he shall cry and he
shall not be herd. Item sequitur prouerbiorum. xxi. Qui sequitur iusticiam et
misericordiam inueniet vitam et gloriam. Alibi vincit cuncta dare / da si vis
superare. Per dare regnare poteris / celosque valere.

B. To give breed and drink.
Unto the poor look that thou give.
Both breed and drink in time of need
If thou so do / verily believe
Thou shalt be saved / be out of dread
GOd will that thou break and give thy breed unto the poor / not the breed the
which is moulde / infecte / or corrupt / ne breed the which is comen of
theft or of pyllery / but of breed the which is thine / and of that the
which thou etest. Vnde Ysaie. lviii. Frange esurienti panem tuum. Et legitur
prouerbiorum. xxii. Qui pronus est ad misericordiam benedicetur de panibus enim
suis dedit pauperi. He the which is enclyned unto mercy shall be blyssed / of
his breed he has given unto the poor. Et legitur prouerbiorum. xxviii. Qui
dat pauperi non indigebit / qui dispicit deprecante^ sustinebit penuriam. He
the which gives unto the poor shall have no need / he that dysprayseth the
besecher shall sustain pouerte. Et legitur prouerbiorum. xi. Qui abscondat
frumenta maledicetur in populis He the which hydeth his whete in time of
famyne shall be cursed among the people And note well that it is unto the poor
and indygent people that thou sholdest give and not unto the rich. Vnde Luce.
xiiii. Cum facis conuiuium voca pauperes debiles claudos. etc. et non diuites
ne faciat tibi retributio. etc. Example by this how saint Eustace was an
almesman / god would not that he were dampened / and him converted. Quere.xliii.
b. Another example how that a barley lofe prouffyted much unto a rich man the
which keste it unto a poor man by furoure. Que^. xliii. c. Another example
that the cursed Dyues brenneth and broyleth in the fire of hell / for he had
no pity of the poor lazare. Quere.lxxxiiij. A. Another example of a rich man
merciful. Quere in the examplary. lxxxiiij. C. And of duke Durande.lxxxiiij. b
Also god will that thou give drink unto poor folk that been thyrsty / and
thou shalt have reward in paradyse / and if thou ne give but one dysshe with
cold water. Vnde mathei. x. Quicunque potum diderit vini ex minimis istis
calicem aque frigide ta^tum in nomine discipuli. Amen dico vobis non perdet
mercidem suam Example of a man merciful the which was drowned as he wend to
take the water for to give it unto a poor man / and he yede in to paradyse or
his body was cold. Quere in the examplary.lv. B.

C. To lodge and to clothe.
The poor people that lodging want
In to thy house receive them gladly
If they of clothes have verey scante
Provide that needs as seems the sadly.
GOd will that the poor pilgrims and people passing by the way the which
have not where to lie ne to lodge / that thou gader them and bring them in to
thy house. Vnde Ysaie.lviii. Egenos vagosque induc in domum tuam. Et paulus ad
hebreos. xiii. Hospitalitatem nolite obliuisci. Example by that / yt Abraham
kept hospytalyte / and that he lodged the aungelles / he had a sone the which
had benedyccyon. Genesis. xviii. Sara sterilis erat conceptret et peperit
Ysaac. Sara the wife of Abraham was barayne and ancient the which conceived
and chylded ysaac. Quere. li. A. Another example. Saint Gregory shows in his
omelye of the monday in Ester weke that there was a fader of an household the
which served by great study unto hospytalyte with them of his house / and he
received every day at his table the pilgrims / and on a day thither came many
pilgrims the which he received / among the which there was one whom he
would have washed as he was accustomed to serve them in humylyte / and as he
ne did but take the lauer he ne wist where ye said pilgrim became whom he
would have served. And as he meruayled him of ye deed in that night god unto
him said by vysyon. Thou haste received me these other days in my members and
yesterday thou received me in my propre person. Unto this purpose it is written
Mathei. xxv. how god shall say at the Judgment. Quod vni ex minimis meis
fecistis michi fecistes. That that ye have done for the love of me unto one of
my leest ye have done it unto myself. And god will that if thou find any
naked person frosen for cold that thou cover him / and if thou be of power
that thou give him a vestyment. Vnde ysaie.lxviii. Cum videris nudum operi eum.
Et legitur luce. iii. Qui habet duas tunicas det vnam non habenti. Example
saint Gregory shows in his first book of his dyalogue yt saint Bonyface was
so merciful that from his chyldehode he gave oftentimes unto ye poor his
gown and his sherte. And on a time in ye absence of his mother when there was a
derthe he gave and dystrybuted unto the poor people all the corns of the
garners. And for as much as the said mother was wroth he prayed unto god / and
the said garners were replenysshed with corns. Another example how saint
Martyn gave the half of his mantell unto a poor man. And the night following
he saw god among the aungelles covered with the said mantell the which said
in this wise. Martinus ad huc cathecuminus hac me vest contexit. Martyn yet
cathecumyn that is not baptized but in will to be has covered me in this
vestement.

D. Of the seek and prisoners.
The seek and poor thou shalt vysyte
And with good heart also them aid
The prisoners eke as is requysyte
That lie in chains shrewdly arayde
AFter ye scryptures thou ne sholdest be slouthefull / ne take for thing in
grefe too vysyte the seek. For as to aid and conforte them a man is confermed
in the dyleccyon of god and of his neighbor Vnde ecclesiastice. vii. Non te
pigeat visitare infirmum ex hijs enim in dilectione firmaberis. Example of a
Samaritan the which vysyted and made to heel a man the which was in the
hands of thieves. Quere in the first commandment.iii. H God shall say at the
Judgment. I have be seek and in prison and thou haste vysyted me.

E. Example how saint Gregory shows in the omelye of this gospel. Vide^s
ciuitatem fleuit super illam. There was a worshypfull man a monk named Martyr
the which by grace of vysytacyon parted from his monastery in the which
preceded a fader spyrytual. And as he yede his way he found a mesyll or lepre
in the way the which was so deformed and replenysshed with wounds and sores
of the sekenes elephantyne as he might be / he would go in to his hospytall /
but he ne might so much do / he was so weary / and intended to go the way of
ye said Martyr monk. And the man of god had pity and compassyon of the said
weary mesyll and thought to help and socoure him in his need / he took his own
mantell and spredde it on the earth and wrapped the said lepre in it and lift
him upon his sholders and bare him. and when he approached nygh to the gates of
the said monastery the fader spyrytuall of the said monastery began to cry
with an high voice unto his servants. Run ye run ye and open the gates of
the church for brother Martyr is comen the which bears god on his sholdres.
And when he aryued at the gate he the which he had thought to be a lepre
lepte from his back in the form of our savior and redemptour Ihesu christ
the which was god and man mounted in to heaven before the said friar Martyr in
saying. Martyr thou have had no shame of me upon the earth / and I shall have
no shame in heaven of the. And when the holy man was entered in to ye church the
fader of the monastery him demanded saying. Brother Martyr where is he that
thou barest right now. He answered If I had known him I should have holden him
by the fete. Than Martyr told ye case / and said that as he bare him he felt
no weight. etc.

F. Another example how saint Elyzabeth served a mesyll four days. Men find
in writing that in an hospytall the which saint Elyzabeth had do to be made
there came a mesyll or lepre so foul / horrible and lothely to behold that
the chamberers and servants of the said hospytall had horror and ne would
mynyster and serve him of such necessytes as were requysyte. And when saint
Elyzabeth saw that he was in such wise dyspised of other she came unto him
for to mynyster his necessytees in all humylyte and dylygence. She washed his
heed / bathed him / and bare him upon her sholdres / and made him to rest in
her lap / and she did him this service four days. and than the said seek
man departed. The fyfth day as saint Elyzabeth was making her devout oraysons
our savior Ihesu christ appeared unto her and said. I am Ihesu christ the sone of
the vyrgyn Mary / unto whom thou have mynystred at such days. And for as
much as thou haste purueyed me in form of a lepre thou shall have with me
eternal life and Joy. etc.

G. Another example of a seek body the which was vysyted of an angel. It is
written in the life of the faders that an ancyent man solytary was seek by the
space of thyrty days the which had never a person that him vysyted / nor
the which unto him did any service in his sickness the which he bare
patiently. And after the said.xxx. days god unto him sent an angel the
which unto him admynystred by seven days his necessytees / for no person him
vysyted. And after that some freres remembered them of the said man ye wh^^
said togyders. Such one our brother comes no more forth let us god vysyte
hy^ lest peradventure he be seek / and they arose incontinent and went toward
him. And when they came to knock at the door the angel of god departed from
him / and the said seek man began to cry with an hye voice in the said house.
Go hens bredren / goo hens / and in weeping they yode and took the door of the
hokes and entered unto him / and than they demanded him wherefore he had in
such wise cried / and he unto them answered. For I have labored by.xxx. days
in sickness and no manner of person has vysyted me / and here these seven
days god has sent an angel the which has minystred unto me my necessytees
/ and when ye were comen unto the door he departed fro me. And when he had
said these words he deyed / and all they praised our lord god. etc. Another
example how many freres gave a clustre of grapes unto the most weykest. Quere
in the examplarye.lxxv. A. Another example of a curate the which vysyted a
rich man at his death / and would not vesyte a poor woman wydowe the which
deyed.cv. A. Another example of a curate ye which tarried to long or went to
mynyster the sacraments to his parysshen the which deyed. Quere before.viii.
C. Another example how two men became lepres for that / that they had
horroure and despised lepres. Quere in the examplarye. lxxxiiij. E.

H. To bury the deed.
The deed bodies yt lie above ye ground
Having not whereof in earth to be brought
To bury them all christian men ben bound
Specially those yt of themself have naught
IN scriptures we read yt the good man Thobye left his dinner and ran for to
have the bodies of them that had been slain and by night entered and buried
them against the will of the king / for he fered and loved more god than the
king. etc. Also we read. Eccclesiastice.xliii. Corpora sa^ctorum in pace
sepulta sunt / et viuent noi^a eorum in eternum. That is to say. The bodies of
those that been holy ben buried in peace / and the names of them lives in
perdurabylyte.

I. To counceyle and to conforte.
Confort them that been confortlesse
And counceyle them yt no counceyle have
Of such good deeds thou do not cesse
If thou think thy soul to save.
A Great work of mercy it is as too give good counceyle unto those the which
have sinned folyed / or gone out of the way or the which have many doubts and
dyffycultees. The wise man says that health shall be in the thing where as
ben many counceyles. Vnde prouerbiorum.xi. and.xxiiii. Salus erit vbi sunt
multa consilia. A man should take the counceyle of god and of the good men and
not of the evil. Vnde thobie quarto. Consilium semper a sapientie perquire. The
evil people ne counceyleth but evil and sin / and therefore take not their
counceyle. Vnde ecclesiastice.xxxvii. A consiliario malo serua animam tuam.
Example / evil came unto Theophyle to take the counceyle of a sorcyer / for he
made him to renounce unto god and unto the vyrgyn Mary. Quere.lviii. b Also
evil came unto Amon the which defloured and had to do flesshely with his
sister Thamar by the counceyle of Ionadab for he was slain after. Quere in
thexamplary.lxxxxi. C. Another example how evil came unto the king Ochozyas
for sendynge too seek counceyle at the devil / for he deyed myscheuously / and
his messengers were burnt with the fire celestyall. Quere in thexamplary ad
numerum.lx. g An other example also how by the cursed counceyle of
Balaam.xxiii. thousand men of the children of Ysraell were burnt for
committing fornycacyon. Quere in thexamplary ad numerum.lxxxx. d. Also it is a
great relygyous work as too conforte those the which ben seek and in
trybulacyon. Vnde iacobi. i. Religio munda et immaculata apud deum et patrem
hec est visitare pupillos et viduas in tribulatione eorum. Example in god the
which conforted the three children the which were in ye fornayse. Quere.lviii.
B. Also god conforted Susanne in her trybulacyon. Quere in the
examplary.lxxxxvi. Also it is written in the first chapter of Thobye that the
said Thobye yede by all those of his knowledge for to conforte them. And he gave
mete unto them that had honger and clothed them that were naked / and those
that were frosen of cold. etc.

K. To chastyse and to teache
Chastyse those right wisely
That thou have in governance and kepinge
With soft words also swetely
Teache all those of simple understanding
THe matter of chastysement and techy^ge is written here before. Quere.xxii. C. D.

L. To pardon and to pray
Of charity and pity pardon all those
That the has offended in word and deed
For his love that deyed and arose
Pray for thyn enemies quycke and deed
HOw those the which hates should pardon and pacyfye to gyders the Iniuryes
and offenses done and spoken if yt they will that almighty god pardon them
their sins. Quere hanc materiam. xx. G. Example in eodem loco. Also it is an
holy thing and saluable as to pray for them that been deed the which have
honger and thyrste to se god / the which ben seek in the prison of purgatory /
naked and unpurveyed of all goods. Vnde ii. Machabeorum. xii. Sancta et
salubris est cogitacio pro defunctis exorare / vt ea peccatis soluantur. Also
great reward follows to pray for the quycke the which has necessyte. Vnde
mathei. v. et luce. vi. Orate pro persecutoribus et calumnianti antibus vos /
et erit merces vestra multa et eritis filij altissimi. etc.

M. To supporte.
Thou sholdest sagely the sy^ple supporte
And help to ease them of their charges
The folysshe folk advise and exhort
Than each will praise thy bou^tees larges
AFter the law of god thou sholdest supporte and help thin au^cyent faders
and the imperfeccyon and pouerte of thy neighbors / in likewise as it is
written here before. Quere.xxi. H.

Thus leueth to speak of the works of mercy.
It is a thing right according
And much it pleases god almighty
Unto the soul also great helping
To excercyse the works of mercy
AFter the holy euangelyst god shall say to the good at the day of Judgment.
Come ye blyssed of my fader / and possede you the eternal realm the which
unto you is apparayled and made ready from the beginning of the world. I have
had honger and thyrst / and ye have given me to ete and to drink. I have been
seek and in prison / and ye have vysyted me. Vnde mathei. xxv. Venite benedicti
patris mei possidete paratum vobis regnum a constitutione mu^di. Esuriui et
dedistis michi man ducare / situi et dedistis michi potum. and cetur. This
sentence conteyneth.vi. clauses. The first is understand by this word (venite
the which denotes a Joyous calling in an assocyacyon amyable. The second
clause is understand by this word (benedicti) the which denotes dyuyne
benedyccyon. That is that the good shall receive the benedyccyon of god / and
they shall be of the nombre of the blyssed saints of paradyse. The third
clause is understand by these two words (patris mei) the which denotes
dyleccyon paternall / that is that they shall have the dyleccyon and
benedyccyon of god the fader as of god the sone. The fourth is understand by
(possidite) ye which denotes that the good shall be put in possessyon and
saysme of the Joys and of the good deeds that they have deserved. The fyfth is
understand by (paratum vobis regnum) the which is the assygnacion of the
place and of the heritage the which is apparaylled unto ye good the which
unto them shall be denounced and given at ye day of Judgment. The syxte clause
is understand by (constitutione mundi) that is predestynacyon the which is
that god were predestynate to be saved. By the which the said Joys of
paradyse unto them were made ready. And unto the contrary ye ill people the
which have not wylled to excercyse mercy / as the cursed Dyues: and to do good
operacyons shall have this sentence upon them the which our lord shall cast
at the dredefull day of Judgment. Discedite a me maledicti in ignem eternum
qui paratus est diabolo et angelis eius. Esuriui et non dedistis michi
manducare. etc. Vt legitur mathei. xxv. That the pride the which is against
the dyleccyon of his faders and neighbors is here defended / and humylyte is
here commanded: Quere ante.ix. E. F.

Here leueth of the.iiij. commandment.
A. Here follows the fyfthe commandment of god the which defends homycyde
unjust. xxiiij.
God the defends to beet and to kill
Ire / hastynes / and wrath intyerly
All malice / rancour / and evil will
Punysshed shall be full bytterly
THis commandment is written. Deuteronomie. v. ca. No^ occides. Thou shalt
not kill ne slay. Alibi dicitur. Non sis occisor. By the of will ne of deed be
none homycyde / or evil shall come unto ye in likewise as it has done unto
many. Quere in thexamplary.lxxvi. A. B. C. For to understand right shortly
this commandment in general / a man should understand that god in it
defends all man slaughter unjust of will and of deed as unto ye body and as
unto the soul / and all ire / furour / vengeance / strife / envy / and hate.
And therein commands for to love his neighbor by charity / and to do him
no harm against right and Justice. In like wise as shall be found here after
by ye chapytres.

B. And first that god defends death corporal and spyrytuall. xxiiij.
NOn sis occisor. Ne slay not the soul of thy self ne of thy neighbor for
too grieve him by sword. And slay not thy soul ne that of thy neighbor by
mortal sin. In this commandment two sorts of dethes be^ defended. The one
is corporal and the other is spyrytuall. A man sleeth the soul spyrytually of
ye death of gylte by mortal sin / the which is a dysobeysaunce so venymous
/ full of infeccyon and of sekenes mortal that it mortyfyeth and quenches
charity and the virtues and separeth god / his love: and his grace the which
gives life unto the soul. Vnde augustinus. Sicut corpus moritur recedente
anima a qua est eius vita / ita anima recedente a deo a quo est eius vita
mortua est. That is to understand. In likewise as the body deyeth when the
soul departs / in semblable manner the soul is deed of deeth of gylte when
god is departed by sin. For god is ye life the which makes the soul to
live. Vnde. John. xiiij. Ego su^ via veritas et vita. And a man should not
understand that the soul defayled is deed and quenched / for it is immortal.
But a man should understand that the soul is deed spyrytually of the death of
gylte as it is said / and deputed for to descend in to ye tourmentes
infernalles of hell with all the deuyls / the which is ye second death /
where as the dampened has death without dyenge / and life without living.
Saint Bernarde says. Non viuit qui superbia inflatur / qui luxuria sordidatur
/ qui ceteris peccatis inficitur / quoniam non est hoc viuere / sed vitam
confundere et appropinquare vsque ad portas mortis. That is too say. He the
which is blown with pride the which is soyled by lechery / and ye which is
infecte by other sins he lives not For it is no life to live so. It is to
confound his life and to approach unto the gates of death. Et paulus dicit.i.
ad thymotheum v. Vidua que in delici^s est viuens / mortua est. Glosa. Quia si
viuat natura / mortua est culpa / vel si viuat mundo mortua est deo. The wydowe
the which is living in delytes of sins is deed spyrytually for all be it
that ye nature lives she is deed by gylte. Or if she live to the world she is
deed unto god. Et legitur appocalipsis. iii. Scio opera tua qui nomen habes
quod viuas et mortuus es. etc. The beginning of corporal death and spyrytuall
proceeds by ye sin of our first fader Adam the which brake the
commandment of almighty god. Our lord him defended that he should not ete
of the truyte and unto him said In what hour that thou etest of it thou shalt
deye. That is for to understand of double death / for thou shalt be mortal
as unto the body to deye one day the which shall come / and also thou shalt
deye spyrytually of death of culpe or gylte / for grace and virtues shall
depart them from the And the devil came after the which is ye great
murderer and enuyous hangeman of the soul and insacyable enemy of humayne
creatures the which counceyled and provoked unto our first mother Eve that she
should ete of the fruit. And he tempted her first for that the woman is more
frail and apt to convert than the man by fair language and flateryes. And
she answered / god has said unto us that in what hour that we ete of it we
shall deye. no the devil said unto her. It is not so ye shall not deye. God
has said so for that that he knows that in what hour that ye ete of this
said fruit your cyen shall be opened and ye shall be as gods knowing the
good and the evil. So Eve consented her unto the devil and did ete of the
apple / and made Adam to ete against the commandment of god / and anon they
were bound unto the death corporal and spyrytuall. God had created their
souls fair / and clear / shynynge in innocence / full of charity / of virtues
/ and of spyrytual gods / and hadd put them in a place delectable that is
paradyse terrestre / and they were immortalles / but after that they had
sinned they were bound unto death as it is said and were adnychyllate / and
their spyrytuall goods forgoten. Quia legitur ezechielis. xxxiii. In quacunque
die peccauerit iustus omnes iusticies eius obliuioni tradentur. Before sin
the soul was fair / but after it was vile and foul and pryued from grace and
from virtues and taken out of paradyse terrestre and put in this present
world the which is the land of labor and of mysery / and deputed to
descend in to the regyon infernal that is hell. etc. Who so should well
consider th^s example he should keep him from commyttyng of mortal sins the
which mortefyeth the life of the soul and his spyrytuall goods as it is
said. A man should note here that all the good operacyons that a man does in
mortal sin ben deed and of none effect for they ben done without grace and
charity. Quere post.xlv. B. And therefore he ye which commytteth mortal sin
is culpable of a great crime worthy of punycion to slay in such wise his soul
and his virtues by the death of gylte. Example how filius prodigus was deed of
death of gylte by sin when his fader said unto his ancient sone. Illud Luce.
xv. Gaudere oportebat quia frater tuus hic mortuus fuerat et reuixit / perierat
et iuuentus est. Another example of a thief the which saint Johan converted
when he him demanded of the bishop the which should have kept him. He
answered. Parer mortuus est deo. That is to say. Fader he is deed unto god of
death of gylte / he is prince of the thieves. Another example how Susan^e said
that death was in her if she committed the lechery that the two ancient men
would have had her commyt. Vnde Damelis. xiii. Si enim hoc egero mors michi
est. si autem non egero non effugiam manus vestras sed melius est absque opere
incidere in manus vestras quam peccare in conspectu domini. For a good cause
Susanne would not commytte sin / for incontinent that it is consummed and
done it engenders the death / as says saint James in his epistle. Peccatum
cum consummatum fuerit generat mortem. And the soul the which has sinned
shall deye of death. Vnde ezechielis. xviii. Anima que peccauerit ipsa
morietur. For too understand well the scriptures god defends the death
corporal / and death spyrytuall as it is said. It is a thing clear sith that
god defends yt thou sle not the body / by a more greter reason he defends
that thou slay not the soul spyrytually. For it is nothing as of the body the
which is transytoryous as to ye regard of the soul the which is perdurable
and eternal. etc.

C. The manners how a man commytteth homycyde. xxiiii.
NOn occides. Thou shalt not slay. Homycyde is committed corporally and
spyrytually in many manners. First a man commytteth homicide spu^ally by evil
thoughts when a man consents him by delyberacyon to do any mortal sin. In
likewise as it is written indepenitentie disti^ctione.l. c. Siquis volu^tarie.
If by delyberacyon thou desyrest the death of any of thy kynnesmen and friends
for to have their goods and herytages. Or if thou have hate with any of thy
neighbors in desyryng to beat him or to kill him / or to do him any evil in
his person or in his goods or herytages thou art deputed homycyde of thy
soul spyrytually. Vnde.i. iohannis.iiii. Qui odit fratre^ suum homicida est.
etc. This matter shall be declared hereafter in the chapter of the sin of
hate. Quere post.xxvii. c. And in the two last commandments of god.
Secondly a man commytteth homycyde spyrytually when a man gives so evil
example unto his subgectes that they habandon them to sin as it is declared
here before in the fourth commandment Quere.xxii. E. Or when the subgectes
go unto perdycyon by defaute of correccyon. Quere.xx. C. Or by defaute to show
and to teache the word of god. Quere.xxii. D. Versus. Exemplum / men's / lingua
/ manus / substractio victus. Corporis ac anime dici possunt homicide. Thyrdly
a man commytteth homycyde spyrytually by the tongue when a man makes lesynges
for to noye his neighbor. Vnde sapientie.i. Os quod mentitur occidit animam.
Also when a man blasphemeth or when a man swereth vaynely against the dyleccyon
of god a man sleeth the soul of the death of gylte. The wise man says that
the death and the life ben in the hands of ye tongue Vnde prouerbiorum.xviii.
Morset vita sunt i^ manibus lingue. Examples how the deuylles did slay the
child of a rich man in blasphemynge god. Quere in the examplary ad
numerum.lxii. B. Also a man does homycyde by the tongue when a man accuses
falsely any person for too make him to deye / as the Jews when they accused
falsely the Just lamb that is our savior and redemptour Ihesu christ unto
Pylate the Judge crymynall by lesynges and after cried as unreasonable beestes.
Crucifige / crucifige eum. They were homycydes and culpables of his death. And
Pylate the which him Iuged and condamned wrongfully / they committed homycyde
how be it that they stroke not the nails. Another example how Judas yt which
sold our lord for.xxx. pence sayng. Quid vultis michi dare. etc. was homycyde
/ traytre / and thief too deliver his master / and evil came unto him for he
lost the dygnyte to be an appostle and another was elect and put in his place /
as it is written in the deeds of the appostles. Hiat habitacio erus deserta / et
episcopatum eius accipiat alter Also he was accursed of god / and he had been
better never to have been borne. Vnde mathei.xxvi. Ve homini illi per quem
filius hominis tradetur / melius esset illi si natus no^ fuisset homo ille. And
at the last he hanged himself and is dampened. Also a man does homycyde by the
tongue when a man commands unjustly for to do homycyde. In likewise as it is
written distinctione.i. Si quis viduam. Et de peniten. disti. i. capitul.
Periculose. Example in Herod the which commanded that saint Johan baptyst
should be beheeded / he was homycide albeit that he gave not the stroke Other
examples there ben of them that has committed semblable homycydes as of Egeas
the which made saint Andrew to be crucyfyed. And Tarquyn made Thymothee to be
slain. And Hyrace yt which made to kill saint Matthew. And Quyncyen saint
Agathe. And Neron saint Peter and Poule. They were homycydes of the^ how be it
that they ne deden the operacyons. Quere ista exempla.lvii. f. g. h. i. Also
they the which counsaylleth or commands to excercyse wars ye which be
not just after god / or ye which that to do ben moved / by auaryce or
vengeance more than for the love of Justice ben homycydes and culpables of the
murdres the which thereof comen. Also those ye which cou^saylleth to do any
homycyde breketh this commandment / as it is written. di. i. cap. Si quis
vidua^ and de pe. di. i. c. hominum. and ca. Omnis iniquitas. These baudes the
which counsaylleth to do lechery / or these ill knaves theft ben homycydes of
ye souls spyrytuelly. etc. Also those ye which susteyneth the quarrel of
war unjust puts themself in danger. Quia agentes et conscientes pare
pena punientur. That is to understand those ye which makes war / the
which it susteyneth / and the which also consents shall be punysshed of
semblable pain. etc. Fourthly a man does homycyde by the hand and by cursed
operacyon. If it be will dysposed unjustly that is a great sin much enorme
and reserved unto the bishop or unto the pope after the person slain. Vt
habetur. di l. ca. Si quis voluntary. It is that ye which is spoken before.
Christian / man / and christian woman to hate / to beat / and to kylle unto the is
defended entyerly. If thou hold rancoure thou shall be punysshed bytterly This
sin bydeth unto great punycyon Example how the angel showed unto tongdalus
in hell a valee replenysshed with coals of fire in the which were put these
homycydes. Quere.lxxvii. g. Another example how leueresse made saint beatryce
to be slain. And the devil posseded her and slew her.lxxvii. a. Another
example how iesabell made Naboth to be slain / and she was slain and the
hounds eat her.lxxvi. b. They shall be sent unto the fire of hell the which
is a torment right cruel. Quere.xlix. b. Also when by charnalite or other
cursed government a man is cause that the fruit of a woman perysshe before
the baptysme or after / he is homycyde and case reuersed. Also empoysonners /
and enuenimers / or women the which drynketh herbs for to make the fruit of
them to deye such people ben homycydes and transgressors of this
commandment. Also a man homycyde by the hand / and of that it behooves to
make dystyncyon. When the judge makes any person to deye for his demerytes by
right justice. And that he and the hangman done execusyon for to punysshe
alonely the sinner by justice / the judge ne synneth in co^maundynge it / ne ye
hang man in doing execusyon / but it may be merytorye for the conseruacyon of
the comune wealth / and of the thing publyke / as approves saint poule in a
pystle where he says ad romanos.xiii. Omnis anima potestatibus / sublimoribus
subdita sit Sequitur si malum feceris time non eni^line causa portat gladiu^
minister dei. vindex est in iram ei qui malum agit. That is to understand.
Every soul is subject to the haulte puyssau^ces. Certes the mynyster of god
bears no sword without cause he is venger in ire unto him ye which does
ill. And if the judge or ye hangman make the sinner to deye / not upon entencyon
to accomplysshe justice / but upon entencyon dysordynate to shed the blood
humayne of the christian people and creatures of god / or by vengeance or
cursydnes / they ben deputed homycydes for the entencion was corrupt and
enfecte with malice and cruelte / all be it that the sinner had well and
justly deserved it. In like wise as it is written in the droit. Also when a man
sleeth by necessyte it behooves to make dystyncyon of the necessyte / if it may
be avoided or nay / as here ben people the which will slay me unjustly / it
behooves that I slay them / or that they slay me. If that I may escape so that
they slay me not / nor I them I should avoid For if I go to slay them and that
I may escape I should be homycyde and transgressoure of this commandment.
But if I may not avoid but that I must go through them and that I do homycyde
without hate ne will to slay. I shall not be deputed homycyde ne transgressour
of this commandment. How be it good thing it is to make conscience to be
comen unto such necessyte. Bonarum enim mention est timere culpam vbi culpa
non est. Vt habetur in decreto extra de homicidio. Interfe cisti. Also when a
man sleeth by case of fortune it behooves to make dystyncyon wha^ the fortune
happens if a man do operacyon lefull or not lefull. If it were operacyon
lefull as to cut a tree / or that he cast ye sheuys from the carte. etc. And
that he take heed to behold about and to cry hye and clear / and the hour.
In such wise ye if there were person and that he might well avoid ne should
be deputed homycyde. Vt probatur. di. l. ca. Sepe cotingit: et extra de
homicidio capitu. Quidam. But if he did operacyon unlawful as to cast stones
where as the people have of custom to pass. etc. he should be homycide and
transgressour of this commandment. Also if a man lay to slay any in just
batayl he is not deputed homycyde as it is written. xxiii. q. Quid culpatur.

D Fyfthly a man does homycyde for to withdraw the living of any person as
when faders and moders ne gives no meat unto their little children / or that
ye mother gives them no souke / when a bird ne bears meat unto her little
birds they deye. In like wise faders and moders ben homycydes. Also when the
syege is before a town it behooves to make dystyncyon if ye war be just or
not / if they be just for to famysshe them and to make the^ deye for hongre
if they yield not the place I trow to punysshe them it is no homycyde / how be
it yt the thing is dangerous For many bears punycyon the which have
nothing to do. And if ye war be not just / it is homycyde to make them dye
of hongre Also when rauisshers takes away the substance of the poor people
unjustly they take away their life / and therefore they ben deputed homycydes.
Vnde eccle. xxxiiii. Panis egentiu^ vita pauperis est qui defrauldat illum homo
sanguinis est: qui aufert in sudore pane^ quasi qui occidit proximu^ suum. That
is to understand / the bread of the hongrye and nedy is the life of the poor
/ he ye which takes it from him or begyleth is a man of blood he the which
takes away in sweet the bread is also as he ye which sleeth his neighbor.
But people of arms the which gothe against their adversaries in just war
for to defend the country and the comune welthe ye which have no wages may
take of lyuynges curteysly without exces ne to grieve the poor it is suffered of
the king / and the law suffers it for the great necessyte of the comune
wealth. Necessytas non habet legem: si malum inde sequeretur postea. Vt habetur
de consecradi.i. Sicut etiam patet extra de consuetudine. ca. iiii. But those
ye which have wages and takes unjustly the goods of an other by force
openly without mocyon of war breketh the commandment of god the which is
written exodi. xx. Non furtum facies. et deutero. v. Non concupisces rem proximi
tui. Also god commands yt thou love thy neighbor as thy self. and that thou
do unto him none ill no more than thou would that he did unto ye Vn^ thob.
iiii. Quod ab alio odis tibi fieri vide ne tu aliquando alteri facias. Also
after the scripture pyllerye is more great sin than the theft. For he that
steleth takes secretly with dread. And he the which pylleth takes apertely
before all gredely and without dread. unto both tway^ it behooves to make
restytucyon. Quia non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatu^. xiiii. q.
vi. ca. Sires. Example how a knight was beten of the deuylles for yt that he
took away the cow of a woman wedowe. Quere.c. ix. e. Another example of a
rauyssher in pains for that / that he took the got of a woman wedowe. Quere.
c. ix. f. Another example how one monyer saw in hell a rauyssher in pains.
quere. c. x. a. Also those the which have habou^daunce of goods and by
auaryce lets their pore neighbors to deye for hongre be it by scarsete /
syknes / or other necessyte ben deputed homycydes and transgressors of this
commandment. Vt habetur. de. pe. di. lxxxvi. ca. Pasce fame morie^tem et si
non pauisti occidisti. Example how ye cursed dives was dampened and sent in to
the fire of hell / for he had no pite of the pure lazar the which coueyted to
have of ye cro^mys the which fell from the table. Quere lxxxiiii. c. Another
example.lxxxiiii. b.

How homycyde is a sin ye which asks vengeance of god. ca. xxv
NOn scis occisor. Be thou no murderer. It is great horror and cruelte to
committee homycyde / to undo that yt god has made to his own semblaunce to
murdre and slay his semblable and brother crystyen. Among other sins it is a
vice the which demau^deth of god vengeance that homycide. We have by example
in Cayn after that he had slain his brother abell god came unto him and him
demanded where his brother abel was / he answerde am I the keeper of my brother.
And god said unto him. Here is ye voice of the blood of thy brother Abell the
which cries unto me from the earth and demau^deth vengeance. vn^ge. iiii.
Ecce vox sanguinis fratris tui abel clamat ad me de terra. This matter shall be
declared in the examples where he speaks of ye homycyde of Cayn. Quere.lxxvi.
a. Also after that the cursed massacre herodes had slain the innocents / the
voice of ye said innocents cried for vengeance unto god as it is written in
the legende. Sub altar audiui voce ociosorum clamatiu et dicencium vindica
sanguine^ nostru^ deus noster. And god them answerde. Abide ye yet a little
while till unto ye time that ye nombre of your brederne be acco^plysshed.
Expectate ad huc modicu^ te^puis donec i^pleatur numerus fratrum vestrorum.
Than ye syn of homycyde demands vengeance / and in the end the innocents
were venged / And the said herodes deyed myscheuously In like wise as it is
written in the examplayre. Que. lxxvi. d. Every person be he king / prince or
labourer should fere to do homycyde unjust. For incontinent that it is
committed / the said person is bound unto pain and punycion in such wise
that he ne may escape but that he have punycyon in this world or in the other.
The said king herodes which slew the innocents was punysshed by little
worms that slew and ete him. etc. Also Pylate ye which made wrongfully our
lord Ihesus to dye / he slew himself with his own knife And the jews by
whom he was slain / god was venged / for some deyed by famyne / the other by
sword / and all deyed myscheuously. By the which it appears that by the
sin of hate and homycyde there follows punycion and vengeance. And therefore
said god unto saint peter when that he cut of malcus ere in his passion.
Illud mat. xxvi. Convert gladium i^locum suum: omnes qui acceperint gladium
gladio peribunt. Who so sleeth with the sword shall deye of a sword. That is
to say of the sword corporelly or spyrytuelly if he ne do great penance.
Item legitur gene. ix. Sanguinem enim animaru^ vetraru^ requiram de manu
hominis / de manu viri / and de manu fratris eius requiram animam hominis.
Quicu^que affuderit humanum sanguinem fu^detur sanguinis illius. Certainly I
shall demand of ye hand of man the blood of our souls. That is to
understand how god shall demand of the hand of the murderer the blood of
his brother crystyen that he has slain. It is so great sin that by the right
of Justice the said murderer ought to be slain and therefore of good right god
says / what so ever person has shed the blood humayn of the man his
blood shall be shed Et legitur apoca. xiii. Qui gladio occiderit oportet eum
in gladio occidi. etc.

B When it is lefull to beat / and when it is defended. Ca. xxv.
DAuyd the prophet says in ye psalter. Irascumini et nolite peccare. Wrath
ye or be ye wroth again your sins / and again those of your neighbors and
children and keep you from syne That is to trouble your entendement by passion
of ire to the end that thou ne do correccyon unjust. Nolite peccare / that is
to say if there come the a sudden ire / ne give thy consentement to do
vengeance without the bounds of justice. Ne strike thou not / ne murdre thy
neighbor unjustly / god it defends and so commands the to love him /
and that thou ne hate him. It is that thing the which is spoken in the
beginning of this commandment. Christian man or christian woman / to hate / beat
/ or kylle to ye is defended entyerly / if thou will hold rancour thou shall
be punysshed bytterly. To beat his neighbor is sometime commanded of god and
sometime defended. God commands that a man beat by charity and fair
correccyo^ the children sinners mobedyentes unto god and unto good manners. It
is a great work of mercy to save a soul / to correct an ill person ye
which gothe unto dampnacyon / more great than to give great alms. The sage
says sapien. i. Probata virtus corripit insipientes. That is to say the
virtues prouued corrects the fools unlearned / unwise / and sinners. Those ye
which have subgectes in their correccion them should correct and instruct in
good manners. And if they ben rebels inobedyent and sinners they should beat
them / punysshe and correct saigely and dyscretely by love and charity without
hate ne vengeance. This matere is declared in the fourth commandment. Quere.
xxii. c. Example how saint benet bette a monk by fair correccyo^. Quere. lxv.
g. In another manner god defends by this commandment that a man ne beat nor
murdre unjustly his neighbor by ire / furoure / courage moved / and by cursed
will. In the ancient testament the child that bette his fader / or his mother
by ill will / was put to death. Vn^. exodi. xxi. Qui percusserit patrem suu^ and
matre^ sua^ morte moriatur. Also in ye same chapter it is written. Qui percus
serit hoi^em vole^s eu^ occidere morte moriatur Also when any beat a person if
he deyed he was slain. exodi. xxi. Si mors fuerit subsecuta reddet ai^am pro
ai^a. And if he put out the eye of his neighbor / men should a put out his
eye. And if he had broken his neighbors tothe / men should a plucked out one
of his / if he had cut an hand / his hand should a be cut / or foot for
foot / or brennynge for brennynge wound for wound. etc. Vn^. ex. xxi. Beddet
oculu^ pro oculo / dente^ prodente / manu^ pro manu / pede^ pro pede / etc.
when any beat his neighbor again the commandment of god It is a thing
reasonable that he be beten Vn^. psalm. Scdm^ opera manuu^ eorumtribue illis.
God commands unto every person that he ne do unto another more than he would
another did unto him / and none ne would be beten ergo. etc. It is written
thobie. iiii. Quod ab alio tibi odis fieri vide ne tu aliquando alterifacias.
The syn of betyng is more great in some persons than in some other / for to
beat a clerk or a priest / it is a case reserved to the pope / to beat fader
or mother is case reserved unto ye bishop. Also to beat his parents of each
degree by ill / ye nerer they be the gretter is the sy^ne. Also those the
which beat their wives and children / or ye scolemayster his clerks by ire
and furour and not by correccyon offends this commandment / and if they do
it by fair correccyon / it is the work of charity. Also those the which
defend them in betynge and killing more by ire than to defend them justly
offends against this commandment. Example how a knight was gretely
tormented in purgatory for yt that he fyled the church yerde / and hurt one
wtin it. Que.lxxvii. f Another example of a man the which ^^te and tormented
his wife so often y^ she renyed the faith / slew her child / and consented
unto the will and temptacyon of the devil.lx.i.

A How god defends all ire unjust a yenst his neighbor. xxvi.
Saint James says in his epystyl l. Be every man swyfte to here / late to
speak / and late unto ire. Certainly the ire of the man ne does the justice of
god Vn^. iacobi. i.c. Si au^t oi^s homo velox ad audiendu^ / tardus aute^ ad
loquendu^ / and tardus ad iram. Ia eni^ viri iustitia^ dei operatur. Ire
furoure / noise / hate / dyuysyons they committee and reyse among neighbors
brederne and friends for many things. The first is to gain or to have to
gods or herytages the one of the other. The second is for the loss of the
goods or herytages the which is done for the one or for the other. The third
is for ye dimynucyon of the reno^mee of any / and iniuryes spoken between
them. The fourth is when any smyteth or sleeth any of them The.v. is when any
ymaginacion true or false that any hurt him in any thing or if that his
person be despised or full little praised. For to understand shortly: ire
spryngeth up when any has do^mage of another in his body / or has reno^med
hy^ or in his goods or herytages. And such ire is sometime kept and enclosed
in the heart without apperynge it without forth sometime it is showed in word /
and sometime in operacyon. The first is ill. The second is wors. The third is
worste of al.

B The first ire the which is in heart makes a man sorye / dyspleasau^t
again his neighbor in awaytynge the opportunyte when he may be avenged on
him and to do him dyspleasure and do^mage. If it be by delyberacyon /
delectacyon and conse^tement of reason there follows dampnacyon and putting
from paradyse. Vn^. ma. v.c. Oi^s qi irascitur fratri suo reus erit iudicio.
Every man ye which is wroth with his brother shall be culpable of judgment and
shall be cyted unto the judgment of god / and it behooves will he or not yt he
there appear after his death. Where he shall be demanded how he has kept
this commandment ye which is to love his neighbor as himself. What may he
answer when he has hated him and desired his ill and would do vengeance.
Every person the which is in such estate if he dye in such wise he is sent
unto dampnacyon. The prophet says quod in tempora vindicte disperdet te deus.
Example of a woman dampened the which kept her ire in her heart without will
to pardon.lxxviii.d.

C The second ire ye which is showed by sign or token is when any man has
the heart so full of ire and wrath again his neighbor that he shows the
said ire without forth by any ways / or by any tokens or manners. Of whom
speaks the euangelyst of him the which says racha the which is an
interieccyon showing ire and indygnacyon without being interpretee / or as he
ye which enclyneth his eyes having no will to behold him / or ye which
makes clean his mouth and make the spyttynge / or the which ne will speak in
metynge one with another / or ye which gothe by another way for dread to mete
him that he hates and semblable things / If thou therein have offended by
reason disposed in willing him ill thou art culpable of cou^sayl dygne of
punycion. Vn^. ma. v.. Qui dixerit fratri suo racha: reus erit consilio. The
counsayll of the blyssed trinite is that in such mesure and manner of ire as
thou have had against thy neighbor that thou shalt find it and have it in
such manner against god / the vyrgyn marye and the saints of paradise. Vn^
super illud lu. vi. Eade^ me^sura qua me^si fueritis remecitur vobis vbidicit
basilius: q^ me^sura vnus qisque peccat: aut been agit eade^ premi^a: aut pena^
sumet. God shall show the his ire in such wise that thou shalt never se him
ioyously by joyous face / and that he shall never have mercy on the / and shall
never deliver the from pains and torments if you depart or deye in such ire.
And prayers and oraysons yt men done for ye shall never serve the of nothing.
Whereof it is written hie. vii. Tu noli orare pro populo hoc nec assumas laude^
and or^em et no^ obsistas michi qia no^ exaudia^ te. God said unto saint
Hiereme / pray you not for this people for I shall not gracyously here the. The
token of ire of ye virgyn marye and of the saints of paradyse is yt they shall
never make prayers ne suffrages for a man dampened. Example of cursed dyues the
which demanded a drop of water / he was not herd. The token of ire of the
angels shall be yt they shall sever and depart the good from the ill / and
shall send them in to the chemyne of the fire. In the which they shall weep
and grynde their tethe of rage and of anguysshe / and they shall be put from
glory. vn^ math. xiii. Exibu^t angeli et seperabunt malos de medio iustoru^
and mitte^t eos i^ caminu^ ignis: ibierit fletus et stridor de^tium And ye
prophet Ysaye says. Tollatur impius ne videat gloria^ dei.

D The third ire the which is showed in word is when any has ye heart so
furyous heavy and angry against his neighbor that he ne can hold it wtin but yt
it must nedely forth in words / sygnyfyenge iniuryes / blames / shames /
noyses: reproaches / as to say that thou art a thief / pyller / or murdrer etc
/ or a liar / to dyspyte / to menace / as to say I shall beat the / or I shall
sle or I shall do such a thing and such / such people ben culpables of the
fire of hell as says the gospel math. v. Qui dixerit fratri suo fatue: reus
erit gehenne ignis. This matere shall be declared in the.viii. commandment of
god.

E The fourth ire is showed in ill operacyons / for the furoure and ire ye
which is in the heart oftymes makes vengeau^ces by the hand leyed and of
deed / as to beat to slay / to murdre beestes / or people / or to do^mage by
process / iuges / sergentes / men of law / officers / men of war / or by other
false things unjust / ill / and unlawful. Such vengences and operacyons ben
defended in this.v. commandment and ben right ill. For they put from paradyse
and makes to have dampnacyon. legitur math. v. Dictum est antiqis no^ occides:
qi eni^ occiderit reus erit iuditio. etc. You have in your law Slay thou not
thy neighbor / he the which has slain shall be culpable of judgment. That
is to be iuged unto semblable pain yt which is death corporell. But I tell you
every person yt is wroth or angry in his heart agay^st his brother in
willing him ill unjustly by delyberacyon / he is culpable of judgment / that
is to be accused before god unto dampnacyon and perdicio^. And that ye god
says after / qui dixerit racha / yt is when the hatered appears without forth
as it is said that the sin is the more great / and to say / fatue / it is
yet more great sin and to do the operacion It is the sin unto the which
apperteyneth more great punycyon and dampnacyon. Example of diascorus the
which by great ire and furoure beat iniustely saint barbara / and after
beheded her / and he was burnt with the fire celestyall. Que. lvii. e. Many
other examples ben written in the first commandment of the exemplayre of
princes and tyrauntes the which have made to slay and martyr the crystyeus by
great ires and furours. And they shall deye of ill death.lvii.d. f. And after
ye scryptures all men and women shall yield account at the day of judgment of
one and every of them and of all the ill operacyons that they have done in this
world if they dye impenytentes without contrycion / confession and
satysfaccion unto god and unto their neighbor after the offense done. If thou
will not believe that it be true by simple word than put to faith unto the
wytnes of the holy scripture yt which varyeth not Vn^. athanasius in psalm.
Quicu^que dicit quod ad aduentu^ christi oe^s hoi^es reddituri su^t de factis
propriis / rationem and qui bona egeru^t ibu^t in vitam eternal: qui vero mala
in ignem eternu^. At the coming of Ihesu christ al men shall yield reason of
their own deeds / and those the which have well done and wrought shall goo in
to the joy eternal. And those the which have ill done shall go in to ye fire
eternell. Et paul.ii. ad. co. v. Oe^s eni^ nos manifestari oportet ante
tribunal christi vt referat vnusquisque propria opera corporis prout gessit
sieve bonum sieve malum. It behooves us al to appear before the charity of Ihesu
crist where every man shall report his own operacyons of the body as he them
has dode ben they good or ill. Et. hie. xxv. Redda^ eis secu^dum opera little
and secundu^ facta manuum suaru^. I shall yield unto them says god after their
works / and after ye deeds of their hands. Also they shall goo in to the
place that they have deserved after their operacyons and works / the which
they shall bear with them. Et psalm. Secundum opera manuum eoru^ tribue illis
read retributionem eorum ipsis et cetera. Et apo. xiiii. Opera eni^ illorum
sequu^tur illos. Thou irous or wrathful man ye which haste had thy thoughts
ill to avenge the on thy neighbor / or the which haste wronged / and menaced
/ or beten / or slain if thou will be saved repent the and take the
condycyons of the pilgrim of paradyse the which ben written here after q^re
xlv. a. Also obey unto god and unto his commandments to the end that thou
possede the Joys of paradyse ye which ben great in like wise as they shall be
declared here after.xlvii. a. Also leave ire / furour / repent the and obey
unto god of dread / to be sent in to the fire of hell the which is a torment
right cruel in like wise as it is declared afterward. Quere. xlix. b. Vn^
legitur apoca. xxi. De homicidis / fornicatoribus / beneficis / ydolatris / and
oi^bus men dacibus / pars illorum erit in stagno arde^ti igne et sulphur quod
est mors secunda In the said chapter he speaks of homycydes / fornycatours /
enuenymours / ydolatryes / and also liars / the which deye impenytentes / the
place and the party of those shall be in a ponde of fire brynninge in hell
the which is the second death where the dampened shall be and shall have death
without deyenge and without ending and default without defayllynge. Example
of a man dampened the which spoke of ye fire wherein the dampened ben. Quere.
lvii. a.

F How god defends ire again himself. Ca. xxvi.
NOn contristabit iustum quicquid acciderit ei. prouer. xii. c. What fortune /
loss of gods aduersyte / pouerte / that comes unto a Just man / he should
not be wroth / for the good person bears pacyently all aduersytees for the
love of god as did ye good man job / a man is wroth again himself in many
manners. whereof one is right ill and worste of al when by ire a man fails to
dyspayre / and yt man is homycyde of himself. For thereof follows dampnacion
and perdycyon for the brekynge of the commandment of god Non sis occisor. By
thyselfe of will ne of deed be thou no homycyde / ne in thyselfe ne in thy
neighbor. Those the which be ire ben homycydes of themself should be put
from the prayers oraysons and from sepulture ecclesiastycall / and should be
buried in ground unhallowed if the end of them appear without any repentance
ye which may be so great that as unto god / that such homycyde shall be in
the way of salvation / but such thing is unknown as unto us. Also a man is
wroth against himself when a man accomplyssheth not his will / or when yt he
leseth or wynneth any thing by his folly / or when a man leseth or geteth any
good / or when a man falls in to any inconuenyente by deffaulte of takynghede
to himself. For these things here and for many other a man is wroth sometime
so outrageously that a man stryketh himself / or his wife his children / and
servants / and that a man breketh pottes and pa^nes in doing many ylles. And
oftymes a man falls in to sykenes the which grieve the body / the which
takes head to get of goods also well spyrytuell as corporell / and the
which dampneth the souls of them the which ben obstynate and persevering
unto the death without penance. By this Ire yt person is all troubled. ^n^.
david i^ psalm. Turbatus est in ira ocuius meus anima mea and ve^ter meus. Et
socrates dicit quod iracu^dis cu^ aliis irasci desierit sibi irascitur. etc
After the cause wherefore any is wroth and the ill the which follows and he
it appetyteth to avenge him and to do ill / ye syn of ire is more great or more
little the which is known as unto god ye which shall do the judgment and the
punycyon.

G Of ire ye which is again god. xxvi
ITem infer cave cu^ quo gracia tibi iuncta est. Chaton says unto his child
/ keep the from bringing in of strife or noise / with god / thy friend / or
thy neighbor with whom grace is joined unto the A man wratheth him against
god for many things / pryncypally for the flagellacions / aduersytees /
fortunes / sykenesses / and mortalytees / losses / punycyons / famyne / war
and ill time. etc. that he sends. For these things here a man murmureth
ayenste god in blasphemynge him yllynge him / dyspytynge / renyenge him and his
saints. And if a man may venge him / men do venge them the which is a haulte
folly to have will to resyste / or to go against the will of god ye which
sleeth or makes lively / the which makes to go in to paradyse or in to
hell. Vn^. psalm. Dn^s mortificat et viuificat deducit ad inferos and reducit /
dn^s pauperem faciat et ditat humiliat et subleuat. Also it is folly to be in
will to resyste against god the creatoure ye which is the judge that punyssheth
all malefactors. Vnde deutero. xxxii. Reddam vltionem hostibus meis et his qui
oderu^t me retribuam / inebriabo sagittas meas sanguine / et gladius meus
deuorabit carnes etc. Thou sholdest not be wroth against god / for he sends of
aduersytees and flagellacions for five consyderacyons. The first is unto the
sinners to the end yt they confess them / amend and purge them from sin /
and it is a token of love. For god wylleth not that they ben dampened / Vnde
appo. iii. Ego quos amo arguo et castigo Et alibi: ad hoc tendunt mala que
vobis infero vt reconsiliam me vobis dicit dn^s: ego cogito cogitationes pacis
and no^ afflictionis. Example in saint eustace unto whom god sent of
tribulacyons for to convert him and save him. etc. The second is unto sinners
obstynate in sin to the end that they begin their hell in this world as
herodes the which was eaten with hand worms and other worms. etc. The
third is to the good and just. For god them sends of trybulacyons to the end
yt they enpryde them not of the good deeds that they done / and for to keep
their virtues as god did unto saint poule. Vnde ii. ad corin. xii. Ne
magnitudo reuelationum extollat me / datus est michi stimulus carnis me
angelus sathane. vt me collaphizet. etc. The fourth co^syderacion wherefore god
sends of tribulacyons unto the good is unto the great acumulacyon of virtues
and to the end that they ben ye more glorious in paradyse. For the more the
saints have endured pacyently great torments. And the more they have been
virtuous and glorious as job. Quamuis multas tribulationes habuit tamen
sanctior effectus est. The.v. is to the end that ye name of god be louede and
gloryfyed / as of a man the which was borne blind / and after was lyghtened
and god was praised / And of the lazar the which was araysed after that he had
be three days in the earth buried. etc.

H Of the vengeance that god defends. Ca. xxvi.
THe sage says that he the which will venge him on his neighbor he shall
find vengeance of god. And also as he keeps his hate for to venge him wha^
he has oppertunyte. In like wise shall god do to avenge him on him for his
sins. Vn^. eccle. xxviii. Qui vindicari vult a dn^o inueniet vindictam / et
peccata illius seruans seruabit. When any person is offended / hurt / or
exceded in any manner he ne should venge him of that himself for many things.
First for god has with holden and reserved to him and unto his vycayres to
do Justice / judgment and vengeance. vn^ ad roma. xii. Michi vindicta^ et ego
retribuam in tempore dicit dn^s. Et deutero. xxxii. Mea est vltio et ego
retribuam eis in tempore. The vengeance and I shall reward them in time. and
eccle. xii. Altissimus odio habet peccatores et impiis reddet vindictam. Also
when any is venged of himself he takes the office of god / as if he were god
and judge. Also he him makes judge and party in his own cause the which is
again right and reason Nullus debet ee^ iudex i^ sua propria causa: regula
iuris. Also justice ought to be done by counsayll. pro. xi. et. xxiiii. Salus
erit vbi multa sunt consilia. Health shall be where many counsaylles ben. Also
it ought to be done by great and meure delyberacyon / and all in peace
withouten have. The which thing ne does he the which him auengeth /
incontinent / but where a person has offended god he punyssheth him not ne
his officers / they abyden the time and the place to punysshe and to do
Justice. Legitur luce. xviii. Deus autem non faciet vindictam electorum suoru^
clamancium ad se die ac nocte: sed pacienciam habebit in illis. Example how a
man curyal yt which sinned upon ester even at night was not punysshed of god /
incontinent yt he wend to be / but god abode to punisshe him. viii. days
after. quere lxxx. b. Another example how the jews ne weren in contynent
punysshed that they had made our lord Ihesu christ to be crucefyed / but god
tarried a great while after and left them saint Iamys for to convert them and
for to abide that they might do penance. And when god had seen their
obstynacyon and that they had slain the said saint James he suffered that
they were punysshed of Vaspasyen in this world In like wise as it is written in
the.v. commandment of the examplayre. when ye innocents were byheded by
herodes and that they cried unto god for vengeance Vindica sanguine^ nostrum
deus noster. He ne venged them incontynente: ne herodes was not soday^li
punisshed / but god them answerde yt they should abide. Expectate donec
impleatur numerus fractu^ vestrorum. Also how be it that god saw and knew the
sin of the sodomytes before that he them punysshed he said illud genesis.
xviii. Descendam et videbo vterum clamorem qui venit ad me opere compleuerint:
an non est ita vt sciam. I shall descend and shall se if they have
accomplysshed in operacyon the clamor the which is come unto me / where if it
be not so yt I may know it. And sent two angels in semblaunce of men the
which lodged nere unto Loath. etc. In gyuynge example unto the Iuges that they
ne sholden do punycyon without great delyberacyon and informacyon. And he the
which vengeth him of himself has no counsayll / of delyberacyon / ne
auctoryte so to do / wherefore he offends gretely. But if he so do amend the
ill the which unto him is done by / justice he offends not. For justice
should be done and founded in good and after him / How be it yt the ill
officers them peruerten in many maneres. The great lords the which ne wyllen
obey unto justice it departen with the sword. And is suffered of them / ye
which have good right Vnde catho. Pugna pro patria. Fight for to defend the
country. Also when any is offended and he him vengeth in his wrath he ne uses
of the Justice of god. Under iacobi.i. Ira enim viri iusticia^ dei: non
operatur. Et catho. Ira impedit animum ne possit cernere verum. Ire lets the
courage that it may not dyscerne true with ye false / and Dauyd says. Mine eye
is troubled with Ire. Vnde psalmista. Turbatus est in ira a furore oculus meus.
A man should note that the vengeance the which is done by ire is unjust and
ill in four maneres. The first is when any punyssheth / or woide punysshe him
the which has not deserved it. The second is wha^ he him brings or would
bring to gretter pain than he has deserved. The.iii is when he infere / or
would inferer asmoche of pain egally as he has deserved / but not after the
order of justice as when he will punysshe any of himself without calling
justice and superyores / unto whom it apperteyneth for to do it. The fourth is
when any brings in or would bring in any just / and after the order of
justice but not by good and just entencyon / and for good end. The entencyon
of him yt which punissheth should other for the wealth and salvation of him the
which has deserved punycyon / to the end that he correct him / or by the
conseruacyon of the justice comune / to the end that all other correct them by
his example / or for to do honor unto god in punysshynge ye offense that a
man has done to break his commandment. He than the which vengeth him / or
appetyteth to venge him by hate / rancour / or to ye end that he beholden and
called a good iusticier / in sechinge the preyse of the world / or to the end
that he have money / or for any other cursed end / he should understand yt
he sy^neth mortally / and after saint Thomas. Ire is mortal sin when any
brings in or will do any vengeance unto another after the maneres beforsayd
/ or after some of them / for it is again justice and charity. Also he the
which vengeth / him dysobeyeth unto god after the scryptures the which says
in many places and passages / that a man ne yield the ill for the ill. Vnde
paulus.i. thessal. qui^to Videte ne quis malu^ pro malo alicui reddat: sed
semper quod bonum est sectamini inuicem: et in omnes. Take heed that none ne
yield unto any ill for ill / but that ye follow evermore togyders that the
which is good. Et legitur ad roma.xii. Noli te prude^tes tieri aput vosmet
ipsos nuilli malu^ pro malo redde^tes. Be ye not prudentes against yourselfe ne
yeldynge ill for ill unto any. Sequitur. Non vos deffende^tes carissimi: sed
date locum ire. Right de re friends defend you not but give place unto ire.
Item ad roma. xii. Benedicte per sequentibus vos: benedicite et nolite male
dicere. Bliss ye those the which persecuteth you / bliss them and curse them
not / Example. We read that our lord appeared him unto a woman in trybulacyon
unto whom he said / keep three things and thou shalt be saved / hold thy
peace in malediccyons / be pacyent in trybulacions / and yield not the ill for
the ill. Quere. lxxxix. b. Another example how the blyssed and holy saint
Machayre was pacyente and suffered when he was wronged and beten cruelly and
impyteously for a woman the which had accused him and put upon him falsely
and wrongfully that she had conceived a child of his sede and of none other
Quere. lxxxx. a. It is a great perfeccyon as to bear pacyently aduersyte and
to do the good again the ill. And therefore god says / if any stryke the on
the right cheke give unto him the other. And he the which stryueth with the in
judgment and take away thy robe and gown / leave it him and the mauntell. Vnde
mat. v. Si quis te percusserit in dexteram maxilla^ tua^ prebe ei et alteram:
et ei qui vult tecum in iuditio co^tendere et tinicam tuam tollere dimitte ei
et palium vt dictum est. Those yt which be not of such perfeccyon makes them
to amend the ill done by justice. Al so thou shall not seche vengeance. And you
shalt not be remembered of the iniurye of thy cytezeyns. In like wise as it is
written. Leuitici. xix. Non queras altionem. nec memor eris injury ciuium
tuoru^. Et legitur eccle. x. Omnis injury proximine memineris et nichil agas
in operibus injury. Thou shall not remember the of the injury of thy
neighbor / and do nothing in the operacions of iniurye. And Chaton says.
Litis preterite noli maledicta refer. Compte not ne reken the cursed things
of stryfes paste. Et prouerbiorum.xx. Ne dicas reddam malu^ pro malo sed
expecta dominu^ et liberabit te. Also god will not that a man venge himself. In
like wise as it appears clearly in the gospel / of saint Mark when the
samarytayns would not receive him / and saint Iamis and saint Johan said unto
him. Will thou yt we say yt the fire dyscende from heaven and that it consume
them. Our lord blamed and repreued them of that thing / unto whom he said.
luce. ix. Nescitis cuius spiritus estis: filius hominis non venit animas
perdere sed saluare. Know ye not of whose esperyte ye be / the sone of a man is
not come for to lose the souls / but to save them Example how a boy or knave
was dampened for hate and would be venged. Quere. lxix. a.

I Also Ire and vengeance dyspleaseth unto god. For he the which vengeth him
by ire brenneth his temple. That is ye conscience of the man the which is ye
place and the house wherein god rests. vnde psalm. Incenderunt igni sanctuarium
tuu^ in terra: polluerunt tabernaculum nominis tui. That is to say these
wrathful people has burnt by the fire of ire thy holy place / where as they
have soyled the tabernacle of thy name in the earth / and saint poule says ad
corinth. iii. ca. Descitis qia templum dei estis et spiritus dei habitat in
vobis. And there follows a thing much to dread. Si quis autem templum dei
violauerit: desperdet illum deus. Certainly if any has fyled ye temple of god
/ god shall dystroye him. Iterum in eodem. ca. Te^plu^ dei sctu^ est quod estis
vos. The temple of god is holy / the which ye be. When an hostyller is angrye
or wroth the hosts yt he has lodged in his house be not at their ease
herbeged / god is not in ye man angry or wroth. Vnde super illud ad ephe.
iiii. Nolite contristari spiritum dei sanctum vnde grego. Dum ira animu^ pulsat
spiritusancto habitationem turbat. Trouble thou not the holy spyryte of god /
when ire stryketh the courage of ye man it troubles the habytacion of the holy
ghost. And therefore god will not enhabyte / nor abide by grace with a mamirous
/ furyous / motyf hasty / but he will enhabyte and abide in people humble and
peasyble the which fereth his words. As it is written Ysaye penul. ca. Super
quem requiescet spu^s meus nisi super humilem et quietum and trementem sermones
meos. In the place where god enhabyteth is not but peace as dauyd says. In pace
factus est locus eius. And he loves people peasible / and persecuteth people
furyous. etc. Example how those ye which wrath them against god and against his
saints ben deed myscheuously as ege as / Tarquyn / Dacien / Valeryen. etc.
lvii. c.f.h.

K A questyon when it is that ire is good or when it is venyell sin or
mortal. Capitulo. xxvi.
DEsine ab ira et derelinque furorem / noli emulari vt maligneris dicit psalm.
That is to say cesse the of ire and leave furoure / ne have thou none envy
upon another that thou become not a curste. Men find in scripture that ire is
sometime good and leful / and sometime it is mean and veniel sin / and sometime
right ill and mortal sy^ne. Ire is good when it is again his own sins / or
again those of his neighbor without passion of his troblement. For a man
ought to have dyspleasau^ce to have offended god by sin or to se him
offended. And that dule or sorrow yt is taken for the said sins ben called in
scripture contrycyon / and the duyll or the ire ye which is again the sins
of another is named zelus iustitie. God and his saints have used of this ire
again the sinners whereof Moses spoke unto the children of Israel / illud
deutero. xi. Cauete ne forte decipiatur cor vestru^ and recedatis a dn^o.
Sequitur iratusque dominus claudat celum. etc. Also god wrathed hy^ without
passion of trouble again Dauyd for that yt he made to nombre his people / as it
is written.ii. regum.xxiiii. and for his sin he made mortalyte in his said
people. Also he was wroth again dauyd when he committed auoutrye / and for
asmoche that god loved him he would correcke him. For a good fader the which
loves his child him threteneth and punissheth when he offends. Saint pou^e
says ad hebre. xii. Ei^i mi non n^gligere disciplinam dn^i: neque fatigeris
du^m a^ eo argueris: quem enim d^^git dn^s ca^^igat: flagellat autem omnem
^^^tum quem recipit sequitur. Quis fi^ius quem non corripit pater quod si extra
disciplinam estis cuius particepes facti estis: ergo om^es adulteri et no^
filii dei. Also when Moses spoke unto pharaon and he would not here it he was
wroth exodi. xi. Exiuit a pharao ne iratus nimis. Also Moses commanded unto
the children of Israhell that they ne should keep the manna till unto the
morning. And they were dysobedientes. and Moses was wroth. exodi. xvi.
Iratus e^ moises contra eos. Also when Moses came to seche the commandments
/ he found the calfe and the dance and he was wroth as it is written exodi.
xxxi. Iratus est valde. Also god wrathed him again the jews the which made
their marchaundyses in the temple. And he chaled them out and their oxen and
kyen / and made a whyppe etc. as it is written ma. xxi. And therefore may a man
be wroth without sin again the trespassours. It is the work of mercy as
it is declared before. / Quere ad numerum.xxii. c. and.xxv. b. Men make a
question. That is to understand whether it be lefull for to speak any foul
thing because of correccion. The answer is made after saint Thomas scda^
scde^. q. lxxii. In like wise as it is leful to beat any person or to
endo^mage in worldly gods because of dyscyplyne. In like wise may any man
speak word co^uysyous unto hy^ that he corrects when he him should correct.
And in this manner our lord called his dyscyples fools / as it is written luce
vltimo. Ostulti et tardi cord ad credendu^ et apo. ad gal. ii. O insensanti
galathe How be it in like wise as saint Austyn says. Obiurgacyons and words
conuensieuses be not to speak if there be not necessyte. And not to the end that
they serve unto us / but unto our lord. In speaking such words a man should
have right great dyscrecyon and attempraunce / for he may speak such wyce that
he should dyshonoure the person. And that himself should sin mortally as
the scripture says the which shall abide because of shortness. Ire is venyall
sin when it is sudden without delyberacyon of reason. And when any sourdeth
suddenly in ire and that forth with by reason he repents him / resystethe
and puts out such ire without will to venge him he ne synneth but venyally
Vnde cassiodorius dicit quod venialis ira est que non couritur ad effectum.
Also ye scripture says that when any feleth him hurt there sourdeth suddenly
a mouynge of courage impetuous yt which appetyteth vengeance is ire for as
much as he suffers. Vnde super illud mathei. v. Om^is qui irascitur fratri
suo. dicit glosa. Ira e^ vehemens motus animi ad nocendum.: / Ire is a moving
hugely of courage to noy or hurt / and this ire if it be so much sudden in
any manner that it comes before any delyberacyon of reason. And al mouy^ge of
will / it is said the first mouynge ye which is not in our puyssaunce to
resyst And therefore it is no sin / but it may be the pain of sin. And when
reason apperceyueth ire and it appetiteth with vengeance and therein takes any
pleasure / Also he ne resysteth at the first / how be it he ne gives full
consenting ne delyberacyon for to venge him / it is venyell sin Also when
any wratheth him suddenly / And that in little thing he vengeth him How be it
that he him should venge well in great thing if he would / but he will not
do it. Than such ire and co^mocyon may alonely be venyell sy^ne by ye
lytylnes of vengeance as to draw a child by ye herys and semblable things.
Also when any wratheth himself of a natural mocyon / and that he is impacyent
/ how be it ne in deed ne in word ne in manner what so it be for this said ire
he would not venge him ne put his ire in effect / this Ire may be venyell
sin. Also some wrath them suddenly and anon repents them and demands
pardon. And in some men it is long or the fire of ire be lyghtenyd in them and
lately it is quenched / for seldom they repent them and demand pardon.
Those here ben worse than those before spoken. Vnde. au. Melior est enim qi
quauis ira sepe temptetur / tum festinat quod sibiremittat ille cui fecisse
iniuriam agnoscit quam qui tardius irascitur et ad veniam petendam tardius
inclinatur. And of this self matere speak the holy doctoure saint Iherome upon
the pystyll of saint poule. ad titum / and says. Neque vero qui aliquando
irascitur iracundus est / sed ille dicitur iracundus qui crebo hoc passione
superatur. Ire is mortal sin when a man desires to do ill and for to commit
and do vengeance unto his neighbor by delyberacyon and consenting of
reason. And such or semblable ire the which is sin in sometime in the heart
alonely without any more / and sometime it appears also in a man withouteforth
/ either by tokens or by words / and sometime in works and operacyon. In like
wise as it is declared here before more alonge in this said book. Quere. xxvi.
b. d. e.

L Of the remedies against the syn of ire. Ca. xxvi.
DEnuntiamus aute^ vobis fratres vt subtrahatis vos ad oi^ fratre ambulante
inordinate. ad thessal. iii. ca. Saint poule says in his epystyl. Brederne we
denounce unto you that ye withdraw and take away from every brother yt which
lives and walks dysordynately. Four remedies ben found in scripture as
agay^the ire of his neighbor. The first is how a man should speak sweet words
unto people the which ben treful / troubled or wratheful / for to cole them and
appease them from their ire / in like wise as says ye sage. Also the
experyence techeth it us. Vn^. prouer. xxv. Lingua moliis co^tringit duritia^
cordis. et prouer. xv. Respontso mollis frangit iram sermo durus suscitat
furorem. That is to say a soft answer breketh ire / a hard word moves
furoure / answer peasybly in swetnes. Vn^. eccle. iiii Respo^de pacitice i^ man
suetudine. and eccl. vi. Verbu^ dulce multiplicat amicos. and makes soft the
enemies. Also the sage man makes him amyable in words. vn^ eccle. xx. Sapiens
is vbis am abtle^ se facit. The second remedy again ire is ye a man should
hold his peace again him the which is wroth / yt which menaceth or
wrongeth. And hy^ behooves not to yield iniurye again iniurye for to defend
him. In like wise as says saint Poule ad romanos.xii. Non vos deffe^de^tes
carissimi: sed date locum ire. Example of a relygyous the which demanded of a
holy fader what he should do for that / that he had no peace with the other.
The good fader answered him. In omnibus si tacueris requiem habebis. Thou shall
have rest and peace in all things and again al persons the which says the
ill if thou hold thy peace. When a man holds his peace again a man that is
wroth he appeaseth him little and little. And the fire of his ire he is
quenched. Verbi gratia. Also when a man takes the wodde from ye fire the
which is matere it quenches little and little. When a man holds his peace
again a man ireful / and that in his fire of ire a man puts no matere for
to increase the fire / he quenches it. And if there be in company an irefull
man detractoure by whom noise is moved / him behooves to depart and after peace
shall be there. Vnde prouerbiorum.xxvi. Cum defecerit lingua extinguetur ignis
/ susurrectione subtracto conquiescu^t iurgia. and eccl viii. Non litiges cu^
homine li^guato and ne strues in igne^ illius ligna. And Chaton says unto his
child. Co^tra verbosos no li conte^dere verbis. Lis minimis verbis interdu^
maxima crsccit. Strive thou not in words again these tangelers saying ill.
Great ire / noise / and strife they make sometime by little words. Dauyd the
prophet used of this remedy. For when a sinner spoke again him / he kept
his mouth from ill spekinge. Vn^. psalm. Posui ori meo custodiam / cum
co^sisteret peccator aduersum me. Another example how a chamberer or maiden
servant in a house was pacyent when her maystres cursed her and tormented her
by strokes / and god appeared unto her. Quere.lxxxxix b. Another example of the
pacyence of a good child the which praised our lords Ihesu christ in many
torments that he suffered / the which were done unto hy^ by men of war.
Quere: xvii. b. Also for to put scylence unto a man lygycyous and debatefull /
ire is appeased and peace comes in the company. Vnde prouerbiorum.xxvi Qui
imponit stulto silentium / rigas mitigat. Also it is a great goodness as of
peace. And it is more worth than meat as to eat a mouthefull of bread in peace
than to have wynes and meats in war and dyuysyon. Vnde prouerbiorum.xvii.
Melior est bucela sicca cum gaudio: quam domus plena diuiciis cum iurgio. And
therefore men should seche the means to appease ye people irous. Example how
that a knight abstayned him for to speak for to flee cursed words / and to the
end that he offended not against god. The third remedy again ire is to fle
the company / famyly arite / amytee / and felawshyp of all people Irous /
noysefull / furyous / and wrathful First a man should fle the suroure and ire
of an Emperor / a king / or of a mighty prince or lord / for he is right
terryble and furyous when that he is wroth / or has any body in indygnacyon.
Vnde prouerbiorum.xx. Sicut tremitus leonis ita et ira regis: et sicut ros
super herbam ita ethyleritas eius. Also it behooves to keep him to speak unto
him words that been noyfull and wrongful. For they trouble sometime those that been sages. Vnde. ecclesiastisis. vii. Calumia conturbat sapientem: et perdet
robur cordis illius. Also it behooves to keep him to take strife against an
Emperor / a king / or another great lord / for the death thereto belongs
and apperteyneth. Vnde prouerbiorum.xvi. Indignatio regis inimicus est mortis:
et vir sapiens placabit cum. Et ecclesiastisis.iiii. Noli resistere contra
facie^ potentis ne coueris contra ictum fluuit.: / Resyste thou not against
the face of a puyssaunt king / or lord that he make yt not for to be casten
in to the water for to be drowned. Et ecclesiastisis.viii. Non litiges cum
homine potente / ne / forte / insidas in manu illius. Also a man should flee ye
company and famylyerte of men and women irous / furyous / and noysefull: for a
man is not surely nere them nor about them. And their famylyarte is worth
nothing. Vnde prouerbiorum.xxii. Noli amicus esse homini iracundo: neque
ambules cum viro furioso ne forte discas semitas eius: et sumas sclandalum
anime tue Also it is more worth to have the hate of the ylle than there
company. For a man there lerneth non ylle / and no good thereof proceeds. vnde
ysidorus. Melius est enum maloru^ odium quam co^sortiu^. Et psalm. Cum sancto
sanctus eris and cum peruerso peruerteris. and Ecclesiastisis.xxii. Cum stulto
non multum loquaris: et cum insensato non abieris: serua te ab illo vt
molestiam non habeas et non coinquineris in peccato illius deflete ab illo et
inuenies requiem et non accidiaberis in stulticia illus. Et ecclesiastisis.vii.
Discede ab iuiquo et deficient mala abste. Go away or depart thou from an ill
person. And illys shall defayll in the. And saint poule says. Will thou not
to commune with the operacio^s infructucuses of derkenesses / but repreue them.
Vnde ad ephesios quinto. Noli co^munycare operibus infructuosis tenebrarum
magis autem redarguite. Also in like wise a man should fle and eschew the
company of a woman irous / furous / and debatefull. For she is right malycyous
and ill / iniuryous without keeping of any secret what so ever a man can do
unto her All confusyon / dystruccion / and irreuerence comes and proceeds of
her. vnde ecclesia. Non est caput nequius super caput colubri. et non est ira
super iram mulieris. Sequitur mulieris ira irreuerentia et co^fusio magna. Et
prouerbiorum.xxi. Melius est habitare in terra deserta / quam conmuliere rixoza
et iracunda. Example of a woman ye which was angry and wroth one time
sharply again her husband / the which woman ne could keep his secret. And
in her furour and ire said unto him. Thou wenest to have three children of me /
and thou ne have but one only. Quere.lxxi. a. The fourth remedy again the
ire or hate of his neighbor is to do him the good again the ylle / as to
give him to eat and to drink when he has hongre or thurst or other thing
in his necessyte. And in so doing thou shall quench the fire of ire / and
thou shall embrace in him the coals of charity / and he shall be in thy love /
more over god shall give the retrybucyon. Vnde ad romanos.xii. and
prouerbiorum.xxv. Si esurierit inimicus tuus ciba illum / si scicierit da
eibibere / hoc enim faciens carbones ignis congregabis super caput eius et
dominus reddet tibi. / And god says in the gospel love your enemies / do ye
good by operacyon unto the^ the which have hated you. Bliss ye with mouth
those that curse you / and pray for your persecutoures the which wrongeth you
and dyspyseth you. And your reward shall be great in heaven. Vnde mathei. v. et
luce.vi. Diligite inimicos vestros benefacite his qui oderu^t vos benedicite
maledicentibus vobis / et orate pro persecut^ribus et calunniantibus vos et
erit merces vestra multa in celo. A man should note here yt the virtue of
pacyence is again the sin of ire / and therefore in all aduersytees /
iniuryes / sekenesses / and fortunes It is the very and sovereign remedy as to
bear pacyently.

A Of hate the which god defends. Ca. xxvii.
IT is written leui. xix. Non oderis fratrem tuum in cord. God made to tell unto
the children of Israhell by his servant Moses. Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thy heart. That is to understand by envy in thinking ill upon him
/ or in desiring the loss of his goods / or herytages / or the ill and
dyshonoure of his body / or the dampnacyon of his soul. It is written in the
same chapter leuitici. xix. Non facies calunniam proximo tuo: nec vi opprimes
eum. Thou ne shalt do no dyspyte unto thy neighbor / and thou ne shalt
chase him by force. Sith that god the commands that thou love thy neighbor
as thyselfe it follows well that he the defends that thou hate him not / and
that thou do unto him none ill / no more than thou would a man did unto the
/ love thy neighbor / than thou hate him not. It is written zach. viii.
Vnusquisque malum contra amicum suum ne cogitetis in cordibus vestris: et
iuramentu^ men dax ne diligatis omnia sunt que odi / dicit dominus. Every of
you or none of you ye thy^ke none ill again your friend in your hertes / and
love ye not the oath of a liar / god hates these things. Every man the which
dysobeyeth unto god synneth mortally. And every man yt which hates his
neighbor dysobeyeth unto god / than he sins mortally by the consequent he
puts himself from paradyse and byndeth him unto dampnacyon.

B The sin of hate is to dread and to fle for many things whereof we shall
tell five. The first is that for to hate his neighbor in desiring his ill a
man dysobeyeth unto god the which is so great sin / venim / and syknes unto
the soul that it chaseth from the hater charity and these other virtues and
lets all his gods spyrytuall that it ne may unto him proffyte as by
symylytude saying that sekenes corporell chaseth the health of the body. And
lets to drink and to ete / And other good that it ne may unto him profit.
And also as sykenes is contrary unto health and that thou ne may be hole /
and seek togyders. In like manner hate is contrary unto dyleccyon. And envy
unto charity the which ne may be togyders. For the logycyans says that two
things the which ben contraryes and opposytes the one unto the other ne may
be ne abide togyders but that ye one chaseth the other. Vnde duo opposita
nunquam possunt simul esse in eodem subiecto. Yt thou hate than thy neighbor
thou love him not. If thou have envy or wrath against thy neighbor or
even christian thou art out of charity. And if thou be out of the love and of
the charity of thy neighbor Thou art out of the love and of the grace of
god / thou ne love neither god nor thy neighbor. Vnde.i. iohannis.iiii. Si
quis dixerit quoniam diligo deum et tratrem suum oderit mendax est. That is to
understand if any will say yt he loves god and hates his even christian he is
a false liar. Iterum in eodem capitulo. Qui no^ diligit fratrem suum quem
videt: deum quem non videt quomodo potest diligere He the which loves not his
brother even christian that he sees / how may he love god ye which he sees not
/ hene may do it. for to give you in knowledge and to understand clearly / if
thou hate thy neighbor and even christian / thou love not our lord ihesu
christ / and thou art clean out of grace and charity / and thy virtues and thy
gods spyrytualles ben departed from the. Quia virtutes cum viciis remanere
vel parmanere non possunt. Then no good spyrytuell rests in the. And by the
consequent thou ne may be in such wise saved / but dampened with all the
deuylles of hell. Also saint Ambrose says. Qui caritatem non habet amyttit
omne bonum quod habet. He the which has no charity leseth all his spyrytuell
goods. And he the which hates his neighbor has no charity. For charity
is to love god and his neighbor / and it behooves that there be the one love
and the other / or charity is lost. For unto the dystruccyon of all one
diffynycyon or proposycyon it suffyseth that the one party be false / thus
says ye logyciens. Ad destructionem totius diffinitio^is vel prepositionis
sufficit vna pars esse falsa. And master Nycole de lyre says that by an ill
cyrcu^staunce all the deed is ill. Malum consistit in singulis defectibus: ita
quam vna circunstantia mala: facit totum actum mala. And the holy and blessed
saint poule says. Illud.i. ad corinth. xiii. Si linguis hominum loquar et
angelorum: caritatem aute^ non habuero factus sum velut es sonans aut cymbalum
tinniens. This auctoryte is expounded in the end of the chapter of charity
Quere.iiii. c. Example how a woman auoutres was dampened for the keeping of hate
without being in will to pardon. lxxviii. d. Another example how that a woman
aduoutres was dampened ye which trusted in the almesdedes that she had given.
Quere.lxxxxii. d. It is written eze chie.xxxiiii. that the justice of the just
and his almesdedes and good operacyons ne shall deliver him in any hour that
he has sinned. Also it is written in the said chapter as here after ensues.
Iustus non poterit viuere in iustitia sua in quacu^que die peccauerit. The
just ne may live in his Justice in any day that he synneth mortally / as to
hate his neighbor and even christian be it man or woman. Al manner of goods
spyrytual and temporal grows there as is peace / concord / and perfyte love /
and they less and dymynysshe where as is dyscorde / malice / wrath / Ire and
envy. Vnde ambrosius. Parue res concordia crescunt: magne vero res discordia
dilabuntur. Also every royalme the which is divided shall be desolate. Vnde
mathei. xii. Omne regnum in se ipsum diuisum desolabitur et domus supra domum
cadet.

C The second cause wherefore hate is to dread / is for that / that it is so
great a glayue and sword and offense that it sleeth spyrytuelly of death of
gylte the souls of haynours or hateful people the which hates their
neighbors and even christian by envy or malice desiring their vnfortune and
loss both in their bodies and goods vniustelye.i. vnde iohannis tertio
Oninis qui odit fratrem suum homicida est: et scitis quoniam omnis homicida no^
habet vitam eternam in se manentem. That is as much for to say. Every man the
which hates his neighbor in his heart is a man kyller and know ye that
every homycyde has not eternal life abiding in him. For by his hate he
departs froo god / his love / and his grace / the which is the life of his
soul. In like wise as it is declared in the commandment of homycyde and
murdre. Also by hate and cursed malice a man sleeth his soul spyrytuelly / in
like wise as a man may se by symylitude that a stroke with a swer defieeth a
man corporelly. For hate rancouce and envy and all mortal sins / is by
symylytude as a sword cuttynge of does sy^es the which stryketh the soul
for to dampne it. And if that remedy be not had therein in this world by
penance there is no health after the death. Vnde eccle. xxi. Quasi rumphea bis
acuta omnis iniquitas plage illius non est sanitas Also the sins be to flee
as from the face of a serpent. For they slay spyrytuelly the souls of men.
Vnde ecclesi. xxi. Quasi a facie colubrifuge peccata si accesseris ad illa
suscipient te dentes illius dentes leonis interficientes animas hominum. Note
well that a man should not understand that the souls ben deed / slain / and
that they defaylleth above al by sin / for they ben mortelles / but a man
should understand that they ben deed spyrytuelly / of death of gylte / and
dyscendeth in to the death eternel / the which is death without deyenge as it
is said before. For to avoid the said death it behooves to love our lord
Ihesu christ and his neighbors / and to flee hate. Saint Austyn says. Vita
mea dilectio est et mors odium. My life is dileccyon / and my death is hate. Et
legitur. de. peni. di. i. Omnis qui non diligit: manet in morte. Every man the
which loves not dwells in death. Et poeta dicit. Si quis odit fratrem suum
censetur ob hoc homicida. He is iuged for homycyde. etc. Example how a boy was
dampened for hate and that he would be venged Quere.lxxix. a. Another example
how the devil slew a man for the keeping of hate and would not pardon
him.lxxix. c.

D The third thing wherefore ye sin of hate is for to be dredde is for that
/ that it blyndeth the soul of the haynoure / that is to put out the inward
eyes of his understanding. Vnde.i.x.ii. Qui diligit fratrem suum in lumine
manet: qui autem odit fratrem suum in tenebris est et in tenebris ambulat: et
nescit quo eat quoniam obcecauerunt oculos cius. That is to say in our
maternall tongue of English to you the which understands not the laten. He
the which loves affectuously his even christian brother he dwells in light
And he the which hates him is in derkenes and walks in derkenes. And he ne
knows where he gothe. For derkenes has put out his eyes. His entendemente
is made derke / his light is lenyne / that is charity the which gives light
and shyneth is put out / charity is adnychylate and lost. Also in like wise
as the eyes of ye body of a person wexeth dy^me and derke for to behold
sharply the beaumes of the son. In like wise the eyes of ye soul ben put
out and made derke for to se ye wealth of their neighbor. Vnde gregorius Men's
inuidi tam de alieno bono affligitur quam de radio solis excecatur. By the
great light is understand here the haboundau^ce of the good operacyons of thy
neighbor / by the which good operacyons the enuyous haynoure is blinded of
duyl that he has to se them. Also thou hateful thy soul is in derkenes. In
likewise as a man may se by symylytude that the body of a blind man is in
derkenesse when his eyes ben put out. Thou seyth not the ylle that is in the
ne that that thou have for thy sin. And therefore thou may say. Iliud psalm.
Comprehenderunt me iniqiatates me et non potui vt viderem. Under stand well
when a blind man has lost his conductoure and leder he ne sees when he
falls in a dytche or in any danger / no more does the hateful when he
has lost his conductoure and leder the which is god / his lantern is put
out / that is charity as it is said. And therefore he sees not ne understands
ye inconuenyents wherein he falls and tombleth. Vnde prouer. iiii. Via
imptoru^ tenebrosa nesciunt vbi corruu^t. Et psalm. Via impiorum tenebre et
lubricum. Et eccle. xxi. Via peccantium complantata lapidibus / et infinem
illoru^ inferi et tenebre pene Also these hateful and enuyous ne may see the
goodness of their neighbor. For their malice and syn blyndeth their eyes. Vnde
legitur in libro sapientie. Eccecauit illos malitia illorum Also these hateful
ye which deyeth impenipente / they shall be sent into the land of myserye
and of derkenes. job. x. Verram misery et tenebrarum etc. As it was of him the
which entered at the weddynges without being clothed of the vestement
nupcyall or wedding garmente / yt is of charity. Vnde mathei. xxii. Amice
quomodo huc intrasti non habens vestem nuptialem: ligatis manibus et pedibus
eius proiicite eum in tenebras exteriores. / Bind ye him hands and fete / not
with cords but with the dyuyne justice / and cast him in to derkenesse / that
is in to hell. etc. Example. It is written in the.xi. chapter of exode / that
the king pharaon and his people had the.xi. plage of derkenes thycke by
punycyon / and the children of Israhell had light. etc.

E The fourth thing wherefore hate is to dread / it is for that / yt it puts
from paradyse. Quia deus non saluat impios vt dicitur job. xxxvi. of this
matter. Quere xliiii. b. c. d. e. f. g.

F The fyfte is for that that it byndeth unto punycyon and dampnacyon: Quia
iniusti punientur: et semen impiorum peribit. vt dicit psalm. Examples of people
hateful. Quere. lxxix. a. b. c.

G How hateful people should pardon / and pacyfye togyders the iniuryes and
offenses done and spoken if they will that god them pardon their sins.
Capitulo. xxvii.
IT is written mathei. v. ca. Vade reconsiliari fratri tuo. Thou hateful man go
to reconsile the with thy brother. The most sovereign remedy that the hateful
should do for to be in the love and in the grace of god / and for to have
paradyse when he shall depart out of this world is that he should put away
his hate and to go to pacyfye him with his neighbor And to pardon and forgive
him benygnely his trespass. For it is the right way for to make his peace
with god / and for to have salvation. Saint Gregorye says that by the love
that we have in god the love of our neighbor is engendered. And by the love
that we have unto our neighbor the love of our neighbor is noury^shed Vnde
gregorius in moralibus. Per amorem dei amor proximi gignitur / et per amorem
proximi dei amor nutritur. It is the most great thing and most pleasant
unto god to love his neighbor as himself / as all the sacrefyces and
oblacyons that we may do unto him. Vnde marci. xii. Diligere deum ex toto
cord and proximum tanquam seipsum / maius est omnibus olocaustimatibus and
sacrifiis. And therefore the holy euangelyst says that if thou do oblacyon unto
god at the alter and that thou record or remember ye that thy brother or thy
neighbor has any hate or thing against the leave thy gift before the alter
go first to pacyfye the with thy said brother / and afterward come offer thy
gift. Vnde mathei. v. Si offers munus tuum ad altar et ibi recordatis fueris
quoniam frater tuus habet aliquid aduersum te: relinque ibi munus ante altar /
et vade prius reconsiliari fratri tuo. The gloss and the expositours says
upon this paas there. Si frater tuus habet aliquid aduersum te. For that that
thou have him offended and wronged or hurt. That is yt thou sholdest leave thy
gift for to go pacyfye ye with him. And if he has offended the he should
come to the / thou ne sholdest go unto him / but thou art to pardon him In like
as thou would that god pardonned ye thy sins. And when thou ne will pardon
him he shall goo again the / and god ne shall pardone the thy sins as you
shalt here herafter. Saint peter demau^deth of our lord / if my brother sin
in me seven times will thou that I pardon him till unto the seventh. And our
lord him answered. I say not alonely till unto the seventh time / but I say
unto the if he repent him / and that he demand the pardon / that thou him
pardon till unto four hundred.lxxxx. times. Vnde mat xviii. Non dico tibi vsque
septies sed vsque septuagesies septies. Et luce. xvii. Si septies in die
peccauerit inte frafer tuus et septies in die conuersus fuerit ad te dice^s
penitet me dimitte illi. If thy brother has sinned in the by seven times in a
day and that he be converted unto ye seven times in a day saying I repent me
/ pardon him. Our lord Ihesu crystis so pypeous / merciful / and so full of
charity / yt all those the which him has offended / if they will repent them
/ amend / and demand grace and pardon in doing penance that he pardonneth
all benygnely and with good heart. Vnde Ezechie. xviii. Si autem impius egerit
penitentiam. etc Vita viuet and non mortetur: ominum iniquitatum eius non
recordabor. He gave pardon and forgyuenes unto Longis the which perced his
side with a spear / and is sauyd in the realm of paradyse with all the blessed
seyntes. He gave pardon also unto the good thief Dysmas the which hanged on
his right side on good friday. And if he be so merciful to give pardon He
wylleth also that in like wise we do unto them the which us has offended /
And if we so do we shall be his children / imitatours regynynge and parteyners
in his realm / and we shall pardon our sins if men us requires. Vnde
mathei. vi Si dimiseritis hominibus peccata eorum dimittet et vobis pater
vester celestis peccata vestra. That is to say / if ye have left or forgiven
unto men their sy^nes / your fader celestyall shall forgive you your sins. Et
legitur ecclesias. xxviii. Belinque proximo tuo nocenti te: et tunc deprecanti
tibi peccata soluentur. And if thou will not pardon unto thy neighbor his
offenses that he has done unto the and if he the require / god shall not
pardon ye offenses that thou unto him haste done. Vnde mathei. vi. Si non
dimiseritis hominibus peccata eorum: nec pater vester dimittet vobis peccata
vestra. Et augustinus dicit quod vnusquisque talem indulgentiam accepturus est
a dn^o qualem ipse dederit proximo. Every man and woman shall have such
indulgence of god as he has given unto his neighbor. Also if god pardon the
many sins in confession and that you be so unkind that thou wylt not pardon
unto thy neighbor / god shall redemaunde and axe the that / that he unto the
has pardonned for thyn unkindness / you should be merciful unto another as
thou would that a man should be unto the.

H Example in the euangelyst. mathei. xviii. of him the which owed unto his
lord. x. M. talentz the which had not therwt to pay it / he asked mercy of
the lord and he quyted him and gave him al his debt And incontinent that
servant made to put in captyuyte a servant of his the which ought him but an
hundred pens / and for any prayer that he could make / he ne would have mercy
ne pardon him his det And when the lord herd it / the which had pardonned
him the great det he was right wroth and angrye of the unkindness and of the
hardness of ye said servant that he ne pardonned the little debt / and
incontinent made him for to come before him and said unto him. Illud mathei
xviii. Serve nequam omne debitum dimisi tibi: quoniam rogasti me / no^ne
oportuit and tu misereri conserui sicut and ego tui misertus sum. Cursed
servant I had for given the all thy debt / for thou have prayed me / was it
not conuenyent unto the yt thou had mercy on thy servant in likewise as I
have had mercy of the. The said lord made to take him / and to put him in
prison / and him demanded al yt that he had him pardonned. And in like wise
shall god do unto them the which ne wyllen pardon unto their neighbors as
says the said euangelyst. Upon this matter there are many oppynyons. For so me
says that as before is written / that god shall redemaunde the sins that he
had pardonned for the unkindness. The other says that it behooves not to
understand that in the said word there is totale symylytude. For that that
god has one time pardonned / hene shall redemau^de it ne yet punysshe it more.
Quia non punit deus bis inidipsum: et quia deus est pronior ad miserandum quam
ad puniendum ita quia est imitabilis. And it should seem that he were muable if
he demanded yt / that he before had pardonned and forgyuen unto the wretchyd
sinner in this world / as did the beforsayd lord of whom is made mencyon in
the said euangelyst. But there is symylytude in that that where the foresaid
lord reproved his servant of unkindness done unto ye other man and punysshed
and put him in prison. In likewise shall god unto those that been unkind the
which ne will pardon their even christian as the said servant did / and unto
them shall say. Serve ne quam. etc. And them shall send in to ye prison of
hell / there for to remain for evermore in pain and dystresse / not for
their sins that before he had pardonned / but for their unkindness to their
even christian Also some say that the said unkindness is so great sin and
grievous that it may not be like in grauyte unto ye sins pardonned or forgyuen
before. And therefore the haynoures and hateful people should pardon or they
shall be punysshed eternally without any remyssyon. Also he ye which ne will
pardon / prays unto god yt he ne pardonne him his sins when he says his
pater noster in saying dimitte nobis debita nostra sicut et nos dimittimus
debitoribus nostris. That is to say Pardon us our sins in like wise as we
them pardon unto them the which has us offended. Men find that the emperor
Theodosyen held unto great bou^te when a man him required and prayed
faithfully that he would pardon him and forgive him. And the more that he was
wroth and angrye / ye more sooner he pardonned. In like wise should we do by
charity. etc. And in as much as the said gospel of saint mathieu says illud
mathei v. Relinque ibi munus tuum ante altar. Leave thy gift before the alter
/ that is to understand yt god refuse not thy gift And so ne wylleth yt thou
it bring again for thou sholdest give it / but he wylleth yt thou defferre and
that thou it offer in charity without the which it is not meritorious till
that thou haste taken away thy hate. Quia sanctus thomas dicit. Nullus homo
potest mereri nisi media^te gratia. No man ne may do thing merytoryous but
only by ye mean of grace. And in as much as he says vade / not alonely
with fete / but with that in humble courage for to bow the down and to humble
the to demand pardon and forgyuenes And to pacyfye the with thy said brother /
And afterward come for to offer thy said gift / and it shall be unto god
agreeable and unto the good and merytoryous / vtyle and prouffytable. The manner
to reconsyle him with our lord Ihesu christ and with his neighbor after that
as says master Johan crysostome upon the said euangelyst. Si offers munus
tuum. etc. Si cogitatu offendisti cogitatu reconsiliare / si verbis / verbis /
sifactis / factis. etc If thou have hated thy neighbor alonely in thyn heart
without speaking ne doing ill / take away thy hate / pardon hy^ with thyn
heart without vengeance and reconsyle the with god and with thyselfe / without
speaking unto him / and if thou have offended by words / also reconsyle ye by
words. And if thou have offended by deed reconsyle the by deed / for so
sholdest thou do.

I Epample. It is written in some places and reherced in the book of the
dyscyple how a knight slew the fader of another knight / the which would
venge him of the death of his fader / but he ne might find the said homycyde
unarmed and vnpuruayed for to kill him. And one time on the good frydaye that
god was crucyfyed the said knight yode barfote unarmed for to require pardon of
the other knight the which knight also soon as he saw him he drew out his
sword for to have taken vengeance on him / and came toward him. Than the
other knight fell prostrate at his fete and said unto him. I beseech you and
require you for the love of him the which on this day has been crucyfyed for
us on the mount of caluary yt ye pardon me that yt I have offended again you to
have slain your fader. And yt knight took him up and pardonned him al for the
love of our sauyoure Ihesus. And in token of pardon and reconsylyacyon he him
embraced and kyssed. And when it came to the offrynge that the said knight
yode to kiss the cross as he was accustomed than Ihesus on the cross
embraced the said knight with his arms and kyst him before all ye people / and
a voice was herd of all that was there. Thou the which have pardonned on this
day him the which has slain thy fader for the love of me. And I pardon the
this day al thy sins. And in that knight was accomplysshed that the which
is written. Luce. vi. dimitte et dimittimini. Forgive and me^ shall forgive you
/ pardon and men shall pardon you. And those that been obstynate the which will
not pardon as it is said shall have no pardon what so ever confession that
they make. Vnde ysodorus de su^mo bono. Erustra deum sibi propitiari querit qui
cito in proximo placari negligit. He ye which dysprayseth to pacyfye with his
neighbor / for nothing secheth he to endebonayre god in him. Example of a
man yt the devil slew for keeping of hate and ne would pardon. lxxix. c.
Another example of a woman dampened for the keeping of her ire without being in
will to pardon. lxxviii. d. Another example how the devil wend to let saint
Thybault to concord the barons of the company the which were in diuysyo^n.
Another example. cxii.l

K How envy and all her branches and dependences ben defended by this
commandment. Ca. xxviii
Saint Austyn says quam inuidia est dolor aliene felicitatis. Ennye the which
god defends is to have doloure / heaviness and bytternes to se that his
neighbor abounds in temporell goods / or spyrytuell. Also he reioyseth him
to se the ill / the do^mage / the ruin / dampnacyon / and perdycyon of his
neighbor is envy that god defends. Vnde prouerbi. xxiiii. Cum ceciderit
inimicus tuus ne gaudeas / et in ruina eius ne exaltet cor tuu^. Thou shalt
not enjoy the when thine enemy shall be fallen. And thyn heart shall not
exalte in his ruin. Et legitur prouer. xviii. Qui in ruina letatur alterius:
non erit i^punitus. He the which enjoys him in ye ruin of another shall not
abide vnponysshed. Envy is a cursed tree / his rote is he uynes / his stroke
is malice / his branches ben rancoure and hate / his flowers ben palenes / and
lenenes / the fruit is worth nothing / it is but bytternes. wherefore ye tree
is not good but to brenne in the fire of hell Vnde ma. vii. Omnis arbor q^ non
facit fructum bonum excidetur / et in igne^ mittetur. Every tree / that is
every person ye which ne does good fruit / that is good operacyons shall be
cut / yt is taken from this world and sent in to the fire of hell Also by
envy for to noye his neighbor the enuyous says of him many ill words by
detraccyon / susurracyon / and mockerye for to put him from his good reno^me /
and to menysshe his good. This matter is declared in the.viii. commandment
Also by envy many process / noyses / hates iniuryes / wars / bataylles / and
occysyo^s ben done / ye which to have dampnacyon and perdycyon. Also by envy
of the devil death dampnacyon and perdycyon ben comen in to this world. And
those the which ben enuyous follows the said devil and shall go with him in
to hell in perdycyon if they deye impenytentes. Vnde sapientie. ii. Inuidia
diaboli mors intrauit i^ orbem terrarum / mittatur autem illum qi sunt ex patre
illius. Also by envy Cayn slew his brother Abell / as it is written in the
examplary. Quere. lxxvi. Also by envy Joseph was sold of his own bredren ye
which said unto their fader that they had found his gown all blody and
that he was deed. And their said fader said illud genesis. xxxvii. Hera pessima
deuorauit filiu^ meum joseph. A cursed be has devoured my sone joseph /
that is envy. etc. Charity the which is again the sin of envy is here
commanded / the which is ye mother and the cause of all virtues in like wise
as it is declared before. Quere iiii. a.

A. Of the virtue of pacyence the which is again the sin of ire. Ca. xxviii.
IT is written prouerbiorum. xii. Non contristabit iustum quidquid acciderit ei.
The sage says that the just wratheth him not by passion of ire ne of
trobleme^t for pain ne aduersyte yt to him comes / For he bears all
pacyently for the love of god. Patience in aduersyte is a virtue / by the
which the bounte of ye man is proved in like wise as men shall here hereafter
/ And it is to be noted that pacyence in trybulacyon makes the man pacyent to
ha^^ ^any goods spyrytuelles. First pa^^^nce in trybulacyon enlumyneth the
en^endement of the man and it makes for to know himself. Vnde ysaie. xxviii.
Tantummodo sola vexatio dabit intellectum auditui. Secondly pacyence in
tribulacyon makes the man sage and governs by great prudence / and he ye
which is impacyent lyfteth up himself and shows his folly. Vnde
prouerbioru^. xiiii Qui paciens est multa gubernatur prudentia / qui autem
impaciens est exaltat iustitiam suam. Et legitur prouerbiorum xix. Doctrina
viri per pacientiam eius noscitur. The doctrine of the man is known by his
wisdom. Example how the sone of Abraham Ysaac sustained pacyentely when his
said fader would a made sacryfyce of him. Quere in the exemplayre li. a.
Thyrdly pacyence in aduersyte keeps the virtues and ye spyrytuell goods of
the soul as the coffre and the purse keeps the money and the treasoure of
the man. Vnde. lii. xxi. In pacientia vestra possidebitis animas vestras.
Example how David was much pacyent again the wars and torments that Saul
did unto him and would not slay him / where he might well have done it many
times if he had would as it is written.i. regum xxiiii. Also when he cut one
part of his mauntell and when he found him a sleep. Vt habetur.i. regum.
xxvi. And if the theuys breketh the coffre lightly they take the treasoure.
Also if a man be broken in trybulacyon by impacyence lightly the devil takes
and deceyueth the soul. Legitur ecclesiastici. xxi. Cor fatui quasi / vas
confractum et omnem sapientiam non tenebit. Fourthly pacyence in trybulacyon
and sweet words in answer appeseth the ire of his enemies. Vnde prouerbioru^
xv. Vir iracu^dus prouocat rixas qui autem paciens est mitigat suscitatas. In
eodem capitulo. Responsio mollis frangit iram: sermo durus suscitat furorem. Et
ecclesiastici. vi. Verbum dulce multiplicat a micos: et inimicos mittigat.
Sweet words multiplieth friends / and makes soft the enemies. Example in
Ihesu christ ye which never proffered ill word against them the which
wronged him / persecuted and put unto death / but bare all pacyently. Fyftely
pacyence in trybulacyon makes god to enhabyte with the pacient Vnde psalm.
Iuxta est dominus his qui tribulato sunt cord. Iterum psalmi. Cum ipso sum in
tribulatione. Example in the life of faders how as these deuylles in the gyse
of beestes bette and tormented saint Anthony / god them chased and him aided
in his trybulacyon. Than saint Anthony said unto god / where were thou my lord
Ihesus / wherefore ne had thou comen at the beginning. And god said unto
him. Anthony I was here / but I abode thy strife to se how thou would resyst
And for as much as thou haste well resysted in pacyence. I shall make to be
renommed of the through out all the world. Syxtely pacyence in trybulacyon
makes man vyctoryous and knight before the king celestyall dygne of more
great reward and praise than he the which has vaynquysshed his enemies /
breketh ye battle and wynneth the iourneye. Vnde prouerbiorum. xvi. Melior est
paciens viro forti and qui dominatur animo suo expugnatore vrbum. Example how
job was pacyent when he lost his goods and his children and he wrathed him
not but blessed god. Vnde job. i. Dominus dedit dominus abstulit: sicut domino
placuit ita factum est sit nomen domini benedictum Another example how ye three
children were pacyente in the furneys and therein blyssed god / as it is written
danielis. iii. And they ben dygne of praise and of reward eternell. It is
written in the third chapter of the appocalypse. He the which has
vay^quysshed shall be clothed in white clothes / and I shall not put out his
name of the book of life. And I shall confess his name before my fader and
before his aungelles. Also it is written. He ye which has vaynquysshed in
this wretchyd valeye of myserye I shall give unto him in my kingdom of heaven
that he shall be with me in my throne. And it is written in the second chapter
of the appocalypse. Be faithful and true till unto ye death and I shall give
the the crown of life / He the which has vaynquysshed shall not be hurt of
the second death. And it is written in the first chapter of the epystles of
saint Iamys. Blissed be that man the which suffers temptacyon / for when he
has be approved he shall take ye crown of life that god has promised unto
those the which loves him. And if it be so that the person be vaynquysshed
by tribulacyon he leseth the reward and ye glory of the good knight pacyent.
Vnde prouerbiorum. xix. Qui impatiens est sustinebit damnum. He the which is
impacyent shall sustain dommage and hurt. Seventhly the man pacyente the
which is among his enemies wronged and tormented deserves to have a crown
of glory as the martyrs. And ye man or woman the which is impacyent in
trybulacyon leseth the crown the which was retained for him or her if they
had well foughten against the temptacyon of the devil. Vnde. ii. ad
thimoteum. ii. Qui certat in agone non coronabitur: nisi qui legi time
certauerit. Eyghtely the man the which bears and takes pacyently the
sekenesses and trybulacyons here byneth in this wretched valeye of mysery for
his own sins and trangressyons after confession it shall serve him of
penance and of medecynes for to purge him and make him clean of his iniquytes
and trespasses The wise man says in the ecclesiastice. Altissimus de terra
creauit medicinam: et vir prudens non abhorrebit illi. Also the virtues ben
better and parfayte in sekenes when the man it bears patiently. vnde.ii. ad
corin. xii. Virtus in infirmitate perficitur. And those the which endures the
death wylfully for their own sins / and defautes after confession. When they
ben seek in their beds or when they ben hanged and made to deye as the good
the fethe which was put to death when that our lord suffered his passion. It
is right great penance much merytoryous wha^ it is borne pacyently. And
therefore god said of good right unto the said thief. thou shalt this day be
with me in paradyse. / Hodie mecu^ eris in paradiso. Vnde apo. xiiii. Beati
mortui qui in domino moriu^tur. Blessed be those that been deed ye which deyeth
in our lord / their death is much precious before god. Vnde psalm. Preciosa
est inconspectu domini mors sanctorum eius. And unto the contrari the death of
sinners impacyent is right ill. Eccles. xli. O mors quam amara est memoria tua
homini iniusto. Nynethly pacyence in trybulacyon makes to god in to paradyse.
/ Vnde actuum. xiiii. Per multas tribulationes oportet nos intrare in regnum
dei Also of those the which have had of tribulacyons in this world it is
written in the apocalypse that saint Johan saw one time so great a hepe of
people that a man ne might nombre them the which praised god. And he demanded
of one of the auncyentes what these people were that were there. Vnde apo. vii.
Niqui amitti sunt stolis et albis qui sunt: et vnde venerunt. R. Hi sunt qui
venerunt de tribulatione magna et lauauerunt stolas suas and dealbaueru^t eas
in sanguine agni ideo su^t ante thronum dei: et seruiunt ei in templo eius: et
qui sedet in throno eius habitat super illos. Without pacyence none ne comes
unto perfeccyon / none ne has vyctorye / for who so leseth patience he is
vay^quysshed / and if he have pacyence he is glorious. The cup of gold
suffers many strokes and of fire before that he come unto the kings table.
And the chalyce before that it be lift up and set on the auiter for to sing
mass. Many great strokes suffers the tonne before that the wine be put
therein. Much is the robe of scarlet de foylled before that it be worn. And
unto this may a man find as many of examples as there are of crafts within
London. In like manner before that thou goo before god thou ought to be well
puryfyed and made clean from sin. And to be precious as the gold / hard as
ye iron it behooves to have pacyence in trybulacyon / that is the yate whereby
the just persons enters in to paradyse. Hec porta domini iusti intrabunt in
ea^. vt dicit psalmista.

B Also pacyence in trybulacyon makethe a man to have six vtylytees after. vi
propretees that the fire has. Primo the fire shyneth and gives light / too
does trybulacyon as says Ysaye. xxviii. Tantummodo sola vexatio dabit
intellectum auditui. Secundo. The fire bre^neth the wodde and the things
combustibles so does tribulacyons the delectacyons of the body and of the
world. Tertio. The fire makes soft the led / ye iron and the things hard.
In like wise trybulacyon and loss of goods makes sort hertes / and makes
them to cease and to hold rygoure. Quarto. The fire purges and makes clean
the ruste of ye iron and of metal. In like wise trybulacyon purges the man
from the ordure and fylth of sin / and him makes to confess and to require
god. Mala q^ nos hic premiu^t ad deum nos ire compellunt. Quinto. the fire
prouueth the gold in the furneyse for to understand if it be good / pure /
and clean In like wise god sends of trybulacyo^s unto man to the end that he
be prouued manyfestly if he be good or ill for to have trybulacyon in good or
ill / how be it that god him knows well. Vnde psalm. Probasti nos deus igne
nos examinasti sicut examinatur argentum. Iteru^ psalm. Domine probasti cor meum
and vesitasti nocte igne me examinasti. Et legitur eccle. xxvii Vasa figuli
probat fornax and homines multos temptatio tribulationis. Also for to know
that that is within a person him behooves to speak some iniurye that prycketh
him / and his courage shall appyere without forth. Vnde hugo de sancto victore.
Qualis vnusquisque aput se lateat: illa ta iniuria probat. Sexto. The hete of
the fire goes upward. In like wise tribulacyons makes the persons to take heed unto god to the end that they possede paradyse / unto the which we may go
cum illo qui est benedictus in secula. Amen.

A Here follows the syxte commandment of god / the which treat of theft
and avarice. Capitulo. xxix.
Nothing of other men's you shalt take
By theft / extorcyon / ne gyle
A full strayte account must thou make
Live thou long or little while
IN the old testament is written this commandment deuteroum. v. ca. and leui.
xix. Non facies furtum. Thou shalt do no theft in manner what so it be / or
ill shall come unto the if thou deye without correccyon and amendment / in
like wise as thou shall find by many examples Quere. lxxx. a.b. This word
here theft to take it generally comprehends under it all auaryce / ye which
is defended by this commandment and all sacryleges / all pylleryes / symonyes
/ vsuryes / treasons / trecheryes / frauds / begylynges / decepcyons / and all
other cautelles / branches and dependauntes that a man may recompte by the
which the esperyte dyabolyke may bring in mind unto the auarycyous of what
estate that he be to take and to draw unto him the goods of another unjustly
And here is commanded the virtue of justice as well dystrybutyue as
coniunctyue the which us adresseth to yield unto every man that that unto him
apperteyneth Vnde math. xxii.c. Reddite que sunt cesaris cesari: and que sunt
dei deo. And for as much as couetyse is the rote of all ill. In like wise as
says saint pouie. i. ad this motheum. vi. Radix omnium malorum est cupiditas.
And how yt rote extends her savor and humor in all the persons of the
world. For from the least till unto ye most great all estudyeth and takes
head unto auaryce and does trycherye / frande and decepcyon the one unto the
other. In like wise as says the prophet Hieremy. vi. A minore qippevsque
maiore^ oe^s auaritie stude^t and a propheta vsque ad sacerdote^ cu^cti faciu^t
doiu^. Wherefore it follows yt this commandment is oftymes broken and that
theft and auaryce brings many to dampnacyon / as it is delared here after by
chapytres. B. And first.

Of theft that god defends. xxix.
NOn furtum facies. Thou shalt do not theft / the which is committed when a
man takes ye goods of another unjustly / fraudelently / and secretly against
the will of the master unto whom they belong / and without right and reason.
Many sorts of thieves reygneth in the world in likewise as the experyence
techeth it us. There ben some the which ben covered the which steleth
secretly the goods of another unjustly / the which breketh this
commandment / and ben hanged when they ben known. The good man Thobie feered
this sin. For on a time his wife brought a kydde in to his house / When the
good blind man herd it cry he said. Beware yt it be not comen of theft for
it behooves us not to ete / ne to touch any thing that is comen of theft /
yield it again unto the owner. Vn^ thobie. ii. No^ licet nobis aut edere de
furto aliqui dant contigere. etc. Some there ben the which ben pryue and of
those there be^ two sorts For the one does the great theftes / as the balyfs
/ sheryfs / and receyuers / the which steleth the amends and fynes and many
other things from their lords. The other does the little theftes as the
children and servants of an house the which steleth the breed / the meet /
the wine / bear / or ale / and the capons / and hens. etc. The thieves
companyons ben they the which ben parteyners unto the theft in partynge it /
or the which have of gifts / or ye which them byeth / or the which
cou^ceyleth that it be done / or the which them commands to do it / or
those the which defends the thieves / or those the which the^ lodges and
receleth / or the which ben present when they ben done / it sees /
understands / and knows / and accuses them not ne repreueth / nor them
correcketh unto their power. Qui tacet consentire videtur. et in decre. Agentes
/ pacientes / consentientes / pari pena pumentur. xvii. q. iiii. Omnes. As
much is he worth that holds as he that fleyeth. Also those ye which have
not accomplisshed the testamentes and ye bequestes of those yt ben deed
wtholdynge the goods ben thieves / and shall have punycyon if they deye
impenytentes without correccyon and restytucyon. Example how the deuylles bare
away the soul of a man the which had withholden ye horse of a deed knight
/ the which had given it unto the poor people. Quere in the examplary. lxxx.
C.

C. A questyon. For to understand if a man commyt theft in taking of a
lytelll thing as of a great thing. The answer is / ye. For theft is taken
where a man takes unjustly the thing of any person be it great or little.
And in theft god takes head unto the heart of the thief and not unto the
thing that he takes. Vnde primi regum. xvi. capitulo. Homo videt eaque parent
dominus autem intuetur cor. Et indecre. Hurtum est iniusta ablatio rei quamtu^
cunque parua sit. xiiij. q. vi. ca. vltimo Quia in furtu non quod ablatum: sed
meus fure^ it is atte^ditur. xiiij. q. vi. capitu. vltimo. And this is to be
understand when ye thought is such that he would take also with good will a
great thing if he might / or as of yt little thing taken the lord entendeth
to be grieved. And saint Thomas secunda secunde questione. lxvi. If any take a
little thing theuysshely / and that he unto whom apperteyneth the said thing
ne repute that a man do unto him noysaunce / and also that he the which takes
presumes yt that thing the which he takes is not against the will of the
lord or owner unto whom it apperteyneth and belongs / and when that it is
in such manner committed he is excused of theft. Otherwise it is mortal
sin / for it is again the dyleccyon of his neighbor unto whom a man does
nuysaunce. Also saint Thomas says that in such little things if any have
courage to stele or to do nuysau^ce unto his neighbor that he sy^neth
mortally. And therefore little theft is to dread as great / for if any do unto
his wyttynge do^mage with his beestes in the meadows or labors of his
neighbors / or if he take the fruytes of trees / as appylles / peris benes /
pesen / or hunters the which does do^mage in the corns with their hounds
etc. such people ne should be assoylled if yt they ne will make restytucyon of
the dommages that they have done. Vnde dicitur in decre. Inferens damnum
proximo no^ est absoluaundus: nisi prius damno secundum arbitrium lesi
restituo. xiiii. q. vi. co^petimus. It is that that before is written Nothing
of other men's thou shall take by theft ne by deceyte / if thou haste you
must yield it or thou shalt never se god in the face. The sin of theft
noyeth unto the soul of the thief in many maneres First theft puts the
soul unto pouerte of goods spyrytuelles / for it chaseth and makes to put in
forgetefulnes his virtues and good operacyons lately gotten. Quere ad numerum.
lxiiii. b. Secundo. Theft lets to get of virtues and goods spyrytuelles in
as many of manners as a man will get. Quere post. xliiii. c. Example how that a
servant ne might receive his creator of the hand of saint Thomas / till that
he had confessed that he had stolen of fygges from his master. Quere in the
examplayr four score and one. b. Tertio The theft dyffameth the thieves in
this world when they ben known and hanged. Quere post ad numerum. xliiii. d.
Example of a thief the which was arrested dyuynely with his theft upon the
grave of a deed body. Quere in the exemplayre. lxxx. b. Quarto. The theft
blind the ye soul of the thief in such manner yt he sees not the good that
he leseth / and ye line and bond in the which he puts him. Quere ibi post
ad numerum. xliiii. e. etiam. Quere. xxvii. d. Quinto. The syn of theft is a
place by the which the thief is taken by justice and hanged on the galowes. Or
it is a place by the which ye great hangman the devil hangs the thief on
the gybet of hell / and keeps him from rysynge and mountynge in to paradyse
/ in like wise as it is declared here after.: / Quere ad numerum. xliiii. f.
Example how a monk saw by permyssyon dyuyne of rich men hanged in the fire
of hell Quere in the examplayre. lxxxiiii. d. Another example how that a thief
usurer was tormented in hell / out of whom proceeded a dry tree on the
which was hanged those of his lygnage the which had not wylled to resyste
when they lived in this world. Quere. lxxxvi. a. Another example how four men
of a lygnage were damned and hanged one after another for yt / that they did
possede falsely an heritage Quere. lxxxi. g. For that that a little bird
takes a little grain of corn fast by the grynne / he is happed by ye neck
and put unto death and perdycyon. Also for a little of another man's goods
that a thief takes he is gretely in do^mage / for ye fraccyon / and brekynge
of the commandment of our lord Ihesu christ is the cord the offense the
halter / whereby he is taken by the hangman the devil for to hang and strangle
him as it is said before. And for a little thing the which endommageth
another he endommageth himself gretely. For he leseth his goods / his body
and his soul etc. Sexto. Theft sleeth the soul of the thief spyrytually of
death of gylt In like wise as it is declared in the begy^nynge of the sin of
homycyde. Quere. xxiiii. b. and in ye chapter of hatred. Quere. xxvii.
Septimo. By theft the theuys be cursed and excommuned every sunday in the
church universal / the which is a thing much to dread in like wise as it
is declared herafter. Quere. xlviii. b.

Octauo. The theuys should dread the judgment partyculer and general the
which shall be done of them in the court sovereign before our lord Ihesu
christ. In the which judgment there shall be many accusatours. Example of a
child the which was accused of ye devil before god for that that he had
stolen an halfpeny from his cosyne germayne and had punycyon. Quere in the
exemplayre. lxxx. d.

Also these theuys should / and also ben bound to restytucyon if they will be
saved what confession so ever they make. In likewise as it is written in droit.
xiiii q. vi. c. Sires. Non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum. De
restitutio. Quere ibi post. xxxiiii. b. c. d. e. f. Example of a child the
which was tormented in the pains of purgatory for that that he had not
restored ye money that he had borrowed. Quere. lxxxviii. b. Other examples in
eodem loco. Nono. These thieves should dread to lose the Joys of paradyse.
Quere. xliiii.i.xlvii. a. vnde. i. ad corin. vi. Neque fures neque auari regum
dei possidebunt. Decimo. These theuys should dread punycyon and dampnacyon
eternel Quia iniusti punie^tur. Quere post. xliiii k. Example of the punycyon
of a thief named achar. Quere. lxxx. a. Another example of a carle the which
was punysshed of the devil for that that he had unclosed his neighbors hedge
of a little of the hedgynge. Quere. lxxxi. a. Those the which have offended
god by theft do penance and restytucyon / and take the condycyons of the
pilgrim of paradyse the which ben written toward the end of ye book and they
shall be sauyd. Example of a thief zecheus the which repented hy^ and made
restytucyon and he is saved. Another example of the prince of theuys that saint
Johan converted / he was saved by penance. lxxiiii. e.

A Of sacrylege that god defends. capitulo. xxx.
AFter these masters. Sacrilege is in such wise dyffyned. Sacrilegium est
sacre rei violatio et eiusde^ vsurpatio. Sacrylege is vyolacyon of holly thing
and vsurpacyon of the same thing. Et dicitur sacrilegium quasi sacrum ledens
vel violans vel depurpans. And it is said sacrylege also as hurtyng holy thing
/ or vyllynge / or deturpynge. Sacrylege is committed sometime by reason of the
person / sometime by reason of the place / and sometime by reason of the thing.
It is committee by reason of the person when that any beteth a clerk or a
person relygyous. xvii. q. Quisquis. And it is a case reserved unto the pope
after the manner as the deed is committee. By the reason of the place as when
the chircheyarde or the church be violed / deturped / broken or burnt / or
such other semblables. Such people ben excommunyed and cursed of sentence de
droit ipso facto. By the reason of the thing as when that it is consecrate and
deputed unto holly usage of the church / and that it be usurped / rauysshed /
taken / or when of that thing a man abuses or uses vnlefully. This last
membre is dyuysed in three parties. For sacrylege is committed when a man
steleth or rauyssheth the holy thing within holy place / or wha^ a man takes
the thing not holy in holy place / or the holy thing in place not hallowed. In
like wise as it is written. xliii. q. iii. Quisquis. Sacrylege is a great sy^ne
much comune. for many ne makes charge for to take the goods of the church /
as rentes / revenues / oblacyons / dysmes / or other goods the which has been offered and given unto god and unto his church or unto any saint. etc.
Acurate has no power to absoyle of sacrylege / for it is a case reserved
unto the bishop. etc. For to speak of those the which handeleth ye money of
the church / a man should understand that if the receyuours or tresorers of
the goods of the church has been unfaithful in their charges and co^myssyons
/ that is to understand if they have comptes ye which be not good verytables
/ and loyalles or if they have compted more hye thanne they should in iourneys
put and dyspens. They ben thieves and yet wors than sacrileges to defraude and
to pylle the church Yet shall they compte one time before god in judgment where
they shall have ye payment after their desert. Vnde. psalm. Tu reddes vnicuique
iuxta opera sua. God is their party and Judge with whom they have to do. And
therefore if they have offended in any manner make in such wise their
appoyntement by penance and satysfaccyon or they shall have dampnacyon. / It
is written marci. x. Ne fraudem feceris. A person the which fraudeth ye
church fraudeth first of all his own propre soul / and he shall find no
prouffyte / but do^mage in the end of the causes. Vnde prouerbiorum. xii. Non
inueniet fraudulentus lucrum. The begyler ne shall find of gain unto his
soul. Also the sage says that in like wise as he ye which stryketh with a
spear or arowe for to slay another / him noyeth much / so does also he ye
which fraudulously noyeth unto his friend. Vnde prouerbiorum.xxvi. Sicut
noxius est qui mittit lanceas et sagittas in mortem / ita vir qui fraudulenter
/ nocet amico suo. Our friend that is god and his church and he the which
fraudeth the chirch of god noyeth him much / and therefore god shall punysshe
him. Vnde psalm. Vultus domini super facientes mala / vt perdat de terra memoria
eorum. The vysage of god looks upon them the which done ill to the end that
he lose from ye earth their memory. Also these unjust shall be punysshed and
the sede of the cursed shall perysshe. Vnde psalm. Iniusti punientur / et semen
impiorum peribit. Also some people ben infydeles unto the church the which
byeth the bread from the mother of god / or the appelles from the chircheyarde /
or other things the which have be given or the which apperteyneth unto god
or unto his saints / and afterward ne will pay them without being cyted or
adiourned or so long dyffereth to yield it that ye church has necessyte.
Such people knows that it is great offense and that they ben bound to
great satysfaccion / for they goo again the will of god. mathei. xxii. Reddite
que su^t cesaris cesari: et que su^t dei deo. Some men makes no conscience /
and says that they ben of those ye which has given the said bread unto the
mother of god / or that the appelles of the chirchyarde unto them apperteyneth.
Unto that I answer them that they have nothing therein / and that incontinent
that they have made any gift or any oblacion vnto^ god / unto the vyrgyn marye
/ or unto the saints of paradyse / they have no more nothing in the gift
that they have made the seygneurye and domynacyo^ that they had therein is
gone unto god / or unto his saints / they ne may do more nor dyspose
afterward unto their pleasure but that they have offended. And so it should
not return unto the usage seculers after the rule of right the which says.
Quod semel dedicatu^ est deo amplius ad humanos vsus reduci non debet.

B. Also some tresorers ben infydeles and dysloyall unto the church the which
takes the goods of it and gothe and aydeth unto their occupacyons seculers as
they should do of their own. And also they ne demand license ecclesyastyce.
A man should say unto such people that they open their vnderstondynges and
know yt they offend in many manners. First they defraude thentencyon of those
the which have given or founded the goods. Secu^do they retarye the
spyrytuell good / for parauenture the church has had thereof need. Tertio if
they them steleth from the church they shall be sacryleges. Quarto they go
again the droit written and again the will of god. The thing the which is
given or dedicate unto god / or unto his saints ne should return unto the
secularytees vsayges / so a man should not abuse it / it should incontinent and
without taryenge go in the usage of the said church or of the servants of
god in like wise as it has be establysshed. And if the people of the church
betake unto ferme muable their dysmes and revenues unto the seculers it is none
abuse / it is suffered / to the end to put them unto prouffyte and for to make
them the better in valor. Also to ye end that the people of the church may
ye more better take heed unto prayer / study and contemplacyon. Thou tresorer
answer me. Haste thou puyssaunce without leave to take the goods of thy
neighbor and for to aid the in thy necessyte: vel sic. have thou puyssaunce
to take them either unto thyselfe or unto another without ye will of them unto
whom they apperteyne / you sholdest answer me that nay. And also I sygnyfye
the that thou haste no power to take the goods of ye church / thou haste but
the hands as servant to put unto ye prouffyte of the church. And the
servant of a temporal lord has no power to go take the money of his
master and to aid hy^ in his necessyte / or to lend it at his pleasure / no
more have thou the goods of the church / and therefore in so doing thou
offendest god. Also thou tresorer when thy neighbor has given of his gods
unto the virgin marie or unto saint peter thou ne sholdest take them or put
them to ye building of saint poule. For thou sholdest defraude ye entencyon of
thy said neighbor the which is to give or to found Also thou take away
from the vyrgyn marye that thing that apperteyneth unto her. Also thou ne
accomplysshest justice the which is to yield unto every man the good that
apperteyneth unto him. Also saint poule is content of the good that he has
and that god him has given / the which will not yt thou take away from
another his good for to bring it unto hy^ and therefore in doing such thing you
sholdest go against god and of his justice / and sholdest be unfaithful unto
thy neighbor and unto the vyrgyn marye to defraude the^ Men say in commune
langayge that ye thing the which is given unto saint peter ne should be given
unto saint poule. etc. C.. Unto a man unfaithful a man ne should betake ye
gods of the church to keep / to receive / to dystrybute / ne office / cause
to judge / to appoint / to plede / to keep and to demene. For in him dare not a
man trust. The psalm. says. Deleantur de libro viuentium et cum justice non
scribantur etc. The people unfaithful shall not be written in the book among
them that be good / for they ne do the operacyons. The good and faithful
servants ben praised of god and of the world / and them should a man love as
himself. And the unfaithful ben dyffamed and put out. Audi scripturas.
legitur prouer. xxviii. Vir fidelis multum laudabitur. Et in eccle. Si est tibi
seruus fidelis sit tibi quasi anima tua. / If thou have a faithful servant
take hy^ unto the as dear as thy soul. Also a faithful friend is great
defense / he the which fyndeth him has found a treasour / no comparyson is
there unto a feythfull friend. Vnde eccle. vi. Amicus fidelis fortis protectio:
qui inuenit eum inuenit thesauru^ amico fideli nulla est comparatio. God shall
reward well his servants ye which ben faithful. Audi scripturas. legitur
apoca. Esto fidelis vsque ad mortem and dabo tibi coronam vite. Be thou
faithful till unto the death / and I shall give the / the crown of life. Also
god said unto Abraham the which was faithful. Illud genesis.xv. Merces tua
magna mecum nimis. Thy reward is right great with me Also god said unto Moses
that he was right faithful. Illud deutero. viii. Rerum omnium perfrueris
abundantia. Also he said unto his appostylles. Illud mathei. v. Gaudete et
exaltate ^m^ merces vr^a copiosa e^ in celis. Et luce. vi. Ecce eni^ merces
vr^a: multa est in celo. Enjoy ye and lift up your hertes for your reward is
haboundaunt in the heuens. God shall not say so unto the unfaithful people /
but he shall shyt ye yates of paradyse unto them And shall say unto them that
he knows them not. Nescio vos vn^ sitis descedittame. By these things
beforsayd ben understand that every tresorer should well examyne his
conscience if he have taken any thing / borne away / nor lend as it is said
ne done thing that is dysloyall in his said co^myssyon / for it is a charge
much to dread as to handle the money of ye church unto those ye which done
their deuoyr. For they ben bound unto restitucyon and unto great penance if
they will be saved / in like wise as thou shall find in the chapter of
restytucyon. Also those the which takes unjustly the good of ye church
should dread maledyccyon and excommunycacyon. For every person that has the
maledyccyon of god and of the church is gretely acurst. And those ye which
takes the goods of the church unjustly have their maledyccyon / than is he
much accursed. Also those the which have the maledyccyon of god and of the
church ben pryued from masses / prayers and oraysons of the church. And those
the which takes the goods as theuys sacryleges have the maledyccyon of the
church / Than they ben put from the said prayers and benefaytes of the
church. And by the consequente they ben acursed. Also these dysloyalles should
dread to lose paradyse When that a servant robs his master he puts him
out of his house and from his office and service. In like wise shall god unto
those yt takes his gods as it is said Example in judas yt which was put from
paradyse / and from ye nombre of the appostles and servants of god. Vnde ps.
E^tant dies pauci and episcopat si eius accipiat alter His days were abredged
and how another took his dygnyte and his office / he was appostle and
purseberer / he murmured of the precious oil yt Maudeleyne shed upon our
lord / and said yt it had been well sold for three hundred pens. And he said
those words because he was a thief / sacrylege and accursed. Also those yt
takes the goods of the church unjustly dread punycyon and dampnacyon. And
if they will not believe it by simple word or by these scriptures / yet put to
faith in the examples yt follows. First. Example how Heliodorus was terrybly
punysshed of punycyon dyuyne in taking the tresours of the church of
Iherusalem as thou shall find in the exemplayre.lxxxii. b Another example of
theuys sacryleges the which were punysshed because they had stolen the cross
and the goods of the church.lxxxii. d Another example in iulyen the apostat
ye which persecuted the church and he was slain myraculously.lviii. a.
Another example how relygyous people should dread ye syn of theft and
sacrylege for gyuynge the gods of the church to their parents. lxxxii f.g.
Another example how that an earl and many of his lygnage were dampened because
he posseded an heritage unjustly the which had be taken away from the
church.lxxxii. a. Another example how ye friar of doyen of Coleyn was dombe
and arested dyuynely / for that yt he denied the money of the church the
which had be lent him / and he ne would yield it again. lxxxii. c.

A. The examplayre and theleccyon of those yt well or ill pay their dysmes.
xxxi
IT is written deuteronomii.xiiii. ca. Decima^ parte^ seperabis de cuntis
fructibus tuis qi nascu^tur i^ terra per amos si^gulos decima^ frumenti tui et
vini et olei and primogenita de apme^tis et ouibus tuis: vt discas timere dn^m
deu^ tuu^ i^ oi^ te^pore. Thou shall depart ye tenth party of all thy fruytes
yt ben borne in ye earth every year. The tenth of thy whete and of thy wine /
and of thin oil. The first borne of thy beestes and of thy sheep to the end yt
thou learn to dread thy lord god in all times. The dysmes should be paid unto
god and unto his servants of right. And therefore those the which have stolen
or the which have nothing paid of dysmes of goods yt god unto them has
made to grow upon ye earth or the which has witholden any party or the
which has paid and given of the worste / or paid with ill will / or
suffered to lose the said dysmes without putting them unto prouffyte / and
sauete / or dyffer to long to pay them. This is here a great sin much to
dread / for it is again the will of god the which commands to pay the
dysmes cerymonyally in like wise as thou shalt here hereafter by scryptures.
And first thou shalt know yt god is the creatoure the which makes to grow
and to come thy corns / thy labors thy fruytes / thy bestyall and all thy
gods that the earth bears. And also thou sholdest know that god has
witholden and retained for himself the tenth party of al those fruytes and
goods growing in ye said earth. If thou will not believe it by simple word /
let him go study the scryptures in the chapytres the which shall be hereafter
alleged. And first it is written deutero. xii. Decimas et primitias manuum
vestrarum and vota atque deuorta primogenita bonum et ouium reddere precipit
dominus. That is to say. Our lord has commanded to yield the dysmes and
first fruytes / ye labors of your hands and your vows and gifts / ye first
borne of kyen and of sheep. And it is written deuto. xviii Ab his qi offeru^t
victimas sieve bouem sieve oue^ i^molauerint dabu^t sacerdoti premicias frume^ti
vini: et olei and lauarum partem ex duium tonsione: ipsum enim elegit dominus
deus tuus de cuntis tribubus tuis vt stet et ministret nomini dei tui. etc. Of
those the which offreth sacryfyces or the which have sacryfyced ox or sheep
they shall give unto the priests the first fruit of whete / wine / and of
oil / and ye part of the wolles of the clepynge of sheryng of the sheep. Thy
lord god has chosen that priest of all thy lygnees to the end yt he it
hold of the and admynystre in ye name of our lord. Also our lord sent unto
the children of Israhell when they should offer in deserte the words the
which ben written leuitici. xxiiii. Cum ingressi fueritis terram quam ego dabo
vobis et messueritis sagetes feretis manipulosspi carum messis vestre ad
sacerdotem. etc. When ye shall be entered in to the land that I shall give you
/ ye shall bear your hands full of ye erys of your corn unto ye priest. etc.
Et legitur leuitici. xxvii. Omnis decime terre sieve de fructibus sieve de pomis
arborum dn^i sunt: et illi sanctifica^tur. All the dysmes of the earth / be it
of corns / or fruytes / or of apples of the trees / they ben of our lords and
they ben sanctyfyed unto him. Et legitur numeru^. xviii. Vniuersas frugu^
primicias quas gignit humus domino deportantur. The vniuerselles first fruytes
and corns the which the earth engenders be borne unto god / If thou will
understand what it is to say primicias. Catholycon says that primicia
primicie dicitur a primis pluraliter he primicie prumiciarum. vulgo dicitur
quod primicie sunt proprie que primo de fructibus percipiuntur: vel que deo
offeruntur. Primicie they ben the new the first fruytes and corns that the
earth bears. Also primicia est prima pars frigum dn^o offerenda. And it is
written in the.vii. chapter of the epystylles saint poule unto the hebrews how
the priests the sons of leui taking the commandment had to receive the
dysmes of the people after ye law. Example of this matere of a lord the
which withelde the tennethe of ye gods that he gave unto his servant. Quere.
lxxxiiii. a. Augustinus dicit decime et debito requiruntur et qui eas dare
noluerit res alienas inuadit. That is to say yt the dysmes ben demanded of
right. For they ben due / and he the which ne has wylled to give them he
witholdeth things strange the which apperteyneth not unto him. And god
says in the gospel / mathei. xxii. Reddite que sunt cesarus cesari et que
sunt dei deo. Sith that it is so found in the scryptures that god has
wtholden for himself the tenth party of ye fruytes and corns the which
comes from year to year upon the earth as it is said / and that he wylleth and
commands cerymonyally that in such wise it be done. Those that dysmeth ill
understand they that they committee sin and that it is unkindness unto them
for to mysknowe their benefactour. Also those that ill dysmeth that may well
they shall answer at judgment partyculere / or general the which shall be
made of them before god in the court celestyall. For god shall be there judge
and party. Also they shall have so many of accusatours the which shall accuse
them of their sins that they shall see / and know themself that they ben
culpables Also those the which pays unto the.xi. or unto the.xiii. or unto
the.xxx. should understand that it is no dysme. It is an ill custom the
which has be bego^ne of covetous people / auarycyous and unkind the which
dysknoweth the good that god unto them has given. Those the which follows
such custom should dread that couetyse and auaryce ne put out their inward
eyes. Whereof it is written in ye book of sapyence. Malitia eorum eccecauit eos.
Their malice that is their sin has blinded them that they may not see
their ill. It is great peril and danger for the soul to follow the custom
and will of people auarycyous. For they goo unto dampnacyon if that they deye
impenite^tes etc.

B. The condycyons to pay well the dysmes. Many condycyons should those have
ye which will pay well the dysmes of the which we shall tell four. The first
is that a man should pay entyerly / again those the which pay nothing in
rekeny^ge five or six sheuys of corn and begyleth god of the half shefe / or
again those ye which pay nothing of the new fruytz eten in somer / as
peers / plo^mes / benes / and pesen. etc.. It is written eccle. xxxv. Bono animo
read gloriam deo et minuas primicias manuum tuaru^. Yield glory unto god by
courage and mynysshe not ye first fruit of the labors of thy hands. The
second is that a man should pay ioyousli without heaviness ne without having
grutche therein again those unto whom it seems that they lose that that they
give to the dysme / as if they should cast it down the water they offends
gretely. Audi scrypturas. eccle. xxxv. In omni dato hylarem fac vultum tuum et
in exultatione sanctifica decimas tuas. Make thy vysage joyous in every gift /
and sanctyfye thy dysmes in exultacyon. Et legitur. ii. ad co. ix. Hilarem enim
datorem diligit deus. / That is to say yt god loves the gyuer joyous. and
ysodorus says. Qui cu^ tristitia largitur remuneratio^is no^ percipit
fructu^. He the which gives and enlarges with heuines ne apperceyueth the
fruit of remuneracyon. Also a man ne should let lose the dysmes nor the thing
that apperteyneth to god. For it is written exo. xiii. Pru^^^ (...) trugu^ tree
tue deteres i^ domu^ dei tui. (...) first corns and fruytes of the earth y^
(...) bear them in to the house of thy lord (...) The third condycyon that a
man she (...) have for to pay well his dysmes is that a man should pay of the
best and not o^ ye worste / or that the which falls unto the tenth again
those the which given the corn eten trodden or full of drake / or agay^ those
the which takes for themself the good appelles and gives the ill / they
offend gretely. Audi scripturas. Legitur numeri. xviii. Oi^a que aftertis ex
decimis and in donaria separabitis optima: et electa erunt. All those things
the which ye offer in dismes and in gifts ye shall depart the best and they
shall be chose and agreables unto god. et legitur leui. xxvii. Quicqid decimum
venerit sanctificabitur dn^o no^ elegitur bonu^ nec malu^ nec altero
commutabitur. Si quis mutauerit quod mutatum est et pro quo mutatu^ est
sanctifica domino. Hec precepit dn^s moysi. What thing so ever it be that
comes the tenth shall be sanctyfyed unto the lord / the good nor the ill be
not chosen and it shall not be changed in to another. If any change it ye
thing the which is changed / and wherefore it is changed / santefye it unto
our lord Our lord has commanded these things here unto moyse. Et legitur
eccle. xxxv. Noli afferre munera praua non enim suscipi et illa deus. Offer
thou not ill gifts god ne shall take them. Et legitur iuce.xi. Ve vobis
phariseis qui decimatis mentam and ruta^ et oe^ olus preteritis iuditiu^ et
caritate^ dei. Woo be to you pharysyens the which dysme the little and ill
herbs and trespass ye charity of god. The fourth condycyon is yt a man should
pay without taryenge / nor to draw back till that a man be somoned / cyted
or warned. It is offense to tarry to give unto god yt which apperteyneth unto
him / or lend unto himself his dysmes till unto another year without spekyng
unto the curate. It is written exodi. xxii. Decimas tuas and premitias no^
tardabis of terre. Thou sholdest not tarry to offer thy dysmes / and thy first
corns and fruit. C.. We have example in Cayn and Abell of those that well or
ill pay their dysmes. From the beginning of the world god commanded unto
our forne faders yt they should pay ye tenth of their fruytes. And for as
much as they had not unto whom to pay it god commanded yt they should brenne
it and that they should make smoke ye which should mount in to heaven for to
do unto god honor and sacryfyce by obedyence / and in reknowlegynge yt the
said goods comes of god. Cayn and Abel yt were Adams sons made it. But Abels
was good for he dysmed well / and there his smoke mounted in to the heaven and
pleased god. Cayn was wicked and dysmed ylle / wherefore his smoke yede
downewarde toward ye earth and it pleased not to god. Also his land fructefyed
not well in fruytes and labors and bare thystylles / drake / and darnell / and
thorns. etc. And for asmoche as Abell was good and obedyent and loved of god /
and that his land fructefyed well and that al goods came unto him / cayn had
envy upon hy^ and slew him and was accursed. Vnde ge. iiii. Respexit dn^s ad
abelle et ad munera eius: ad cayn autem et ad munera eius no^ respexit.
Sequitur. Nunc maledictus eris super terram cu^ operatus fueris eam no^ dabit
fructus suos: vagus et profugus eris super terram. God looked upon Abell and
upon his gifts / for he made them well / And he looked not upon Cayn / nor upon
his goods / for he gave of the worste / and god said unto him. Thou shalt be
now accursed above the earth when thou shall labor it ne shall give her
fruit. Also ye be cursed in dysmes and first corns and fruytes. For ye have
frauded me of my part that I have witholden for myself Vnde. michee. iii. In
dicimis and primitus vos maledicti estis. etc. Glosa. Quia fran dastis me part
mea. The gifts of god for to pay well the dysmes. Those the which pay well
the dysmes have pryncypally.iiii. gifts of god. The first habou^daunce of
fruytes / labors and worldly goods as says the scryptures in many places.
Vnde malachie.iii. Inferet omne^ decimam in horeu^ meum: et sit cibus i^ domo
mea: and probate me super hoc dicit dn^s si non aparuero vobis catharactas celi
et effundero vobis benedictione^ vsque ad abu^ dantiam: et increpabo pro vobis
deuorantem. Glosa. Vermen vel virium aeris sequitur: et non corrumpet fructu^
terre vestre nec erit sterilis vinea in agro dicit dominus. That is to say
bear al dysme into my garnier and that that is to ete in my house / and prouue
me of this thing says god If I open not to you ye things of heaven and if I
shed not benedyccyon till unto haboundaunce. And I shall blame for you the
devouring worm and vice of ye air And he shall not corrupt ye fruit of your
land. And the vine shall not be barayne in the field says our lord. Example
of a lord the which paid well his dysmes and his vine bare of fruit two
times in one year quere in the exemplayre.lxxxiii. b. Et legitur leuitici.xxvi.
Dabo vobis pluuias temporibus suis: et terra gignet getmen suum / et pomis
arbores / replebuntur. et cetera. I shall give you of raynes in their times and
when they have need says our lord Ihesu christ. And I shall make the earth
for to fructefye and engendre his buddes and his flowers. And also ye trees
shall be replenysshed with apples. etc Et legitur deuterono.xi. Dabit pluuias
terre vestre temporinam et serotinam vel colligatis frumentum et vinum et oleum
fenum ex agris ad pascenda iumenta / et vt ipsi comedatis et saturenimi. Moses
said unto ye children of Israhell. etc. God shall give raynes couenables in
time unto your land / to the end yt ye gadre whete wine and oil / hay from
the feldes to pasture with your marys / and to the end that ye ete and be
fed. Et legitur prouerbiorum.iii. Honora dn^m de tua substantia and de
primiciis omniu^ frugu^ tuaru^ da pauberi implebuntur horea tua saturitate et
vino torcularia redundabunt. That is to say. Honor god of thy substance and
of the news of all thy corns and fruytes / give unto the poor and thy
graynes shall be filled of haboundaunce / and the pressers shall redounde of
wine.

E. Example in job yt which was true / obedyente / pacyent / and beloved of
god / for he dysmed right faithfully. Also after that he had be prouued god
sent unto him haboundaunce of al goods. It is written job. xlii. yt he
posseded.xiiii. thousand sheep. syx thousand camellys / two thousan couple of
oxen / and a thousand of asses. etc. Also Ioachin and saint Anne yt paid well
their dysmes and departed their goods in three parties / habou^ded in goods as
it is written in the legende of saint Anne. and unto the contrary. Those yt pay
ill their dysmes ben punysshed by maledyccyon of famyne and pouerte / as it is
said of cayn Legitur deutero. xii. Cauete ne forte de cipiatur cor vestru^ and
recedatis a dn^o. etc. Sequitur iratusque dn^s claudat celu^ et pluuie no^
descenda^t: nec tra det germen^ suu^: pereatisque velocit de tra optima. etc.
Beware lest parauenture your heart be dysteyned / and that ye depart not from
god and that he be not wroth and close the heaven / and that ye raynes dyscende
not / and that ye earth ne give his sede / and that ye perysshe not hastily from
the land right good and best and for the defaute to dysme well and to obey
unto god. The second good that those have the which well pay their dysmes /
is health of body / whereof speaks saint Austyn saying. Si decima^ been dederis
non solu^ abonda^tia^ fructuu^: sed etia^ sanitatem corporis consequeris. If
thou have well paid thy dysme thou shalt not alonely have haboundau^ce of
fruytes / but with that health of body. Also when thou haste done an almesdede /
health the more sooner shall come to the. Vnde ysaie. lviii. Cu^ feceris
elunosina^ sanitas tua citius orietur. And unto the contrary those yt ill
dysmeth god unto them sends sickness / as of ye gout / of the heed / of ye
stomach / of the axes. etc. The third gift that those have that pay well
their dysmes / is that god unto them pardonneth their sins after true
confession. Legitur prouer. x. Vniuersa delicta operuit caritas. Charity
covers all sins. Et legitur.i. petri. iiii. Anteoi^a inutua^ in
vobismeipsis caritate^ continua^ habentes qia caritas cooperit multitudine^
peccatoru^. The.iiii. gift is to possede the realm of paradyse and the great
gods and joys that there ben. Of these two last gifts speaks saint Austyn
and says. Qui primu^ desiderat habere aut peccatoru^ indulgentia^ promereri
decimam et de nouem pertibus cla^ dare studeat pauperibus: qi vero non dat
punitur i^ oppositis. He the which desires to have reward or to deserve to
have pardon of his sins pay his dysme and study to give unto the poor of
the nynthe parties of thy goods that with him abides. And those yt give not
as it is said / god punyssheth them by the opposyte. That those which will not
pay well their dysmes have not haboundau^ce of goods / health of body / ne
remyssyon of their sins. And also they ne shall possede paradyse if they deye
impenytentes after ye remedy that unto it apperteyneth. Many examples of those
the which pay well their dysmes shall be found in the exemplayre Quere.
lxxxiii. a.

A. Of vsurye the which god defendethe. Ca. xxxii.
IT is written in the.xxv. chapitre of the book of leuytes. Pecunia^ tua^ no^
dabis ad vsura^ / and frugum superhabu^dantia^ no^ exiges ego do minus vester.
Our lord made tell to the children of Israhel by his servant Moses. Thou
shall not give thy money unto vsurye / and thou shall not axe superhabou^dau^ce
of corns. etc. For to understand well the matter of vsurye / a man should know
that vsurye is sometime manifest and sometime hid / wrapped / diverse contractz
yt is defended by this commandment For god will not that a man sell the time
yt he has given in co^munalte. That is to say ye when a man lends any
thing god defends that he take ought over for dylacyon of time. For in such
manner a man sells ye time / wherefore he is an usurer. For without labourynge
they will have prouffyte / which is again the will of god as he said by his
prophet Dauyd. Labores manuu^ tuaru^ qia ma^ducabis. Thou shalt labor with
thy hands / for thou shall ete. Sith it is true that god defends vsurye ye
scripture speaks in many places. First it is written deute.xxiii. Non
feueraberis fratri tuo ad vsura^ pecunia^ ne fruges nec qua^libet alia^ re^
Thou shalt not lend unto thy brother money to vsurye / ne of corns / ne of
any other thing. And it follows in the said chapter. / Fratri au^t tuo
absque vsura id quod indiget co^modabis vt benedicat tibi dn^s deus tuus in oi^
tempore. etc. Thou shalt lend unto thy brother without vsurye that thing whereof
he has need / to the end yt thy lord god bliss the in all times. God will yt
men lend each other by charity / and not for hope of any gain or retrybucyon.
Usury manifest is when a man lends corn / wine / gold or silver pry^cypally
for to have any prouffyte expressed by the parties or alonely in hope. Canon
dicit. quod vsura est vbi amplius requiritur qua^ datur quicqid illius sit: sed
si non recipit and spe^ habeat recipiendi vsura est. The droit canon says.
Vsurye is when a man demau^deth more tha^ a man ne gives what thing so ever
it be / and if he receive no more. And yt he has hope to receive it is usury.
For god regards the thought yt is reputed for the deed When any has lent
corn / wine / or sydre / the lender has no more seygnourye of yt thing
lend. The said lender gives the lone or pressed after the commandment of god.
Mutuu^ date. And if the said lender receive gift he thereof has the gayn not
of himself but of the dettour / ye said lender ne sells nothing unto ye
dettour the which is his / but if he should take gift he should sell the time
the which apperteyneth unto god. And when any sells the thing the which
apperteyneth not unto him / he ne should have the gain. In like wise he ne
should sell the time / for ye should be vsurye. The usurer will have gayn in
slepynge and waking without any labor yt which is again ye word of god
written. Gene. iii. ca. In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane tuo. In the sweet and
labor of thy vysage thou shalt get thy bread. / When any lends his horse /
or ox for to do any labourage lefull he may take price For it is his thing ye
which ne gothe unto the seygnourye of the lender as of money lend. Vbi est
mutuu^ ibi e^ dn^m. vn^ mutuum dicitur de meo tuum.

B. The kinds of vsurye hid that god defends. ca. xxxii.
IT is written luce. vi. Mutuu^ date nichil inde sperantes. God commands that
a man give the pressed without having hope to have any thing over the thing
lend. Vsurye hid ye which otherwhyles is said wrapped in seven kinds. The
first is done in receyuynge gage / or in making herandes. The second in
selling and in byenge. The third is made in lendynge. The fourth for to be
mean to lend. The.v. by assocyacyon. The.vi is under manner of pain The.vii.
for to take service without price / or for to make to lend unto another and in
taking gratuyte. As unto the first kind the which is done in receyuynge gayge
/ or in making erandes a man should understand that it is dyuysed in.v.
manners. The first is when by the lone a man receives any gayge for assurance
ye which of it self bears any fruit or prouffyte / as who should take a
gardin in morte gayge. A man ne should take the fruytes or prouffytes of the
said gage but in rebatynge upon ye pryncypall so^me lend / or it should be
vsurye / and it behooves to make restytuco^n. Moses says in deute. Non
accipies loco pignoris inferiorem et superiore^ mola^. Thou shall not take in
s^ede of gayge neither ye upper grindyng s^one nor the under. A man demands
what it is of co^munytes of any cytees the which betaketh money unto usury.
The answer. All those cytezynes ben vsureres of whose auctoryte and cou^sayll
ye said pressed is made. Vnde raymondus dicit. Oe^s illiciues quorum auctorytate
and consilio fit: vsuraii su^t. And in yt manner if a communyte should receive
any gage / as cite castle or town / and that they ne compte the fruytes over
the pryncypall price. All those here ben usurers. ar. vii. q. i. Sicut vir.
and. xxiiii q. iii. Sihabes. Understand this matere and of one person / and
of many. For all those the which takes the fruytes and leueed of the said
castle or town without rebatynge upon the prxncypall price ben usurers as it
is said. The second manner is when the lender receives gayge that he uses /
or makes serve without any thing dyscomptynge of the pryncypall / as lynnen
clothe vestementes. Vnde amos propheta.ii. ca. Super vestimentis pigneratis
accubueru^t. etc. They ben couched upon ye vestimentes engayged. The third is
as the lender takes bestyall in gayge / and makes them more to dyspende and
ete than they ne should in such case. The fourth is when the usurer makes
erandes and messages / and at every erande or message he has a reward and
lives by it. The.v. is as the usurer renneth and that he ne will give dylacyon
till that a man unto him has given any thing. Of such people a man may
say. Illud psalmiste. Deuora^t plebem mea^ sicut esca^ panis. They devour my
people as the mete of bread.

C. The second kind of vsurye hid the which is made in selling or byenge
is dyuysed in four manner. The first is when any sells his marchaundyse
unto credence for much more than it is worth for asmoche as he gives term
of payment / he yt does so is an usurer. vt pz extra de vsu. c. Consuluit. The
second is when a man byethe the things that yet grows / as ye corn in
grass / ye appelles or vynes in flower much less than they be worth. For as
much as a man auau^ceth the payment / or yt a man them take in payenge
himself by such condycyon yt they shall have such case when it may happen
their catell safe / in this manner a man sells the time yt is not to be sold
/ and therein is vsurye. extra de vsu: co^suluit. But who so should by them of
so mean a price that a man should be uncertain whether they should be more
worth or less. For to put a way the peril of the vsurye it is better to do
and to say in this wise. I will not in no manner what so it be sell my corn /
nor mine appylles now: but I purpose to sell them on such a day / and if thou
will give me the price that they ben worth at ye said day or more / or less
thou shall have them / and I shall keep them for the. And if thou auau^ce money
now ye pryse shall be as they shall be worth at the said day as when the
apples are to be gadred and the corn after Auguste. The third is when a man
byeth any ware to be delivered at such a term much less than they ben
worth at the said term for asmoche as a man auaunceth the money / here is
vsurye. The.iiii. is when any rich man is required to lend or to engage unto
the poor people the which ben in necessyte / ye will not sell in perpetuyte
their rentes or herytages if they may find a lender / or an engayger. And the
said rich man in such wise knows it / but he has the heart in the
practyse / and wylleth that his fynaunce unto him be prouffyte and encreasy^ge
/ but for to fle ye name to be an open usurer he loves better to make the
contracte under the form of sale and byenge as of the priest / or of other
pryse to the end that his said fynaunce unto him do prouffyte / if in this
manner he by of the said indygens rent or heritage to requyte again that
these other call unto grace. That is to understand by such condycyon that as
many times and as often that within certay^ term / as of.vii. or.x. years / or
unto him or unto his heirs he shall yield the so^me given with the arrerages /
the said herytages or rentes shall come again unto ye said sellers / or unto
their heirs / here is vsurye hid the which is as silver lend contrary unto
charity / and here behooves restitucion of al yt that a man takes over the
first so^me given. Such people the which will increase their rychesses / and
fle contractes of winning and of lone / in hydynge their vsurye by form of
selly^ge and byenge / defrauldeth the entencion of the law of charity and of
justice unto their power / and deceyueth their soul by ye sin of such
vsurye hid. The which sin they wolden unto them to be lefull wtoute
reproach or without oblygacyon to make restytucyon the which thing may not be
done. But who so should bye the said herytakes the just price that they ben
worth in good entencyon without having the entencyon corrupt as it is said
of the rich the which takes head unto the practyse he may do it without
vsurye / how be it that there is time to require it. Quicqid agant hoi^es:
intentio indicat oe^s. The usure is wrapped in the thought yt god sees and
knows. The which shall make in dycacyon. Legitur primi regu^.xvi. Ho^ enim
videt ea que para^t: dn^s aute^ intuetur cor. Also it is to be noted that when
in any co^tracte has defaulte of justice and of good equity in such wise
that one of ye parties is endo^maged / he that does the do^mage is bound in
deed of conscience to quyte ye contracte or to supplye the defaute of justice
but specially when ye party it requires and is of necessyte.

D. The third kind of vsurye hid the which is done in lendynge is dyuysed
in many maneres The first is when ye usurer lends upon intencyon to have any
gift / gratuyte / or service over ye thing lend / how be it that in lendynge
it were not spoken. And if he thought not to have some prouffyte / he ne would
lend nothing. Here is vsurye as unto god for ye entencyon corrupt yt our
sauyoure defends. luce. vi. Mutuu^ date nichil inde sperantes. Et deutero.xv.
Si vnus de fratribus tuis ad paupertate^ venerit no^ obdurabis cor tuu^ nec
co^trahes manu^. sed aperies ea^ pauperi and dabis mutuu^ quo eu^ indigeri
prospexeris. When that any lends money under hope to receive any thing and
that it be so that he ne would lend nothing if he ne thought not to have
prouffyte / that that he receives afterward is vsurye / how be it that he axe
it not. And is holden to make restytucyon. The second is when the usurer
lends old corn sydre / or wine when it is at a vile price / to the end
that it be yielded unto him in the time that it shall be more dear / better or
renewed and not for ye necessyte of him yt boroweth / but upon entencyon to
gain it is vsurye. ext. de. v^u. ca. Nauiga^ti. E.

E. For to know many cas in generalyte it is to be noted yt when a man gives
money or other thing unto any indygent in.v. manners. The first is lyberally /
and without any gain of hope temporell / here is charity. The second is to
the end that the marchaunte of the said money under condycyon of loss and of
gain as well of the pryncypall so^me as of gain / and that may be lefull. The
third in such condycyon yt the so^me lend shall be evermore certain and
sure as unto ye lender / but the gain shall be under doubt of loss / or of
gain / and here is vsurye. The scripture gives a rule general and says ye
thing ye a man takes over ye pryncypal is vsurye. vt pz. xiiii. q. iii.
Plerique. The fourth by such condycyon that the lender adventure the so^me
lend in perils / and fortunes upon him / but the borower shall be bounden in
any so^me unto the lender / here is v^urye / and if he lost an. C. M. crounes
for to have in certain a little blanc. extra de vsuris. ca. nauiga^ti. The.v.
in putting gain and catell incertayne / as to lend an hundred crowns for to
receive at the end of the year an hondreth and ten / here is vsurye manifest.
If any man has lend lyberally and without hope to have retrybucyon temporell
/ and the borower would unto him give any thing lyberally he may take it
without peril of vsurye For in such case he is no more restraynte as not to
dare take gift after the priest as before. If a man had promised to yield the
so^me lend at a certain day / and by ye defaute of the which promise the
lender is endo^maged / for he should pay his rent or his tax. etc. he may
over the said so^me lend take justly his loss without v^urye. Also some
usurers there ben the which for ye pressed takes evermore some thing or
puts more over and above the thing lend. And for as much as ye borower ne
may furnysshe at every term ye said lender makes him to compte two or.iii.
times / and takes decretm away some thing as every time yt he compteth / and
makethe often of vsurye the pryncypall debt. / By the which they ben reputed
vyllains and cruel usurers.

F The.iiii. kind of vsurye hyd is when any receives any gift for to be ye
mean to make ought be lend unto the indigent G The.v. is made in assocyacyon
of bestyall ye which may be good or ill dyuersly The which they make in many
of maneres / but it behooves to take for a rule general the which is sothe
that as often that by the condycyons of the contracte ye one of the parties
abides subject unto the loss and adventures / and the other is sure nothing
to lose / it is vsurye / as a man may say that he the which betaketh his
beestes / yt is by such condicyon yt they shall be immortelz. That is if they
dye the fermer shall put as many of other / or shall pay the so^me yt they ben
worth when they were unto him betaken / if they increase the betaker will
part / and if they decrease he will nothing lose / the which is vsurye. Also
when one of the parties of ye ferme is notably assured / and the other
euydently grieved / the contracte is dampnable / but little excess in loss or
in gain is not in all again justice ne peril of damnacyon. A questyon for to
understand if it be v^urye if a man receive an.C. sheep to keep for one year /
and for the fruytes and keeping of the same he should have twenty shelinges or
more after that yt the gyuer and he couenau^ted togyders by such condycyon yt
in the end of the term ye gardyen him should restore as many of sheep and so
many good with the wo^les. To assoyll this questyon after the cou^sayll of good
experyment a man should consider if it be time of moreyne if the sheep ben seek
/ or if the pasture ben sekely and that it appear great peril and loss upon
the gardyen and not upon the gyuer / here is vsurye / but if the said pasture
and the sheep were hole without time of moreyne ne of peril and that a man
give pryse reasonable and that the said gardyen may well yield that ye said
gyuer demands / therein should be no vsurye. A more sure thing it should be
to marchaunde alonely for ye fruytes pains and keeping of the said sheep. And
that the perils of prouffytes were upon the gyuer and not upon the gardyen.

H. The syxte spyce or kind of vsurye hid is when a man lends unto a term
spoken to yield the thing lend upon pain to pay as much of advantage /
here may be vsurye after some cyrcumstaunces / but sometime he may well do it
justly for to punysshe the negligence of some as is beforsayd.

I. The.vii. kind of vsurye hid is when the usurer will nothing take over
the price given / but for the said pressed put in besynes.ii. or.iii. days of the
borower in his field / or when he ne will lend by his hand / but makes to
lend his servants or another his friend and keeps the gratuyte. For to be
short in this matter ye malice of worldly people auaricious is right great /
for they find so many of cautelles in betakynge their usury under ye shadow of
pity and in making passementes of oblygacions of bargayns of contractes that a
man ne may escrye nor determyne the hydynge of their vsurye / but every man
should understand that god commands that a man do charity unto his
neighbor and that a man lend him. And more over he defends that for the
priest a man ne sell the time as it is beforsayd. Those the which it sells
or the which have sold it remedy unto their conscyences if they will well
deye surely / and to be assured to go in to paradyse. For when they shall be in
judgment before god their cautelles no^ malice there shall make nothing. And
their vsuryes wrapped and hid under the shadow of pity shall be unfolded and
manifest. Quia nichil occultum est: quod non reueletur. And our lord Ihesu
christ shall judge them and condampne the^ after the truth of the thing / in
beholdynge what thoughts these vsureres had.

Also god sees and knows if any man has sold the time in hydynge his
vsurye / and if he has taken bounte and prouffyte over the thing lend
without taking therein pain ne labor for the dylacyon of the time termyned.
And for as much that such judgment is doubtous and that dampnacyon is to be
dredde it is beter to make restytucyon and penance for to have assurance of
salvation. T'ene certu^ et dimitte incertu^. Hold the thing certain and leave
that the which is not certain Dauyd makes a questyon in the psalter sainge.
Dn^s qis habitabit i^ tabernaculo tuo aut quis requiescet i^ mo^te scto^ tuo.
Seqitur Qui jurat prooximo suo et no^ decipit: qui pecunia^ sua^ no^ dedit ad
vsura^ et muneta super i^nocente^ non accepit. That is to say Lord who shall
enhabite or dwell in thy tabernacle / or who shall rest in thy holly
mountain. The answer. That shall be he the which swereth unto his neighbor /
and deceyueth him not. He the which has not given his goods unto vsurye /
and the which has not taken gifts of ye innocents he shall mount in to
paradyse. etc Examples of vsurye. And first of an usurer yt would not make
restytucyon for the amonycyon and warning of his priest / the which said that
he would prove if he might be saved without restytucyon. and so myscheuously he
deyed.lxxxvii. e. Another example how an usurer ye which would not restore
cried at his death yt he brent and broyled.lxxxvi. h.

K Of usury manifest and notable. xxxii.
IT is written math. xvi. Quid perdest hoi^ si mu^du^ vniuersu^ lucretur ai^e
vero sue detrime^tu^ patiatur what does it prouffyte unto a thief usurer to
assemble and wy^ne all the world / and that at his death his soul be sent
unto the torments of hell. Vsurye open and notoryous is much detestable / the
which a man should fle for many things: of the which I shall tell four. /
The first is for that yt these usurers be cursed by sentence of right / ipso
facto. The second is for yt that they ben pryued from the holy co^munyon / for
unto the usurers a man should deny the sacrament of the altar as well in the
death as in the life / if they have not true repentance and if they will not
make restytucyon. Example of an usurer the which would not restore
Quere.lxxxvii. a. The third is for that that their oblygacyon is not agreeable
unto god / and it ought not to be received. The iiii. is for that yt they
should be pryued from sepulture ecclesiastyke. Vt habetur extra devsuris. c.
quia i^ oi^bus. Example of an usurer the which would not restore that was
borne by an ass unto the gybet or galowes and there was buried. Quere. lxxxvii
a. Many other examples of usurers ben written in ye exemplayre of the
commandments. Quere. lxxxvi. a. b. c. d. An open usurer and known the
which should come at the necessyte of death ne should be assoylled / if he
did not yt were in him to restore plainly till unto the last penny all ye
vsurryes wherein he may be reproved and redeuable. And there unto he should
dyspose mouables and herytages / ne also it should not suffyse to ordeyne that
after his death they were restored. But it behooves that forthwith the party
endo^maged be contented / or in his absence the ordynayre / or the chapelayne
representynge the party endommaged / otherwise the testamente that he makes
is of no valor / ne the absolucyon that he receives. And if he deye so he
should be pryuate from ye holy ground / for he yt should bury him should be
cursed. extra de sepulturis eos libro.vii. Also the herytiers the which him
shall succeed in mouables and herytages shall be in like wise bound to restore
the dommages upon pain of dampnacyon. Example how iiii. men of one lygnage
were hanged in hell the one after another / because that they did possede fasly
an heritage without being in will to restore it.lxxxi. g. Another example how
that another Earl and many of his lygnage were dampened and put in to hell in
tormente upon a laddre / because they did possede an heritage unjustly
without being in will to restore it.lxxxii. a. Another example how that an
abbot sent again the money given and bequethed from his monasteri / because
that it was comen of vsurye / and ill begoten.lxxxviii. f.

A. Of symony that god defends.
AFter the masters symonye is in such wise dyffynyed. Simonia e^ studiosa
volu^tas eme^di vel veldendi spu^ale vel annexu^ spu^ali. A man commits
symonye for to selle / or to by a spyrytuall thing or a thing yt is annexed
unto the spyrytualyte by paccyon or gift / of promise / service / prayers /
supplicacyons undue / or by any other thing te^porell. God and nature
gaynsayeth yt a thing spyrytuell may be compared / or bought by thing
corporell and temporell of what pryse and dygnyte yt it be / as it shall be
declared here after. This sin is named somonye / for asmoche as in the time
of ye appostles the false and dysloyall simon magus offered a great so^me of
money unto ye appostles wenynge by yt to get the grace yt he saw in them /
and understood yt if he might have that geace yt he would selle it unto other /
and should recover much of fynau^ces. But in figure of all those yt sells or
byeth things spyrytuelles he and his money was cursed by the mouth of saint
peter / and because that he was the first in the new testament yt would by
thing spyrytuell / this espyce or kind of theft is named symonye in all holy
church because of ye cursed simon fygured of all the dampened symonyacques. For
to sell or to bye a thing spyrytuall a man should understand every paccyon or
contracte ye which is not made symply and purely for the love of god / but is
made pryncypally by gifts / prayers / seruyces / and for any other thing
temporel Also for to sell or to bye things spyrytuel it is here to understand
the grace of the holy ghost / and the virtues yt ben in the soul the spyryte
of prophecye / office of predycacyon / or to do the office dyuyne in the
church and to admynystre the holy sacraments. By things annexed unto the
spyrytualyte is to be understand sepultures / dismes / chalices / corporaces:
to welies / anbes / and other vessels / or vestementes hallowed the which may
be sold or changed unto other chirches not the more dete for as much as it
is hallowed other wise it should be symonye. Also cures / predendes / chanonryes
/ chapelles / right of patro^nayge in it self symply considered right to
receive dysmes / oblacyons because of benefyce of the church / auctoryte or
office to serve a cure or other predende of ye church / al these things have
annexacyon unto holy ordres and they ne may be boughtne sold after the form
beforsayd but yt there be symonye which is a crime capytall after the droitm
and compared unto heresye. vt habetur. i. can. q. i. Qui studet. Et thomas.
iii.iiii. By the which crime all holy ordeynaunce of ye church is perverted
and shall be from ill unto wors approchynge ye great and excessyue trybulacyon
of the chirch Thou shalt find many examples of symonye in the.vi.
commandment of the exemplayre.lxxxv. a. b. c. Quere. per tabula^.

B. Of ye manners of symonye that god defends. Ca. xxxiii.
IT is written actuu^.viii. ca. Pecunia tua tecu^sit in perditionem Saint peter
said unto Simon magus. Thy money be with ye in perdycyon. These words here
may be taken and also understand upon all symonyacques as it is before said.
but a man should understand that the sin of symonye is changed in to many
manners after the dyuersyte of the people the which entermell them unduly in
things in spyrytuell things / as hereafter so me in partyculer shall be
declared.

C. First a man the which receives ye holy ordres or the which enters in
any benefyce of the church in gyuynge or in promettynge by himself or by
other / gold or silver or any other thing is suspende by right written Extra
de symonia. tanta and. i. ca^. i. q. Reperiu^tur. And if in such estate he
mysbehaue him unto ye mysteres dyuynes he is irreguliere and may not be
assoylled if he ne resyne the benefyce / or if he have not dyspensacyon of the
pope. It is written iohannis.x. Quit non intrat per hostiu^ i^ ouile ouiu^ sed
ascendit aliunde: ille fur e^ and latro: qi aute^ intrat per hostiu^. i. xprem:
pastore e^ ouiu^. That is to understand / he which enters not by ye door /
yt is by Ihesu christ in to ye fold of sheep / yt is in ye church
ecclesiastical for to govern the people but enters by another place than by
ye doeyt is Ihesu christ he is a these secret or a watcher of the way.

D Secondly a clerk that makes paccyon with a man of the church or other for
to have his title in promising yt he shall never demand nothing for asmoche
as unto him suffyceth yt it may pass / he is pryued from the ordres yt he
receives in such manner yt none there may dyspence him but the pope after ye
droite. Extra de simonia per tuas.

E. Thyrdly two persons benefycyed ye which couuena^teth together under such
form (permute we benefyces) but for as much as your benefyce is better than
my ne I shall give you such a so^me of money This is here symonye. How be it yt
the one may make pensyon unto ye other without symonye. And if they make ye said
permutacyon symply without any thing demanding the one of the other / but they
make gifts or promesses unto ye patron for to grant his good will thereunto it
is also symonye. And if they say to each other in this wise for asmoche as we
may not permytte together without ye consent of ye bishop labor we both to
get his consent Such paccyon ne should be symonyacall if it were made symply
wtoute gift / and that ye said consentement were not gotten by manner of
symonye. Also to renounce unto any benefyce by such condycyon / and paccyon
made that it shall be given unto such a person it is symonye / when the
renouncyacyon is not made unto a person that is worthy to have it / and simply
and purely for the love of god. Legitur ioh. x. Ego sum ostium ouium per me si
quis introierit saluabitur et pascua inueniet. / Our lord Ihesus says. I am
the door of the sheep cote if any there enter by me he shall be saved and he
shall find pasture there within. Symonye is committed and done sometime as well
of the person that gives the benefyce as of him ye which receives it /
sometime of the one alonely / sometime ne by the one ne by the other / as if for
example some gives unto the famylyers of the bishop any thing for to moeue
him to give any benefyces. He the which knows nothing of that gift
nesemblably the bishop by the mean albeit of the which gift should be made
donnayson of the benefyce. Such donayson should be made symonyall / but
alonely he the which has made the donayson unto the famylyers of the bishop
shall be in mortal sin / and symonyer as unto that. And he that is benefyced
by such manner unknown should be bound when it should come unto his knowledge
to renounce unto ye said benefyce and to the other goods prese^tes of the same
/ but he is not bound to restore the goods dyspended during the time of the
poor conscience. For to know clearly when a man commytteth symonye in
permyttinge of benefyces / or when any renounceth unto his benefyce / or when
any gives a benefyce / or when any receives it. It behooves to se and to
consider the condycyons / the manners / and the causes / and if there ne be
gifts / ne promesses / ne prayers of lords or of friends. etc. Moreover it
behooves pryncypally to regard the fynall end to the which a man has
entencyon for to come. For if the condycyons and the fine be made purely for
the love of god he is well entered in the benefyce by the door. And if a man
enter otherwise in benefyce than by god / symonye is to be dredde For he is not
entered by the door.

F. Also for to know that it is great syn to sell a benefyce a man may it
clearly se in the example of hieroboam king / the which sold the
bysshopryches and dygnytes. And therefore god was wroth again him in so much
that he was degraded and unclothed him and his lygne / as it is w^^ten in
tertio regum.xiii. Quicunque vo^bat implebat manum hieroboam et fiebat sacerdos
excelsorum. etc. Quere. lxxxv. c.

G. Also men read in secundo machabeorum.iiii. how the king Anthyochus sold
unto Jason the dygnyte to be sovereign priest (that is bishop) and ill came
unto him. The prophet Ysaye says in his.v. chapter. Ve qui iustificatis
impium promuneribus et iustitiam iusti aufertis ab eo. Cursed be you the which
iustyfye ye ill by gifts / and take away the justice of the just. Those the
which enters in to benefyces unduly by the force and puyssaunce of princes
or great lords / or by menaces / murmures / or by their prayers and
supplycacyon / and not by the door the which is Ihesu christ ben thieves. For
for the dread puyssaunce or favor of ye said lords the good right is
corrupt / ye good ben expelled / and the unworthy beneficed and ill comes
unto them. We have an example in primo machabeoru^.vii. how cursed Alchymus was
constitute sovereign bishop of the king demetrius. The which did many of
ylles. Also the said Alchimus deyed cursedly / as it is written.i.
machabeoru^.ix. ca. This example is written after. Quere. lxxxv. h. Also some
enters in to benefyce unduly by flateryes / glosynges and decepcyons. And for
asmoche as they enter not by ye door / that is by Ihesu christ they ben theuys.
Also these bysshoppes and prelates the which pays their servants of their
salayres and seruyces by gyuynge unto them some benefyce or prebe^de / chapel
or dygnyte where it is so that the cause be for the payment / and not for the
love of god it is symonye. But it is written in droit canon / yt when a bishop
consydereth the prudence of his clerk / the dygnyte of his service / the
stremyte / holiness / and bo^unte of him / and yt he be of great merit. For the
goodness yt he sees and knows in him he should benefyce him in that church
and it is no symonye / but it is well done. For in the courts of prelates a
man should prouue the clerks. Also to ordeyne charity a man should give first
unto his famylyeres as unto strangers if they ben egally good.

H The people lay the which gives or prometteth or makes prayers and
supplicacyons indue for to benefyce their kynnesmen / servants or other their
friends / ben symonyackes and should be accursed / after that that saint Thomas
says and raymonde. Si quis auaritia ductus amore seruitio vel precibus
episcopalem vel sacerdotalem acceperit dignitatem: et i^ vita no^ relinquerit
eumque in asperam penitentiam mors no^ inuenerit ineternu^ peribit. i. q. i.
ca. Si quis. If any has taken ye dygnyte epyscopale or sacerdotale led by
auaryce / by love / service or prayers / and he ne has left it in his life /
and at ye death ne has found it in sharp penance he shall pay in
pardurablete. In gyuyng a benefyce unto one ye which is of his blood / albeit
there be no symonye for that / yt there is no sale / yet is there sin the
which is commit in three manners / or for asmoche that he loves tenderly his
flesh / or for that that he coueyteth to give a thing undue unto his
kynnesman / or for asmoche as he vylependeth the thing spyrytuell in gyuynge
it unto one indigne. And it seems that he should have therein symony if he
had the regard how his cosyn has the prouffyte temporal for the spyrytuall
/ in as much as cosyn / for he should receive a thing the which ne should be
due unto him. It is not the less symonye for to have the regard that his
kynnesman has the prouffite temporal but as if himself had it. When a man
gives a benefyce a man should behold whether the person unto whom ye gift
is made be worthy it. And that it be given symplye and purely tor the love of
god. We read math. x. How our lord said. Gratias date / the which is
expounded in two manners. Or when a man there puts no cause of sale / or when
a man has no regard in gyuynge but alonly god / or only grace. And therefore
he ye which gives unto his kinnesman ne gives in such wise / albeit yt god
has said / gratis date. Also who so will give unto his kynnesman without
symonye / it behooves that the person be worthy it. And that the gift be made
for the love of god purely / as it is said. Vt intret per ostium: id est
christum in ouile ouium. Our lord Ihesu christ gave the dygnyte and
government of the church unto saint peter and not unto saint Johan nor unto
his other parents / in gyuynge us example that in like wise should we do Also
when the appostles chose Mathyas and Joseph the just / to the end yt one of
them two were apostle in ye place of judas. Sors cecidit super mathiaz. For
Ioseth was of the parente of Ihesus. Legitur in secundo libro regum. quod
infidelis est episcopus qui nepotulo suo co^fert prelationem cum sciat enim
inabillem et sciat totum pondus prelii versum super prelatu^. That is to say.
The bisshoppe is unfaithful the which brings unto prelacyon / or dygnyte
his little neuewe when it is so that he knows that he is feeble to fight and
that he knows that all the country and the ruin of the battle tourneth on
the prelates. Example that a man ne should constytute any by prayers
charnelles. / Quere. lxxxv. f. Also god gives us example clearly that we ne
should lift up our parents in dygnyte spyrytuel if they be not worthy it.
Legitur mathei. xx. that when the wife of zebede aunt of Ihesus him prayed that
her two children / saint James and saint Johan cosyns of our lord that he
should make them sytte the one on his right hand and the other on his left
hand. The answer was. Nescitis quid petatis. They were unworthy to be set nere
by him. And therefore god said unto her ye wot not what ye demand. Marye ye
may well endure passion as I. But to set you on my right hand it is not unto
me to give it you: sed quibus paratu^ est a patre meo. That is unto them the
which ben dygne.

I. Fourthly those the which make paccyon to give certain so^me for to be
received in a monastery such wise rented yt it is suffycyent to sustain and
to puruaye as well those that there ben now as those yt they shall receive they
ben symonyacques And in like wise those ye which makes the said recepcyon /
or thereto give cou^sayl consentement / and there nys custom unto the contrary
the which may excuse ye sin.

K. Fyfthly the people of the church should admynystre the sacraments / and
the sepultures without making paccyon ne exaccyon of money / otherwise there
is symonye. But after yt they have done their deuoyre the lay people them
should content after the customs auncyentes or otherwise a man may make them
to come before the bishop after the droitz. Extra de symonia ad apostolicam.
The sacraments of the church ne should be sold / for that should be symonye.
Our lord it showed clearly unto his apostles when he said unto them Illud
math. x. Infirmos curate mortuos suscitate: leprosos: mundate: demones:
eiicite: gratis accepistis: gratis date. The gospel says. Hele ye the seek /
arayse ye the deed / hele ye the lepres chase away the deuylles / ye have
taken for nothing give you it for nothing. Also it is written. Administre ye
taking nothing for it the Eucharistie that is the sacrament of the altar
unto ye people / confess ye taking nothing / baptyse ye taking nothing /
give you unto all folk for nothing after the appostle. Vn^ augustinus dicit.
Gratis eucharistiam plebi ministrate: gratis: confitemini: gratis baptisate
secundum apostolum: cuntis gratis date.

L. When any priest sells or marchau^deth the masses or that he sing mass
for money and that the cause fynall of ye dylectacyon be to the end that he
have ye said money / it is symonye / and synneth mortally. Vnde augustinus.
Qui precise vna^ missam vel plures pro pecuniis celebrat da^nationem sibi
eternam preperat. He that syngeth a mass / or many for money he prepares
unto himself eternell dampnacyon. And it is here to be noted that ye things
temporelles ne should never be ye end of things spyrytuelles / but there ben
causes well mouynge. Vn^ hec est falsa: The priest is holden to give the
things spyrytuelles to the end that he have the things temporelles. Sed hec
est vera. The layeman is holden to give the things temporelles for the things
spyrytuelles / not in byenge them / for they should not be sold as it is said
in like wise as a man sells the flesh upon ye stalle. The grace of god the
which is in the sacrament is inapprecyable and it falls not under any price
/ For man has not thing whereof he it may bye / but for asmoche as the
servants of god ne may labor in things spyrytuelles without having their
living and sustentacyon / god will that a man unto them give some thing for to
live it hi^ they have done their deuoyre. Vnde pau. i. corinth. ix. Qui altario
deseruiu^t cum altario participa^t ita et dn^s ordinauit hiis qui euangelium
anunciant de euangelio viuere. They the which on the alter dysseruen shall be
parteyners of the altar / in such wise that god has ordained unto them the
which show the gospel / to live of the gospel / not that they shall selle
it / for that should be symonye as it is said

M. Syxtely mark well that no man lay ne should presume to do the office of
priests ye which ben in holy ordres / where if they do ill shall come unto
them as did unto the king ozyas. For after that he had coueyted and presumed
to do the office and that he had taken the ense^cer and encensed and menaced
the priests for ye that they gaynsayed him leperye him took in the vysage
within the house of god / etc. as it is written.ii. paralipo.xxvi. Quere. lxxxv.
g.

N. Seventhly a man ne should sell the yeftes of grace / ne the virtues the
which ben in ye soul / ne science / where that should be symonye. Augustinus
dicit. Spectat ad offirium vestre dignitatis gratie pete^tibus dona dare
gratis: sed si vnquam fidei munera vendatis incoursores giezi lepra^vos
sciatis. It belongs unto ye office of your dygnyte to give gifts for
nothing unto the demaundauntes of grace / but if ye sell in any wise the
gifts of faith knowledge you than unto the lepre of Gyezy. In likewise as
says saint austyn unto the mynystres of the church. Giezie was the dyscyple
of Helyseus / ye which took a great gift of the rich man Naaman for yt that
his master had heled him of his leprye: And therefore the said prophet
Helysyus said unto giezi. Lepram naaman adherat tibi et semini tuo. The leprye
of Naaman shall be brought unto the and unto thy sede. In like wise was it
done as it is written in quarto regum.v. ca. For he had received gift of the
grace of the holy ghost. Quere post.lxxxv. b.

O. A questyon to understand if an advocate may sell the science of the just
cause that he demeneth. The answer. He ne should selle the science / but he
may selle ye great labor and trauayll of his body yt he takes to study to
plede and to defend ye just cause. For god says in the gospel that ye
werkman is worthy of his mete and of his hyre. Mathei. x. Dignus est eni^
operarius cibo suo. Et luce. x. Dignus est enim operarius mercede sua. But if
ye said advocate sold the science by manner of sale / or that he had in his
thought the entencyon to selle it he should be symonyacke before god. It is
written prouerbiorum.xxiii. Veritatem eme et noli vendere sapientiam et
doctrinam et intelligenciam. etc. Be ye true and sell not wysdom doctrine and
intellygence. Also the science sold noyeth as it is said. and if it be given
it grows and also multeplyeth. / And if it be hid it serves of nothing /
Vnde scientia que data est crescit: crescere nescit si taceatur. Et legitur
ecclesi. xx. Sapientia absconsa est et thesaurus inuisus: que vtilitas in
vtrisque. Sequitur Melior est qui celat insapientiam suam / quam homo qui
abscondit sapientiam suam. Sapyence hid is a treasoure where a man sees not
what prouffyte is in ye one and in the other. Better is he the which hydeth
his vnwysdome than the man ye which hydeth his sapyence. Et legitur eccle.
iiii. Non abscondas sapientiam tuam in decore eius: in lingua enim agnoscitur
sapientia: et sensus et scientia et doctrina in verbo sensati. Thou shalt not
hyde thy wisdom in his honor / certainly wisdom is known in the tongue /
and the wit and the science and the doctrine in ye eloquence and word of
wisdom. An advocate ought be verytably and to sustain veryte. Also he ought
to keep and defend ye just cause that it perysshe not. And afterward he may
take gift for the trauayl of his body as it is said without to excede the
bounds of reason as many done ye which demand and take salayres and gifts
outrageously / more than they ne should / and that they ne have deserved to
have. And therefore they should dread damnacyon / for they ne ben just and
accomplysshe not justice in themself to be in will to have that thing yt they
have not wo^ne and the which ne apperteyneth unto the^ Also they should dread
if they have hated and broken Justice / judgment / ye good cause and ye good
right to receive yertes. For they sin mortally and run in maladyccyon. Vnde
ysaie.v. Vequi iusiti^icatis impium pro muneribus: et iustitiam iusti aufertis
abeo. Also they should dread if they have no will to lead / to cou^sayll to
keep the causes of the poores / as they done those of the rich / for that yt
they have no goods to give unto them. It is written eccle. In iudicando esto
pupulis / misericors vt pater et eris iu velut altissimi fi^ius obediens et
miserebitur tui. In judgment be thou merciful unto the orphelyns in like wise
as a fader and thou shall be obedyent. And also as the sone of the right hye
god / and he shall have mercy on the. Also if these advocates have made the
ylle causes good by their cautelles / malyces and subtyltees / and makes to
lose the good right they sin and ben unjust and corrupters of justice. And
if they have nourysshed / defended and sustained of certain science to be
good. It is great sin without doubt for to sustain dysloyalte / ill and
iniustyce. And in so doing the advocate yeldeth hyms^^^ culpable / and
brings himself in with malefactoure. By the which he is dyg^^ of punycyon
and synneth mortally. Vnde paulus ad roma. i Non solum qui fac^^ peccata: sed
qui consentiu^t facientibus d^gnisunt morte. Not alonely those the which do
the sins / but those the which also consents unto the doers / ben worth^
of death. Those synneth mortally / how be it that a man ne should understand
that ye said advocates co^mytteth symonye. etc Example how the devil bare away
in body and in soul a cursed coueytous these advocate. Quere.lxxxi. e. Another
examble of an advocate insacyable the which led a cause unto a man ye which
ne did bring unto him money unto his appetyte and he wronged him and took
the process and brake of the lectres / and trod upon it by dyspite in saying.
Vyllayn there is thy process the which ne broughte^^ me but this. The good
man in wepyng^ excused him by pouerte. But to be shor^^ anon after the
advocate deyed myscheuously. Also the master of a scole ne should sell the
science but the labor that he takes of his body. And in like wise of other
semblables. Quia omnis operarius dignus est mercede iua: vt dictum est. Also ye
prechers ne should selle the science that they speak in prechynge for the cause
fynall to have the gain temporal / or in like wise for to have favor
humayne or for vaynglorye / and not for charity and reconsylyacyon of the poor
sinners / commyt^^ symonye. But for as much as they have had pain corporal
for to study / to preche and to walk they may take that that men and women
unto them give for the sustentacyon of their living. Quia de^ ordinauit his
qui euangelium anuncta^ de euangelio viuere. Vt dicitur.i. corinth. Et augu.
dicit. Non debimus eua^gelizare vt vt uamus: sed viuere vt eua^gelizemus. We
should not preche the gospel to the end that we lyuen / but to live to the end
yt we preche. Also we should preche to the end that the reward of predicacyon
be not the mete the which is appetyted and desired / but the thing necessary
the which follows / that is sustentacion unto ye temporalytes the which is
requysyte unto a precher. Item augu. Euangelizare debemus vt non sit merces
predicationis cibus qi appetitur: sed necessariu^ quod seqitur id est
substantatio in temporalibus que necessaria est predicatori. Also those clerks
that lets to preche / to show / to reprehende / and to correct the vices
for any favors / or for false love / or for dread / or for any other thing
mutyle / and also hold their peace to se and to here ye ill. The prophet ysaye
them calls dogs not willing to bark / that is to preche. Vnde ysaie. lvi.
Caves muti non valentes letrare. Sequitur Oe^s in via^ sua^ declinaueru^t
vnusquisque ad auaritia^ sua^ a su^movsque ad nouissimu^ etc. A dog the
which bayeth not for to sustain his master is not good unto hy^ no more is a
precher unto god the which is dombe to sustain veryte. And therefore he is
called dog. Et legitur ihere.iiii. Sapientes sunt vt faciant mala / been
autem facere nescierunt. They ben wise to do ill but not to do good. Example in
the gospel of him the which hid ye talent he was called an ill servant and
a slothful / and was commanded that men should take away from him the
talente. Vnde math. xxv. Auferte ab ille talentu^. And for asmoche as the
haboundaunce of the derkenes of sin has ouerclouded the veryte of the
commandments of god in ye more part of the christian people living at this
day. No man ne should suffyse to write in partyculer the cautellous decepcyon
of this condampned sin of symonye. But these things spoken here shortly
justifies unto people of good conscience to make them inquire more plainly
after the occasyons and diverse maneres the which unto them may in this
thing come upon or happen. etc. More over people symony acques should dread
maledyccyon and excommunycacyon. Also they should dread irregularyte the which
shall not be declared because of shortenes. Also they should dread to be found
in ye judgment before god Also they should dread to lose the joys of paradyse.
Also they should dread punycyo^ and dampnacyon. Example of a man dampened ye
which had many benefyces. etc. Quere.lxxxv. e. Another example how few of
curates ben saved. Quere. lvi. g. Also they should dread to be sent for to
abide in the fire of hell perpetually. Those the which has offended by
symonye / run they unto penance and they shall have grace and mercy. etc.
Also do they of almesdedes for that is a good remedy.

A. Of restytucyon that god commands. Ca. xxxiiii.
IT is written in the.xxii. chapitre of the gospelles of saint matheu Reddite q^
su^t cesaris cesari: et que su^t dei deo. Yield those things the which ben of
caesar / the which ye have taken unjustly / yield the^ unto caesar / yt is to
understand to the lord temporal / unto whom they appertey^ and the things
ye appertain to god / yield them unto him. To make restytucyon it is necessary
for to come unto paradyse. and for to know clearly ye matter of restituco^n we
shall ordeyne it in five questyons. Prima wherefore a man ought to make
restytucyon. Secunda what he is yt ought to make restytucyon. Tertia unto
whom a man should make restitucyon. Quarta what thing a man should restore.
Qui^ta / when a man should make restytucyon as unto the first questyon the
which is.

B. Wherefore a man should make restitucyon. Ca. xxxiiii.
MAn reasonable know thou yt it is requysyte to make restytucyon. For asmoche
as it is so that to take from another again reason and justice it is mortal
sin. In like wise to have a steadfast will to witholde from another when a
man it may and ought to restore it is mortal sin / ne a man may not be
assoylled by any auctoryte during such ordinance of will. It is written in
droit. xiiii. q. vi. c. Sires. No^ dimittitur pectatu^ nisi restituatur
ablatu^. The syn is not forgyuen if ye thing taken away be not restored. And
saint Thomas says scda^ scde. q. lxii. ar. viii. Who so ever lets another
unjustly in the usage of the thing ye which unto him apperteyneth / he
trespasseth the commandment of charity / and is holden to restitucion.
Quilibet tenetur ad restitutione^ cuilibet rei subtracte. Every man is holden
unto restitucyon. Et i^ decre. Infereus da^nu^ prooxi^o no^ e^ absolua^dus nisi
da^no prius scdm^ arbitriu^ lesi restituto. He yt bry^geth in do^mage to his
neighbor ne should not be assoylled if ye do^mage were not restored to hy^.
Que. xiii. q. vi. c. Co^perimus. And saint thomas scda^ scde^. ii. q. dicit.
quod falsus testis peccat mortalitur: and tenetur ad restitutione^ da^ni quoth
alius i^currit. I falls wytnes sins mortally / and is holden unto
restitution. In like wise as you may se in many examples written in ye.vi.
commandment of thexemplayre q^. lxxxviii. a b. c. d.

C. The second question demanded.
WHat is he yt ought to restore. The answer. It is he that in cause by one or
many of manners ye which follows where any is put from his thing That is to
know either by commandment expres / or by counsayll given / or by fault
vycyous for to give it / or by consentement / or by adulacion. For to defend
or to sustain / ye endo^mages / or by hydynde or reteynynge in his keeping the
thing of another / or ye which gives effors / aid / or refuge unto ye wrong
doers / or will not say the truth in judgment / or in other place whereby
restytucyon might be made or the which ne gives unto the endo^mages / aid /
cou^sayll or defense yt apperteyneth to his office. All these manner of people
ben called generally / fauourables / parteners / or conse^ters. And when such
manner of favor or of conte^nement is such yt it is the cause of the do^mage
so happened / every of ye aforsayd is holden unto restytucyon / notwtstandynge
yt he has received but certain party or all holly any thing. But when they
ben many in cause of do^mage if one restore all holly as he is bound he
dyschargeth al ye other anen^^ the party endo^maged / but every of ye
parteners unto him is bounden prorata / yt is to understand in the so^me the
which unto him apperteyneth / where otherwise he shall not be dyscharged.

D. The third questyon demanded.
WHat thing should a man restore. The answer. The propre thing ill witholden
or his valor unto ye gre of the party. And with that ye fruytes of the same /
if it be a thing the which of it self dereth fruit. But costs myses and
dyspence made for to estyme the said fruytes should be first rebated and
compted unto the said restituant. Also a man should make satysfaccyon plainly
unto ye party endo^maged of the do^mages and lettynges / because of his thing
ylle witholden. For right reason it requires.

E. The.iiii. question demanded. xxxiiii.
Unto whom a man should make restytucyon. The answer. Unto him the which is
endo^maged if he be present / or unto his propre heir if he be deed or if he
were so far of that the dyspence should be more great for to go toward hy^
or in many places thanne the restytucyon should amount / or yt a man has not
the knowledge of them unto whom restytucyon should be made. Than a man should
give unto the poor for the spryrytuell well of him or of those unto whom may
apperteyne the said restytucyon. For as says saint thomas. These poor ben
very heirs in such case. Vn^ tho. i^. iiii. se^ten. Qn^ incertus est dn^s
rerum ablataru^ tu^c pauperes su^tillaru^ heredes. Some has wylled to say yt
such restytucyon should be made by the dysposycyon of ye bisshoppes diocesai^s
but reverence kept it is not found by words expres in any droit written. And
therefore in like wise as says the scot when dyuyne law or law of the
church ne binds us to do any thing determynetly / a man should follow
naturell reason ye which is in this matere present us tells yt by his good
and dyscrete confessor or other man of reason or by himself a man make the
said restytucyon anenst the poores The scripture says that the droit posytyf
in place there where it dyffreth not as in droit natural. Ibieni^ ius positiuu^
locu^ hm vbi nichil differt quamtum ad ius natural vnu^ sic vel aliter fiat.
Thomas scda^ sce^. q lx. articulo primo ad primu^.

F The.v. questyon demanded. xxxiiii.
When a man should make restytucyon unto onye. The answer. / It should be made
incontinent and without any taryenge as unto the will. For in like wise as he
the which is in sin mortal should repent him incontinent / and to purpose to
make confession when place and time. In like wise he ye which takes from
another should have a will pressed that as soon as he may goodly he it shall
restore entyerlye. A man may dyffer by some time the execucyon for to restore
that is to understand yt he unto whom he ought to make restytucyon will well
/ or should will by right and just reason that restitucyon were dyfferred for
a more great good. As for example. If a man of arms has dystressed a
merchant of the so^me of a thousand crowns / or gives commandment / aid
/ favor / counsayll / or comfort yt to do after the form before declared.
The which fynau^ce he ne may restore if he ne sell horse and harneys. Whereby he
shall be vnprouffytable unto the service of the king for the well of the
realm in such case or semblables. The merchant should more sooner be in will
that ye said man of arms dyfferre for a time restytucyon to be made unto him
than yt he should yield the man vnprouffytable so For as men say and it is very
true by the defaute of a nail a man leseth a sho / by a sho an horse / by a
horse a man / by a man a battle / by a battle a realm. And for as much as
the merchant will not content him but that restytucyon be unto him redely made
/ yet it shall not follow that the other were not absoylled / and in the estate
of grace by the dyspleasaunce of his sin and good purpose to restore in time
and place

G. By these things before spoken of restytucyon a man may well know that
lords and officers the which know to have servants and subgectes the
which pylleth the small people / whom men dare not to make them restore for
dread of ye said lords and officers / yet they ben bound to restore. Saint
Austyn says. When Justice is exclused and taken away great lords ben
excessyue pyllers. Remota iustitia qid su^t magna regna nisi magna latrocinia.
vn^ dicit augustinus in quarto libro de ciuitate dei. Those the which have
found any goods apperteynynge unto another also should curyouslye inquire
unto whom they may apperteyn / and if they ne may find him / they may retayn
such thing for a time and long enough with such conscience that always
when that they know unto whom it apperteyneth they it shall restore. Those the
which by things yt have been stolen / rauysshed / or else taken away where
unto ye seller has no right synneth mortally / if they have not entencyon to
bye them for to restore them unto whom they apperteyne / And notwithstondinge
that they have suffycyently given the valor also they ben bound to restore
them unto them to whom such things apperteyneth. Those ye which by hontynge
or haukynge endommage the corns ye vynes and other labourages / or that their
dogs strau^gle a sheep geese or other besty all be holden unto restytucyon if
the grefe be not so light that it should seem very semblable how the laborers
it bears gracyously. He the which malycyously hurts another in his body
whereby he leseth his iourneyes or is mutyle of any of his members he is holden
to pay the barbers / and also to save harmeles of iniurye and of the iourneys.
And he ye which should put to death any man which has to nourysshe or to
susteyn fader or mother / and children over the penance sacramental should be
bound to puruay al these beforsayd if it unto him be possible And for asmoche
as such restytucyon is right hard to estyme it should be expedyent for the
salvation of the soul of such homycyde to bear pacyently and wyllyngly in
justice the pain of tallyon that should be to endure death / or to go to
dyspose his life for him that he has slain / and for the law of Ihesu
christ. The scot reproves them the which absoylleth sometime more lightly an
homycyde than they ne should him ye which malycyously has slain his
neighbors dog. He the which malycyously lets any to come unto benefyce /
or office / or other good he is holden to restore not egally as much great
good as is the good in such wise let / but after the estymacyon of some of
good conscience or by himself. Four cas follows without gyuynge diffynyte.
The first is of them yt reysen in their herytages of new douuehouses / or
warennes / unto ye great preiudise of his neighbors. The second case is of
them the which wynneth great fynaunces in plays defended as of cards / dyse
/ and other plays of fortune. The third is of ye woman married the which
conceyueth lygnee of another than of her husband. The fourth is of them the
which by the vice of detraccyon takes away the good renomme of their brother
crystyen. Legitur prouerbiorum. xxiiii. Cum detractaribus non co^miscearis:
quoniam repent consurget perditio eorum vbi glosa dicit hoc vitio fore totum
humanum genus damnatur. These before said may in their conscyences by good
counsayll other than by ye shortness of this present treatise the which ne may
bear ye explycacyon than should be necessary in ye dyffyculte of such case and
of other ye which may come upon. Of the which is not here made mencyon.
Examples of restitucyon. And first of a man named Fredrycus tormented in
purgatory for that that he had not restored tho things ill
begoten.lxxxviii. a. Another example of a child in purgatory by defaute to
restore money borrowed.lxxxviii. b. Other examples of restytucyon in the.vi.
commandment of the exemplayre. Quere par tabulam.lxxxviii. c. d. e.

A. Here follows the.vii. commandment of god the which treats of lecherye
that a man co^mytteth in operacyon.
Keep the from lecherye and thoughts ill
Mysuse not thy body with wife ne maid
In this good mind be thou ever still
Be she never so nycely arayde
IN the ancient testament is written this commandment. exodi. xx. ca. And in
the new. math: v. et luce: xviii. Non mechaberis. Thou ne shalt do aduoutrye
/ or rybaudrye where if thou do ill shall come unto the if thou deye wtoute
correccyon and amendment. In like wise as thou shall find here after by many
examples. Quere.lxxxxii. a. b. All lecherye that a man co^mytteth in operacyon
is defended by this commandment. That is to understand fornycacyon /
aduoutrye / defloracyon / incest / sodomye. And al these other branches and
manners the which shameless people commytten. Whereof speaks ysydore the which
says. Nulla libidine poluaris si ne maculeris. Thou shalt not be polluted or
soylled by any lecherye. Et paulus dicit ad roma. xiii. Non incubilibus and
impudiciis non in contentione et emulatione: sed induamini dominu^ nostrum
thesum christum et carnis curam ne feceritis in desideriis. Not in beds and
shameful things / not in strife and in envy / but clothe ye our lord Ihesu
christ and make ye not the desires of the flesh.

B. Of fornycacyon that god defends ca. xxxv.
Saint poule says in ye.vi. chapitre of his first pystyl unto the
cori^thiens. Fugite fornicatione^. Fle fornycacyon / for god it defends.
Fornycacyon generally taken comprehends all these lecheryes that a man
co^mytteth in operacyon / and that the which is taken here in partyculer is
when those yt commit lecherye ne be in marriage / of affynyte / of gossiprede /
or under other line and enhabyteth vnlefully / It is great mortal sin to
know ye concubynes and the sclau^dre yt thereof proceeds It is a more great
sin to go unto wedowes / and they lose their honor / and the syn is right
great and infame to goo to those that been common / for they ben foul vile and
stynkynge which receive all people / and some are married which is aduoutrye.
etc The stewys or brodelhouse of the said co^munes ben taken from the laws
cyuyles in some co^munytes for to eschew and avoid a more great ill. But it
is not to be understand that god ne punyssheth the syn by eternell dampnacyon.
Vn^ psalm. Perdedisti omnes qui fornicator abs te. Thou haste lost from the al
those the which do fornycacyon. And a man should well know that the man the
which has company carnell of a woman is of affinite of all the consanguynes
that is of all the parents of the woman in that degree of affynite the which
apperteyneth unto the said woman in consanguynyte For the systers of the said
woman ben his systers / and the germayns his germayns / and so of other
degrees. And a like thing is it of the woman in regard of the parents of ye
man with whom she has committed lecherye And if that afterward the one or
ye other abandone them with any of the said parents and affynes under the.v.
degree he should committee inceste the which is a case reserved unto the
bishop. Legitur.i. corin. vi. Qui adheret meretricivnu^ corpus efficitur.
Sequitur eru^t duo in carne vna He the which draws unto a strompet is made
one body / two shall be in one flesh.

C. This fornycacyon is to fle for many things. The first is for that that
those yt committee it go again the commandment of god / whereof speaks ye
scryptures. Vn^. pau. i. co. vi. Fugite fornicatione^. seqitur. Qui aute^
fornicatur i^ corpus suu^ peccat. Fle fornication. He yt co^mytteth fornycacyon
/ synneth in his body. And again he says in the.v. chapitre of ye ephesyens.
Fornycacyon ne none immundycyte or auaryce be named in you / in likewise as it
apperteyneth unto saints. Et le. i. co. vii. Propter fornicatione^ euita^de^
vnusque vxore^ sua^ habeat and vna^quamque suum viru^. That is to say every
man has his wife for to fle fornycacyon / and every woman has her husband.
Also fornycacyon dyspleaseth unto god for those ye which it co^mytteth fyleth
his temple / yt is the conscyens of persons the which is the place yt he
has chose for hy^ to rest in. Vn^. i. ad co. iii. Te^plu^ dei estis and spu^s
dn^i habitat i^ vobis. That is to say ye be ye temple of god / and the spyryte
of our lord habyteth in you. and sequitur. Si qis au^t templu^ dei violauerit
disperdet illu^ deus. Empti estis precio magno: glorificate portate deu^ i^
corpore suo. If any has fyled ye temple of god / god shall destroy him / ye
be bought by a great price / gloryfye ye and bear ye god in your bodies.

D. Secondly fornycacyon is to flee for that yt it displeases unto ye
au^gelles of paradyse whereof we read. Example in ye life of the faders of an
angel yt as he walked with a man by the will of god when they met a lecherous
man well clothed / ye said angel stopped his nose / and he stopped it not
afterward when they met a great carayne so stynkynge yt a man ne might
approach unto it. And yielded ye cause and said yt for ye lecherye of ye said
young man he had stopped his nose. For lechery is more stynkynge before god
than all other infeccyons. Also lecherye dyspleaseth much unto the aungel the
which has the commyssyon of god to keep us and to counsayll as in his
presence the horror and abhomynacyon of sin is done in forsakynge his
counsayll and admonycyon. Legitur in psalm. Angelis suis deus mandauit de te vt
custodiant te in oi^bus viis tuis. God has sent his aungelles unto the that
they keep the in all thy ways. And therefore wha^ the judgment shall come of
the said lecherous man the said angel shall wytnes again him yt he would not
obey unto hy^

E. Thyrdly fornycacyon is to flee for yt that it pleases unto the devil. For
lecherye is so strong a line by the which ye devil holds these harlottes
that with great pain may they escape / whereof it is written osee.v. Non dabunt
cogitationes suas: vt reuertantur ad dn^m deu^ suu^: quia spiritus
fornicationu^ in medio eorum est. These lecherous people ne should give their
thoughts that they retornen unto their lord god / for the spyrytes of
fornicacyon ben in the myddle of them. Also a man bestyall apperceyueth not the
things the which ben of god. Vn^ legitur. i. co. ii. quod ai^alis ho^ non
percipit ea que sunt spiritus dei. Example of him yt excused him to goo to the
souper when he was boden. Vn^ luce.xiiii. Vxore^ duci et ideo no^ possu^
venire. The lechery the^ holds so strongli and byndeth yt they ne may think
on god ne leave yt sin / as afterward more play^ly shall be declared.
Quere.xliiii. f. Also lechery pleases unto the devil / for by it he wynneth
two persons at a time ye which thing he does not of other sins: it is a
stroke the which is worth two as ye hazardours he wynneth the man and the
woman by the said sin.

F. Fourthly fornycacyon is to flee for yt that it noyeth in many of maneres
unto those that it co^mytteth. First they lose the Joys of paradyse as says
the scriptures. Vn^. pau. i. co. vi. Nolita errare: qia neque fornicarii neque
ydolis seruie^tes: neque adulteri: neque moles: neque masculoru^ concubitores.
etc. regnu^ dei possidebu^t. Err ye not for the fornycatours / ne the
servants unto ydoles / ne these aduoultres / ne those the which commits
the sin of sodomye with masles. etc. ne shall possede the realm of god. And
he says.v. ca. ad gal. That the operacyons of ye flesh ben manifest the
which ben fornycacyon / uncleanness / vnchastyte / and lecherye / and it
follows / those yt do so shall not have paradyse and he says ad ephe. v.
Scitote i^telligentes qm^ oi^s fornicator: aut i^mundus: aut auarus quode^
ydolorum seruitus no^ habet hereditate^ in regno christi. That is to say
understand you that every fornycatoure / or unclean / or auarycyous the which
is seruytude of ydoles has not of heritage in ye realm of Ihesu christ. Also
these fornycatoures leseth god and the company of au^gelles / and all the
saints of heaven / and of all the things celestyall / and spyrytuall / they
lose their good reno^me their virtues and good operacyons / if they deye
impenytentes they lose the joy / the hele and the health of the soul. Also by
lecherye they feeble their bodies / engendre sekenes / corrupt the their blood
/ shorteth their life / they less their rychesses and their temporell gods
they chase away sapyence / science / and the gifts of the holy ghost / they
assocyate with deuylles with all maledyccyon / and with the dampened of perdicyon
/ they put their souls in great myserye and dystresse / they bind their
souls to death of dampnacyon eternell / and to be in the fire and in the
pains of hell without any remyssyon / if they in such wise deye without
contrycyon confession and satysfaccyon. Vn^ ysodorus. Ad penas tartari hominem
libido perducit. Lecherye bring a man unto the pains of hell. Example. It is
written in the second book of kings that Abner knew the concubynes of his
fader Hysboreth and within a little time after both twain were slain. Also
the prodygal man of whom it is written luce.xv. Who so dyspendeth and uses
his substance in lyuinge lecherously yeueth example that lecherye dymynyssheth
the richesse and the gods of the meschaunt fornycatoure / for it is given unto
harlottes and nouryture / And he lives delycyously while he has whereof. Also
the fornycatour makes gifts unto promoters / offycyalles / deanes / and
pays a great amends and loses to gain for the occasyons of his lechery.
etc.

A. Of aduoutrye that god defends. Capitulo. xxxvi.
NOn adulterabis. Thou shall not commit of rybauldyse. Aduoutrye is committed
when ye one of the parties / or both twain ben in ye line of marriage / and
they committee lecherye with another than with their party / and it is said
aduoutre quasi ad alterius thoru^ te^dere. vn^ marci. x. and math. xix.
Quicu^que dimiserit vxore^ sua^: and alia^ duxerit adulteriu^ co^mittit super
ea^. Et si vxor dimiserit viru^ suu^: and alii nupserit mechatur. It is to
know that men find by writing yt seven mortal sins may follow in
brekynge his marriage. The first sin is fraccyon of ye commandment of god in
two places. / That is coueyte not the wife of thy neighbor. exodi. xx. Non
concupisces vxorem proximi tui. And do thou not the sin in operacyon mathei.
v. Non machaberis. The second sin is pariurye / for those yt breketh their
marriage transgresses ye faith yt they have received in baptysme and promised
unto their party solemply in the face of the church before their priest and
friends / the which is a great sin as to break ye christian faith. For it is
written ad hebreos.xi. Quod sine fide i^possibile e^ placere deo. It is
impossyble to please god without faith. and ye faith of a person is nothy^ge
worth without doing ye operacyons as it is written iacobi.ii. Sicut eni^ corpus
sine spu^ mortuu^ e^: ita and fides sine operibus mor tua est i^ semetipsa. In
like wise as ye body is deed when it has no spyrite. In like wise the faith
is deed without operacyons. Those yt breketh ye faith given in marriage ne
believe well in god / by faith operant wherefore they shall be condampned in to
hell if they deye impenytentes The third is lyenge and infydelyte / for those
yt breketh their marriage show them to be liars and infydeles to break the
loyalte of the body and of the goods that they have promised to keep the one
with ye other the which is a great sin much to be blamed. For it is
written.iiii. ethicoru^ quodoe^ me^datiu^ prauu^ e^et fugie^du^ and sequitur.
Verax e^ laudandus / me^dax vero vituperandus Every lie or lesynge is ill and
to be fled / and it follows yt ye true man is to be praised and the liar to
be shamed. Et legitur pro.xxviii. Vir fidelis multu^ laudabitur. The man yt
keeps loyalte on his party shall be much lauded and praised before god and
the world / and shall have retrybucyon in like wise as it is written math.xxvi.
Euge serve bone et fidelis qia super pauca ^uisti fidelis supra multa te
constitua^ itra i^ gaudium di^u tui. O good and faithful servant enjoy ye
for thou haste ben faithful of a little thing. I shall ordeyne the above a
great thing / enter in to the joy of thy lord And unto the contrary the
person a liar and infydele shall be dyffamed before god and the world as we
read de villece. luce.xvi. Qui di^ famatus est apud dn^m suu^ quasi dissipasset
bona ipsius. And there follows damnacyon unto those which deye impenitentes.
The.iiii. sin is theft the which is when any man does unto his neighbor
theuysshely / fraud / nuysaunce / treson / and decepcyon secretly and
hydyngely again his will and it is done in such wise also when any is gyltye
on his party hydyngly and takes possessyon and saysyne of the body and of ye
flesh the which unto him is united by the sacrament of marriage / and the
which unto him is given and granted of god and of the church / whereof it is
written. gen^. ii. and math. xix. Proptur hoc relinquet homo patre^ et matre and
adherebit vxori sue and erunt duo in carne vna. That is to understand a man
shall leave fader and mother for marriage / and to draw him to his wife / and
they shall be two in one flesh / also they be not two / but one flesh. The
thing yt god has comoincte man shall not depart it. Vnde. marci. x. Itaque
ia^ non sunt duo: sed vna caro quos deus conuinxit homo non separet. Et legitur
primo. corinth. vii. Mulier non habet potestate^ sui corporis sed vir:
similiter virno^ habet potestate^ sui corporis sed mulier The woman has no
power of her body / but the man. In likewise the man has no puyssau^ce of his
body / but the woman For if the one or the other be prycked / or tempted of the
flesh they should obey ye one unto ye other for to fle sin. etc. Since that
the people married ne ben but one self flesh as it is said and that the one is
not master of his body / but it is the puysaunce of the other. It behooves to
say yt auoutrye is a great sin when the harlot steleth from him fraudelently
the thing the which unto him apperteyneth again ye commandment of god. Vnde
leui. xix. Non facies furtum. Thou ne shall do of theft ne of fraud unto thy
neighbor. vn^ mar. x. Ne fraude^ feceris proximo tuo. Also it is great sin
unto ye harlot to do unto his neighbor that thing yt he ne would unto
himself to be done. Vn^ ysodorus Quod no^ vis pati no^ facias: Saint poule
says: quod fures and latrones: regnu^ dei non possidebu^t. That is to say yt
convert theuys and watches of ways shall not possede the realm of god if they
deye impenytentes. etc. The.v. sin is sacrylege ye which is committee when
that a man hurts soylleth or violateth the holy things / or when a man them
steleth. In like wise does the harlot the which hurts / soylleth or
vyolateth marriage the which is a holy thing when he co^mytteth ye stenche and
fylth of lecherye in good and lawful marriage. Who so puts under ye fete of
hogs the sacrament of the altar / the corporaces or any holy thing to
the end yt they were soylled and hurt much he should sy^ne Legitur math. vii.
Nolite sanctu^ dare canibus: neque mittatis margaritas ante por. cos: ne forte
conculcent eas pedibus suis. Ne give you not holy things unto dogs / and put
ye not margaretes before the tete of the hogs yt they ne soylle them with
their fete. In like wise is it to hurt and to soil the holy sacrament of
marriage in the stynche of lecherye the which is more foul than donge ne
dyrte. Vn^ legitur eccle. ix. quod oi^s mulier q^ est fornicatoria q^si stercus
in via ab oi^bus pretereu^tibus conculcabitur. Every woman the which is a
fornycatoure shall be soylled in like wise as a torde in the way. Marriage is
an estate of great auctoryte the which should be treated and may^teyned
holyly / for god it establysshed in paradyse terrestre in the estate of
innocence before that man had ever sinned. And therefore a man it should holyly
keep for the reason of god ye which it establysshed and of the place where it
was establysshed. And after it is an estate of great dygnyte. For god would be
borne of a woman married / that was of ye blyssed vyrgyn Marye. etc. The.vi.
sin the which also may follow is incest ye which is a man to know his
kynneswoman / or a woman her kynnesman carnally as done these dogs. For if ye
harlot engendre a daughter on the wife of his neighbor it is possible that one
of his sons marye with ye daughter the which is his own sister ygnorantly /
for he knows nothing / or parauenture has her company as with a harlot
wenynge that she were nothing to him / so should it be inceste ye which is
the sin of a dog or hounde. The vii. sin is dysherytynge of their own
heirs when lygnee follows. For when the harlot engenders a child on the wife
of his neighbor / the said child shall possede the heritage wherein he has
nothing / and the true heirs shall be dysheryted and put out. The poor man
fraulded the which weneth to get for his children is spended and wasted. For
aduoutrers shall possede his goods and herytages ye which is so great a case
hard it is to find therein remedy and it to counsayll well that ye most sage
clerks therein ben excessyuely let. For all maladyccyon / dyffame /
dampnacion / and perdicion follows as well unto harlottes / rybauldes men and
women the which have committed the sin as unto the children aduoultres the
which be seized of the said goods and herytages wherein they have nothy^ge /
so nothing will they do for that / yt their mother was in lain of marriage when
they were begoten and born It is written eccle. xxiii. Mulier oi^s relinque^s
vitu^ suu^ and statue^s hereditate^ ex alieno matrimonio i^ lege altissimi
i^credebilis fuit viru^ suu^ dereli^quit i^ adulterio fornicata est et ex alio
viro filios statuit sibi. No^ trade^t filii eius radices / et rami eius non
dabunt fructu^ dereli^que^t i^ maledictu^ memoria^ eius and dedecus illius no^
delebitur. That is to say. Every woman leuynge her husband and establysshynge
ye heritage of a strange marriage has be incredyble in ye law of god / she
has left her husband / she has commit fornycacyon in aduoultre / and she
has taken a sone of another husband, her sons ne shall take rote and the
bow^s ne shall give of fruit. They shall leave the memory of her in malediccyon
and the dishonor of her shall not be es^aced. Et l^. pro vi. Qui au^t adultur
e^prodet ai^am sua^ turpuu dine and ignominia^ congregat sibi / and opprebrium
illius no^ delebitur. That is to say / he yt is a rybaulde shall lose his soul
/ his good fame and his reproach shall not be done away if he deye
impenytente. Also he yt co^mytteth aduoutre has maledyccyon in like wise as
it is written deute. xxvii. Maledictus q^ dormit cu^ vxore proximi sui: and
dicit oi^s populus ame^. Note well yt the sy^ne of aduoutre noyeth in.ix.
manners unto those yt it co^mytteth. Que. p. ad nu. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k.

B. Examples we read tertu regum. xi. how salamon was a much harlot and loved
women strange ye which unto him were defended of god. And therefore his realm
was divided after his death in two parties / and his sone had much trouble for
hy^.

C. Also men find in writing in the ancient testamente of an aduouterer a
much harlot named judas / not he ye which sold our lord Ihesus / the which
as he yode to commit the said aduoutre in the presence of his wife / ye earth
opend under him and he fell in to depnes all clothed. Another example of a
woman married the which used her life in lecheryes and glotonyes / and therefore
was she dampened.xiii. a. Another example of a burge is aduoutrer / and of
another woman married / the which were dampened for their lecheryes lxxxxi. b.
Many other examples of aduoutrye shall be found in the exemplayre and by the
table the which is all alonge. The punycyon of those the which did break
their marriage and wedlock in the ancient and old testamente was that they
were stoned and put unto death incontinent the which should be a thing right
cruel if it should be used as now a days. For many should be punysshed ye
which ben a live. Legitur. leui. xx. and deutero. xxii. Si me chatus qis
fuerit cu^ vxore alterius et adulte riu^ propetrauerit cu^ co^iuge proximi sui
morte morientur and mechus and adultera. Those and they yt have broken their
maryages by lecherye should have contrycyon and make confession sacramentally
and do penance and they shall have grace and mercy. Example of a woman
aduoultres yt was saved by maky^ge co^fessyo^ sacramental. Que. lxxxxii. b
Another example how david ye prophet yt committed auoutrye with the wife of
vrie was sauid by repentance. He reknowleged his defaute and said peccaui. In
likewise as it is written in the.xii. cha. of the book of kings. etc.

Of things meritoryous and of offenses lecherous that a man co^mytteth with
his own wife. Ca. xxxvi.
Saint poule says in his epystylles. Satagitevt pro bona opera certa^
faciatis vocatione^ vestra^. Procure ye that ye make your vocacyon certain by
good operacyons. Marriage is certain vocacyon when it is kept holyly / clenly
/ and honestly. And it is dampnacyon when people the which ben knytte and united
in marriage ne keeps the honest and the chastyte the which apperteyneth unto
ye said holy sacrament. The deed of marriage may be merytoryous in.iii. manners.
First wha^ the pryncypall cause of yt is for to conceive lygnee. Secondly when
it is for to yield ye deuoyre of ye sacrament the one with the other. Thyrdly
when it is by good dyscrecyon to eschew sin in himself or in other. In this
last manner if they therein have no merit yet may he do it without sin. Some
time the deed of marriage is alonely venyel sin as when over the three manners
beforsayd a man secheth the pleasaunce of his sensualyte / how be it in such
conscience that the man ne will excede ye terms of honest of marriage. sometime
there is mortal sin and many manners. A metrifiour says. Qui^que modis
peccati^ vxore^ maritus: abutens. Te^pore: mente: loco / co^ditione / modo. The
husband abusing him with his wife synneth in five manners. That is to
understand by time / by mind / by place / by condycyo^ by the manner. By this
word here tempore is to understand yt in the time yt his wife is seek / feeble
/ and weyke / a man should absteyne from the operacyon of marriage / and the
woman should excuse her / for it should be great sy^ne in likewise as it is
written leui. xx. Also it is to absteyne him in the time of fastings for to
take away the pleasures of the body / and for to get anenst god more grace
and virtues. Also in ye time of the feestes solempnelles for to santyfye and
honor the said feestes the better Also in time that the woman is laid in
chyldbedde or ready to child. This word mente denotes yt when the thought and
concupyscence is carnal and lecherous / that it is out of the bounds of
marriage / yt is yt the man should accede also wyllyngly and promptly unto a
harlot if he hold her as he does his wife / the sin is great for ye thought
is ylle in all maneres where it is out of marriage. This word loco denotethe
when a man knows his party in place holy / as in the church / or
chircheyarde / it is sin for the holiness of the place. Also condition / for
to know it by condycyo^ of unhonest as openly before the people: or by
condycyon unlawful. It is a great offense. Also this word / modo / denotes yt
a man ne should know his party in other manner than nature it techeth: for it
is great sin. vn^. au. Vsus qi est contra naturam execrabiliter fit in
meritrice: sed execrabilius fit i^ vxore.xxx. q. v. adulteri. The usage yt is
again nature is done execrablye in ye harlot / but it is done more execrably
in his own wife.

E. Examples men read in thobye.vi. of the wife unto little thobye yt was
meruaylous fair and married unto.vii. husbands successyuely. The which the
devil strangled all seven the first night that they were laid together / for
that yt the said husbands acceded with her / not under ye entencyon of the
honest of marriage / but for to accomplysshe the voluptuolyte of their bodies
as they use somwhyle to do with a harlot. The little Thobye did not so by the
counsayll of the angel raphaell / and therefore the devil slew him not. vn^
tho. vi. Illa mulier tradita e^ septe^viris and mortui su^t: sed et hoc odiui
qia demon occidit illos. etc. F. Another example saint Gregorye shows in the
first book of ye dyalogue yt a woman in Catane of new married was conuayed
with other women to goo unto the dedycacyon of the church of saint Sebastian /
and the night yt she should go in the morning she was pricked with the flesh
that she ne might hold her from her husband. And in the morning she had
more great shame of men than of god and yode theder. And anon as she was
entered in to ye oratorye where the relyques of saint Sebastyan were / the
devil took her and began to tourmente her before all yt there were. Than the
priest of the church took the couerture from ye alter and couerde her / and
anon ye devil assaylled ye priest / and than the friends of yt woman said
unto ye enchauntours yt they should enchaunt the devil by their
enchau^tementes / but anon as they enchaunted by the judgment of god a legion
of enemies.vi.M.vi.C.lxvi deuylles entered in to ye woman and tormented her
asprely. And an holy man named Fortunate heled her by his prayers.

G. Another example saint gregorye tells in his dialogue how a woman lefully
was known of her own husband at saterdaye at night / and when she
accompanied with the other at the processyon of the sunday the devil entered
in to her and tourmented her strongly before all the people. By this example it
is to note that in holy times a man should absteyne him sometime from things
lefull. Also a man should understand yt marriage is one of ye.vii holy
sacraments / and for as much as it is holy he should draw him honestly and
holyly / and accede on his party in good entencyon. Those and they the which
done the contrary should dread to lose paradyse and ye reward yt the good
shall have the which have kept the sayncete of the said sacrament. Also they
should dread punycyon and dampnacyon / for all mortell sin byndeth unto
dampnacyon.

H. Example of a man married much devout / by the voluptuosyte of his flessh
yode unto his wife in other manner than nature ne techeth him / and therefore he
was dampened in the end of his days. As it was after showed by vysyon unto his
sone relygyous by his prayers and by the holy life that he was of.

I. Another example that men find in writing of a man married yt used his wife
dyshonestly as ye sodomytes / and much dyspleased unto his wife. and one time
again her will commit in her the sin of sodomy and incontinent after that he
arose from his bed to goo in to the chambres in the which his bowelles fell
from him and dyscended by the foundement with great torment than he began to
cry / the people came and of the doloure yt he felt he told his said sin /
and that god him venged and punysshed / and my scheuously he deyed. Another
example of a man yt knew his wife on ester even. Que. lxxxxiii. a. Another
example how ye children of a man and of a woman ne might have baptysme for ye
sin that they committed in marriage / Que. lxxxxiii. b. Those yt have offended
in their maryages make they true confession and they shall have mercy. Que.
viii.c.

A. Of defloracion yt god defends. xxxvii
NOn mechaberis. keep ye from doing lecherye in any wise what so it be / he
yt does the work of nature out of marriage deceyueth himself. A man
co^mytteth defloracyon when one of the parties or both twain ben vyrgins and
they commit lecherye out of marriage. In the ancient testament she the which
suffered yt she were deflored was brent. vn^ le. xxi. Puella si depreheusa
fuerit in stupro et violauerit nome^ patris sui: fla^mis exuretur. For yt that
sychem deflored dine ye daughter of jacob / he and his fader with them of his
house were slain as it is written ge. xxxiiii. He yt defloreth a vyrgyne unto
her does do^mage inaprecyable / so yt there nys gold ne silver ne any thing
temporel of what valor so ever it be yt may be compared unto the valor of
one soul contynent as a vyrgyn maiden. Of whom it is written eccl. xxvi. Oi^s
po^deratio sclm cuiuslibet rei tpreoralis cuiuscu^que sit po^deris and valoris:
no^ e digna ai^e co^tine^ti. Saint jerome says yt unto these vyrgy^s is
promised fruit a. C. times / and when they be one time corrupt or bruised they
shall never recover the said fruit ne their vyrgynyte / no more than a man may
repair a lamp broken in pieces how be it it is to be understand but that they
may be saved in doing of penance / but they shall never be of the nombre of
vyrgyns in paradyse* they shall be of the nombre of those yt have done penao^ce.
Unto wedowes yt have well kept chastyte is promised fruit threscore times.
This says saint Iherome And unto women married fruit thyrtye times and every
one shall have after their deserte. Also the harlot the which corrupts a
vyrgyn is cause of all the payllardises and ylles yt the said vyrgyn does ever
after / as he the which makes a breche in ye corn well closed is cause yt
the said bestes entren in to the said corn and there done of do^mage / and for
to satyffye of the said ylle ye said harlot should close the breche unto his
power / yt is to withdraw ye said woman from sin. And after ye droitm he her
should marye with his goods / or to take her in marriage if she be not married:
or he should enter in to a monastery for to do penance perpetuell. Examples
how ylle is comen unto many the which have dyspoylled vyrgyns of their
maydenhede. First how a knight was dampened for that / yt he had deflored a
vyrgyn. Quere.lxxxxi b. Another example how a vyrgin was rauysshed in the
dance and fyled and after henge herself. Que. lxviii. f. Many other examples
ben written in the examplayre / Quere. lxxxxi. a. b. c.

B. Of inceste yt god defends. xxxvii.
NOn mechaberis. Fle al sin of lecherye and love clean life and pure / A man
co^mytteth inceste when ye parties the which accomplysshen lecherye ben of
lygnage / or of affynyte or under from the fyfte degree / or when there is
between the^ gossiprede by the mean of the sacrament of baptysme or of
confyrmacyon. After ye ancient law those the which committed this sin were
put unto death. vn^ leui. xx. Qui dormierit cu^ nouerca sua cum muru sua vterque
moriatur / quia scelus operati sunt sanguis eoru^ sit super eos. He ye which
has slepte with his stepmoder / or with his sister in law / the one / the
other shall deye / for they have done sin / their blood be upon them. Also he
the which has taken his sister the daughter of his fader or the daughter of
his mother ben they slain before ye people vn^ in dicto. ca. Qui acceperit
sorore^ suam filiam patris sui vel filiam matris sue. etc. Occidatur in
co^spectu populi sui. For this sin Ammon the sone of dauyd was slain by the
commandment of his brother Absalon / for he had deflored their sister Thamar
as it is wryte^ ii. regum. xiii. Also all malediccyon dyscendeth upon them the
which committee this sin as it is written deutero.xxviii. Maledictus qui
dormit cu^ vxore patris sui et cu^ sorore sua filia patris sui vel matris sue
et dicit omnis populus amen. That man is accursed the which slepeth with the
wife of his fader / and with his sister ye daughter of his mother. And all the
people shall say amen so be it. Also punycyon and dampnacyon follows unto
them ye which know their gossyppes men or women or god sons / or god
daughters as we read in the dyalogue of saint Gregorye that for the lecherye of
a curyal the which corrupt a fair daughter that he had holden on the font
of baptysme he deyed suddenly in the church before the people. Que. post ad
numerum.lxxxx. b. Another example of a woman dampened and terrybly tourmented
the which had committee lecherye with one of her kynnesmen. Quere. lxxx^ a. If
thou have offended in this vice goo unto penance. Quere.viii. b.

B. Of sacrylege as unto lecherye yt god defends. Ca. xxxvii.
Saint Bernarde says. Tangere qui gaudens meretricem qualiter audes. Palmis
pollutis: rege^ palpare salutis. Thou man of the church the which enioyest ye
to touch an harlot / how dare thou touch the king of health with thy
hands soylled. Thou art sacryleged the which soyllyst the holy sacrament of
ordres that thou haste received. Sacrylege is committee in many manners / but yt
which touches the sin of lecherye / is when a man hurts / soylleth / or
vyolateth ye holy things / as those the which ben in holy ordres hallowed unto
god / priest religious man or woman / and they co^mytteth ye sin of the
flesh. Such people synneth grievously they ben to punysshe. Example how a
priest fornycatour deyed suddenly in sy^ as he would have so^ge mass. lxxxxiii
d. Another example of the punycyon and dampnacyon of a no^ne the which
committed lecherye.lxxxiii. f.

Of things the which greueth ye sy^ne of ye flesh. in people of the
church. xxxvii
Saint Iherome says. In maiori gradu: mayor si^e dubio pena Of asmoche more as
lecherye is committee in great degree of a person / unto him there apperteyneth
the more great pain and punycyon. Many things aggreueth ye sy^ne of the
flesh in them of the church. The first thing is that they break the vow
of chastyce that they promised unto god in receyuynge the holy ordres. When any
them receives he renou^ceth unto marriage / and unto all copulacyon of woman.
And if ever after he go thereto he is a breker of his auowe the which is a
great case. The psalmyst says. Couete et reddite dn^o deo vestro. Vow ye and
yield ye unto our lord god. It is great sin unto lay people to committee
lecherye out of marriage / for they go against the law and commandment of
god / but the sin is more great unto the people of the church ye which
breketh their vow and the commandment of god. The second thing the which
aggreueth the sin unto ye people of ye church / is when dyrectly and
wyttynge they go again the will of god and again ye science and ye good that
they know. Their sin is greter than that of simple people the which ne
know ne yet understand the scryptures and synneth by ygnorau^ce Saint
gregorye says. Melius est via^ veritatis n^n cognoscere: quam eam cognita^
no^ seruare. It is better thing not to know the way of truth / than not to
keep it after that it is known. And saint peter says. Melius erat illis no^
cognoscere via^ iustitie quam post aguitione^ retrorsu^ co^uerti / It were
better unto those sinners not to know ye way of Justice than to convert them
unto ye contrary after the knowledge. And iaco. iii. Scie^ti bonu^ facere and
no^ facie^ti peccatu^ est illi. Sin it is to him knowing to do well and not
doing it The third thing ye which agreueth the sin in people of the
church is for yt / that they ben the example of all derkenes derysyon /
sclaundre / and sin. And they should be the light / the lantern / and ye
example of all chastyte / bounte and holiness and virtues after yt the which is
written mar. v. Vos estis lux mu^di. Sequi^ui. S^ luceat lux vestra cora^
hominibus vt videant opera vestra bona et glorificent patre^ vestrum qi est in
celis. You be the light of the world / your light shyneth in such wise /
before men that they se your good operacyons and yt they gloryfye your fader
the which is in heaven. And saint augu. says Quicqid vide^t laici vobis
displicere dicu^t procul dubio sibi no^ licere. Quicqid vos in opere vident ad
implere: credu^t esse licitu^ et culpa carere. What thing yt this lay people
se dysplease unto you / they se without doubt that it is not lefull unto them
and any thing that they se you to accomplysshe in operacyon they believe to be
lefull and without gylte. When the candyll or the light of a house is put out
it is occasyon that all those of the said house ben in derkenesse. Also when
the curates / chapelayns / clerks / and people of the church ben harlottes
the whi^^e should be the light of chastyte / of pureness / of clennes as it is
said / it is the occasyon that little people ben ill and harlottes. And by this
ye sin is ye more grievous unto pleople of ye church the which ben the
example of sclaundre and of sin / whereof follows maladyccion. Vnde mathei.
viii. Ve mundo a scandalis. Sequitur. Ve homini per que^ scandalum venit.
Maledyccyon unto the world for these sclaundres. Maledyccion unto him by whom
sclaundre comes. / When a priest is lecherous by him there proceeds great
sclaundre the which is a thing that pleases unto the devil and dyspleaseth
much unto our lord. Example how the devil charged a woman for to committee
lecherye with priests for the great ill the which thereof does proceed
Quere.lxvi. f. Also the wound or hurt is wors more vyllayne and apparent when
it is within the eye than in another membre / so is the sin of lecherye in
people of the church than in the lay people. Ihero. dicit. quod clericus aut
honestior e^ ceteris aut alus fabula. The clerk either he is more honest than
these other / or he is the tale unto other / yt is the example wors than ye
other. The fourth thing the which agreueth the sin is for yt that the
people of the church ben mynysters of god and of his household deputed unto
his service and live of his gods and have the great wages: benefyces and
revenues. When the household servant of the king of great lord governs
dyshonestly and dysobeyeth unto his master he is more to blame and to punysshe
than is another stranger / for that that he lives under him and has great
salayre / in like wise is it of the people of the church. Vn^ psalm. Verba
dn^i. Si inimicus meus maledisset mihi: sustinuisse^ vtique. and for asmoche as
the word of god is despised of his own household servants he is the more
ill content. etc. Also when fornycacyon is done in the church the syn is more
great than if it were done in other place. For the church is blyste and
deputed unto ye service of god. Also lecherye is more great sin in people of
the church the which ben blyste in receyuynge the holy ordres and deputed
unto service of god than in simple people. Au. Plus peccat clericus multere^
concupisce^do quam carnalitur laycus ipsam atti^ge^do. The clerk synneth more
in couueytynge the woman than ye lay man in touching her carnally. Also ye
barkynge of dogs is nuysyble unto ye ox. ye wayllynge of hogs pleases
more to god tha^ these lecherous clerks. Au. Plus placet deolatratus canu^ /
mugitus bouu^ / gemitus porcoru^ / quam vox clericoru^ luxuriantiu^. Also these
rich people have in hate and abhomynacion their servants when they ben foul
and vyllayns / and loves ye pure and clean. In like wise god has in hate his
servant foul / stynkynge / and soylled by lecherye. Le. eccle. xii. quod
altissimus odio habet pcto^res. The right great / yt is god ye which has in
hate the sinners. Also the sinner and his sin be in hate unto god. vn^.
sapien. xiiii. Odio sunt deo impius and impietas eius. The.v. thing the which
agreueth the sin is the dygnyte of the office wherein ben ordained these
priests the which is soylled in co^myttynge lecherye. The priests ben so
dygne that they excercyse the office of au^gelles / whereof it is written ma. ii.
Labia eni^ sacerdotis custodiu^t scie^tia^ and lege^ requirent ex ore eius qia
angelus diu^ excercituu^ est. The lyppes of the priest keeps science and these
other requires ye law of his mouth / for he is an angel / yt is to
understand messenger of our lord of the office of compaygnyes. The office and
ye excercyse that these aungelles have ye which keeps us to admynystre unto
us and to counsayll to live after the science and the law and the
commandments of god / and unto priests is betaken this office. And therefore
they should live chastely or their sin shall be right grievous. Also ye
priests have more great dygnyte than the au^gelles in as much as they have
the office to consecrate the body of Ihesus the which the aungelles have not.
For they have not received the ordres. And for asmoche as these priests have
so great dygnyte they should be full of great valor and bounte more than the
lay people / or their sy^ne shall be more great. Also a pyece of gold is
more worth and more dygne than a piece of led or metal / so is ye priest for
his dygnyte / than a seculer / whereby his sin is more great when he offends
against god Also no man ne here the mass of a priest the which he knows
vndoutfully to have concubyne. Vn^ lucius dicit. quod nullus audiat missa^
sacerdotis que^ scit idubitantur co^cubina^ habere. Also these priests /
curates and prelates ben vycayres and lieutenau^tes of god the which have
puyssaunce in many case to absoyle and to unbind ye sins from their
subgectes. And if any be defayllynge and inobedyentes for to bind them and to
exco^munycate as it is wryte^ mat. xvi. Quodcu^que ligaueris super terra^ erit
ligatu^ et i^ celis and quodcu^que solueris su per terram erit solutu^ et in
celis. et iho. xx. Quorum remiseritis pcta^ remittu^tur eis: and quoru^
retinueritis rete^ta su^t. when a lieu tenant governs him ylle in his
co^myssyon in dysobeynge unto his master his sin is more great than if he
had not the office. These prestes have the office beforsayd ye which ye
au^gelles have not / whereby their sin is the more grievous if they govern
them ylle. Example how two of the priests of the ancient law couueyted
vnshamefully and prayed Susanne of dishonor / and because she resysted again
them they thought to have made her deye but they themself were slain / their
syn was great for they were priests au^cyentes and iuges. Que. lxxxxvi. c.
The.vi. thing ye aggreueth the syn is when these prestes lodge and put to rest
their god and maker after ye celebracyon in their bodies ye which is vile / and
stynkinge / and in deed if he be polluted by lecherye. Vn^. i. corin. xi.
Quicu^que ma^ducauerit pane^ vel biberit calice^ dn^i i^digne reus erit
corporis and sa^guinis dn^i seqitur. Qui eni^ ma^ducat and bibit i^digne iudi
ciu^ sibi ma^ducat and bibit. A man should say yt it should be great sin to
put the body and the blood of Ihesus in a chalyce soul in deed / and by a more
strong reason in the body lecherous. Augu. Melius e^ spu^alia penitus emiti:
quam impure tractari. It is better utterly to leave in all things spyrytuelies
than to entreat them foulely.

E Example how two prestes lecherous were punysshed. It is written in ye
promtuarye of the dyscyple yt Guyslaume recyteth how a priest lecherous and
soul by sin received the body of Ihesu christ in his mouth also as every day
/ and the vengeance of god came upon him. His mouth his lyppes turned toward
the nose and ye chynne and his tonguestanke so strongly ye with pain his
friends might endure hy^ And he recyteth again of another priest ye which was
in such wise in wales. unto whom it happened that as his hands were upon the
altar they were brent till unto ye elbowes by punycyon dyuyne. People of the
church ben the servants of god and of his household. And therefore they
should be holy / chaste / pure / and clean in following their master. Vn^.
leui. xx. Sanctifica mini et estote sancti / quia ego sanctus su^ dicit dominus
/ et leui. xxi. Sancti eru^t deo suo et no^ poluent nomen eius. The people of
holy church ben holy unto their god / and the name of him they ne soyllen.
Example how a vyrgyn saw a priest / chaste / clear / and fair in singy^ge
mass. Que. lxxxxiiii a. Another example how a bishop was so chaste / pure /
and clean that he saw on ester day some men confeste the which were black /
and the other white. Quere. lxxxxiii c. The virtue of chastyte is agreeable unto
god and unto men. And therefore we it should keep curyously. Master hugues
says. Qui perdit puditiam perdit anima^ suam / perdit deum / perdit seipsum.
He ye which leseth chastyteleseth his soul / leseth himself.

F. Example for to keep chastyte / and for to flee the stynkynge sin of
lecherye the which is cause of so many euylles / It is written in ye life of
faders that a relygyous wrapped his hands in his mau^tell of dread to touch
his mother when he passed with her over a water And she axed him wherefore he was
so wrapped / he answered yt the body of a woman is fire / and at yt hour that I
touched yt it came to my remembrance of other women / wherefore if we will keep
chastyte it behooves to fle the look / the company / and the touching of the
woman. The pope innocent lays yt these clerks ne abyden with these women but
with those the which ben ancient without voluptuosyte carnal. And saint
Augustyn says in the rule of chanoynes when ye be in the church where these
women ben keep together your chastyte. Qn^ estis in ecclesia vbi et feminini
su^t iuice^ puditia^ vestra^ custodite. etc. Those ye which have offended god
by lechery done they penance and they shall be saved. Example how a relygyous
apostate and lecherous had mercy by penance. Quere. xlviii. e.

G. Of the sin again nature and of sodomye that god defends.
THe master of sentences says in his fourth book. Peius est eni^ cu^ matre
quam cu^ aliena vxore dormire: sed oi^m horum pessimum quoth co^tra natura^sit. It
is wors to sleep with his mother than with another woman / but worste of all above
all these other is that the which is done again nature. The sin again
nature is commit in many manners / the which sin is so horrible and
detestable yt men dare not write ne preche yt that the scriptures tells and
for cause / for many therein may offend. But in confession it should be
declared by the sinner if ye sinner will save his soul if he be fallen in to
such sy^ne by atouchy^ge upon himself / or with bestes / or in other manners
again the ordonnaunce yt god and nature has put in such case. Those yt
comyt this sin after ye faith should be put unto death. vn^ leui. xx. Qui
dormierit cu^ masculo coitu feminco vterque operatus est nefas morte moriatur
sit sa^guis eoru^ super eos seqitur. Qui cu^ tume^to et peccore coierit morte
moriatur: pecus quoque occidite. etc. Also they have maledyccyon as it is
written deutero. xxvii. Maledictus qi dormit cu^ oi^ iume^to et dicet oi^s
populus ame^. Sodomye was lost for this sin ye which dyspleaseth unto god
yt he made to fall.v. cytes. That is to understand Sodom / go more / segor /
boym / and oleale. And all this was for their cursed sins / as it is written
in gene. xix. Thou shall find this example written at length in ye exemplayre.
quere. lxxxv. a. Another example of ye war and slaughter yt was made upon ye
sodomites of Benjamin for ye lechery yt they co^mytte^ with ye wife of leuite.
Que. lxxxxv. b. Another example of a man yt used his wife sodomytly.lxxxxv. c.
Many other examples ben written in ye exemplayre. lxxxxv. d.e.f.

A. Of ye virtue of chastyte ye which is again the sin of lecherye. Ca.
xxxviii.
IT is written luce. xii. Si^t lu^bi vestri preci^cti and lucerne arde^tes i^
manibus vestris. etc. Let your rayns be gyrde with the gyrdyl of chastyte and the
lyghtes brenne in your hands by good operacyons. God will that al persons men
and women live chastely. chastyte makes ye soul fair / white / pure and
clean / and loved of god. And of ye soul chaste and vyrgyn is written. can^.
ii. Sicut liliu^ int spinas: sic amica mea i^ter filias. The lely is a fair
flower ye which has.vi. leuys white the which sygnyfyeth the chastyte of ye
body / and has six granes with in gylte the which sygnyfyeth the chastyte
and clennesse of the thought. Of this chastyte and vyrgynyte speaks the sayge
sapie^tie. iiii. O quam pulcra est casta generatio cu^ caritate: immortalis
eni^ est memoria illius: cm^ apud deu^ nota e^ and apud hoi^es And this word
here is to be noted ye which says cu^ caritate. For the tools vyrgyns the
which have not of oil in their lamps the which sygnyfyed charity were
strongly closed / and they entered not with the spouse with the vyrgyns sage in
charity. Vn^ math. xxv. Clausa est ianua. Also the estate of vyrgynyte is fair
/ white pure / and clean without any spotte. Unto ye which estate a man may
say that there apperteyneth a white robe. Of this estate it is written how
saint Johan law a great hepe of people chastes and vyrgyns the which song
melodyously a new long / and unto him it was said illud apocalipsis. xiiii.
Hi sunt qui cu^ mulieribus no^ sunt coinquitati virgins enim ^unt. Hi
sequu^tur agnum quocunque ierit. sequitur. Si ne macu^a sunt ante thronum dei.
A white robe is more clean than another / ye which ought to be kept from
soyllynge. For the spotte therein is more foul than in another robe. In like
wise chastyte vyrgynyte ought to be kept from the soyllerye of lecherye. Of ye
beauty of vyrgynyte is written can^. ii. T'ota pulchra is amica mea: et macula
non est in te. Example is the blyssed vyrgyn marye the which is the example of
virginite and of all chastyte the which was all fair without any spotte for
never origynal sin / venyel / ne mor tell ne entered in to her. Also chastyte
is a treasour inaprecyable. Whereof it is written ecclesa. xxvi. Omnis ponderatio
scz cuilibet rei: temporalis cuiuscunque sit ponderis and valoris non est digna
anime continenti. There is neither gold ne silver ne precious stone ne other
thing corporell / of what valor and price so ever it be / yt is to be
compared unto onesoule chaste and contynente as a vyrgyn and maiden. Example
men read in ye legende of saint bernarde that there was a fair man ye which
came to lodge in an ynne / and in the night he began to cry / a these thieves
these thieves / for his hostess came to him in the night for to have had his
company / and three times in such wise he cried / wherefore the people rose up
which found no thieves. And in the morning his dyscyples him demanded the
cause of his cry. He them answerde that his hostess would have stolen from
him his precious treasour of vyrgynyte. Of this treasour of chastity that a man
should love it is written math. xiii Simile est regnum celorum thesauro
abicondito in agro. Thesaurum in agro est castitas in cord. etc. A treasour ye
which is hid in a poor place / as the body ye which is frayll to sin
ought be kept ye thieves stele it not. A loule contynent as a vyrgyn ought well
to be kept it eme ylle thoughts / or she shall lose her said treasoure. Quia
augusimus dicit. Nichil prodest virginitas corporis vbi operatur corruption
mentis. Also to live chastely and to keep vyrgynyte in our corruptyble bodies
the which of it self is lecherous is not a life erthely nor terryenne / but
it is a life angelike. Vnde therono. In seimone de assumptione beat marie ait
sic. Been angelus ad virginem mittitur: quia angelis semper e^ cognata
virginitas profecto ait. Incarne preter carnem viuere non e^ terrena vita: sed
angelica. Wherefore you vyrgyns / and men and women the which loves chastyte
beware of exces of metes and drynkes for yt provoke lecheryes. / And for
asmoche as those and they ye which keeps vyrgynyte and chastyte ledeth a life
angelyke / they shall be semblables unto aungelles. Vn^ math. xxii. In
resurrectione no^ nubent neque nube^tur: sed eru^t sicut angeli dei in celo.
Also these au^gelles keeps the vyrgyns and the people chaste by great
curyosyte. In like wise as saint Cecyle said unto valeryan. Vnde legitur in
legenda cecile. Angelu^ dei habeo amatorem qui nimio zelo custodit corpus meu^
etc. Also the soul chaste and vyrgyn ye which has steadfast faith in god is
the espouse of Ihesu christ: whereof it is written.ii. ad. co. xi. Despo^di eni^
vos vni viro virgine^ casta^ exhibere christo. Et legitur can^. iiii. Veni de
libano spo^sa mea veni coronaberis. Et in vna antiphona. Veni spo^sa christi
accipe corona^ qua^ tibi dn^s preparauit ineternu^. The espouse of Ihesu christ
shall be crowned in paradyse for the resystence that she had made again her
body lecherous and again her other adversaries Example we read in ye legende
of saint Cecile that an angel bare two crowns of fair flowers well
smelling. And the said angel put one upon ye heed of saint Cecyle. And the
other upon the heed of her husband Valeryan. Vn^ legitur. quod valetianus
inuenit iuxta cecilia^ angelu^ dn^i stantem fla^meo aspectu radie^tem coronas
duas portante^ i^ manibus corusca^tes rosis et liliis albescentes qique vna^
dedit cecilie / et alter a^ valeriano dice^s. Has coronas nu^quam marcesce^tes:
nunquam aspectus suiflorem amitte^tes nunquam odoris sui suauitate^ minue^tes
de paradiso dei: vobis allatas mu^do cord and corpore cusiodite q^ ab alio
vide ii no^ poteru^t nisi ab eis qibus castitas placuerit sicut vobis probata
e^ placuisse. Unto the flower of virginite ben appropried the words of the
sayge. eccle. xxiiii. Flores mei fructus honoris and honestatis. That is to
say my flowers bears fruit of honor and of honest. Many flowers there ben
the which bears truyte of honor and of honest as the lylly / the rose /
the vyolet ye gyllofre. These flowers here have in the^ four things. The
first is beauty in beholding them. The second is good odor in smelling
them. The third is yt they worship the person ye which bears them
The.iiii. is yt they ben good to make medecynes and water. etc. In like manner a
person vyrgyn and chaste has these four propryetes here. First his soul is
fair / and so is the body oftymes. Sicut le. ge. xxiiii. Rebecca fuisse puella
decora nimis vgo que pulcherima and i^cognita viro. Another example ye saint
Barbara was fair of faith of body / and of soul. Pulchra facie: sed pulchrior
fide. For she vowed and kept virginite and refused to be married. And her fader
did make for her a toure for to hyde her beauty. O nimia^ pulchritudinem fecit
la pidcam in qua genitor iilam subliuius collocaret. etc. Secondly the person
the which keeps vyrgynyte and chastyte has the odoure of good reno^mee and
before god and the world as the vyrgyn married and these other vyrgyns. etc.
And unto the contrary lechery makes to have ill reno^mee unto those and them
that use it / and unto their lygnee. Thyrdly vyrgynyte and chastyte worshyppeth
and honors the vyrgyns / and ye place where they ben entered / and where
their image is / is worshypped and honored. Fourthly vyrginyte and chastyte is
of valcure / for ye vyrgyns do miracles and many good deeds Lecherye is unto
the contrary of the.iiii. things beforsayd / for she is not to be compared
unto the vile carcas and flesh roten the which leseth four things / that
is for to understand / beauty corporell / savor good and sweet odor / and
good reno^me. Chastyte is a fair virtue the which ought to be gretely
appetyted for the goodness the which thereof proceeds. Vn^ magister hugo de
sa^cto victore dicit. Magna est pudicitie virtus nam hominem a terreno subleuat
/ angelis sociat deo coniungit / et de terreno celestem de carnali spirituale^
facit. Chastyte is a great virtue celestyall and spyrytuall / it lyfteth up the
man from erthly things and felawshyppeth him with the aungelles / and conioyneth
him with god from erthly and makes him celestyall / and fro carnal espyrytual.
A questyon / who so should demand what vyrgynyte is / and what reward unto
it apperteyneth. The answer. Vyrgynyte is to have thought to keep perpetual
chastyte in his body corruptyble. And of the reward saint Iherom says that
unto the vyrgyns is promised fruit and ho^dred times. Unto wydowes lx. And
unto the married men and women xxx. For to be a vyrgyn and to have the reward
that thereunto apperteyneth it behooves to keep two things the which ben
chastyte of body and of thought. And a man should note here many things. First
that when a person has committed one only time lechery by delyberacyon and by
operacyon he loses the reward of vyrgynyte Howbeit that a man should not
understand but that he may be saved by penance. And when the thought of a
vyrgyn is corrupt and not the body if she be repaired by penance with purpose
for to keep her she loses not the reward the which apperteyneth unto
vyrgyns. And when any persons maryeth them and that they do the operacions of
marriage in likewise as god and the church has ordained / in such case they
do their salvation / but they have not the reward the which apperteyneth
unto vyrgins. And of those and them the which have their bodies entyer without
corrupcyon / and the which ne ben married but have their wylles steadfast to
mary them / they ben not worthy too have the reward the which aperteyneth
unto vyrgyns. Vnde hiero. Nichil prodest habere virginem si mentem quis
nupserat. Et augustinus in libro virginitate sic ait. Felici or michi videtur
esse mulier nupta quam virgo nuptura habet enim illa quam ista cupit. The
vyrgyns have the most gretest reward in paradyse / and of good right. For
their bodies have not ben soyled ne corrupt by lechery / and also they have
opteyned ye better party / that is to please and to serve god and not unto the
body and unto the world. Vnde hieronimus. Bona est castitas co^iugalis /
melior est vidualis / sed optimus virginalis. Et paulus.i. corinth. vii. Qui
sine vxore est sollicitus que domini sunt quomo do placeat deo. etc. sequitur.
Mulier innupta et virgo cogitat que domini sunt / vt sit sancta corpore and
spiritu. Qui cum vxore est sollicitus est que sunt mundi quomodo placeat vxori
and diuisus est. Alibi. Dico aute^ no^ nuptis et viduis bonum esse illis si
perman serint sic quod si se non continent nubent / melius est enim nubere quam
viri. And if a vyrgyn be corrupt by force she loses not the reward of
chastyte by such wise that afterward she be not unto the said deed agreeable /
and that she humble her toward god. Quia peccatum est actio voluntaria / and
no^ est peccatum nisi voluntarium. Et legitur primi regum.xvi. Homo enim videt
ea q^ parent deus autem intuetur cor. Example in saint Luce the which lied not
/ for ye holy ghost was in her / said unto the tyrau^t Si inuitam me violare
feceris castitas michi duplicabitur ad coronam. Et leo ^^^a dicit. Virgins dei
q^ oppressione barbarica integritatem carnis perdiderunt pudoris laudabilioris
erunt si se inco^taminatis non audeant comparare virginibus. etc.

B. The vyrgyns should dread many things for feere to lose paradyse and their
reward. The first thing that they should dread is pride espyrytuall and
vayneglory Vnde Augustinus in libro de virginitate sic ait. Non solum
predicanda est virginitas vt ametur verum et mouenda est ne i^fletur. The
second is slouthe / tedyousnes and ydlenes whereby the devil has entry^ge for
to tempt and deceive. When ye person is occupied the devil has none
entering / that is too understand folysshely to behold / to here / to speak /
to touch / and to goo in to evil companyes. etc. Who so will keep chastyte
ought to have good closure that cursed beestes and the venym of lechery enter
not in to the gardyn of their conscience. Vnde can^. iiii Ortus conclusus soror
mea sponsa / ortus conclusus fons signatus. When a gardin is well closed therein
enters no beestes. etc. The vyrgyns keep clennesse of heart and of conscience
to the end that they have beatytude. Vnd mathei. v. Beati mu^do cord quoniam
ipsi deo videbunt. And if their said heart be soyled by lechery they ne do
nothing. Vnde augustinus. Nichil prodest virginitas corporis vbi operatur
corruption mentis vt dictu^ est. Example how Iudyth kept well her five wits of
nature / for after that her husband was deed she made her secrets and her
bed in the heyght of her house for to euyte and fle companyes of people / and
lived solytaryly with her mayde^s without being in will to mary. She kept
chastely her wydowhede. Vnde judith vltimo. Erat judith virtuti castitas
adiuncto / ita vt non cogno sceret virum omnibus diebus vite sue ex quo
defunctus est manasses vir eius. and cetera. The fourth thing that these
vyrgins should dread is to much great nourysshement / for the good wine and
the delycyous meets draws the^ unto lechery And therefore these vyrgyns
should fle drinking of wine in likewise as venym. Vnde Hieronimus. Virga ipsa
vinum fugiat vt venenum. Example in Loath the which defloured his own
daughters when yt he was drunk / and he apperceyued it not in his dronkennes.
The fyfthe is imperseueraunce / for it suffyseth not too keep vyrgyte in
sometimes / but it behooves to persevere Vnde mathei. x. and.xxiiij. Qui
perseuerauerit vsque in finem hic saluus erit.

C. Examples of vyrgynyte. And first a man may say by figure and symylytude
that the soul the which is vyrgyn / chaste pure / and clean without sin is
loved of Ihesu christ and shall be crowned in paradise if he persevere in bou^te.
As Hester was beloved of king Assuerus / of whom it is written in the bible.
Quod hester erat pulchra nimis facieque decora and omnium oculis gratiosa / hec
enim dicta est ad cubiculum regis et adamauit eam rex super om^es mulieres et
posuit dyadema regis in capite eius. Another example how saint Agnes vyrgyn and
martyr was much loved of Ihesu crist. Also she reputed her to be his espouse
when she refused the sone of the prouo^ in marriage / her friend / and his
rychesses unto whom she said that she was prevented unto another lover better
than he of kind and of dygnyte the which unto her offered better ournementes
than he ne did. And that was Ihesu christ the which promised her paradyse and
the reward of vyrgynyte. Vnde legitur in legenda eius. Discede a me fomes
peccati nutrimentu^ facinoris pabulum mortis quia iam ab alio amatore preuenta
sum qui satis michi meliora ornamenta offerens fidei sue anulo s^^barrauit me /
long te melior et genere et dignitate po fuit signum in faciem meam vt nullum
preter eum amatorem admitta^. etc Another example that saint Luce was so chaste
of body of thought with the aid of the holy ghost that no strength of man ne
might led her unto the stews or bordelhous. The holy ghost her fastened and
held so strongely that no men ne might moeue her from thens where she was
rested / the which was steadfast as a mountain. And in likewise these women
should be so ferme and steadfast in good purpose to keep chastyte that no men
ne might draw them for to commytte lechery. etc. Another example how saint
Iustyne kept her chastyte and resysted against ye devil and against Cypryan
the which her tempted to commyte lechery in likewise as it is written in her
legende. Another example how three fair vyrgyns systers were kept of god in
such manner that the provost of Rome ne might defloure them / and as he wend
to dyspoyle them in his kechyn he did his sin in the pottes and caudrons.
Quere in the examplarye. lxxxxi. E. Other examples how saint Margaret and saint
Peronell kept their vyrginyte and resysted so well that they ben worthy to
have the reward eternal / to the which we may go. Amen.

A. Of dronkenes and glotony that god defends. xxxix.
IT is written eccle. xxi. Amaritudo anime vinum multum potatum. Wine drunk to
excess is bitter unto the soul / and also also it is contrary unto chastyte
For when the womb is replete lightly it is moeued unto lechery. Vnde
hieronimus. Venture mero repletus de facili spumat libidinem. And saint Poule
says ad ephesios.v. Nolite inebriari vino in quo est luxuria. Be ye not drunk
by wine / wherein is lechery. That is to wete yt the wine heteth and moeueth the
body to comytte lechery / and the man that so delyteth is not wise. Vnd
proverb. xx. Luxuriosa res vinu^ et timultuosa ebrietas: quicu^que hus
delectatur no^ erit sapie^s. The sin of glotony is defended when a man
breketh the fastings commanded in obeyenge unto the womb yt will ete when
god commands to fast or when men ete any things defended as Adam yt ete of
the apple against the commandment of god / or as those the which eteth
flesh on the frydayes or saterdayes or butter in lent when it is defended in
ye bysshopryche / or when some gloto^s loves their wombes more than god or
egally unto him the which is ydolatry / as it is declared in the first
commandment. Que. ix.c. Or when men take the hour as to ete on ye sondayes
and festes before mass or before yt they have served god / or when a man
secheth unto superfluyte and is to much lycorous or gredy of good wynes / and
of fatre and delycatyue meets / or prepayreth them over deyntely. To such
savor and delectacion unto superfluyte there is sin / but if any have honger
and yt he eteth and also delyteth in the meet it is no sin / for it is a
thing natural yt behooves unto al bestes If any also prepayre the meet in
such manner and intencyon yt he may ete it after the co^plexyon and faculte of
him / for otherwise he ne may ete it / he it also may do without sin. Vnde
au. Vtantur diuites co^suetudine i^firmitatis sue: sed dolea^t se aliter no^
posse melius ei^ facere^t si aliter possent. Also those the which has vowed
not to ete eggs on the friday / or flesh on the wednesday sy^neth as unto
the fraccyon of the vow: and as unto glotony. Also the excess of meet and
drink is defended that is to understand when a man eteth too much of breed
and of meet that nature be grieved / or that a man vomet / or when a man takes
so much of drink that a man becomes drunk and that the entendement be
troubled / or to excede in drink and mete togyders. A doctor named de
vrimaria says. Quicu^ que inebriatur vel excedit mensuram in commedendo vel
bibe^do et hoc facit preposito and intention / talis peccat mortaliter tociens
quotiens / sed si sit ignoranter et sieve preposito vel si causa euenerit aut ex
fragilitate sume^tis tunc peccat venialiter. That is to say. What soever man
that makes himself drunk or excedeth the measure in etinge or drinking and
does it with intency on and purpose synneth mortally by as many oftymes as it
happens. And if he do it ygnourantly and without purpose disposed or if it
happen by fraylte he synneth venyally. And another doctor named herma^num
believes that when any takes so much of drink and meet unto superfluyte and
from than forth that it grieve nature be it by vometynge or not / and that of
it yt which he has superfluyte and haboundaunce many poor people had been
sustained the which peradventure had thereof necessyte / he believes that it
is mortal sin. Qr contra caritatem proximi. This sin is called surfyt the
which is when men eteth of the meet eschauffed and warm before that it be
baked / soden / or roasted enough / the which does evil / or to ete so much
mete yt it ne may bake in the dygestyon natural the which causethe corporal
infyrmytees and spyrytualles / and makes men surfytous to deye as says ye
sage. Vnde eccle. xxxvii. Propter crapulam multi obierunt qui autem abstinens
est aduciet vitam. And the gospel says that these persons should keep their
hertes that they be not grieved in surfytes and dronkennes. Vnde luce. xxi.
Attendite autem vobis ne forte grauenter corda vestra in crapula et ebrietate.
Et psalm. dicit. Tanquam potens crapulatus a vino. A man surfyteth also by
ouermoche dry^ke / when he takes so much that his heart is drouned. Also the
excess of drink wastes the mind / breketh the wit and the thought /
confounds the entendement it moves unto lecherye / it noyeth too speak well
and implies the words / corrupts the blood / derketh the sight / perturbeth
ye veins / takes the strength from the synewes / makes the eeres deef /
troubles the guts / subuerteth the person / moysteth ye brain / lets the
sleep / weyketh all ye me^bres / shorteth the life / lets prayer / the
virtue and all good operacyons. Vnde legitur eccle. xxxi. Vinum multum potatu^
irrationem et iram et ruinas multas facit ebrietas animositas imprudentis
offensio minorans virtutem et faciens vulnera. etc Also the sage Salamon says
that the Joy of the body and of the soul is when a man drynketh of wine
moderately without excess / sobre drinking is health of the body and of the
soul. Vnde eccle. xxxi. Exultacio amime et corporis vinum modere potatum /
sanitas corporis et anime sobrius potus. And saint Poule says that these
dronken people shall not possede the realm of paradyse if they deye
impenytentes. Vnde.i. ad Corinth. vi. Neque fures / nequod auari / neque
ebriosi / regnu^ dei possidebunt. And of him the which constreyneth any to
dry^ke to excess saint Augustyn says. Qui alium cogit vt plus bibat quam
opus sit vt bibendo inebriet / melius esset illi vt carnem suam cum gladio
vulneraret quam animam eius per ebrietatem occideret. that is to say that he
the which constreyneth any to dry^ke more than he should to the end that in
dry^kinge he be dronken / better it were for him that he made a wound in his
body with a sword than he should sle his soul by drokennesse. Note well that
the sin of drunkenness noyeth and harmeth in many manners unto them the
which it commytteth Quere ad numerum.xliiii. b.c.d.e.f.g.h.i.k Examples how
mani ben come unto an evil conclusyon by glotony. First how great evil came
unto Adam for bytynge of the apple. etc. Quere in the examplarye. liiii. A.
Another example written in the.xii. chapytres of Iudyth the which with wine
made Holofernes drunk / and in his dronkennes smote of his heed. Another
example how punycyon dyuyne / sekenes / and death came unto the cursed king
Balthazar in a great dinner that he had made unto the great lords of his court
in likewise as it is written. Danielis.v. ca. Another example how Amon the sone
of Dauyd the which dyspoyled his sister Thamar was slain at a great dinner by
his brother Absalon / in likewise as it is written in the.xiii. chapter of the
second book of kings. Another example how the sons of Job and his daughters
were slain at a great dinner of their oldest brother / in likewise as it is
written in the.xvi. chapter of the said Job. Another example how ye princes of
the Phelystyns feested togiders and made a great dinner / and Sampson ye strong
pulled down the house upon them / and there were three thousand persons slain
in likewise as it is written in the.xvi. chapter of the book of Iuges. Another
example how saint Johan baptyst was beheeded and his heed was borne unto king
Herod as he was making a great dinner in likewise as it is written in
the.xiiii. chapter of the gospelles of saint Mathewe. Another example of
filius prodegus that wasted his substance in glotonyes and lecheryes / in
likewise as it is written in the xv. chapter of the gospels of saint Luke.
Another example of a pilgrim ye which sold his goune for to drink wine /
and evil came unto him. Quere in thexamplary.lxxxxiii. G. Another example that
ill came unto a man named Vodo the which yode to ete and drink at the tavern
wha^ he should have gone unto the church. Quere in thexamplary.lxvii. E. Many
other examples of glotons shall be found in the third commandment of
thexamplary. Quere per tabulam.lxvii. a.b.c.d.e.

B. Of fasting and abstinence that god commands. xxxix.
IT is written. Gen^. iii. ca. De ligno scie^tie boni et mali / ne comedas.
Incontinent that Adam was fourmed god him defended that he should not ete of
the fruit of the tree of science both good and evil. He dysobeyed unto the
said commandment and evil came unto him / in likewise as it is written in the
examplary. Quere liiii. a. Also god will that we fast and do abstynence in some
days that the church determyneth us. Fasting is instytued for ye health of
our souls / in likewise as says the scryptures. Vnde hiero. Ieiunio et
oratione sanande sunt passiones corporis et pestes mentis. The passions of the
body / and the pestelence of the thought ben heled by fasting and prayer. And
Ysodorus says Abstinentia enim carnem superat / luxuriam refrenat / et alia
vicia calcat. Abstyne^ce surmou^teth the flesh / refreyneth lechery / and
fouleth ye other vices. A man may not well overcome the temptacions but by
fastings and abstynences. Vnde. Ysidorus. Non potes te^ptationes vi^cere nisi
ieiunus insisteris. Also fasting lyfteth our thought up unto god in devotion
and contemplacyon / and also augmenteth the virtues and the reward eternal /
in likewise as says ye preface of lenten. Qui corporali ieiunio vicia
co^primis / mente^ eleuas / vtute^ largiaris and premia. etc. Also abstynence
and fasting ben much prouffytable in likewise as it appears by many stories
of the bible. It is written in the.xiii. chapter of the book of Iuges how the
angel of god appeared unto the wife of Ma^ne brehaigne unto whom he
commanded that she ne should drink wine ne sydre and yt she should not eete
any unclean thing and yt she should have a sone / and so it was done. And she
conceived Sampson the strong. Another hystory is written in the.xx. chapter of
the book of Iuges that after that the children of Ysrael had fasted and wept
they fought with the sons of Beniamyn and they had victory. Another hystory
how the prophet Helye did great abstyne^ces when he demanded of a woman
wydowe a little of water to drink and a shyuer of breed / the said wydowe gave
it him / and her mele or flower multyplyed / as it is written in the.xxii.
chapter of the third book of kings. And it it written in the.xix. chapter of
the said book how the aungel of god brought unto hy^ breed and water after that
he had much fasted and trauayled. Another history written in the.xxi. chapter
of the.iii. book of ky^ges that after that king Achab had made Naboth to be
slain he was manassed and thretened and knowleged his defaute / he cut his
vestementes / ware the hair / fasted / and slepte upon a sack / and god
atte^pred his pain and sentence. etc. Another hystory written in the third
chapter of ye prophet Jonas that when those of the cite of Nynyue herd that
their cite should be subverted and that they should be punysshed for their
sins / they fasted al great and little / and they clothed them with sackes /
and changed their cursed ways / and god had pity on them / and did not unto
them ye evil yt he would have done unto them. etc. Another hystory written in
ye fourth book of Iudyth that after yt the children of Ysraell had herd the
terryble puyssaunce of Holofernes they fasted and prayed god and they had
vyctory. Another hystory written in ye fourth chapter of Hester how before
that Hester made request unto the king for some people the which should be
slain she said unto a man Mardocheus that he should go unto the said people to
make them pray for her / and that by three days they ne should ete ne drink /
and yt she and her servants should fast / and so it was acco^plyshed and her
request unto her was granted. etc. Another hystory written in the first
chapyter of danyell how danyell and his company Ananias / azarias / and mysaell
also abstened them to ete of metes of the king and to drink of the wine / and
god gave unto the three children science in all books / and unto danyell he gave
entendement of visions and of dremes etc. Another example written in the third
chapter of the gospelles of saint Mathewe how the mete of saint Johan baptyst
was greshoppes and wild honey / and he neither drank wine ne sydre / and was
so full of great abstynences and holiness that it is written of hy^. Internatos
mulierum non surrexit mayor iohanne baptista. A question / who so demands
what fasting days the church commands to fast / and what people ben
bound to fast them. The answer. The church commands fasting unto all
those and them ye which may do it by health of their bodies / the fourtymes of
the year / yt is the ymbre days / and the vygylles of ye feestes the which
follows. That is to understand / the vygyll of crystmas / of whytsontyde
saint Johan baptyst / saint Laurence / the assumpcion of our lady / the vygyll
of saint Peter and saint poule / saint Andrew / saint Simon and saint Jude /
saint Matthew / and ye day of saint Mark / but it if come upon the sunday the
fasting and processyon shall be on the monday after. Also the custom is now to
fast all the vygylles of the feestes of our lady / and in many places the three
days of the cross. etc. Also the quarantyne of the lenten is of commandment
of the church to fast / in likewise as says these doctors. Alijs diebus
ieiunare remedium at premiu^ est / in quadragesima non ieiuna re peccatum est
alio tempore qui ieiunat accipiet indulgentia^ / i^ quadragesima qi potest et
non ieiunat sentiet pena^. A questyon / A man may demand in what aege a
person is bound to fast the lenten. Saint Thomas answers.ii.ii. q. xlvii.
Et dicit qua^diu aliquis stat in statu augmenti non tenetur ad oi^a ieiunia /
scilicet ad finem tercij septe^nij.i.xxi. years. And after the said saint
Thomas says / it is conuenable that every person under the said aege of.xxi.
years excercyse him to fast the most that he may do / as he of xiiii. years
should fast more than he of.x. years. And howbeit that a man ne may fast all /
yet he should enforce him to do every of them after his puyssaunce. We read in
the.xxiiij. chapter of Exodi how Moses fasted.xl. days when he received the
law and ye commandments of god. Also we read in the third book of kings in
the.xix chapter how the prophet Helye fasted.xl. days and.xl. nyghtes wha^
the aungel brought him meet. etc. Also we read in the.iiij. chapter of the
gospelles of saint Matthew that our blyssed savior and redemptoure Ihesu christ
fasted.xl days. Vnde mathei. iiij. Et cum ieiunasset quadraginta diebus et
quadraginta noctibus postea esurijt. etc. Also the said lenten should be fasted
/ and it is of the commandment of the church unto them yt have aege and that
may do it.

C. Many persons ben holly excused / as women with child for her fruit / and
also nouryces if they may not fast they should do after their power with the
nuryture of the child. A questyon of women yt ben strong and may well fast
it / but their husbondes defends it them. The answer is / scdm innocen. vbi
dicit. Licet dimittere debea^t mulieres vota voluntary suscepta propter
habitatione^ viroru^ / non tame^ ieiunia ab ecclesia precepta. Also the seek /
and the weyke ben excused. A questyon of pilgrims and people sore laboury^g.
The answer after saint Thomas. If ye pilgrimage or labor may be deferred or
taken away without inconuenyent fastings should not be broken. And if it be
necessyte to walk and to do the great Iourneyes or to labor much and that
they ne may do it with fasting they ben not bou^dede to fast. In such things
it should be surer to have recours to be dispensed of ye prelate. And a man
should not understand in common proverb how all the laborers ben excused to
fast it. For if any be rich and has suffycyent nourysshynge and wherewith to
keep the fasting day he ought to labor the less to the end yt he may fast and
satysfye unto the commandment of the church. But if he be poor and that
necessyte co^streyne him to labor strongly for yt he ne may have his
necessytees for his wife and children if he did not the said great labor he
synneth not mortally if he ete on the fasting day sygnauntly so that he have
his coura-and will that he would obey gladly unto ye commandment of the
church if he might have the said necessytees. Also it is to understand that
fasting is so grievous and so hard unto some persons that scantely and with
great pain they may fast one day in the weke in lenten for their labors
and trauayles that they aledge. Unto those a man should answer that they shall
have the more and greter merit in paradyse for the great labor yt they take
to fast / and that god shall reward unto every person the fastings and the
labors after ye operacyons that they do. Vnde psalm. Retribu et vnicuique scdm
opera sua. And if he will not fast do almesdedes or oraysons or good operacyons
in recompense and in showing token that he would obey gladly if he might.
Questyon of poor beggars if they ben holden to fast. The answer after
Thomas.ii.ii. q. cxlvii. where he says yt if they may have as much of alms
together as shall suffyce unto them to ete at dinner / they shall not be excused
of fasty^ge. And if they may not so much assemble for to suffyce them on that
day to feed they ben not bound to fast / or when they ben weyke for the
pouerte thereof procedynge they ben excused. Example of fasting Quere in the
examplarye.cv.C

A. The eight commandment of god defends all words the which ben against
the dyleccyon of thy neighbor. xl.
False witness look thou none bear
Ne yet lie in any wise
Dread thou also to speak or swear
Against thy neighbor by mine advise
THis commandment is wryte^ in the ancient testament. Deutero. v. ca. et
exodi. xx. Non loq^ris contra proximum tuu^ falsum testimonium. Thou shalt not
speak ne bear false witness against thy neighbor. And it written. Leuiti. xix.
ca. No^ mentiamini nec decepit vnusquisque proximum suum. Ye shall not lie and
neither of you shall deceive his neighbor. And it is written in ye new
testament. Mathei. xix. ca. et luce. xviii. Non falsu^ testimoniu^ dices. Thou
shall not say false in wytnessy^ge but that thou be punysshed as many have been
in likewise as thou may se by examples. Quere.lxxxxvii. a.b. In this
commandment god defends generally all falls and evil languages in all the
manners yt a man may bring them forth with the tongue the which ben against
ye dyleccyon of thy neighbor / in likewise as it shall be declared in
particular herafter / and us commands the virtue of veryte. For sith that he
defends in such wise al lesynges and evil languages it follows well that he
us commands that we bring forth good and verytable words. etc.

B. Of false wytnessynge that god defends. xl.
NOn falsu^ testimoniu^ dices. you not say falls in witnessy^ge. He yt makes
falls report in judgment of certain conscience for to noye unto neighbor
synneth right grievously in three manners. Primo / in as much as he forswereth
him and falseth his faith yt he takes upon ye font of baptysme and that he
renounceth god yt is full of veryte / and leueth his feaute and the oath that he
had made unto him for to draw hy^ unto the devil the fader of lyenge and the
hand that he lyfteth up in forsweringe hy^ apperteyneth unto the devil / and
when he blysseth and crosses him it is with ye deuilles hand. Scdo in as much
as he is the cause whereby ye right Justice is fyled and corrupt whereby falls
great inco^uenyent. Tercio / in as much as he is a liar / false / and
corrupter of veryte. Those the which forswereth them wytyngly in judgment ben
infamed as it is written in right. extra. q^rela^. Et. v^ q.i. Infames. Also
they ne should never be take in wytnes. extra de testi. Sicut. e. vii. q.i.
Quicunque. They deceive three persons that is the Judge / the innocent / and
themself. They deceive evil the Judge / wors the Innocent / and worst of al
themself. They deceive the Judge by that / that he believes that they say
veryte / and he makes false Judgment against right Justice the which is to
yield unto every man that thing the which is his. They deceive yet wors ye
Innocent / for by the false witnessynge sometime ye Innocent leseth his heritage
/ sometime his goods / his good renounce / or sometime is slain and put unto
death. They deceive worst of all themself / for they do dampne their souls /
and they bind them to make restytucyon of all the losses and domages in the
which the said Innocent re^neth by the said false wytnessynge. In likewise as
a thief or harlot the which takes and withdraws the goods of his neighbor
is holden to make restytucyon. In like manner a false witness the which
wtdraweth the goods of his neighbor by false wytnessynge is holden to
restytucyon as it is written in many places in the decrete. Tenetur autem falsis
testis ad restitutionem oi^m que per suum falsum testimoniu^ proximus eius
amisit. extra de elec. significati. vlter. med. and.xxviii. di. de syracusa ne.
extra de of. orde. ad reprime^dam. and.ii. q. c. presbiter. and non sane / et
non res aliena. and.ii. q. notu^. and ar. iii. q. ix. nichilominus. Sometime a
false witness or a false accusatoure is homycyde or thief. He is homycide of
his neighbor innocent when that he deyeth by his false accusynge or
witnessynge / as ye Jews the which made Jesus christ to deye And if he deye not
he takes from him and steleth his good renoune / and is holden to make
restytucyon / or else he ne may be saved nor he should not be absoyled. Qr no^
dimittitur pctm^ nisi restituatur ablatu^. xiii. q. vii ca. Sires. The sin is
not pardoned if ye thing taken away withdrawn / stolen / or alyened be not
restored. The good renoune of a person is better tha^ an hepe of gold. Vnde
proverb. Melius est nomen bonum quam diuitie multe super auru^ et arge^t u^
gratia bona. A good name is better than much richesse / good grace is above
gold and silver. If a man make restytucyon of gold nnd of silver / by more
greter reason a man should make restytucyon of ye good renoune the which is
more precious than gold or silver. Also they the which make false wytnessynge
and lesynge wytingly in Judgment in cause of crime for to noye unto their
neighbors synneth mortally and breketh this commandment. For they subvert
the truth of the Judgment ye which is unto the death of gylte of all
communyte present. Of the which thing it appears if the Judge speak false
thing wytyngly in vttrynge false sentence or wytnessy^ge it in reportynge unto
the procuroure or advocate in following and defendinge false cause they
transgress this commandment / and ben bounden toward him that suffers the
injury. Also ye false accusatoure or witness is a thief when he makes to lose
the goods or the heritage of his neybour unjustly by false wytnessynge and is
holden to restytucion as it is said. For his neighbor had not lost the thing
if he had been by reportinge falsely. Wha^ a witness is called to report of
a thing he should say for ye one and other the good and pure truth yt he
knows of it / without putting any wyle or lesynge.iii. q. xi. hortamur.
and.iiii. q. iiii. nullus. and.xiiii. q. v. No^ sane. Et legitur deuter. v. Non
declinabitis neque ad dextra^ nequam ad sinistra^ sed per via^ qua^ precepit
dn^s deus vr^am bulabitis vt viuatis et bn^ sit vobis. Ye shall not declyne on
the right hand ne on the lift hand / but ye shall walk by the way that your
lord god you has commanded to the end that ye live and that it be well with
you. Et prouer. xii. Qui quoth nouit loqitur iuder est iusticie / qui aute^
mentitur testis est fraudule^tus. He the which speaks that / yt he has
known is judge of Justice Certainly he the which lies is a fraudulent
witness. Also a witness should not receive money to bear witness of any thy^g
For in likewise as the sentence ne should be sold no more should witness.
Howbeit the witness may receive ye dyspence of hy^ yt brings him / as it is
written.iiii. q. Venturis. And if the witness take money for to bear witness
of any thing Raymonde says yt foully and cursedly he takes it / and yt by his
advise he should make restytucyon. And of those the which sees to lose ye
thing of their neighbor by defaute of probacyon and say nothing for fere to
have the hate of one of the parties they sin mortally. Vnde au. Quisquis metu
cuiusque opta^tis veritate^ occultat / ira^ dei super se prouocat qr magis
timet homine^ quam deum / and post pauca vterque reus est. Et qui veritate^
occultat et qui profert mendaciu^ qr ille prodesse no^ vult / et iste nocere
desiderat.xii. q. iii. Quisquis. That is to understand if any hyde the truth
by dread of any puyssaunce he provoke the ire of god upon him / for he
dredeth man more than god / and it follows the one and the other is calpable.
And he yt hydeth the truth and yt brings forth lesinges. for he the which
holds his peace ne will prouffyte / and the liar desires to noye. In such a
case a person preuyleged as a priest should be constrained for to bear
witness.xiiii. q. ii. quam quam. But it is to understand if the cause be
such wherein it is lefull to a priest to bear witness / for it shall not be
lefull unto him in cause of blood as homycide. Over this case be^.vi. cases
wherein a priest or a clerk may swear as a lay person / that is for the right
of the faith for obedyence / for peace / for the domynacy on of the church
when any is unbound of sentence of excommunycacyon / and when yt an enfamed
ought to be purged / these here ben taken. extra de eccle. significa. vlt med.
xviii. di. Syracusane. Legitur in.ii. ethi. quod in obscuris apertis
testimonijs oportet un In things derke it behooves to use by wytnessynge
appert. Thou shall not bear false witness against none in Judgment. Many false
witnesses reygneth now in ye world the which forswereth them for less tha^ a
pot with ale / and lends the conscience the one unto the other / and such
shall not abide unpunished without satysfaccyon unto god and unto their
neighbor. Vn^ proverb. xix. Testis falsus non erit impunitus and qui loquitur
me^datia non effugiet. et al. testis peribit. A false witness yt speaks
lesynges shall not escape / and he ne may flee but yt he have punycion / also a
witness liar shall perysshe if he deye impenytent. And if so be that he
demand penance / after ye canons for perjury manifest the which is so
lempnysed a man him should enjoin.vii. years of penance if he swear
fermely.xxii q. v. Si quis se periurauerit. Examples of false witnesses and
periuryes. And first of a christian man yt forsware him on the auter of saint
Nycolas. Que. lxxxxvi. A. Another example of a friar of doyen of Coleyne yt
forsware hy^ for money borrowed.lxxxxii.c Another example of wytnessynge how two
old men wytnessed against Susan^e Quere.lxxxxvi.C. Many other examples of
false witnesses ben written in the examplary. Que. lxxxxvii. a.b. Also of.ii. yt
made false witness against saint Stephen for to stone him / and how they
theymselfe first did cast stones at hy^ / in likewise as it is written.
Actuum.vi. Also of two ye which made false wytnessynge against Ihesu christ for
to crucyfye him. Mathei. xxvi. Et psalm. Insurrexeru^t in me testes iniqui et
mentita est iniquitas sibi. Evil witnesses has risen against me / and the
iniquite is lyengly upon them. And for that / yt they were cursed liars and
false witnesses they were punysshed in the vengeance ye which Vaspasyan made.
etc.

C. Of cursed language that god defends. xl.
DAuyd the prophet says in the psalter. Prohibe linguam tua^ a malo et labia
tua ne loquantur dolu^. Defend thy tongue from evil saying / and thy lyppes
that they ne speak treachery / fraud / ne fallace. It is that thing the which
is before written. Ne bear thou no false witness and lie not in no wise. Ne
mysse say thou by thy language any creature in no manner. In this eight
commandment god there defends all false reports / all lesynges / all
murmures unjustly made / and treasons brought forth for to deceive other Also
all detraccyons the which ben made in publysshynge the secret sins of his
neighbor / or showing them by encreasynge or Imposynge upon him false crimes
/ or in denyenge that he does good operacyons / or in demynysshynge his good
renown / or by chaungynge the good in to evil for to noye and harm him.
Such detractours the which takes away the good renown of their neighbor
takes from him life honorable / and therefore they ben false witnesses and
homycydes. Vnd bern^. Durior est li^gua detrahe^tis quam la^cea q^ perforauit
corpus xprei in cruce pe^de^tis. The tongue of the detractour is harder tha^ the
spear yt perced the body of christ hanging on the cross. Et legitur hiere. ix.
Sagitta vulneratis li^gua eorum dolu^ locutu^ est. The arowe making a wound
is ye tongue of them yt speaks ill. Et legitur sa. i. A detractione percite
lingue qm^ sermo obscurus in vacuu^ non ibit. Spare ye / cease ye of detraction
of the tongue / for a derke word shall not go in vain. Et legitur prouer.
xiii. Qui detrahit alicui ipree se in futuru^ obligat. He yt makes detraccyon
of any person he byndeth him in time to come / that is unto punycyon. Example
how a detractour had cruel Judgment before god for ye holy persons that he
had detracted rose against hy^ and demanded of the Judge vengeance / and he was
damned. Quere.lxxxxvii. D. Also god defends all flateryes as here after shall
be declared. Also he defends susurracyon the which is when any puts
dyuysyon between bredren / kynnesmen / and neighbors / or for to demynyssh
secretly the good of another. Vnde eccl. xxviii. Susurro and bili^guts
maledictus multos ei^ turbauit pace^ habentes. Example how a woman committed
this syn^e the which put dyuysyon in a good marriage. Que. lxxxxix. e. Also god
defends all defames / iniuryes / and mokeryes. Example how a boucher was
dyuynely punysshed for that yt he mocked the holy ashes.lxvii. F. Also god
defends all idle words and noyenges / and all bostynges / praysynges / and
shameful songs / and all evil counceyle / and to make short all words yt
ben against ye dyleccyo^ of god and his neighbor. And of the said words hy^
behooves to yield acco^pte before god at ye day of dome / and to have punycyon
if they be not effaced or raced out by penance / as yt holy scryptures
witnesses in many places. The first witness is the gospel yt says. Illud
mat. xx. Ame^ dico vobis om^e verbu^ ociosu^ quoth locuti fueri^t hoi^es redde^t
rationem de eo in die iudicij ex verbis enim tuis iustificaberis et ex verbis
tuis conde^naberis. that is to say. Certainly I tell you that every idle word
the which these men have spoken they should yield reason at the day of
Judgment / thou shalt be Iustyfyed or condampned by thy words. Also the
devil writes all evil words that thou spekest for to accuse the at the day
of Judgment. Example how saint Bryce saw the devil the which wrote the evil
words that was said in the church. Quere. lxv. E. Another example how a man
reuyued said that incontinent that his soul parted from the body he was
presented in Judgment / unto whom all the sins yt he had done / spoken and
thought appeared clearly in likewise as they had been present / so that there ne
abode yt leest thought but that it appeared clearly in likewise as it had been
thought. Quere. C.viii. D. And sith that it is so after the gospel that a man
shall yield account of little idle words by a more stronger reason a man
shall of great and evil noysom words. The second wytues is the sage the
which says Illud sapientie.i. Qui loquitur iniqua non potest latere nec
preteriet illum corripiens iudicium. He the which speaks an evil thing he
ne may hyde it / and the Judgment correctynge shall not pass from him / that
is to say / he shall not escape but that he be corrected. Et prouerbiorum.xxii.
Qui seminat iniquitatem metet mala. He ye which sows inyquyte gadereth
euylles. Et legitur prouerbi. xxv. Que viderunt oculi ne preferas in iurgio
cito ne posteo emendare non possis cum deshonestaueris amicum tuum. The things
that thyn eyes have seen bring them not forth anon in strife to the end that
thou ne may after amend when thou have dishonored thy friend. The third
witness is saint James. Vnde legitur iacobi. iii. Lingua inqietum malum plena
mortifero veneno ex ipso ore procedit benedictio et maledictio. The tongue is
evil without rest full of mortal venim / from the which mouth proceeds
benedyccyon and maledyccyon. Also saint James says. If any we ne to be
relygyous and refrayneth not his tongue but deceyueth his heart it is vain
relygyon. Let every man be hasty to here / slow to speak / and late unto ire.
The ire of man does no Justice. Example of a wrathful woman the which cursed
her maiden. Quere. lxxxxix. B. Another example of a relygyous the which
murmured against god and he was punysshed dyuynely. Quere. liiii. I. The fourth
witness is the phalmyst the which says. Vir religiosus no^ dirigetur in
terra / virum iniustum malacapient in interitu. The man Iangler shall not be
adressed in the land of the living or lyuers / euylles shall take the man
unjust in the death. Iterum psalmus. Dilexisti omnia verba precipitationis
lingua dolosa propterea deus destruet te i^ finem / euelle^ te et emigrabit te
de tabernaculo tuo et radicem tuam de terra viue^tium. Thou have loved always
words of precypytacyon / and therefore god shall dystroye the in the end / He
shall areche the and draw the from thy tabernacle / and thy rote from the
earth of those that been living. Example how a relygyous man said at his death
that all those the which had troubled and supposed against him had enforced
them to slay him. Quere. lxxxxix. A. Thou man or woman obey unto the
commandment of god the which the defends here all evil words to the end
that thou be of the nombre of the saved / and thou shalt possede ye Joys of
paradyse the which ben promised unto the obedyentes in likewise as it is
written in the end of this book. Quere. xlvii. A. Also keep the from the
bringing forth of evil words / of dread to be sent unto ye fire of hell the
which is a tourme^t much cruel for them the which thither shall be sent /
in likewise as it is declared in the end of this book. Que. xlix. b Example of
a woman the which had the upper part of her body burnt in ye church after
her death for her cursed language. Quere in the examplarye.lxxxxix. F.

A. Of lyenge that god defends.
IT is written leuitici. xix. Non mentiemini nec decipiet vnusquisque proximum
suum. Ye shall not lie / ne none of you shall deceive your neighbor. The wise
Salamon required of god two things before that he deyed the which ben that
vanyte and lyenge words were far from him. Vnde proverb. xxx. Vanitate^ et
verba mendacia long fac a me. It behooves to se what lyenge is. Saint Austyn
says. Mendacium est falsa significatio vocis cu^ inte^tione fallendi. Lyenge
is a false sygnyfycacyon of voice with intencyon to deceive. In this
dystynccyon there ben two things. That is to understand a false thing and to
tell a lie. Dicere falsu^ est aliqid esse quod non est ita non distinccio vtru^
intendat dicere veru^ vel falsu^. To say a false thing is to say some thing
to be so the which is not / as when a man speaks it without regarding the
intencyon to speak true or false. Et mentiri est contra mentem iri. To lie is
to go against the thought after thethymologisement of the word. Is qui
mentitur co^tra id quod animo sentit loquitur voluntate falle^di. He the which
lies speaks against that / yt he has in his courage with intencyon to deceive.
In likewise in the dyffynycyon of lyenge is comprysed to speak a false thing /
and to tell a lesynge / and therefore there is dyffere^ce between lyenge and
saying a false thing. For every person yt lies speaks not a false thing.
Sometime he says troth albeit yt he wene to speak a false thing / and unto
the contrary every person ye speaks a false thing lies not. For he weneth
sometime to say all bet it yt he say false. So every person the which lies
deceyueth evermore by will / albeit yt he be deceived in the truth of the
deed / and therefore he the which lies sins always. For ye tongue culpable
ne makes / but ye thought culpable / as it is written.xxii. q. ii. Homines He
that speaks a false thing synneth not always mortally. Sometime he speaks a
false thing with intencyon to deceive ye which is mortal sin. And in lyenge
he speaks sometime a false thing yt he weneth to be true / and wha^ after his
saying he enquyreth dilygently of the deed / and repents hy^ when he has
apperceyued his falsenes it is but venyall sin / as it is written.xxii. q. ii.
Homines. For to have examples of liars it behooves to take them the which be^
perjured / for they ben liars and periurers toder. Example how a devil lied
unto a noble man and put him in error for to deceyueth him at his death.lx. B.
Another example how two merchants told unto their curate yt they ne could
sell any thing without lyenge. Quere. lxxxxix.

B. For to know the manners of lyenge a man should understand ye saint Austyn
assygneth.viii. kinds. The first kind of lyeng is when a man makes a lie
against the faith / or against ye doctrine of holy relygyon / as who should say
yt Ihesus is not borne of ye vyrgyn Mary / or yt he has not suffered death and
passion for to redeem us etc. To speak such words by reason disposed it is
mortal sin and case reserved / and it is the chief of all lyenges. The
second kind of lyenge yt is after the gretest sin / is when a man makes a
lie for to hurt or hy^der any person unjustly so yt such lyenge ne
prouffyteth unto no creature / but noyeth unto some / as too say evil of his
neighbor by detraccyon in forgynge false lesynges for to take from him his
goods / and his good renoune as it should be too accuse him or witness
against him unjustly of theft or of any crime. Those the which in such wise
lies synneth mortally and right gretely / and may be deputed homycydes / or
thieves after ye lie or lesynge as it is said before. The third kind after
most gretest sin / is when a man makes a lie for to aid unto some and to
noye unto another in cause of money / goods or herytages as to wytnes unjustly
with any for to make another too lose his money / such lesynge is mortal
sin. The fourth kind is when a man makes a lie by delyberaci for to deceive
any person in lechery or auaryce / it is also mortal sin. The fyfth is made
by couetyse for to please unto any person by flatery / and this flatery is
made in three manners. The first is granting unto any person some goodness that
he has not / as to say thou art wise / thou art fair thou art mighty / and
that he were not so The second is in approuynge the evil yt some cursed
person has done / as if he has beten / or pylled his neighbor. etc. to say
yt he has well done and to praise him of the said evil / these two flateryes
here ben.ii. mortal sins / but the last is wors and more great sin than the
first.xxii. q. ii. Primu^. xlvi. di. sunt no^ nulli. And ye prophet ysaie
saythin. v. ca. Ve qui dicitis malu^ bonum et bonum malu^ / ponentes tenebras
in luce^ et lucem in tenebras / ponentes amaru^ in dulce et dulce in amarum.
Maledyccion or woe be unto you the which say the ill to be good and the good to
be ill / putting derkenes to be light and light to be derkenes / putting sour
to be sweet and sweet to be sour / such flaterers ben called falls witnesses.
The third flatery is to praise any person to hyghly of any good deed for to
please hy^ / this last flatery is venyall sin The syxte kind of lyenge is
when the lesynge or lie noyeth not unto any and profyteth unto some for to
avoid the loss of his money / as if a pyller would take away thy money or
that of thy neighbors and he demands the where it is / and yt thou say I
know not. The seventh kind of lyenge is when the lie noyeth unto none and
prouffyteth unto some for to avoid yt he ne be slain / as if a murderer would
s^e unjustly a person hid in thy house / and demands the where he should
be / and ye answerest I wot not where he is. The eight kind of lyenge is when
the lie hyndreth not unto any and prouffyteth unto some for to keep him from
velany corporal as if an harlot demanded a vyrgyn for to corrupt her lies
unto her and says that he would mary her. etc. The five first kinds of lyenge
the which noyeth unto his neighbor ben mortal sins as it is said and as it
is written.xxii. q. ii. Primu^ ne quis. The three last the which noyeth not but
aydeth unto some ben venyall sins after all the doctors in person imparfayte
/ but unto persons parfayt as cloysterers / relygyous there are diverse
opynyons / for ye one says that it should be venyall sin and the other
mortal / howbeit that there is no venyall sin but yt it may torn in to
mortal when it pleases / and yt a man it does of custom in likewise as it
is written before in ye second commandment. There is doubt made what he
should answer the which has a person hid in his house whom a man secheth
to slay / if he show him he should dread of the crime of homycyde leest by him
he were slain in showing him. Also he should dread the sin of them the
which pursues for the slay him. Also he should dread if he the which a man
would sle were in mortal sin that if he deyed impenytent and that he were
dampened. Unto that saint Austin says yt how be it that he that lies does
good unto an other / nevertheless he does his own propre damage / and in no
manner he ne should lie for to redeem the life of another in especyall the
person perfayte. For it is said yt none ne shall be brought unto health
sempyternall by lye^ge / but he should hold his pease to the end that in such
wise he ne lose ne lie / ne sle his soul for to save the body of an other.
Vnde augustinus dicit / quod nullo modo debeat quis mentiri et maxim pro vita
alterius redimenda ait enim et sempiter nam salutem nullus est ducendus
opitula^ te mendatio. Idem augustinus. Ne quis arbitretur perfectu^ et
specialem pro ista te^porali vita morte cuius sua vel alterius no^ occidatur
anima debere mentiri / sed taceat vt sic neque perdat / neque mentiatur / neque
ocadat animam suam pro corpore alterius. xxii. q. ii. Primu^ ne quis. Item
Ysidorus diat. Omne genus mendatu summopere fuge nec casu / nec studio loquaris
falsum / nec qualibet fallacia vitam alterius deffendas xxii. q. ii. Omne. Fle
by sovereign work al kinds of lyenge and speak not false / ne by case / ne by
study / and defend not the life of another by any fallace. Ite^ au.
Periculosissime admittitur hec co^pensatio vt nos faciamus aliquod malu^ ne
alius grauius malu^ fauat disti. xxiiij. q. ait and ita dicu^t siplicitur
plurimi doctores. This compensacyon is taken right perillously yt we make any
ill ye other ne do more grievous evil. Some other doctors says yt in such
case men should lie but Raymond says yt sauy^ge better Judgment than his yt he
believes yt they should say nothing as says saint Austyn / or to transfer
his word in him questyonynge of other matters or to answer some word
equyuocall sygnyfyenge two things. We read ye Abraham descended ones in Egypt
with his wife and fered yt Pharaon ne slew him for her / and for this he said
to his wife / say yt thou art my sister and not my wife / and he said true /
but it was equyuokely for his wife was his sister for she was daughter of his
brother / thus men ought to answer equyuokely without lyenge. Also another
dysty^ccyon is made magystrally of lyenge of the words of saint Austin playner
and shorter the which ben devised in three manners. The first lyenge is aydynge
seruyable and pyteous the which co^pryseth the.iii. last kinds of the
dystynccyon beforsayd. The second is pleasant and joyous yt is the lyenge of
flaterers. The third is noyenge and full of cursednes the which compryseth
the kinds of the dystynccyon beforesayd. And in all these three manners there is
sin For every lie is either mortal sin or venyall. Vn^ au. Oe^ me^datiu^
est pctm^. xii. q. ii. Micht no^ absurd. I say than yt ye lesynges aydynges
ben sins / the pleasant lies be^ greter sins the which ben of bourdes /
flateryes / and scoffs / to speak and to flater there is syn^e without doubt /
and ye noyenge lies ben right great mortal sins when a man them speaks
wytyngly / and unto thynky^ge for to damage another. Unto this last lesy^ge all
these falsenesses / trecheryes / and fallaces yt a man does through ye world
for to deceive another in to damage either in soul or in body / or in goods
or in renoune / or in any thing what so ever it be / for every time yt a man
lies for to noye another as it is said unto his wytynge it is mortal syn^e
xxii. q. ii. Primu^ ne quis. Of this lyenge speaks the psalm. Perdes om^s qui
loquu^tur me^ daciu^. Et sa. i. Os quod me^titur occidit ai^am The mouth yt
lies sleeth the soul of death of gylte. Al ye falseth a man as a man falseth
the seal of a king or the popes bull / and for as much yt such a man bears
false lettres he shall be Iuged as felon or as falsary at the day of Judgment.
Vn^ au. No^ artificioso me^datio nec si^plici vbo oportet quam quam decipere qr
licet me^titur quis occidit ai^am sua^. It behooves not to deceive any person
by lyenge artyfycyall ne by sy^ple word. For how be it that any lie he sleeth
his soul as it is said. Also the liar is as a false coyner yt makes money
falls and naught. Also he is among the true people as ye falls penny among the
good. One good penny is better tha^.x tals / also does a true man than.x. liars
and falls. With great pain will a man take a falls penny wyty^gly / but will say
it is noumt it is false and coper. And he cares not of him self if he be a
liar or falls / whereby it appears yt he prayseth more a falls penny tha^ hy^
self which is great folly. Also lyenge is as veny^ mortal / for fro ye time yt
it is in ye mouth it enuenymeth and enfecteth all the person Vn^ psalm.
Accueru^t li^guas suas sicut serpe^tes venenu^ aspidu^ sub labiis eorum. They
have whetted their tongues as these serpe^tes ye sharp venym of the adder
mortal is under their lyppes. Et iacobi.iii. Lingua i^qietu^ malu^ plena
mortifero veneno. This lesynge was ye venym yt the serpent of hell had in his
mouth when he deceived Eve And therefore men say yt lyenge gives occasyon yt
the serpent has veny^ in his mouth. And those the which lies has ye tongue
enuenymed of the serpent of hell that told unto Eve the contrary of yt god
unto her had said in lyenge. And thereby they resemble to the devil yt is their
fader by imytacyon. Vn^ john.viii. Vos ex patre dyabolo estis et desideria ptis
vti vultis face ille homicida erat ab u^tio et i^ vitate no^ stetit qr no^ est
vitas in eo cu^ loquitur me^datiu^ ex proprus loquitur qr me^dax est and pr^
eius. You be of the part of your fader the devil / and ye will do the desires
of your fader / he was homycyde from the begynny^ge and he holds him not in
veryte / for veryte is not in him wha^ he speaks a lie he says it of himself
/ for he is a liar and also his fader. The devil is fader of liars / for the
first inuentour of lye^ge was the devil / and also he forged lies and taught
them to his dyscyples.

C. How a man should fle lies and love truth xli.
IT is written ad eph^. iiii. Depone^tes me^daciu^ loquimini vitate^ vnusquisque
cu^ proximo suo. Take away lyenge / speak truly every man with his neighbor.
And saint Peter says in the second cha. of his first epistle. Put away all
malice / all treachery / symulacyons / enuyes / and all detraccyons as
reasonable children newly engendered. etc And it is written ad col. iii. Nolite
me^tiu i^uice^. Lie ye not togyders but speak ye true We should love veryte and
fle lyenge for many things. First in folowy^ge our fader celestyall. It is
written prouer. vi. how god hates.vii. things whereof lyenge is one / yt is to
understand / the eyes lift up in pride / the lyenge tongue / ye hands
shedynge blood yt noyeth not the heart ymagenynge ill thoughts / the fete ready
to run in to ylle the brynger forth of lies / the false witness and he ye
sows dyscorde between his bredre^. Also god loves veryte as says Dauyd.
Vn^ psalm. Ecce eni^ veritate^ delixisti. Alsoo god is veryce yt deceyueth not
ne lies. Vn^ john. xiiij. Ego su^ via vitas et vita. And by yt we should hate
to lie and love veryte in following our lord. Vn^ ma. viii. Veritate^ and
pace^ diligite. Love ye troth and peace: a good child should love the good
manners of his fader / than if we ben the children of god we ben also verytables
and not liars. It is written zacha. viii. Loqinum vitate^ vnusquisque cu^
proximo suo seqitur iurame^tu^ me^dar ne deligatis. Secondly we should fle
lye^ge and love veryte / for lyenge dyffameth the persons if their lesynges
ben dyscouered Vn^ eccle. xx. Opprobriu^ nequam in hoi^e me^daciu^ et i^ ore in
disciplinatorum assidue erit. Lyenge is an evil rebuke to a man / and it shall
be accustomed in the mouche of them not dysciplyned / and verite makes to have
good renoune before god and the world. Vn^. iiii. ^hi. Verax est lauda^dus /
me^dax vero vitupera^dus. That is to say. The veritable is to praise / and the
liar is to be shamed or hated When a person is verytable yt for one ne other /
for cousyn / kinnesman / ne friend ne swerueth on the one side ne on ye other /
but says ye pure veryte he is to praise and to love and holy thing habyteth
in hy^. Vn^. i. ethi. Ambobus exista^tibus amicis sctm^ est prehonorare
veritate^. Saint James says in his canons. Si quis in vbo no^ offe^dit his
perfectus est. Who so offends not in word he is perfyte. Et legitur eccle.
xxxvii. An^ oi^a opera verbu^ verax precedat / an^oe^m actu^ co^siliu^ stabile.
Thyrdly we should fle lyenge and love veryte / for lyenge puts man fro
paradyse and departs him from god / and veryte ledeth man in to paradyse. Vn^
sap. vi. Co^cupisce^tia id est amor sapie^tie and vitas ducit hoi^em ad regnu^
perpetuu^. Fourthly we should fle lyenge and love verite / for lyenge makes to
have perdycyon and da^pnacyon. Vn^ psalm. Perdes oe^s qui loquu^tur me^daciu^.
Thou shall lose all those the which speaks lesynges if they deye Impenytentes
/ and veryte delyuereth from evil and dampnacyon. Vn^ io. viii. Si ma^seritis
in sermon meo vere discipuli mei eritis et cognoscetis veritate^ et veritas
liberabit vos. If ye be abiding in my word ye shall verily be my dyscyples
and ye shall know veryte / and veryte shall deliver you / in likewise shall
god the which is veryte the which shall preserve you from dampnacyon and
shall led you in to his glory / whereunto we may all go. Amen.

A. The.ix. commandment of god defends all lecherous thoughts and
commands clennesse of he^te.. xlii.
Man beware that thou ne desire
Thy neighbors wife / dought ne maid
In avoiding eternal fire
God to offend be thou afraid
THis commandment is wryte^ in the ancient testament. Deutero. v. ca. No^
co^cupisces vxorem proxum cui. That is to say. thou shall not coueyte thy
neighbors wife for to do sin. In this commandment god defe^deth all evil
thoughts disordonate of the sin of lechery and commands chastyte of
thought. For as nothing serves the chastyte of the body where the thought is
corrupt. Vn^ au. Nichil prodest vginitas corporis vbi operatur corruption
mentis. God defends in the seventh commandment the operacion of lechery and
in yt he defends the will the which comes of the thought. These two
lecheryes here ben to fle. Dauyd it required of god Vnd psalm. Ure renes meos
and cor meum. Brenne my raynes and my heart that they ne committee lechery. For
to have the heart blyssed / pure / and clean after the gospel. math v. Beati
mu^do cord qm^ iprei deu^ videbu^t. It behooves to shytte well the gates of ye
wits or nature that ye lecherous enemy mortal enter not / and that he soil
not ye said heart by evil thoughts. Master Hugues de saint victor says yt
lechery comes in to ye heart in.vi. manners. Sometime by sight / sometime by
herynge / or by touching / or by thought / or by word / or by operacyon / by
such things lechery is chauffed and nourysshed / ye soul is departed fro god
/ and chaftyte is fled from the manners / and lechery is excercysed in his
wits. And a man should note that incontinent yt the dylectacyon of lechery
comes unto the heart by sight or hery^ge / or by kissing. etc. suddenly than
resyst by pynchynge thy flesh / or byte thy tongue / pull thyn eere / think
on the tourmentes of hell. etc. And by such resystynges a man shall keep his
heart from soylynge and geteth a crown. In likewise as you shall find by the
examplary of ye.ix. commandment. Quere. C.ii. A.

B. The concupyscences of ye flesh how lechery is commyt in thought. xlii.
NOn concupisces vxore^ proximi tui. Thou shall not coueyt thy neighbors wife.
A man should understand ye concupysce^ce carnal is lechery without operacyon /
and it is said in.iii. manners. The first is without sin. The second is with
sin venyall. The third is with mortal sin. The first moeuynges of
concupyscence carnal the which ben sodaynes wtin the bo^des of nature and of
the sensualyte the which depends not upon the will ben not sin / for they
ben in ye puyssaunce of nature humayne. But more sooner is matter to purchase
virtues unto whom therein well resysteth by the mean and grace dyuyne / as unto
the foul thought without dylectacyon / and that it come against his will / yt
is no sin if reason thereto consent not. Vn^ greg. super ezech^.
Qua^tu^cu^que i^mu^da sit cogitatio me^te^ no^ polluit si ratio no^ co^sentit.
Et au. dicit quam pctm^ est actio volu^taria / nullu^ eni^ pctm^ nisi
volu^tariu^. It behooves sometime to be hold these women to speak to them / to
touch and to think on them / but after as the thought is ordynate or
dysordynate / there is sin or there is none. As it is of necessyte to ete and
drink / but after the ordonau^ce or dysordonaunce it may be well done or ill
done. Un de aug. in libro de nuptiis et concupisce^tus dicit. Co^cupisce^tia
no^ est pctm^ qn^ ad illicita opera no^ co^sentitur. Concupyscence is no sin
when the will ne consents unto the operacyons unlawful. Than those the which
lives chastely should not trouble the^ when there comes ill thoughts unto
them / for the devil tempts more the good than the badde. Bernar. dicit. No^
ei^ contristari debemus si in te^ptationibus inciderimus / sed si i^
te^ptationibus superatifuerimus. We should not be wroth if we be^ fallen in to
temptacyons / but if we therein have been overcome. When temptacyo^s comes a man
should stro^gely resyst and fight against them for to have reward and merit.
Vn^ bernar. Quotie^s resistis totie^s coronaberis / na^ quotiens resistimus
totiens ^yabolu^ superamus angelos letificamus deu^ honoramus. By as ofte^tymes
as you resystest as many times shall thou be crouned / and as oftentimes as we
resyst so many times we surmount the devil / we rejoice yt angels and we
honor god. The second concupysce^ce of the flesh is when the moeuynges
comes of the dylectacyon unto thing unlawful without propre will ne reason
dysposed to accomplysshe the operacyon / he is venyall sin. Also when an
evil thought comes unto any man with the dylectacyon all times without plain
consentement of reason than is it venyall sin. The devil begins to show
the temptacyon / and if a man consent not thereto but resysteth incontyne^t it
is no sin. And if dylectacyon come after the temptacyon it is venyal sin.
And understand well yt if the consentement of reason be not there / for if it
were there it were of the kind of mortal sin. The third concupyscence of
ye flesh is when yt delectacyon of evil is abyden and that reason and the
propre will ben dysposed it to accomplysshe here is mortal sin / albeit yt
afterward a man ne may come to do the operacyon / for the will is reputed for
the deed. In likewise is it of all other sins mortalles when the will is
dysposed the sin is as who says done. And a man should here understand yt
it behooves yt all men and women the which should enter in to ye realm of
paradyse have in their purpose yt if they lived eternally they ne would sin
mortally in any manner what so ever it be. Than of necessyte of health it
behooves that all those and they yt will have salvation should have in their
thought yt they ne will committee lechery in any manner but in good and lawful
marriage. If thou wylt not believe of simple word study the scryptures that
tells it in many places. Vn^ au. dicit quod voluntas reputatur pro facto. The
will is reputed for the deed. Iterum dicit. Co^se^sus i^ opus pcti^ mortalis
est pctm^ mortale and co^sensus in opus pcti^ venialis est pctm^ veniale.
Consentement in operacyon of sin mortal is mortal sin / and consentement in
work of sin venyall is venyall sin. Et greg. dicit. Qui co^sentit pcto^et
no^ arguit dignus est morte. He yt consents to sin and stryueth not to
resist unto the contrary is worthy to deye. And it is written in the gospel yt
our savior Ihesus said unto ye auncyentes. Do ye none aduoutry / and I say
unto you yt every man yt has seen a woman in desyry^ge to know her he has
committed sin in her in his heart. Vn^ math. v. Dictu^ antiqis Non mechaberis
/ ego au^t dico vobis qr oi^s qui viderit muliere^ ad concupisce^du^ ea^ me
chatus est in cord suo. God shows here yt the will is reputed for the deed /
unto ye dyfference of them the which weneth not to sin if they accomplysshe
the operacyon. It is written.i. regu^. xvi. No^ ei^ videt ea q^ pate^t / dn^s
au^t i^tuetur cor. The man sees those thing the which appears / and our
lord beholds ye heart and the will. Et pau. ad to. i Non solum qui faciu^t
peccata sed qi conse^tiunt facie^tibus digni su^t morte. After that saint Poule
had named many sins he said / not alonly they the which do the sin /
but also they the which consents to do them ben worthy of death. Example how
a woman was dampened for the conse^tynge of will to commytte lechery. Quere c.a.
Another example of a monk ye which lost the breed celestyal for having evil
lecherous thoughts. Quere. C.i. A.

C. For to understand clearly the dyfference of mortal syn^e and venyall it
behooves to take the words of saint Austin the which ben written in his book
of ye cite of god the which says. When a man loves a person is behooves yt
the said love be good or evil. It is good when it is for the love of god / and
therein is virtue And also such love is necessary as when the sone loves the
fader. etc. it is natural / the which is not louable ne vytuperable. Also
such love is voluptuous and lybydynous / it behooves to make dystynccyon / for
if the dylectacyon and will be above the love of god / or egally unto him / as
to say. I love better such operacyon of lechery than to obey unto god the
which it defends / or of as much as he endeuereth him to do it / albeit he
do it not here is mortal sin in two manners. And if the love be under god /
that is to say that a man loves better to obey unto god than to do it / it is
venyall sin. Vnde augustinus. Peccatum veniale est libido sieve amor voluptas
citra deum / mortale vero est libido sieve amor voluptatis. supra deum vel
equaliter ei. Mortal sin is lechery or love of volupte above almighty god or
egally unto him.

D. The euylles and domnges that the evil thoughts do. xlii.
EVyl thoughts ben to fle for many things. First for yt they separate the
persons from god. Vn^ sapi. i. Perverse ei^ cogitato^nes sepera^t a deo.
Secondly for that they make to have maledyccyo^. Vn^michee ii. Ve qi cogitatis
i^utile and operamini malu^m cubilibus vr^is. Maledyccion unto you ye which
think things inutyle / and do ill in your couches. Et ec. iii. Ve duplici
cord and labus sceleratis and manibus malefatie^tibus and pcto^ri terra^
egredie^ti duabus viis. Maledyccyo^ unto men of double heart / and unto ye
lyppes of women sinners / and unto the hands doing evil / and unto the
sinner entering in to ye earth by two ways Thyrdly ill thoughts ben to fle for
yt they chase away ye virtues and goods spyrytualles of ye soul and lets
all good espyrytuall yt it ne may profit. As a man may say by symylytude yt
sekenes corporal chaseth away the health and the welthe of the body / and to
let to ete and dry^ke / and all goodness yt it ne may prouffyte. etc. in
likewise as it is declared afterward. Que ad numerum.xliiii. b. c. d. e. f. g.
etc. Fourthely evil thoughts ben to fle for yt they sle spyrytually the souls
of death of gylte / for they separate god / his love / and his grace the which
is the life of the soul as it is declared in ye commandment of homycyde.
quere. xxiiii. b. Fyfthly evil thoughts ben to fle for yt they blind the
eyes wtinforth of ye soul and of the entendement and makes ye soul derke and
puts it in derkenes / as it is declared afterward. Quere. xliiii. Syxtly ill
thoughts ben to fle for yt they ben publysshed and showed at ye day of
Judgment before all the world / as it is written. Math^. x. et lu. xii. Nichil
au^t opertu^ e^ quoth no^ reueletur neque absco^ditu^ quoth no^ sciatur and i^ pala^
veniat. There is nothing so strongly covered but yt it shall be showed / ne hyd
but yt it be known and seen openly before all. Also it behooves to yield
account at the day of Judgment before god of all evil thoughts. Vn^ sapi. i.
In cogitationibus i^pu i^cogitatio erit. Interrogacyon or questyon shall be
made of the thoughts of the sinner. Et sapre. iii. Impuau^t scdm q^
cogitaueru^t correctione^ habebu^t qi neglexer a^t iustu^ and a dn^o
recesseru^t. The ill shall have correccyon after the things yt they have
thought. Example yt it behooves to yield account at the Judgment of ill
thoughts. Quere. cviii. D. Seventhly ill thoughts be^ to fle for dread to
lose ye Joys of paradyse and beatytude eternal / ye which Joys ben promised
unto those yt have pure hertes / and clear fro syn^e. Vn^ mat. v. Bti mu^do
cord qm^ iprei deu^ videbu^t. of this matter. Que. xliiii. and.xlvii. a.
Eyghtly ill thoughts byndeth unto punycyon and da^pnacyon eternal wtin the
fire of hell the which is a tourment much cruel in likewise as it is
declared hereafter. que. xlvii. b. Vn^ eccle. iii. Cor grauabitur in doloribus.
The evil heart shall be grieved in dolours. By these things beforesayd it
appears ye a man breketh the commandment of god by thought lecherous /
against the which a man should resyst for to go in to paradyse. Unto ye which
almighty god us conduyte the which is reygnynge and benedictus in secula
seculorum. Amen.

A. The tenthe commandment of god the which defends all evil thoughts of
theft / coueytyse / and auaryce the which ben against the dyleccyon of his
neighbor. xliii.
Coueyte thou not in any thing
Thy neighbors good ne heritage
Let not thy heart in it have liking
Lest thou be dampened for such outrage.
THis commandment is written in the old testament. Deuteronomy. v. ca. Et ^ro. xx.
No^ co^cupistes re^ proximi tui / no^ domu^ nec agru^ / nec seruu^ / nec
a^cilla^ / nec vniuersa q^ illis su^t. That is to say. Thou shall not coueyt
thy neighbors thy^g / his house his field / ne the servant / ne the maiden /
ne any thing yt unto him belongs. In this commandment god defends al
couetyse wtin forth / yt is to wit ye will dysposed to have the goods of
another unjustly against the will of him to whom they belong. Also god will
yt every man content him with the good yt he has / or yt to him shall come after
right / reason / and Justice / but a man should understand yt the first
mouinges coueytynge the goods of another yt be^ wtin the bonds of ye
sensualite / yt preue^teth all holly before the delyberacyon of reason they ne
ben dampnables / but al will dysposed and consenteme^t of reason being in will
to have them unjustly it is mortal sin and fraccyon of this commandment.
No^ co^cupisces re^ proximi tui. Some coueyteth ye thing of another in.iii.
manners. The first some there ben ye it coueyteth / but for yt / yt they know
well yt they can not have it they ne pursue it. And if they wist well yt they
should have it they should put it in effect / such synneth mortally. Secondly
some other coueyte the thing and enforce them in effect to have it / albeit yt
they ne may have it yet synnen they mortally and more grievously than ye first.
Thyrdly some other there ben to whom it suffyseth not to coueyte the thing /
but by falls enforcy^ge done so much yt they possede it / and such synneth
more grievously tha^ these beforesayd. They ben as those thieves and rauysshers
after yt they have coueyted comen to effe^^ to take it. It is written of these
manners here beforsayd.i. ad thym^.vi. Qui voluit diuites fieri i^cidu^t in
te^ptatione^ et laqueu^ dyaboli and desideria mlta i^utila and nociua q^
mergu^t hoi^es in i^teritu^ and perditione^. Saint Poule says yt they ye
which will be rich falls in to temptacyo^s and in to the deuyls gynnes in
many desires vnprouffytables and noyenges which plongeth these men in death
and perdycyon. Another exposycyon upon these said words. No^ co^cupisces re^
proximi tui. Thou shalt not coueyte ye thing of thy neighbor for to possede
it unjustly. It is against right / Justice / and reason / and for to ordeyne it
or too use it unto an ill end / as those yt appetyteth good for to lead great
pompes and estate in vaynglory / or for to use lechery / or to have dylycatyfe
metes / as ye cursed Dyues yt was daily served delycyously and rychely / or as
ye clerks yt appetyteth ye benefyces and dygnytees / not for to dystrybute ye
goods to ye poor as they should. Qr bona eccliarum su^t bona pauperum. But
for to live fatly and po^pously in superfluytees and sins. etc. vlsic. Thou
shall not coueyte to have ye thing of thy neighbor unjustly for to wtholde it
as these auarycyous yt keep and assemble without gyuynge and dystrybutinge.
Morouer a man should understand right clearly yt as many times as any is
disposed in his thought to go against any of the commandments of god he
synneth mortally and is a breker of this commandment against the which he
will go / albeit yt he ne come to do ye operacyon. Verbi gr^a. If you in thy
heart hate thy neighbor in desyringe his death or his damage you brekest yt.v.
commandment. Vn^. i. john. iii. Qui odit fr^rum suu^ homicida est. Also if you
be wroth in thy heart against thy neybour in desyringe to venge ye unjustly by
delyberacyon you brekest ye.v. commandment and synnest mortally. Vn^ math. v.
Oi^s qi irascetur fr^i suo scilicet i^ cord reus erit iudico^. This matter is
suffyciently declared in ye precedent commandment and in the things
beforesayd where it speaks yt the will is reputed for the deed. Here is the
end of the ten commandments of god ye a man should keep for to come unto the
glory celestyall / unto the which we may go cum illo qui est benedictus in
scla sclorum. Amen.

B. How those the which have broken ye commandments of god and the which
ben in mortal sin ne should not with draw to do always good deeds /
howbeit that they should be dampened. xliii.
Saint poule says in his epistle ad heb. iiij. ca. Oi^a nuda et apperta sunt
ante oculos dei. All things the which ben naked and hid ben before the eyes
of god. He sees and knows our thoughts and operacyons / and shall yield unto
every man that / yt he has deserved. Vnde psalm. Tu reddes vnicuique iuxta
opera sua. Et alibi scribitur. Nullum malu^ remanebit i^punitum et nullum bonu^
irremuneratu^. That is to say. that none evil shall abide unpunished / and no
good deed but that it shall be rewarded / be it in this world or in the other
And therefore ye person yt is in deedly syn^e should not withdraw to do well.
Vn^ versus Non amittuntur / q^ pro dn^o tribuuntur. Om^ia que fiunt / in
mortali bona pro sunt. Nam mu^di bona da^t demonijs arma refrena^t. Me^tes
u^lustrant / etia^ torme^ta minora^t. Ad maiora bona / da^t vsu^ facienda Non
tame^ eternal / possunt acquirere vita^ Vel sic. Versus. Co^dita peccato
mortal dant bona terre. Augme^tant vitam minuunt tormenta gehe^ne. These
metres or verses beforesayd has been made and taken upon the scripture the
which says yt they the which do good deeds in mortal sin be^ rewarded
in.v. manners / albeit yt if they deye impenytentes they shall not be saved. The
first reumneracyo^ yt they shall have ye which done good deeds yt god shall
send them the sooner erthly goods in this world / and greter haboundaunce
than if they ne did good deeds. The second remuneracion is yt by doing of
deeds they refrain / wtdrawen / and tarry the assautes of the devil that is to
say yt the devil has not so great puyssaunce and force upon them the which
does or says good as if they ne so did ne said / and also is wtdrawen.
Example how an holy man saw by the suffraunce of god at a great dinner how the
deuylles drew a back when those the which dyned spoke of god and good words
/ and the aungelles drew them nere. And when they spoke of detraccyon and of
evil ye deuyls came again. etc. Quere in thexamplary.lxxxxix. H. The third
remuneracyon is that the good deeds yt they do shyneth unto them / and
enlumyneth their entendementes to reknowlege their defautes / and to se the
good yt they lose / and the evil that they get. Also their entendementes ben
not enlumyned when they do no good deeds as when they do. The fourth
remuneraco^n is yt if these persons the which do good deeds in mortal sin
were dampened in hell they ne should be so grievously punysshed and tourmented
as if they ne had done no good deed / for the good deeds does quench the
sins as the water the fire. Vnde ecclesi. iii. Ignem ardentem extinguit aqua
and elemosma resistit peccatis. Example of a man deed the which fell in going
over a bryd^ for whom there was great strife for his al mesdedes and evil
deeds the which he had committed in likewise as it is written in the examplary.
C.x.C. A man should note here ye more that a person does of evil in this
world the more cruelly shall he be tormented in hell. Quere in
thexa^plary.xlix. c. And the more that he has done of good deeds and the less
of evil he shall endure and feel the less doloure if it were so that he were
dampened / and therefore a man should never draw back to do evermore good
deeds. The fyfth remuneracion that those have the which done good deeds in
mortal sin is that god them sends the more sooner grace to correct them
and amend them and to come unto salvation than if they ne did any good deeds
/ in likewise as a man shall find by many examples. First example by Cornelyus
the which was paynym / and for that yt he gave almesses he saw an angel the
which said unto him that he should go unto saint Peter the which should tell
him what he should do. Vnde actuu^. v. ca. Corneli mitte et excersi symonem qui
cognoi^atur petrus / hic dicet tibi quid te oporteat facere. And he did so
and was converted unto the faith of our lord Ihesu christ. Another example is
written in the legende of saint Syluester how the cause of the health and
salvation of ye emperor Constantyne was for yt he had pity on the children
that men would have slain to thentent that he were bathed in their blood for
to have remedi against his lepreheed. The said emperor would not that the said
children were slain for him and made to deliver them again unto their moders
the which wept / and morouer made to give unto them gifts. And the night
following he saw saint Peter the which said unto him that he should call ye
pope Syluester and that by him he should be converted / baptized and heled of
his lepry and meselry. And in likewise was it done as it appears in the said
legende. Another example. It is written in the legende of saint Eustace how the
cause of his conuercyon was for the almesdedes that he did. The begynny^ge of
the life of saint Eustace was that he was an ydolatre and sinner / but he was a
great gyuer of alms and full of pity and of mercy / and for the good deeds
that he did god would not that he were dampened / but gave hy^ grace to convert
him / to correct and to amend / and appeared unto him the which should be to
long to tell / and for an end and conclusyon he is holy and saved. etc.

C. Another example. It is written in ye legende of saint Johan thalmosyner of
ye conuersyon of the rich man chaunger and exposytour named Peter / the which
in ye beginning of his life was right cruel unto poor people and chased them
out of his house with great ire and Indygnacyon. And on a time the poor men
complained them togyders yt never in their life they might not have so much as
one only almesdede of him. The one of them said. What will ye give and I this
day may get any alms of him. Than they made covenant with him / and he
yode unto the house for to demand alms. And when the said rich man came
and saw the said poor man before his gate he could find no stones to cast at
him / so as one of his servants passed by the which bare barley loves to his
house he took one of those loves and smote ye said poor man by great wodenes.
Than ye poor man took up the lofe and so ran unto his neighbors unto whom
he showed ye alms that he had gotten of his hand. And two days after ye
said rich man was seek to ye death and saw in vysyon yt he was in Judgment
and black men put his ylles in balaunce / and on the other part of ye said
balaunce some other clad in white / and the one of them said. We have but one
barley lofe yt he gave unto god by constraynt two days passed. And when they
had put ye said bread within the said balaunce it seemed unto him that the
balaunces were egalles / tha^ they said unto the said rich man. Multyplye this
barley lofe or these black men shall take the and than he awoke and said. Alas
if one barlylofe that I kest by wodenes has so much auayled me / how much
avails the almesdedes the which ben given lyberally. etc. For to make short
ye said rich man converted him and was a right great gyuer of almesses after
and a very good man. Another example of another rich man the which served
the devil about.xl. years / and for going to here a predycacion he converted
him and was saved As it is written in the examplary. Quere. lvi. K. Another
example by that yt a man dyspayred had served saint Domynycke / he appeared unto
him / conforted him / and put him in the way of salvation / as it is written in
the Legende of the said saint. Another example of a man that was se^tencyed and
Iuged unto dampnacyon / and was delivered at the request of the vyrgin Marye /
as it is written in her miracles. Another example of a fair maiden po^peously
arrayed and cladde upon a sunday after that she was weary of daunsynge the
devil would have taken and borne her away in body and in soul / and she began
to cry for help of the vyrgyn Mary / for her mother had learned her to serve
her / and she was delivered from ye devil / as it is wry in thexamplary.
Quere. lxviii. c. d. A questyon. What deference is there between ye good deeds
the which ben done in deedly sin / and those the which ben done in ye
estate of grace. The answer. There is great deference / for the one is right
lively and merytoryous for to have the reward eternal in paradyse. It is that
the which is done in thestate of grace without sin. The other the which is
done in mortal sin is a good deed / deed and without reward eternal / for
it is done without grace and charity. Also sin is a venym so mortal unto the
soul that it mortyfyeth all goodness spyrytuall / and departs god his love
and his grace / whereby the sinner loses his reward eternal. But the good
deeds that he does in mortal sin serves hy^ / for there ben the.v.
retrybucions beforesayd. For to understand well this matter the persons the
which shall be saved at the day of Judgment shall have merit and reward
eternal that they have done in the world in thestate of grace. And if they
had committed any mortal sins and after do penance all those good deeds yt
they have done in thestate of grace in precedinge ye said sins come again
unto them in their good valor by the penance. And of those good deeds the
which ben comen again in conualescence ben saved and they shall have reward
eternalle in paradyse. And not of those the which they have done in mortal
sin / for that / yt when they were done they were deed by sin as it is said
/ and by that the merit eternal is lost. Vnde sctu^s thomas. Nullus po^t
mereri nisi mediante gratia vt dictu^ est. quere.xlv. b. Vn^ versus. Illa
remiscu^t que mortificata fuerunt. Viuere no^ possunt q^ mortua nata su^t That
is to say that those good deeds reuyueth in god co^ualescence by penance / the
which have been mortyfyed by sin. But those good deeds the which were done
in sin may not live / yt is reuerte in conualescence after penance to have
reward eternal. It follows than that the good deed yt is done in the estate
of grace is better than the other deed. And therefore those the which
dyfferreth to confess them in lente^ or in other times ben to be reprehended
to do a good deed in sin. Also a man should understand that no good deed is
lost / but the one good deed is much better than another. etc.

A The thing mouynge for to keep the commandments of god. Ca. xliiii.
Those that learn ne will.
The commandments and law to keep
And in every point them fulfill
In hell shall lie right deep
IN that aege that an enfant is capable of the commandments of god he is
holden to learn them / for that that he should keep him that he break them not
upon the pain of dampnacyon. Vn^ legitur in secundo libro sententiaru^.
disti^. xvii. Stati^ eni^ cu^ quis fit capax precepti dei tenetur ad eius
noticia^ et obseruantiam. Et david dicit in psalm. Tu mandasti ma^data tua
custodiri nimis. Thou haste command much to keep thy commandments. When
yt any temporell king makes to bane proclayme / or show any commandment
thorowoute his realm his subgectes move them to obey unto hy^ of dread to
run in pains and do^mages that they may have for their inobedye^ce. Also
many things should move us to keep the commandments that the king of heaven
and of earth has made to proclayme / and to cry over all the world. The
first thing the which should move us to keep the commandments of god is
for the great goodness in fynyte that is in him / that is to say that there is
so much of goodness in god that it is innumerable. For a man ne can find the
end so much there is of goodness in him. Of this matere is somewhat spoken in
the end of this treatise / and how the saints of heaven behold above them
the fair myrrour ye which is god. quere. xlvii. a. Example.xlvii. b. c The
second thing esmouynge to keep the commandments of god is for to obey to
his will / he is our fader celestyall the which has create our souls as it
is said before. Also it is he yt which nouryssheth us with his gods that he
makes to grow / and it is he the which has again us bought us by his
precious blood / and ye which will that we possede his heritage in paradyse as
his dear children. It is good reason yt the children obey unto the fader / and
by that yt we ben the children of god we should obey unto his commandments.
The third thing ye which moves us to keep the commandments of god is to
the end to be in his love and in his grace / for he loves those the which
keep them in like wise as it is written johannes.xv. Si precepta mea
seruaueritis manebit is i^ dilectione mea. If ye have kept my commandments
ye shall dwell in my love and dyleccion. Iteru^ in code^ capitulo. Vos amici
mei estis si feceritis que precipio vobis / Ye be my friends if ye do that
thing ye I commau^de you. Example by that / that abraham was obedient unto god
/ he was so parfytely in his love that he had his benediccion. Quere.lxi. a.
Another example by that that saint Mor was obedyent he did many miracles
among the which he ran one time upon the water wtoute synkynge or ylle
having. Que. lii. c. Another example by the obedyence of a relygyous / god
loved so much that a dry belet block that he arroused with water bare flower
and fruit. Quere in the exemplayre.lii. e. God said in the gospel / if ye
love me keep my commandments. He ye which loves me not / keeps not my
commandments. vnde iohannis.xiiii. Si diligitis me mandato mea seruate.
Sequitur Qui non diligit me sermones meos non seruat. Any lord or king ne
may love his servant when he dysobeyeth unto his commandments / no more
does god / how may he love ydolatres blasphematoures children unnatural /
inobedientes / murdrers / theuys / payllars / and false witnesses / when they
dysobeye unto his will and break his commandments he ne may love them.
Behold what hate and inconvenient that there came unto adam for a bit of an
apple that he did again the commandment of god. Quere.liiii. a. Also
behold how chore / dathan / and abyron / were punysshed for the inobedyence
and murmr that they made again god and Moses. Quere.liiii. God ne may love
hy^ the which dysobeyeth unto his commandments. But he loves him the
which obeys unto him. We read how god demanded of saint peter if he loved
him / Petre amas me. He answered thou know that I love the. Tu sis quia amo
te. And by that that saint peter loved god / and obeyed unto him / our lord
Ihesu christ said unto him in this manner of wise. pasce agnos meos: pasce oues
mea. I shall give the keys of the reame of heaven unto the / and that that thou
byndest in earth shall be bound in heaven etc. For that that he was obedyente
unto our lord Ihesu christ / god gave unto him the government of the church
and the keys of paradyse. Also we should keep the commandments of god to
the end that it would please him to abide with us / for to keep us and save
us. Vnde iohannis.xiiii. Si quis diligit me sermonem meum seruabit et pater
meus diliget cum et ad cum veniemus et mansionem apud cum faciemus. That is to
say / who so loves me keeps my words and my fader shall love him says
Ihesus / and unto him we shall come and we shall make with him our dwelling /
and it is written. ioha^nis.xv. Manete in me et ego in vobis. Dwell ye in me and
I shall dwell in you. Et legitur. ioh. iiii. Deus caritas est: et qui manet in
carytate in deo manet: et deus in eo. God is charity and love / and who so
dwells in charity / he dwells in god and god in hy^ We read that our lord
said unto the appostles that they should goo to preche and to convert the
infydeles. And that they ne should think what they should answer unto the
tyrauntes / and that it should be given unto them that that they should answer
of the holy ghost the which abodem them as says the gospel. Dabitur eni^
vobis in ti^la hora quid loquamini. Non enim vos estis quiloquimini: sed
spiritus patris vestri qui loquitur in vobis. So it appeared that god abode in
them. And who so does again the will of god he ne abides in him. etc. The
fourth thing yt should move us to keep the commandments of god / is to
the end that the good deeds that we done be unto him agreeable / and unto us
vtyle and prouffytable / For if we dysobeye unto him our operacyons pleases
him nothing. Three things ben requysyte before that we may do thing the
which is unto god agreeable / The first is the good deeds that we do be done
genere bonorum. That is that it proceed of a good kind or stock as to give
almesdedes of his own labor without doing it of theft or pyllery. The
second is: quod sit ad laudem dei non ad vanam gloriam. That is that it be
done unto the preyse of god / and not unto vain glory. The third thing is
that a man be in the estate of grace. For the good deeds that a man does in
sin is not merytoryous unto the eternyte unto the person the which does
it. Also it is not aggreable unto god: how be it yt a man should not draw back
to do evermore of good deeds as it is declared before. Quere.xliii. b. The
pope pius says de consecratione distinc.v. Nichil prodest ieiunare and orare
et alia religionis opera agere nisi men's ab iniquitate reuocatur. It
prouffyteth nothing as unto salvation to fast / and to pray / and to do
other good deeds of relygyon if the thought be not called again from sin /
that if a man cease him not to committee mortal sin. etc. And saint poule
says.i. corinth. xiii. Si linquis hominum loquar and angelorum. etc.
Caritatem autem no^ habuero nulis michi prodest vt dictum est ante: quere.iiii.
ca. After the scryptures it behooves to do the good deed in estate of grace /
in doing the pilgrimage of the world as it is said in ye first condycyon of
the pilgrim of paradyse. Quere ibi post. The.v. thing that should move us to
keep the commandments of god it is to the end that it would please him to here
and to understand our requests / prayers and oraisons / and that he them
grant unto us and exalte when we require him. Vnde. ioh. xv. Si manseritis in
me et verba mea in vobis manserint: quodcunque volueritis petetis and fiet
vobis That is to say if ye abide or dwell in me that is in my love. and that my
words be abiding in you / that been my commandments / ye shall demand
what so ever thing that ye will and it shall be done to you. Et legitur mathei.
xxi. and marci. xi. Omnia quecunque peneritis in oratione credentes accipietis.
God says you byleuynge in me by faith operant / take ye in orayso^ all
things what so ever ye demand / and the psalm. says. Occuli domini super
iustos and aures eius ad preces coru^. The eyes of god ben upon the just / and
his eres unto the prayers of them. Et legitur luce. xi. Petite et dabitur
vobis: querite et inuenietis: pulsate et aperietur vobis etc. Example how at
the prayer of a man a mounayne was remeued from one place unto another.
Quere.xli. a. Another example how a good priest catholic entered within the
fire to conferme the faith / and was not burnt. Quere.lxi. b. And in deed
contrary the orayson of him the which will not keep the commandments of god
ne shall be exalted / and ne shall get grant anenste god of that that he
demands. Vnde augu. Qui preceptis auertitur quoth in oratione postulat non
meretur: nec impetrat ab illo bonum quod poscit: cuius legi non obedit.
Example. The request of ye cursed dives was not granted hy^ when he demanded
a drop of water and that the lazar should go unto his brederne. etc.
Quere.lxxxiiii. a. The syxte thing mouynge us to keep the commandments of
god is to the end to have the great benediccyons that god prometteth unto those
the which here with good will and keep his commandments the which ben
written after. Quere.xlv. f. The.vii. to the end to have great reward in
paradyse / whereof it is spoken afterward. Quere.xlvii. a. The.viii. is to have
dread of the maledyccyon and exco^munycacyons the which ben cast upon the
sinners inobedyentes unto god and unto the church. Quere.xlviii b. The.ix. of
dread to have punycyon as pharaon the which had the heart so hard and was so
obstynate in ill yt he would not obey unto god and unto his servant Moses.
And therefore god sent unto him many punycyons and in the end he was drowned
divinely he and his people. Quere in ye exemplayre.liiii. f. Also these dys
obeysantes should dread to be sent in to ye fire of hell ye which is a
torment much cruel in like wise as it is written in ye end of the treatise.
Quere.xlix. b.

B. How many things ben nuysau^tes unto those the which ben inobedyentes and
breketh the commandments of god / the which ben written herafter by psalms.
Capitulo. xliiii
QVi in vno mandato peccauerit multa bona perdet. Ecclesiastisis.ix. ca. Who so
has sinned mortally in one commandment shall lose many of good deeds / That
is to understand that ye transgressyon of every commandment that a man
commytteth in synnynge mortally by dylectacyon and delyberacyon noyeth unto the
soul in many manners yt which shall be herafter declared and put by psalms /
First the fraccyon or brekynge of any commandment puts the soul of the
breker unto pouerte of spyrytuall goods. for it chaseth and makes to be
forgoten his virtues and good operacyons lately gote^ and the which rested in
him. Saint ysydore says. Per vnum enim peccatum multe iustitie pereunt. That
is to say yt by one sin many of justices peryssheth and saint poule says
ad galatas quinto Modicum fermentitotam massam corrumpit. In like wise as a
little of leuayn or sour dough corrupts a great dele of paste / even so the
brekynge of the commandment corrupts a great hepe of fair virtues.
Example how ye angel said to a vyrgyn chaste devout / a gyuer of alms and
charytable that she ne might be in such wise saved if she were not pacyente /
for ye sin of ire abode in her. Que. lxxxxix b. circa finem. Another example
of a monk the which was so much replenysshed with virtues that god sent
unto him every day celestyall bread. And after that he had committed sin
he lost ye said bread. Quere in the exemplayre ad numerum.ci. a. Another
example how the sone of a rich man the which served god in fastings and
oraysons and in doing operacyons was in the end dampened for that that he kept
ire in his heart / and for yt he would be venged. Quere.lxxix. a. Hold thou
for certain that the dysobeysaunce that a man commytteth in sin mortal is
an infeccyon and sekenes mortal the which takes away chaseth and anientith
and makes to be forgoten the virtues and ye goods spyrytuelles that any man
has before gotten and the which rests in hy^ For the scripture says yt
these virtues ne may dwell with the vices. Virtutes cum vitiis remanere no^
possunt. And these logicyens says two things opposytes and contraryes the
one unto the other ne may enhabyte ne dwell togyders in one self subject but
that the one chaseth a way the other. Duo opposita nunquam possunt esse in
eodem subiecto. The sins and the virtues ben contrary the one unto the other
/ than they may not dwell togyders. If I be than in mortal sin / my sin
chaseth away the goods spyrytuelles from and makes it to be forgoten before
god whiles yt it regneth in me / for I ne may be hole and seek togyders / good
and ylle / governed of god and of the devil / of good spyryte and of ylle. In
like manner I ne may be in grace and in sin / for they ben things contraryes
that when the one rules it chaseth and puts away ye other what so ever it
be. Vnde bernardus. Sicut ignis et aqua simul esse non possunt / sic
spirituales et carnelis delitie non se co^patiuntur ad inuicem. In like wise as
ye water quenches ye fire / or bytternes chaseth away swetnes and all things
delycyous / or the traycle the venyme / or the derkenesse the light / or the
hete the cold / In like wise mortal sin chaseth away the virtues and the
goods spyrytuell of the soul. Example also as the water departs it from the
pot the which is perced or holed. In like wise does good operacyons from men
by mortal sin. Quere.cii.x. Also mortal sin is by symylytude as infeccyon
and venym mortell / for in like wise as venym corrupts ye health and the
goods of the body / in like wise sin corrupts the health and goods
spyrytuelles of the soul. And in like wise as those yt which ben inuenymed
ben in danger of death if they ne go to seche of tryacle / so ben they in
mortal sin if they ne goo unto penance. Quere.viii. a which is the tryacle
and the remedy again sin Augustinus dicit. Omne seminarium voluptatum venemim
puta. Et luce.xiii. Nisi penitentiam egeritis omnes simul peribitis. Also
mortal sin is a rotennesse the which corrupts the beauty of the soul the
end of virtues / the odor of good renomme and the sauoure of glory. And in
like wise as rote^nesse gothe unto naught and leseth all beauty and bounte of
an apple so does mortal sin of the soul. vnde job. xiii. Qui quasi putredo
consumendus sum: et quasi vestimentum quod comeditur a tinea. Example how an
earl was dampened for an heritage ylle witholden albe it that he had done of
good operacyons. Quere.lxxxii. a. Another example how a woman the which fasted
and excercysed her in oraysons and good operacyons was dampened for the keeping
of Ire without being in will to pardon. Quere lxviii. d. Also a man may say by
symylytude that mortal sin noyeth unto the soul / in like wise as epedyme
or pestylence: or other sekenes mortal noyeth unto the body. For in like wise
as the sekenes corporal takes away the health and all the goods of the body.
In like manner ye dy^^beysaunce the which is ^^^hin mortal sin is so great a
sekenes unto the ^^u^e that it takes away and chaseth^ virtues and good
spyrytuelles the which rest^th in her. Vnde ezechielis.xxxiii. Inqua^tur que
die peccaue^it iustus omnes iustitie ^ius obliuioni tradentur. In what hour
that the just has sinned all his justices ben forgoten. Also when one membre
is seek / all the body feleth it and playneth. Cum patitur vnum membrum
co^patiuntur oi^a membra. Also when a man co^mytteth one mortal sin in
brekynge one of ye commandments of god a man dampneth the body and the soul
/ he leseth god / he leseth paradyse and all good spyrytuell / the which ben
forgoten as unto salvation. Vnde iacobi.ii. ca. Quicunque totam lege^
obseruauerit offendat autem in vno factus est omniu^ reus. Qui enim dicit non
mechaberis dicit and non occides quod si no^ mechaberis occidas autem factus es
tra^gressor legis. Example how a woman a great gyuer of alms the which wend
to be saved in doing the almesdedes that she did and in the end was dampened
by mortal sin not confeste. Quere.lxxxxii. d. Also one ylle or sin that a
man co^mytteth makes all the person to be culpable and dygne of punycyon. And
also as one cyrcu^staunce ylle makes all ye deed to be ill / in like wise one
sin brings unto naught all virtues and good spyrytuell. Vn^ magister
nicholaus de lyra dicit super illud ad galla. Modicum fermenti totam massam
corrumpit. Malum enim consistit ex singulis defectibus ita quod in
congregatione fidelium vnus peruersus in fide corrumpit alios per suam
malitiam. E alibi. Vnica sola pecus inficit omne pecus. When that a town is
taken with assault those the which takes it puts unto death and chaseth
away those the which it possedeth. In like wise done the sins and deuylles
when they have possessyon of a person / and that they rulen / they slay the
death of gylte and chaseth away the virtues. Vnde ad roma.vi. Qui mortuus est
peccato mortuus est semel. He the which is deed by sy^ne / is one time deed /
that is to understand of death of gylte / for grace and virtues ben departed
from him. etc. Also when ye jews / sarazyns / or payny^s have the dominacion
of christian men they slay them and take from them their goods / in like wise
done the sins and deuylles when they have domynacion upon a person to speak
spyrytually. etc. Example how the body the which is a fool makes the soul to
lose all her spyrytual goods and puts her in dampnacyon and perdycyon.
quere.lxvi. a. For to rehearse in partyculer upon the sin of lecherye. A man
should understand that in committing lecherye a man breketh the
commandment of god / and also a man synneth mortally / and such sin
makes the virtues and good operacyons gotten before to be forgoten. In like
wise as a man may say by symylytude / as if they were burnt / broyled / lost
and brought unto naught. For in like wise as ye fire of ye world brenneth /
consumes and puts in to ashes and unto nothing these words and these
other materes combustybles that a man gives unto it. In like manner yt body the
which is chauffed to do the operacyon of lecherye that god defends brenneth
and brings unto naught the good operacyons and virtues of the soul / if ye
said fire be not put out by penance. Of the which it is written job. xxx.
Crimen luxury fax est et iniquitas maxima ignis est deuorans vsque ad
perditionem et omnia eradicans gemmina virtutum. Wha^ a house is enbraced
strongly with fire / if the said fire be not quenched by water i^ brenneth and
consumes all the goods and materes combustybles till unto the earth and unto
the stones / in like manner the fire and embracement of lecherye brenneth and
dystroyeth all ye goods spyrytuelles of the soul of the lecherous man / or
woman / in such wise that the germe and engendrement of virtues ben taken
away and enrached / and it is understand by ye words before spoken.
Eradica^s omnia gemmina virtutum gemmen geminis id est germen: vel genero
generas. Also the blyssed and holy man saint Jerome says Gladius igneus e^
species mulieris. The glayue of fire is the beauty corporal of a woman. Vnde
ecclesiastici.ix. Concupiscentia carnis quasi ignis exardescet et sequitur.
Colloquium mulieris quasi ignis exardescet. The which is for to say / who so
will keep him from brennynge / draw he a far from the fire / that is from
company of harlottes. For as ye fire brenneth those the which touches it / in
like wise to touch or to handle a woman harlot or enclyned to sin / and to
take pleasure in her face and langayge / a man brenneth and dystroyeth
himself. And if parauen^ure some there ben that therewith ben touched the more
ferther let them draw back / from the company of evil women. For a bronde
that one time has been burnt ye more lyghtely takes it fire if it be not with
drawn far back from the fire. A man ne may be better exyled and dystroyed
than by fortune of fire. Nor the good spyrytuel of the man and of the woman to
be lost / as by the embracemente of lecherye. For master Hugues of saint
vyctor says. / Qui perdit puditiam: perdit animam suam: perdit deum: et
perdit seipsum. He ye which leseth chastyte leseth his soul / he leseth god
and himself / he is as he ye which brenneth himself unto his wyttynge his
house and his goods within it. Vnde scryptura. Qui peccatum committit quasi
qui ignem in propria domo ponit. And the moo of sins that he co^mytteth he is
he the which puts as many of fagotes and byllettes of wodde in his house
for to brenne it that is for to brenne his soul in hell. Example of the
daughter of a king the which was a right great gyuer of alms / and also
much devout toward god in her prayers and orayso^s that was dampened because
yt she conceived a child and deyed impenytent without confessyo^
Quere.lxxxxiii. h. Another example of a woman the which was a great gyuer of
alms that was dampened for the delyberacyon of will to commytte and do
lecherye. Quere.c. a. Also he the which sy^neth mortally as he the which
hates his brother even christian / or his neighbor in desiring the ylle of his
body / or the loss of his temporel goods / he quenches and brings unto
naught charity and ye other virtues and good operacyons the which rests in
his soul. In like wise as it is declared and showed in the sin of hate Quere
ante.xxvii. b. And how be it that mortal sin adnychyllateth in such wise
the virtues and makes so many of ylles yet should not a man draw back nor
cease to do ever more of good deeds if it so were that a man should be dampened
as it is declared before. Quere ad numerum xliii. b.

C. Secondly inobedience the which is mortal sin lets and keeps for to
get virtues and goods spyrytuelles / the which ben merytoryous unto the
(...) Capitulo. x^^ii^^
PEccatum meum contra me est se^per. Dicit david i^ psalm. Miserere. After that
the king Dauyd had committed mortal sin / he said that his sin was
evermore again him. Also thou man reasonable know thou and hold thou for
certain that if thou be in any sin mortal thy sin shall be ever more
again the and noyeth unto the soul in all manners and sorts that a man can
tell it the. For if thou will get paradyse and to possede the joys the
which there ben thy sin shall keep the from going theder any sin mortal
what so ever it be. And if thou will not have of pain / ne punycyon temporal
/ or dampnacyon eternell / thy sin shall make the to have in this world
punycyon. And if thou have not by penance / correccyon and amendment / thou
shalt have dampnacyon eternal and shall be constrained to be in ye fire and
torments of hell will thou or not. And if thou have gotten of virtues yt time
that thou commytte in will or deed any mortal sin / incontinent without any
delay as thou haste committed it / it brings to naught all the good deeds
yt thou have done before / as it is specifyed above. And if it so be that thou
will purchase here in this valeye of myserye of virtues and of goods
spyrytuelles / thy sy^ne shall keep the in all the sorts and manners that thou
would get as thou shalt here herafter so that thou sinner may say with
dauyd the prophet. Peccatu^ meum contra me e^ semper. Sin is said mortal
because it mortefieth good deeds acquired And also it sleeth the merit and the
reward eternell of the good deeds that a man would get. And therefore a man
may say by symylytude that mortal sin is a sekenes spyrytuel unto the soul
the which lets all his good deeds as the sekenes corporell lets all the
goods of the body Verbi gratia. If a seek body drink or ete also the sekenes
lets / that thing that he takes that it ne gothe unto ye nouryture of the
body. Also the sin lets the taste / the appetite / the sauoure and the
odoure and takes away the strength / ye beauty and courage of the body. Also
it lets to say his matynes / his service / to go unto ye church / to
labor / and to work. In like wise does the sekenes and infeccyon of mortal
sin to speak spyrytually. For if mortal sin regne in a person it takes
away the taste / the appetyte / the savor / and the odoure of glory / and
draws back the will for to do good deeds. Also it takes away all strength
/ and devotion to do good operacyons / and keeps that they ne prouffyte unto
merit and unto the nourysshynge of the soul in like wise as says these
scryptures. Vnde papius dicit de consecratione. v. Nichil prodest ieiunare scz
quantum ad meruum et orare et alia religionis opera argere: nisi men's ab
iniquitate reuodetur. That is to say that it prouffyteth nothing to fast as
unto merit and reward eternel / and to pray unto god and to do other
operacyons of relygyon / if the thought be not taken away and called
incontinent with out any delay from sin / and saint poule says in his
epystyll. i. ad corinth. xiii. Si linguis hominum loquar et angeloru^ etc. et
si distribuero i^ cibos pauperum omnes facultates meas. etc. Caritatem aute^
non habuero nichil michi prodest quantum ad salutem. This same auctoryte is
expounded and declared before all alonge. Quere ad numerum. Et sanctus thomas
dicit. Nulius homo potest mereri nisi median te gratia. There is no man the
which may do a thing merytoryous but by the mean of grace being without
mortal sin. Example how the fastings / oraysons and good operacyons that a
woman did prouffyted her nothing as unto salvation for the sin of hate and
rancoure that she had within her heart. Quere. lxxviii. d. Also another example
how that these almesdedes and good operacyons that the daughter of a king did
unto poor folk prouffyted her nothing as unto salvation for the mortal sin
that she committed and did. Quere. lxxxxiii. h. For to know clearly how
mortal in lets to get of good deeds unto the soul in many manners / it
behooves in partyculer to goo upon the good deeds that a man would have.
First mortal sin and the devil lets to get science / and sapyence
dyuyne / for the devil lets his scolers in worldly conning vain and
diabolyke of tables and try^les and mockeryes. And if any scoler being in
mortal sin study dyuyne science that that enters at one ere gothe again
cute at the other. Vnde sapientie. i. ca. In animam maliuolam non introibit
sapie^tia: ne chabitabit in corpore subdito peccatis. Example also how the
water renneth from the pot that is perced / in like wise does the virtues of
the man. Quere. cii.x. Also the wise salamon says in his proverbs yt he the
which delyteth him in wine ye which is a lecherous thing / and dronkenes ne
shall be wise. prouerbiorum. xx. luxurio sares vinum et tumultuosa ebrietas
cuicunque his delectatur non erit sapiens. Secondly mortal sin and the
devil if they have lordshyp and domynacyon of a person they draw back the
devotion of fasting and says. Thou art tender and of feel complexion thou
ne may labor study / walk / and fast? or do such operacyon. And if ye
person young be in mortal sin it lets and keeps that it be not
merytoryous unto him in deed. How men find by example in the bible yt sy^ne
let that the fasting of the people was not agreeable unto god whereof it is
wryte^ ysaye. lviii. Quare ieiunauimus et non aspexisti humiliauimus animas
nostras and nescisti. etc. Sequitur. Ecce ad lites et co^tentiones ieiunatis
and percutitis pugno impie: Wherefore have we fasted and thou haste not regarded
us / we have humbled our souls and thou haste nothing known us. And the
answer unto them was given. You do your fastings in hates / stryfes /
contencyons / sins / and ylles / and therefore your betynges and torments be
as nothing. For god will that the good deed be done in the estate of grace.
Example how a religyous was dampened for his glotonye / for he ete in secret
when men wend that he had fasted. Quere ad numerum. cv. e. Thyrdly mortal
sin lets penance and confession / for he puts before the person shame
and horroure to committee such sin / or dread to have great penance / or
fere to lose his good renomme. And if the person has done penance he
brings again the dylectacyons of sin for to waste the said penance. Vnde
augustinus dicit. quod inanis est penitentia quam sequens culpa co^macuiat
nichilque prosunt lamenta si replicantur peccata. That is to understand that
penance is vain / that is it shall not save ye person when sin is
committed after and ye wayllynges and the wepynges ne prouffyte ne thing as
unto the salvation if ye sins be again reco^menced / and he the which
wepeth his sins and leueth them not he submytteth himself unto more great
pain. Vnde grego. Qui peccata plangit nec tamen deserit pene grauiori se
subiicit. And how be it that penance done in sin is not meritoryous as
says the scot yet should not a man leave to do it / for it may be
satysfactoyre. Examples how by the shame to have committee mortal sy^ many
persons has left to confess the^ and to do penance whereby they ben gone
unto dampnacyon and perdycyon. quere ad numerum. lxxxxiii. h. and. c. a.
Fourthly mortal sin lets and keeps to do almesdede to less his bread /
his silver / and his good for to betake unto such truande and makes to
despise and to rebuke the poores. Also sin lets the reward the merit
eternel of almesdede and it anientyth and brings unto naught. Vnde ysidorus
dicit. Nulla scelera elemosinis posse redemisi in peccatis quisque permani
erit. No sins ne may be again bought by almesdede if he the which gives
it be in sin. And no pardon of trespass is given when mercy proceeds / so
that the sy^nes comes after. Vnde ysidorus. Nulla est delicti venia qn^ sic
precedit misericordia vt eam sequantur peccata. Example of a woman a gyuer of
alms dampened for the delyberacyon of will to committee lecherye. Quere. c. a.
Fyftely mortal sy^ne lets yt orayson is not agreeable unto god and
merytoryous unto him the which does it. Vnde ioh. ix. Scimus quia peccatores
deus no^ exaudit. We know that god hereth not gracyously ne exalts the
sinners. Et psalm. dicit. Iniquitatem si aspexi in cord meo non exaudiet
dominus. If yt I behold sin in my heart and keep it still in my mind / our
lord Ihesu christ shall not gracyously here me / nor accept my prayer. Et
legitur prouerbioru^. xxviii. Qui declinat aurem suam ne audiat legem: oration
eius erit execrabilis. He ye which declyneth his ere to the end that he noye
the law his oraison is execrable and in fructuous. etc. When a child
dysobeyieth the fader and that he demand a new robe / or shoes / they ne be
given unto him ne accorded by his dysobedyence. Also god ne grau^teth unto us
that thing that we him demand for the sins and ylles / that we do against
his commandment. This matter is approved by many examples. First how the
orayson of an hermyte ne prouffyted unto him for that thing that he made it
fore. For he delyted in his sins without resistynge there unto. quere. c. e.
Another example semblable how orayson is not exalted by sin. c. d.

D. Thyrdly inobedyence the which is mortal sin noyeth / for it dyffameth
ye person the which it co^mytteth. ca. xliiii.
PEccator transgrediens ma^data dn^i incidit in promissionem nequam. Ecclesi.
xxix. The sinner trespassynge or offendynge the commandments of god shall
fall in to ylle promyssyon in dyffame and reproach as by manner to say thou art
a blasphematour / a thief / an harlot / murdrer / false wytnes / infamed /
digne of punycyon / and it is written. eccle. vi. Improperium and contumiliam
malus he redit abit et omnis peccator inuidus et vilinguis. That is to say.
The ill man shall have in heritage reproach and noise and every sinner enuyous /
and he the which has two tongues the which says le pro. and le contra.
Mortal sin is so great vice the which so much noyeth unto the persons the
which it co^mytteth yt it takes from them their good reno^me as well in this
world as in the other. We read luce xvi. De villico qui diffamatus est apud
dn^m suum quasi dissipasset bona ipsius. / There was a man the which was
dyffamed anenst his lord for he dispended and wasted his goods. When a
person dysobeyeth unto god in synnynge mortally / he wastes and dystroyeth
the good virtues and goods spyrytuell of his soul / or when he purchases of
worldly gods unjustly / or when he puts them forth prodygally in cursed
langayges / or when he ne dysposeth the goods unto the poores / as he should /
he is dyffamed anenste god his lord the which him shall rebuke at ye day of
judgment and shall say unto him illud mat. xxv. Ite maledicti in ignem
eternum: esuriui et non dedistis michi ma^ducare. etc. I have had hongre and ye
have not given me to eat. etc. Many sy^nes regneth the which dyffameth the
persons the which them co^mytteth in like wise as the experyence techeth it
us. A man knows openly that the sin of lechery is a dishonor before the
people in ye country where it is committed / and infame unto those the which
do it and reproach unto the lygnee the which of it proceeds Example the
sin of the sodomytes dyffamed them before god and ye world ineternum and
dyshonoureth their land and country. Also it is a reproach unto their lignee
and unto all those ye which follow them in co^myttynge their sin. legi. eccl
xli. Cu^ semi^e pcto^rum assiduitas opprobrii erit. That is to say. With ye
sede of sy^ners accustomaunce of reproach shall be. It is a thing manyfeste yt
when a maiden breketh her virginite / or a wife her marriage they do^mage their
children which bears the rebukes of their sins and crimes / And those
children ben pryued of goods and heritages of both the fader and also of the
mother / and from holy ordres / and from all dygnyte if he be not dyspensed
with of our holy fader the pope. etc. Also ye sin of theft dyffameth much
the theuys / wha^ they ben hanged and strangled for their theftes. So does
pariurynge when it makes to pylle and to infame ye pariurers. So does murdre
the which makes the homycyde to be beheded. In like wise sorcerye / heresye /
and the sin again nature ye which makes to bre^ne these sorcyeres /
heretykes and sodomites For to be short many other sins there ben these ill
knaves to beten through out the streets / or to cut their eres / or to be
enprysonned / to cly^me / or to preche / whereby they ben noted / dishonored /
and dyffamed. Example how filius prodigus was dyffamed for his glotonnye and
lecherye / as it is written in ye gospelles of saint luke in the.xv. chapitre.
Another example of a sone the which had in his foreheed a tode.xiiii. year
over all the country of france by punycyon dyuyne for that that he defaylled
unto his fader and mother. Quere lxx. b. Another example in ye proud ama^ the
which would be honored and that al men should bow them before him and to be
worshipped / and he was so dyffamed that he was hanged as it is written in the
third book of Hester. Mortell sin noyeth much when it takes away ye good
reno^mee of the person the which is better and more precious than gold or
silver / as it is written prouer. xx. ca. Melius est nomen bonum quam diuitie
multe: super aurum et argentum gratia bona. Et legi tur eccle. vii. Melius est
nomen bonum: quam preciosa vnguenta. Et augustinus dicit Crudelis est qui famam
suam negligit. He is right cruel the which dysprayseth his good reno^mee. And
when a man by prayseth his good reno^mee / it is a token yt he is fallen in to
the profou^dyte of sy^nes And that he is posseded of the devil / the which
him holds in his bands / for it is written prouerbiorum. xviii. Impius cum in
profundo peccatorum venerit contemnit: sed sequitur enim ignominia and
opprobrium. Also it shall be great dishonor unto the sinners at the judgment
when all the sins shall be seen and known apertly in them and upon them of
all the world as if they were painted and written upon their bodies. It is
written luce viii. Non enim est occultu^ quod non manyfestetur: nec absconditum
quod no^ cognoscatur et in palam veniat. That is for to say that at the
judgment there has not ben sin done so hydyngly or secretly but that it
shall be showed and known and that it shall come in aperte before all A man
shall know appertly the sins of one and of other as a man knows in a
great hepe of people that such one is clothed in graye / or in black / or in
white / For these sinners shall bear upon them their confusyon and their
sins. as it is written ezechielis. xliiii. Peccatores portabunt confusionem
suam et scelera sua q^ fecerunt. Et ezechiel. xviii. Iustitia iusti erit super
eum: et impietas impii super eu^ erit. et cetera.

E. Fourthly inobedyence the which is mortal sin noyeth. For it aueugleth
and derketh the inward eyes of the soul. ca. xliiii.
QVi odit fratrem suu^ in tenebris est et in tenebris ambulat and nescit quo
eat quonia^ tenebre obce caueru^t oculos eius. vt dicitur ioh. i. c. He the
which synneth mortally by dylectacyon and delyberacyo^ as he the which has
his brother or neighbor not willing to socoure him in his necessyte / or in
desiring his ylle / his ruin / his dyffame / the loss of his goods or
herytages / or the ylle of his body / or ye da^pnacyon of his soul again that
the which is written ad to. xiii. Dilige proximu^ tuum sicut teipsum. That
sinner or hater is in derkenesse and walks in derkenes and knows not wheder
he gothe. For ye derkenes has put out his eyes within forth of his soul.
The reason is so abused and made derke by hate or other mortal sin that the
sinner is bestyall without dyscernynge the good that he leseth and ye ill the
which is in him / and the which shall come unto him if he persevere in such
estate. vn^ david in psalm. Homo cum in honor esset no^ intellexit comparatus
est iumentis insipientibus et similis factus est illis. By mortal sin ye
soul is blinded and reason made derke as a be the which ne dyscerneth
between the good and ye ylle the which a man ledeth to sle and he perceyueth
it not. Example the sage salamon says in the.vii. chapitre of his proverbs
yt he saw by the wyndowe of his house a yongman walking by a way / and when
he came unto a tornynge back there was a woman acurned and appareylled with
the habyte of a strompet for to take the souls the which came to her / and
she began to laugh and to flater with him and spoke unto him ydell words and
kissed him and handeled him / and incontinent reason was so overcome and the
soul auengled of the said young man that salamon has written in ye said
chapter. Et ecce iuuenis statim sequitur ea^: quasi bos ductus ad victimam: et
quasi agnus lasciuiens and ignora^s and nescit quod ad vincula stultus trahitur
velut si auis festinet ad laqueu^. And therefore mortal sin is to flee the
which puts out his eyes within forth of the soul as it is said / and
abuses the entendement and makes him to be bestiall. Vnd david in psalm.
Nolite fieri sicut equus and mulus quibus non est intellectus Also mortal
sin is so great a sickness fylthynes and infeccyon unto the soul yt it
takes from her all beauty / whytenes and bou^te / joy / and light / and
makes it black derke / hydeuse / and dy^me. vn^ au. Vna sunt deteriora omni
malo scz ai^a in peccato perseuerans q^ nigrior est corno: dyaboli qui eam
rapiunt et locus in quo ducitur. Saint Austyn says that three things ben wors
than al ill / that is to understand the soul perseueraunt in sin ye which
is more black than the rauyn / the deuylles the which it rauyssheth / and yt
place the which is hell where unto she is led Example by symylytude. In like
wise as Lucyfer became black / derke / and vyllayn / and abhomynable and lost
all beauty incontinent that he had committee sin even so comes it unto the
soul by sin in dysobeynge unto god. For she leseth her light / that been her
virtues and good operacyons the which give light unto man and is in derkenes
as he that is blind ye which has lost his eyes his clarte and the joy of
this world. And if the blind man leseth his conductoure he falls and
tombleth in inconuenyence / as in water / dytche / or mire / and if he be
soylled yet sees he nothing. In like wise the soul yt which is in mortal
sin she has her inward eyes put out / made dy^me in derkenes she sees not
where she gothe / nor she sees the good that she loses / ne the ill wherein
she falls / she has lost her conductour the which is god / and also she
sees not how she is soyled / albeit yt the body live in the world. Vn^ psalm.
Co^prehe^deru^t me iniqitate me and no^ potui vt videre^. Also these sinners
as thieves / robbers. etc. ye which ben in such wise blinded leueth to do
their operacyon by night in derkenes pryuely as beestes and birds that goo by
night for dread yt they ne be rebuked and sharped as it is written. John. iii.
ca. Dilexerunt homines magis tenebras quam luce^ era^t eni^ eorum mala opera.
etc. And therefore god shall punysshe them in hell by derkenes in ye land of
mysery / of ye which it is written. Job ^. ca. Verra^ misery et tn^braru^ vbi
vmbra mortis et nullus ordo sed sempiternus horror inhabita^s. The remedy for
to give sight unto blind syn^ers is pride. Vn^ paul. ad to. xiiij. Abuciamus
opera tenebrarum and ^^nduamur arma lucis. Put we out by confession the
operacyons of derkenes those ben of sins / and be we clothed with ye armours
of light they ben virtues of good deeds and in such wise persevere we unto the
death to the end that we ben in the nombre of ye saved the which ben the
children of light / of whom speaks saint Poule in his epistle ad Ephesios.
Eratis aliqua^do tenebre nu^c au^t lux in dn^o vt filij lucis ambulante. This
matter is largely aleged and declared in ye sin of hatred. Quere ante. xxviii.
D.

F. Fyfthly inobedyence yt is mortal syn^e noyeth / for it is that / yt holds
ye souls of the person yt it commytteth. xliiii.
INiquitates capiu^t i^piu^ et funibus peccatorum suorum vnusquisque
co^stringitur vt habetur prouer. v. c. That is to say. These i^iquytees takes
the cursed sinner and every of them is constrained and bound by the cords of
his sins. And saint Austin ye which was more than.xx. year in his young aege
without being in will to be baptized says in his co^fessyonary yt he was
bound / not with strange iron / but with the yren of his one will that is
harder than yren. Vn^ au. Ligatus era^ no^ ferro alieno / sed ferrea mea
volu^tate. And Dauyd yt committed aduoutry and homycyde says in the psalter
Hunes pcto^rum circu^plexi su^t me. The cords of my sins has beset me or
compassed about / holds me and byndeth me. After the scryptures mortal sin
is by symylytude as a lain / a shakle / or an halter whereby the devil holds
the man and woman in his seruytude / in his thraldom / and in his captyuyte /
or to dysobey unto god it is a lain whereby the great hongman the devil hangs
the sinners on the gybet of hell / or it is a lain whereby these sinners ben
bound in the fire and tourmentes of hell without having power to aid him
self / to euade / or escape in any manner. The sin holds the man and woman
in the seruytude of the devil. In likewise as the ox is bound by the horns
with ye lain / or the birds taken with snares and gre^nes and put unto death and
perdycyon / or as these yrens or fetres holds ye prisoners in prison and
captyuyte. We find in writing yt such puyssaunce as a man has in his propre
be / such puyssaunce has the devil in the sinner when he is in mortal
sin. Qualem potestate^ habet ho^ in pecore proprio / tale^ hm dyabolus in
peccatore. When the devil has tempted ye man / surmounted: and beten down by
mortal sin the devil is master of the said sinner and holds him in his
hondes by the rope of sin / and the sinner is obedyent unto him as a servant
unto his master. Vn^ ii. petri. ii. ca. Aquo ei^ superantis est eius seruus
est. That is to say. Of him of whom thou shall be surmounted thou shall be his
seruytour. If thou be surmounted of ye devil by mortal sin than you shalt
serve him. Et legitur. i. john. iii. ca. Qui facit petm^ ex dyabolo est qm^
dyabolus ab initio peccat / He yt does sin is of the party of ye devil.
etc. Et legitur ioh. viii. ca. Oi^s qui facit pctm^ seruus est peccati. He that
does sin is servant unto sin / so as a servant / a page / or a maiden do
not their wylles but ye wylles of their master / who so puts him in
service leueth his frewyll and fredome. Example how the devil gave in charge
to a woman four things after that he had surmounted her / the which was
obedient to the devil till unto the death. etc. Quere lxv. F. A colte the
which was never ryden for to be overcome and put under a sadle shall serve will
he or not. Also if the devil vaynquysshe the by his temptacions and yt thou be
fallen in mortal sin thou shall obey him and serve him. That is to
understand when he shall say unto ye / serve me. where thou have the company
of such a woman The lecherous shall obey unto his power / and shall do as the
servant unto ye master Vn^ paul. in epi. ad to. Nescitis qm^ cui exhibuistis
vos seruos ad obediendum serui estis eius cui obedistis sieve peccati in mortem
sieve obeditionis ad iusticia^. When oni man of war is beten down /
vaynquysshed / and overcome his master takes from him his harneys and all the
goods the which ben upon him / after he puts him in lokkes and feters.
More over he his obedyent and servant of his master / so that he ne main
dare go in to place what so it be but by ye leave of his master. At the last he
is put to raunsom and he must needs pay it before that he may escape. In
likewise is it in this purpose when any man is vaynquysshed and surmounted of
the devil by mortal sin First he loses his virtues and gods espy
rytualles of his soul as it is said here before. Eccle. ix. Qui in vno peccato
peccau^^^ multa bona perdet. Secondly he is put in yrons and bonds and holden
in prison of ye devil / and servant and obedyent unto him without going in
place what so it be but by his commaundeme^te / but understand well how. Wha^
a be is drawn he gooth no ferder than the length of his draught / no more
does he the which is in the bonds of the devil. But note well that the
devil alyeneth the in thy draught for to goo unto fornycacyon / or for to do
theft / or for to pleed falsely / or to bear falls witness / (...) or to haunte
tauernes / or to work on the feestes / or for to do homycyde / strive /
deu^syon / and all euylles and sins / or for to go unto ye church / not for
to pray to god / but for to speak there evil words / and to pertourbe and
trouble the deuocyons of other And if the devil se that there be predycation
or fervent orayson he shall draw out of the church his servant and prisoner.
Example of one of the monks of the order of saint Benet that the devil drew
out of ye church when ye other prayed. Que. lxv. g. Another example how the
deuylles held a man bound in a chain and led him with great Joy. Quere. C. ii.
z. Another example how a man being in mortal sin is lo bound that he ne
may do any good operacyon that is merytoryous to him. Quere. C. ii. and. And
here should a man note that in likewise as the hangman ledeth ye thief by the
cord / and by the cord he him ledeth unto the galowes / in likewise does ye
devil the which is hangeman of souls by sin holds us and ledeth us unto
ye galous of hell / and unto the pains and tourmentes as the boucher ledeth
the ox by ye horns with a cord for to kyl hy^. Example of auaryous usurers
hanged in hell. Quere in the examplarye. lxxxvi. A. Other examples of people
hanged in hell. Quere. lxxxi. g. and. lxxxxiiii. d. Moreover a man should know
that the devil has throughout the world so many coltrappes / instruments
and baytes for to take the souls in his gynnes / snares / and strings as
there ben delectable things thorowout the world by the which men commytte
mortal sins. That is to understand yt as many as there ben delectable
goods throughout ye world that man takes or coueyteth to take unjustly by
theft or pyllery. etc. The devil has in the world as many instruments
caltroppes and snares for to take and led ye souls in cords and bonds / and
every theft or mortal sin yt a man co^mytteth ben as many of snares as it is
said. Or a man may say that as many of beautes as men and women have throughout
the world so many instruments and slings has the devil for to take the
souls. Example how the devil said unto a fair daughter pompeously arrayed the
which daunsed on the sondaye-Thou art our arms and our daughter for to take
souls. etc. Quere. lxviii. c. Unto purpose of this matter the sage says in
the.ix. chapter of the ecclesyastes. Inueni mulierem morte amariorem que
laqueus venatoru^ est / sagena cor eius vincula sunt manus eius / qui placet
deo fugiet eam qui peccator est capietur ab ea. That is to say. I have found a
woman more bitter than the death ye which is the threde and lease of hunters /
the heart of her is the net / her hands ben the bonds / who so will please
god fle her / and he that is a sinner shall be taken of her. Another example
how saint Anthony saw the world replenysshed with snares and halters of the
devil. Quere in thexamplary. C. ii. Q. And when any man co^mytteth mortal
sin he is caught / he is bound and fallen in to the deuylles trappe / as the
wild be the which is taken in the bukstall / or the fysshe in the lepe or
net. Vnde psalm. Cadent in reciaculo eius peccatores. Et Job xviii. Tenebitur
planta eius laqueo. And when a man is fallen by syn^e in to the lines of the
devil he shall not escape when he would of himself without the aid of god and
of the sacraments. Vnde grego. Qui deeds in rethe mittit non cum voluerit
exit. The fysshe has power of hy^self to enter within the net / but when he
is within he may not get out by him self no more does the sinner from sin.
Hy^ behooves to be assoyled and unbound of the priest. and of the prelates of
the church the which have the power. Vnde math^. xvi. Quodcu^que solueris
super terra^ erit solutu^ et in celis. And a man makes orayson unto god to
unbind him from sin forsakynge them. Absolve q^s domine animam famuli tui ab
oi^ vi^culo peccatorum. For to be short the soul is unbound from sin by
true repentance / confession / and satysfaccyon. Example how saint Bernarde
the holy man saw a sinner the which had a chain about his neck the which
had mo than an hundred lynkes / and at every teere that he wept he brake a
lynke the which fell down Quere in thexamplary. lv. a And after that the
soul is unbound from sin it is free and merry as a little bird the which
is escaped from the pytfalles and nets of the fouler. Vnde psamista. Anima
nostra sicut passer erepta est de laqueo venantium / laqueus contritus est et
nos liberati sumus.

G. Syxtely Inobedyence noyeth for it sleeth the soul spyrytually of the death
of gylte. xliii.
QVi odit fratrum suum homicida est Primo Iohannis. iii. capitu. He the which
synneth mortally is he the which has his brother or his neighbor in desyry^ge
the evil of his body or of his goods he synneth mortally and sleeth
spyritually his own soul of death of gylte. For he separateth god the which
is the life of the soul / and mortifyeth grace and the virtues and the good
esperytuall of him / in likewise as it is declared in the fyfthe commandment.
Non sis occisor. And also in ye sin of hatred. Quere. xxvii. C.

H. Seventhly inobedyence noyeth / for it makes to curse and to excommunicate
ye persons the which dysobey unto the commandments of god. xliiii.
VE vobis viri impii: qui dereliqistis legem dei altissimi / and si mortui
fueritis in maledictione erit pars vestra. Ecclesiastice. xli. That is to say.
O ye me^ right cursed the which have left the right high god / maledyccion be
unto you / and yt shall have been deed your party shall be maledyccion. etc.
This matter shall be declared here after. Quere. xlviii. B.

I. Eyghtly inobedie^ce noyeth / for it pryueth from paradyse. xliiii.
SI vis ad vitam ingredi serua mandara. Mathei. xix. If thou will enter in to
the life eternal keep thou the commau^deme^ts of god. If thou break one or
many by de^ectacyon and delyberacyon and that thou in such wise deye
impenytent you shall be put from paradyse / from the vysyon of god / from the
sweet amyte and felawshyp of angels / from all saints / and from all heavenly
things and spyrytualles from on hye as shall be herd here after by scryptures
/ reasons / lettynges / and examples. First god has made to cry and to
proclayme all about the world yt all his commandments to keep upon pain to
be put from paradise. Vn^ psalm. Tu mandasti ma^data tua custoditi nimis. And yt
the things ye which proceeds from his mouth shall be accomplysshed without
that there lack any thing / without tryfle or mockery. Vn^ psalm. Que procedu^t
de labus meis no^ facia^ irrita. When a king temporal makes too proclayme or
to show his saying or commandment echone thereto obeys for dread of pain
and damage. And god the which is king of heaven and of earth commands yt
that you keep his commandments in likewise as says the scryptures. Vn^
leuiti. xix. xx. and. xxv. Custodite oi^a precepta mea et vniuersa iudicia mea
and facite ea / ego dominus qui scti^tico vos. Et legitur deuturono. xiii. Dn^m
deu^ vr^m seqiminiet iprem timete / et mandata illius custodite / and audite
voce^ eius ipsi seruietis et iprei adherebites. Iterum deu. v^ Custodi precepta
dn^i dei tui / vt un sit tibi et tiliis tuis post te. Keep the commandments
of thy lord god to the end that you be well to the and to thy children after
the. If a servant dysobey unto his master and that he be of cursed
governance he puts him out of his house. In likewise does god / he puts
from paradyse them ye whi dysobeyeth his commandments. Also a king
temporal for banyssheth from his realm them the which dysobeyeth unto his
commandments / so does god from the realm of paradyse. Also for the crime
and sin of some man he is hanged and loses his life / his goods and
herytages yt be^ co^fysked at ye princes will. Also by sin man is pryued fro
paradyse. Example yt in Cayn yt slew his brother Abellis pryued fro heaven for
he brake gods commandment. No^ sis occisor. lxxvi. a. After writy^ge sins
mortelles and all inobedyences done against god puts man and woman fro
paradyse. Or legitur job. xxxvi. Deus no^ soluat implos. Et legitur ysaie.
xxvi. Tolatur impius ne videat gloriam dei. Et psalm. Non habitabit iuxta te
malignus neque permanebat iniusti an^ oculos tuos. Thou art in mortal sin
and vnobedyent unto god I put ye case than it follows that you shalt be put
from paradyse if thou deye in such wise Impenitent. Also those the which
renneth in the indygnacyon and in ye hatred of god for their cursed life shall
be put from paradyse if yt they deye without making appoyntemet Man and woman
renneth in his hate and Indygnacyon by inobedyence and mortal sin as says ye
scryptures. Vn^ psalm. Odisti omnes qui opera^tur iniquitate^. Et eccle. xii.
Altissimus odio habet peccatores. Et sapien. xiiii. Odio sunt deo impius et
impietas eius. Than it follows well that man and woman shall be put from
paradyse if they remedy not unto their case before their death. Also paradyse
is a place pure and clean and therein enters nothing that is soyled by sin.
As it is written appocali. xxi. No^ intrabit i^ regnu^ celorum aliquid coinquina
tum and faciens abhominatione^ et mendatiu^ Thou art soyled and spotted with
sin I put the case for thou have committed it. Tha^ shalt thou not go in to
paradyse. The solucyon of all the laid argument is such / yt it is true that
all mortal sins that man co^mytteth puts him from paradyse if he will not
do penance / in likewise as it is written. Luce. xiii. Nisi penitentia^
egeritis oe^s simul peribitis. But if he repent him / correcke / and amend
whiles that he lives in this world and that he do penance he shall be saved
and shall go in to paradyse. As it is written. ysaie. lv. Derelinquat impius
viam suam and vir iniquis cogitationes suas et reuertatur ad dominum et
miserebitur eius. etc. Example after that Adam and Eve had biten of the apple
and broken the commandment of god they were put out of paradyse terrestre and
pryued from paradyse celestyal / they and their lygnage till unto the time yt
the sone of god again bought by his passion the said Adam the which did
penance / and all those ye which had well lived. Of the inobedyence of Adam
quere. liiii. A. Five things lets to mount in to paradyse. The first is
for yt / that a man is in the Indygnacyon of god by mortal sin. The second
is for that yt the sin mortal is a line the which holds the person that
it commytteth as it is said here before. The third is for that yt mortal sin
makes the soul seek and deed of the death of gylte as it is said / and a
person seek may not clymbe hye ne go at his pleasure. etc. The fourth thing
the which lets to mount in to paradyse is for that yt the mortal sin is
a heavy burden ye which greueth the soul and it keeps and holds from hye
mountynge. Vnde david in psalm. Iniquitates me super gresse su^t caput meu^ et
sicut ouis grave grauate su^t super me. Example of a man in purgatory the
which had an helmet that weyed upon him more than a mountain. Quere. lxxvii.
F. Another example how sin is heavy or weyghty as he the which puts of
wood in his burden when he might not lift it up. Quere. C. ii. Y. Another
example how a scoler dampened had a cope ye which weyed more than a toure upon
him. Quere. C. viii. A. The.v. thing the which lets man to mount in to
paradyse is for yt / that the place is so hye and that it is so great a way in
going upward that it is impossyble to every person thither to mow come ne may
mount of his propre virtue without that god has given him the puyssaunce. Quia
om^is per ipsum facta su^t et sine ipso factum est nichil / vt dicitur ioha^.i.
The aungelles and saints of paradyse mount and descend in one only moment.
In momento i^ ictu oculi. Not of their propre virtue / but of the puyssaunce
that god unto them has given. There ne is but god that has puyssaunce thither
to mount of his propre virtue thus says saint Johan. Nemo ascendit in celu^
scilicet propria vtute nili qui desce^dit de celo filius hois qui est in celo.
Also between this and paradyse there ben many heuens after scryptures. There is
celu^ aereu^ ethereu^ / olimpiu^ / igneu^ / sidereum / christallinum / et
empireu^. And each of these heue^s are in meruaylous heyght / and the place of
paradyse is the highest heaven where god abides and where the aungelles ben /
and all ye saints holy men and holy women. And in to that place no person
gooth but by god as it is said. And god shall not suffer the sinners thither to
come the which ben dysobedyent unto him thus says the poet. Serua mandata /
li tu vis regna beata. Qui non obedit / celesti sede carebit. Also between this
and paradyse there is an heaven the which is of fire / and people boted with hey
ne these sinners ne can thither pass ne mount of themself. For one can not
mount in to a chamber without some mean as on a stayre or laddre. etc. Wherefore
they shall be pryued from paradyse if they obey not unto god. Vn^ math^. xix.
Si vis ad vitam in gredi serua mandata. Examples Judas was priued from paradyse
albeit yt he was the dyscyple of our lord / and the cause wherefore was for his
sins. He was a thief and traytre unto his master / he was fayntyfe and
deceptyfe / for for the coueytyse of.xxx. pens he took and delivered Ihesus
unto his enemies for to put him unto death yt which was Innocent good and
Just / and therefore he had maledyccion and he dyspayred and hanged himself and
was put from his dygnyte / office / and from the company of god / from the
saints of paradyse / and from the Joys the which there ben / and another was
put in his place / as it is wryte^ in the deeds of the appostles. Fiat
habitacio illius deserta et episcopatu^ eius accipiet ali. Also by the cursed
sins of cursed Dyues he has been pryued from paradyse and is buried in hell /
and there is tourmented within the fire for evermore. Quere. lxxx. A. Also
Iulyan the appostate is pryued from paradyse. Quere. lvui. Also Egeas.
Diascorus Simon magus ben pryued from paradyse Quere. lvii. c. d. e. Also for
to find of examples how mortal sin is pryued from paradyse it behooves
shortly to understand that ye cause wherefore all persons ben put from the
realm of paradyse is for co^myttynge mortal sin. Take heed in all the
examples of this present book and thou shall find yt it is true. Also in ye
nombre. lxxxx. c wherefore a woman tourmented with a tode and little serpents
was dampened and priued from paradyse / and thou shalt find that it was for
her sins. Also look in the nombre. C. a. wherefore a woman was damned and
terrybly tourmented and pryued from paradyse / and you shalt find that it was
for a cursed thought of lecherye. The prophet Dauyd made a questyon in
demanding. What shall he be yt shall mount on hye in paradyse. Vn^ legitur in
psalmo. Quis ascendit in mo^tem dn^i / aut quis stabit in loco sancto eius. And
incontynente he yielded he answered and said. It shall be he yt which does the
good operacyons as the works of mercy / and he the which does none evil
operacyo^s with his two hands as to work on the feestes commanded. He also
yt does no thettes / homycydes. etc. Innoce^s manibus. And says after. Et
mu^do cord. He yt has the heart pure and clean without thinking any ill
thoughts against the love of god and of his neighbor / the which in no wise
will break the commandments of god / the which ne will none evil unto his
neighbor / and that is not Joyous of his damage the which ne will but all
good / he shall mount in too paradyse. And it follows after of him yt vttreth
no ill words against the health of his soul ne for to deceive his neighbor
by fraud treachery / ne in lyenge ne swerynge. Qui non accepit in vano ai^am
suam nec iurauit in dolo proximo suo. That man shall mount in to paradyse and
shall have the benedyccion of god and his grace and mercy. Hic accepiet
bn^dictione^ a dn^o et mi^am a deo salutari suo Example how our blyssed savior
Ihesucryst and the prophets were at ye death of an holy fader the which they
led in to paradyse. Quere. C. iii. a. Another example how god and his
aungelles came to fetch ye soul of a holy fader at his death. Quere. C. iii.
b. Many other examples ben written in the said chapter of people the which ben
gone in to paradyse by that yt they have obeyed unto god and accomplisshed his
commandments. Quere. C. iii. and. C. iiii. a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. For to
fle swyftly as the au^gelles in to paradyse and to have the benedyccyon and
glory of god is behooves to have the hands / the heart / and the mouth hole /
inuocantes / pure / and clean from all sins without yt the hands be seek or
undone by cursed operacyons / ye heart from evil thoughts / ye mouth
enuenymed from foul words. A bird or an hawke the which has the beck /
the heart / and the wings hole / pure and clean is right nymble for to fle. In
likewise a man yt has the mouth clean without bringing forth cursed words /
yt heart without thinking ill thoughts / the hands without doing ill operacyons
is right nymble to fle in to paradyse. Of this self questyon speaks the
prophet Dauyd in a place where he says. Dn^e quis habitabit in tabnaculo tuo
aut quis reqiescat in mo^te scto^ tuo. The answer is such yt it shall be he
the which has so well lived or well purged and made clean his sins by
penance in this world that his soul shall not be soyled by sin when he
shall deye. Qui i^greditur sine macula. And says afterward / et operatur
iusticia^. That is when ye death shall come to take him he shall be found
doing the operacyon of Justice / yt is not willing to have any thing of
other men's and to yield unto every man that yt is his Also he yt speaks
veryte in his heart / he yt has not done decepcio^ in his tongue. Qui loquitur
veritate^ in cord suo / qui no^ egit dolu^ in lingua sua. Also he yt has not
done ill unto his neighbor / and has not taken reproach toward his neighbors
Nec fecit proximo suo malum et opprobriu^ non accepit aduersos proximos suos.
Also he the which swereth unto his neighbor and deceyueth him not / he the
which has not given his money unto usury / and has not taken gifts upon the
Innocent. Quiturat proximo suo et no^ decipit / qui pecunia^ sua^ no^ dedit ad
vsura^ et munera superinnoce^tem non accepit. Qui facit hec non mouebitur
ineturnu^ He yt shall be found doing ye things beforesayd when the death
shall come to take him shall not be dampened / but shall mount in to heaven.
Example of a charytable man yt yode unto heaven at his death or that his body
was cold. Quere. lv. B. Another example of a relygyous the which yode in to
paradyse incontinent that he was deed. Quere. lxiii. A. Another example. Quere.
C. iiii. G. For to go all right in to ye life eternal without going any thing
out of the way it behooves to have the condycions of ye pilgrim of paradyse
the which follows here after.xlv. A. Those the which do the contrary ben ye
pylgryms of hell and they shall not go into the life eternal How may a man
mount in to paradyse the which has committed mortal sin in operacyons /
in thoughts / and words The answer is such yt he shall not thither mount
for the contempnynge / and dyspraysynge and dysobedyence that he makes / yt he
says / and thinks anenst god / or for the offense / the inyquyte / and
cursednes that reygneth in him for his sins. For mortal sin is a sickness
/ a venym / a poison / and an infeccyon so great that it dystroyeth ye
strength / the virtue / and the goods of the soul the which ne holds him
from clymbynge / but more sooner vylaynsly to fail. Example of a bird the
which has the bec / the heart / the wings seek he forces not to fle / but
more sooner to fall. In likewise the man the which has the heart seek and
undone by ill thoughts / ye mouth enuenymed of ill words / the hands
scabbed / crooked / and undone by ill operacions he ne is able to fle in to
paradise. Saint Poule says yt they the which do the operacio^s of the body
the which ben of syn^e shall not mount in to paradyse. Vn^ ad gal. v.
Manifesta su^t opera carnis q^ sunt fornicatio / immundicia / impudicitia /
luxuria / ydolorum seruus / veneficia / iimicitie / co^te^tiones / emulationes
/ ire / rixe / dissentionis / sect / i^uidie: homicidia / ebrietates /
co^messationes / and his similia qm^ qui talia agunt regnu^ celorum non
co^sequentur. Also saint Poule says. i. ad co. vi. Nolite errare' qr neque
fornicaru / neque ydolis seruie^tis / neque adulteri / neque molles / neque
masculorum co^cubitores / neque fures / neque auari / neque ebriosi / neque
maledici / neque rapaces regnu^ dei possidebu^t. Example of a woman yt used her
life in lecheryes / glotonyes and pleasaunces carnal that was dampened / and
her husband was saved yt lived so brely and well. Quere. lxxxxii. A. Another
example yt ye body of a fool pryued his soul from paradyse. Quere. xlvi. A.
Also we appetyte to be well heryted / and well lodged in a fair house / and by
mortal sin who so deyeth impenytentes leseth the fair heritage of paradyse
and the fair lodgings the which there be^. He is a fool yt shytteth his house
so strongly that he may no more enter therein / or who so sells or gives his
heritage for nothing. In likewise does he the which commytteth mortal sin
/ he him closes or shytteth from paradyse / and if he sell it and give it for
nothing / that is for sin. And there is no person in all the world so
evil but that right gladly he would have paradyse / ne the which would lose
his part. And for certain they the which commytteth mortal sin and if in
such wise they deye they lose it as it is said before. Quia deus non saluat
impios. Vt legitur Job. xxxvi. Et etiam legitur ysaie. xxvi. Tollatur impius ne
videat gloriam dei. Also we appetyte to be fair / clear / shyninge well clothed
be seen and aorned. Also we desire to have rychesses and honors / also health
agylyte and all other things delectables / and by mortal sin all is lost
unto them the which deye Impenytentes as it is said before. etc.

K. Nynthly inobedyence the which is mortal sin noyeth / for it byndeth
unto pain and punycyon. xliiii.
Iniusti punitur vt dicit david in psalm. The unjust shall be punysshed. Every
person ye which will not have pain and punycyon let him keep him from
dysobeynge unto god / unto the church / and unto his superyours in committing
mortal sin. For from the time that any man has committed mortal sin he
is so bound unto pain and punycyon that he may never escape but that he have
punycyon corporal the which is transitory in this world / or punycyon and
dampnacyon eternal in the other world. For it is written. Nullu^ malu^
remanebit impunitu^. That is to say / yt none evil shall abide unpunished.
And it is written in the gospel yt god shall lose ye ill euylly. Vn^ math. xxi.
Malos male perdet. Iteru^ dd dicit. Tu reddes vnicuique iuxta opera sua.
Example how god made to rain fire and sulfre upon them of Sodom for to
punysshe the^ for their sins. Quere. lxxxxv. a. Another example how Pharaon
and his people had many punicyons for yt they ne would obey unto god. Quere.
liiii. F. Another example of the punycyon of Chore. liiii. H. When any has
committed blaspheme / homycide / theft / fornycacyon / or any mortal sin /
he is bound body and soul to receive pain and punycyon before god for his
sins. And as if he were bound before ye notaryes to pay any sum of money /
so that he shall never escape without hauy^ge punycyon as it is said Dauyd the
prophet says in the psalter ye words of god. Si iusticias meas prophana
uerint ipit et mandata mea non custodieri^t visitabo in virga iniquitate eoru^.
That is to say. If the cursed inobedyentes have taken in scorn my Justices and
take no head to my commandments / I shall vysyte in a rod the inyquytees
of them in strykynge their sins. Also a man should understand after the
scryptures that god punyssheth the sinners for their Inobedyences and
cursednesses. Quicqid patimur peccata nostra merueru^t. And yet they apperceyue
not from whens proceeds such punycyon / as it is declared before where is
treated that they the which breketh the festes oen punysshed. Quere ad
numeru^. xix. A. Also god punyssheth ye sins in this world by famyne / war
/ and mortalyte. By famyne for he makes the corns to fail / apples / vynes
and other fruytes and labors / by frost / mist / heet / air corrupt. etc.
Vnde deutero. xi. Cauete ne forte decipiatur corvestru^ et recedatis a domino
et mandata eius / iracusque dn^s claudat celum and pluuio no^ descendant / nec
terra det germen suu^ pere atisque velocitur. etc. Example how the sons of
Jacob were punysshed by famyne / for that they sold their brother Joseph and
made their fader to believe yt a be had devoured him / and that be was
envy. Vn^ gene. xxxvii. Fera pissima deuorauit filium meum joseph dicit jacob.
etc. Another example written in the third book of kings how great dryness and
famyne came unto ye people for ye ydolatryes and sins the which reigned in ye
time of ye cursed king Achab and of his wife Iesabell yt made to sle the good
man Naboth / and it was at the prayer of ye prophet Helye. Vn^ iacobi. v.
Multum valet deprecatio iusti assiduo / helyas erat homo passibilis similis
nobis / et oratione orauit vt non pluerit super terra^ / and no^ pluit annos
tres et menses sex / et rursum orauit et celum dedit pluuia^ et terra dedit
frutum suu^. Secondly god punyssheth ye sinners inobedyentes by mortalyte / as
he did unto the people of Rome the which people after Eester went to play /
to be drunk to excercyse lecheryes / sins / and euylles in such manner yt
god wrothed him against the said people / and made to come great waters and
great multitude of serpents and snakes the which deyed and enfected the air
After there was so great mortalyte yt innumerable people deyed / and many deyed
in yanynge suddenly. After that saint Gregory was pope yt institued the
processyon and fast on saint Marks day. Another examp^e of ye punycyon of some
yt returned after ester to their ylles and sins. Cu. t. Also of them yt brake
gods commandments. lxiiii. k Another example written in the last chapter of
the second book of kings how after yt Dauyd had vyctory of his enemies he
made to nombre his people by vain glory god sent unto him the prophet Gad yt
said unto him yt he should chose of three ylle things one which he would / yt
is to have. vii years famyne and honger in his land / or.iii. mo^thes so
strong war yt he should fle before his adversaries yt should persecute hy^ /
or three days of mortalytee in his people. Than Dauyd said. I am anguysshed and
hard beten on all sides. He took mortalyte yt was so great yt in. iii days
there dyed of his people.lxx. M. men by sekenes of pestelence. And Dauyd said
unto god. Ego su^ qi peccaui ego iiqui egi. Isti qi oues su^t qid fecer^t /
vertatur obsecro manus tuas co^tra me and co^tra domu^ mea^. Another example
written in the book of Moses how the children of Israel had punycyon by
mortalyte for their murmr. etc. Thyrdly god does punysshe the inobedyent
sinners by war as we have by example how by the proud answer yt king
Roboam gave unto the people of Israel they raised another king and the said
Roboam had war all his life. Que. lxxxxix. m. Another example written in
the.xix. chapter of the book of Iuges yt mo than.lx. M men were slain in
battle of the people of Beniamyn for to punysshe them of the sin of lechery
yt they committed in the wife of Leuyte. que. lxxx^^. b For to be short god
punyssheth the inobebyent sinners in many manners / for they be^ bound to
punycyon by sin as it is said Example written in ye third book of Jonas how
god sent unto ye people of Nynyue yt they should be dystroyed / they and their
cite wtin xl. days for their sins. Adhuc xl. dies et nyniue subuertetur.
etc. They did penance and god had mercy on them. The punycyon of sinners is
sometime temporal and transytorye. And sometime it is eternal. The punycyon
temporal is sometime voluntary / as that the which is done by penance the
which is merytoryous. Sometime it is done by constraynte as ye thieves the
which ben punysshed and hanged against their will / this punycyon and pain is
not merytoryous. Vn^ legitur. quod oi^s actus meritorius oportet quoth sit
volu^tate i^peratus. But if a thief bear with good will the death and such pain
for his own sins as yt good thief yt was put to death when our lord deyed /
such pain and death should serve for penance / ye which is greter than to
fast. etc. The good thief said. Illud luce. xxii. Na^ digna tactis recipimus
morte^ / hic au^t nichil malifecit / and for that: yt god knew and saw his
faith / his contrycyon and the death that he bare so wyllyngly for his sins
of good right he said unto him. Hodie mecum ens in paradiso. etc. Of the
punycyon eternal that the sinners Inobedyentes shall have it is written
herafter. Quere ad numerum xlix. a. Examples shall be written toward the end
of the book. Quere in penis inferni.

A. The co^dycyons yt the pilgrim of paradyse should have touching yt a man
should apply his.v. wits of nature upon the commandments of god / as a
good pilgrim does on his way.xlv.
IT is written in ye.xix. cha. of saint matthew how a man axed of christ what good
deeds he should do to get eternal life. And he answered. If you wylt enter in
to eternal life keep the commandments. Si vis ad vita^ ingredi serua ma^data.
For the obseruacion ye co^mau^dements is the right way without going by in any
wise. you art here living as a pilgrim yt te^deth to go to heaven or in to hell
/ for thy life is but a pilgrimage of little during. And therefore if you wylt go
to se god / the vyrgyn Mary / the aungelles and holy places of paradyse / and
to have heritage in that contree there and not in hell / employe thy five
wits of nature upon ye commandments of god / and take the condycyons of
the good pilgrim. It is written. eccl. xxix. Pone the saurum tuu^ i^ preceptis
altissimi / et proderit tibi magis quam auru^. Put thy treasour in the
commandments of god / and it shall prouffyte the more than gold. Also
follow the life of god / his manners and condycyons. He appeared unto two of his
dyscyples in semblaunce of a pylgrime. Vn^ luce. xxiiij. T'u solus peregrinus
es in inthrlm et non cognouisti ea q^ facta su^t in ea his diebus. etc. He
descended from paradyse for to accomplysshe the pilgrimage of the world / he
was borne of the vyrgyn Mary and lived in the state of grace without any sin
xxxii. years and an half / and at his death his pilgrimage was accomplisshed /
and after returned in to paradyse his contree. He showed unto us by example and
by word how we should live in this world. Cepit dn^s facere et docere. to
the end yt we be pilgrims of paradyse / and that we goo to dwell with him in his
glory: A good pilgrim should have many condycions for to make his pilgrimage
of the which we shall tell. viii.

B. First a good pilgrim should confess him and put him in thestate of grace
and so to do his said pilgrimage. Also in doing ye pilgrimage of this world
we should confess us often times / and we should live in thestate of grace to
the end yt the good deeds yt we do be unto god agreeable and to us proufytable.
For mortal syn^e is an infeccyon and sekenes unto ye soul so ill yt it
lets all spyrytual good deeds yt it unto hy^ ne may profit as a man sees
by symilytude how bodily sekenes lets to labor / to walk. etc. and that
meet and drink in no wise can profit unto the body / so yt a man seek
corporally and spyritually ne may do his pilgrimage till he have health / yt is
to be well confessed and yt he have charity without the which no good deed ne may
prouffyte / as is declared in ye chapter of charity. que. iiii. c. and in ye
fourth thing yt moeueth to keep ye commandments of god. que. xliiii. a. Vn^
aug. in libro de natura and gr^a. Nullu^ opus qua^tu^cu^que de se bonu^ su^mo
opifici est acceptu^ / nisi agatur i^ gr^a. No work how good so ever it be of
it self it is not agreeable unto the sovereign werker if it be not done in
grace. And saint Thomas says. Nullus ho^ po^t mereri nisi media^te gr^a. No
man may deserve to have reward eternal but by ye merit of grace And howbeit
yt good works done in sin ben not merytoryous unto eternyte yet a man should
not let to do them as it is declared here before. Of this matter example of a
pilgrim yt lived in this world in the state of grace after ye commandments
of god / and he was conforted of aungelles of paradyse the which bare his
soul in to heaven. And of an ypocrite that pleased to the world and did
sins secretly / the devil drew his soul from h^s body with an hoke and bare
it in to hell. For he was pilgrim. Quere in thexam. C. iiii. C. Another example
of a wydowe that was comforted and vysyted at her death of the vyrgyn Mary. And
of a rich man yt was vesyted of deuylles in lykenes of black cattes. etc.
Quere. C. v. A.

C. Secondly ye good pilgryme should take clothynges the which ne may grieve
hy^ in his vyage. And should take away from him al weight or heaviness of burden
/ and al thing yt might let him to walk well. Also in doing ye pilgrimage
of this world a man should not take vestyments / gyrdylles shoes. etc. full of
pompes / fro whens does proceed pride and elacion the which lets to goo in
to the realm of paradyse as says saint Poule in his epy. ad thy. No^ i^
tortis crinibus aut auro / margaritis / vl vesta preciosa. Et psalm. No^hi^tabit
i^ medio domus me qui facit superbiu^. He yt commytteth pride shall not
enhabyte in the myddle of my house. Example how a woman pompeously arrayed and
clothed was enuyroned and set about with deuylles / and she bare many upon her
tail. Quere. lxv. D. Another example how the cursed dyues clothed in purple
was the pilgrim of hell / and there is buried. Quere in thexa^plary. lxxxiiii.
A. Another example how saint Johan baptyst yt was clothed with sharp vestements
is in paradyse for he was a pilgrim. etc. And a man should understand that ye
noblesse of habyllementes is not defended unto every man after his estate. But
the superfluyte and pride is defended the which may be taken in those
habylleme^ts. Also thieves the which ben charged of ye gods of their
neighbors ne may well walk ne mou^te into paradyse. Vn^. pau. i. ad cori^.
vi. Neque fures / neque auari regnum dei possidebunt. Example in Achar ye
which was a thief and therefore he was stoned and all his goods brent by the
commandment of god. Quere. lxxx. a. Another example how ye thief zacheus was
a pilgrim of paradyse and is saved / for he dyscharged him and restored the
theftes that he had done. Vnd luce. xix. zacheus dixit ad jesus / ecce dimidiu^
bonorum meorum dn^e do pauperibus / and si quid aliquem defraudaui reddo
quadruplu^. etc. Also glotons / dronkerdes / the which eats and drinks
unto excess walks not into paradyse / but falls in to hell. Saint Poule
says. i. ad cori^. vi. Ebriosi regnu^ dei no^ possidebu^t. Example of a
pilgrym yt sold his gown for to drink wine. Quere. xci^i. G Another example
how a friar was a pilgrim of hell for that he wont him to drink and ete when
the other occupied they mat the service of the church / at his death he saw
hell open / and the tourmentes. etc. Quere lxvii. C. A man yt is to much fed
may not well walk / nor he mounteth not in to paradyse. Also these mortal
sins ben burde^s much heavy the which greueth the soul and keeps it from
mountynge in to paradyse Men knows by experyence how a heavy burden greueth ye
body / in likewise does sin the soul. Vn^ da. Iniquitates me supergressu^t
caput meu^ and sicut ouus grave grauate sunt super me. Put away the sins ye
which ben in ye for to walk well. The pilgrim of paradyse should put from
above him all things the which lets to do ye commandments of god the
which ben the way of the said paradyse as it is said / to the end yt he may
well prouffyte. When a man cutteth the superflue of the vine / or ye burgeons
of the tree they increase / grow and fructyfye the better. In likewise does a
man spyrytuall for to put from above hy^ all vestementes and array replete of
pride and of vanyte. etc.

D. Thyrdly the good pilgrim should often times with his mouth demand ye way
for dread to go out of it. Also the pilgrim of paradyse should demand and
learn ye commandments of god and the salutary things / as did a man the
which demanded of our lord Ihesu crist. Good master what good deeds shall I
do to the end that I have eternal life. And he answered. If thou will enter in
to life eternal keep ye commandments. etc. as it is said before. Also Dauyd
the prophet axed of god yt he would teache him his Iustyfycacyons to ye end yt
he him self were Iustyfyed. Vnde psalm. Doce me iustificatio^es tuas. Thou art
not so great a lord as Dauyd / for he was king of Israel. Thou art not so
wise ne so learned ne so holy as he / and he demanded for to be instruct for
to have salvation and therefore demand ye commandments. And I tell the for
certain the way for to fle right in to paradyse is obedyence the which is ye
ladder for to mount thither and the ten commandments ben the pynnes of
steps as it is declared in ye beginning of thexamplary where it speaks of
ye obedyence of Abraham. Que^. li. a Also every person yt comes to the aege
of dyscrecyo^ should hold / keep / and acco^plysshe the commandments of god
upon pain of eternal dampnacyon. And therefore every man and woman should learn
them for dread to break them. Vn^ ligitur in scdo libro sente^ci. di. xvii.
Stati^ ei^ cu^ quis sit capax precepti dei tenetur ad noticia^ et obserua^tia^.
The poet says. Serua mandata / si tu vis regna beata. Qui non obedit: celesti
cede care bit, Keep ye commandments if you will have the blyssed realms. He
yt obeys not shall not have a syege celestyall in paradyse Example how the
devil slew a child of.v. year old in his faders lap for that yt he was a
blasphematour. Quere in thexa^plary. lxii B. If the fader had correcked his
child / and also if he had taught him the commandments of god ye deuylles
had not slain him. And therefore a man should demand and learn. When a
pilgrim will not demand ne learn his way he often times swerueth and gooth out
of the way. Also good pilgrims should speak of god and of good words in
making their vyage / and god abides and is among them as it is written.
Mathei. xviii. Vbi duo vel tres co^gregati sunt in noi^e meo: ibi su^ in medio
eoru^. Example how god appeared unto Cleophas and unto saint Mark in speaking
of hy^ as they yode unto Emaus. As it is written. Lu. xxiiii. Another example
how god was in ye mids of two relygious at crystmas in speky^ge of his
natyuyte. lxxxxiiii. b And to the contrary when ye pilgrims of hell speaks
detraccyons / mockes / and ylles the devil their master is by them yt shall
led them in to hell that is their cite and country to dwell in. Example how a
detractour was sent thither and had cruel Judgment Quere. lxxxxviii. Also the
gospel of saint Matthew takes the way for to go in to paradyse and says.
Illud. math^. vii. Intrate per angustia^ porta^ qr lata portat et spreosa via
e^que ducit ad perditione^ / et multi su^t qui i^trat per ea^: qua^ angusta
porta et arcta via est q^ ducit ad vita^ et pauci su^t qui i^ueniu^t eam. That
is to say. Enter ye by the strayte gate for ye large gate and spacyous is that
yt ledeth unto perdycyon / and many there ben the which enters by yt. The
anguysshous gate and strayte way is that yt ledeth unto life. And few people
enters by yt. For to understand well this strayte gate / it is to lead a life
of austeryte and hardness in fasty^ges / abstynences / sobrenes / chastyte / and
penance. And the large way is to live in all voluptuousnes / carnalytees /
lecheryes / glotonies / daunses. etc. Example of a fool and a wise man which
took the way in to hell. lxvi. A Other examples yt it is well taken unto many
for to demand ye word of god / and first How a woman demanded of a
relygyous a good exhortacyon yt prouffyted so much yt her husband yt was of
ill conscience converted him. Que. lv. B. Another example of a relygyous yt
asked often times the faders to tell unto hy^ some admonycyo^. q^re lvi. C.
Another example how he the which techeth ye word of god shall have great
reward in paradyse. lvi. G. Another example of a monk the which reknowleged
his sins in showing them to another. Quere. C. i. A.

E. Fourthly the good pilgrim should evermore take heed if he be well in the
way ye is taught him. Also the pilgrims of paradyse should evermore take heed
if they accomplysshe well the commandments of god the which ben their right
way and conductour the which shall conduyte them and the which shall enlumyne
their eyes to walk well. Vn^ dd. Preceptu^ dn^i lucidu^ illumina^s oclos. Also
the word of god is ye lantern yt shyneth and gives light unto ye fete for to
go well. Vn^ dd. Lucerna pedibus meis verbu^ tuu^. Et legitur pro. vi. Ma^datu^
lucerna est et lex lux. What thing that a man does in this world he should
evermore take heed if he do that yt god commands. For they ye which thereto
takes head shall not be confounded / thus says Dauyd Vn^ psalm. Tu^c non
co^fu^dar cu^ perspexero in oi^bus ma^datis tuis. Et eccl. xxiii. Nichil est
dulaus quam respice in ma^datis dn^i. That is to say. Nothy^ge is more sweter
than to take heed unto the commandments of god They the which take heed
thereunto and abuses them in worldly vanytees and pleasaunces / as daunces /
plays / and folyes / lightly gone out of the way and leueth the way of
paradyse. Example Eve our first mother took none head on ye commandment yt
unto her was given and was deceived by te^tacion / and for the beholdy^ge of ye
fair fruit And therefore she was put out of paradyse terrester. liiii. A. Also
they the which ben lecherous and abuses them to behold the beauty of women (
vl eco^uerso) or the women ye beauty of the men swerueth and leueth the way to
paradyse. It is written. ec. ix. Nec aspicias muliere^ mltiuola^ ne forte i^
laque os eius. Cu^ sallatrice ne assiduus sit nec audias illa^. That is to
say. Behold not yt woman the which will many things that you fall not in her
laces / ne accustom the to be with a woman yt is a daunser / or leper / ne
here her not sing. etc. Example by that that Synchem beheld the beauty of
Dyne the daughter of / Jacob / he coueyted her and slepte with her as it is
written gen^. xxxiiii. Que^ in thexamplary. lxxxx. d. Another example by that yt
the wife of Pharaon beheld the beauty of Joseph / she prayed him of dyshonoure
as it is written. gene. xxix. Saint Gregory says. No^ licet i^tueri quoth non
licet co^cupisci. And therefore Dauyd required of god that he would torn his
eyes from prosperytees yt he beheld not the vanytees of the world by the
which he should be abused. Vn^ david. Auerte oclos meos ne videa^t vanitate^.
etc. The appostles and saints of paradyse have so well looked on the
commandments of god that they have not ben abused and yt they ben gone all
right in to paradyse / and in likewise should we do.

F. Fyfthly the good pilgrim should take pain to here / to understand / and
to retain those the which techeth him his way. Also the pilgrim of paradyse
should with good will here ye commandments of god* the prechynges / and them
the which unto them shows it / for all benedyccyon and salvation thereof
proceeds. In likewise as says these scryptures. Vn^ luce. xi. Bean qui
audiu^t verbu^ dei and custodiu^t illd. That is to say. Those the which
hereth the word of god and keeps it ben blyssed. Et legitur deute. xxviii. Si
audieris voce^ dn^i dei tui / vt facias atque custodias oi^a mandata eius
venie^t super te universe bn^dictiones iste et apprehendent te. Bn^dictus eris
in ciuitate et benedictus in agro / bn^dictus fructus ventris tui / et fructus
terris tue / fructusque iumentorum tuorum / greges armentorum tuorum / et caul
ouiu^ tuaru^ / bn^dicta horrera tua / and bn^dicte tue reliquie / bn^dictus
eris and ingredie^s et egredie^s. That is to say. If you here ye voice of thy
lord god to the end yt thou do and keep al his commandments his benediccyons
vnyuarsalles shall come upon the and shall apprehende the / thou shalt be
blyssed in the / thou shall be blyssed in the field / the fruit of thy womb
shall be blyssed / and the fruit of the earth / and ye fruit of thy mares /
of thy bestyall / and of thy sheep / thy garners shall be blyssed / and thy
relykes shall be blyssed / you shall be blyssed in entering and going forth of
al places. Many other gods shall be written in the said chapter yt abides
because of shortness. Et le. pro. xxix. Qui custodit lege^ beatus est. He yt
keeps ye law is blyssed and that dredeth god / and excercyseth him in his
commandments ye sede of him shall be puyssaunt in the earth / the generacyon
of the good shall be blyssed. Vn^ dd i^ psalm. Beatus vir qi tunet dn^m in
ma^datis eius volet nimis. Pote^s in terra erit seme^ eius gn^atio rectoru^
bn^dicetur. Example in ye blyssed Magdaleyne yt took great pleasure to here ye
word of god and set her at his fete by humylyte for to here him speak. Vn^
luce. x. Maria sede^s secus pedes dn^i audiebat verbu^ illius. Also it is
written ioha^. viii. Qui ex deo est vba dei audit. He yt is of god hereth his
word and it follows of them yt will not here it. Propterea vos non auditis
qr ex deo non estis. Ye here not the word of god / for ye be not of his party.
Et legitur io x Oues me voce^ mea^ audiunt. My sheep / those ben ye good
persons the which here my voice. etc. Of this matter it is written in the
third commandment. Quere. xv. c. All salvation proceeds to here the word
of god and many persons has been saved for herynge of it. In likewise as men
find many examples. First how a great syn^er repented and was saved for to
here a predycacion. Quere. lv. a. Another example of an earl yt converted him
by the herynge of the word of god. Quere. lv. e. Another example of a rich
man yt served the devil. xl: years and in a sermon he repented him. Que^ lvi.
k. Those the which have shame to here speak of god / our savior Ihesus shall
have shame of him at the day of Judgment. Vn^ luce. ix. Qui me erubuerit and
sermones meos / hu^c filius hoi^s erubescet cu^ venerit in maiestate sua. Also
he yt will not here the faith and the commandments his orayson shall be
execrable / and unto him it ne shall be accorded. Vn^ prouer. xxviii. Qui
declinat aures suas vt no^ audiat lege^ or^o eius erit execrabilis. Example of
a carle yt would not here the word of god in his life / and the crucyfyxe
stopped his eres unto the service that men did for him in his buryenge in
betokenynge yt he ne would here ye oraysons that men made for him. Quere. lv.
f. The said carle and all those the which will not here to speak of god / but
ben ready to here of detraccyons and ill should understand yt they sin gretely
/ and ben worthy to have great punycyon if they deye Impenyte^tes Example
written in the sermons of the dysciple of a bishop yt was borne in to purgatory
after his death for to do his penance and he was there gretely tourmented of
the stynke of his clerk being in hell the which mounted unto him for that he
herd sometime his detraccyons and had not eygrely enough correcked him /
howbeit yt above al other things the said bishop had be good. Another example
of a man that was tourme^ted in hell within his eeres for that yt he had
folysshely herd of symphonies and Instruments. Quere. Cvii. d. Another
example of a man yt was terrybly tormented for ye vain songs and syngynges yt
he had herd in the world. Cvii. d. All ill proceeds to speak and to here ill
words. And all goodness proceeds of the word of god as thou may here in
the camplary. Que^ lv. a. b. c.

G. Syxtely ye good pilgrim should thy^ke upon his way till that his pilgrimage
be accomplysshed. Also the pylgryms of paradyse should think upon the
commandments of god and them should plant and root in their hertes without
forgetynge them / whereof it is written i^ deuteronomu. Audi israel precepta dn^i
et ea in cord tuo quasi in libro scribe / et dabo tibi terra^ fluentem lac et
mel. O Israhel here ye commandments of god and write them in thyn heart as
in a book / and I shall give unto the ye land / flowynge milk and honey. These
words spoken touches three things. The first is that men should here gladly
the commandments of god. Audi israel. The second is yt men should put them
in my^de Et ea in cord. The third is yt the reward follows. Et dabo tibi
terra^. etc. Of ye which reward shall be here afterward spoken. xlvii. a.
And it is written eccl. Que precepit deus illa cogita sper. Think evermore upon
those things yt god has commanded. Example in the blyssed vyrgyn Mary the
which held all the words of god and kept them in her heart. Vn^ luce. ii.
Maria autem conseruabat oi^a verba hec co^ferens in cord suo. They the which
have ye heart and the thought to break the commandments of god be not the
pylgryms of paradyse / but of hell / the which shall go to se lucyfer / the
deuylles / and the dampened / and shall have heritage in that country there / if
they deye impenytentes without correccyon and amendment. This matter is declared
in the nynth commandment and in the tenthe.

H. Seventhly the good pilgrim should walk on his fete and do the operacyon
of his way in trauaylynge his body. Also the pilgrims of paradyse should live
in this world in doing the operacyon of the commandments of god and they
shall have benedyccyon and salvation. Vn^ psalm. Beati qui a^bulant i^ lege tua
dn^e. They the which walk in thy law be^ blyssed. Iterum pres. Bti
i^maculati in via qi a^bula^t in lege tua dn^e. Blyssed ben they not soyled in
the way yt walks in ye law of our lord. Example in Dauyd yt ran in the
way of the commandments and loved the law of god. Vn^ psalm. Via^ ma^datorum
tuorum cucurri. and lege^ tua^ dilexi. Another example in Abraham that did in
operacyon ye will of god and he had his blyssynge. li. a. Another example of
the good man of an house yt received the pilgrims and set them at his table
received god. Quere i^ q^rto precepto. in ye works of mercy. Another example
of a monk yt bare god upon his sholdres in semblau^ce of a mesell or lepre.
Que. xxiii. e. Many examples shall be found in thexamplary of people the
which have done in operacyon the will of god and of their superyours / as saint
Mor. Joseph. Thobye. Quere. lii. c. d. e. f. etc Also for to be saved and
Iustyfyed it suffices not to here the commandments but it behooves to
fulfill them in operacyon. Vn^ ad to. ii. No^ ei^ auditores legis iusti su^t
apd deu^ sed factores iustificabu^tur. Saint James says in his.ii. cha. In
likewise as the body is deed without soul / even so faith is deed without
operacyons. Also he says in his first cha. Estote fco^res verbi and no^
audit^res tm^ fallentes vosmetipres. Iterum di. Ex operibus legis ho^
iustificatur et non ex fide tm^. That is to say. Be ye the doers of ye word
of god and not alonely the herers deceyuinge your self. Example of a wrothfull
lady that yode often to here ye sermons and she ne correcked her for thither
going. Also example of her maiden yt desired thither to go and god appeared unto
her. Quere. lxxxxix. b. Also each man yt calls god lord and master shall
not enter in to heaven / but he yt does in operacyon his will there shall enter
/ as it is wryte^ in ye.vii. cha. of saint math. The pilgrim of paradyse yt
loves god keeps and does his word / and he yt loves hy^ not does the^
not. io. xiiii. si qis diligit me sermone^ meu^ seruabit / qui no^ diligit me
sermones meos non seruat. Example how Mathatias yt kept the law of god
persecuted the sy^ners the which brake it. Quere. lii. a. Those the which ne
will do the operacyon of the co^mau^dements of god ben pilgrims of hell and
thither shall be sent for too dwell will they or not / if they deye without
correccyon and amendment. Example in cayn yt slew his brother Abell.

I. Eyghtly the condycion of a good pilgrim is to bear a bordon or a staff
for too defend him from dogs and from his enmyes. Also the good pilgrim of
paradise should have a good staff yt is steadfast faith for to defend him from
deuylles. Vnd. i. petri. v. ca. Aduersarius vester diabolus ta^quam leo rugie^s
circuit quere^s que^ deuoret cui resistite fortes in fide. Example how saint
Anthony was strongly tourmented and beten of deuyls / but he had vyctory
against them by the great faith yt he had in god. Also he had in him all the
condycyons of a good pilgrim / wherefore he is in the glory of paradyse. Unto
the which we may goo cum illo qui est benedictus in secula seculorum. Amen.

A. Example how the body the which is a fool draws the soul in to the way
of hell. xlvi
IT is written eccle. xxxvii. A consiliario malo serua ai^am tua^. Keep thy
soul from an ill councelour for if you believe ill counceyle thou shalt be
deceived and in danger of perdycyon. Et legitur. i. io. iiii. No^ oi^
spu^icrede^du^ est. A man should not believe ne give credence unto every
spyryte. For the ill person ne counceyleth but ill the which in hy^ rests.
Example of a fool and a sage yt made a vyage togyders / the which yode unto a
cite wherein men said yt many goods unto them were promised / and in going in
the said vyage came to demand ye way of pastures or herdmen the which to
them said. Ye shall find.ii. ways the one much large / the other right
strayte. If ye go ye strayte way anon ye shall be at your cite. And if ye go
by the other large way it is way full of bypathes the which shall bring you
out of your way / and also it is full of thieves the which shall take from you
your gods and peradventure shall make you deye and ye shall not go unto your
cite / how so ever it be go ye not that way. Than said the sage unto the fool.
Go we by this streyte way. The fool said yt will we not do / here is a fair
way and a large it is better to believe that yt we se than that yt men tell us.
And the sage said / thou see how ye pastoures says. Than said the fool / fie
/ fie on these pastors they wot not what they say / thou art more fool than I
come on / come on thy way. And the said fool drew the sage and went the large
way. And anon they were out of the way and fell among thieves the which took
from them al their gods / held them prisoners and put them in their bonds /
service and captyuyte. And they were so long yt the fool deyed / and in
contynent the cause was put in Judgment before the Judge / and was declared as
it is said that for as much as the sage believed the fool / and yt they would
not believe ye pastoures yt they were fallen in such inconuenyent. Than the
Judge gave sentence yt the said fool and the sage were cast together in to the
fire to be burnt and broyled without mercy / and it was done. Here is the
example but it behooves to expound it. By the fool is understand the body of
every of us / by the sage is understand the soul / ye vyage is this world
the which is but a pilgrimage / the cite is paradyse / the Judge yt condempneth
them is god. The pastoures ben these bysshoppes curates / prelates / and
prechours the streyte way is to lead a life of austeryte in fastings /
abstynences / so bryete / chastyte / and penance. The large way is to live in
all voluptuosytees / and carnalytees / of lechery / glotony / daunses. etc.
that the body appetyteth / the enmyes ben the deuylles / the world / and the
flesh / the thieves ben the.vii. deedly sins the which takes from them al
their goods / yt is all good virtues and paradyse / the Judge the which them
condampneth is god yt shall condampne the body and the soul at ye Judgment to
be brent togyders. etc. More openly it behooves to expound it. That yt these
prelates counceyleth the strayte way / is yt thing that ye gospel of Matthew
speaks vii. Arecta et angusta est via que ducit ad vitam / lata et spaciosa
est via que ducit ad perditione^ / vt dcm^ est. Et prouer. xii. Iter impiorum
decipiet eos. Sequitur. Iter au^t deuiu^ ducit ad mortem. A fool ne will believe
till that he receive. In likewise these folysshe sinners will not believe the
clerks and prechers till that they be in the fire of hell in dampnacyon. By that
yt is the sage yt is the soul the which would go by the streyte way / and the
body the which is a fool gaynsayeth it. It is yt the which is written ad gall.
v. ca. Caro co^cupiscit aduersus sprem. etc. and illd roma. viii. Sisecundu^
carne^ vixe ritis moriemini. By that ye the thieves yt sins take a way the
virtues / it is that yt is written ecclesiastes.ix. Qui in vno peccato
peccauerit multa bona perdet. By that that they were put in seruytude is yt
that is written. John. viii. Oi^s qui facit pctm^ seruus est peccati. Et.ii.
petri. ii. A quo ei^ quis superatus est eius seruus est. And that yt god shall
Judge it is written. Marci. xvi. Qui crediderit / and baptizatus fuerit saluus
erit / qui vero non crediderit condempnabitur.

B. How the pilgrim of paradyse should consider.iiii. things. xlvi.
DAuyd the prophet says in ye psalter. In cord meo abscondi eloquia tua / vt
non peccem tibi. I have hid thy words that been thy co^mau^dements in my
heart to the end that I syn^e not against thy will. Thou sinner for to keep the
from sin and for to bear lightly all the labors / pains / trybulacions /
sekenesses / and aduersytees the which comes unto the in doing the
pilgrimage of the world. Consider.iiii. things. First consider ye shortenes
of thy life / and how at thy death all ends. That is to understand all
fastinges wakynges / erly rysynge / sekenesses / aduersytees and tourmentes
that thy body has borne and endured. What thing is it as of thy life / it is
a vapor apperinge in a little thing. Vn^ iacobi. iiii. Queest vita vestra /
vapor est ad modicu^ parens. And to^ said. Remember the how life is wy^de. Vn^
job. vii. Memento qr ventus est vita mea. For in likewise as a blaste of wind
is soon paste / so is our life in regard of eternyte. Ite^ job. vii. Parce
michi dn^e nichil su^t enim dies mei. Good lord spare me my days ben nothing
/ they ben right short. Breues dies hominis sunt. etc. Thou man labor
strongly while that thy life dureth and bear all sekenesses and trybulacyons
pacyently / for you shall have the reward eternal of yt that you have labored
and borne for ye love of god. Secondly consider ye labors / pains /
trybulaclons / and death yt Jesus for to again bye the and us all. He yt is ye
sone of god eternal / king of aungelles / and of saints of paradyse. If a
great king bear for thy sake a great weight or burden / you outest to bear for
his sake a straw. And ye king celestyall has borne for the ye cross /
fasted labored / preched / and suffered death. Tha^ sholdest you endure evil for
the love of him. Thyrdly consider the pains / labors and trybulacyons yt the
dampened bears in hell / for the which pains we may be delivered for to
labor and to endure aduersyte in this world for gods love. Vn^. ec. xxix
Minimu^ pro magno placeat tibi. Little thing the pleases for a great thing.
For all ye pains of this world be nothing in regard of them unto ye dampened
the which be^ eternalles. Example of a man dampened yt spoke of the fire of
hell and of the dampened the which ben brent and broyled. lvii. Another example
of tourments yt a woman had that was dampened. lxxxx. a. Fourthly consider the
great Joys that been prepared in paradyse unto those the which labor well in
this world for the love of god. Whereof speaks saint Isidore in the book of
sovereign goodness and says. Qui vite future premia diligentur excogitat mala
oi^a pn^tis vite equanimitur portat qm^ ex illius dulcidi^e huius amaritudine^
te^perat. That is to say. He that thinks dylygently on the rewards of the
life to come bears egally in his courage all the ylles of this present life.
For it attempereth the bytternes of yt by ye swetenes of paradyse. And saint
Poule says Ad romanos. viii. Non sunt condign passiones huius te^poris ad
futuram gloriam. The passions of this time be not co^dygne unto the glory to
come / of the which is spokene hre after.

A. Of ye reward eternal that they shall have the which keep the
commandments of god. xlvii
IT is written in the.xliiii. chapter of Ysaie. And in the second chapitre of
ye first epistle of saint Poule ad co. Quod oculus no^ vidit nec auris audiuit
/ nec in cor hoi^s ascendit q^ pre parauit deus dilige^tibus se. This auctoryte
speaks great things. First it says that never eye ne saw in the world so
much good as god has prepared unto those yt love him. That is to say. if it
were possible yt any had been in the popes court / and of all ye patryarches /
cardynalles / archebisshops bishops / and of all the kings / dukes / earls
queen's / ladies / and gentylwomen of all ye world / and that he had seen their
treasours honors and goods yt they have and that unto them is done / it
should be but shame to have al those goods in regard to have one day in
paradyse of the leest Joy that is in it. There is. Quoth oculos non vidit / after
follows. Nec auris audiuit. If it were possible yt thou were as fair as was
Absalon ye sone of Dauyd the which had not in all his body one spotte ne foul
thing / but was all white / sanguyne / tender / and laughing / and his heeres
were so fair that when they were shorn they were sold for an hundred cicles
of gold. And if thou were as swyft as was Absael the which was so swyfte to
run that he passed an heart to course in plain country. And if thou were
also strong as Sampson fortyn the which at one time overcame a. M. men of
arms. And if thou were also doubted as Augustus Caesar unto whom all the
world obeyed. Of whom it is written (no^ habemus rege^ nisi cesarem) said the
Jews And if thou were also rich as was king Alexander the which was much
rich. And also wise as Salamon yt which was the wysest of the earth when he
lived. And also hole as Moses the which never lost one tothe / ne his sight
waxed derke. And if thou sholdest live as long as Matussa le the which lived.
ix. hundred years / or as Enoch and Helye the which ben in paradyse terrestre
/ and shall not deye unto the end of the world / and if all the world loved yt
as much as did Dauyd Ionathas whom he loved as him self. And if yt all were
accorded unto the in likewise as Helyseus and Cypre accorded togider / for that
yt the one would the other would. And if thou were lord of all and loved as
Joseph was in Egypt. If all that yt I have spoken were in the as yet as much
as a man might tell unto the / yet should it be but a thing of no valor in
regard to be one hour in the Joys of paradyse. Vn^ psalm. Melius est dies vna
i^ atriis tuis super milia. After follows. Nec cor hoi^s ascendit. That is to
say. If all the wysest clerks and people that ever reigned in the world
ymagyned the gretest Joys that they might they ne could comprehend ye leest
Joy of paradyse yt the saved have Also those the which in this world has
done and accomplysshed the commandments of god shall have consolacyon at
their death of god and his saints as it is written in thexamplary and approved
by many examples. And first of an holy fader that saw as his death the
prophets and Ihesu christ. Quere. Ciiii. a. And a man should understand yt the
reward of the saved shall not be egall / for every man shall have after his
desert. Appoc. xiiii. O pera ei^ illorum sequu^tur illos. Et paul. i. ad co.
xv. Alia est claritas solis / alia est claritas lune / alia est claritas
stellarum. Stella enim a stella differt claritate / sic et resurrectio
mortuorum. In likewise as in the fyrmament there is a clerenes of the son and
another of the moon and one of the sterres the which differreth the one from
the other in clerenes / in likewise shall dyfferre the resurreccyon of the
saved. That is to say. That so much the more as they have obeyed unto god /
and endured aduersyte for the love of him / of so much the more shall they be
in paradyse fair / clear / and nere unto god / and the more clearly shall they
se him and have of scy^ce and of retrybucyo^. And therefore says our lord.
John. xiiii. In domo pr^is mei mansiones multe sunt / scz pro diuersitate
virtutu^. Many mansyons ben in the house of my fader for the dyuersyte of
virtues And how be it yt god us gives by word in ye gospel Math. xx. that he
repreued the idle people and that he sent them at diverse hours to work in the
vine. The one in ye morning the other at tyerce / mydday / and even / and in
the end of the Journey every of them had a penny / as well those of the
euentyde as they of the morning. Of yt a man should not murmr if god give
paradyse unto sinners at all aeges when they will repent them / to leave their
sins and to put them to do well. This penny that they all had was paradyse /
they all had Ihesu christ yt which was crucyfyed in their possessyon / as well
those of the euentyde as those of the morning. In likewise as says saint
Austy^ But they had retrybucyon in beauty / clerenes / bounte / science. etc.
but unto the egalite of the good deeds that they had done in the world as it
is said / and as the scryptures declares. Vnde daniel. xii. Qui docti fuerint
fulgebu^t sicut firmame^tum / et qui ad iusticiam erudiu^t multos: quasi stelle
in perpetuas eternitates. They the which have been sage and wise shall shine in
likewise as the fyrmament / and they the which techeth any unto Justice as ye
sterres in perpetual eternytees. Et legitur ezechiel. xviii. Iusticia iusti
erit super eum / et impietas impu super eum erit. The Justice of ye just shall
be upon him / and the sin of ye wicked shall be upon hy^. Also every man
shall bear his charge. Thus Ezechyell says in his. vi. chapter. Et legitur
Ihe. xxv. Reddam eis secundum opera eorum et secundum facta manuum suarum. I
shall yield unto the saved and dampened after the operacyons of them / and after
the deeds of their hands. Et psalm. Tu reddes vnicuique iuxta opera sua. Thou
shall yield unto every man after his operacyons. The saved shall have Joy on
all parts. First they shall have Joy above them of god yt they shall behold
/ and of the great glory that shall proceed of hy^. For Dauyd says in the
psalter. Excelsus dn^s et super celos gloria eius. Et appocali. vii. Iusti su^t
an^ thronum dei / et seruiu^t ei. etc. Sequitur. Qui sedet in throno habitat
super illos. The lord is lift up and the glory of him is above the heuens.
Also the Just ben before ye throne of god and serve hy^. And it follows. He
the which sytteth on the throne abides upon them. Also the saved shall fe god
clearly face to face in his great honor and in his great glory infynyte /
whereby they shall be replenysshed with all Joys. Ysaie. xxiii. Begem in decore
suo videbu^t. It is written. i. ad corin. xiii. Videmus nu^c per speculu^ et in
enigmata / tu^c autem facie ad faciem videbimus. Also in seeing him clearly
there they shall take parfyte delectacyon and love / and they shall love him so
perfytely yt they shall never leave hy^ and they shall not go against his will /
in such wise that they shall have sure holding. Augustinus dicit. Videbimus /
amabimus / et laudabimus. Also in beholdynge this fair myroure the which is
god they shall se all them of paradyse / and of hell / and so they shall draw
and take of the fountain of science and sapyence so strongely that they shall
know the things past / present and some to come. And also they shall know
all the persons of paradyse / those the which they never saw as the other
and their name / and what they were / and of what operacyons and merytes. etc.
Too speak of this matter to much forth it is not good. And for because that
the wise Salamon says proverb. xxv. Sicut qui comedit mel multu^ non est ei
bonu^ sic qui scrutator est maiestatis opprimetur a gloria. In likewise as it
is not good unto him yt eteth much honey / in likewise to him the which is to
inquire of the mageste shall be put from ye glory. And said Poule yt was
rauisshed unto the third heaven and in paradyse as it is written ii. ad corint.
xii. Audiuit archana verba que non licet homini loqui. And also he says ad to.
xii. Dico oi^bus qui sunt intur vos non plus sapere quam oportet sapere / sed
sapere ad sobrietate^ et vnicuique sicut deus diuisit mansura^ fidei. I say
unto al them the which ben among you / ne savor ye no more than it needs
to savor / but savor ye unto sobrenes / and unto every one as god has
devised the measure of ye faith. And Cathon says. Mitte archana dei celumque
inquirere quid sit. Cu^ sis mortalis que sunt mortalia cura. That is to say.
Leave to inquire the secrets of god / as what thing is the heaven / sith thou
art mortal have in thyn heart those things that been mortalles. Also the
saved shall have Joy under them to se the tourmentes and pains of hell from
the which they shall be preserved and kept / and in such wise to have passed
and avoided the danger of the world wherein they were when they lived. Also
they shall have Joy by them to be assocyate with so great noble / and amyable
company / as in the company of aungelles and saints of paradyse / the which
shall be so fair / clear / shynynge / a ourned / elegaunt / and amyables /
than there ne is tongue yt it may declare ne entendeme^t comprehend. It is
wryte^ apo. vii. Vidit turba^ magnam qua^ dinumerare nemo poterat ex omnibus
tribubus populus et linguis. etcetera. Saint Johan in the appocalypse says. I
saw a great turbe or multitude of people the which no man might esteem ne
nombre of all lygnages / peoples and tongues. Also more over we find yt it is
written in the gospel yt they shall be semblables unto aungelles. Vn^ mar. xii.
Cum a mortuis resurrexerint neque nubent / neque nubentur sed su^t sicut angeli
dei in celo. Also the place of paradyse is so fair pure / and clean / and
delectable yt a man ne may take symylytude ne co^parayson: ne yt entendeme^t
may comprehend / wherefore it is better to hold my peace than to speak unduly.
The good Thoby says in his.xiii. chapy. Beatus ero si fueri^t reliquie seminis
mei ad videndu^ claritatem iherusale^. I shall be blyssed upon the relykes of
my sede when they shall se the clerenes of Iherusalem / that is paradyse. And
in the said place of paradise the which is pure and clean there shall no
person enter if he be not well purged and made clean from all spotte of sin
/ as it is written apoca. xxi. Non intrabit aliquid coinqi natu^ et faciens
mendatiu^ et abhominationem: Also the saved shall have Joy much meruaylous in
themself that they shall se themself so fair / bright / and shynynge. Also
of that yt they shall be so swyft / subtylles / immortalles / and impassybles.
etc. Also they shall be in the place of peace / bounte / beauty / love / honor
/ life / light / franchyse / suerte / swetenes / richesse / health / concord
dysporte / wisdom / rest / glory / Joy / gladness / they shall have peace
without war ne dyuisyon. Vn^ ysaie. xxii. Sedebit pplus meus in pulchritudine
pacis and in tabernaculis fiducie and in requie opulenta. My people shall sytte
in the beauty of peace / in ye tabernacles of fyaunce / in rest / habondaunt in
goods. They shall have bounte without any malice / sin / crime / ne blame.
Quia cu^ su^mo bono non potest intrare malu^. Also they shall have beauty without
foulness. Quia iusti florebunt sicut sol in regno pr^is eorum. vt legitur
math^. xiii. And the prophet Ysaie says. Ysaie. xxx. Eret lux lune sicut lux
solis / et lux solis septe^plicitur sicut lux septem dieru^. The Just shall
flourysshe as the son in the realm of their fader. That is to understand
that after the Judgment yt light of the moon shall be as clear as the son is
now / and the son shall be seven times clerer than it is at this time /
wherefore the Just shall be much clear and fair And saint Poule says ad
philip. iii. Saluatore^ expectamus dn^m nr^m ihesu^ xprem qui reformabit corpus
humilitatis nostre co^figuratu^ corpori claritatis sue. We abide ye savior our
lord Jesus christ the which shall reform the body of our humylyte confygured
unto the body of his clerenes. Also they shall have strength without debylyte
or feebleness. Quia mutabu^t fortitudine^ in fortitudine^ diuina^. Vn^ psalm. Dn^s
fortitudople bis sue. The saved shall change their stre^gthe in to strength
dyuyne. Also our lord is the strength of his people. They shall be so strong
that all that they will do god unto them shall give ye puyssaunce / so yt they
shall be as all puyssauntes / but they will nothy^ge do but yt it please unto
god. Also they shall have perfyte Dyleccyon the one with ye other without hate /
envy / rancoure / ne ill will so that their said love shall be so confermed
togyders that they shall enjoy the^ of the good deeds, of their neighbors as
if it were unto themself. It is an excellent goodness as to be assocyate with
so amyable a company and to be of such fraternity and amyte the which is in
god and after him. Also the saints shall have honor praysyng without shame ne
dishonor. Vnde psalm. Nimis honorati sicut amiti tui deus. God thy friends ben
much honored. Also they shall have life without death. For it is written
sapientie.v^. Iusti autem in perpetuum viuent / et apud dominum est merces
eoru^ Et sapient ^e. iii. Iustorum anime in manu dei sunt et non tanget illos
tormentum mortis. The just people shall live and be in perpetuite / and their
reward is anenst our lord. Also the souls of the Just ben in the hands of
our lord / and the tourment of death shall not touch them. Also they shall
have light and day without derkenes / night without obscurete. Vn^ psalm. Lux
orta est iusto. Et appoca. xxi. Ciuitas illa no^ indiget sole / neque luna vt
luceat in ea. Na^ claritas dei illuminabit illam. The cite of paradyse has no
need of the son ne of the moon there for to shine / for the clerenesse of
god shall enlumyne it. Also they shall have frau^chyse / lyberte without
subgeccyon ne seruytude. Vn^ ad to. viii. Creatura liberatur a seruitute
corruptionis i^ libertate^ glie filiorum dei. Also they shall have suerte without
dread Vn^ johan. xv. Gaudiu^ vr^m nemo tollit a vobis. No man shall take from
you your Joy. Et aug. dicit. Quoth ibi erit su^ma securitas / secura tranquilitas
/ tra^quilla / iocu^ditas / iocu^da felicitas / etna beatitudo. In paradyse
shall be sovereign surete / sure tranquylyte / ioyouste / felycyte / debonayre
eternyte / and eternal beatytude. Also they shall have swetenes on all parts
without bytternesse. Vn^ psalm. Qua^ magna multitudo dulcedinis tue dn^e qua^
abscondisti timentibus te. O lord how great is the multitude of thy swetenes
the which thou have hid unto those that dread the. Also they shall have
richesse spyrytuall and habondaunce of al goods celestyalles without pouerte. Vn^
psalm. Glia et diuitie in domo eius. Vn^ psalm. Replebimur in bonis domus tue.
Glory and richesse in the house of god yt is in paradyse. Also we shall be
replenysshed with the gods of thy house. Also they shall have health without
sekenes. Vn^ appo. xxi. Absterget deus oe^m lachrimaru^ ab oculis sanctoru^ et
iam non erit amplius / neque luctus / neque clamor / neque vllus dolor. etc.
God shall wype away all the teeres from the eyes of his saints / and there
shall be no more weeping / ne clamor / ne any dolor. Also they shall have
concord without dyscorde / for that yt the one will the other wylleth it /
such concord shall be between them as there is between the two eyes when the
one torneth the other torneth also incontinent. Also they shall have dysporte
without enoy. Augustinus. Sine fine videbitur deus / sine fastidio amabitur /
sine fatigatio^e laudabitur. Et psalm. Mill anni an^ oculos tuos tanquam dies
hesterna que preterut. God shall se without end he shall be beloved without anoye
/ he shall be praised and lauded without being weary. Also a thousa^de years
before thy eyes shall be in likewise as the day of yesterday yt is paste. Also
they shall have wisdom without folly as it is beforesayd and perfyte knowledge.
Gregorius dicit. Qui claritate^ conditoris sui conspiciu^t nichil i^ creatura
agitur quod videre non possint. They the which beholds the clerenes of their
condytoure nothing is made but they may se it. Also they shall be in the aege
of youth without oldnes / for in the aege that our lord was crucified. Ad
ephesios. iiii. Resurgent oe^s in mensura^ etatis ple^itudinis christi. They
shall have rest without labor. Appoc. xiiii. Amodo iam dicit spiritus vt
requiescant a laboribus suis. Also they shall have glory and gladness eternal
without end in likewise as says these scriptures in many places. Vnde
psalmista. Exultabu^t sancti in gloria. The saints shall enjoy them in
glory. Et legitur Johannes.xvi. Tristicia vestra vertetur in gaudium. Your
heuines shall torn in to Joy. Et legitur Ysaie. xxxv Gaudiuin and leticiam
obtinebu^t. The saints shall have and obtain Joy and gladness in paradise.
Unto the which we may go cu^ ille qui est benedictus in secula seculorum. Amen.

B. Example of a man saved the which spoke and declared of the Joys of
paradyse. It is recyted in the promptuary of the dyscyple that there were two
monks the which spoke together of the life eternal / and they agreed between
them yt the first the which deyed of them should come again to notyfy unto
the other of his estate if it pleased unto god. When the one was deed he that
lived sorowed and was heavy / and the deed appeared to him clerer than the son
and he salued him benygnely. And when the quycke monk axed him of the life
eternal He answered. Sicut audiuimus sic vidimus quod oculis no^ vidit nec auris
auditut. etc. In likewise as we herd so have we seen. Never eye in the world
ne saw / ne ere herd / ne in the heart of man ascended ye great Joys yt god
has prepayred unto them ye which love him / when he had spoken these words
he departed.

C. Another example of a relygious that was.CCC. year to here a bird sing.
The dyscyple recyteth in his sermons that it is wryte^ how a relygyous man
right devout required of god yt he would show hy^ some sweetness of the Joy
celestyall. And on a day as he was in orayson he herd a little bird sing by
him / so he arose fro his prayer and would have taken her / and ye said bird
flewe unto the forest the which was nere unto the monastery and set her upon a
tree / and the said relygious yode after and rested him under the said tree for
to here the song of the said bird or angel / and after yt he had song as
much as pleased god he flewe away. And the said relygyous returned unto the
said monastery weny^ge to have be under the said tree but the space of an hour
or two / and was all abashed when he found the gate of the monastery masoned
and stopped and another gate on ye other side and that he ne knew the porter
ne the relygyous ne abbot / he was axed of whens he was and what he demanded.
And he said I a am relygyous of this monastery and parted from hens at such an
hour etc. Than they demanded the name of the abbot that reigned in that time.
He answered he had such a name. Tha^ they serched their chronicles and they
found yt he had failed in the said monastery and had been to here the song
of the said bird ye space of.CCC.xl. years without having heet ne cold / and
without that his vestyments were worn. etc. What swetnes shall they of
paradyse have when they shall here the song of all the nine ordres of
aungelles about the dyuyne magesty.

D. Another example of the clerenes of god. It is recited in the promptuary of
the dyscyple yt as master Jordan friar of the order of prechours passed by a
town for to go and preche he was prayed of the people yt he would vysyte a
woman posseded of the devil. And when he approached ye devil salued him
literally. And it was so yt the woman had never learned any lettres. And ye
said Jordan questyoned the devil lytterally. Wherefore tormentest you this woman
/ and wherefore delytest thou to dwell in her. The devil answered yt he was
constrained of his creator there to be / and that he ne might be else where.
And ye said Jordan questyoned him of many things among ye which he him
prayed yt he would tell him some thing of the clerenes of the face of god for
yt he had been in paradyse and had seen it clearly. The devil answered Neither
I ne all the aungelles the which it beholds and ben in paradyse / if they
were here in earth ne could tell any thing that might suffyse / but I shall
tell the some symylytude by the which thou may understand that his face is
clear. And he said understand. If all the flowers of all the herbs and trees
of times past and to come / and all grenenes of all graynes and herbs / and
all the colors of all the precious stones / and of all metalles / and the
shynynges of the son and of the moon / of the sterres / and all the clerenes
of all lyghtes ye which ever did shine to give light in the earth / all that
clerenes should be but a derke night in regard of the clerenes of the true
son the which is god. Than master jordan said. O how unhappy is that man yt
loses that / and yt geteth not that great Joy. etc.

A. Also the reward of them the which well or ill has enployed their.v.
wits of nature upon the commandments of god. xlviii.
ALso it is written. Eccle. xv. Si voluetis ma^data conseruare conseruabunt te.
If thou have wylled to keep the commandments of god they shall keep ye fro
hauy^ge evil. And if thou have not wylled to keep them they shall make the to
have punycyon. To consider well the holy scryptures all those the which
pretend to go unto paradyse should enploye their.v. wits of nature upon ye
commandments of god. For those the which well enploye them in
accomplysshynge them shall have great retrybucyon in paradyse. Vnde. dd. Eteni^
seruus tuus custodit ea in custodiendis illis retributio multa. And those which
do unto the contrary shall be strongely punysshed in hell. The mouth of the
good yt well has inquired / demanded and taught the said commandments of
god shall laugh and praise god / they shall enjoy them in paradyse. And he yt
has counceyled or commanded to break them shall cry and howl and shall be
dysco^forted. Vn^ Ysaie. lxv Hec dicit dn^s deus / ecce serui mei comede^t: et
vos esurietis / ecce serui mei bibe^t: et vos sitietis / ecce serui mei
letabuntur: et vos confu^dimini / ecce serui mei laudabu^t preexultatio ne
cordis: et vos clamabitis pre dolor cordis et pre co^tritione spu^s
vllulabitis. My servants shall ete and drink / not of breed and of wine /
but shall be refeccyoned of my glory. Vn^ psalm. Satiabor cu^ apparuerit glia
tua. And you dampened shall have honger and thyrste of my glory. My servants
shall enjoy them and ye shall be confounded My servants shall praise me for
ye great Joy of heart that they have / and ye shall cry for great dolor of
heart and shall howl for contrycyon of spyryte. Also the dampened shall wayle
and sorrow as a woman the which trauayleth of child. Vn^ Ysaie. xiii.
Tortiones and dolores tn^bunt / quali perturiens dolebunt. Example of Tongdalus
that was led to se the tourmentes of hell / and afterward brought again in to
his body told that he saw the souls tourmented wtin ye womb of a cruel
be / and within a ponde ysy and frosen the which souls cried so horrybly
yt they filled hell of the noyses and howlings. etc. Que. C.xi. e. And it is
to be noted yt the membre yt has offended most shall be tourmented. Vn^ ber.
In quo me^bro creator plus offe^ditur in eode^ pcto^r grauius punietur. The
eeres of the good the which with good will has herd the word and ye
commandments of god shall here in paradyse swetenes of songs and inobrable
melodyes. Vn^ david. Qua^ magna mltitudo dulcidinis tui dn^e qua^ absco^disti
time^tibuste. And the eeres of the cursed shall here in hell brayenge / cryenge
/ howlynge / and great tempests of people out of wit and enraged for the
great tourmentes of hell / of the which shall be written here after. Que. xlix.
B The eyes of the good the which has beholden to do and accomplysshe the said
commandments shall be enlumyned and clear shall se god / the holy places /
and all delytes and bountees. And those of the cursed yt has loved to se
dauncynge or folysshe vanytees shall be bly^ded in such manner yt they shall
never se Joys ne bountees / ne things the which may comfort them / but
sometime they shall se the thing the which may torment them. Also their eyes
shall weep and their tethe shall grynde and gnasshe for the anguysshes that
they feel says god in the gospel. Math. xxii. Ibi erit fletus et stridor
de^tiu^. Example of a soul yt bewept the time yt it had lost. It is written in
the book of dread yt as an holy man was in orayson he herd by the will of god
a voice horrybly weeping. He demanded who it was yt in such wise wept. The
answer was given yt said. I am a soul damned / and he demanded. Wherefore
wepest you so horrybly. He answered and said / one of the things wherefore I and
all the dampened wayle most for is for that yt they have lost and wasted
vnprouffytably the time of grace in sin where in one hour by repentance
they might have gotten grace and escaped ye tourmentes wherein they ben and shall
be eternally. etc. Another example of a woman dampened that had two todes in her
eyes for the folysshe lokes yt she had made. Quere. lxxxx. A. The nose of the
good shall smell good odoures / and those of the cursed foul stynkes. The
hertes of the good shall enjoy them so gretely of the great Joys that they
have that they ne shall cease to praise god. And unto the contrary the hertes
of the ill shall be so sorry and so wroth of ye tourmentes and of the
contrycyon yt they have that with hye voice their mouths shall cry as before is
said in the auctoryte prealeged. Ysaie. lxv. Serui mei. etc. Also the hertes of
the dampened the which has thought the sins and taken delectacion ne shall
thy^ke but upon pain and dolor. Vn^ hiero. Ta^ta erit i^ i^ferno vis doloris
quod meus aut aliud dirigi non poterit / nisi ad quoth vis doloris i^pulerit. The
fete the hands / and the body of the good shall have lyberte and fraunchyse to
run by the cleme^tes and places where it shall seem them good and unto gods
pleasure. Vn^ sapi. iii. Iust^ florebu^t sicut sol / et tanquam scintilem
aru^d^neto discurre^t. And those of the ill shall be in the derkenesses of hell
bound / not with cords but with the dyuyne Justice without power to remeue / ne
to aid / ne to avoid ye place for to go from one place to another Vn^ math^.
xxii. Ligatus manibus et pedibus proucite enim / scz impiu^ in tn^bras
exteriores / ibi erit fletus et gridor de^tiu^. Cast the sinner in to derkenes
exteryoures the fere and the hands bound. weeping and gryndynge of tethe
shall be there. For to be short ye dampened shall be so tourmented that they
shall desire ye death and shall seche it / but they shall not find it / it
shall fle from them / and they may never deye. Vn^ apo. ix. In diebus illis
quere^t hoe^s mortem et non i^uenie rat ea^ / et desiderabu^t mori et mors
fugies ab eis. By these things before spoken it appears yt the pilgrims of
paradyse yt which has well enployed their five wits of nature upon the
commandments of god shall have Joy and retrybucyon in those five wits of
nature. And the pylgryms of hell the which has dysobeyed unto the
commandments of god shalll have pains and tourme^tes eternally in their
said wits of nature. And therefore it is a good thing to labor in the way of
paradyse / and to fle that of hell. Example of a woman much tourmented in hell
in her five wits of nature. Quere in the examplarye.

B. The maledyccyons and excommunycacions of those yt which have dysobeyed
unto god and the church. xlviii
IT is written eccle. xli. ca. Ve vobis viri impii qui dereliquistis lege^ dei
altissimi. Ye men yt which have forsaken and left the law of the right hye
god maledyccyon is unto you. And it is written in ye first of the prophet
Ysaie. Ve genti peccatrici pplo graui iniqitate / semini nequam / filiis
celaritatis. That is to say. Maledyccyon unto people syn^ers / unto people
grievous of inyquyte / unto the cursed sede / unto the children sinners. What is
that maledyccyon. Maledyccyon is pryuacyon from benedyccyon / and from all
spyrytuall goodness and assocyacyon with all ill. And when a person loves /
serves and obeys more sooner unto the devil than unto god he is much
acursed / or when he leueth god for to follow ye devil / or when he has loved
ye euyls / the sins / and the cursednesses / and that he leueth the good
deeds / the virtues / and operacions Vn^ psalm. Dilexit maledictione^ and veniet
ei et noluit bn^dictione^ et elo^gabitur ab eo. The person yt dyobeyeth unto
the commandments of god loves maledyccyon and it shall come unto him. And
he has not wylled to have benedyccyon and it is elonged from him and shall be
pryued from paradyse and from the company of the blyssed saints of paradyse.
Vn^. i. ad cori^thios. vi. Neque maledicti regnu^ dei possidebu^t. For to speak
of excommunicacion and of malediccyon it behooves to se four things. The
first is wherefore a man is excommunicate The second the manners how any renneth
in the less excommunycacion. The third how he renneth in the great
excommunycacion by sentence of the Judge. The fourth by sentence of right written.

C. As unto the first. If thou demand wherefore a person is exco^munycate.
The answer. It is written in the droit that exco^munycacyo^ ne should be brought
in but for mortal sin. Exco^municati no^ nisi pro mortali culpa affligi
debet. Vt habetur. xi. d. iii. ca. Nemo episcoru^. And when any is cyted of
office and that he is excomunyed by the defaute of none apparaunce at a day
that is for the sin of inobedyence / for he should obey unto ye church and
there answer We ben all members unto the church unto the which we should
obey. Also when any is a thief / fornicatour or sinner and yt he ne dredeth to
offend god by sin he is excommunycate by medycyne for to give him shame and
dread / that is yt he knowledge his fault and yt he have so great shame to be
separate that he him corrects and amendeth. Exco^munycacyon cast of wrong or
of right is to dread / for such weneth not to be accursed yt is. Example of
two me^ the which gelded them at their advise in good intencyon / for the
which thing they were excommunicate / as it is written in thexamplary. lxxxix.
F.

D. As unto the second thing a man should understand that some run in the
less excommunycacyon incontinent that he companyeth wytyngly with one
excommunyed against the defense the which is made openly of the church / as
for to speak to drink to ete / to come too chapter. etc. This excommunycacion
separateth from the sacraments of the church. For ye person exco^munycate of
this exco^munycacio^ ne should in such estate receive none of ye sacraments
and the defaute not first assoyled in confession of that exco^munycacyon as of
other sins in saying. Absoluote a sententia minoris exco^municationis. But
the priest that has puyssaunce to assoyle that person of mortal sin a man
may assoyle. It is said the less / for how be it that it pryuateth from the
sacraments it ne separateth from entering into ye church / and to company with
other persons.

E. As to the third a man should know that the great excommunycacyon the
which is of the sentence of the Judge written and sealed separateth the person
excommunycate from the sacraments / from entry^ge in to the church / and from
the company of al faithful christian people. It is much to dread for many
things. First for that / yt these exco^munyed ben cursed of god the fader / yt
sone / and ye holy ghost. For that / yt the church mylytaunt curses and
byndeth it is also cursed and bound of all the blyssed trynyte. Vn^ math^.
xvi. Quodcu^que ligaueris super terra^ / exit ligatu^ and in celis. Also they
ben taken and delivered unto the devil as saint Poule betoke a fornycatour /
and as men find in writing. Also they shall be separate from the company and
co^munycacyon of the faithful christian people as lazers / or lepres infecte and
corrupt not worthy to be among the other / and pryuate from the partycypacio^
of all the masses / prayers / oraysons / alms deeds / and from all the other
good deeds of ye church without power in such estate to receive any of the
sacraments / ne to be buried in holy ground the which is a great infame / to
be buried as a dombe be / without solempnyte / without prayer / and oraysons /
not worthy to e^habyte ne to be in holy ground and blyssed. Also they ben as a
membre cut and separate from the body yt takes no part of the good of yt said
body. Where they ben as a bough or a branch cut from the tree the which
dries and is no more worth for nothing than to brenne. Vn^ io. xv. Ego sum
vitis vos palmites / sicut palms non potest far fructu^ a semetipso nisi
manserit in vite sic nec vos nisi in me manseritis Also a man may well speak
with a lepre without any sin ne danger / the which thing a man may not do
with one that is exco^munyed / his company is more dangerous than that of a
serpent. For as to company and habyte with a serpent a man synneth not mortally
ne dampneth his soul / as he does with a person excommunyed. Also one
excommunyed dysobeysaunt unto god and unto the church is cursed in his body /
in his members / and in his goods and fruytes and he bears maledyccion with him
in all places / and in all stedes where he enters and abides. Understand the
scryptures and go seche them in the chapytres the which follow. It is written
deutero. xxviii. ca. Si audire nolueritis verbum domini dei tui vt custodias et
facias omnia mandata eius / venient super te om^s maledictiones iste and
apprehendent te. Maledictus eris in ciuitate maledictus eris in agro /
maledictu^ horreu^ tuum / et maledicte reliquie tue / maledictus fructus
ventris tui / et fructus terretue / ar menta boum tuoru^ / et greges ouiu^
tuarum maledictus eris ingrediens / et maledictus egrediens / mittet dominus
super te famen et esuriem / and increpatione^ in oi^a opera tua que facies
d^nec conterat te and perdat te velociter propter adinuentiones tuas pessimus
in quibus reliquisti me / plura alia mala ponuntur ibi. etc. That is to say. If
thou wylt not here the voice of thy lord god to the end that thou do and keep
all his co^mmaundementes all these maledyccyons the which follows shall come
upon the and shall take yt Thou shall be cursed in the cite / thou shall be
cursed in the field / thy garner shall be cursed / thy relykes shall be cursed /
the fruit of thy womb shall be cursed / and the fruit of thy earth shall be
cursed / and the fruit of thy kyen / sheep / and bestyall / thou shall be
cursed in going in / and in going out of all places. God shall send upon the
hongre pouerte / blame / reproach in all thyn operacions that thou shall do
till unto that that he put the out hastily for the sins that thou have
found / for the which thou haste left god. Example how the flower of an
apple tree falls / dries / and leseth the beauty incontinent that it is
exco^munyed for a portous the which was in the said apple tree. Quere. lxxxix.
D. By this example a man should understand that ye soul of ye thief
excommunicate the which had stolen ye said portous was in ill point when the
flowers took part of his malediccyon. Another example of breed fair and white
the which was incontinent black and musty as it was excommunyed. Quere.
lxxxix. A. In showing the ill yt is wtin the person excommunycate. Dauyd the
prophet says in the psalm. Increpasti superbos maledicti qui declinant a
mandatis tuis. thou have blamed those yt ben proud / they ben cursed the
which declyneth from thy commandments. And it is written in the second
chapter of the prophet Malchyas. If thou wylt not here my commandments
says god / and also if ye will not put in your heart yt ye give glory unto my
name I shall send you honger / pouerte / and curse unto your benedyccyons. And
it is written Ysaie. iii. ca. Ve impio in malum. Maledyccyon unto the cursed
sin in ill And it is written in the.x. chapter of Job If I be ill maledyccion
is unto me. Example of a fader and of his sone the which curied each other in
hell. Quere in the exa^plarye. lxxi. Also thieves / coueytous / auarycyous /
pyllers / and false tythers / and many other people dysobeyeng unto god ben
cursed and excommunyed in likewise as these scryptu^es sayen. It is written in
the second chapter of the prophet Abacuch. Maledyccion unto him the which
assembleth cursed auaryce in to his house / to the end yt his nest be on hy / and
he weneth to be delivered from the hand of evil. And it is written in the.v
chapter of Ysaie. Maledyccyon unto youth which assembleth house with house / and
couple field with field. Ye should not enhabyte you all alone in the myddle of
the earth. And it is written in the.xxiiii. chapter of Ysaie. Maledyccyon unto
ye that pyllest / for thou shall be pylled. And it is written in ye.vi. chapter
of the gospels of saint Luke. Maledyccyon unto you yt be rich the which have
in this world consolacion for if ye deye in such wise without co^trycyon and
amendment the end shall be ill in desolacyon. Example how the devil drew the
soul from ye body of a cursed rich man with an hoke. Quere. C. v. a. Another
example how Chore. Dathan. and Abiron descended into hell hosed and cladde for
that they murmured and dysobeyed unto god / and unto Moses in likewise as it
is written in thexamplary. Quere. liiii. H. Another example for that yt Adam
dysobeyed unto god the earth was cursed in his operacyon Quere. liiii. a.
Another example how cayn was cursed for that / yt he slew his brother Abell and
also he tythed ill. Quere. lxxvi. a

F. As unto the fourth thing that speaks of persons exco^munyed by sentence
of right. A man should understand not al only those the which ben denounced
by ye commandment of the bysshoppes / prelates / and Iuges ben exco^munyed
of ye great excommunicacion / but also in many cases after the droit canon some
fall in the great excommunycacyon. Also many sentences ben written in droit
canon the which has been ordained by popes and counceyloures upon them the
which co^mytteth any sins determined. And the persons yt which commytteth
the sins ben excommunyed ipso facto / but the curates should not put them out
of the church till that they ben declared of the Judge for some causes ye
which ben not here wryte^. And for as much as those sentences the which ben
written in droit canon should be to long to write / many shall abide for to fle
the length and some the which has been drawn fro the said ryghtes here
follows. First these heretykes and lollers ye which believe / sustain / and
touch any thing against the artycles of the faith ben exco^munyed by
sentence of right. Also al those the which puts faith and credence unto
the said heretykes in reputing them to be good and to have good faith. Also
those the which defend them in word and in deed ben also excommunied. Also
those the which puts in holy ground the said heretykes and their alies by
credence / or those the which them has received and defended ben also
excomunyed / and should not not have the benetyce of absolucyon / if they ne
vnbury them with their own hands. Also if any say that the church of Rome is
not ye heed and that he will not obey it / or if he say yt it ne may ordeyne
the canons / such is an heretyke exco^munyed by sentence of right. Also those
the which false or make to false yt lettres of the pope / and those the which
them sustain and defend ben excommunyed. Also those the which falseth the
lettre or seal of a cardynall is exco^munyed. Also those ye which gives
lettynge unto messagers and ambassadors of the holy syege appostolycal ben
excommunyed (ipree facto). Also ydolatres / wytches / inuocatours of the devil
/ and they the which him demands his help and will have his aliaunce / or
the which makes covenant with him / or those the which unto him do sacryfyce /
or yt worship him And those the which unto him does homage or honor / or
that demands answer of any demand / such people ben excommunyed of deed
by sentence of right Of this matter thou shalt find many examples in the
nombre.lviii. and.lix. Also they the which puts vyolently the hands on
prestes / relygyous / and clerks ben excommunyed. And if there be (atroci) yt
is hurt enorme it is a case reserved unto the pope. Also those they the which
stryketh no clerk / but by their commandment be stryken and with holden ben
also exco^munyed Also those the which ben ye cause or ye which give the
counceyle to aid or put ye hands on clerks ben exco^munyed. Also those the
which ne counceyleth ne commands but after that the deed is done ben
agreables ben excommunyed. Also a relygyous that leueth folysshely the habyte
of his relygyon is exco^munyed and apostate. Also ye monks and chanons and
regulers the which has not of admynystracion the which go and give them unto
courts of pry^ces without having any license especyall of their prelates / if
they do any domages unto their said prelates and monasteryes in the said
courts where they ben betaken / the text says that in yt deed they run in
sentence of excommunycacion. Also all relygyous yt which bring forth
wytyngly any things in their predycacyons or elleswhere to the end that they
withdraw the auditors and herers to pay the tithes ben exco^munied And those
relygyous the which says unto them that go to confession unto those yt should
make conscience to have paid the tithe should be suspended from the office of
predycacyon till yt they have made conscience and that they have said unto
those confessed yt they have not well counceyled not for to pay the said tithes
if they may find them ne to have the oportunyte. And afterward if they were
without repentance and that they presume to preche the said neclygence / they
ben exco^munyed by sentence of right (ipse facto). Also a clerk ye which
knows carnally his concubine that is openly exco^munyed / for that yt he
departs not from the said concubyne is exco^munycate. Vt habetur extra de
sen. ex. ca. Si concubine. Also those the which makes fraccyo^ in a church /
or the which it brenneth ben excommunyed. Also those the which draws any
person vyolently out of the church the which thither was come^ for to waraunt
him ben exco^munyed. Also those the which gone against the lybertees of ye
church / or the which mak^th to keep oni customs against the said lyberte
ben exco^munyed. Also the rectours of the chyrches the which takes away such
customs against the said lyberte / and it may defend abate and do it not ben
excommunyed. Also the lords temporalles which constreyne any to sing the
things dyuynes in places interdyted / or the which dyffendeth that the
persons exco^munyed openly go not forth of the church when he that syngeth
mass them commands or makes to tell them ben exco^munycate. And those the
which be^ named exco^munyed if they go not out of ye church aggreueth them in
greter exco^munycacyon. Also those the which steleth the oblacyons from the
auter / some say yt they ben to be exco^munyed. Also those the which buryeth
in a chyrchyarde enterdited / or the which buryeth those yt ben exco^munyed
openly or inderdyted named by word express. Or those the which buryeth
usurers the which ben open and the which will not restore the vsuryes / such
people ben excommunyed. Also false makers of money the which falseth the king
coin of England / or those the which bears false money for to deceive other
ben exco^munycates in that deed. For to short this matter al persons the
which ben cursed and excommunyed shall be dampened and sent in to the fire and
tourment of hell if they so deye without absolucyon / correccyon / and amendeme^t
Thou art cursed and excommunyed I put the case / than thou shall be dampened
and sent in to the fire of hell if you correct the not. Vn^ athana. Qui mala
egeru^t ibu^t i^ igne^ eturnu^. vel sic. They shall be strongly cursed yt shall
have like sentence / punycion: and da^pnacion as the devil of hell. They the
which break the commandments of god shall have like sentence and punycion
as ye deuyls if they deye impenytentes. Than they shall be much accursed. Vn^
mat. xxv. Discedite a me maled: cti in igne^ eturnu^ qui paratus est dyabolo et
angelus eius. This sentence that god shall cast at the day of Judgment upon the
damned co^teyneth.vi. clauses. The first clause is understand by (discedite a
me) ye which is that god shall depart and shall send ye evil out of his
company / the which shall be unto them a terryble thing for to here For after
yt they shall be departed they shall be put from the vysyon of god / yt is yt
they shall never se him ne his saints. The second clause is to understand by
this word (maledicti) the which is yt god shall cast his great fulmynacyon /
exco^munycacion / and maledyccion upon the dampened. The third is understand
by this preposicion (in) the which god shall assygne / lodge / and put ye
sinners wtin the prysons of hell. The fourth clause is understand by this
word (ignem) the which is ye god shall put them in possession of a terryble
tourment that is the fire that shall brenne them for the ylles that they have
done. The.v. is understand by (eternu^) the which shall make the ill to
dyspayre / for after yt they ben entered in to hell they shall never go forth /
ne never have grace / mercy / help / socoures / ne comfort For in hell shall
be their bed / house / and dwelling. The.vi. is (qui paratus est diabolo et
angelis eius). That is yt the dampened shall be assocyate and assembled to be in
hell punysshed with the deuylles. Example of a cursed rich man that burnt in
the fire of hell.lxxxiiii. A. Other examples of people exco^munyed
Quere.lxxxix. f. g. h.

A. Of the punycyon eternal that those the which have broken the
commandments of god shall have. xlix.
DAuyd the prophet says in the psalter the words of god. Si iusticias meas
prophanaueri^t impii et mandata mea non custodierint vilitabo in virga
iniquitates eorum et in verberibus peccata eorum. If the cursed sinners has
taken in scorn my Justices and that they have not kept my commandments I
shall vesyte their inyquytees in a rod and in strykynge their sins.
Creatures reasonables we should obey to do that yt god wylleth and commands
for the love him the which is full of bounte infynyte / and of dread to have
punycyon and dampnacyon eternal. For it is a thing certain that every man yt
synneth mortally in brekynge one or many of the commandments of god by
delyberacyon. And if in such wise he deye impenytent / obstynate and arested
that he shall be put from paradyse and sent in to the fire and tourments of hell
without any remyssyon as is beforesayd. Thou have commyted theft or lechery / or
broken any co^mau^demente / I put the case and so thou deyest impenytent Than
thou shall be brought in to the fire of hell the which is a tourment much cruel
Vnde appo. xx. Qui non est inuentus i^ libro vite scriptus missus est in
stagnum ignis. He that is not found written in ye book of life is sent in to
the ponde of fire brennynge. And Athanaise in the psalm of qui cu^que. Qui
mala egeru^t ibunt in ignem eturnum. Those the which have done evil and
sin in their lives shall go in to the fire eternal if they deyen
impenytentes. Vn^ luce. xiii. Nisi penitenciam habueritis omnes simul
peribitis. None of us ne would be brent / ne broyled / ne cast in a fire
brennynge there for to dwell / and so to abide without ever going forth. And
it is a thing certain that all those and they ye which deye in mortal sin
impenytentes / obstynate and arested shall be sent in to the fire of hell by
the sentence before written. Ite maledicti in ignem eternum. And shall be
constrained there for to dwell and there to hold them will they or not. God
shall not spare them at the day of vengeance the prayers shall do nothing /
ne the wrath / ne the gold ne the silver / ne gifts / ne promysses. Vnde
prouerbio. vi. Zelus et furor viri non parcit dominus in die vindicte nec
acquiescet cuiusquam precibus nec suscipiet pro redemptione dona plurima. Also
he yt which has broken one of the commandments of god shall be dampened and
put from paradyse / for it as for many if he be deed impenytent without
correccion and amendment / for he has be transgressoure of ye law. And god
would that that the which he has broken were as well kept as all ye other.
Vnde iacobi. ii. Quicunque autem totam legem seruauerit offendat autem in vno
factum est omnium reus. Qui enim dicit. Non mechaberis / dixit et non occides:
quod si non mechaberis occides autem / factus es transgressor legis. etc. Also
he the which has broken the commandment of god shall feel terryble dolours
at his death in likewise as a man shall find in the examplary where it speaks
of the death of evil persons. And first. Example how ye devil drew the
soul from the body of a cursed rich man with an hoke. Quere in the examplary.
C.v. A.

B. A questyon. Who so should demand what is or shall be the fire of hell
where unto the said inobedyentes shall be al sent The answer is after the holy
scryptures that it does defer in many of manners unto that fire of this
present world here. Primo that of this present world does give clerenes ^
and that the which is of hell is black / obscure / and tenebrous the which
gives no light unto no consolacyo^. And by sometimes it casts light but it is
for to give more greter tourmentes / pain / dread / and desolacyon. Saint
Gregory says in his moralles. Hic flamma que succendet illuminat illic / ignis
qi cruciat obscurat. The flambe the which brenneth in this world gives light
/ and the fire that tourmenteth in hell waxes derke. Secundo the fire of this
world quenches / and it must be holden togyders with wood and with matters
combustybles to blow and to kyndle. And ye fire of hell is unto the contrary /
for evermore it dureth without quenchinge / without wood and without to be blown
ne to be kyndeled / and the matter combustible of the said fire of hell where it
takes and where it brenneth cruelly / yt is all sin / all ill / and
inobedyence. It is written Ysaie vlti^o. ca. and mar. ix. Quoth vermis eoru^
scilicet da^natoru^ non monetur / et ignis non extinguiter. That is to say The
remors of the conscience and the worm of the dampened deyeth not / and the fire
ne quenches nor gooth out / that is incessably it dureth and it holds in
estate / and evermore it brenneth. The gospel of saint mathewe says that god
shall send them in to ye fire of hell that is inextynguyble. Also it is written
Job. xx. Demorauit illu^ scilicet i^pium ignis qui non succenditur / super quod
ait gregorius. Gehenne ignis cu^ sit corporeus et in se missos reprobos
corporaliter exurat nec humano studio succe^ditur / nec lignis nutritur / sed
semel creatus duratinextinguibilis / nec ardore caret. The fire the which is
not light shall devour the cursed dampened Saint Gregory expounds this ye
which says. The fire of hell as it is of body and bre^neth corporally the
dampened sent in to it is not lyghted by study humanye / nor nourysshed by wood
/ but ones created inexty^guyble has not of indygence successively to be
holden togyders / and it is not without heet. Et math. iii. dicitur paleas.i.
peccatores co^buret igni inextinguibili. Tercio the fire of this world
co^sumeth / puts in to ashes makes to dye and to defayle. And that of hell
is unto the contrary / for though that it be much cruel / eygre / sharp /
and hot yet consumes it not / ne makes too defayle ne to deye the dampened.
Saint Johan Crysostome de reparatione lapsi. Ignis iste qui in presenti vita
est consumit cuncra que recipit / ille vero quos suscipit semper cruciat et
pene sue semper integros reseruat. For the soul is immortal the which shall be
clothed with a body uncorruptyble and immortal at the resurreccyon of the
great Judgment / not unto the honor of life but to ye great langour of
tourme^t. The psalm. says. Sicut oues in inferno positi sunt / mors de pascet
eos. And sayni Gregory says how the dampened shall have death without dyenge /
end without endyng / defaute without defaylynge. The death evermore shall live
The end evermore shall begin. The defaute ne may defayle. And evermore in
dyenge they shall live / and in living they shall dye / and dye may they never.
Grego. Sit miseris sine morte / finis sine fine / defectus sine defectu / quia
mors semper viuit / finis semper incipit / et defectus deficere nescit. Quarto
the fire of hell is so brennynge ho to the regard of that in this world and
above it that our entendement ne may co^prehende and esteem it / the which
shall broyle the cursed dampened / not egally / but as every one of them has
of sin with him the which sin is matter combustyble whereof the said fire
holds as it said is / and in likewise as it shall be declared here
afterward. Quinto the fire of hell is stynkynge / and so is not that of this
present world. Examples. Primo how one of the dampened told unto saint
Machayre the gretenes of the fire of hell / and the dyfference of tourmentes of
them the which there do brenne. Quere.lvii. A. Another example of the cursed
Dyues ye brenneth in the fire of hell. Quere.lxxxiiii. a. Another example.C.vii.
A. Another example how a priest saw his mother that was dampened and tourmented
cruelly for arayenge and making gay atyre upon her heed / for shewy^ge her
breasts / for daunsynge / lepynges / and vnshamefull enbrasynges. Quere.lxxxx.c
Another example of a woman aduoutres damned and cruelly brenned and
tourmented.lxxxx. A. And the dampened endures will they or not ye said fire of
hell / so have they many tourmentes. They shall have with the said fire
derkenes / stynke / smoke / tempest / honger / thyrste / cold / and froste.
They shall have foulenes / horror / heaviness / weykenes / dread / and fere. They
shall have terreur of deuylles / serpents / and foul company whereof the soul
shall be enuyroned and set about. They shall have dyffame / shame reproach /
euilles innombrables without end They shall cry and bray / they shall deye
without deyenge. They shall have ire / dyscorde hate / cofusion / they shall
blaspheme and curse for the punycyon / they shall have seruytude dolor /
bytternes / desolacyon / they shall be sorry / enraged / out of wit / and
despayred. Also the said dampened shall never have peace for all euylles shall
run and war upon the^ They shall never have bounte / for they shall be cursed
and evil / they shall never have beauty / but ever hydeous / vylanous / black
/ and horrybles. They shall never have force ne virtue / but evermore weyke and
feeble / they shall never have love / but evermore shall be in hate / ne honor
but dishonor. They shall never have Joyous life / for they shall have death
without deyenge as it is said / ne light for they shall be in derkenes the^
shall never have lyberte to go ne to do they^ will / for they shall be at the
subgeccyon* obedyence of all euylles and aduersytees unto the which they must
obey will they or not. They shall never have suerte / but be in dread and fere
/ ne swetenes for they shall be in bytternesse / ne richesse but evermore in
pouerte. They shall never have health / but evermore sekenes / ne concord but
evermore discord / ne dysporte but evermore enoy ne wisdom but evermore folly
/ they shall never have swyftnesse / but always shall be weyghty and heavy / ne
subtylyte / but always evil subtylles. Also they shall be evermore passybles /
immortalles howbeit yt they desire death it flees fro them. Also they shall
never have paradyse / rest / glory / joy / gladness / but evil and
heaviness. Who so should speak of every of the euylles yt they shall have in
pertyculer as the scryptures determyneth it should be to long a thing to
write And therefore this suffyseth of things thee be spoken in general.

C. Here follows a questyo^ for to understand if those the which commytteth
in this world many sins in dyspysynge ye commandments of god if they shall
have punycyo^ eternal in hell for each of those sins / by such wise yt if
they deye imponytentes without contrycyon ne confession. The scripture gives the
answer yt says Quoth nullum malu^ remanebit ipunitu^. Et legit. i. ad co. iii.
Vnusqque au^t propria^ mercedem accipiet scdm suu^ labore^. And ye psalmist
says. Vureddes vnicuique iuxta opera sua. Whereby it follows yt all sin
shall be punysshed. And for to dyscerne of the punycyon how great it shall be it
passes our wit but god in whom all the treasour of science and sapyence
rests and that is full of bounte infynyte ye which is Just and the fou^tayne
of all Justice the which sees and knows the hertes and operacyons of every
one and in what intencyon they ben made shall yield unto every man after his
labor be it in well or in ill. That is to say. that in such measure yt any
has sinned that is to commytte of great sins and of great nombre and taken
delectacyon and is long time in such measure he shall be punysshed without that
he fail any thing. Vn^ luce. vi. Eade^ mensura qua messi fueritis remitietur
vobis. Vbi dicit basil. Qua mensura vnusquisque peccat aut bn^ agit / eade^
premia aut penam sumet. Example a man yt has done an hundred sins shall
feel an hundred times more great pain than he that has done but one. Vn^
deuteronomy. xxv. Pro me^sura peccati erit et plagaru^ modus. After the measure and
quantyte of the sin shall be the manner of ye wounds. Also of as more as the
sin shall be done in the greter degrees of persons they shall be the more
grievously punysshed. Vn^ Ihero. In maio u gradi / mayor sieve dubio pena. As he
that is married or priest synneth more in co^mittynge lechery than other
persons. Also of as much more as they have taking more greter delectacyon /
or that they shall gloryfye them in their sins and vanytees / or of as much
more that they therein have be^ more longly / of as much more shall they have
in hell more great pain and tourmentes. Vn^ appoc. xvii.. Qua^tum glorificauit
se scilicet peccator in peto^ and in deliciis fuit i^ diurnitate tm^ date illi
torme^tum and luctu^. Also of as much more as they have sought new
delectacyons not accustomed of as much shall they be tourmented. Vn^ job. xx
Iuxta multitudine^ adiuentionu^ suarum sic et sustinebit. Also those members ye
which has most habounded in sin most shall habounde in tourmentes as
says ye scripture. Vn^ Isodorus. In membro quo quis amplius peccauit / in
illo amplius tormenta patietur. Et ber. dicit. In quo me^bro creator plus
offendit / in eode^ peccator grauius pumetur. And every man shall be punysshed
(per pena^ talionis) for his offense to the end that he there have evermore
reemors in his conscience that he endures so much evil by his own
operacyon. Vnde sapi. xi. 'Per que peccat quis / per hec et torquetur. And in
the person in whom there is most of sins and of cursednesses ye fire of
hell most terrybly shall take and cruelly shall bren^e and tourment. For as
it is said the matter combustyble of the fire of hell / and wherefore it is
create: and where it takes for to do ill / that is for to brenne sin and
the person yt it commytteth. Also we se by experyence that the fire of this
world is more great and sharper where as is most of fagottes and of matters
combustybles. In likewise is it of the said fire of hell where there is most of
sins and great sharpenes of fire / wherefore the great sinners ben more burnt
and tourmented than they in whom there is less of sins. And if saint Peter
were within the fire of hell even by Lucyfer he should have none harm / for in
him there is no matter combustible / yt is no syn^e And therefore if any person
were all assured and certain too be dampened yet should he cease to do ill and
sin / and should do the most of good deeds that he might to the end that he
have the less of pain in the tourmentes of hell. He the which thathe no
moo but one sore / botche / or sickness has not to suffer so much of pain
and anguysshe as he the which has on him x. or.xx.

D. A questyon. What dyfference is there between the fire of helland that of
purgatory / and of the souls the which there ben burnt / broyled and cruelly
tourmented. The answer after some scryptures is in this manner of wise. The
said fire is egally hot ye one as ye other / but it has a dyfference in as
much as the one is eternal and the other is but for a time. And they yt ben
in purgatory go in to paradyse after yt their penance is ended / but they of
hell go not out of the said fire. And wherefore abide they and the other gone
forth. The reason is such yt those that been in purgatory has gotten grace or
they departed fro this world / and have taken away ye culpe or gylt of sin
by contrycyon and confession / and for that they have not done the pain yt
they have deserved after penance thider they go to do it in the said fire of
purgatory. And when they ben wtin it ye fire takes and begins to brenne the
delectacyon and spot of sin the which is his matter combustyble as it is said
/ and never shall cease to bren^e and to broyle till yt it find no more matter
of sin. As a man may se how the fire of this world well kyndled brenneth ye
wood and all the matter combustyble that unto it is admynystred till yt the matter
be consumed and brent and yt al be purged. And when the said fire of purgatory
has consumed and purged all the matter of sin the person is delivered / and
so gooth in to paradyse pure and clean. And it is to be noted that it behooves
to pass through the fire / and that the fire shall prove what the operacyon of
every man is. And if the operacyon yt he has edyfyed abide without brennynge /
he shall have reward. And if the operacyon that he has edyfyed brenne he shall
suffer tourme^t He shall be saved also as the fire. Vn^. pau. i. ad cori^. ii.
Vnusqsque opus quale sit ignis probabit / si cuius opus manserit quod
superedificauit mercede^ accipiet: si cuius opus arserit detrimentu^ patietur:
ipse aute^ saluus erit sic tamen quasi per ignem. The dampened ben unto the
contrary of them of purgatory. for when they deye they ben impenytentes /
obstynate / and abides in their sins / and bears them with them without
taking away the gylte of the said sins by co^trycyon and penance ne without
getynge any grace ne mercy whiles that they lived in this world and that they
have the time and the place for to do it. And for as much as the soul is
eternal and immortal the which shall be sent unto the fire eternal / and
that it shall have with it evermore sin that the said fire shall brenne. In
likewise ye soul evermore shall suffer pain / and evermore shall brenne with
ye said sin the which never shall have mercy. By these things the which
ben written in this book it appears that we should love god chyldely and
perfytely more than al things for ye great good Infynyte the which is in him
/ and to love our neighbor as our self in god / and for the love of him.
Morouer it appears that we should do and accomplysshe the commandments of
god for to escape ye tourmentes of hell / and to the end to possede the Joys of
paradyse. Unto the which we may go and us to enjoy cum illo qui est
benedictus in secula seculorum. Amen.

Here is the end of the book the which is called the flower of the
commandments of god.
Here begins the exemplayre of the commandments of god. ii.
Almighty god the fader / the sone and the holy ghost / the which is but one
only god in trynyte / pleases it hy^ to enlumyne the hearts and thoughts of
all those the which shall study this book the which is called the exemplayre
of the commandments of god / for it is all of examples. The which examples
has be extracted and gadered in many books / in likewise as bears wytnes
every example. And has be transmuted and changed first from laten in to
Frensshe / and from Frensshe now lately in to English tongue. To the end that
ye simple people the which know no laten them may understand. And if any
say that there are of examples ye which ne ben holy scryptures I confess it
well. But I say that they ben vysyons or miracles that some persons credybles
has seen ryally / or known by experyence the which has be put in writing.
For asmoche as they have consonance to approve the holy scryptures. etc. And
for that that many examples ben put in the book of the dyscyple it is not for
to alegge it as holy person / or holy scripture / but for that / that it was
a great clerk the which found the said examples in books the which we
have not studied. etc.

Obedientia.
A. Examples of those the which has obeyed to the will of god and of their
superyours. And first example how Abraham was obedyent unto god. Ca. li.
IT is written in the.xvii. chapter of gene. how Abraham was obedyent unto god
when he hy^ commanded the cyrcumsycion the which was a thing much hard and
cruel. Also he was obedyente when god said unto him that he should leave his
friends and his country. Egredere deterra tua et de cognatione tua. etc For
his obedyence god appeared unto him in an evening and said unto him. It is I
that has made the heaven and ye earth etc. I am appeared unto the for that /
that you dredest my name. And therefore I shall give the benedyccyon and unto thy
lynce Again god said unto him. Behold the earth on the one side and on the
other. I shall give the all the countrees that thou beholdest unto the and unto
thy lygnee. / More over god said unto him. Behold ye sterres of the sky and
nombre them. Than Abraham said that there were so many that he ne might nombre
them. And god said unto him. In like wise shall be thy sede upon the earth. Of
the and of thy wife shall come forth a sone the which shall have my
benedyccyon and those of his lygnee. Abraham and his wife Sarra were ancient /
yt wend little to have had lygnee because of their aege. After that the said
Abraham had a sone named ysaac the which he loved so much that he nese him
half / for that that he had but him legytyme / and for that that he had him in
his aege. Also for that that god unto him had promised benedyccyon. More over
for that that he was of great beauty and full of bou^te. Also it is written in
the.xvii. chapter of genese how god would assaye Abraham and he appeared unto
him and said unto him. Abraham thou ne may have no mo children I have given
ye one the which thou love much. I will that thou go in to a mountain yt I
shall show the and that thou make unto me sacrefyce of thy sone. The manner to
make sacrefyce in that time there was that they had a lamb or a got and did
cut his throat and burnt him / the which thing was commanded unto Abraham.
Than Abraham would obey unto god albeit that in his heart he was right pyteous
to slay his sone for the love that he had unto him And he took him and his
ass and two of his servants and so yede unto the said place that god unto
him had commanded How be it that they had the space of three days Journey to
walk. When they came unto the foot of the said mountain / the said Abraham
left his ass and his two servants and yede he and his sone. And took a
burden of wodde / a sword and of fire. And in going up the said mountain
Ysaac demanded of his fader where the said sacrefyce was. He answered yt god
should provide. And when they were at the place Abraham said unto his sone in
weeping that god him had commanded that he should make sacrefyce of him Than
the sone the which was good and benyngne answered in willing to obey unto
god and unto his said fader. My sweet and amiable fader it is reason that I
submytte me and obey unto you / and that the will of god be accomplysshed: /
Than they began for to wepree. And Ysaac said unto his fader. Alas my fader
wherefore had ye not told me / to the end that I had said farewell my mother. I
pray you my fader yt ye reco^maunde me unto her / And also I pray you that ye
bind me / for that yt I am young and strong and yt ye be ancient and feeble /
to the end yt wha^ ye shall come for to sleeme that I ne do unto you thing the
which is not good. / Than Abraham with great teres bound his hands. And
left him on hye upon the fagotte of byllettes / and drew his sword for to
stryke of his heed. And when he had lift up his stroke for to stryke ye
angel cried and said. Abraham / abraham stryke not thy child / now god
knows that thou dredest him. And Abraham cast his syghte aside and saw a
lamb by hy^ among the thorns the which was teyde by the horns in the said
thorns. He thanked god with great joy. etc. And took the said lamb and made
sacrefice in steed of his sone / in like wise as it is written in gene.xxii. ca.
This example ought to move us for to obey unto god and unto fader / and unto
mother. If Abraham were obedyent unto so cruel a commandment as to slay his
child / by more strong reason we should obey unto things the which ben
light to do. etc. Obedyence is certain life and way for to go unto life
eternell And also as Adam was forclosed from ye realm of paradyse by inobence.
In like wise Abraham has had beatytude and life eternell by obedyence. Also
obedyence is the laddre by the which men mouu^t on hye in to paradyse / in
like wise as men may se by figure. For it is written how Jacob saw in his
sleep a laddre the which touched the heaven with the one end / by the which
the aungelles ascended and dyscended and Ihesus was there intremedled. Vnde
gene.xxviii. Jacob v^dit in so^nis scalam stantem super terram atm cacumen
illius tangens celum: angelos quo que dei ascendentes et descendentes per ea^
et dominus innixum scale dicentem sibi ego sum deus Abraham. etc. This laddre
is obedyence. For without obeynge unto the commandments of god a man ne
may mount in to paradyse as says ye gospel. Vnde mathei.xix. Si vis ad
vita^ ingredi serua mandata. That is to say / Yt thou will enter in to life
eternell keep the commandments of our lord Ihesu christ. The staves of this
laddre ben ye ten commandments / unto the which a man should obey redely
without dylacyon devoutly without dysdeyne / wyllyngly without contradyccyon /
ioyously without heaviness / virtuously without feebleness ne weykenes /
perseuerauntly without ceasynge ne ennoye. Also obedyence is ye keye the
which opens paradise / and inobedience is that that shytteth it. Saint poule
says of those the which ne will obey. Illud ad thessal.iii. Si quis non
obedierit verbo nostro per epistolam hunc notate et ne commiseamini cum eo vt
confundatur. That is to say. If there be any that will not obey unto our word
by epystyll note ye him / and acompany ye not with him / to the end that he be
confounded / For to be short / obedyence is requysyte of necessyte of health.
And therefore it is in such wise dyffynyed after master Hyonde foliot.
Obedientia est salus omnium fidelium genitrix omnium virtutum: inue^trix regni
celorum: virtus celos aperiens et hominem in de eleuans cohabitatrix angelorum:
cibus omnium sanctorum ex hac enim letati sunt: et per hanc ad perfectionem
venerunt. The which is as much for to say. Obedyence is the health of all
those that be faithful / the engendresse of all virtues / the fynderesse of
the realm of heuens / the virtue opening ye heuens lyftynge up man from the
earth / the dweller or nere enhabytaunt of aungelles / the vyande of all
saints / by her they ben given souke / and by her they ben come unto
perfeccyon. Without obedyence no man may have salvation nor escape
dampnacyon. And therefore if thou will have of good and not to have none ylle /
it behooves that thou be obedient unto the commandments of god and of the
superyoures in things the which ben after god and good maneres as was Abraham
and as has be the saints of paradyse.

B. Another example of a monk ye which cast his sone in to a brennynge oven
by obedyence / yet was he not brende. li.
IT is written in the life of faders how a seculer man renounced ye world and
made him a monk And afterward by leave he yede to seche a little sone that he
had left in a cite / and bare him unto the monastery. And the abbot took him
between his arms and kyssed him. After said unto his fader. Love thou this
child (he answered ye) After the abbot demanded loueste thou him. And the
fader yet answered him ye. After the abbot said unto hy^ If thou love him take
him and cast him in to this brennynge fire. At ye hour they were at the oven
where men make bread. and ye oven was enbrased with fire / and the fader cast
him within the oven. And incontinent ye said oven was in like wise as it had
be roused with water and ye fire ne did no hurt unto the child. In that deed
he gate glory in that time / as did Abraham the preatryarke by the great
faith that he had in god and obedyence unto his abbot.

C. Another example of the obedyence of Noe. li.
IT is written the.vii. chapter of genese that Noe was obedyent unto god in all
things that he him commanded. Facit noe omnia que mandauerat ei dn^s. And for
yt that he was a good man Just and obedyent he ne was taken in the deluge with
the ylle. For god him commanded that he should make an arche in ye which he
should enter himself / his wife / his three sons / and their wives. And they
were saved and preserved from the great haboundaunce of waters the which
drowned all the world.

D. Another example of the obedyence of Joseph. li.
YT is written in the.xxxvii. chapter of genese how Ioyeth was prepared to
obey unto his fader when he would send him unto his brederne the which kest
him in to an old cysterne and sold him unto strange people. In the end and
conclusyon for yt that he was a good man Just and chaste not willing to
committee lecherye with the wife of Pharaon the which required him and that he
was obedyent unto god and unto his said fader he had domynacion above his
brederne. Albeit yt he was the youngest.

E. Another example of the obedyence of young Thobie. li.
IT is written in the.v. chapitre of the book of Thobye that after yt the young
Thobye had be well instruct of his fader that he ne should committee mortal
sin / and that in his life he should do many almesdedes and good operacyons /
and more over that he him had commanded that he should go in to a place far
from his worldly besynesses. The good child answerde illud thobie. v.c. Oi^a
quecu^que precepisti pater faciam. That is to say fader I shall do all things
that thou co^maundest me By his obedyence the angel was assocyate with him /
and led him unto the place where his fader had sent him and after brought
him again without having any ylle.

A. Another example of matathias. lii
IT is written in the.ii. cha. of ye first of Machabees that a man of ye lygnee
of Israhell named Matathias was so obedyent unto god in keeping ye law of his
faders that the messagers of ye king of Anthyoche ne might make him to do
sacrefyce unto the ydolles and to leave his law. Unto the which messengers he
answered. Et si oe^s ge^res regi anthioco obediu^t and disceda^t vnusqsque a
seruitute legis patru^ suoru^ and co^sentia^t ma^datis eius: ego et filii mei
and fratres met obediemus legi patru^ nostroru^. That is to say if the people
of Anthyoche leave ye law of their faders to obey unto the king / yet I my
sons and my brederne shall obey unto the law of our faders. This matathias
was so wroth to se the people err and goo against the law of god yt he slew
the messenger of ye king of Anthyoche as he constrained the people to do
sacrefyce / and did cast horrybly a Jew upon the altar as he sacryfyced.
Afterward dystroyed the ydoles and fled he and his children in to the
mountains and called with them all those yt had zele of the law and
persecuted the sinners / This matathias the which loved god and obeyed unto
his commandment more sooner than unto the commandment of a te^porall king
he is to love / to praise / and to love. For a man should keep the law and
the commandments of god as it is said and to persecute the sins / and
those the which them commytte.

B. Another example of the obedyence of our lord Ihesus and of his
appostylles. Capitulo. lii.
IT is written in the.ii. chapitre of ye gospelles of saint luke that our lord
Ihesus was cyrcumcysed and would be presented in the temple with oblacyons in
showing yt he would obey unto ye law / And when he had.xxii. years it is
written that he was submytte and obeyssaunt unto the parents. Vn^luce.ii. Erat
subditis illis. Also it is written yt he was obedyente unto god till unto the
death for us. Vn^ pa. ad phi. ii. Xpres factus e^ pro nobis obediens deo patri
vsque ad morte^: morte^ au^t crucis And of the appostles it is written yt
incontinent yt our lord them called they were obedyent and yode after him.
Vnde mat. ix and.iiii. Relictis oibus secutisu^t eu^. Also wha^ the appostylles
were reproved of ye princes of ye priests yt they ne kept their
commandment. they answered illud actuu^. iiii. Obedire oportet ded magis quam
hoi^bus That is to say that it behooves to obey unto god more sooner than
unto the will of princes / in like wise should we do and we shall have paradyse.

C. Another example of the obedyence of saint Mor. lii.
IT is written in the legende of saint Mor how saint benoyst knew in spyryte
yt the water of a river bare away a child yt was fallen in it / he called one
of his dyscyples named Mor and commanded him to run after ye child / which
was obedyente and yode above the water after it He found him and brought him
by the here hole and sound. And when he was out of the water he looked behind
him / he meruaylled and apperceyued ye miracle that he granted unto the
merytes of his master And saint benoist said that it was by the obedyence of
saint Mor.

D. Another example of a relygyous the which bound a lion. lii
IT is written in the life of faders yt an abbot commanded his relygyous y he
should go seche him a lion the which was a much cruel be / he theder yode
by obedyence / he found him / and bound hy^ and led him unto ye said abbot
as a man would have do a simple and sweet be / When he ran after him and
that he had said unto him. Mine abbot has commanded me yt I should bind yt
and bring yt unto him. When the said abbot saw the beast would humble him
unto his relygyous said unto him. Baneur unbind hy^ wherefore have you brought
him. In this deed here all relygyous may know that it is a great thing of ye
virtue of obedyence Also it is to be noted that ye good abbot ne praised his
relygyous of dread of vayn glory / but blamed him for to meke him.

E. Another example of a relygyous the which watered a dry busshe. lii.
Written it is in the life of faders how an abbot set a dry busshe and
commanded unto his relygyous yt he should water it every day till that it bare
fruit. And yt he should go seche of water in such a fou^tayne ye which was so
far of that when he parted in the morning: it was night when he came again.
The said relygyous was obedient unto his abbot / and watered it by the space of
three year every day. And by his obedyence ye logge waxed grene and bare fruit
/ was given to the freres saying yt they should ete of the fruit of obedyence.
By this example it behooves to understand yt it is a great thing of the
virtue of obedyence sith yt a dry logge bare fruit. For it is a thing
contrary unto nature.

F. Another example of a religious writer
IT is written in the life of faders yt an abbot had a dyscyple named marc yt
he loved for his obedyence / he had of other dyscyples yt were sorry yt the
abbot loved better marc than them. After yt these other au^cyentes herd this
thing they came unto him to show how the freres yt were with him were sorry /
and before yt he unto them confessed any thing led him into the chambres of
every of them and called the^ by their propre names / and said unto them
brederne come ye forth / for I have to be besy with you / and none of them ne
would come out forth. After they yode unto ye door of marc and incontynente yt
the abbot had stryken and called him by his propre name he came forth without
taryeng and the abbot entered and demanded what he made / and he said yt he
wrote / and had left his lettre imparfayte when he herd him call. And the
other auncyentes said unto him. Truly we love him in the thing yt thou
loueste him / and also god loves him for his obedyence. This example denotes
yt all good relygyous should obey unto their prelates redely without heaviness /
or dilacyon / they shall have praysyng before god and ye world.

G. Another example how obedyence proceeds the other virtues in heaven.
IT is written in ye life of faders how four brederne came unto ye abbot pambo
with robes of skins / and every of the^ showed ye virtue yt one of the other in
the abscence of him of the which men spoke and the one of them fasted much /
the other ne posseded nothing / the third had great charity. Of the.iiii.
they said yt he had be xxii. years in great obedyence. The abbot pambo answered
them. I say you yt the virtue of this here yt has had obedyence is more
great than the other. For every of you has retained his propre will with the
virtue the which possedeth / and this here renounceth unto his propre will and
makes himself servant of a strange will. Unto a relygyous it apperteyneth
great reward / for at every hour his will is broken. When he is laid in his
bed and well at ease / also it behooves yt he arise to go to matynes by
obedyence / and that his will be broke. And also of ye mass and of other
hours him behooves to leave all other wylles for to go theder. And also these
relygyous may not go in no place without license / of the prelate / for they
ben dyspoylled of their propre wills so yt they ne have. neque velle: neque
nolie And therefore they ne may leave more great thing than their propre wylles.
etc. Also it appears yt unto a good religious obedyence it apperteyneth to
have great reward in paradyse. The which reward unto them is kept after
the death. Of the which speaks saint poule in his epistle ad co. quam oculos
no^ vidit: nec auris audiuit: nec i^ cor hoi^s asce^dit q^ preperauit deus
diligentibus se.

H. Another example how relygyous obedience have great reward in paradise.
IT is written in the life of faders yt how a holy fader saw in heaven. iiii
ordres of people. The first was of seek me^ which yield thanks unto god in
their sekenes. The second was of men hospytalers yt lodged the poor and
mynystred unto them their necessites. The third order of people were
solytayres yt lived without seeing any person. The.iiii. order was of people
submytte to obey unto the people spyrytuell for the love of god. This.iiii.
order yt was obeyssaunce had in heaven more great merit and reward than ye
other. For these obedyentes have crown and ceptre of gold. And ye holy fader
ye which saw these said things demanded of him that showed them unto him.
How has this order more great reward ye which me seems to be more little
than the other. He answerde those yt ben hospytalers live after their propre
will / in like wise those ye ben hermites solitayre they live in ye world of
their propre will / but they yt ben in obedyence take away their own wylles yt
depend unto god and unto ye commandment of ye fader spyrytuel / and therefore
they have more great glory than these other / and therefore obedyence is good
when it is done for the love of god.

I. Another example of a religyous obedyent and of an abstynent. lii.
IT is written in the life of faders / how two brethren carnalles came to
dwell in a monastery. The one was of right clear contynence and the other of
great obedyence. When the fader of the monastery said unto the obedyent / do
this thing / he did it / do that there / he obeyde / ete in the morning / he
ete / upon this thing he had great opinion. And his brother contynent was
punysshed for the envy that he had ayenste his brother / the which thought
unto him that he should prove him for to understand if he were obedyent / and
he came unto the fader of the monastery and said unto him. Send my brother with
me for to go by ye country. The abbot suffered them to go. And ye friar
contynent would prove him. When they came unto a great water wherein there was
of terryble beestes the which ben called cocodrylles / he said. Go down into
the water and pass. And incontynente he dyscended / and the said beestes came
unto him the which did him none ill / but they licked his body. And when his
brother saw it he bad him come out of the water And as they yede they found a
body deed in the way / and the abstynent said. If we had any thing to cast
upon this body / and the obedyent said let us more sooner pray unto god and
parauenture he shall arise / and as they were in orayson ye said deed body
arose / and the brother abstynent gloryfyed himself and said yt by his
abstynence the deed body was raised. God showed al unto the fader of the
monastery. And how he tempted his brother of ye beestes. And how the deed man
was raised. When they were come again unto the monastery ye abbot said unto ye
abstynent. Wherefore have you done so unto thy brother. Know you that by his
obedyence the deed body has be raised.

A. Another example of an abbot ye which called his relygyous deed ye which
came again and was obedyent and spoke of the Joys of paradyse.
THe disciple reherceth in his sermon yt the which is written in libro cesaru
and says yt there was a relygyous named menigotm a man simple and good / that
was so seek yt he had the sacrament of vnccyon. And in yt time as ye abbot
would depart to go unto the chapter general he said unto him. Brother you
shalt deye but tarry at thy departing till I come agay^ He answered. If I may
I shall do it / and the abbot commanded him to do it. The abbot yede unto ye
chapter and tarried long / he comen again being at ye gate ye belles range.
He demanded the cave of ye ryngynge. It is for menygotm yt is departed / The
abbot said I should have spoke with him. Than he hasted him and found him deed
/ and cried unto him. My brother menygotz. He ne had in hy^ voice ne wit /
and secondly he repeted his name / and the pryour badde him torment him no
more. The abbot said in his eere. I commanded ye not to deye till I came
again. And yet said / I command the yt thou answer me. And in wayllynge
opened his eyes as if he awoke from sleep and said. O fader what have you do /
wherefore have thou called me again / The abbot said where was you. I was in
paradyse in a syege of gold nere ye fete of our lady and as you caldest me
again Ysambart our secretayn drew me from ye sege and said unto me. Thou
shall not be here thou art hither comen inobedyently / return to thine abbot
/ so am I come agay^ And how be it / it is promised me that yt syege and place
is kept for me where I have seen the secretayn in great Joy.

B. Another example how a serpent was obedyent to a friar iardiner. Also of
theft And to do good unto his enemies. liii.
Saint Gregorye says in the book of his dyalogue that there was a monk
gardyner in a monasterye of good life. And a thief had of custom to stele of
herbs of the garden and lepte upon a hedge. For the said monk planted many
herbs and he found but little. And some were fouled and the other broken / he
yede about the said garden and found whereby the thief passed / as he walked
he found a serpente unto whom he commanded and said. Follow me. He yode
after him. And when he was in the place whereby the thief passed / he commanded
unto the serpent in the name of Ihesus that he should keep the enter / and that
he ne should suffer ye thief to enter. The serpente abode ouerthwarte the way.
And the monk returned unto his monasterye. When it came unto the time of the
myddaye that ye brederen had of custom for to rest / yt thief came as he
had accustomed and lept upon the hedge. And as he set his foot in the
garden he saw suddenly that the serpente closed the way / and in trembling
drew back his fore so it took through ye hedge and he abode hanged bakwarde
in the said hedge till that ye gardyner came And when he was in such wise
found he said unto the serpent. Thou haste accomplysshed my commandment / go
thy ways now. And forthwith the serpent departed. And he came unto the thief
and said unto him / how is this brother god has given the in to my hands /
wherefore have thou presumed to do so many of times theft unto the labor of
monks. Than took he the foot from the hedge and said unto him. Come thou after
me in to the garden. And he gave unto him these herbs that he had appetyted
to stele with great Joy. And said unto him. Goo and do thou no more theft /
and that thing yt thou shall appetyte come unto me and I shall give it the
without that that thou take it in co^myttynge sin. In this example two
things be to be noted. The first is that sith a serpent was obedyent unto the
said relygyous / by more great reason we the which ben reosonable should obey
unto our superyoures. The second thing is that sith that the said relygyous
gave of herbs unto the said thief the which did unto him ill. It is to
understand that we should do the good again the ylle unto our enemies. etc.

C. Another example of him the which commanded unto two dragons yt they
should keep the door of his house. liiii.
IT is written in ye life of the faders that a holy fader dwelled in an
hermytage and the thieves came often unto him the which ete his bread and his
substance whereof he lived. After that ye said fader had much endured of the
said thieves he yode in to the feldes and found two dragons the which he led
with him to whom he commanded in the name of our lord Ihesu christ that they
should keep them still at his door / and that they should keep the enter
against ye forsaid theuis When the thieves came as they had of custom and
that they found the said dragons the which kept the enter they had right
great dread and fell down as deed to ye earth without speech When the ancient
apperceyued it he came unto them and found them as half deed. And he lift
them up and blamed in saying. Look you and behold that ye are more hard than
these beestes here / they obey unto us for the love of god / and ye ne dread
god and also ye have no shame of the servant of god. Allbeit the said fader
made them enter in to the monasterye and set them at the table / and commanded
them that they should ete. Than they repented them did penance and converted
them unto god and so much they prouffyted by penance that in short time
after they did miracles.

D. Another example how the water o^f a flode obeyed unto a bishop. Ca. liii.
IT is written in the book of ye dialogue of saint Gregorye how a flode or a
streme ran nere unto the walls of a cite and by the dysriuasyons ye water
made his course to shede through the field and took ye that it found sown and
set. After that ye water had done of great ylles and that the necessyte
constrained the people of god / ye men began to study by great labors to make
torn the said dysriuasio^s by other places / but they ne might. Albeit that
there they labored longly. Than the bishop yt was a devout man made a little
rake afterward put him in orayson and came unto the last end of the streme
and commanded unto the water that it should follow him by the places that he
should show it and he drew the rake above upon ye earth The which water left
hastily his propre course. And all the water followed him till that it left the
place accustomed. And made his course where ye said bishop drew his rake. And
more over the said water ne hurted more that the which was sown and planted.
Sins that the water obeyde unto the said bishop wherefore shall not thou obey
unto god and unto thy supery dures. Cesse thou of doing ill as ye said water
and obey unto god and unto his commandments or thou ne shalt be saved / so
says the gospel. mathei. xix. Sivis ad vitam ingredi serua mandata. etc.

E. Another example how the fire yt which burnt a house was obedient unto a
freer the which prayed god. Ca. lii.
MEn find by writing this ye which follows that the dyscyple recites in
his prompt^arye and says how a devout friar precher and lectour was one time
in a house of a knight of England and the fire took suddenly in the house
where they souped / the water to fayll and all the counsayll humayne. And as
the fire grew more and more the compaignon ran and cried with the household.
And the said relygyous fell prostrate in orayso^ and chased the fire in such
manner yt there abode none apperceuaunce / the said frerene lift himself up
in vaynglorye ne yet told it unto no person / but wrote it unto the master
of the order of prechers unto the edyfycacyon of other.

F. Another example how the rain touched not unto two freres prechers in wall
king on their way. Ca. liii.
IT is written in some books this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth
in his promptuarye and says ye two freres of the order of prechers were sent
by obedyence unto a convert and as they accomplysshed Ioyously ye said
obedyence it befell that great impetuosyte of rain began to sourde / the
which fered them gretely. And they began to say the one unto the other.
Parauenture god has not agreeable our obedyence. And wha^ they see no place
where they might hyde them / the one thought on a miracle that god did unto
saint domynyke in taking away the rain from above him and above his
compaygnon. And he was moved in hope and put him in orayson / he made the token
of the cross again the tempeste and impetuosyte ye which came unto them /
and forthwith the water of the rain divided it on the right hand and on the
left hand and suffered that they ye de without being wete so that there ne
fell one drop of water upon them / albeit that they saw on the one part
and on the other fall rain. By these examples before said and many other the
which tarry because of shortenes / it appears that for to obey unto god and
unto our superyoures a man does miracles. A man geteth also the love of god /
paradyse and Joy eternel. And unto the contrary by inobedyence a man byndeth
unto punycyon and dampnacyon. Also a man leseth al goods and purchases all
ill. In like wise as men shall here herafter. etc.

G. Of the obedyence of a relygyous named Pol: iiii.
IT is written in the life of faders yt there was a man simple named pol among
the dyscyples of saint Anthonye The beginning of his conuersyon was that he
saw a rybaulde lyenge upon his wife / than he was sorry in heart departed from
his house and yede unto the monasterye of saint Anthonye and demanded to speak
with him / when saint Anthony understood yt he asked the way of health he
considered that he was a simple man of nature and answered him that he might
be saved if he obeyed unto the things the which should be spoken unto him And
the said Pol said unto him that he would do all things that he should
commau^de him. And to the entente saint anthony might prouue if he would
accomplysshe his promesses said unto him. Hold the here before this gate and
pray unto god till that I come again unto the. And he entered in to his
chamber / and pol abode in the place and was so obedyente that he yode not
forth all the day and the night from the said place / where he prayed god. And
saint Anthony beheld him often by a wyndowe secretly / the which knew that
he remeued not / ne in the hete of the day / ne at the dewynge of ye night and
held him without mouynge in orayson as it is said. The other day after saint
Anthony yede for the and taught him of every thing how he should live. And
among other things he commanded him that he should take his refeccyon at the
even tide / and that he should take heed yt he ne took so much whereby he
might be full fed / Pryncypally in drink and affermed that the fantasyes of
the soul were made never less for to drink haboundaunce of water / than of
hot wine. And after that saint Anthony had well enstructed him and largely of
every thing. And commanded how he should live / he builded a little habytacle
three mile from him where he dwelled. And saint Anthony vysyted him often and
enjoyed him for that yt he found him accomplysshynge tho things the which
had be taught unto him and commanded. Also of the obedyence of the said Pol It
befell that many freres parfyte men came unto saint Anthony with whom came the
said poule. And as they drew many things parfounde and spoke of prophets and
of the savior. Pol them axed by symplenes of courage if Ihesu christ were
first or the prophets. When saint Anthony had understand the folysshe
questyon / he had shame and by sweet words said unto him. Hold thy peace and
goo thy way. And incontynente Pol parted / and yede unto his little chamber
and kept scylence: In like wise as if he had be commanded from heaven so that
word he ne spoke in the world. When saint anthony had apperceyued that in no
wise he ne spoke / he commanded him to tell the cause wherefore he kept
scylence. Pol answerde. Thou saydest unto me that I should go my way and hold
my peace. Than saint Anthony meruayled him that he kept ye said word that he
had brought forth neclygently. And said. This here us condamneth all / we have
not accomplysshed thoo things the which ben commanded us from heaven / and
this here keeps every word the which proceeds from our mouth Afterward
saint Anthony commanded him of things the which were without cause and
rayson to the end that his obedyence were proved and said unto him. draw of the
water of this well and cease not to cast it about all this day upon the earth
and he was obedyent. Also he him commanded that he should undo all the rods
of a basket and afterward that he should tie them togyders and make them
again / he was obedyent. Also he him commanded that he should cloute or
patche his vestyment / and afterward that he should vncloute it and cloute it
again. These things here ben again reason commanded the which pol ne
agaynsayd. And shortly he came unto perfeccyon. At the example of pol saint
Anthony taught that if any would come hastily unto perfeccyon / that he should
be master of himself. And that he ne obeyde unto his propre wylles / albeit
that the thing seemed unto him to be good and just so that he keep the
commandment of the savior the which is that before all things every man
also should deny unto himself and renounce unto his propre wylles. Vt ante
omnia vnusquisque abneger semetipsum sibi: et reemmiciet propriis voluntatibus.
The blyssed savior did this thing in like wise as it is written in the
gospel. Ego veni non vt faciam voluntatem meam: sed eius qmisit me. And in
like wise should we do for to come unto perfeccyon. etc.

H. Of the obedyence of a man ye which bare of the flesh al naked upon his
body Capitulo. liii.
IT is written in the life of the faders how saint Anthony would prouue a man ye
which demanded to enter in to religyon. Unto whom he said that he should go
to bye of flesh in such a market / and yt he should bring it unto him all
naked / ye which was obedyent. And as he bare in such wise the said flesh /
the birds came from ye sky unto him the which rent and brake all his body /
and he bare the said flesh unto saint Anthony as he had commanded him unto
whom he told ye case. And saint Anthony said unto him Those the which
renou^ceth unto ye world ben in such wise punysshed and assailed / but they
should be ferme and constant in the faith of god for to resyste against them.
etc. By this yt Anthony proved those the which yielded them unto him to be
relygyous. It is well to be noted that in likewise should do these prelates
before as to clothe and to receive of nouyces. For many there ben received the
which receive ill knaves. They make many dyuysyons sclaundres and desolucyons
/ and breketh the scylences / ceremonies / and constytucyons / whereby relygyon
is lost. Vnica so la pecus. Also as a seek be vndoth many other / in
likewise in a congregacyon when one relygyous is ylle inobedyent and rebel he
makes many ylle. Master Hugues of saint vyctor declares the life of the
sayll ill relygyous at the beginning of the rewle of chanons and says. Sunt
quidem in congregatione obstinati in suo sen^u sapientes in suis oculis. hu hoc
quodin in animo conceperunt qua^i ex ratione defendu^t. nec se aliis sed alios
sibi aplicari contendunt. Et si viderint sibi non obtemptari: statim
commouentur et alios perturbant. Tales solent esse rebels mandatis senioru^
plurunumque regnat in eis passio inobedientie et impatientie: isti no^ su^t
ydonei ad concordiam. etc.

Inobedientia.
E. Examples of inobedyence / and first example how Adam and Eve dysobeyed unto
god. liiii.
IT is written in the third chapter of genese how the serpente tempted Eve to
ete of the fruit that god her had defended / and eve said unto the serpente.
God has said unto us that one what day yt we ete of it we shall deye / that
is to say / we shall be bond unto the death. And the serpente said unto them
that they should not dye and that god knew well that on any day that they
should eat of the fruit their eyes should be open and they should be as
gods knowing the good and the ylle. Than eve byleued the persuacyon and
temptacyon of the devil / and ete of the fruit defended. And also made adam
to ete. And afterward god demanded of Adam wherefore he had broken his
commandment. He excused him upon eve that she had counsaylled him / but his
excusacyon vaylled him nothing. And god said unto him illud genesis.iii. Eo
quod obedisti voci vxoris tue plusquam michi: maledicta erit terra i^ opere
tuo: in laboribus comedes eam cuntis diebus vite tue spinas et tribulos
germinabit tibi: et comedes herbas terre: In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane
tuo donec reuerraris in terra^ That is to say for asmoche as thou haste obeyde
unto ye voice of thy wife more sooner than unto mine ye earth shall be cursed in
thy operacyon. Thou shalt ete y^ earth by labors all the days of thy life.
The earth shall bring forth thorns and thy stylles. And than thou shalt ere
the herbs of the earth. Thou shalt get thy bread in ye sweet of thy face
till unto that that you shalt return unto earth whereof thou art come. For
thou art poudre and ashes / and unto poudre thou shalt return. And god axed
Eve of her inobedyence ye which excused her upon the serpente that tempted her
but her excusacyon vaylled nothing / For god said to her illud genesis.iii.
Multiplicabo erumnas tuas et conceptus tuos. In dolor peries filios tuos et
sub viri potestate eris and ipse dn^abitur tui. That is to say / I shall
multeplye thy poorenes / myseryes / and thy conceyuynges. Thou shall child thy
sons in sorrow and thou shall be under the puyssau^ce of the man. etc. By this
example a man should understand that those the which synneth mortally in
brekynge the commandments of god and in obeyenge unto the temptacyons of the
devil / of the world and of the flesh shall not have of execusyo^ before god
for to say I have be tempted but that they shall be put from paradyse and lent
unto the fire of hell / by the dysobeyssaunce of the bytynge of an apple the
which is a little thing as unto the bytynge / but a great thing to do again
god the which it had defended. Paradyse celestyall was close / and adam and
eve were put out of paradise terrestre and put in to this world full of
myserie. And by their sin it behooves that we all ben baptized or put from
paradyse. Vnde ioha^.iiii. Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua et spyrytu scto^
no^ potest i^troire in regnu^ dei. Who so well should consider this example he
should keep him to offend again the commandments of god

B. Another example how by the dysobeysaunce of the man of god a lion
strau^gled him in the way. liiii
IT is written in the.xiii. chapter of the third book of kings that at the
prayer of a man of god ye kings hand was heled ye which was dry. When he
had done this miracle the king prayed him to go dyne with him and that he
should give him of gifts. He answered / If thou would give me the half of thy
house yet would I not ete of bread ne I shall drink of water in this place /
it is in such wise sent me in the word of god the which it commanded.
Vnde.iii. regu^. Nec comedes panem neque bibes aqua^ nec reuerteris per via^
qua venisti. Than he yode by another way. And the prophet ancyen the which
dwelled in Bethell there as the king had be heled herd the said words that
ye man of god had no will ne to etene to dry^ke mounted upon his ass and yode
after him / and prayed him to go in to his house and to drink and to eat. He
excused him and said that god him had defended, and he said unto him. I am a
prophet as you art / and the aungel told me bring him again in to thy house
to the end that he ete of bread and drink of water / he did so much that he
brought him with him and ete of bread and drank of the water / And as they
sat at the table the word of god was brought forth in this manner. Quia no^
obedie^s fiusti ori dn^i: and no^ custodisti mandatu^ quod precepit tibi dn^s
deus et reuersus es: et comedisti pane^ et bibisti aquam non inferetur cadauer
tuum in sepulchrum patrum tuorum. That is to say for asmoche as thou haste not
ben obedyent unto the mouth of thy lord and have not kept his commandment.
etc. Thy body shall not be borne to be buried in the sepulcre of thy faders.
After that they had ete and drunk the man of god mounted upon his ass and
departed for to go / and found a lion in the way the whithe slew him the body
deed abode in ye way and the ass by. And the lion ne ete of the said body and
did none ill unto the ass but sat by him. etc. By this example we should
understand yt if god punysshed so holy a man for the fraccyon of so little a
commandment that he shall punysshe of great obedyences. And for asmoche as the
lion ne ete of the body it is to understand yt the said man of god is not
dampened and that his inobedye^ce was pardoned him / but he was punysshed for
that yt he was not obedient he byleued to lightly unto ye temptacyon of the
other man. Non oi^ spu^i credendum est. A man should believe unto every
spirit.

C. Another example of the disobeyssau^ce of two nonnes the which demanded of
the pope that they should confess each other. Ca. liiii.
IT is written in some books this yt follows the which the discyple recyteth
in his sermons and says yt the nonnes of a monastery were dysposed one time
that two amongst them should go unto the pope to get yt they might confess
each other. For they estymed that it was a thing unlawful yt they should
declare their sins and sekenesses unto a man / yt is unto a priest. When they
came unto ye pope and that he had understand their symplesse and the fraud of
the devil he took unto them a box shitte and closed and said unto them yt
they should bear it with them unto their lodging / and that they should
bring it him again in the mornyge with our opening it and that they should
obteyn that / yt they demanded. When they were at their lodginge they beheld
it dylygently and had great will to open it and the one of them said unto the
other open w^^ it let us se what is within it. The other said we dare not / for
the pope has defended it us. In the end by temptacyons they opened the said
box and thought to have shytte it again as it was. And a bird ye which was
within enclosed took her flyghte and fled / than they had dread. And in the
morning when they returned unto the pope and that he had known their
inobedyence / he said unto them. In this thing men know your instabylyte and
sekenes. In like wise should ye do the one with the other if ye should confess
each other / when the one should offend the other / she should hyde her sin
/ and so the pope sent them again without granting unto them their
demand.

D. Another example how the king Amaleche resysted again ye will of god / and
ill came unto him. Ca. liiii.
IT is written in the.vii. chapter of exode how the king amalech fought
meruaylously again the people of Israhell / and resysted again him as he
mounted into Egypt / and ylle came unto him the which shall be declared
herafter. Also god told it unto Moses. Delebo enim memoriam amalech sub celo.
etc.

E. Another example of the obeyssaunce of king Saul. liiii.
IT is written in the.xv. chapter of the first book of kings how god sent
unto king saul by the prophet Samuel that he and his army should go to
slay and to dystroye the king sinner Amaleche and all his people / and all his
beestes / and that al were dystroyed and lost without taking any unto
mercy. And without coueytynge ne taking any thing.vi regum. xv. Vade and
percute amalech and demolire vniuersa eius et non concupisces ex ipsius ali
quid no^ parcas ei: sed interfice a viro vsque ad mulierem and paruulu^ atque
lactante^ bouem and oue^ and asinu^. etc. Than Saul yode he and his army the
which was great and accomplysshed not the commandment of god / for he took
the king Gag quycke / and slew Amalech / and the good bestyall was spared.
Also they took the precious vestymentes and clothes / and the best of the
goods And slew the wulgarye people and bestyall and dystroyed all that ye
which was not good and precious against the will and commandment of our
lord Ihesu christ by his prophet. etc. This thing dyspleased unto god for
that yt Saul was inobedye^t where as he punysshed not the sinners as it was
commanded him. And for as much that he pylled and took their goods the
which was defended him. etc. After yt that the prophet samuel had spoken
unto god / and knew that he was wroth of the said inobedyence. He came unto
Saul and demanded him werfore he had not obeyed unto god / and that he was
gone unto ye pyll erye. Saul answered unto Samuel and said unto him. So have I
obeyed unto god. I have brought Gag the king and also Amalech have I slain /
ye people has be pylled and brought of fair sheep and of oxes to the end that
he did sacryfyce unto god. Meliore^ eni^ obedie^tia quam victime / That is to
say obedyence is better than sacryfyce. Also the prophet Samuel reproved
another time the said saul for his inobedyence and said unto him. illud. i.
regu^ xiii. Stulte egisti nec custodisti mandaradn^i dei tui q^ precepit tibi:
quod si no^ egisses iam nu^c preparasset dn^s regnu^ tuu^ super israhel in
se^piternu^: sed nequaquam consurget etc. Thou haste done folysshely and haste
not kept ye commandments of thy lord god the which he command the. If
you had not done it our lord had prepared thy realm upon the people of
Israhell in eternyte. But from hensforth he ne shall lift him up. For as much
as the said saul left god and did the will of the devil / the devil him
posseded and tormented gretely as it is written in the books of the kings / and
the end of hy^ was right ill / for he drew his sword and slew himself.
Saul arripuit gladiu^ suu^ and irruit super eu^. etc.

F. Another example of the dysobeyssau^ce of Pharaon and of his punycyon. liiii.
IT is written in exodi in the.vii. viii. chapitre. etc. How the king Pharaon
had the heart so enha^ded / rebelle and inobedyent yt he ne would obey unto god
/ and unto his servant. For he ne would let go the chyldre and people of
Israhell by many times in likewise as god him commanded. And therefore at every
time that he dysobeyed unto our lord Ihesu christ he sent a punycyon. The
first punycyon that our lord sent them was that all the waters and ryuers of
the kingdom of Egypt was changed and turned unto blood. The second that
god sent them so many of frogs yt they spradde over all egypt. The third
god sent so many of gnattes and flies upon bestes and people that they ne
might defend them. The fourth other flies and more terryble or al sorts.
The.v. was mortalyte upon all the beestes of egipte. The.vi. was wou^des and
bladders upon the beestes and people The.vii. was thondres and lyghteny^ges
hayle and fire in the mids. The.viii was grasseloppes and other ye which ete
all the verdure and grenesse of egypt. The ix. was derkenes. The.x. was
mortalyte upon ye first borne / and for that yt he had the heart so hard that
he ne would obey to god ne by word ne by punycyon moses stroke the water of
the sea the which departed on the one side and on the other And six hundred
thousand men of the children of Israhell without the women passed with dry
foot. And pharaon and all his army entered afterward and all we redrowned. Vn^
exo.xv. Curus pharaonis and excertitus eius proiecit in mare. Et electi
principes eius sub mersi sunt in mari rubro: abyssi operuerant eos descenderu^t
in profundu^ quasi lapis. Filii au^t israel ambulauerunt per siccu^ in medio
mari. By Pharaon the which was so obstynate yt he ne would never obey unto
the servants of god / ne him correct for plage nor punycyon yt god sent
unto hy^ ben understand ye sinners obstynate the which ne correct them for
prechynges ne wrytynges yt a man unto them might tell / ne for sekenes of
fortune what so ever ye god unto them sent. And for asmoche as they be in
danger to have in the end and conclusyon as pharaon had / yt is yt god shall
punysshe them and make to deye myscheuously and yt they shall descend in to
dampnacyon in to hell. etc.

G. Another example of the inobedyence of the prophet jonas. liiii.
IT is written in the first chapter of Jonas how god him commanded yt he
should go to preche in the cite of Nynyues / the which obeyed not redely and
fled from the face of our lord / mounted upon the sea in a ship and
incontinent these began to move for ye tempest of the time. For to make short
Jonas was cast into the sea / and a fisshe named a whale him swalowed / and
was in his womb three days and three nyghtes. And in the womb of ye said
fysshe made his orayson unto god. Afterward god commanded unto the fysshe yt
he should vomete Jonas. He was obedyent and vometed him and cast him on dry
land. And when Jonas came forth of the womb of the whale / god him
commanded secondly that he should go to preche in the cite of Nynyue / and he
was obedyent forthwith.

H. Another example how chore: dathan and abyron / and their alyes dyscended in
to hell for their inobedyence and murmr. Also how the children of Israhell
gadred of the manna again the commandment of Moses. Ca. liiii.
IT is written in the.xvi. chapter of the book of nombres / how chore / dathan
and abyron and two. C. and. l men murmured against god and Moses and ylle
came unto them. For ye earth opened under them. And they dyscended all quycke
in to hell hosed shod and clothed / and in such wise they perysshed. Vnde
numeri.xvi. Dirupta est tra sub pedibus eorum: et aper^es os suum de uorauit
eos cum tabernaculis suis: and vniuersa substantia eorum descenderumque vi ni
in infernum operti et perierunt. etc. Also it is written in the.xvi. chapitre of
ye book of exodi how ye children of Israhel murmured that they had not of
flesh and of bread. And god sent unto them of ye manna the which dyscended
from heaven / and Moses commanded them that they ne should gadre ne keep but
that the which should suffyse them for the day without keeping it till unto
the morrow. And many were inobedyentes and kept it till unto the morrow / the
which manna stanke and therein gadred the worms. These examples here show
that inobedyence and murmr makes to have punycyon and dampnacyon temporell
and eternell and therefore it behooves to obey unto god and unto his servants.

I. Another example of a friar ye which was punysshed dyuynely for the murmr
that he made again god. liiii.
IT is written in ye life of faders that there was a friar honest and verytable
/ after that he had served god long time in the order of prechours / and that
he ne had apperceyued any thing of consolacyons and swetnes of god the which
read and that he had herd how these other had tasted often times. In a night
they were before the crucyfyxe and lamentably began to inquire before god in
saying these words here. My lord I have herd of the ye thou procedest al
creatures in bounte and mansuetude. And I have served the by many of years in
keeping hard things for the words of thy lips / and wyllyngly I am all
mortefyed for the love of the And my lord I know that if I had done as much
of service unto a tyrant he would have showed me some sign of benyuolence
either in speaking swetely / or in gyuynge me some thing / or in co^myttynge
me to do some secret / or at ye leest in laughyng on me. And certainly my
lord thou haste not shed in me any doulsour / thou haste not showed in me
any benyuolence. Thou lord the which prechest swetnes thou art in me cruel.
Thou art more hard than if thou were to me a tyrant / you lord what thing
is it or wherefore do thou it. Than as he said these words and began again
and many other semblables / he herd one time and two great tremblynges / in
like wise as the church had threted ruin / and above the covering of the
church he herd sco much of tredynge as and if many dogs there had grated
with their nails and gnawen with their tethe. When he herd that he was a ferde
hugely and all his body trembled / and suddenly he saw behind him an horrible
vysage. And with a thing that he held in his hands stroke it and fell
prostrate unto the earth. And as he would have risen / he ne might in no manner
/ and in brekynge he drew him toward an altar / And more over he ne might
ferther proceed for the great dolor that he had. When the freres arose at
pryme and that they found him replenysshed with dolours / they bare him in to
the fermerye and knew not the cause of his maladye. He lay the space of three
wekes / and unto himself and unto other he stanke so much that with great
pain might they serve him if they did not stop their nosethrylles. After
that he had recovered his strength and that he was corrected of his
presumpcion returned unto the place where he had be stryken and where he had
deserved the wrath and ire of god / to the end that he should get mercy. And
he said. My lord I have sinned in heaven and before the I am the leest of all
those of whom you haste pytye / and am indygne of thy great graces. My lord
thou haste beten me justly. but debonayrly thou have heled me. Than he fell
prostrate on his face and required pardon many times of things that he had
folysshely thought and lightly spoken again god / and a voice unto him was
made. Yt thou will have ye consolacyons that thou have made. And these
doulicurs of the holy ghost it behooves that thou the repute vile in like wise
as a worm and as the mire where upon you tredest. When he herd that he was
strongly comforted he rose him up and yielded graces unto god / And afterward
did the said things humbly brennyngly / and lyberally he showed this thing
the which happened him unto the master of the order of prechours / and men
believe that it came unto him as it is before rehearsed in the life of the faders
/ and therefore inobedyence makes to have punycyon. etc.

VErbum dei.
A. Examples for the word of god and the prechynges. And first. A. Example
how a great sinner repented him and was saved by the herynge of a predycacyon
or a sermon. lv.
MEn find by writing in many books this the which follows the which the
dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says that as saint Bernarde preched
in the churcheyarde in a cite / ii. rybauldes were nere. Of the which the one
theder would go as the other people / the which yede theder. And ye other
mocked him and said unto him. How ledeth the theder now the devil the which
nededyste in all thy life any good deed. And now thou wylt go unto the
predycacyon And he took no head of the rebukes that he said unto him and theder
yode. And saint Bernarde preched again those the which spoke cursed words
and the which led an ill life. The sinner began to have contrycyon and
doloure for his sins / and he began for to weep. And saint Bernard saw that
he had about his neck a great chain the which had more than an hondreth
linkes / but at every iere that he wept there fell a lynke from the said
chain Than saint bernarde began to preche more strongely and ardauntly and to
deteste his sins. And the sinner more strongly wept. In the end the chain
was al undone and broken. After the said predycacyon saint bernarde called him
and comforted him. And by his admonycion he confessed all his sins and
afterward lived holyly and his compaignon abode in sy^ne and bond with a more
cheyne than was the other. By this example a man should understand that
mortal sin is a bond or a chain by the which the soul of sinners is
bound and holden in the hands of the devil of hell. In like wise as
approves the scripture in many places / Vnde david in psalm. Funes peccatorum
circumplexi su^t me. The cords of my sins has beset me about and
compassed in all things. Et legitur prouerbioru^.v. Iniquitates sue capiunt
impium et funibus peccatorum suorum vnusquisque constringitur. The iniquytes
happen the sinner. And every one is constrained by the cords of his sins.
And saint Austyn says in his confessionayr. Ligatus eram non ferro alieno:
sed ferra mea voluntate / I was bound not with strange iron / but by my
thought hard as iron.

B. Another example how a relygyous converted in few words a man of gross
conscience. lv.
MEn find by writing in the promptuarye of the dyscyple and of other books
that a rich man puyssaunt had a wife devout / and he himself lived seculerly
and without devotion and it befell that a relygyous the which passed ye
country yode unto their house / and they sitting at the table / the wife
prayed the relygyous that he would say before her husband some good
exhortacyon / he answered so shall I do if he will. Than the husband said I
shall here it with good will so that it be short. And he said. So shall I do
but understand it well and put it in effect. I say that it is written mathei
xii. Oi^a quecu^que vultis vt vobis faciant hoi^es: and vos eade^ facite illis.
That is to say. The good that thou wylt that men do to the / do it unto thy
neighbor. If thou keep these words here without forgetynge them and that
thou accomplysshe them you shalt be saved. Than he began to think yt he would
keep them and he did it / afterward sometime as he passed by a way he found a
mylle yt he had made to dystroy he recorded him of the words of the said
relygyous / he sent his procurour to compounde with him unto whom it
apperteyned. Semblably these other yt he had offended / he them appaysed and
satysfied them unto his power. It befell also that he found a poor man in the
way as he came again he led him in to his house he refresshed him and made
him to sytte by him at the table / and gave him of his metes. After souper he
brought him for to sleep in a place where he and his wife slepte yt was nere
the yates of the door. and when the poor man had a little while slepte he had
thurst. For he had taken good refeccyon not accustomed and when he had not to
dry^ke he cried importunatly yt he was tormented by great thirst / and for
asmoche as the household slepte and was in a place on ye side far of the
host all only he herd hy^ cry the which was moved unto mercy he rose him
up and demanded him what he neded / and he said unto him. My lord I lose by
thirst. Than the master would have brought him of water of the cysterne. And
as he drew he fell within it and was drowned. Afterward long time when the
servants sought him they found him within the said cysterne / the which had
about his neck a cercle of gold in the which there was in writing that his
soul was borne in to heaven before yt his body was cold after yt he was deed.
/ By this man the which was converted from ylle unto good for to here one
good word it is to understand that it is a great thing to preche and to
show ye word of god. And for that yt he restored ye things ill done and that
he was mercyful it is to understand that he had contrycyon and purpose to live
well and that he changed the ylle in to good. And by that that men found the
lettre of gold written and that he was saved. It is to understand that he
deyed in good consummacyon as very repentaunte and good catholyque.

C. Another example of a master delycatife the which ne would here the word
of god ne do of penance and was converted in few words. lv.
IT is written in the book of dread of a master delycatyf / the which refused
so much the estate of penance that hene would goo unto sermons. And also hene
would here speak word of god lest that he were moved to enter in to relygyo^
And it befell one time yt a precher of his parentage came to vysyte him in his
house. And when he was in his chamber he dreded that he came to him to preche /
unto whom he said. Friar wherefore are ye come / if ye will speak unto me of
god I care not of it / and if ye speak of other besynesses ye are welcome. And
he said unto him master I have to speak with you of other things / and sithe
that ye will not here speak of god I purpose not to speak unto you of him / but
by your leave and license. Than he received him to speak of other besynesses.
And after that these rumors were fined when the friar would go said unto him.
Master give me leave to speak one word of god / with great dyffyculte he
granted it him. And the said friar said to him. Master I pray you yt when ye
be laid this night in your bed that ye remember you of the bed yt these
slothful men and women have in hell the which ne do of penance in this
world. And ye said man said unto him. What bed have they / and the said
friar said / The prophet Ysaye says in the.xiiii. chapter. Subter te
sternetur tinea et operi mentum tuum erunt vermes. The (...) as much for to
say that thy fire shall (...) strewed under the with mouths and thy couerture
shall be worms. After these words the said friar departed. And the said
master thought so much of the said word of the bed of hell that all the
night he ne might sleep. And the said word had so great effect and so much
vaylled it unto him that within a right little time after he entered in to
relygyon and corrected him. Wherefore it is a great thing to here the word of
god.

D. Another example of an ill knight the which in his life was confessed but
one time / and at one sule predycacyon he corrected himself and converted. lv.
MEn find by writing in the sermons of the dyscyple and many other books of
a knight replenysshed with many sins. The which ye devil had so strongly
blinded his heart yt in all his life he had not be confessed but one time. And
it befell that he came reverently unto the church on the day of pentecoste /
and not for because of devotion / that he had unto our lord Ihesu christ nor
unto his saints / but to the intent for to show himself. For upon that day
he had be clothed with.ix. vestymentes the which were right precious. And on
the said day he herd speak unto prosne the priest of the said parysshe the
which showed of the solempnyte and virtue of the holy ghost. And when the said
knight herd that unto those what so ever they were either men or women the
which have committed sin that would repent them that god should send the
holy ghost ye which should make clean their hearts and al sins. And
afterward should enhabyte in them. Incontinent that the priest had spoken this
thing the said knight yode in to a place secret to pray unto god and said. O
lord god I am a sinner / I have gotten many of sins / of the which I sorrow
and repent me gretely. I pray the by thy great mercy that thou send me on
this day the holy ghoost the which shall make me clean and enlumyne mine heart
And incontinent god exalted him and sent unto him the holy ghost the which
made clean his heart by verey contrycyon and after by pure confession. And so
ye holy ghost came unto him and abode with him: and after sinned he no more
mortally and did penance dygne and satisfaccyon and ended his life in good
conso^macyon. This example denotes that it is a great thing to here the word
of god / for all benedyecyon and salvation proceeds of it. Another example it
is written in the deed of ye appostles that as saint peter preched the holy
ghost dyscended upon all those yt herd the word of god. Vn^ actuu^.x. Adhuc
loque^te petro cecidit spiritussa^ctus super oe^s qi audiebant vbu^ dei.

E. Another example of a count ye which converted hy^ in hery^ge ye word of
god
IT is written in ye sermons of ye dyscyple and in other books yt there was an
earl lecherous / proud / and malycyous ye which lived longly in many sins
and so it befell one time yt he entered in to ye church and there herd a
sermon. And when he herd preche yt / yt is written eze.xviii. In quacu^que hora
i^gemuerit pcto^r oi^m i^iqitatu^ eius no^ recordabor. That is to say / in what
hour the sinner shall wayle and weep his sins I shall not remember of al his
iniquytes. He took this auctoryte in himself he repented hy^ bytterly and
required of god his grace and his mercy and that he would pardon him his sins
/ and confessed and said yt he ne would do more other thing till unto the
death than to serve god / he left the world / he entered in to relygion and
there served god deuoutely. And after his death men found in writing upon his
sepulture in lettres of gold the words of the psalmyste. Misit dn^s vbu^ suu^
and sanau^t epos. That is to say yt our lord sent his words and heled him /
yt is yt he converted him from ylle in good by the herynge of ye word of god.
and therefore it is a great thing as to preche and to teache. Another example of
a carle ye which would not here the word of god / and the crucyfyxe stopped
his eres in sygnefyenge yt he ne would here ye prayers that men made for him.

Master Jacques of Vitre says in his book yt there was a carlysshe man yt
would never in his life here ye word of god / and when the priest began for to
preche he yode out of ye church and went in to the chircheyarde to talk and
to detracte with other carles ye which was repreued many times of his said
priest for yt that he and the other let to speak the word of god / but he
ne corrected hy^ and abode in his obstinacyon. The which was afterward seek
grievously / and called his said priest and confessed him for dread of death /
and not for the charity of god / ne for his health / and of the said sekenes
shortly he deyed. And when his body was borne unto the chirch and that the
said priest and clergy song the dyryge and the office of the deed bodies the
image of ye crucifixe stopped his eres with ye fyngers of his hands taken from
the crrosse before all the people. Than as all they meruaylled to se yt / the
priest said unto ye people. Know ye what token this is here. They answered
that nay. And ye said priest said. Ye shall understand that the soul of this
carle whose body lies here is now between the hands of the deuylles. For in
likewise as he stopped his eres that he herd not the word of god / In like
wise god closes his eres that he ne here ye prayers and oraysons that we make
for him. And the said priest defended unto all the presence yt they ne should
pray more for his soul. Than they ceased to pray for him. And his body was
taken from the holy place and was buried in a field. For as for the soul of
one dampened a man should not pray. Quia in inferno nulla est redemptio. After
that a person is iuged and sent unto the pains of hell for to suffer pain /
he shall never come again unto light ne never shall he have mercy. Wherefore
it behooves no more pray for it. Vnde gregorius vndecimo. Quis quis ad inferna
mala tollera^da semel decenderit: nequaquam vlterius mia^ parcentis liberat
quos semel in locis penalibus iustitia iudicantis damnat.

A. Another example of ye paroyssyens of a curate the which ne would here ye
predycacyon and the commandments of ye church.
IT is wryte^ how a curate reproved many times his paroyssyens for yt that they
yede in to ye chircheyarde when he preched and made his antetyme. Also when any
other made predycacyon / and for asmoche as he knew not how to remedy it for
ye health of their souls. For they dyuysed of their occupacyons seculers in
the said chircheyarde when he diuysed of feestes / fastings. And other
co^maundentes of the church. What did he / he made to bring him a little
stole in the mids of them in the chircheyarde and so set him down / and
beheld them there. And he herd their langayges. And when he ennoyde them
they demanded what he did there. He answerde. Vbi sunt ciues ibi debet esse
episcopus. That is to say. That ye bishop should be where his cytezyns ben
Also a curate should be where his paroyssyens is / and you are here / wherefore
I should be with you. And for asmoche that at ye first time they correct them
not / yet theder did he goo afterward the second time. And when it came unto
the third time they all had so great shame that afterward they yede theder no
more. And so he correct them / and unto them it prouffyted more than all the
langayges yt he had spoken to them before. And therefore when a man may not
correct his paroyssyens in one manner him behooves to assaye in another.

B. Another example how a herdeman was saved and correct himself by the
herynge of one predycacyon. lvi.
THe dysciple recyteth in his tromptuary how that a pastor or herd man yede
late unto ye church unto mass and sermons for the keeping of his bestyall And
one time he passed by a cite and entered into ye church and herd preche yt
every creature is taught to fle sy^ne and to love god / by this prechynge he
was edefyed. And in beholdynge ye creatures he said to himself Such a
creature serves unto god and obeys unto him. The water in rennynge ye birds
in singing the herbs in rysynge up and growing and in like wise of other
creatures. And he saw a toode one time and said / the creatoure might have
create me as this tode if he had would / and I offend him contynuelly by
sins and am unkind. For he has made me and create unto his image for to
have beatytude and me has redeemed by his passyo^ etc. For to be short he
converted him and did penance / and was suffycyently instruct of a holy man
and perseuered louably in the service of god. etc.

C. Another example. That to here the word of god it is prouffytable albeit
that a man hold it not.
IT is written in the life of the faders yt a friar said unto a good fader
abbot. I have axed questyons oftymes that they would tell me ammonycyon for the
health of my soul. And of all that that they tell me I reteyne nothing. The
auncyente said unto the friar I have two vessels void goo fetch me one and
wasshe it with water / and afterward cast it and put ye said pot in his
place. And the said friar did so one time two times / and the au^cyente said
unto him. Bring me ye two vessels heder / when that he had brought them
the auncyente said unto him / Which of the two pottes is most moist and also
clean. The friar said unto him. It is that wherein I have put my water that I
have washed. Than the ancient said unto him. Sone in like wise is it of the
soul the which hereth often the word of god / albeit that he reteyne
nothing of the things that he axeth / notwithstondynge he is more clean than
he the which demau^deth nothing and also hereth not any thing.

D. Another example how some freres slepte in herynge the word of god and in
herynge the ydell words they were much waking. Ca. lvi
IT is written in the life of the faders that an au^cyent the which set him in
hermytage for to pray unto god that he would give hy^ grace yt he slepte not
when men should speak of spyrytuell things. And when men should speak of
detraccyon or of hate that he might sleep incontynente that the eres ne token
the venyme of that sin. He said that the devil studied hy^ to admoneste
these men in ydell words for to impugn doctrine and thing spyrytuell. And he
told this example. When I spoke some time unto some freres of the vtylyte of
souls / they slepte so profou^dely that they ne might meue the eye lyd of
their eyes. And I would show that it was a thing dyabolyke. And I yode to
speak things ydell. And they were incontinent waking and enjoyed them and I
took me to wayle and to say. I spoke till unto now of things celestyall /
and all your eyes were holden by grefe to sleep and when an ydell word has
be brought forth / ye have be all prompte and ready to here. For the which
thing I pray you right dear brethern that ye know that it is the work of
the cursed devil / take heed to your self and keep you from slepynge when ye
do or here any thing spyrytuell. etc. By this example a man may understand
that the devil brings a sleep his servants of dread that they ne here the
word of god / and that they ne should leave their sins. And also he waketh
the^for to here ylle / to the end that they fall in to sin and dampnacyon. etc.

E. Another example again those the which flees the sermons. lvi.
IT is written that as saint martyn yode from town to town prechinge and
doing miracles one Cayment impotente fled evermore before him from town to
town / and from cite to cite / and fered that he should hele him / of dread
that he ne lost to get and to demand his living. In like wise the
rauysshers / ye the uys / the lechoures / and sinners flees the sermons and
they ne will here them / of dread lest that they leave their sins / and they
ne amend them. etc.

F. Another example how the case of a prechoure was borne at the death / and
how Ihesu christ aided him and chased away the deuylles. lvi.
SOme masters has written this ye which follows how ye dyscyple recyteth
in his pro^tuarye and says that it was commanded unto a relygious priest of
the order of the prechers that he should go to preche again the sarazyns / ye
cross he theder yode and so deyed. And he appeared unto one of his compaygnons
ye which axed him of his estate. He answered in this. It seemed me that my
pain was to long. And when that I deyed I ne saw by me but the deuylles the
which began to say unto me. Thou keptest never well thy professyon ne the
obedyence that thou have promised unto thyn abbot And also thou ne preched
never unto any clearly thy lord god. And as the said deuylles preposed against
me diverse things in the said manner and that there ne was person the which
answerde for me Ihesu christ came and said. Come after me / for thou haste
preched me. And incontinent all the company of deuylles departed as a smoke and
I followed Ihesu christ in to glory and I ne felt any other pain except the
said fere. etc.

G. Another example how he the which precheth the word of god shall have great
reward in heaven.
MEn find by writing in some books / also the dyscyple it recyteth in his
promptuarye that as a good priest precher approached unto his death one of his
good friends made him swear in our lord that he should come to certefy him of
his estate.xxx. days after his death. After that he was deed the said priest
appeared unto him as he had required hy^ in a meruayllous fair chapel al
replenysshed with ouches of gold that is to say of Iewelles rich / noble
good and precious / among the which there was one upon the breast dyffered /
and was more fair without comparyson than the other. And as he inquired of his
estate / he said unto him that it was well. After he him demanded wherefore he
was so cladde. He answered I have this vestyment for the great zele and love
that I have had unto my neighbors. And as many as I have converted of sinners
there are in my vesture of ouches. And I have received the ouche that thou
see on my breast / for that that I have converted a sinner of whom no man had
any hope of health. And he asked him of the estate of those the which have
cure and charge of soul and of people / as the curates the which have
parysshynges. He answered right few shall be saved. For they walk in the
large way ye which ledeth unto hell. And show evil examples unto their
subgectes they be so much habandoned in couetyse that they care not of souls
so that they have the gods of their subgectes. And enioyneth yt is yet more
peryllous / that / yt they should convert unto the usage of ye poores / they
dyspende it with vile persons. When he had spoken these words he departed.
/ These curates and those the which have cure of souls should well note this
example. For great reward follows unto those ye which well show unto their
paroyssye^s. And also dampnacyon unto those ye which use ill of the office and
charges yt they have. etc.

H. Another example how the devil ne might strangle a knight / for that / yt
he salued the vyrgyn Marye every day / and for the good will that he had to
here a predycacyon he was saved. lvi.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye this the which follows / the which
is also written in other books and says. That there was a knight lord of a
castle whoo had under him many tyrauntes. And this said knight dyspoylled all
the goers by without mercy / but he had of custom that every day he salued
the vyrgyn Marye. And one day there passed thereby an holy monk that ye said
knight commanded he were dyspoyled / and the holy man prayed the pyllers that
they would bring him unto their master and that he had a secret thing to
tell to him when he was led he prayed the lord yt he would make al his
servants to come forth to the end yt they should here a predycacion. And he
commanded that they should come al. When it was done he said They ne ben all
here there wants one. and some said ye chamberer defayleth / he was made to
come. The holy man said. It is this here that I demanded. And he said unto
him. I the adjure and command yt in the name of the fader / of the sone / and
of the holy ghost that thou tell what thou art / and wherefore thou art heder
come. He answered. Alas I am constrained to declare my secret. I am not a man
but a devil / and I have dwelled with this knight.xiiii. years / for our
prince sent me hither for to look the day that this unhappy said not the
salutacyon accustomed to the end that I should strangle him. For I have the
puyssau^ce of god for ye sins that he has co^myted / to the end that he
were our compaygnon in hell / when the knight herd these words he was
abashed. And he fell prostrate at the fete of ye said monk / required him
pardon. And amended his life in to better. It is a great thing to here a
predycacyon and to serve the vyrgyn Marye. And in like wise as the devil of
hell flees / and renneth from the predycacyon / because yt he would not find
himself there / denote yt those yt flee the sermons follows ye devil of hell
And as now there are many of his party the which ne will here predycacyon.

I. Another example how men shall forgete the commandments of god in the
last or latter generacyon.
IT is written in ye life of the faders that one time the holy faders assembled
them together and prophetyzed of ye last generacyon. Amongst whom one
pryncypall named querimus said. We accomplysshe the commandments of god. And
these other faders shall ask it in demanding. And those that shall come
after us what shall they do. He answered and said unto them. They shall
accomplysshe parauenture the half of the commandments and shall require the
good eternell. And the faders demanded after these people where shall become
these other. In answering he said. The men of that generacyon shall not have
the operacyon of that / yt god wylleth that be do. And they shall forgete the
commandments of god. Also in that time sin above shall habounde / and
charity shall were cold / and great temptacyon shall come upon them / but
those ye which shall be in bounte proved they shall be better / more blyssed and
proved than we and or our faders.

K. Another example of a rich man ye which served the devil.xl. year. And in
a s^^mon repented him.
LEgitur in dyalogo cesarii. It is written that a rich man and puyssaunt full
of vices and cursydnesses was in such estate.xl. years. And afterward
repented him in a sermon / confessed him / changed his life / entered in to
relygyon / and prouffyted so gretely yt he was in the grace of god / and that
he made reuelacyon of ye hour of his death. And when he was seek he said unto
his friends yt he should deye the third day and so he did. etc. By these
examples beforsayd it appears yt all godenes / all salvation / and benedyccyon
proceeds to here and to keep the word of god / and therefore it is written in
the gospel. luce. xi Beati q audiu^t vbu^ dei and custodiu^t illd.

Primum preceptum.
Idolotria.
Example upon ye first co^mau^demente of god. No^ adorabis deos alienos. and
first A. Another example of a priest prince of the ydoles of the people yt
burnt in the fire of hell / and how these without believe shall be found
there.
WE find in the life of faders yt a good abbot named machaire found in his
way in ye deserte a head dry of a man deed / whom he co^iured and demanded
him what he was / and he answered. I am the prince of the prestes of Ydoles of
the people ye enhabyted in this place here. And the abbot asked him of ye pain
yt he endured / and in wayllyng on hye he said. Qua^tu^ distat celu^ a tra:
ta^tu^ ignis altus e^ i^ quo medio positi sumus. That is to say / yt of
asmoche as there is of dystau^ce from heaven unto earth of asmoche is ye fire of
hell great in the myddest whereof we ben put when ye holy Machayre herd this
word he began to weep and say. Ve hoi^ il li q ma^data dei tra^sgressus e^.
Malediccion is unto yt man ye which has transgressed the commandments of
god. And he asked him again if there were more great pain / and he answerde
yes. And yt the jews were more strongly brent and tormented / and lower than
they / for that yt they had gretter knowledge of god and of ye faith than they
have had. And after said yt ill christian men and women ye which live in sy^ne
mortal ben yet more bas brent and tormented / For as much that of certain
science they offend god and had more great knowledge of him and of the faith
than the Jews and paynemes ye which offended by ygnoraunce and enfermete and
unsteadfastness. And therefore they ben in the botome of hell / ye which of
asmoche as it mounteth hye / and it is the less hot. And therefore we ne ben
so much tormented as ye said crystyens / and when the said Machayre herd the
said words he asked hy^ no more / and in wepy^g so departed. This example
shows yt all sorts of people incredules and unfaithful yt go against the
faith / and deye impenytentes shall be punysshed in ye fire of hell after
their deserte. Unto ye purpose the psalm. says. Pones eos vt clibanu^ ignis i^
te^pore vultus tui dn^e: dn^s i^ ira sua conturbabit eos et deuorabit eos
ignis. That is to say O you lord you haste put the ylle in like wise as an oven
of fire in ye time of thy face / yt is of thy judgment / the lord shall
trouble them in his ire / and the fire shall devour the^. And again ye psalmyst
says. Cade^t super eos carbones: scz i^ die iuditii: i^ ignem deucies eos i^
miseris no^ subsiste^t. That is to understand. The coals shall fall upon them
at ye day of judgment yt shall brenne where ye sy^nes has been made / you shall
cast them in ye fire / they ne may be but in my seryes. Et le. job. xx.
Deuorabit eu^. s. i^piu^ ignis q no^ succendit. That is to say. The fire yt is
not light shall devour the cursed dampened.

B. Another example of the ydolatrie of Nabugodonosor when he made the three
children to be put in ye furnayse. lvii.
IT is written in the third chapitre of the book of Danyell how the king
Nabugodonosor did make an ydole of gold of.lx. cubytes in heyght / and six of
largenes / and made to bear it in to a great field and caused all the people to
come theder. More over he sent a commandment yt all the people should worship
the image when they should here the instruments melodious sou^de / and that al
those yt would not prostrate them or fall unto ye earth and worship the said
ydole yt they were taken and cast in to the furnayse light and embraced. And as
the people worshypped in such wise the said ydole there were three children
called sydrac / Mysac / and Abdenago yt would not worship it ne prostrate
them. Than the king made them to come before him to whom he demanded.
Which is the god that may deliver you fro my hand. And the said children said
unto the king nabugodonosor. Of that thing it needs ye none answer. The god
that we worship has puyssaunce to deliver us from the furnayse brennynge and
from thy hands. / Than ye said king was replete of furour and commanded yt
the said furnayse were.vii times more strongly embraced than had be accustomed
/ and the most strongest men of his host bound their fete and their hands
and cast them within the said furnayse The which was done / and the fire
burnt those yt cast them in / but it did none ill unto ye said children /
the which walked within the myddest of ye said furneyse in lauding and
blissynge god. And the fire ne did them never ill. Than the king was much
meruaylled to se them in such wise to walk through the fire / and to give
louynges unto god the which made them for to to go out of the furneyse. And ye
great and puyssaunce of the king beheld them gretely / but they found that
the said fire had not had any puyssaunce to touch the^ nor never here of
their hedes nor vestymentes were burnt. Than the king nabugodonosor began to
cry yt their god were blyssed the which sent his angel / and delivered his
servants the which byleued in him. And they changed the word of the king
the which made a decrete that all the people of what lygnee and tongue that he
were ye which had made blaspheme again the god of sydrac / mysaac / and
abdenago / should perisshe / and his house be wasted. etc. In this example a
man may understand yt all blasphematours ben reprehend and punisshed grievously
be it in confession or otherwise / sith yt the king the which was ydolatre
and peruers knew manyfestly the puyssaunce of god / and that he offended
again him in doing him such dyshonoure / rebuke and blaspheme to give the
divine honor unto an ydole ye which apperteyneth to god And therefore of good
right he made to punysshe the blasphematoures after that he had known his
health.

C. Another example how Egeas ydolatre was slain of the devil. lvii
IT is written in the legende of saint andrewe how the king egeas constrained
the crystyens to do sacryfyce to ye ydoles. Again whom came saint Andrewe to
reprehende him and they dysputed longly togyders of the passion and redempcyon
of our sauyoure. And for asmoche as the said saint Andrewe was ferme in ye
faith And the said egeas ne might put hy^ out he him iuged and condampned to be
crucyfyed and put in the torment of the cross the fete upward to the end yt he
had ye more long and gretter torment. And to be short in such wise was it
done. And the said andrewe was two days in ye said torment where he preched
and showed unto the people the which were present by estymacyon. a.xx. M. the
which people yode unto the said egeas cryenge yt unjustly he had condampned
him to death. etc. The said egeas came unto the said saint for to satysfye unto
ye people and to take him from the cross. And the light dyscended unto the
said saint. And as the said egeas returned him the devil entered in to his body
the which slew him in the said way and so euylly fined he his days.

D. Another example of the death of simon magus and of other myscreau^tes. lvii.
IT is written in the deed of ye appostles yt the enchauntour symo^ magus
deceived ye people by false art magyk in many manners the which abide because
of shortness / in the end of his days he vaunted hy^ to flee in the air. And in
deed mounted in to a toure and took him to flee before ye people / but they
were the deuylles the which bare him through the air / the which let him
fall by the commandment of saint peter / and fell upon the stones ye which
brake his body. And right shortly after yield up his spyryte / and so deyed
myscheuously. / Another example of two enchauntoures / zaroes and arphasat ye
which deceived ye people in many maneres. And they were burnt and bruyled of
the fire and of the lightening the which dyscended from heaven. When saint
simon and saint Jude should be martred in like wise as we read in the legende
of those appostles. Another example how he the which slew saint leodegayre
yede out of his wit and cast himself in ye fire / and so was brent as it is
written in ye legende of saint leodegayre. Another example how the priest of the
ydoles the which cou^saylled that men should sle saint Vital / yede out of
wit / and by seven days was posseded of the devil / and drowned himself as
it is written in the legende of the said Vytall. Another example how the
emperor domycyen ye which put saint Johan the euangelyst to death and made
him to be put in a to^ne of oil was slain yt year. And all his deeds were
reproved ill of ye senators as it is written in the legende of the said Johan.

E. Another example how dyascorus ye which was ydolatre deyed euylly. lvii.
IT is written how dyascorus was fader unto saint Barbara / ye which was a
great lord (but ydolatre) And for as much as the said daughter saint barbara
made her to be baptized and ne would believe ne worship the ydoles / ye said
dyascorus betoke her unto the judge marcyen / for to torment her and to punysshe
by martyrdom / and so was it done. And after that she had endured many
martyrdoms and yt the said marcyen was confused he sent her again unto
dyascorus / ye which led her on a hye mountain / and to make short there
byheded her with his own hands. And afterward as he came again in dyscendynge
the said mountain vengeance and punycyon dyuyne followed / for fire /
lightening / and tempeste dyscended upon him and was burnt and consumed in
such wise yt of his body there ne abode poudre / ne ashes / ne other thing of
him / and so mischeuously he ended his days as reason was / and as done people
of ill life.

F. Another example how the prouoste Tarquyn the which was ydolatre deyed
myscheuously. lvii
IT is written in the legende of saint syluester / yt after yt the provost
tarquyne had made saint thymothee to deye by martyrdom for that / yt he
preched fermely the faith of Ihesu christ / he commanded unto saint syluester
to do sacryfyce unto the ydoles / or he would make him in the morning to be
tormented by diverse torments. And syluester said unto him Fool thou shalt
deye this night and thou shalt receive torments perdurables / and will thou
or not you shalt know the god the which we believe to be true / and in eatinge
at dynere the bone of a fysshe abode in his throat the which he ne might cast
ne swalowe down / so dyed he at mydnyght and was led unto ye tomb with
great wepynges and lamentacyons / and saint syluester was delivered from prison
with great Joy. So it appears that people ydolatres and myscreauntes deye
myscheuously.

G. Another example how the king of perse quosdros the which would be of all
folks praised and worshypped as god / had the heed stryten of.
IT is written in ye exultacyon of the cross / that the king of perse quosdros
put under his empire many realms of the world After he did make a toure of
silver and gold where the precious stones did shine / and made ye images of
the son and of the moon and of the sterres in semblau^ce of an heaven. And a
precious sege wherein he sat / and made him to be worshypped as god. More over
he had a sone much or guyllous / great and puyssaunt the which made the
war / the which fought upon a bridge again the humble prince eraclius. For
to be short god gave grace unto the said prince eraclius in such manner yt he
dyscomfyte the orguyllous in fighting. And after yode unto the said toure and
stroke of the heed of the said king quosdrus for that yt he ne would believe in
god So it appears that the proud men and mysbyleuers fined their days
myscheuously.

H. Another example of the death of the ydolatres dacyen and Valeryen. lvii.
IT is written in the legende of saint Ypolyte that dacyen and valeryen
emperors deyed myscheuously / for after that they had made to sle by
martyrdom saint laurens / saint Ypolyte and many cristiens / he mounted in to
a chair for to goo to tormente of other crystyens / and dacyen was rauysshed
of ye devil / cried. O Ypolyte has rauysshed me / and holds me with great
chains. And valeryen cries. O Laurens you drawest me bound with chains and
deyed incontinent. And Dacyen returned unto the house / and was three days
tormented of the devil / and deyed euylly.

I. Another example of the death of king Yrache ydolatre. lvii.
IT is written in the legende of saint mathieu yt after yt the king Yrach had
made to sle saint Mathieu ye fire took in his palace ye brent and wasted all /
and none ne escaped but only ye king / and one of his sons was rauysshed of
the devil / and began to cry the sins of his fader and so yode unto ye
sepulcre of saint mathieu And his fader was a foul lepre ye which slew
himself with his sword when he saw he ne might be hole.

H. Another example of the ydolatrye of Quincien. lvii.
THe legende of saint Agathe specyfyeth yt after that Quyncyen had made to
cut the breasts of the said saint Agathe and to deye by martyrdom / he
entered in to a boat and his two horses began to greune togyders / and the one
of them bote him / and the other stroke him with his fete and cast him to a water
in such wise that ye body of him ne might never be found.

L. Another example of the death of neron. lvii.
AFter yt Neron had made to crucyfye saint peter and to beheed saint poule /
and that he had committee many other euylles for to make short he slew himself
with a sharp staff.

M. Another example of the death of Maximien. lvii.
AFter that maximien had made to sle and to martyr many crystyens toward
the end of his days he dysguysed him and would command to tyrannyse as a
tyrant. And he was pursued of constancyen his sone in law the which made him
to be taken hastily / and so fined his days as it is written in the legende of
saint Mauryce. By these examples beforsayd it appears that the people of ill
life defyneth their days cursedly. Also those the which has dispysed and
persecuted god and his servants / god them shall punysshe and persecute at the
hour of their death. And shall be iuged and punysshed after that that they
have deserved. Vn^ psalm. Tu reddes vnicuique iuxta opera sua.

Apostasia.
A. Examples of people apostates. And first how Iulyen apostat the which
left the crystyente and persecuted the church / deyed by punycyon dyuyne.
lviii.
IT is written how Iulyen the apostat was in his chyldhode instruct in art
magyk and afterward was monk. And stole and took away from a woman three
pottes full of gold as tells master Johan beleth. More over he left the
relygyo^ and yode unto Rome. And in the end did so much that he was emperor
of ye cite of rome / as well by money as otherwise he did many ylles and
persecuted the church. Also he fined his days ylle. For as he yode in arms
in battle he sent unto saint Basylle bishop yt he should provide him of his
necessytees unto him and unto his host. He answerde that ye things of the
church was not his: but gods. Than ye said Iulyen was angrye and swore yt at
his return he should dystroye his church. and the said bishop trusted in the
keeping of our lord Ihesu crist and of the vyrgyn Marye put him in fastings /
oraysons and almesdedes himself his clerks and his people in requyrynge their
aid. And as the said bishop was in orayson in his church requyringe aid of
our lady / he was rauisshed in spyryte before ye trone of god / where he herd
ye vyrgyn Marye yt complained her unto her sone of ye dystruccyon of her
church. And god demanded which was he yt would venge the iniurye of his
mother. And incontinent saint Mercure martyr yt was buried in ye church offrid
hy^ to do the said vengeance. Than he rose him from his tomb and armed him
and came in to the place where every man made him way / and with his axe of
arms stroke the said Iulyen apostat ye which took of his blood himself and
cast it toward ye sky and said. Thou have vaynquysshed me nazareth / you
haste vaynquysshed me. And so deyed myscheuously / and his host fled The
said bishop told by order ye said vysyon unto his people and for token of
troth they ne found saint mercure in his sepulcre the which was open / ne
his armoure the which hang in ye church. And after three days all was found
in their places And those the which came again from battle told the truth
of the deed. And they all yielded thanks unto god the which delyuereth all
those yt have trust in hy^ as it is written. eccle.ii. quod nullus sperauit i^
dn^o and confusus e^. and david says. In te speraueru^t patres nostri
speraueru^t and liberalti eos. That is to say there is none yt has hoped in
god yt is confused. Also for trust you haste delivered our faders.

B. Another example of Theophylle ye which was apostat / worshypped the devil
renounced unto god and unto ye vyrgyn Marye / but he repented him and after was
saved. lviii.
IT is written in the legende of our lady that Theophylle desired to be vycayre
and rectoure of a bishop / and for to come unto his entencyon he yede to seche
the counsayll and aid of a cursed Jew hebrewe sorcyer the which led him
unto the sabbat of the devil. And so much ill he counsaylled him that he
drew him to do ye will of the enemy / and that he was apostate / worshypped
the devil / renounced god and the vyrgyn Marye / and betoke hy^ a lettre of
his hand. After yt the bishop found him so much tempted and prycked that he
constytuted ye said Theophylle to be his vycayre general. And when he had
reigned an espace of time by the grace of god he reknowleged his fault /
repented him and did penance / and came before the image of our lady and
wept and waylled his sin by day and by night / and continued in fasting and
oraysons to require the aid of the glorious vyrgyn Marye / the which appeared
unto him / that should be a long thing to tell / but for to be short she
gate his grace and was mean yt all was pardoned him. And yt the lettre wherein
he was bound unto the devil unto him was restored. Also yt he showed before
the said bishop in great congregacyon of people al ye case by order how it was
done. And anon after he deyed in good consummacion and is of the nombre of ye
saved. By this example is to be understand yt there nys in the world so great
sinner but yt he may have salvation if he will come again unto god and do
penance here. Vn^ ysaie. lv. Dereli^quat impius via^ sua^: and vir n^quus
cogitaciones suas and reuertat ad du^m and miserebit eius.

C. Another example of a monk ye which renyed god / his baptysme / and
purpose of monk / after he repented him / did penance and was saved. lviii
IT is written in ye life of faders how a relygyous was tempted of fornycacyon /
ye which loved to much ye daughter of a priest of ye ydoles yt he demanded
herto wife / which priest gaynsayd him till he had spoken with his gods. Then
he spoke to the devil yt told him if he would renye his god / his baptysme /
and the purpose of monk than give her unto him. / The said priest told it to
ye monk yt was content to renounce unto ye three things beforsayd. And
inco^tynent he saw a white douue going from his mouth ye which flewe into
heaven. And the priest returned to ye devil and told him he had promised him
to renounce / shall I give her unto him / and he said nay / for his god is not
yet departed from hy^ but him aydeth. When the said relygyous herd yt he had
great repentance / and told his case unto a good fader yt bad him fast three
wekes contynually / and he should pray for him. At the end of the first weke
the good fader him demanded. Have thou any thing seen. and he answerde I have
seen in ye sky a douue fle over me / and at the end of the second weke. He
said he had seen the douue fle after him. And at the end of the third weke he
saw her come over him and entered in to his mouth / the which denotes yt he
had done all his penance for the renyenge of god / and yt god hy^ had
pardoned. By this example a man may understand that grace and virtue depart
them from the person the which renyeth god. or synneth mortally. Also a man
may know that grace comes again unto sinners / when they repent them and do
penance. etc.

D. Another example of a bisshoppe the which renyed god for to escape ye
torments of the incredules / the which repented him afterward did penance
and was saved. lviii.
IT is written in ye life of faders how a good fader walked.xvii. days by a
country of desert for to se if he should find any the which served god. And
he found a little habytacle. And by it a tree of palm. And a man being there
the which had great here / and the berde white of age the which covered him.
And he was poorly clothed. Also he was of terryble look. When he saw me he
yode in orayson / and when his orayson was fined he did know that I was a man
took me by the hand and axed me how I was comen theder / and whether the
persecucyons were yet in the world. I answered him that I was comen theder
unto him ye which served god for the grace of him. And how the persecusyons
were ceased by the puyssaunce of god. And I prayed him that he would tell me
how he was comen theder. And in weeping said unto me. I was a bishop / and of
the myscreauntes I had of persecusyons and torments. And for asmoche as I ne
might bear the said torments I renyed god and did sacrefyce unto ye falls
gods. After yt I reknowleged my sin and gave me in to this hermytage to
deye and do penance. And it is.xlix. year sith that I have been here in
confession and prayer yt god me would pardon my sin. I have lived of the
fruit of this tree ye god has given me. And I have not had of consolacyon of
my said sin till unto. / xlviii. years. In this year here I have had
consolacyon. When he had said these words here / he rose up and yode out /
and there was in prayer a long space of time. And when his orayson was ended
he came unto me / and when I beheld him I had fere / for he was as tire. And
he said unto me dread not god has sent the heder to the end that thou bery my
body. And wha^ he had spoken these words / he stretched out his hands and so
deyed. And I dyspoylled my robe I cut the half / and with the one party I
covered wrapped / and beryed the holy body and with the other half I covered my
body. And incontinent the said tree waxed dry. And his habytable fell down.
Than I wept strongly and prayed god that he would lend me the said palm.
And how in yt place I should persevere ye remenau^t of my life. And I knew that
it was not the will of god I returned in to the world and showed this thing.
Many things be to consider in this example. First a man should understood
that if the said bishop had not repented him correct and amend he had be
dampened. Secondly a man should consider ye by penance he was saved. Thyrdly it
is to consider the great austeryte of life / as to ete but one fruit / and
not to lie in bed / ne to have of clothing ne co^solacyon of person / and
to be so long time as is.xlviii. years without having reuelacyon ne
consolacyon of his sin. etc.

E. How a christian man lost the crown of glory by that that he renounced ye
crystendome. And a paynym wanne it. lviii.
THe disciple says in his sermons yt it is written how one time.xl. cristyens
were take of the myscreau^tes. The which crystyens were put in the time of
winter in a tonne of cold water there to suffer martyrdom. And as they were
in the said torment a paynyme saw by the suffraunce of god.xl. aungelles the
which held.xl. crowns over their hedes And in the end one of the said
crystyens said yt he renounced unto the crystendome by such condycyon that men
should take him out from the vessel. And incontynente yt he was taken out one
of the said au^gelles flewe in to heaven with one crown. And ye said paynym the
which saw this thing said. And I believe in him for whom these here suffer
pain. And he was put wtin the said tonne of water to suffer. And he the which
was taken out demanded hy^ who it was the which converted him so soon. Than
he told him by order that / yt he had seen. So he that which ne perseuered as
the other lost the crown of glory all be it that he had well begone. And ye
paynym the which perseuered with yt other had the crown eternell For to be
saved it suffyseth not to begin well / but it behooves to persevere. Vnde mathei
decimo. Qui perseuerauerit vsque i^ finem: hic saluus erit. Saint bernarde
says. I we ne that it is a good life to suffer ill / and to do good
operacyons. And so to persevere till unto the death.

F. Another example of a man yt gave ill counsayll for to make martyr ye
crystiens and make them renye their faith / and that cou^sayll redounded first
upon him. lviii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promtuarye how a master werker gave folysshe
counsayll unto a tyrant called Valeryen the which did do make a great bulle
of brass holowe within / and that the crystyens were put in that bulle and of
fire under for to torment them. And said ye their voices should resounde not as
men but they should below as bulls. The tyrant did do make it / but of the
ordonau^ce dyuyne the said werker the which had given the counsayl there was
first punysshed and put in by the said Valeryen for to here his voice how he
should below and braye. So the cursed counsayll that he gave came first unto
him before other as reason was after god and the scryptures Vnde eccle. xxvii.
Qui fodit fouea^ vt noceat proximo in illam decidet. Et qui statuit lapidem
proximo offendet in co: et q laqueu^ alio ponit peribit in illo facienti ne
quissimu^ consilium super illud deuoluetur et non agnoscet. Vnde veniat illi.
Et david in psalm. Lacu^ aparuit et effodit eum: et i^ cidit in foueam quam
fecit.

Exempla contra hereticos.
A Examples to confou^de heretykes / and first example how the deuylles kept
from brennynge an heretyke / but when ye hosty was there they might not keep
him. etc.
MEn find by writing in some books. Also ye dyscyple recyteth it in his
promptuarye and says / that as an heretyke the which should be brenned / ye
When he was cast in the fire he cried. / Help me / aid me. And incontinent
the deuylles drew him out of the fire. And he therein was cast again / and
the deuylles drew him out again. And in this hanging the good catholyckes
dysputed of the faith. And a good predycatour said unto the bishop. Make ye
body of Ihesu christ to be brought. When it was brought the said heretyke was
cast in the fire as before. He cried help me. And the deuylles answerde
appertly / we ne may: for a more great master than we is comen / and so was he
burnt / they ne might resyste again god almighty. Quia non erit impossible
apud deum omne verbum. Vt dicitur luce. i. ca. Also god is the strength of all
his people that says david. Vnde psalm Dominus fortitudo plebis sue. etc.

B. Another example how an heretyke was dombe by the virtue of ye faith. lix.
IT is written in the promptuary by the dyscyple this yt follows / There was a
faithful and devout christian man albeit that he was an ydiot. And an herytyke
mocked him of the faith yt he held. And wend to have beten him down / but
the said faithful christian man put him in oraison And lift up his eyes and
said before all unto the heretyke. I command in the virtue of the faith
crystyen that thou ne declare ne blaspheme any thing again it that is again
the faith. And forthwith he was dombe before all. And ye crystyens reioysed
them and the herytykes were all confounded.

B. Another example how a cautellous heretyke was brende of a fool demonyacle
MEn find by writing this the which follows how ye dyscyple recyteth in his
tro^ptuarye and says that there was an herytyke right cautellous the which
dredde to be sought and burnt for that that he yode again god and the faith.
And one demonyacle him vay^quysshed / and was led in to a church and bound.
And in that church was there a clerk posseded of the devil and bound / The
which clerk by the will dyuyne unbound himself in the night following And
when he was vnbou^de he assembled the mattes / the strawes and benches of ye
said church. And put them in a hepe upon the said heretyke. And the said
herytyke wend that yt woodman had played / and endured / and dyssymuled to
call aid unto yt that the said clerk demonyacle took of fire of a lamp / and
lyghted the said heepe of straw. Than when the fire was taken the said
heretyke began to cry. And at yt voice the gardyens of the church ran all
abashed / the which would quench the said fire. But the said clerk found a
glayue in the said church / and vyolentely chased the said gardyens out and
burnt ye said heretyke without any taryeng. And indede by ye judgment dyuine
that clerk was delivered of the devil. And appeared play^ly all hole heled.

D. Another example how the bishop of heretykes feigned to give light unto one
that was blind. lix.
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye and says that a bishop of Arryens
named Cerula seeing that he was confounded by the reasons and dysputacyons of
the good catholyques he gave unto a man of his sect fyftye pieces of gold by
such couenaunte that he should feign to be blind and heled of the said
bishop. And Cerula passed in great company and excercyte of people of arms
and of bysshoppes good catholykes prisoners The said man took him to cry and
to say O ye my right verytable Cerula behold my blyndenes / and give me the
experyence of thy virtue. For thou gyuest the sight to the blind / the herynge
unto ye defe / thou helest ye lepres / and reysest the deed. Than Cerula drew
him a part / touched his eyes and said. After our faith that we believe
ryghtfully thyn eyes ben open and you see clear. Forthwith that he had spoke his
said words the eyes of the said accursed took them to swelle so horrybly that
they would out by great dolor / the which in cryenge dyscouered ye malice.
And he cried in casting the pieces of gold and said Here is thy gold and
yield me again my sight. Than the man used of good counsayll / and prosterned
him before the bysshoppes catholykes in weeping and denyenge the envy of the
arryens. Than saint Eugenye bishop made ye cross upon his eyes gave him
health and received his sight When the king saw this thing noted that his
sect was confounded / and that ye faith catholyke was exalted / made to
torment ye saints of god in diverse manners and incontinent the son wexed
derke / And the said king was posseded of the devil in such manner that he
tere him with his own tethe. And so fined his days by dygne torment. Chaton
says. Te^poribus peccata late^t and tpree parent. The sy^nes some times hyde
them but in time and place they appear. Also the gospel says that there nys
thing so bestowed and hid but that it be wyste and known / and that it ne
come manyfestly before all Nichil occultu^ est quoth no^ sciat: nec absco^ditu^
quod non agnoscat et in pala^ veniat. etc.

E. Another example how a simple bishop vaynquysshed an heretyke right great
phylosophre.
IT is written in the hystorye ecclesyastyke that many phylosophres gadred them
together to the end yt they should war again the faith of Ihesu christ. / And
among those philosophres there was one unto whom none ne might resyste / For
he soylled lightly all the arguments Than a simple bishop was moved agay^ him
and demanded audience. And these other crystyens the which knew his
symplenes dred yt he ne should fayll unto purpose / but for his holiness they ne
durst defend hyme. The which in arguyng with that phylosophre purposed yt
Ihesu christ had taught to eschew the fallaces dyabolykes and to believe in one
god / and in Ihesu christ his sone / and in saying all the symbol said unto
the phylosphre. Tell me if thou bileue so. Than incontinent as he herd the
faith coming out of his mouth he was enlumyned and bileued and said unto
those yt which were present. When I have herd ye words of the one and of the
other I have yielded word for word But when the dyuyne virtue was approached I
ne might ferthermore answer ne more again say unto the faith cristien but I
me consent I am enlumyned of ye faith.

F. Another example how by the penance and good example of saint domynyke he
converted an heretyke. lxi.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptu arye this the which follows / the
which is written in other books and says that as saint domynyk yode to
dispute again the heretykes with many relygyous and priests. And for as much
as they ne knew the way they demand it of a man and wend that he had be a
good catholyke / but he was an heretyke. The which said with good will I shall
show you the way / and so I shall led you till unto the place. Than he them
led through a forest / and malycyously them made so much to swerue and to go
out of the way / that he them led through the thorns and breres / so yt
their fete and thyes were fulfilled with blood. And saint domynyk bare it
pacyently and said unto them. And by a great ioyousnes admonested them to
praise god and to bear all pacyently / and said unto them. Right dear friends
trust ye in god that we shall have vyctorye / our sins ben now purged by
the effusyon of our blood. And that heretic the which regarded the joyous
and meruaylous pacyence of them. And the good words of the man of god repented
him and unto them declared the venim of his fraulde / renou^ced unto ye said
heresye and revoked himself afterward and demanded life louable.

Exempla contra fidem.
A. Examples of people yt have not ben steadfast in ye faith / and first example
of charmers yt in maste time charmed their hogs. lx
MEn find by wrytinge this yt w^^che follows / how ye disciple recyteth in
his book and says yt a man devout found the devil in a forest in man's
lykenes / he asked him what he did there He answerde I keep the hogs here
that has been charmed yt the wulues and cruel beestes ne devour them. And to
the end ye men put to faith unto ye said charmours and that they abide in their
erroures. I keep them in all dylygence.

B. Another example how a devil lied unto a noble man / and put him in error
wenynge to deceive hy^ in his death. lx.
SOme masters has written this ye which follows how the disciple recites
in his pro^tuarye and says that a man noble and puyssau^t with his people
passed through a forest by night. And he herd the voice of a woman singing in
like wise as she had be nere by him / and he said unto his servants / is
there any of you that will se this woman the which syngeth. And they ne would
go. and they said unto him that they ne would go. He theder yode all alone and
found her under a tree. The which was also as a black nonne the which song
holdyng ye hands toward heaven. And the said noble asked her what she did
there. She answered. I praise here my god / he byleued yt she was one of ye
holy women. He prayed her in saying. I pray the tell me what thing is to come
unto me. She answered thou haste done many ylles and yet shall do And after that
thou haste overcome thyn enemies / thou shalt pass the sea and thou shalt go
in to the vyage of Iherusalem / And thou shalt receive the cross and so
shalt thou deye in the service of thy lord Ihesu crist. When he had herd
these words he departed with great Joy. And as it was told him he
vaynquysshed his enmyes. And in awaytynge to goo over the sea he fell in to a
grievous sickness. Than his friends and the physicyens prayed hy^ that he would
confess him and repent him of his sins and to receive the sacraments for
the peril of death. He ne would in no manner. And said that he ne should die
yet. And as the physyens meruaylled the^ of this thing they called his brother
carnal the which was a great clerk / and told him ye peril of death and
that he should warn him of his health. When the said clerk had argued ye
seek. He answerde. Thou art also a fool as these other / for I know well that
I shall not deye now. And the clerk in weeping him demanded how he knew it.
Than he declared unto him that that the said woman had said unto him in the
wodde. And ye clerk was stryken of dolor in heart / said unto him. my dear
brother it was the devil ye which lied unto the ye which watches the and
taryeth to have the and to dysceyue ye now at thy death. Repent the think of
thy health and receive the sacraments. And without taryenge he repented him
demanded ye priest required pardon / confessed his sins / and the error
wherein he was / and establysshed his testamente / took the body of our lord /
was anointed and in good estate he deyed. And so men believe that he was
delivered from ye malice of deuylles And the said clerk brother of the deed
knew the bounte of Ihesu christ / entered in to relygyon in to the order of
prechers. And left in the world many of goods. etc.

C. Another example how a woman in error byleued in a bird the which is
called a cuckowe. lx
MEn find by writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuarye and says yt a woman was seek till unto ye death / and her daughter
said unto her. My mother send to seche the priest and confess thy sins. Unto
whom the mother said. What needs it I shall be hole to morrow. And when ye
daughter saw how she empayred she made ye neighbors to come theder / warned
her to confess. Unto whom she said. I shall not dye before.xii. years. for yt
cokow told it me. In the end she was dombe in such peril. And her daughter
made the priest to come with the body of god. And the priest demanded her if
she would any thing confess / she said alonely cokow cokowe. And so the
priest returned / and she so deyed. etc.

D. Another example how a relygyous in error byleued that he should live.
xxii year / and he ne lived but two year. lx
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye how yt a relygyous co^uers herd
sing a bird the which is called a cokowe. He nombred the times yt she sange
without ceasynge / and he found.xxii. the which he counted for as many of
years as he should live in this world. And said for certain putting to faith
yt he should live yet.xxii. years. More over he said wherefore shall I make me
leave in relygyon so long time. I shall return in to ye world xx. years. And
I shall repent me ye other two years the which ben yet to come. but our lord
Ihesus ye hates all deuyninges dysposed it otherwise / for he lived but.ii.
year / and was deceived. Saint poule says in his epystylles. It is impossible
to please god without steadfast faith. Sine fide i^ possibile e^ placere deo.
And therefore men should put to of faith in such things incredybles.

E. Another example how that there is mo of women than of men dampened.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuary that one deuyne converted unto the
faith coniured one time the devil that he should show him of the which was
more either of men or of women dampened. The devil answerde that mo of women.
And ye deuyne said. How may yt be / for there ben many vsureres / rauysshers /
players / rybauldes / blasphematoures. etc. The devil answerde. It is as I
have said. And the deuyn constrained hy^ to tell the cause. He answerde that it
was for the sorceryes / and deuynynges / and how ye lightly they falsed their
faith catholyque Eve our first mother byleued more sooner unto the devil the
which spoke by ye serpent than unto god the which defended that they ne
should eat of the tree of ^ience of good and of ill. And by yt these women the
which believe to lightly go again ye faith and commandments of god. And by
that they go unto dampnacyon.

F. Another example how some prepayred the table unto deuylles because yt they
would enryche. lx.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says that as saint germayn yode
to lodge in an ynne / he saw yt after souper men prepayred again the table and
he meruayled. And he demanded unto whom men prepayred such things. His
hostess told him yt good things sa^ there by night / to the end that they
should enryche them in temporal goods. And ye holy man waked by night. When
the deuylles were come in manes lykenes / and that they were set at ye table /
ye holy man suffered not that they yode cut of the house and yode to wake them
of the house and demanded them if they knew those persons there. They
answered that ye. And that they ben such and such. Than the holy man sent
them unto the houses of their neighbors for to seyf they were there and they
found them in their houses. When they had reported it unto the holy man / he
constrained the deuylles to tell what they were. And they confessed that they
were deuylles and that they deceived in such wise the men. etc.

G. Another example of a king ye which sent to seche counsayll of beelzebub /
and his messengers were burnt of the fire celestyall. And he deyed
myscheuously. lx.
IT is written in the first chapter of the.iiii. book of kings how the king
Ozochias was seek in bed. The which sent for messengers for to take
cou^sayll of belzabub god of Acharon. That is to understand if he should live
or dye of the sekenes. And the angel of god came unto the prophet Helye /
unto whom he said. Arise and goo thou before the messengers of ye king of
Samarye and thou shall say unto him. Is it not the god of Israel yt is to
understand unto whom ye should go to take counsayll / and not unto beelzebub
god of acharon. For this thing our lord has said from thens that thou art
mounted you shall not dyscende / but you shalt deye The said prophet made his
message: and the said messengers returned to tell it unto the king. And ye
said king said. why are ye come again. And they told how a man herye cladde
unto the raynes with a skin is comen again us. etc. ye which said it is
Helye. Than ye said king sent unto the said prophet a Capytayne and fyfty men
under him / ye which capitayn came unto him and said. Gods man ye king has
commanded that you dyscende. Homo dei. Rex precepit vt disce^das. And Helye
answerde. If I be gods man dyscende the fire from heaven and the devour and thy
fyfty men. And incontinent the fire dyscended from heaven and him devoured with
his.l. men And again the said king sent another capytayne with fifty men ye
which were burnt as the other in the same manner / and yet again the said
king sent another capytayne and fyftye men under him / ye which came before
ye said helye / yode on knees and prayed humbly / not as the two other ye spoke
proudely / and said. Man of god ne dyspreyse thou my soul / ye fire is
dyscended from heaven yt has devoured those yt have been sent toward ye before
me / and I pray the have mercy on my soul / and the angel of god spoke unto
the said prophet and said. Dyscende with him and dread thou not. Than he came
unto the said king with him / unto whom he said. For yt that thou have sent
messengers to take thy cou^sayll with beelzebub god of Acharon / as and if there
ne had be of god in Israhell of whom thou may axe a word. And therefore
from the bed wherein thou art mounted thou shall not dyscende but thou shall
deye of death. Than he deyed alter ye word of ye prophet. This example
denotes manyfestly how a man should evermore seche counsayll after god and
good maneres And so men should take heed to believe ylle counsayll in like wise
as says the saige Vnde ecclesiastici.xxxvii. A co^si^io malo serua ai^am
tua^. And by that yt these two first capytaynes the which spoke proudely in
saying / the king has commanded yt thou dyscende / is here to be noted yt
god punyssheth boweth down and dystroyeth the proud men. And exalts and
preserves the humbles as he bide the third capytayne the which humbled him
on knees and spoke humbly. etc.

H. Another example of a man the which gave himself unto the devil because
that he should enryche him. lx
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye and says yt a rich man came unto
pouerte and afterward submytted him of his good will unto the devil to the end
that he should enriche him. And the devil took him and baptized him in
saying. I baptyse the in the name of Lucyfer and of all the deuylles that thou
be ours in body and soul. Afterward the devil took him many rychesses and
said unto hy^ For as much as thou art ours you sholdest bear our token the
which is pride in clothyng and in all thy members. After that he had be in
such estate by some years it befell that he entered in to the church and herd
a predycacyon of the mercy of god / And afterward abode in the church
contryte and sorrowful of his sins. He fell prostrate unto the earth and
prayed god lyenge that he unto him would yield his grace / and that he would
correct all that that he had done. When our lord had seen his humylyte / his
teres / and his will that he would correct and amend his life / proffered from
ye altar and said. Arise thou up thy sins be pardoned the. Go and sin thou
no more. The which arose and with the great contrycyon that he had he was
changed that is as an ancient man so yt right few of his household knew him
more. The which did afterward so great penance and tormented his body by
correccyon that it was known that he had the life eternal. Our lord shows
his mercy unto sinners whiles that they benlyuynge in this world and shall
show till unto the judgment / but when ye said Judgment shall be come. He
shall show and do Justice unto the good and unto the ill.

I. Another example of a woman the which renyed the faith / slew her child
and betoke herself unto the devil / and after had mercy. lx.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promuarye how a woman had a husband the which
unto her was much contrary. For when he came fro the mass / From the market
/ from the tavern / he bet her evermore. And she took cou^sayl of an old
woman what she should do to the end yt her husband should love her. She
promised her to find the mean / and led her in to a garnyer When she was
there ye old woman called the devil the which was present incontinent. Unto
whom ye old woman said. This woman would serve you so yt ye make yt her
husband love her. He said yt he should do it with good will so yt first she
must slay her child yt she had. When she had slain it she returned unto him.
Ye shall do yet a thing / ye which is that ye shall renye the faith and ye
aid of god and of all the saints. And she said that she consented / and that
she committed her unto him both body and soul. And the devil said unto her.
Go ye now al assured unto your house / than she theder yo de Joyous. And her
husband came to beat her yt came from the tavern. And as he had be before
ylle and cursed / he was now more cursed. When she se that she was co^fused /
she took her to flee. And as she fled the devil ran after her in semblaunce
of her husband and in semblable habyte / and on horsbacke / unto whom he
said. And accursed whether go thou. She answered I fle before you. Unto whom
ye devil said / return anon unto thy house. For I promise the I will beat
the no more / nor do the ill. And so she lepte behind hy^ upon the horse / and
wend it had be her husbonde. When they were before the house / the devil
vanysshed away so yt she wist not where he was become. And her husband came
for to beat her. Unto whom she said. How fled I before you this day / and
that ye have brought me again. Ye have promised to beat me no more. When he
herd that she had fled before him he began again to beat her. And so bet
her so much / yt she was as at ye death. And as she lay half deed in wou^des
said. bring me a confessor / unto whom her husband said / she will now
confound me and say yt I have slain her / and defended yt none should goo
for ye priest. She ceased not to cry bring me a confessoure. In the end one of
her servants went pryuely to fetch the priest / ye which came at night
with ye body of our lord. But her husband locked ye door against him. And as
he was before the house ye woman cried unto him sayng. My lord at ye leest
here me thorowethe wall (and thus she cried) My lord I confess yt I have
slain my child / and have committed me unto the devil in body and soul / and
renyed the faith of Ihesu christ. And in great contrycyon of her sins yielded
up her spyrite. And incontyne^t god ye which is debonayre pardoned her all her
sins / and received her to grace / and made to bear her soul in to heaven by
his au^gelles. Her husband se that and the pressed and the presence by the
permyssyon dyuyne. And therefore these sinners should have ye eye to require god
the which is fader of pity / mercy and forgyuenes. etc.

Fides.
A. Examples of the faith / and first example how a mountain was put from one
place into another for to conferme ye faith catholyque. lxi
SOme doctors has written this the which follows how the disciple recyteth
in his sermons and says how in the town of a king infydele myscreaunte ill
and peruers came.v. bysshoppes cristyens the which assembled them therefore to
make a consystorye. For one party of ye people of ye town were crystyens And
by the counsayll of an infydele ye said king made to come before him the said
bysshoppes unto whom he said. Nere to this cite there is a mountain ye
lets ye the sea comes not nere / the which should be a great good deed if
the said mountain were taken away. And I can not find the mean to make it
to be take away. And I have understand yt it is written in your law that if
any has faith in your god as the sede of mustarde and that he say unto a
mountain yt it remeue in to another place yt it shall be done incontinent and
for asmoche as ye be the masters of the law I command you yt ye do make to
be take away yt mountain from thens it is / between this and such a day /
or I shall make you to deye. Than the said bysshoppes were sorry in saying
among them that better it was to deye than to make ye said request unto god
for to obey unto the commandment of the said infydele / and that he ne was
dygne that men unto him should obeyene do the said pleasure. And as they
waylled in awaytynge the death and the day and the hour that they should be
trod underfoot. A good crystyen simple man and shomaker demanded ye cause of
their heuynesses. Answer was given as it is said yt / that the king unto them
had spoken. And the said shomaker said Alas and shall our pastors and
bysshoppes dye the which unto us precheth / techeth keeps and susteyneth our
law. And he yode to make request unto god / and said in this wise. My god / my
lord / and my master if it be so yt I have faith in the in like wise as a
sede of mustarde after yt / that ye scripture speaks. I require the that the
said mountain be changed in to another place / and that our bysshoppes ben
kept from death. And incontinent ye said mountain was found in another place
than it was accustomed to be. And the said bishops were kept from death. It
is that ye which is written mathei. xxi. Amen dico vobis sihabueritis fide^ et
non hesitaueritis / and simo^ti huic dixeritis toll and iactate mare cito fiet
et oi^a quecu^que petieritis in oratione credentes accipietis. etc.

B. Another example of a priest a good catholyque the which entered within the
fire for to approve the faith / and he was not burnt.
MEn find by writing in the life of faders this ye which follows how the
dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says yt there was a devout pressed
the which found a great doctoure heretyke of the manychees the which
deceived the simple people. And for asmoche as that doctoure was strong to
turn and to take in words the devout priest said in herynge of all. Light a
great fire of wodde in the mids of the place. And enter we both within the
flambe. And he ye which of us both shall not be brent. men shall believe that
he has the better faith This thing pleased unto the people. and forthwith a
great fire was made. Than the priest took the heretyke and drew hy^ with him
for to enter into the fire. And the said heretyke said. It shall not be so but
every of us syngulerly therm shall enter. Thou shalt enter in to it first
said the heretyke / for thou have first imposed it. And he blyssed him and
entered in ye name of Ihesu christ in ye mids of ye flambe / and was there
half an hour / and there yode on the one side and on the other. And the fire
never hurt him. When the good christian people saw yt / they took them to cry
in great admyracyon and said. Mirabi^is deus i^ sa^ctis suis. That is to say
yt god is meruaylous / yt is in doing meruayles in his saints. Afterward
they began to co^strayne ye heretyke yt he should enter in to the fire / and he
began to resyst and to wtdrawe himself. Than the people took him and cast him
wtin the fire. And incontinent the flambe of the fire beset him about and
burnt him. And yielded him so half brent And the people cast out of their cite
the said heretyke with confusyon / and said ye seductoure brenneth living. And
they took the priest with them in blyssynge god / led him unto the church
with honor And so the crystyens were joyful / and the heretykes confounded.
etc. This example denotes that by the bounte and great faith yt the said
priest had he was preserved and kept from brennynge. And so had honor before
god and the world for puttyng him in danger of death for to defend ye faith
/ and so should we do. etc.

Humilitas contra superbia^.
C. Examples of humylyte of a holy no^ne the which feigned to be a fool / and
was scolyon of the kechyn.
Saint Basyll tells that in a monasterye of women / there was a vyrgyn the
which for the love of god feigned to be a fool. And where the other vyrgyns
were old and well ioconde / she lived sobrely. And she served all the other /
never a no^ne of forty ne se her eat / ne never sat she at the table / nor
never took she piece ne party of bread / but gadred the gro^mes yt fell from
the table and made clean ye pottes And of yt she contented her / she never did
ne said iniurye to none / she spoke verily tell / every body she fled as a
fool. And unto a holy man the which dwelled nere unto the said monasterye came
the au^gel of god unto whom he said. Thou wenest to be great / wylt you se a
woman more holy than you. Go unto such a monastery where thou shalt find one
of them the which has a crown upon the heed the which is more holy and
better than thou / the which fights again the people nere unto her and
night and day / and her heart departs not from god. Than he came unto ye
said monasterye and desired to se all the relygyeuses the which came with
great Joy unto the holy man and set them at his fete. And for as much as he
ne saw her for whom he was come / he said bring them all unto me there
lacks one. And they said that they should make the fool of the kechyn to
come. The which ne would come / for she knew the said deed by reuelacyon. And
they said unto her. Sctu^s pirus vocat te. Than she yode theder. And when ye
said saint saw her he fell at her fete and required her benedyccyon. Than she
gave it unto him. And also she required the benedyccyon of him. And the laid
relygyeuses had shame the which said unto him. Abbot do not that thing she
is a fool. And he answered them / ye ben all foles. Please it unto god that I
were found at the day of Judgment also dygne and worthy as she is. And when
they herd these words / they yode on knees to cry her mercy. When the said
saint was parted she might no more bear the glory yt they did unto her. And
she parted and left the house / wheder she yode / and how she ended her days
it came not unto knowledge for to speak of certain. But men presuppose that she
is saved. etc. This example denotes that for to be of the nombre of those the
which ben perfytely good. It behooves to despise the praise and honor of the
world and to have humylyte and pouerte as had the said woman. Unto purpose
of this example the holy scripture puts. Si quis int vos voluerit sapie^s
esse stultus fiat vt sit sapie^s. sequit. Sapie^tia huius mu^di stultia e^ apud
deu^. That is to say if any among you has will to be wise make himself a
scole unto the wisdom of this world the which takes head unto pride /
auaryce and vanytees. And he be sayge as unto god And fulfilled of grace and of
virtues for the gospel says that he ye which humbles him and boweth down
shall be lift up and honored in glory. Vnde mathei. xxiii. Oi^s qui se
humiliat exaltabitur and qui se exaltat humiltabitur. Et legit job. xxii. Qui
eni^ humiliatus fuerit erit in gloria.

Secundu^ preceptu^.
Blasphemia.
A. Examples of those the which has blasphemed and sworn god and his
say^tes vnprouffitably. And first of the sone of a woman of Israhell ye which
was stoned by the commandment of god for his blaspheme. etc.
IT is written in the bible in the.xxiiii. cha. of ye book of nombres that one
of the sons of the women of Israhell took strife and noise with a man of
Israhell / ye which sone blasphemed the name of god and cursed him. And
afterward was led unto Moses. His mother was called salumyth ye which was
proceeded of the ligne of dan. Moises made yt blasphematour to be put in pryso^
/ till men knew what god should command / for in ye time he spoke to moses
and said. Led the blasphematoure without the castelles and put they all their
hands upon his heed ye which has hard ye blaspheme / and all the universal
people cast stones at him and slay hy^ / and so was it done. And more over god
said to moise Say unto the children of Israhel that ye man the which has
said ill of his god shall bear his sin. And he the which has blasphemed
the name of ye lord shall deye of death / the multitude of people rebuke him
and slay with stones. Vnde leuiti. xxiiii. Homo qi maledixerit deo suo:
portabit pcim^ suu^. Et quiblasphemauerit nomen dn^i morte moriat: lapidibus
oprimet eu^ oi^s multitudo populi. Sith yt it is so yt god made to stone and to
sle the blasphematoures yt reigned in this world in the time of Moses. It
follows well that he shall punysshe them terrybly after their death if they
deye impenytentes. If men dread the punycion of this world / a man should yet
more dread the punycyon eternell. The person ye which blasphemeth iniuryeth
and says ill of his god / his king his Judge and master is not wise / ne he
ne may do well. For he deserves to have punycyon and to be pryued as was he ye
which was stoned the which is an example the which should draw back all
persons from blasphemynge god. If all ye blasphematoures the which regneth in
this world were stoned / many should be deed the which ben alive / but they
should dread to be stoned and punysshed in hell.

B. Another example of a child of the aege of five years blasphematour ye
which ye deuylles slew in ye lap of his fader.
IT is written in the fourth book of the dyalogue of saint Gregorye. That in a
cite there was a man known of all / and puyssaunt the which had a sone that
he loved to much carnally / and nourysshed hy^ to much softely without
correccyon. And that sone had of custom a thing ye which is grievous to tell
and to here / the which is that he blasphemed the majesty of god when there
came unto him any thing in courage / he was of the aege of five years. And one
day as his fader held hy^ in his lap / in likewise as many unto saint
Gregorye it wytnessed ye which were present. The said child saw come to him
the ill spyrytes that been the deuylles his eyes wept / he cried unto his fader
/ Help me defend me. And in cryenge he declyned his face and hid him in the
bosom of his fader ye which was abashed to se him in such wise tremble and
cry demanding what he saw. The child said the black men of moryenne ben
come the which will bear me away. And as he blasphemed the name of the
majesty he yielded up his spyryte. Saint Gregory says upon this example that
al little children the which speak ill a man should not believe that they enter
all in ye realm of heaven. For unto some little children the said realm is
closed by their parents / if they ben ill nourysshed. Vnde gregorius Omnes
paruulos qui iam loqui possunt regna celestia ingredi credendum non est quia
nonnullis paruulis regni celestis aditus a parentibus clauditur si male
nutriantur. After the scripture every person is bound to hold and to keep
the commandments of god in that aege that he may them comprehend. Statim
enim cum quis sit capax precepti dei tenetur ad eius noticiam et obseruantia^
distinctione. xvii Some ben more aduysed and sage in the aege of five years
than the other ne ben at.x. And by that that incontynente that the person may
dyscerne that he does good or ylle. And that he has dyscrecion for to
understand the commandments of our blessed lord Ihesu christ clearly / He
should accomplysshe them for that / yt they ben of necessyte of health. etc.

C. Of a player the which blasphemed the womb of the vyrgyn Marye and ill
came unto him.
IT is written in ye book of miracles of cleruaulx of two players after yt that
the one had lost he wrathyd him and had envy upon him the which had won And
for to satysfye unto his wrath / he began to refrain and say / hold thy
peace. Thou ne sholdest say ill. And incontinent he blasphemed god. And after
swore by ye vyrgyn Marye and to swear by her womb And forthwith a voice from
heaven was herd the which said. I have sustained and forborne mine iniurye /
but the iniurye of my mother I ne may forbere in no wise / And ^orthwith this
blasphematoure was stryken upon the table inuysybly of a wound vysyble and
apperynge and in gaspynge yield up his spyryte. Caesar says yt this is true.
This example should draw back al persons from blasphemynge god and the
vyrgyn Marye. For sith that the said man was in such wise punisshed in this
world cruelly. It is to presuppose that he is dampened and punysshed horrybly.
etc. It is written ecclesiastici. xxiii. Vir multum iurans replebit iniquitate:
et no^ discedet a domo eius plaga. That is to say a man swerynge much is
fulfilled with iniquite. And the plage shall not depart from his house. etc.

D. Another example of an earl blasphematoure.
MEn find by wrytinge this ye which follows how the discyple recyteth in his
promptuarye / and says that an earl brought for the such blaspheme ayenste
god that he said ye would god or not he should have again his land / and
incontinent he fell from his horse upon ye which he was / and was tormented
horrybly. And after that the knights had lift him up again he fell / in
showing the pain of his blaspheme. and when he was brought again in to his
house he was strongly tormented in ye fete and in ye thyes / He dyspraysed
confession and in such wise deyed myscheuously four months after Also in ye
said book of the dyscyple is written of rybauldes ye which dyuyded a he^ne And
afterward by wanto^nes said / neither saint Peter ne Ihesu christ ne can make
it hole again. And forthwith they were lepres. These examples here should
draw back all persons to bring forth words blasphemynge god / for punycyon
and dampnacyon follows.

E. Another example of a burgeis of paris yt had his lips perced for
blasphemy^ge.
IT is written in the legende of saint Lowys yt one of the cytezyns of paris
blasphemed our lord Ihesu crist / but the said saint lowys king of france
made his lyppes to be perced with a hot yro^ by punycyon and for to give
example unto other. And because some pry^ces reproved him for this thing. He
answerde them I would with good will sustain in my lyppes that pain and
vnbesemynge whiles yt I shall live so yt this vice were out of my realm. and
yt no man should offend more. Unto the example of saint Lowys men should
reprehende and punysshe the blasphematours / for it is a sin the which
displeases much unto god and unto his saints. And those the which will go
into paradyse with them should correct the^ of that vice.

F. Another example of a dyse player yt was a blasphemer the which brake ye
arms of the image of the vyrgyn Marye / and he was posseded of the devil.
lxii.
IT is written in the miracles of the vyrgyn Marye yt some men played at the
dyse before the yates of the church of the vyrgyne Marye of ye monastery of
doul. And the one of them was wroth for that that he had lost / and began to
blaspheme the vyrgyn Marye / and to speak foully again her. And in the end he
turned him toward the image of the vyrgyn Marye the which was in stone upon
the yate of the said church / and in his wrath keste again that a stone and
brake the arms of the image. And incontinent the blood sprange out of it
fresshely. And the blasphematoure was posseded of the devil and was tormented
and expyred his days.

G. Another example of a dyse player blasphematoure yt the devil slew. lxii.
SOme masters has written this the which follows how the dysciple recyteth
in his promptuarye / and says that it happened in the realm of Frise in
patria la^ditie of a dyse player blasphematour / and thief the which used his
life in such things. And one time among other to abrege the matere after that
he had committee theft yode unto the tavern to play at ye cards with his
compaygnons and for asmoche as he lost he blasphemed horrybly god and the
vyrgin Marye. And incontinent the devil came unto him to whom he gave such a
stroke upon ye head that all the ioynctes from the members of his body were
dysceuered and departed and he dyed horrybly. Than his compaygnons fled the
which denounced the deed unto his fader / and that he should goo to fetch his
sone in a sack. And as ye said fader theder yode to fetch him / he yode
through the chircheyarde. And one of his neighbors deed seven year before rose
hy^ up and came to mete with him the which he knew and demanded him. Act
not thou such one deed of late / he answered yes. I am sent from god to tell
the that thou burye not thy sone in this chircheyarde with us for his soul is
damned and borne into hell for his sins. And god has suffered that the
devil has killed him. Goo in to such a place where he is / thou shalt find
him by such tokens that all his members ben departed from his body / the
which ben all stynkynge / and burye him in a place profane / and so was it
done. This example denotes three things. The first is that the said
blasphematour deyed myscheuously / and was punysshed corporally for his sins.
The second that his soul is buried in hell with ye dampened of perdycyon in
pains and torments. The third denotes yt the body of one dampened the which
is deed many festly in mortal sin should not be buried in holy ground with
the good christian men that be in paradyse.

H. Another example of a knight with one eye the which was enlumyned for that
that he smote a Jew that blasphemed the vyrgyn Mary. lxii.
MEn find by wryty^ge this yt follows / how ye dysciple recyteth in his book
of a knight with one eye the which with good will herd the mass of ye vyrgyn
Mary. And on a time as he herd salve scta^ pare^s he kneled on his knees. Wha^
(...) Jew saw him he began to mock him and blasphemed the vyrgin Mary. The
said knight ne might bear the injury yt he did unto our lady / but gave him a
buffet and entered into the church and herd mass devoutly. And ye mean time
the Jew yede to compain unto ye Judge / and he ne might tell other token of
him but yt he had but one eye When the people came forth from mass ^he said
knight abode and dredde. The vyrgyn Mary enlumyned him and commaun^ed him yt he
should go forth hardely. Wha^ ^he Jew saw him he said / if this man had ^ot
two eyes I should say yt he were culpa^le. And the knight said. It i^ I yt
smote the love of her that has restored mine eye / for whom I have prepared to
spend my body and my goods. When ye miracle was seen and known great
praysy^ges was there given unto ye vyrgyn Mary / and the knight allowed. etc.

H. Another example of two players at ye dyse unto whom there came ill for
swerynge and blasphemynge. lxii.
IT is written in ye book of honey flies that in a town of the parties of
Champayne a Jew played with a christian man. And after that the said Jew had lost
many penyes he was moeued by impacyence. In the end he recovered his loss and
wroth him against our lord Ihesus and blasphemed and cursed. And as he gadred
the dyse for to cast them his hand closed upon the dyse without being in power
to help himself. And tha^ne by cursed furour he was enbrased and enforced him
to smite the table whereon he had played with the said seek hand. Again he
blasphemed untruly Ihesu christ and his mother and forthwith he turned the eyes
overthwart and fell to the earth all deed. And the christian man yt played with
him for feere lost his wit / la^guysshed afterward and ended his days by
cruel death. etc. By this example a man may se clear that ill comes unto
players blasphemers. Also the death is evil as unto the body / it is to
presuppose that it is right cruel and terryble as unto the soul For in the
fire of hell they ben so much tormented that they have death without deyeng and
without ending and defaute without defaylynge. And evermore in dye^ge they
shall live / And never dye they may not.

K. Another example how ill came unto king Semacheryb the which sent words
blasphemynges against god unto Ezechyas. lxii.
IT is written in ye.xxxvi. chapter of the book of Ysaie how king semacherib
was meruaylously proud for his great puyssaunce of people of arms and of
rychesses / ye which took many towns and castelles / and after came to
besyege Iherusalem / and king Ezechias was within. Unto the which Ezechias he
sent that he should deliver the town and to say unto him by great pride and
elacion. What is he of all the gods of these lands here the which has power
to deliver his land and his people fro my hand / as if he would say that none
had power to resyst against him and who is so great ye shall deliver Iherusalem
fro mine hand. And when ezechyas herd his words here / he cut his clothes and
clothed him in a sack / yede unto ye house of god / and sent Elyachym and the
ancient prestes clothed with sackes unto the prophet Ysaie to tell ye proud
words full of blaspheme against god yt the king Sennacheryb sent / and that he
was besyeged. etc. And the prophet Ysaie said unto the messageres. Illud
Ysaie.xxxvii. Hec dicitis dn^o vestro / ne timeatis a facie verborum que
audistis quibus blasphema uerunt pueri regis assirioru^. Ecce ego dabo ei
spiritum et audiet nuncium and reuertetur ad terram suam et corruere eum facia^
gladio in terra sua. etc. Say to your master that he dread not the words of
the said king. For to abredge this matter it is written in the said book of
Ysaie that the aungel of god struck and slew.lxxxv. thousand me^ of arms of
the said king Sennacheryb And those of Iherusalem came in the morning and
found the said deed bodies / and the said king Sennacheryb fled in to the
cite of Nynyue. And it was done that as he prayed his god in the temple his two
sons drew their swerdes and slew him in the said temple / and so he was
punysshed of his pride. And the said Ezechyas ye which clad him with a sack /
and the which humbled him was delivered. It is that / yt the gospel of matthew
speaks.xxiii. Oi^s qui se exaltat humiliabitur / et qui se humiliat
exaltabitur.

Periurium.
A. Example how a tauerner lost the use or speaking / for swerynge and
blasphemynge. lxiii
THe dyscyple recites in his book yt it is written how in the town of Cluny
there was a tauerne^ ill and of foul life. For when the people that yede to
dry^ke in his tavern paid not his will he blamed get and the vyrgin Mary and
spoke many vylayne words. So it happened yt a man told hy^ yt he had well
paid him that yt he ought h^^ Than the said tauerner swear by ye tongue of our
lady yt he lied and that he had nothing paid him. And incontinent by the
pun^cyon dyuyne his tongue lept fro his mouth and he lost the use of speaking /
and dyed horybly for the vile words that he had said of god / and of saint
Mary.

B. Another example of some children ye which swear / and in swerynge they
were drowned. lx^^^
IT is written in a book that is called mariall how a good woman instruct her
child to salve ye vyrgyn Mary. The which as he ye de with other children to
play they swear and stryued by a water side. The water flowed up the which
drowned them al in blasphemynge / and reserved him before said that our lady
took from the water and set him on her lap / conforted him and saved. etc. By
these examples a man should understand yt swerynges ben to fle / and that it is
great sin and case too swear vaynely. And to name in such wise god and his
saints vnlefully. Legit ecclesiastice.xxiii. In rationi non assuescat os tuum
/ multus e^^casus in illa sequitur nominatio dei non sit assidua in ore tuo
neque in omnibus factoru^ admiscearis quoniam non eris immunis ab illis / quia
omne iuramentum requitet a te.

C. Another example how the heed of a swerer turned that yt was behind before
/ and the cattes cried upon his grave after his death. lxiii.
MEn find by wryty^ge this the which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in ye
book of his promptuary and says that a young man wrothed him moshe / for that
yt he had lost at the playenge at the tenes. Therefore he began to swear and to
dyspyte god and the vyrgin Mary. And incontinent his heed was turned that / yt
was behind before / and his tongue lepte out of his mouth more than half a
foot / and three days after he deyed / and was buried in an abbaye. But every
night there came so great multitude of cattes the which made there so great
tempest that ye monks ne might take no rest / and this dured long time / so
long that finally it behooves to put him out of the chyrcheyarde / and ^kest
him in a dyche.

Vota.
D. Examples how a man should accomplysshe his vows. And first example how
the children of ysraell accomplysshed their vows after that they had vyctory.
lxiii.
IT is written in the bible in the book of Iudyth yt when the children of
Israel were besyeged of holofernes / and yt they felt great necessyte they
made vows unto god for to go in to Iherusalem for to make gifts and oblacyon
if it pleased him to deliver them. And it is written in.xvi. chapter yt after
yt they had vyctory and that Holofernes was slain all they yode in to
Iherusalem to worship god and fulfill their vows.

E. Another example of a vyrgyn yt vowed chastyte and after would be wedded.
lxiii
SOme masters has written this the which follows how the dyscyple recyteth
in ye book of his promptuary / and says how a vyrgyn served faithfully in
chastyte the vyrgyn Mary / and bound herself by vow to serve her and her
sone Jesus christ in chastyte unto her death. And the devil of hell had envy of
her good operacions the which moeued the courage of a rich man in her love
for her beauty / and did so much that he demanded her in marriage / and
offered worldly glory / honor / rychesses / and every day he ceased not by
flateryes and promesses to draw her so to consent what more. The said vyrgyn
was so weary of the temptacyons of the ennemy yt she fell and consented to mary
with the said rich mortal man / and left the espouse of the king eternal
the which is Ihesu christ and the goods perpetualles for to have yt gods
transytoryes. The day of the weddynwas constytute and set. And the night
precedent ye day yt the wedding should be as she rested in the house of her
parents / she saw in her dreme as she slept yt she was rauysshed upon the
mouth of a well / from ye which proceeded so much stynke that it seemed unto
her yt the world was infect and undone. And also kest so great clouds of
smoke yt she thought yt all ye clerenes of the world was driven away / and all
boiled of serpents and worms and of souls tourmented. And as she meruayled
her of the horrible clamours of those the which were wtin ye tourmentes she
saw suddenly go forth of ye said well of these moryens of fire they ben
deuylles the which took without dyffere^ce ye souls deputed to ye tourments and
them plunged and kest wtin it. And as they drew ye said vyrgyn among ye other
for to be plonged there she looked on the one side and on the other as despayred
if there were any aid and saw a far of her ancient lady the glorious
vyrgyn Mary that turned to her ye back. And the which was for yt she might
not draw her back. In the end she converted unto her with all her heart / and
called her name and said. O lady think on thy handemayden constytute in so
great and bitter necessyte. And she approached more nere and said unto her. What
art thou. And she answered I am thyn handmayden / I have be evermore devout in
thy service and in thy memory. And she said / it is not so / thou art not mine /
for thou have dyspised me and my sone / thou art his that thou have chosen /
think on him and he will deliver yt. And she ne might bear the words and
said. O lady far of is he fro me / fro my heart / and fro my mind / deliver
thou thyn handmayde^ and defer it not. O dn^a iam absorbet me profundu^ / iam
vrget super me puteus os suum. And she excused her for to aid her and that the
enemies drew her without gyuynge unto her dylacion. The mother of pity Mary
the mother of god approached unto her / touched with her hand and took her / and
incontinent the enmyes fled far of / and durst no more look when they saw
the help of ye mother of god. Than she spoke and conforted her benygnely and
said. Here ben the fruytes of ye flesh / and the reward of volupt. Thou
know not that thou gyuest the to be cast in this deluge of tourment / fle it
now sith that thou have seen thexperyence / and draw the with all thyn heart
and with al thy might to recover grace and to serve me in time to come chastely /
and I shall help the by my prayers. Than the vyrgyn Mary departed and yielded
the soul / and so she awoke. The friends of the rich man were there the
which demanded what the man should do. And she answered / mynystres of death
depart ye far of / and in great indygnacyon she put them back. The parents
and all were troubled / unto whom and to al together she told all the thing
before said. And they left her fre when they had herd that yt she had showed /
and she returned unto her first purpose And with all her force she excercysed
her in penance and weeping for to recover grace of the glorious vyrgin Mary
and of her dear sone Ihesus. And after ended her days in good purpose. etc.

F. Another example of a man yt had made a vow the which was dampened. Also
example of rauayne and of the pains of hell. lxiii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his pro^tuary this the which follows the which is
written in other books and says that as man preched of the cross a carle
usurer bought again a vow yt he made to Iherusalem / and yode to ye
despensatour fraudelently and gave unto him for his said vow.v. li. and he
might well have given.xlviii. without to dysheryte his children. And as this said
carle sat in ye tauernes he said unto other the which had made vows. Ye
foles ye shall pass the sea in peril of your lives / and ye shall spend your
substance. I have again bought my vow for.v.li. And I shall abide sure of my
life in my house / and also I shall have as great mede as you. And on a night as
he was in his bed with his wife he herd in his myll moeuynge tempest as the
wheles gryndynge / and he said unto his sone. God se what is in the myll. The
child yode and returned anon by great dread and horror / of whom the
master demanded / what have thou seen. I have had so great fere at the myll
door yt I durst not tarry. And he said / if the devil be there yet shall I go
and se who it is. Than he kest his clothes upon his sholdres and yode unto ye
myll / he was all naked sauf only of ye said vestement. He opened the door and
looked wtin and saw to black horses / and a black man by them the which said
unto the carle. Haste the / lepe upon this horse the which is to the brought.
The earl feered / and the black man said. Why taryest thou / cast down thy
vestement and come. There was a cross on his garment. He was dyspeyred at ye
voice and calling of the devil and keste of his clothes and lept on the other
horse. and they were inco^tynent brought in diverse places of pains / in the
which ye cursed saw his fader and his mother in many other yt he had known.
And he saw a knight named He lie of the castle horste yt sat strydlynge on a
cow / and the back toward ye horns. The which cow ran on the one side
and on the other / and tourmented terrybly the said knight in smiting him with
her horns in the back. And the carle demanded hy^ wherefore he suffered such
pain. He answered. I have taken away this cow from a woman wydowe without mercy
/ and therefore she me tourme^teth sore. Afterward there was showed unto the
carle a syege of fire / and it was told unto him. Thou shall return now unto
thy house / and after three days you shalt come again in to this place here /
and thou shalt take thy reward in this syege After these words the devil
brought him again in to his mylle / and he found his wife and his meyny as
half deed / unto whom he told that yt he had seen and how it was comen unto
him. The priest was called for to confess him and to styre him to confession
and to have contrycyon. And he answered. What prouffyteth me these words here
I may not repent me / for I se that in vain I should confess me / and I know
that it is of necessyte to accomplysshe in me the thing the which is
dysposed. And the cursed man deyed in such wise without receyuy^ge the
sacraments of ye church. etc. They the which changes their vows should
take heed therein to make fraud as did ye said man and to mock other / for
punycyon and dampnacyon there follows. Also the rauysshers should well note
where punycyon and dampnacyon follows to take and to rauysshe the kyen or
other gods from their neighbors as was punysshed the said knight named
Helye. Also people obstynate ben to be blamed For if ye said carle had repented
him and confessed he had be saved / but for his obstynacyon he was dampened
eternally. etc.

G. Another example how a doctor yt had vowed and dyfferred to accomplysshe
his vow lost his sight. lxiiii.
MEn find by wrytinge this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt a doctor greatly lettred and clerk after
that he had vowed to enter in to ye order of freres in the cite of melanke /
and that he unto them had assygned the day he was withdrawn of his scolers and
went into another cite to the end yt he should teache his science / and that he
ne se the said freres. And on that day yt he brake his promise he lost his sight
and abode three days blind At the last he reknowleged his sin and recovered
his sight and entered in to the order / and therein was devout and ended his life
in good consummacyon.

H. Another example yt it is peril to dyfferre to do his vow. lxiii.
MEn find by wrytinge this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt a young man named Johan vowed that he
would enter in to the order of Cysterciences / but he was replenysshed with
slouthe and repented him. And instead of that vow he made his pilgrimage unto
saint in galyce James. And wha^ he had accomplysshed it he was received
honorably of his parents. And in his sleep he saw him ascyted before god /
with whom was saint Peter / saint Poule / saint James / saint Johan / and the
other. And it seemed hy^ that saint Peter held in his hand a fair book the
which our lord commanded to open. And he saw that the name of ye said Johan
was written in lettres of gold / and how our lord commanded that it were
scraped out. Than saint James fell prostrate before our lord and required him
that the name of his pilgrim were not put out / and out lord excused him not.
Than our lord reproched hardly unto the said John^ with great Indygnacyon that
he had contempned to accomplysshe his vow / and he commanded unto saint peter
yt he should scrape out his name. And saint James fell prostrate yet again
before god / and prayed him that the name of his pilgrim were not effaced ne
put out / in promyttynge for him that he would accomplysshe his vow wtin.xv.
days. Than the said Johan awoke fro sleep and yielded thanks unto said James /
and promised yt he should begin before the term And before the.xv. days he
entered in to ye order of cystercyences / and was so good afterward that he was
abbot and bishop of Valence where he did many miracles and fynysshed his
life. etc. This example denotes yt those the which repent them to have
vowed or that ne will accomplisshe their vows ne shall be of the nombre of ye
saved / if they in such wise deye without amendment. It is here understand
by yt that god made to efface his name out of the book of life. And that / yt
saint James prayed for him denotes that pilgrimage is agreeable / when any
does in the honor of any saint and remuneracyon there follows For the said
man was saved by the prayer and mean of saint James. etc.

I. Another example how a priest the which would not accomplisshe his vow
ended his days ill. Also of his Judgment and of his punycyon. lxiii.
IT is written in the book of Peter of Cluny yt a priest committed many sins
the which as he was warned many times of ye pryour ot bonneuall that he should
amend his life / yt he should renounce ye world / and that he should enter in
to thordre of relygyon. The which priest vowed yt he therein should enter / but
he accomplysshed not his vow / and suddenly he began to b^ seek / and sent for
the pryour. When he was come he warned him to accomplysshe his vow without more
dyfferrynge / and he began to cry suddenly. O fader pray for me. For two
beres comes to devour me. Than the said pryour with them present prayed for
him and forthwith he was delivered / and yet he accomplysshed not his promise.
And again he began to cry that men should pray for him / for the fire did
run unto him for to devour him / and he was delivered again at the prayers
and requests of the good man. And yet he contempned to accomplysshe his
promise and vow / and as despayred he was rauysshed in the Judgment of god /
and herd that sentence was given against him for his sins / and for the
brekynge of his vow. And he was inco^tynent brought again unto the place fro
whens he had been rauysshed / and told these things the which he had seen
and herd and that he had no more hope of health. And he put to and said. Here
ben to deuylles the which bears a fryenge pan for to have me fried wtin it
by perdurabylyte. And as he said the said word a drop of the fryture fell
upon his hand the which devoured him unto the bones before all yt before him
were the present / and than he said. Believe ye now that here ben the deuylles
the which casts me in to the fryenge pan. And in spekinge these words he
departed and ended his life without correccyon. etc. By this example a man
should denote that he ought too accomplysshe his vows and hy^ correcke and
amend while that he lives for to escape punycyon / and to have saluacyo^. The
said priest was warned of the holy pryour / and for that that he would not
correcke him he was dampened with the deuylles.

K. Another example of a carle the which vowed a cow and her calfe unto saint
Myghell and he accomplysshed not his vow. lxiii.
IT is written in some books. Also the dyscyple recyteth in his pro^ptuary and
says how a carle led his cow and her calfe unto the mountain of saint
Myghell fered of the peril of the sea for the wawes of the water came unto him
/ and in cryenge he said. O saint Myghell help me and deliver me / and I shall
give the my cow and the calfe. And when he was delivered he said. Saint
Myghell was a very fool to wene that I should give him my cow and my ealfe.
And again the wawes of ye water came unto him / and yet he cried and said O
good saint Myghell help me and deliver me / and I shall give the my cow and
my calfe. When he was delivered he said. O saint Myghell thou shall neither
have cow nor calfe. And as he was so as assured the wawes of the sea came
again the which englouted him / and drowned him and his cow and calfe.

L. Another example how some Jews made a folysshe vow for to slay saint
Poule. lxiii.
IT is written in the.xxiiii. chapter of the deed of the appostles that mo
tha^.xl. Jews vowed and made an oath that they should neither eete nor drink
till that they had put saint Poule to death. And they departed and went to
tell unto the prince of the priests that they had vowed by devotion not for
to ete nor drink till that they had put to death ye said saint Poule. And
that he should make the said Poule to come before him for some cause. And ye
sone of the sister of saint Poule the which herd their malycyous counceyle
went and told it unto saint Poule the which found the means for to escape
and eschew ye cursed intencyon that they had conspyred against him. And than
he was led and conduyted by night out of their bounds and frauds. etc.
Almighty god delivered his servant from the hands and touchementes of evil
people / the which had made cursed vow and oath ye which they might not
accomplysshe as reason was. etc By the examples before declared and showed it
euydently appears that all manner of persons ought for too keep them well
from swerynge / from blaspheminge / and fro brekynge the vows justly made for
the love of god for to escape dampnacyon / and also to have salvation.

Tercium preceptum.
Operatio.
A. Examples of the^ the which has broken the festes commanded. And first.
Example of a man yt moses made to be stoned for that yt he gadred wood on the
holy day. lxiiii.
IT is written in the bible in ye.xv. chapter of the book of nombres yt a man
of the children of Israel was found gadrynge wood on the day of the feast
commanded He was taken and given unto Moses and Aaron the which made him to
be put in prison for that yt they knew not what they should do. And god said
unto Moses the words the which follow. Morte moriat homo ista obrua^t eu^
lapidibus oi^s turba extra castra. That is to say / this man shall deye of
death / all the company of the people cast stones at him / and let him be
broken and slain without the castles. And thus was done ye commandment of
god. By this example a man should know ye it dyspleaseth to god to work on
the feast commanded. It was a little thing as to gadre wode / but it is a
great thing as to break the commandments of god yt says. Keep and sanctyfy
the feast without werkynge thereon. By this that god commanded that he were
stoned / slain / and punysshed is to understand that so shall be those the
which break the feestes / in likewise as god says in ye holy scryptures. Vn^
psalm. Si iusticias meas prophanaueri^t et mandata mea non custodieri^t:
visitabo in virga iniquitates illorum. et in verberibus pcta^ eoru^. That is to
say. If the sinners have taken in scorn my Justices / and if they have not
kept my commandments I shall vysyte their iniquytees in rod and betynge
their sins. And the sage says. O ye cursed men maledyccyon unto you the
which have left the law of yt right hye god. Vnde ecclesiastic. xli. Ve vobis
viri impii qui dereliquistis legem dei altissimi.

B. Another example of a woman that was dyuynely punysshed for that yt she
sercled and closed her field on the fest of saint Johan baptyst. lxiiii.
IT is written in the miracles of saint Martin yt as a woman closed her field ye
day of saint john baptist wha^ other were at mass When she began to be besye
her hands were taken incontinent with the fire dyuyne / and her vysage was
enbrased as it had cast flambe of fire / and all her body and her members were
replete with bladders brenny^ge and pryckinge / so that the cursed unhappy was
bound not alonely of dolor of body / but with yt of dolor of shame when it
was so yt she must needs declare her sins This example should withdraw all
persons fro work on the holy day / and ought for to warn too sanctyfye it.
For when a man does thereon operacyon he breketh ye commandment of god / he
synneth mortally / and he byndeth himself unto punycyon and dampnacyon / and
also it puts him from the Joys of paradyse / and from the vysyon of god.

C. Another example of a man yt wrought on the sunday. lxiiii.
IT is wryte^ in ye miracles of saint Martyn how a man made his hedge on ye
sunday / his hands harded them in the wood and he drew back strongly his
right hand / but the fyngers fastened them unto the palm / and was in great
dolor by.xl. days. And afterward by the merytes of saint Martyn he was heled.

D. Another example of a man the which carried hey on the sunday. lxiiii.
IT is written in some books / also ye dyscyple recyteth it in his promptuary
and says ye a man was led to se the pains of hell / and he saw as it had been
a carre full of hey and it was said unto him. There must needs as much hey be
brence on thy back for that / that thou have ladde hey on ye sunday And thou
know well it was defended of the priest. Afterward he was brought again
and did penance / and was confessed of his sins and was of right good life
after.

E. Another example of a man the which bare his whete on the day of the feast
commanded. lxiiii.
MEn find by writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says that a carry led his whete from the feldes in to his
graunge on the day of the feast commanded. And by the suffraunce of god ye
fire brent all the said wheet and the graunge. This said man yede against the
scripture the which defends that a man should not bear charges on the day of
the solempnyte / that is of ye feast commanded. And that a man should put no
charges without his houses. Also that a man ne do operacyon the which should
let the sanctyfycacion of the feast. Vnde hieremie decimoseptimo. Nolite
pondera portare in die sabbati et oe^ opus non facies in eo. etc.

F. Another example of going unto the plough on the day of the feast
commanded. lxiiii.
ALso the dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye how Gregory of tours tells
that as a carle would plowe / that is to ere / he took with his right hand the
hafte or the handle of an axe for to make clean ye plough / but his hand was
nailed and harded in the wood / and two years after was heled in the church of
saint Iulyen by the prayers of the said saint.

G. Another example of two women the which baked their breed in the solempnyte
of the sunday. lxiiii.
IT is written in the miracles of saint Martin of a woman of the parties of
Angyers the which would bake on the saturday after the son going down. And
as she made the breed she was smyten of evil in such manner that her body and
her members became all dry. And in especyall her right hand and her fyngers
were more dry than the other me^bres. And afterward she yode unto the
sepulcre of the holy archebysshop saint Martyn of Tours and fell prostrate in
devotion and prayer. And at the last she had health by the merytes of the said
saint Martyn. By this example a man ought to absteyne him from work on the
holy days.

Another example written in ye said miracles of a woman the which baked on ye
saterdayes at night within the fast of the sunday / and as she put the breed
within the oven her hands were grievously seek / the which claue and took in
the hafte of the pele in setting in the breed. And when the said woman felt
that pain and punycyon took her she would have casten away ye said pele
hastily / but she might not escape the pain. And her said hands were crooked /
and the nails of her fyngers fastened them in the palms of her hands in such
manner that the leches said that she might not be remedyed. Afterward she went
unto the tomb of saint Martyn by great devotion and there was heled / and
vowed unto god and unto saint Martyn that she should goo to serve one weke in
every month in the holy place where the body of the said saint Martyn rested.
And she accomplysshed the said vow one year without faylynge it. And after
that year she left one weke of a month without going thither and doloure took
her in her eyes in such manner that in less than half an hour she was blind
of both the eyes. And afterward she confessed her of her neclygence to have
left the said vow / did penance / returned unto ye tomb of saint Martyn in
orayson and for to accomplysshe her vow / and her eyes keste blood and she was
enlumyned at the end of.viii. days. These examples here denotes that a man
should abstain him from work on the festes commanded / and that a man should
do and accomplysshe his vows / or else he shall be punysshed be it either in
this world or in the other.

I. Another example of baky^ge of breed on the day of the holy feast
commanded. lxiiii.
MEn find by writing this ye which follows that the dyscyple recyteth in ye
book of his promptuary and says that a chorle baked his breed on the day of
the feast / and all the said bread was blody in token of offense made / and also
that the feast should be hallowed and kept.

K. Another example that god sends punycion upon those the which breketh his
commandments. lxiiii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons that men find by writing that it
happened in ye country of England in a year that the corns came and grew in
great haboundaunce and were much fair. And when ye time to gadre approached
there sprange up a swarm of flies in great haboundaunce the which consumed
those corns in such manner that in five thousand pace of land with great
pain might a man find one quarter of corn. The men of the country took some
of those flies and beheld them dylygently / so that they found lettres written
on their wings. And on the one wynge there was written / ira / that is to say /
ire. And on the other winge was written / dei / that is to say / god. The
which sygnyfyeth that god was wroth against them for their sins and mysse
living and that by vengeance and punycyon all mighty god sent unto them the
said vermyn or flies.

L. Another example of two cordoyners of the which the one kept the festes
commanded / and the other would work always. lxiiii.
IT is written in some books this ye follows the which the dyscyple recyteth
in the book of his sermons wherein he speaks of two cordwyners of the which
the one had great multitude of children the which kept well the festes and
yode unto mass every day and habounded in great goods. And the other ne kept
feast ne work day / and ceased not to work day and night and had no children
and was much poor. And this poor demanded of the other from whens came unto
him his goods. And he answered / come with me in the morning in to the
church and I shall show the where I take them He came and they yede by three
mornings unto the church and unto mass. And after ye rich said unto the
poor. Go do thy work. And the poor said unto him. I wened that you sholdest
have led me unto a great treasour. I have none other place where I get the
treasour of the body and the reward of the life eternal than the church. For
god has said. Illud mathei. vi. Primum querita regnum dei et her oi^a
aducie^tur vobis. Go as I do unto the church and keep the festes and obey unto
god / and he shall give the of his goods. He yode confused / corrected him /
yode unto the church / and afterward had goods.

M. Another example of a mowyer the which ceased of mowynge on a saturday at
euensonge time / and his felawes did not. lxiiii.
MEn find by wrytinge this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuarye and says how that a knight made for to fell his
medowe. When it came unto the euensonge time that the belles range in ye
chyrches for the feast one of the fellers said unto his felawes / leave we work
for they ringe to euensonge it is time to cease. And they would not for him /
but confounded by words him the which them warned / and he left work and
yode unto euensong. On the third day he yode to make an end of fellynge with
his felawes the said meadow And for as much as the other yode before and that
he must needs fell the last all the other mocked him / and he bare pacyently
their mockynges and laughynges. And at the beginning that he put the hand
unto the sithe for to fell after the other he saw before him a great pyece of
gold the which hanged at the stumpe of a felled tree / ye which tree was of
great beauty and largenes / than he bowed his knees and thanked god. When he
cried the master of the medowe and his felawes ran^e and they saw the dyuyne
miracle. The knight the which was a clerk beheld the scripture and found
that there was in writing about the said pyece of gold. The hand of god has
made me and brought me in gift unto the poor the which has not broken the
day of the feast. And the knight bought yt pyece of gold of ye said poor and
showed it unto many in recountynge the said miracle. etc.

D. Another example how the sellers and the buyers on the holy day of the
feestes commanded ben gretely for too be reprehended. lxiiii.
IT it written in the bible. Neemie vltimo capitulo. how the prophet Neemie
repreued vyllanously those the which bare in to Ihesalem of lyuynges or
vytayles and the which there sold and bought on the sabbot day / that is on
the feeste / unto whom he said. Did not our faders this that ye do / and our
lord led upon us and upon this cite all ill / and ye bring again his ire
upon Israel in vylynge this feast. For to cease such marchaundyses and
operacyons the said Neemye made to shytte the gates of Iherusalem the day of
the sabbot / and constytued his servants upon the gates that none should bear
burden on the said day in the cite. And the negociatours and merchants abode
two times before Iherusalem with their marchaundyses wenynge there to enter. But
ye said Neemye thretened to lay hand on them if they came ones again: and so
they came no more on the feast day. This here is a great example for to keep and
to sanctyfy the feestes. Another example. It is written in ye.xvi chapter of
Exodi. how the children of Israel gadred in deserte the.vi. day double manna
by the commandment of god to the end that they should rest them on ye day of
the sabbot in gyuynge example that in ye feast men should cease and do none
operacyon.

Seruicium.
A. Another example of a rich man the which rode and went to worldly
occupacyons when they range to mass. Also he despised for too here the
predycacyons or sermons. lxv
SOme masters has wryte^ this the which follows how the discyple recyteth
in his promptuary and says yt there was a rich man of such condycyon yt wha^
he should go to mass he lept on horsbacke and went to se his manoyrs / his
mylles / and his corns in his feldes. And he was warned by his wife yt was
devout that he ne should do such things / and that he should go unto the
mass on the holy sondayes and solempnytees unto the church to the end yt he
might here some good in predycacyon. He answered. I know what I should do
better tha^ thy prechers. At the last on a time as men range to mass he lepte
on horsbacke / and as he rode in a field the devil ran unto hy^ and said.
Alyght from thy horse and here my mass / and the devil led him in to a great
dyche the which was there and keste hy^ in and descended with the devil in to
hell for to here the service of hell. etc.

B. Another example of a woman ye which would have hanged herself / and as
she herd knyll unto a sakerynge she kneled on her knees and was delivered from
danger. lxv.
THere is found by writing this the which follows how ye dyscyple recyteth
in his book of sermons and says that a woman was one time so heavy and
tempested of the devil that she prepared a cord and a place to hang her
self / and as she made an end of that she had begone she hard ryngynge to a
sacrynge / than she bowed her knees and put her in orayson for she had learned
to do it in her youth / and said. My lord Ihesus sone of the living god
have mercy on me. And incontinent the beme and the cord brake / and the
deuylles fled and said. The virtue of the presence of Ihesu christ has
delivered the from the death present and eternal.

C. Another example how the devil bare a book wherein was written the sins of
men and women / and in especyall a complyn that saint Austyn had forgoten. lxv.
IT is written in ye legende of saint Austyn that as the said saint Austyn
studied he saw the devil go before him berynge a book on his sholdre. And than
he coniured hy^ that he would show that the which was written in it. And he
a^swered that they were the sins of men that he gadered in all places and put
them there. Than saint Austyn commanded him yt if he had any of his sins in
wrytinge that he should give them incontinent unto him to read. And he showed
him ye place where he was / and found nothing in wrytinge but that he had
ones forgoten to say complyn. Than he commanded ye devil that he should tarry
there and he entered in to the church and said complyn devoutly and made an
end of his oraysons accustomed. And aftercame unto the devil whom he
commanded yt he unto him should show again the chapter where ye said complyn
was written. And he turned and returned the said place / and in conclusyon he
found ye said place void where it before was written. Than the said devil was
wroth and said that he had foully mocked hy^ / and yt he repented yt he had
showed him h^s said book. etc By this example men should understand that they
the which forgeteth or leueth to say their service that ye devil does not
forgete their neclygence.

D. Another example how deuyls were seen upon a woman's train pompyously
clothed. lxv.
CEsarius dicit. It is recyted in the book of the discyple how caesar shows in
his wrytynges that as a devout priest keste holy water on the sunday upon ye
people at the church door / there aryued a matron be seen and aorned of diverse
aornementes as a pecocke. And the said priest saw great multitude of deuyls
the which were upon her train the which was long and the said deuylles were
little as dormyse black as ethyopyens / scornynge with their mouths / strykynge
with their hands / and lepynge as fysshes do enclosed in the net. When the
priest saw them he called ye people and adjured the deuylles that they should
not fle. The woman was afraid and stood still. And the good Just man obtained
in orayson that the people might se the vysyon. Than the woman understood that
she was so beset about with deuylles for ye pride of her clothy^ge and returned
in to her house and changed her clothing. This vysyon was occasyon of humylyte
as well to other women as to her.

E. Another example how saint Bryce saw the devil write in the church ye evil
words that were said. lxv.
MEn find by writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says how as saint Bryce helped saint Martyn to sing he saw
the devil yt wrote the ill words that two persons spoke in ye church. And
when al his parchemyn was written he drew it with his tethe to length it / the
which escaped him and struck his head against the wall / and the said saint
Bryce began to laugh. And when the mass was ended saint Martyn demanded him
the cause wherefore he laughed. Than he told unto him the deed. And in the end
and conclusyon the said saint Martyn knew that ye said thing was verytable.
Wherefore it follows that evil words ben to fle / in especyall in the church.

F. Another example how the devil encharged a woman for to do four things.
lxv.
MEn find written in the legende of the deed folk that a doctoure tells that
as a woman wydow despayred her lest she should be in pouerte the devil appeared
unto her and said unto her that he would make her rich if that she would do
after his will / and she accorded thereto. And he gave her in charge sour
things. The first was that she should make to do fornycacyon with people of
the church that she should receive in to her house. The second that she should
receive on the day the poor people for to lodge / and that in ye night she
should put them out without doing them any good. The third is that she
should let other of their prayers by her Jangling and talking. The fourth
was yt she should not confess her in none of ye things before said. And in
the end when her death approached her sone warned her that she should confess
her. Unto whom she discovered her deed / and said that she might not confess
her and that her confession ne should nothing prevail. And her sone began to
weep and warned her to repent and too confess her in promising her that he
would do penance for her. Than she had bitter contrycyon and purpose to
confess her and to amend / and sent for to seche ye priest by her said sone /
but or ever that the priest came ye deuyls came unto her / and for the great
horror of them she deyed. Than the sone confessed the sin of his mother unto
the priest / and did.vii. year penance. And when it was accomplysshed his
said mother appeared unto him and thanked hy^ of her delyueraunce and salvation /
and that by him she was saved. This example denotes pryncypally three things.
The first is that the devil counceyleth us to do ill / and to leave the good to
bring us to dampnacyon. The second that a man should correcke and amend him
by contrycycyon and confession how great so ever ye sy^nes be yt a man has
committed / and he shall have grace and mercy. The third is that the penance
and good operacyons that a man does for one that is deed avails to deliver
hy^ fro the pains of purgatory. etc.

G. Another example of a monk that ye devil drew out of the church when y^
other prayed. lxv
Saint Gregory tells in the second book of his dyalogue yt an abbot named
Pompeianus might not correcke one of his monks yt in the time that the other
waked in orayson he went out of the chryche and yede unto vanytees. The which
abbot wrote the case unto saint Benet to the^de yt he should correcke hy^. Than
ye said saint Benet yode unto the monastery and saw vysybly the devil in
lykenes of a black man yt drew out the said monk by ye plytes of his
vestement. And for as much as the other relygyous saw not the said devil the
said saint Benet said unto the^ that they should goo to prayer / and that they
ne should cease to pray god till it pleased hy^ yt some of them might se him
that drew out the said monk. Than they all put the^ in prayer. And when they
had been so by.ii. days saint Mor relygious of the said monastery saw vysybly
the devil the which drew out the said monk with saint Benet. And the said
abbot Pompeianus and the other relygyous might not se the said devil. Than
saint Benet bette the said relygyous / and so he was correct / and the devil
came no more. By this example a man may understand that they the which hold
them not in orayson when they should be bound of necessyte of health / and
have not excusacion but for to go unto vanytees that it is the devil the
which them draws out to the end that they lose the fruit of prayer.

Sompnolentia.
A. Examples of slepynge in herynge the service. And first example of a monk
without devotion the which slepte in orayson. lxvi.
IT is written in the dyalogue Cesaru that there was a monk priest of ye order
of cystercyences called white monks the which lened him upon a syege or
stalle and slepte when the other relygyous were at ye psalmodye and in orayson.
The which thing so much dyspleased unto god that he would show unto him
that in such a place and such an hour he should not sleep. And it befell that
many times when the said relygyous came to pray before the crucyfyxe the image
turned the back unto him / and in denotynge for that yt thou art slouthful
and neclygente in such orayson thou art not worthy to behold my face.
Himself wytnessed that he had seen the experyence of the said thing. Wherefore
men ought to be fervent in prayer.

B. Another example of a monk yt was smyten with the knot of a straw in
slepynge for yt he was without devotion and weyke in spyryte. lxvi.
LEgitur i^ dyalogo cesaru. There was an ancient relygyous the which was
accustomed to sleep in the service time. It befell yt at matynes on a night as
he did sleep at the psalmody he saw in a dreme before him a great man long /
black / and defourmed the which held in his hand a dyrty straw. The which
as he beheld ye said relygyous / and after that he had said wherefore slepest
thou so all ye night he smote him in ye vysage with the said straw. And the said
relygyous the which had so great dread as no marvel was a woke. And to
the end that he might avoid the stroke of him yt smote him he smote his heed
against the hard wall. etc.

C. Another example of a slouthful monk unto whom ye devil gave hot
brennynge pytche for to drink lxvi.
MEn find in writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says that a monk had a custom for to sleep. And it befell
that as he slepte in the quere at the lauds he saw in dremynge a devil right
terryble the which had a ladle enbrased with fire and pitche molten within it /
and came to vesyte every monk for to know if he slepte. And unto some yt
slo^bred he offered in a spone of iron of the said pytche. And when the said
devil came unto the said relygyous the which slepte / and that he unto hy^
had offered the sponefull of pytche in fyndy^ge it hot he withdrewe suddenly
his heed and smote himself sore against ye lenyng of the syeges that he found
himself sore hurt. etc. These example here denotes that god would show that
it him dyspleaseth when a man slepeth in the service of god. And those the
which slepeth ben worthy of punycyon. Tempus est orandi / te^pus est
dormiendi. etc. Oi^a tempus habe^t et in suis spacus tra^seunt vniuersa. There
is time to pray / and time to sleep. All things have their times / and al
things also passes in their spaces of times. etc.

D. Another example of a relygyous the which swette in ye morning at the
matyns. lxvi.
MEn find in writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says that ye devil made to come unto a monk a sweet
fantastycall in the morning / and counceyled him yt he should not arise. And
many times he lost matyns wenyng that he swette in the morninge by sekenes. And
for as much that one time he would have risen the voice of the devil was
herd all on hye the which said unto him. Rise thou not / break not thy sleep.
So he understood yt the devil made him in such wise sloth full / and to lose
to do ye good deed / and correcked himself. etc.

Oration.
E. Examples of prayer. And first how a man should take heed to the prayer that
he makes. lxvi.
IT is written in the life of the faders that a relygyous complained him one
time unto a good abbot that they were tourmented in their quarter for the
dryenesse for it rayned not there. And the good abbot said. Why goo ye not unto
prayer. And he said / we cease not to pray / and it rayneth not I believe yt ye
pray not ententyuely. That is to say that ye pray not devoutly entendynge unto
your prayers. Wylt you se that it is so / goo we unto prayer. He stretched his
hands unto heaven in orayson / and inco^tynent the rain descended from heaven
his boundau^tly. Than the other had great marvel / and knew yt the prayers
were not made of heart and devotion.

F. Another example of a devout relygyous the which ceased not to be in ye
orayson of the psalmodye / and good odoure issued out of his sepulcre.xiii.
year after yt he was deed. lxvi.
IT is written in the book of the dialogue of saint Gregory that there was a
relygyous named Merry much devout / the which was a gyuer of alms / wept
often / and took head so much unto the psalmodye in orayson that he ceased not
at any time but alonely when he drank and ete / or when he slepte. And this
said relygious had a vysyon in the night the which appeared unto him as a
crown of white flowers descended from heaven on his heed. And hastily sekenes
corporell took him / and with great surete and Ioyousnes of courage he deyed
and was buried. And.xiii. year after as the abbot of the monastery made to
prepayre in that place his sepulture so much of good odoures and swetenes
issued out that it seemed that the odoure of all good flowers were there
assembled / in likewise as that abbot wytnessed to have smelled. etc. This
example denotes that orayson well made much pleases unto god when the deed
body the which naturally should stynke kest good odoure. Dauyd says in the
psalter. Dirigat dn^e ad te oration mea sicut incensum inconspectu tuo. That is
to say. O you my lord dyrect mine orayson and prayer in thy sight in likewise
as ensence. When ensence is put upon the coals of fire it casts a good odoure
and smoke the which mounteth unto heaven toward god. Also orayson and prayer
well made and embrased upon the coals of devotion is a good odor the which
mounteth on high before god the which makes to have great reward in
paradyse. etc.

Gula.
A. Examples of drinking when men should serve god. And first example how a
nonne the which ete letuse before that she served god / and without making ye
sign of the cross was posseded of the devil. lxvii.
IT is written in the dyalogue of saint Gregory that a maiden entered in to a
gardyn the which be held and coueyted a letuse / she forgate to make the
benedyccyon and sign of the cross and ete glotonously ye the said letuse /
and incontinent was posseded of the devil and fell unto the earth in the said
gardyn. And as she was strongely tourmented it was showed unto a holy man named
Equycius the which came to pray for her and to socour her the which ye de
thither and entered in to the gardyn. And the devil the which was in the said
maiden began to cry by her mouth and said What have I done. I set me on a
letuse and she is come and has eten me. And ye man of god commanded him that
he should depart and that he had no more place in the servant of god / and
forthwith he departed without power to do her any more evil and grefe. etc.

B. Another example that evil came unto a conuers the which drank wine in
the cite without license / and without making the sign of the cross. lxvii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his book yt it is written in a book how a friar
conuers was right grievously tourmented of the devil in a conuet. The freres of
y^ convent arose them up for they were laid / and called their master saint
Domynycke ye which was at that time in the house / the which sent that he were
brought unto the church. And with great pain.x. freres brought him. And in
entering in to the church with a great blast he put out all the lamps in the
church that there were brennynge. And as the devil tourmented him in many
manners saint Domynycke said unto ye devil. I the conjure from Ihesu christ that
thou you tell wherefore thou tourmentest this friar here. And when and how thou
art entered in to hy^. The which answered I tormente him for he has deserved
it. He drank wine yesterday in the cite without having license / and without
making the token of the cross. And in drinking I entered in him / that is he
drank me with the wine. After these things matynes were ronge. And the devil
said. I may no more tarry here sith that these hoded folk arise to praise god.
And the devil departed fro the friar and left him as deed lyenge upon the
earth. And the freres bare him in to the fermoury. When the morning came he
arose all hole and wist not what was come^ unto him. He the which wrote this
miracle herd it told of one of those the which at that said time was
present there in the abbaye.

C. Another example of a smyth the which waked to drink and to ete when ye
other waked to serve god. lxvii.
THe venerable Bede tells in gestis angeloru^ in libro qui^to how a smyth had
of custom to drink and to ete and to be dronken when the other waked in ye
church at service. And on a time there came unto him a sodeyne sekenes in the
which he was warned to repent him / to confess and to do penance. The which
as dyspeyred began to cry that he might not repent him. For in likewise as
saint Stephen saw heaven open so he said that he saw hell apertly / and a
place of tourmente the which was made ready nygh unto the place where as were
Pylate / cayphas / Judas and ye other the which made our lord Ihesus to deye
/ and afterward told what ye Judgment of him was made / and yt he should never
have hope of health for the great contynuacyon of dronkenes that he had led
And when he had told this he deyed and was put from sepulture ecclesyastycall
and from all prayers. etc. This example here is good for those the which
leseth the masses and the seruyces of the church for to be waiting in
tauernes and potacyons by that yt the said smyth would not wake at ye
sanctyfycacyons of the feestes and in the service of the church / but despised
them. In likewise god would that he were put at his death / and fcom the
prayers of the church and from sepulture ecclesyastycall / and from all good
and honor. And by that yt he said that the Judgment of him was made and that
he saw ye tourments the which was made ready unto him should understand these
dronken and slothful people to go to sanctyfye and to honor god in
solempnytees commanded yt the Judgment partyculer shall be made of those at
their death and that they shall have there punycyon after their deseruynge.
Vnde psalm. Tu reddes vnicuique iuxta opera sua. And god suffered that he spoke
the said words to the end that his semblables thereby take example and head.

D. Another example of a man yt yede t^ play and to drink at the tavern with
his felawes when he should wake in the service of the church. lxvii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons this the which follows the which is
also written in other books and says that in ye time of a devout bishop
named Cyryllus there was a young parent of the said bishop Cyryllus named
Ruffus dwelled with him as a servant. And when the bishop sange mass the
said Ruffus yode unto tauernes to play with his felawes. So it befell that he
was seek and deyed After that he was deed the said cysshop required ye people
the which unto him were subgecte that they would make prayer for him / for he
loved him much and was well loved of the people. And one day after that the
bishop had song for his soul as he was in devotion and orayson the said
deed body appeared unto him all in fire and in great tourment. And he demanded
hy^ what he was. He answered. I am ye soul of thy cosyn for whom thou prayest
god in vain for I am dampened eternally. Than ye said bishop was ferefull and
said. Alas how have thou deserved it the which have lived truly enough / and
I wened that you had be yet in Innocence vyrginal. And he said It is so /
for I am yet vyrgyn. But I am dampened for that yt I had of custom in ye
morning while that ye did sing mass to go and vysyte the tauernes with my
felawes and to play with them at the dyse and cards / and that yt I wanne I
kept to my self without being in will to make restytucyon. And I was the
occasyon sometime yt they swear / wrothed and blasphemed god. And of this I am
not confessed. I ne have done of conscience ne of penance / howbeit that I was
warned in sermons and by good people. Alas I cared not / and therefore I am lost
eternally. This bishop Cyrillus wrote this vysyon unto holy saint Austyn This
example denotes that dampnacion comes upon those the which go to dry^ke and
to ete or to play when they should wake in the service of the church / unto
ye solempnytees and teestes commanded if ye they correcke them not and amend
by penance. Also it is to note that it is offense not being in will to restore
/ or to be the occasyon to swear and to blaspheme god and his saints. etc.

E. Another example of a man named Vodo the which yode unto the tauernes when
he should go unto ye church / what drink / what bayne / and what bed he has
now in hell. lxvii
MEn find in writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says that a man named Vodo had of custom to be dronken well
nere every day / and lived after ye voluptuosytees of the body / to drink
wynes and to ete metes gotten right applykes. And for as much as he did good
operacyons god sent first his angel / and secondly warned him yt he should
amend him / and else that he ne might in such wise be saved / thyrdly the
angel warned him and with that said. If thou amend ye not shortly thou
shalt sustain cursed death. and so the angel departed. The which man amended
him not and perceuered in his sy^nes as before. And on a day he laid him
down drunk / and he had a good servant and devout the which saw ye soul
of his master that the deuylles drew from the body in the said night / and
led it unto ye pains of hell. And the prince of the deuylles rose him up and
came before him / and made him sytte upon a seete of fire / and commanded that
deuylles should bring to hy^ to drink of molten brymstone meddled with fire. And
they gave it him to drink in saying. For as much as in the world thou have
made thy self dronken this shall be here thy drink / and parforced him to
drink. After the prince of deuylles made to apparayle him a bayne of fire in
pytche and sulphre meddled / and was put there in ye bayne And the prince of
deuylles said unto him this here shall be thy bayne for thou have offended thy
creator in baynynge the with delytes and draughtes of lechery. etc. Thyr dely
that devil made to prepayre a bed / and than he was casten in to a dyche
right deep the which was full of fire / smoke / sulphre and stynke. And the
pry^ce of the deuylles said unto him. Have thou not herd and read what is
said by the prophet Amos. Ve qui dormitis in lectis eburneis et lesciuitis in
stratis vestris. And for as much as thou shalt be such this shall be here thy
bed and thou shall rest in this dyche of fire for to lay the on. etc. By this
example that this wretched gloton would not leave his sin and believe the
admonycyons of the angel the which gave him warning to correct him all
glotons should understand and other sinners the which will not correct them
and leave their sins by the admonycyons that the holy prechours makes unto
them the which in the end of their days shall be punysshed. And by that yt
he was perforced to drink of sulfre And that he was bayned and laid in bed is
understand that the dampened shall have punycion for every sin that they have
committed in this world. Vnd psalm. Tu reddes vnicuique iuxta opera sua. And
therefore every man should do the fewest sins that he might so that he may
escape pain and punycyon. etc.

F. Another example of a boucher ye mocked the holy ashes / and drank at the
tavern when the other good folks were at mass. lxvii.
IT is written in dyaloguo Cesarii that there was in ye town of Florence a
boucher the which waked well nere all the night on the shroue tuesday to fill
his belly as many done the which is great dolor. When asshewednesday came he
and mo of his felawes entered in to the tavern for to vngrese their tethe. And
for to wasshe and put away shrouetyde. And when the mass was ronge and the
good crystiens yode unto the holy ashes they abode all alone too drink and to
ete / and the one of them said unto the boucher. We tarry here to long / go we
to ye church to take holy ashes. Unto whom ye boucher said in mocking of ye
holy ashes. Sit thou still and I shall give the ashes and thou shalt give
me. And the other took ashes in the harthe of the fire and kest up on the heed
of the said mocking boucher. And incontinent pain and punycyon followed of his
mockery / for he felt so much dust about his heed and his vysage the which
on him was blown that he was all aferde. And as he began to cry so many
ashes entered in to his mouth that he was well nere choked and his brethe
gone. Tha^ clamor was there / and many came to se the plage of his mockery. He
was led in to a place nere thereunto where as there were none ashes / but it
prouffyted him nothing by the Just Judgment of god / ne in waters / ne in
gardyns / ne among apple trees / ne in no place where so ever it were / he
might never defend him from ye ashes in hepes the which came about him. And
in conclusyon with an hepe of ashes he was choked / and so he ended his days
myserably for his mockery. etc. By this example mockers and glotons ben
rebuked. And also ben those the which gooth-vnto the tavern when men go unto
the service of ye church. If the said mocker were in such wise tourmented in
this world by punycion dyuyne / by more great reason it is to presuppose that
god punyssheth there semblables in hell if they deye impenytentes without
correccyon. etc.

G. Another example of a knight ye yode to vysyte tauernes when he should
vesyte the dedycacyons / and pardons of the church. lxvii.
MEn find by wrytinge this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt a knight would be drunk often times. And
one time he yode with the vessel whereof he drank unto the dedycations and
pardons of the chyrches / but he vesyted the tauernes and cared not of
indulgence and chyrches. And afterward as he was seek his daughter the which
was much devout prayed hy^ instauntly yt after his death he would appear unto
her and for to show her of his estate and being. The which appeared after his
death within.xxx. days and held in his hand the vessel infernal the which
was all in fire. And when his said daughter saw hy^ so enbrased she had great
feere / and demanded him what he was / and what he would with that cup. The
which answered. I am thy fader. And this cup is the tourmente wherein I
drink. Whereof speaks the psalmyst. Ignis sulphur et spiritus procellarum pars
calicis eorum And she demanded him secondly if she might help him by prayer
or good deeds And he said nay / ne all the saints of heaven for the sentence of
the gospel was given against him. Ligatis manibus and pedibus proucite eu^ in
tenebras exteriores ibi erit fletus et stridor dentium. Mathei. xxii. Than he
cried with an hye voice three times (ve) in saying. Ve in amaritudine / ve in
multitudine / ve i^ eternitate penarum. And saint Gregory says in his
moralles. Qui nunc se male in voluptatibus dilatat / illum postea in suppliciis
pena angustat. etc.

Venatio.
A. Examples of hunters. And first example how a lord the which hunted on ye
feestes had a child the which had eres like a dog. lxviii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons this the which follows ye which is
written in libro apu^ and says that a noble man was all given unto hunting in
such wise that he neither herd mass on ye saterdayes ne on the sondayes. And
his wy yt was devout reproved him often / but he took no head. And it befell
that after yt the said wife had many children she chylded an evil shapen
thing the which had the heed as a dog / and the eeres hanging. And when
she saw it she was confused and shamed before many damoysels good matrones the
which were there in presence / the which counceyled all that incontinent it
were covered with earth without being more seen / and it was done. And
forthwith the husband came from hunting ye which demanded where the child:
was and yt he would seit. And for as much as she dyfferred it for shame he
drew his sword and said that he would se it. Than the said woman made to take
out of the earth the heavy and horrible monster: the which said unto her
husband. Behold how the puyssaunt god by showing manifest has venged thyn
vnwytte for that thou have done no good deed ne honor unto the holy days and
festes / and have not given any reverence unto the holy sacraments of the
sacred body of Ihesu christ / but unto vain hunting thou have taken head on
the said holy feast days. etc. Than the said noble man correcked him worthily
and did penance much bitter.

B. Another example ye men knew not where an hunter became in huntinge of a
be. lxviii.
ALso it is written in libro apum this that follows how the dyscyple recyteth
in his sermons. And says yt rich lord parforced his me^ and subgectes to go
with him every day to hunte / the which men left to labor and to do their
seculer occupacions till yt they became poor / the^self / their wives / and
children. And it befell one day that the said lord went to ye hunting in a
wood he and his household the hounds raised ye wild be. He was on
horsbacke and followed him / and saw him evermore / but his rennynge prouffyted
him nothy^ge for he might not take him and perceuered to follow him by night
and from that day afterward never man saw him more / ne no man wist what
there was done of hy^ / and he was not found. Some say that in likewise as ye
earth opened the which swalowed Chore. Dathan / and Abyron the which
descended all quycke in to hell that so it might be happened unto the foresaid
hunter.

Chorea.
C. Example of dauncynge on the feestes And first example how the devil would
have borne away a maiden the which daunced on the sunday. lxviii.
IT is written in the miracles of ye blyssed vyrgyn Mary of a fair daughter the
which in her deeds was desolute dauncer and a synger the which would not
correct her for her mother. And her fader loved her for her beauty the which
clothed her pompeously with fair garments. And one day of the sunday after
that she was werye of dauncynge she sat her down under an apple tree for her
recreacyon. And incontinent the devil came unto her the which said unto her.
Arise thou and come with me. And she said. What art thou. He answered I am the
devil unto whom thou enforcest the to do my will / thou art our arms and
our daughter to take the souls And therefore now thou shall receive pains /
not alonely for thy sins / but for all the sins of them the which ben
drawn unto cursed concupyscence for thy clothyn-and aournementes of thy body.
And as ye devil enforced hy^ to rauysshe her vyolently she cried twyes Lady
mary help me. Her mother had taught her in her youth so to call the vyrgyn
Mary and for to salve her And she learned her to say. Auemaria gratia plena.
etc. And the devil said. Cursed be they that taught the yt orayson. If you had
not said it I had borne the now in to hell and he departed. By the example of
the maiden yt was fair / well clothed / of abyte to dance and to sing must
be understand yt she pleased unto the devil and dyspleased god. For such
vanytees draws unto sin / corrupts virtues and good manners and ledeth
unto dampnacyon. Also by that ye she called help of the vyrgyn Mary yt is ye
flower of vyrgynyte is understand yt in likewise should these vyrgyns do in
necessyte / and them conferme unto ye vyrgyn Mary to the end that they may goo
in to paradyse. etc.

D. Another example of men and women the which dau^ced a year without that any
person might socour them. lxvii.
MEn find by wrytinge this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt in the year of the incarnacyon of our
lord. M. and.xi. There happened in a cite of ye country of saxonye wherein
there was a curate of ye parisshe church of saint Mayng: the which curate was
called Tulles how in the vygyll of crystmas many of his parysshens men and
women put them to dance in the said chyrcheyarde and to sing in such manner
that they let the said curate in his office of ye church. Wherefore he sent
to them yt they should cease / but they ceased not ne would not obey for him.
Than he cursed them in requyrynge god yt they might not cease all that year.
So by miracle it became and was done that in all the hole year there fell not
one drop of ^ater upon them / nor they suffered honger ^e thyrste / nor their
clothing ne hosen we ^e broken / but by anoye and contynuacion of ^^rnynge
they were much weary within ye ^ercle. And much great nombre of folk of ^ll
estates and of diverse regyons came for to (...) the punycyon of god. When it
came to ^hende of the year the archebysshop of Co^yne named Hebart came thither
for to as^oyle them / and made them to come unto hy^ before the hye awter of
the said church in ^he which place a woman and two men among them yielded up
their spyrytes in yt hou^e. Some of the other slepte three days wt^ut waking.
Of the other the hedes and the members trembled. And so they were dy^ersly
punysshed for too be in example for ^uermore that in the church or chyrchyarde
men neither should ^ynge ne dau^ce worldely. And also of the great ill of those
that dysobey their curates.

E. Another example of the punysshynge of a woman dauncer. lxviii.
MEn find by writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says how a man named Arnoldus tells of a maiden the which
every holy day occupied herself in plays and daunces without going unto the
sermon the which was made unto the people. And in the even tide she became
weary and slepte at the door. And incontinent that her eyes were close she was
borne by vysyon of two deuylles in to hell / and was so burnt that there ne
abode here in all her body / the which was full of great bladders and kest a
stynke intolerable. And a devil put in her mouth a brenny^ge bro^de and said
unto her / take this bronde for the songs yt thou have song vnshamefully Her
clothing had no token of brennynge. the which awoke in great clamor and
wepy^ge and told unto her mother and unto many other this thing. She was borne
in to the house / the curate was called the which found in her no mortal
sin / but that wylly^gly she went unto plays and daunces. etc.

F. Another example how a mayde^ was rauysshed in the dau^ce and vyoled / and
after hanged her self. lxviii.
SOme masters has wryte^ this the which follows yt the dyscyple recyteth in
his book and says / yt as a yo^ge maiden went to a gaderynge for to dance she
met ye devil in lykenes of a man the which said to her. Whyder go thou.
And she answered and said. I god for to dance in such an assemble. And the
deceyuable devil ye which counceyleth sometime well the more gretely for too
deceive said unto her. If thou will believe me thou shall not go thither ne come
among them. She took no head and yode thither. And at the dance she was
rauysshed of harlots and corrupt at their pleasures. And after as she came
again wepy^ge and dysco^forted she met the devil / but he dyscomforted her so
yt she dyspayred and hanged her self.

Ecclesia.
A. Example how Nychanor was slain after yt he had thretened ye church. lxix.
IT is written in ye.vii. cha. of Machabeus how Nychanor had a great host and
fought with yt children of Israel / and had lost.v. M. men on a day he yode to
the mount of syon and the old prestes came before hy^ to tell him yt they made
sacryfyce for the king. And the said Nychanor mocked them and spoke unto them
proudly and swore if Judas and his host were betaken unto him and that he had
the vyctory that when he came again from battle yt he should dystroy and
brenne their houses and the church / and with great ire he departed. Than the
said prestes yode unto ye church to weep and to require ye aid of god And to
be short when the said Nychanor was at battle he fell the first and was slain
as it is written the said chapter / and also in the second book of Machabeus
in the.xv. chapter. And when the said Nychanor was deed his host fled / and
were pursued and slain yt there was not one left. After they cut of the heed
of the said Nichanor and his right hand yt he had showed proudely in
thretenynge the said prestes. And god was loved and gloryfyed the which
punisshed the proud herted and aided the meke. By this said Nychanor yt spoke
proudely unto the priests and said unto them that he would dystroye them he
was first dystroyed and punysshed. For by pride all the strength and the
goodness of man is dystroyed and lost. Quia deus superbis resistit et humilibus
dat gratiam. vt dicitur iacobi.iiii. ca. Also he moeued not the prestes to pray
with good mind for him / he being in will to dystroye them. Also they prayed
for his dystruccion and confusyon / and they were herd. Also god aydeth not
unto the proud / furyous / and vengeable / but unto the contrary he them
punyssheth and puts from paradyse.

Sepultura.
B. Examples of sepultures. And first. Example of a sinner the which the
deuylles unburied and drew out of the church. lxix.
IT is written in the.iiii. book of the dyalogue of saint Gregory that a
worshypfull bishop and right herytable told unto him yt he knew of truth
and of his people had seen the deed in a cite named valence / h^^ a man bryttle
in his life and in all light thyges occupied. When he was deed his bod^ was
buried in the church. And when it (...) me unto mydnyght great voices were
he^de / as if men had drawn out of ye church some man by vyolence. At these
voices ^^se up the gardyens of the said church / and ran and saw two
terryble spyrytes the which had unburied the said man and had bound his fete
with a string and drew hy^ out of the church incryenge horrybly. Wha^ the
said gardyens saw that they had great dread and returned in to their chamber.
And when the morrow came they opened the sepulcre of the said deed man and they
found not his body. And they yede to seek him out of the church / and found
him in a dyche and his fete bounden where the deuyls had casten him. By this
example a man should understand that holy ground saves not the sinners the
which ben the^ buried. etc. Also after the right written men put out of the
church people exco^m^nyed or acursed / the which ne ben buried till they ben
assoyled / and reabled. Also people the which ben homycides of them self ben
not buried in holy ground / for that yt it appears that they ben dampened.

C. Another example of an usurer buried in the cloister kept the monks from
slepynge. lx^^.
MEn find in writing this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says that an usurer was buried of monks in their cloister /
And in the night he yode out of the pytte in playnynge and cryenge dyscouered
the house and he stroke with his staff meruayllously and woke the monks. In
ye morning the body of the said man was found cast far of in to a field
beyond the cite. And he was again put in to the pyt And after that many times
it was in such wise done / he was coniured of an holy man that he told
wherefore he and his monks had no rest. And he said of me it is to dyspayre.
For in like wise as by my vsuryes I have tormented by night and by day the
poor people. In like wise now shall I not rest. And ye may rest if that ye
cast my body out of the cloister The which thing was done. And afterward
they ne were more of hy^ troubled. Who so well should consider these examples
beforesayd of this third commandment he shall find that a man should keep
honor and sanctyfye the feestes ye which ben of commandment of the church
without being slothful to go to here the service / and not neclygently to
put him in devotion and to do good operacyons. Item without doing worldly
operacyons the which let the sanctyfycacion of the said feestes. And without
co^myttynge sins mortalles ye which ben operacyons not of sanctifycacyons /
but of da^nacyon and perdycyon.

Quartu^ preceptu^.
Filii.
Example of those the which has not borne honor and reverence unto faders
and moders / and the which ne has socoured them in their necessytees after
the commandment of god.

A. And first examples of Absolon the sone of Dauyd the which deyed
myscheuously for that that he made war with his fader. Ca. lxx
IT is written in the xiiii. chapitre of the second book of kings yt in all
the people of Israhel there ne was so fair a man as was Absolon the sone of
king dauyd For from the sole of the foot till unto the heyght of his heed was
there not in all his body and his members any foul spotte. / And also his here
were of great weyghtynes and beauty. And he the which was noble / young /
fair / and strong was so proud and dysobeyssaunt unto his fader Dauyd and
made again hy^ so great war that he fled one time before him. Also he was
lecherous and so fulfilled of couetyse that he would be king and expel his
own fader from his realm / but he abode not unpunished as reason was. For he
deyed myscheuously. In like wise as it is written in the.xviii. chapter of the
second book of kings. It befell that Absolon ran after the servants of
Dauyd in making war again them / and was upon his mule the which yode
under an oak gretely braunched / and his here took and meddled with the
branches of ye said oak. And as he was there hanged between the sky and the
earth / the mule where upon he was rested not but yode forth still And some men
the which saw this thing yode unto ioab the which was Capytayne and led
the war for David / unto whom they said that Absolon was abyden hanged on
the branch of an oak Than the said ioab took in his hand three speres and
festened them in ye heart of absolon. And for as much as he yet removed and
panted ten stryppelynges of the army of the said Ioab went to kill out of
hand the said Absolon / and cast him in to a great dytche / and laid upon
him a great hepe of stones in sign of punycyon and maladyccyon. This is here
the example of all the evil children yt will not bear honor and reverence
unto faders and moders after the commandment of god. By this that he was
hanged by the here myraculously / is to understand that the pride that he
took in his here dyspleased unto god / and by this that his heart was perced
with three speres / is to understand yt it was reason that the proud heart and
inobedyent unto god the which ne did honor unto his fader / but made war
with him was trebly punysshed. For he was replenysshed with three vices / the
which is pride / auaryce / and lecherye. And by that that he was buried in
ground profane without prayers / without honor / ne without solempnyte
ecclesyastycall was in token of maledyccyon. For it is written deutero. xxii.
ca. Maledictus homo qui no^ honorat patrem suu^ et matrem suam: et dicet omnis
populus amen. That is to say that man be cursed the which honors not his
fader and his mother / and al ye people shall say Amen / so be it. etc.

B. Another example of a sone the which defaylled unto fader and mother / and
he bare a tode three year in his vysage. lxx
THe dyscyple recites in his sermons yt it is written in dyalogo cesarii / how
a rich man and his wife left of their goods and herytages unto a sone yt
they had to the end that he were married unto a damoysell. And then to provide
for the^ haboundau^tly whiles they lived. And after that he was married unto the
young damoysell she had the fader and the mother of the said sone in dyspleasure.
And did so much that they were departed and put in to a caban in the which
they had much of defaute. And one time ye ancient woman said unto her
husband. I saw borne from ye market of good mete in our sons house / it is a
great time sith thou etest any flesh / goo thou theder this sunday and in
deed thou shalt find there of good roste and a great dinner. Than at the hour
of dinner the said auncyente came to knock at the door / and incontinent the
ill sone made to hyde the mete roasted And when the fader was entered the evil
sone demanded him what he would / and he said that he was come to dyne with
hy^ hoping that there was some good thing. And the said sone said unto him.
Look what we have / hold here is two pens bye some thing for ye and for my
mother / and go thy way. And when he was gone the said roste was set again
upon the table and a chekyn roasted by the will of god was changed in to a
great tode ye which lept in to the vysage of the ill sone / and took him so
strongly with ye two fete before on his chekes / yt the flesh of the man and
of the tode was one flesh together / without that they might separe them. And
the behind of the said tode hanged before his mouth. The priest was called
that led him to the Archebysshop / unto whom he confessed his sin and the
case by order euenso as it was happened. Then the archebysshop gave him in
penance that he should go through all the great towns and cytees of France /
and that he should call the young children and recounte unto them the case
beforsayd / to the end that none should despise their faders and parents And
the said tode removed not from his vysage. And when ye man ete he ete. And when
men would take away the said tode with instruments he streyned so sore with
his fete yt the face became so blown that the eyes remeued from their place
and he lived so three years without that that a man could take him away. In
that time friar Johan du pont of ye order of prechers saw him at paris with
many men women and children. The said child the which ne did honor unto
his fader and mother / himself was dishonored. quia legit eccle. xxix.
Peccator transgredyens ma^data dn^i: i^cidet i^ promissione^ ne quam. This
example shows yt punycyon shall come be it in this world or in the other
upon ye children the which defaylleth unto fader and mother in their
necessytees. God ye which is all puyssaunt would that this thing were seen and
known over all the country / to the end that all the children meruaylled them.
And knew ye great offense the which is to defayl unto their parents. etc.

C. Another example of Cham the which mocked his fader noe. lxx.
IT is written in genese yt Noe had three sons / yt is to understand / sem Cham
and Iaphet. And it happened one time that after that Noe had strongly
labored at the gaderynge of wine that he was weary and slepte / the which was
uncovered byneth / and one of his sons named Cham came there / the which
mocked of the things naturell of his fader / which went to seek his two
other brethren for to se it for to mock withal. And the two other when they
saw that covered them and did chyde with Cham / to women they said that it was
not well done to mock with his fader. After this ye said Noe knew it by
reuelacyon and cursed him / not that he was cursed / but al his lynee / not
that ye souls were cursed / but they yt proceeded of him should be subgectes to
great trybulacyons / as of pouerte of gods / or fortunes temporelles. And more
than two thousand year after as our savior and redemptoure preched a wife
issued of the said lynee of Cham came to require our lord to hele her daughter
that was tormented of the devil. Dn^e misere mei filia mea male a demonio
vexatur. etc. And our lord answered to her that it was not good to give the
bread of sons unto dogs. Non est bonu^ sumere pane^ filioru^: et sumere
canibus. He called the said people dogs / because that they were evil / and
issued of the said cursed fader Cham that mocked with his fader as said is.

D. Other example of two sons yt slew their fader. lxx.
IT is written in the.xxxvii. chapitre of the book of Ysaye that the army of
king Sennacheryb was punysshed divinely for their pride and sin / yt should
be a long thing to recounte. And the aungel of god slew in one night. C.
four score and five thousand. And the king Sennacheryb fled in to the cite
of Nynyues / and it was so that as he adoured in ye temple his god / his two
propre sons drew their glayues and slew him in the said temple The which
sons wend to have succeeded and reigned in the realm after him / but the one
nor the other was not king.

E. Other example of a sone the which stroke his mother. lxx.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuary how a sone cast down and stroke his
mother with the fete. And of ye permyssyon dyuyne that foot where with he had
stryken her was cut from him. Another example of a sone the which dishonored
his mother / And in short time all his children deyed / without doubt al
children the which done ill unto the fader and unto the mother / or ye which
dyshonoureth them / or the which fayl them in their necessytees shall be
punysshed in this world or in the other. For they dysobeye unto god and ben
vnnaturelles. etc.

F. Another example how ye two sons of Helye would not be corrected for their
fader and they were slain. lxx.
IT is written in the third chapter of the first book of kings how hely was
judge of ye people of Israhell by.xl. years. And he had two sons named ophi^
and phynees the which lived delicyously and prepayred them delycatyuely ye
meats the which came unto ye temple in sacryfyces / and made of sins and
cursydnesses. Their fader hely the which herd the tidings repreued them /
but he punisshed them not. And therefore god suffered yt they deyed myscheuously
/ for the children were slain in battle. And the said hely fell from his
chair and slew himself when men brought him the tidings yt his children
were slain / and that the arc wherein were ye commandments was taken of the
phylystyens. The clerks presuppose their dampnacyon / more sooner than
otherwise / for the sins the which regne in children / and for ye fault of
their correccyon.

G. Another example of the child that the devil bare away. lxx.
IT is written in the dyalogue Cesarii how a devil bare away a child in body
and soul for the malediccion of his parents. In such manner that his
parents saw him no more afterward. And god suffered it to the end that these
other parents have dread how they curse their children / but that more sooner
they correct them with a rod. etc.

A. Another example how a good and true child loved his fader and might not
endure yt a man did unto him any ill.
MEn find by writing how ye dyscyple recyteth in his promptuary and says
how a man had three sons with his wife after the opinion. And it befell yt they
wrathed them one time together / and that the said wife said unto him. Thou
wenest to have three children of me / but ye ne haste but one. And he demanded
her which it was. And she ne would tell him After that that ye said woman was
deed as the fader lay in his death bed / by his testament he left all that
he had unto hy^ ye which was his own sone. And when he was deed they strove
who should have his goods and heritage. And the king commanded that the said
fader deed were bound unto a tree / and that the three sons should shote at
him. And that he the which should shote most str^^^htest should have the
heritage. And af^^^ yt he was bound two of the sons shot ^han the third
saw that they had shot^^ (...) such wise unto his fader he was wroche agay^
them / and said that he ne would in no manner shote unto his fader. Than men
knew truly that he was the very child the which ne would none ill do unto
his fader. And unto him it was iuged that he should have the goods and
herytages. Also al good children should love their fader deed and quycke. A
be loves naturelly her fruit and semblables. Eccle. xiii. Om^e animal
diligit simile sibi. And those ye which love not their faders and parents ben
gretely vnnaturell / worse than a dombe be / and therefore they ben worthy of
punycyon / ye which they shall have if they correct them not whiles that they
ben lyuinge in this world.

B. Another example how the nature of birds techeth us to think and remember
our parents. lxxi.
Written it is in the book of Ysydore of the nature of birds yt the nature of
cranes is such that they withdraw them from mete and endure ho^gre / to the
end yt they puruaye unto their little birds. And after that their little cranes
may fle and take proye if their parents have necessyte / afflyccyon and
lennes they have co^passyon and gadre them in to a neste / and nouryssheth them
whiles yt they have conualescence / and do good ye one unto the other. In like
wise done ye good children unto their parents. These little grypes ne done not
so unto their parents of whom ye naturyens say that after that their
parents have longely labored to nourysshe them / and to go to get them mete
in many places / and that they have kept themself from mete for to give it
unto them. After that those little grypes be great to fle and have puyssaunce.
Than they beat with their wings their parents. / Also they ne give them to
ete of their proye / but with their bylle and with their wy^ges they beat them
out of their nest. The ill children done in like wise unto their parents. etc.

C. Another example of a daughter the which nourysshed her mother the which
was enclosed in a toure / with the milk of her breasts. lxxi.
VAlerian recyteth that for the sins that a noble woman had committed she was
iuged unto the death / but the Judge ne would punysshe her openly / for the
honor of her parents. And she was enclosed in a prison to the end yt she
should deye for hongre. And her daughter the which was married vysyted her
mother every day by the leave of the Judge in such wise that she was serched
before yt she entered for to se if she bare any thing to be eten. And the said
daughter gave unto her / her pappes to souke and nourysshed her. And at the
last the Judge knew of it wherefore he was moved with pity and gave the mother
unto the daughter. etc.

D. Another example of the child yt bote of his faders nose. lxxi.
IT is written in many books this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth
in his book and says that there was a fader the which led his sone with him
in to tauernes and plays. And he learned that in such manner yt when he was
great he ne might keep him from playnge and using the tauernes / and after was
a thief. First unto his fader / and after unto his neighbors / and was so
cursed yt his fader delivered hy^ two times from hanging in gyuy^ge great
money. And thirdly for a theft was led unto ye galowes And there required
that he might kiss his fader / from whom he bote the nose with his tethe. And
as the sone was rebuked of that he answered. I have done well and justly / for
he is cause that I am hanged in asmoche as he correct me not in youth of my
fautes / for if he had correct me I had not be here. This example denotes yt
the sage says prouer. xxix. Puer qi dimittitur volu^tati ^ue: co^fudit matre^
sua^: i^mo patre^ and oe^s cognatos. etc. The child the which is suffered to
do his own will confounds his mother / also his fader and al his kynnesmen.
And therefore a man should punysshe him and correct in youth. Men plye and
bend the rod whiles yt it is young / so does men a child. And who so
taryeth till they be grown men / he ne may aid hy^. If the said fader had
correct his child he had not byte of his nose nor be hanged / he yt well
loves well chastises.

E. Another example of him whose berde grew after he was hanged. lxxi.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his book and says yt there was a cursed child
inobedyent unto fader and mother ye which slew his fellow / and for his
demerytes was hanged in his young aege. And with in three days after yt he was
hanged a great gray berde grew upon him so much that it came till unto his
gyrdyll whereof the people meruayled. And afterward it was reveled unto a holy
man all the deed of it the which said that he should have lived in as great aege
as ye said berde showed if he had be obedyent unto fader and mother. And all
such children abrydge their lives / and ben in the way of dampnacyon if they
have not great and bitter repentance. etc. Et legitur in psalmi. Subito
defecerunt propter iniquitatem ^uam.

F. Another example of a man the which was fell and hard unto his fader and
his young sone repreued him. lxxi.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuary that there was a man ill and
vnnaturell unto his fader ancient / For he made him to lie in the stable with
his sheep. And gave unto him a vile vesture the remenaunte whereof men covered
the horses. The said ancient had given unto him his heritage for to lift him
up in great estate. Now it happened yt the sone of the said felon was heavy and
displeased to se his grandfader so entreated: And for this thing he came unto
his fader / and demanded him such another couerture of horse as his said
grandfader had. And his fader asked him what he would do with it. And the child
answerde. I shall keep it till yt thou be auncyente / and than I shall clothe
yt with it in like wise as you do thy fader my grandfader the which begat
ye nourysshed the / and left unto the his heritage. etc. Legitur mathei. xv.
et marci. vii.

Honora patre^ tuu^ and matre^ tua^: and qui maledixerit patri vel matri morte
moriatur The holy scripture proceeds of ye mouth of god commands yt men
honor their fader and their mother. And he says unto the children yt do the
contrary. That is they the which curse their faders or moders / or the which
them dyshonoure or defayle in necessyte that they deye of death And it is to
understand not of death corporell alonely / but of dampnacion and death
eternell the which is death without dyenge if they deye without correccyon
and amendment.

G. Another example how a fader and his sone cursed each other in hell. Also of
a good sone yt blyssed his fader in heaven. lxxi.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says how a holy man desired to
se the pains of hell / and the glory of the blyssed the which was led in
to hell by his angel. And among many other pains he saw a fader strive
with his sone. And the fader said unto his sone. Cursed be the time that ever I
begat the. All that that I have done for yt is cursed. For for yt I was a
cursed usurer / to the end that thou had great haboundaunce of goods in the
world. and he said many other things unto his sone in cursynge him. The sone
said unto the contrary. Cursed be the hour that thou begatest me for thou ne
haste taught me the commandments of god / ne to do penance ne other good
deeds / but thou taught me pride and to make false vendycyons / and he
reproched him many other things because he corrected him not of his ill deeds
Than said the holy man unto his aungel the which led him. It is a cursed
thing to here and to se these things here. Afterward the angel showed him
the glory of the blyssed. And in that he saw a fader and his sone the which
were in great Joy And the sone said unto his fader. Fader be thou blessed of
god. For thou me haste made to learn science. And thou haste led me unto the
church / and unto predycacions thou haste taught me many good things and
haste correct me of the ylles that I did. More over thou haste learned me the
commandments of god and to love and to dread god above all things. And many
other things yt the sone said unto the fader in blyssynge him. For by the said
things he had saved his soul. And the fader blyssed the sone in speaking unto
him se^blable things good and prouffytables by the which they were saved.
etc. This example denotes that god has suffered yt this thing were seen and
known to the end that the faders and moders and children in likewise take heed and do. And yt they correct and learn unto their children the good for
to come unto the glory of heaven. And if they do the contrary that they know yt
they shall have punycyon in hell. Where they shall curse other eternally. etc.

H. Another example of a woman damned which dispreysed those that repreued her
of her sins. Ca. lxxi.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuary and says that a woman much devout
and loved of god was right curyous of her mother departed. The which would
know of her moders estate for to help her if she were in purgatory / and it
required of our lord Ihesu christ. / And one time as she was at the church
with teres required god of this thing / she was put in horror and saw by her a
derke spirit. Than she made the token of the cross and demanded who it was.
And the spyryte said I am thy mother. And she her demanded how it was with her
/ and she answered it is with me right ill / thy prayers ne may serve me of
nothing / for I am dampened eternally. Than the daughter with great wayllynge
said. Alas my mother what is the cause of thy dampnacyon And she answered. For
that that I lived and have be nourysshed of things ill gotten by vsuryes and
otherwise / and I culpable took no head to restore unto other. And that the
which was ill done again god of my subgectes in my house I forced not of it /
but I am entered in the ways of ye world ill and unrightful. And also I have
dyspreysed those ye which me have repreued of my sins and ylles. And I ne me
amended ne repented in no manner. And in such wise I deyed. And when the said
mother had said these words she departed / and the said daughter prayed no more
for her Unto this purpose saint Austyn says. Si scire^ patre^ meum in
inferno: non plus orare^ pro eo quam pro dyabolo. That is to say if I knew my
fader were dampened in hell I should pray no more for him than for ye devil.
This example denotes that those the which lives of things ill gotten ben in
the way of dampnacyon / if yt they dye without restitucyon. Also a man should
not dyspreyse one yt repreueth him of his vices and sins.

I. Another example of a tauerner that the devil bare away in body and soul
for that he repreued not those the which did ylle. Ca. lxxi.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons and says that a tauerner received to
ete to drink and to lodge all sorts of people / yt is to understand good and
ill / and suffered to play / to swear / to be drunk / to blaspheme / to
committee baudrye and other sins in his tavern for temporell gain. And one
time on a sunday as he bare of wine from his seller before his yate for that
yt his house was full of other hosts / there arose up a tempeste of wind and
deuylles among it ye which took up vyolently the said tauerner on hye in the
air before all the people. And when he saw himself so lift up and of ye
deuylles borne away cried by great contricion of heart. O deus quid fatiet
ai^a mea. O my god what thing shall be done of my soul. tha^ the deuylles
suffered him to fall in to a field / and they said unto him. For asmoche as thou
haste forgoten all things transytoryes and the life of thyn own body / thy
wife thy children / and thy friends / and that thou haste prayed alonely god
for thy soul by contrycyon of heart we ne may bear the no ferther / for god
ne will suffer us to exercise in the our will. For that that thou haste called
him by contrycyon. And if ye had not done it we had borne the in to hell in
body and in soul. Than the said deuylles yode away / and he was found in the
said field / and borne in to his house. / And he lay in his bed certain
days / and after that he was in conualescence he corrected him and amended /
and put away his tavern. And more over he never suffered in his house to play
/ to blaspheme / ne to do other ylles. All tauerners and hostyllers should well
note this thing yt god ne punysshe them as he did the said ylle tauerner.

K. Another example of a man the which was so ylle instruct and correct that
he sold his soul / and the devil bare it away with the body. lxxi.
THe disciple recyteth in his sermons and says that a man said unto his
compaygnons as they drank at ye tavern if they byleued yt there was of souls
/ and that he byleued nothing / and yt he ne had none seen. And that the
prestes and prechers had found that there was of souls in hell for the gain
temporell And that he byleued nothing. And his compaygnons affermed yt after
the faith catholyke that there was of souls in hell and in heaven / and that
the soul of every person goes unto paradyse or in to hell or in to
purgatory after that it departs from the body. After he demanded if any
would bye his soul. And that he should sell it. And one of his compaygnons said
unto him. I will bye it. And it was sold for a quarte of wine the which was
incontinent drunk. And there came the devil in the form of a man the which
boughte the said soul of him the which sold it / and paid a quarte of wine.
And when ye said wine was drunk the devil said. Give me the soul yt I have
bought / for it is mine. And those the which were present said. It is a thing
just that he the which byeth possede the thing bought. And the accursed the
which had sold his soul said that he had not sold the body. And the
presence said. When yt any sells his horse he gives the coler or halter
withal. And incontinent ye seller was estrangled of the devil. And before the
presence rauisshed the said man and bare him in to hell in body and soul.

A. Another example how ye fader should love more god than his children / and
other parents and friends. lxxii
IT is written how the dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says that a man
was one time so much holde^ in the love of his parents and neighbors that
he was let to love god and to follow him. And one time he would therein find
remedy and called them unto a dinner. And in dynynge he prayed one of them the
which unto him after his advise was most faithful. If thou love me put thy
little finger in this fire for the love of me. And he dredde the pain and would
nothing do. So the faith and the love yt he feigned to have in hy^ appeared to
be vain. After he required all the other by order and said unto them as unto
the first / and they would nothing do. Than he declared his purpose unto
them all / and said unto them that only for the love of them he was tarried
for to love parfytely Ihesu christ / but for that that he found no more faith
in them he would no more tarry. And for that they ne would put in ye fire
transytorye ye most little membre that they had one seule hour for the love
of him / he said that in like wise for the love of them he ne should put all
his body and his soul in the fire perpepual of hell. Afterward he said unto
them / take heed to do for your self / and so will I for myself Then within a
while after he restored and paid all his debtes. And after gave and
dystrybuted all his goods unto the poor for the love of god. And put him to
serve our lord Ihesu faithfully and devoutly / and to love him parfytely. etc.
True it is that we should love our parents / friends and kinnesmen naturally
and wyllyngly And for as much as god commands it / Diliges proximu^ tuu^
sicut te ipsu^. math xxii. But we should love our fader celestyall more than
them and above them. Vn^ au. Dilige^dus e^ genitor sed prepone^dus e^ creator.
And if any man love his fader or his children and parents more than god and
above him he shall be sent unto dampnacyo^ And he ne may be saved without
true penance. For it is written mat. x. and luce. xiiii. Qui amat patre^ aut
matre^ plusquam me no^ est me dignus. Et qi amat filiu^ aut filia^ super me:
no^ est me dignus. We be holden unto fader and mother: but yet ben we more
holden unto god the which has fourmed our souls unto his semblau^ce / and
the which has redeemed us by his precious blood / and suffered death for us.
And more over he us puruayeth and nouryssheth by ye goods yt he makes to
grow. And also unto us prometteth paradyse. And therefore no love what so ever
it be ne should draw us back from the parfyte love of god. etc.

B. Another example of a fader yt which said unto his sone that he should
hold his fyngere in the fire till he had said Aue maria. lxxii.
IT is written in some books that ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth
in his sermons and says that a rich man posseded many goods unjustly
gotten. And after that he had herd ye word of god in predycacyon would
experymente ye fidelyte of his sone. Unto who me he said that for the love of
him he would hold his finger in ye fire so long alonely as he should say aue
maria. And the said sone began to assaye / and incontinent that he felt the
brennynge of the fire / he drew back his finger and said unto his fader. What
shall it prouffyte the that all my body shall feel hete and shall be brent And
the fader said unto the sone. What shall it prouffyte yt for the I dampne my
self and put in the fire of hell eternel / And so the said rich man restored
all tho things that he had ylle gotten and changed his life from ill unto good.

C. Another example how a man should do of good deeds while that he lives with
out trusting upon his heirs. lxxii.
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye and says that a rich man was in
the article of death / he called his three sons and said unto the most
au^cyente. My dear sone know ye that I leave unto you many possessions and
goods that I have kept for you / the which I should have given unto the
poores / and therefore parauenture I shall go in to purgatory. Tell me what
shalt thou give for my soul. And he said unto him yt he should make to sing
many masses / and also should give of alms. etc. In like wise ye second him
prometted. The fader praised these two sons here. And demanded of the youngest
what he would do for him I promise the nothing not to give one penny. Whiles
that thou lyuest dystrybute thy goods for the health of thy soul with out
co^myttynge it unto us / how shall we aid the by deed when we have thy gods
the which ne will help thy self for the love of us / and every of us shall
love better his own vtylyte than thine. And therefore think first on thyselfe
if thou will / When the said rich man herd this young child considered that
he said unto hy^ veryte and dystrybuted his rychesses unto ye poores for his
own health.

D. Another example how a man should do of good deeds in his life time without
taryenge unto his friends. lxxii
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye yt there was a rich man the which
had a sone / the which rich man when he was in his death bed made his
testament solemply / and left much goods unto the relygyous and unto ye
people / and afterward he deyed After his death the said people and the
relygyous came unto his said sone and demanded him that yt his fader had left
unto them by his testament. Than the sone answered and said. I ne shall give
unto no person that lives / and told ye reason. Ye say in approuynge the
scripture yt if any be in hell yt the suffrages and good deeds ne prouffite to
him. And if he be in heaven yt him needs nothing. I know not now if he be in
paradyse or in hell. And if he be in purgatory he is there purged unto the
last sin / for I ne shall give nothing for his soul. The goods temporelles
that I possede I ne shall shed them. Also I doubt me for his soul / but be he
tormented till that he be purged. This example techeth us to do of good deeds
whiles yt we live without taryenge or trusting unto our parents for to do it
after our death. Vn^. grego. Tutior e^ vita vt bonu^ quoth quisque post morte^
sperat agi per alios: agat du^ viuit ipse per se. Beatius quippe e^ liberu^
exire quam post vi^cula liberante^ q^re. Child unnatural sith yt it is so yt
god commands the to help thy neighbors / the poor / ye hongry / ye
thrusty / ye seek / and if you do it not thou shall yield account before god at
ye day of Judgment. By a more strong reason if thou socour not thy parents of
whom thou haste thy goods the which ben in ye prison of purgatory having
hongre and thurst / and great necessyte thou art worthy of great punycyon. etc.

E. Another example of semblable matere to do of good deeds without taryeng or
trusting unto his children. lxxii.
MEn find by writing yt there was a rich man the which had purchased lo^des
and possessions. And all the country about him was his. It happened that he
fell in a great sekenes and sent for his priest and devised that he had / and
required him to pray for him / and made to pray in every monastery. And
promised that if he might escape yt he should de go unto saint James / unto
saint gyles / unto Rochemador. And yt he should do many of good deeds for the
love of god / It happened that he escaped from ye said sekenes / and became
wors than ever he had be and more unfaithful / and did nothing of all that
he had promised unto the priest. Long time after he fell again in to a
much great sekenes / and sent for his priest as before. And promised to do
many of good deeds / and that he would pray for him. Ha said the priest the
other time thou saydest as much unto me / and nothing have you done of yt that
you promised. I have said he to much good / who shall do it for me. Then he
called his sone and his heir and told him yt he had gotten hy^ great lands
and that he must goo for him unto saint James and unto saint gyles And unto
such pylgrymages if I deye / Fair fader said the sone men say that deed men
go as swyftely as they will. Go you by saint James and unto saint gyles if ye
will / so god help me I shall not put my body in pain. If ye have well do ne
ye shall find it. The said heir yode not / and therefore a good thing it is
not to tarry ne abide unto his heirs. For ye lantern ye which is borne before
gives better light than that the which is borne behind.

F. Another example how a man should do of good deeds whiles that he lives and
that a fool taught well one sage. lxxii.
MEn tell of a great lord the which had of custom as done these great lords
when he will go through ye country to send his coke to prepayre his dinner and
his place. And the said lord had a fool yt had of custom to go after the coke
for the prouffyte that he there had. etc. It befell one time that ye said lord
was seek in his bed of the death. And ye people the which came to se him
said unto each other when they met / ye lord gothe his way. The said fool
herd these said words and said yt shall he not do / for his coke is yet here.
And for yt that ye people perseuered to say yt he gothe his way / ye said fool
entered in to the chamber of ye lord / and said to him. My lord all the people
say yt ye go your way / and because ye have not sent your coke before by
saint Peter ye shall deye of hongre. Than the lord said that the fool said
true / and that a fool has assensed well a saige. Than the lord made all the
prestes of the country to sing and to do in his life the seruyces yt men
should do after his death and to do almesdedes and so he sent the coke before
/ and made his fardell to bear with him as does a bryde the which departs
from the house of her fader. etc.

A. Another example of a fader and of his sone the which were dampened for ye
goods ill begoten and witholden. lxxiii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in the book of his sermons and says yt an usurer had
two sons of the which ye one repented him in herynge a sermon / and after
said unto his fader. My fader if we deye in such wise we shall be lost in body
and in soul. Than he said unto him. Pay unto every man that yt thou owe and
return unto god. Unto whom the fader said / and the other brother. Sholdest you
be our confessoure / goo deye where thou will. For we shall abide with our
goods. The which held his peace / left them and yielded himself hermyte /
and lived a poor life in seruy^ge god. And after that this good hermyte herd
speak that his fader and his brother were deed was moved in pity and desired to
know of their estate. And required of god if it were his pleasure that he
might se them. And one day as he was in orayson the angel of our lord came
unto hy^ and said. Thy petycyon is made / come thy way I shall show them the.
And he took him and rauysshed him / and bare him in to hell. And set him upon
a hye mountain. And the said angel said unto him / will thou se and here
thy fader and thy brother and the said hermyte answered yt ye. And he saw a
valeye replenysshed of diverse kinds of torments / and herd a miserable
voice. And he saw first his fader the which boylled in fire as pesen do the
within a great pot ye which said. Maledyccyon / maledyccyon / maledyccyo^ /
cursed be the hour that ever I was conceived. Cursed be the womb that bare me
/ When the said hermyte herd these words he trembled and said. O fader art
you here. The answer. My sone thou art blyst for thou have dredde god and haste
fled this pain right horrible and cruel / but take heed that thou serve
well god. And even in like wise as he spoke these words the sone came and
appeared as the said fader had done with great boylyons of fire: and in
swymmynge on hye and within as a piece in a pot. And the said sone took him to
curse his said fader in pains and said in this manner. Cursed be thou my fader
in pardurabylyte. For by these things yt thou haste ill gotten thou haste
dampened me and lost. And unto the contrary the fader said unto the sone.
Cursed be thou sone / for for the I have gotten such goods and them has
witholden. And so am I put from al good. And therefore I am descended in to this
pain. Unto whom the sone living said. Is there neither prayers ne suffrages
may prouffyte you nor aid. The which said that no. For in hell there is no
redempcyon. And the said angel led again the said hermyte / The which
lived afterward more faithfully and served god deuoutely and he was saved This
example denotes that those ye which takes and witholdeth ye goods of
another unjustly if they dye in such wise with out restitucion and amendment
yt they shall dyscende in to hell in pain and in great torment.

B. Another example of a fader the which put a malet in a cheste / and took ye
keys unto his children. Ca. lxxiii
MEn find by writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuarye and says yt a rich man married his children and enryched them of
his goods. And in the end became poor. And his children gave no force. And
afterward he called his children unto whom he gave the keys of a coffre
wherein he had a locket / and within it was a heavy malet / in like wise as and
if it had be money / but he retained one key to the end that they ne might go
unto the cheste. And he said unto his children. You ben mine herytours and
friends / when I shall be deed open ye the cheste / and ye shall find within
it a lettre the which deuyseth how much I have left unto every of you. For
this hope the children the one after the other inuyterent the said ancient /
they honored him and aid. After his death they found within the said loket a
malet and a lettre ye which contained. That man is worthy to be beten on ye
heed with his malet the which has so much given unto his children and
trusts the which nothing reteyneth for hy^ self.

C. Another example of two daughters the which put out their fader in his
old aege. Ca. lxxiii.
IT is written in some books this the which follows how the discyple recyteth
in his promptuarye and says that a man had two daughters unto whom he gave
all his goods and married them. and after that he was poor his daughters and
sons in law would no more reteyne him with them. And the one of the daughters
said unto her fader. Go unto my sister / and the other said in like wise. That
you shalt repast with me one day / and after go another day unto my sister.
And the ancient man was instruct of one of his nere neighbors the which was
sage / which said unto him yt he should take a fair coffre aourned and besene
withouteforth and that he should put of stones within / and he should make to
bear it unto the church on a sunday when the people ran unto the mass / yt
which thing he did. When his daughters and sons in law saw this thing
they strove togyders who should have to keep the said ancient / the which made
bargayne with one that he should have the said coffre after his death / and that
with in it for to nourysshe him. And took a lettre and kept toward himself
three keys When he was deed his sone in law opened the coffre / and when he
found nothing but stones he was confounded. etc.

D. Another example how a good mother loved naturelly her child and might not
endure that he had any yile. lxxiii.
IT is written in the third chapter of the third book of kings that two
harlottes came before king Salamon / and the one said unto him. Sir this woman
here and I dwelled together in one house / and I have chylded by her. And the
third day after she childed also. We were togider And there was but we two /
She has ouerlayne her child in ye night in slepynge and it is deed. And she
arose up softely by night in scylence / and took secretly my sone by my side
and put it between her arms. And hers ye which is deed she put it by my side.
When I rose up in the morning for to give the breast unto my sone it appyered
to be deed. And when that I had right well beholden it on the day I knew
incontinent that it was not my sone the which I had engendered. The other
woman answered that it was not so and that she had lied falsely and untruly
/ and said my child lives and thine is deed. And the two women stryued so
before the king Salamon. And then the king Salamon said unto the
assystence. This woman says my sone lives and thine is deed. And the other
answers nay / but thy sone is deed and mine lives. Bring unto me a sword
said ye king and deuyde ye the child quycke in two parties and give unto
every of them one of the said halues of the said child / And ye woman unto
whom apperteyned the quycke child said unto the king Salamon. My heart and mine
entraylles is all moved upon my child. I pray you give unto her the child
quycke and slay it not. And the other cried unto the contrary. That it ne be
unto me ne unto her but that it be divided. The king answered and said. Give
the quycke child unto this woman here the which will not yt it be slain That
she is his propre mother So the people knew that the king Salamon had given
ryghtwyse Judgment and that a good mother loves naturelly her propre child
and ne may endure that it have ylle.

E. Another example how ten children trembled and were punysshed dyuynely after
that yt their mother them had cursed for that yt they had offended her. Ca.
lxxiii
IT is written in the legende of saint steven yt a noble matrone a wedowe woman
was wroth and tormented of the multitude of ye ten children that she had
whereof there was seven males. And three females And one time they offended their
said mother ye which required of god that maledyccyon should come unto them.
And in contynent they were stryken of divine ve^geaunce. For they all by
semblable pain horrybly tremble in their bodies and by all their members / by
the which thing they were much sorrowful. And for as much as the people of
the country ne might endure them of the horror that they had to se them in
such horrybly to tremble / they departed them through out the world
vacabondes. And over all where they yode every man beheld them. And two of
them were heled a sone and a daughter by the merytes of saint steven in the
presence of saint Austin. This example shows that all children should dread
to offend their faders and moders yt maledyccyon and dampnacyon come not unto
them. Also faders and moders ne should curse their children / but should desire
that they have benedyccyon and salvation / and if they ben as forsaken they
should punysshe them and correct sagely and dyscretely.

F. Another example that it displeases unto god yt a woman aourned her
daughter and clothed pompously. lxxvi.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his book yt a fader and a mother had a daughter the
which served god deuoutely unto the example of her mother and purposed to abide
in virginite. And the fader commanded unto the mother that she should aourne her
daughter after the course of the world the which dredde her husband and
clothed her daughter pompously and seculerly and aourned her face and her
here. Than ye angel by the commandment of god appeared unto her mother and
said unto her. Wherefore haste thou more dredde thy husband than god to aourne
thy daughter / and to take her from Ihesu christ for to put her in to the
world. For this thing thou shall dye within four wekes / and thou shall be
dampened if thou repent the not with in the said time. And more over within the
said time all thy children shall deye / And this day thy hands shall begin to
dry in pain for that yt thou have aourned the here of thy daughter. Than the
said woman did true penance and all happened in like wise as the other had
said unto her. For she deyed and her children within the said term / and also
her hands dried. etc. Those and they the which ben culpable should look upon
this and take example for to correct them and amend to ye end that our
lord Ihesu christ be not wroth against them / and that they have not
punycyon. etc.

Correctio.
A. Examples of correccyon. And first example how sweet correccyon more
profyteth unto the ill than sharp. lxxiiii.
IT is written in the life of the faders and in many other books that as saint
Machayre walked one time by the country he said unto his dyscyple that he
should go acore. And as he yode he met with ye pressed of the ydoles the which
bare a great staff and the dyscyple said unto hy^ wheder go thou devil yt
thou art. And ye said priest wrathed him against him for his hard words /
and bette him so much yt he left him as for half deed. After ye said priest
yode his way. And as he yode his way he met the said Machayre which said unto
him. Thou art a save walker / thou be saved. And the priest meruaylled and
said unto him. What haste thou seen of goodness in me the wiche salutest me in
such wise. And he said I have behold that you labourest strongly in walking.
And the priest said unto him yt in his salutacyon he has had composycyon /
and he knew ye he was the servant of god and that he had met a cursed monk
yt had iniuried him and that for his iniuryes he had strongly beten him. For to
be short by ye sweet words of the said Machayre the said priest yode with him
/ converted himself / and was relygyous / and many paynyms converted them by
the example of ye said priest. And here ye said Machayre said yt a proud word
and an ill conuerteth sometime ye good unto the ill. And a humble word and good
sometime draws the ill to do good Unto this purpose it is written. prouer. xv.
quod respo^^io mol is fra^git ira^ / sermo durus excitat furore^. Et eccle. vi.
Dulce vbu^ inimicos mitigat et amore^ multiplicat.

B. Another example of ye good correccyon yt was done unto a child. lxxiiii.
THe dysciple recyteth in his promptuarye yt a fair sone noble / was given of
his parents in to a monasterye of the black order / for to be discyplyned
regulerly in good manners / the which was instruct of the pryour and correct
by words / and sometime by rod / in so good manner yt he refrayned him from
all things infancybles and vnnefull / and that he was informed in all goodness.
And the said child took the said correccyon humbly. And in like wise grew he
in good perfeccyon till unto the aege of.xx. years and so deyed / And after his
death appeared the soul of him unto the pryour so clear and fair yt the
chamber was all replenysshed with light and he said. Pryour I yield unto the
thanks of the correccyon that thou have put in me. I am not fallen by little
and by little in to sin by ye which I had be dampened / and by the I am
saved. etc.

C. Another example of the correccyon of two relygyous of the which the abbot
corrected the one and spared ye other. lxxiiii
IT is written in ye book of ye sermons of the dyscyple how there was two freres
in a monasterye / of the which the one was gracious and agreeable unto his
abbot and unto the other relygyous / and therefore he was spared and was not
punysshed of his necligences. And the other was not agreeable. And he was
punysshed incontinent that he did a fault. So they deyed both twain. And he
ye which was gracyous appeared unto his abbot after his de death and said unto
him that he was in great pains. And his said abbot demanded him. Where is the
cursed the which committed more of neclygences than you And he said. O fader he
is not cursed / for he is in the clear vysyon of god. For ye neclygences that
he committed were incontinent punisshed. And by that yt the satisfaccyon of his
sins is made / but for that yt thou sparedest me in my neclygences for my
gracyousnes I am now tormented in purgatory. And therefore my fader I require
the pray unto god for me. And yt ye reco^maunde me unto mine other brethren in
their messes to the end that ye deliver me from the great pains wherein I am.
By this example a man should understand that these sinners the which ben often
times punysshed and corrected or those the which gone often unto confession
and do penance ben more sooner saved than those ye which be not repreued /
and the which go not unto confession but one time in the year. etc.

D. Another example how a man should correct him when a man is warned.
THe discyple recites in his sermons and says that a good relygyous
conceplatyf was rauysshed in judgment ye which saw an earl accused before
god and also a great prelate again whom god was wroth. Albeit at the prayer
of some saints ye which there were present god dyfferred his sentence and
said unto yt relygyous ye he should make them to be warned to correct them by
his abbot. the which thing was done. The earl corrected him by the said
admonycyon for the dread of the said vysyon. And the said prelate contempned
the said visyon and correct him not and he deyed suddenly in his bed

E. Another example how a man should correct and draw back the sinners
swetely as saint Johan the which drew well by swetnes ye prince of ye thieves.
lxxiiii
Saint Clement tells in ye fourth book of the hystorye ecclesyastyce that
saint Johan the euangelyst converted a fair yongman the which was cruel the
which he betoke unto a bishop for to enstructe. And a little while
afterward the said man left the bishop and became prince of thieves. And one
time yt saint Johan came again demanded of the said bishop where he was yt
he had reco^maunded so curyously unto him. He answered. Fader he is deed in
spyrite and dwells in such a mountain with thieves and is their prince. Than
saint Johan was wroth and said unto him. Thou art a good keeper / thou have
suffered to lose the soul of thy brother. And anon he took a horse and yode
surely in to ye mountain. And ye young man saw him and had great shame and
lepte on horsbacke and fled hastily. And than the appostle forgate his aege
and stroke the said horse with the sporres and began strongly to cry after him
the which fled Right sweet sone wherefore fleyst you thy fader sone doubt the
not / for I shall yield ye unto Ihesu christ by reason. And certes I shall deye
with good will for the / in like wise as did Ihesu christ for us / for god has
sent me unto the. And when he herd yt he repented him and wept right
bytterly. And the appostle fell at his fete and began to kiss his hand / as
and if he had be lately purged by penance. Than the said appostle fasted for
him and prayed and gate him pardon. And after the said penitent was ordained a
bishop by ye said appostle and was a good man and a devout. etc. By that / ye
saint Johan kyssed the hand of this sinner and drew him again swetely and
called unto penance. In like wise should those do the which wyldrawe back
these persons from sin and bring them unto salvation.

Caritas.
A. Examples of charity and first example of a clustre of grapes the which
was sent unto many by charity. lxxv
IT is written in the life of faders ye a friar relygyo^us gave a grape unto
saint Machayre / and of his charity he sent it unto the most seek and weyke of
his brethern. And he took it and gave it again unto another unto whom it
seemed as him thought that it should be better employed than unto him. And he
sent it again unto another. And this said grape yode so from one to another
till yt it came again at the last unto ye said Machayre ye which had it
first given. And also they ne knew the one of the other. Than the said
Machayre thanked god of the great charity and abstinence yt he saw in his
bredern relygyous. etc. Unto the example of these good religyous here a man
should give so me noueltees to his neighbors if they ben seek and weyke for
to chere them and comfort them. etc.

B. Another example of the charity of two men the which would deye the one /
for the other. lxxv
PEter Alphons tells in his book that two merchants of diverse countrees
met and accompanied together and loved so much the one the oath that the one
took in marriage the daughter of the other. And after yt the marriage was past
and done the said merchants yode back every of them in to his country. And
it be fell that in short time he yt took ye others daughter in marriage lost
all his gods and came unto so great pouerte yt he begged / He came in to the
town where his said compaygnon dwelled. And it happened yt when he arrived yt
men sought an homycyde the which had slain a man / and on him was this crime
put. And how be it yt he was innocent he confessed it. For unto him it forced
not to dye because of his pouerte. And was Iuged and led unto ye gybet. And
when he was there for to be hanged his compaygnon beforsayd knew him and said.
It is not this here the which has done the homycyde. It is I ye which has
done the deed / and would well dye for his compaygnon so much he loved hy^
Than that last was taken and the first delivered. And the homycyde ye which
had done the deed ye which was present had remors in his conscience cried and
said. He there ne this here has not done the homicyde / it was I. Than the
two first were delivered and the last was taken and holden The Iuges were
meruayled / led unto the king the two first delivered and ye last
retained. And after yt the king had known the truth he pardoned al ye pay^
And this first the which was come unto pouerte was releuid of his compaygno^
the which gave unto him ye half of his goods by love and charity. This
example denotes that it is parfyte love and charity as to put his body ye one
for another / whereof speaks the euangelyst Johan. xv ca. Maiore^ caritate^
nemo habet: vt ai^am suam ponat quis pro amicis suis.

C. Another example how an holy man named sanctulus lyuered himself to be slay^
for the love of his compaygnon. lxxv
IT is written in the dialogue of saint gregorye yt the Lombardes took a deken
for to slay him. And a holy man named sanctulus required them gretely of his
delyueraunce / the which ne would here him / but was betaken unto him to keep
by such law that if he escaped that ye said sanctulus should be slain for
him and were so agreed. When the night came ye they slepte the said sanctulus
said unto ye said deken / rise thou and go thy way / and he said unto him. O
fader if I goo my ways they shall slay the / and he said go thy ways. We ben
all in the hands of god / they ne may nothing do unto us but yt god shall
suffer. Than he fled. And after the Lombardes said unto the said sanctulus.
Chose the of what death thou will deye / for thou shalt deye for the deken /
and he said. Sle me of what death yt god shall suffer. Than they chose a strong
man to stryke of his heed at the first stroke. The said sanctulus fell
prostrate in orayson and required god. And wha^ his orayson was made the
hangman made him to stretche the neck / and he lift up the sword in the air
for to slay him in the presence of much people. And when the said sanctulus
had stratche the neck and seen the sword / he said. O sa^cte ioha^nes suscype
illu^. And incontinent saint Johan vyolently held in the air the arm of the
said hangman and they all thanked god. Some required ye by his prayer the arm
were heled. He answered yt he ne would pray for him / but if he would swear
that he should never kyl christian man. And after yt he had sworn said. Put
down thy hand. And it was taken away and heled. Than the lombardes would give
unto him all the oxen and kyen that they had pylled / but he them refused and
required all the prisoners / and they all were given unto him. So by his
charity he delivered them all. This example should move us to love another /
and to put us in danger corporelly for to save and to deliver our neighbors
from ill and from inco^uenyence as did the said sanctulus the which
delivered the deken from death and the prisoners from captyuyte.

D. Another example how god sent a poor man.xx. s. for one penny ye he gave.
IT is written in the book of the discyple that peter damyen recou^ted ye a
poor man fasted with his wife ye which had not but one penny for to by their
diner and he gave his penny unto a poor man as he yode unto the market. And
after that as he was at his table and that the bread was put upon it there came
in a man unknown hastily the which laid.xx. s. in money upon the said table
in a clothe bound and said. This here my lord has sent you and incontinent
he departed. And men presuppose that it was an angel. This example should
move us to give alms to the poor people. For great retrybucyon follows
thereof. For one penny that the said man gave god sent him twelve score. Al so
if any will have vyctorye and to surmounte his enemies / be he a gyuer of
alms. And if he will regne and to flee in to heaven also give he unto the
poor folk. In like wise as says the scripture. Vn^ poeta. Vincit cu^cta dare:
da sivis superare. Per dare regnare poteris: celosque volare. etc.

E. Another example how the heart of a vyrgyn was cut for the great love that
she had unto god. lxxv.
THe discyple recyteth in his promp tuarie this example the which is written in
many other books and says yt a noble vyrgyn was.xiiii. year much devout
unto ye vyrgyn Marye. And by.vii. years every day she required her yt it would
please her to show unto her her child And it befell as on a crystenmas day
she entered alone in to the chapelle because of orayson the vyrgin Marye appeared
unto her holding a fair sone between her arms and said unto her. Take my
sone and play with him. And she took him with great Joy / reverence and
devotion. And ye said child demanded her / love thou me And she answered /
ye. Whether said he love thou me more than my clothes / and she said. I love
you more than my heart / And ye said child said. How love thou me more than
thy heart. The answer / I ne can tell it / but the same speak. And inco^tynent
the heart of the said vyrgyn for the great love that she had to the said sone
it brake in sondre. And so deyed the said vyrgyn. Than the child took her
soul and so great song and melodye of aungelles was there to bear the said
soul in to heaven / yt the people ran unto the chapel the whic^e were
replenysshed of meruayllous odoure. And they found the said vyrgyn deed. And
her heart cut wherein was wryt^n in lettres of god. I love ye more than myself.
For thou haste create me redeemed and endowed. etc. After the scypture and this
example we should love god more than our self. vn^. math. Diliges dn^m deu^ tuu^
ex toto cord tuo et ex tota ai^a tua.

F. Another example of the charity of him the which did wy^ne his brother the
which was fallen in to fornycacion for to make him self a sinner / and in
doing penance. lxxv.
IT is written in the life of ye faders how two bredren yode to sell in the cite
yt / that they had wrought. And when they were departed in yt cite / one of
them fell in fornycacyon. After that his brother came unto him and said. Brother
return we in to our habytable / he answered I may not return / he demanded
the cause. And he said unto him. After that thou departest fro me I was tempted
and I am fallen in to fornycacyon. And his brother said yt so was he / but
return we together do we penance with great labor. and god shall pardon us
our sy^ne. When they were returned they told it to ye auncyentes. The which
gave them in charge the manner how they should do penance. and the one of them
did penance / but for ye other brother also as he was culpable to have sy^ned.
In few days god showed unto one of the au^cyentes yt the sin of hy^ the
which had done fornycacyon unto him was pardoned by the great charity of
the other the which had not sinned / This example is greatly to be noted /
For for to socoure his brother the which was fallen in to the sin of lecherye
/ and in to the bonds of the devil. And in the way of perdycyon and
da^pnacyon eternell. He made himself a sinner and took labor and penance for
him / yt was charity and great socour did unto his neighbor. In this thing it
appears yt he loved his brother as himself / and that he socoured him in his
necessyte as he wylled yt a man should do unto him / and for the great charity
the sin was pardoned. etc.

G. Another example how one friar wtdrewe another from ill will / not by force
but by charity and pacyence. lxxv
IT is written in the life of faders yt a friar came one time unto a great
ancient and said unto him I have a brother the which goes on the one side and
on the other without holding him with me / and therefore am I tormented. And
the au^cyent said unto him. Bear it pacyently. When god shall se the labor of
thy supporting he shall call him again unto ye ne wene thou not by austeryte
yt any shall withdraw him from his entencyon / for one devil ne expels
another devil / but by benygnyte thou shall make him come again unto the. Our
lord draws unto him many in cherynge them. And he recou^ted to him of two
freres of the which the one was fallen in fornycacyon / the which would
return unto the world and the other wept and said. Brother I shall not suffer
the to return and be lost. And for yt yt he would nothing do / he went to
take cou^sayl of a great ancient which said unto him. Go you with hy^ in to ye
world / god ne shall suffer him to be lost for thy labor than he yode with
him. And when they came in to a street god ye same the charity of ye friar
which yode to save his brother took away ye co^cupyscence of ye friar sy^ner.
Than he said unto his brother yt they should return unto their hermytage. I
wend now to have sinned with the woman but I have no more of will sith yt I
have conquest in such deed. And they retour in to their hermytage in devotion
wtoute co^myttynge sin. By these examples be foresaid it appears that a man
should have love and charity with his faders and neighbors. And as a man
should honor them and socour them in their necessytees.

Qintu^ preceptu^.
Homicidiu^ i^iustu^.
A. Examples of those the which have done homicide iniustely. And first
example of Cayn the which slew abel his brother. Ca. lxxvi
IT is written in the.iiii. chapitre of gene that after that Cayn had slay^ his
brother abell by envy and cursednes god demanded / where is thy brother Abell /
he answered I can not tell / am I the keeper of my brother. And god said unto hy^
what haste thou done / the voice of the blood of thy brother cries unto me from
the earth It is yt that demands vengeance / and incontinent god cast forth
maledyrcyon. Vn^. gene. iiii. Nu^c maledictus eris superira^ cu^ operatus
fueris ea^ no^ dabit tibi fructus suos: spinas and tribulos germinabit tibiva
gus et profugus eris super terram. That is to say thou shalt be cursed above
the earth When thou it shall labor it ne shall give unto his fruytes. It
shall bring forth thorns and thystylles / you shall be wandryng and fugytyue
upon the earth. Cayn saw that his brother Abell was better than he / and more
loved of god because that he paid better his dysmes then he did. / And
therefore god multeplyed his goods and fruytes / and sent unto him
habou^dau^ce. And unto cayn and unto his gifts he regarded nothing. So Cayn
wrathed him hugely and had envy upon his brother and slew hy^. Vn^ ge. iiii.
Propter hoc deus respexit ad abel et ad munera eius: ad cayn et ad munera eius
no^ respexit: iratusque est cayn veheme^ter inuidit super fratre^ suu^ et
occidit. Envy proceeds to se and to consider that his neighbor is better
than himself in any thing be it temporell good or spyrytuell. Vn^ grego. i^
mora. Inuidere eni^ non possumus nisi eis quos nobis in aliquo meliores esse
putamus. That is to say we ne may have envy but unto those yt which we wene
to be better than we in some thing. By this example and by ye scryptures a man
should understand that those the which follows the life of Cayn have
maledyccyon. Vn^ in epi. jude. ii. ca. Ve his qui via cayn abieru^t erroris
ba^aa^ mercede effusi su^t: et contradictione chore perieru^t. For to
understand what maledyccyon is. A man should understand ye maledyccyon is
putting from benedyccyon and from all goods spyrytuel / and assocyacyon with al
ill. And when a person is cursed of god and of the church knowing that he is
pryued from benedyccyon / and from all goods spyrytuelles done in holy church
/ and is assocyate with all ill. And if he deye in such estate impenytent he
shall be put from paradyse / as says saint poule. i. co. vi. Neque maledicti
regnu^ dei possi debu^t. Also when a man obeys sooner to the devil than to
god / he is much cursed or when he leueth god for to follow the devil / or
when he loves sy^nes and leueth virtues. Vn^ psalm. Dilexit maledictione^ and
veniet ei* noluit benedictionem et elongabitur ab eo. etc. That is to say. He
has loved malediccion and it shall come unto him / And he has not wylled to
have benedyccyon / and it shall be lenthed from him.

B. Another example how the king achab and iezabell his wife made to sle
Naboth for to have his vyneyarde. lxvi.
IT is written in the.xxi. chapter of the third book of kings that the king
Achab coueyted to have and to possede ye vyneyard of a good man named Naboth.
And for as much as he ne might have it ne by sale ne by eschaunge was sorry.
And laid him down and would not eat. The said Naboth would not sell the
heritage of his predecessors. And Iesabell wife of the said Achab comforted
her husband. And to be short in the matere she sent lettres unto the
grettest of the cite. And caused to make false wytnes again the said Naboth.
And so made him to be stoned and slain. And when he was deed by the counsayll
of Iesabell Achab went to take possessyon of the said vyneyarde / and the
word of god was made in the prophet Helye in saying. Arise and dyscenbe thou
again the king Achab and thou shall say unto him. Thou have slain Naboth
and possedeth his vyneyard / god has said yt in the place where the dogs
have lycked the blood of Naboth / they shall lycke thy blood. More over god
has said that he shall send ill upon the and upon thy house: as unto
Hieroboam the which was cursed and brought unto naught. etc. Great
thretenynges ben here written. And the said prophet Helye said unto Iezabell yt
god had said yt the dogs should ete Iezabel in such a field. When ye king
Achab herd these words here / he cut his clothes and cladde his flesh with
a sack / fasted and slepte in a sack the heed bowyng down And when god had
seen his humilite said unto the prophet Helye. Haste thou not seen Achab
humble him for because of me I ne shall send him the said ill in his days /
but in ye days of his sone I shall bring in ill unto his house. And so was it
done. And it is written in the.ix. chapter of the.iiii. book of kings that
Iezabell deyed myscheuously. For ye king Cheu made her be cast forth at a
wyndowe in to the street / and the horses of his army yode over her
notwithstondynge that she was a kings daughter. And after the dogs brake her
body and she ne was buried. this example denotes many things The first is the
auaryce and couetyse to have and possede the vine of Naboth yt which is
fraccyon of ye.x. commandment of god. Non ^o^cupisces re^ proximi tui. The
second is false wytnessyng. No^ falsu^ testimontu^ dices. And also homycyde.
No^ sis occisor / ye third is great punycyons temporelles and corporelles
follow after without the punicyon eternell for the fraccyon of ye three
commandments of god. And it is here to be noted that by the penance and
humylyte of the king Achab god spared him in his life / but his sone bare the
punicyon of his said fader the which is great matere to understand and to
moralyze the which shall abide because of shortness. And the false harlot
Iezabell the which humbled her not was slain and eten of dogs the which is
a long thing to declare / in like wise as it is written in the foresaid
chapter. etc.

C. Another example how Ioab slew ye prince Abner malycyously and Amasam and
ill came unto him. lxxvii.
IT is written in the chapter of the second book of kings how Ioab the which
was capytayne and chyef of ye werre of king Dauyd slew malycyously a prince
named Abner for to venge hy^ of his brother that the said Abner had slain in
batayl. And dauyd was gretely wroth of that murdre wept upon his grave and ne
would never in ye day ne ete ne drink till that the sone was gone to rest /
and said unto his servants the which would make him to ete. Ye know not yt
a pry^ce and that right great is fallen this day in Israhell. Our lord grant
unto them the which have done ye ill after their malice. And it is written in
the second chapter of the third book of kings that in contynent that dauyd
was deed the said Ioab fled in to the tabernacle of our lord / and held him
nere the altar for to warraunt him. For the king Salamon commanded that he
were slain / for that yt he had slain two men better than himself without
the consenting of dauyd / yt is to understand Abner prince of the chyualrye
of Israhell / and Amasam prince of the army of Judas. And the said Ioab would
not come forth of the tabernacle / And there was slain by the commandment
of Salamon. Men say inco^une la^gage / he that sleethe with the sword with
the sword shall deye. etc.

D. Another example how herod Ascalonyta made to sle the innocents. lxxvii.
THe euangelyst saint mathieu makes mencyon / yt when god was borne in
bethelem ye three ky^ges came out of orient for to worship him / and demanded
king herod where yt he was borne.: When herodes herd these words he was
greatly troubled / and those of Iherusalem with him. And inquysycyon was made
where it was that Ihesus should be borne / the great clerks said that it
should be in bethleem as it was written by ye prophet mychee. vi. Et tu
bethelem terra judah nequaquam minima as i^ principibus judah: ex te eni^ exi et
dux qi regat populu^ meu^ israel. Than ye king herodes called the other kings
and asked them dylygently in what time the sterre appeared unto them. And sent
them in to bethelem to enquere dylygently where he was borne. And when they had
found hy^ yt they should come again unto hy^ in faynynge to go to worship him
/ but it was for to slay him. When ye kings had found him and worshypped him
it was said unto them in a dreme that they should not return unto herodes /
but goo in to their countrees by another way. And so was it done. Afterward
when herodes saw that ye kings returned not by hy^ and that he was mocked he
sent in to bethelem and made to sle all the children the which were in the
country of the aege of two years and under / wenynge for to slay our
redemptoure Ihesus. And the souls of ye holy innocents cried unto god
vengeance of their blood that herodes had made them to shed. And they had
dyuyne answer that they should tarry yet a little time till that the nombre of
their brethren were accomplysshed. The said herodes ne abode unpunished in
like wise as it is written in the hystorye scolastice. For he began his hell
from this world before that he deyed / he became blown so sty^kynge foul
and vyllayne yt there ne was person yt might approach unto him. and also he
had his guts eten with worms. Legitur etia^ actuu^. xii. By this history it
appears that the said herodes was much cursed where as he would not give
honor unto god as the other kings / but would slay him. And in wenynge to do
him ylle made to sle great nombre of fair children And therefore he had well
deserved punycyon the which came upon him ye which should be to long a thing
to tell. etc.

E. Another example how Herodes Antypas made to slay saint Johan baptyste (ca.
lxxvi.)
IT is written in the.xiiii. chapitre of the gospelles of saint Mathieu yt saint
Johan baptyst reproved herod of his lecherye and said unto him that it was not
lefull to have ye wife of his brother philyppes. By this thing herod was
wroth and by the cou^sayll of his harlot herodien he made saint Johan baptist
to be put in prison for to sle him / but he fered the people for they held him
as a prophet. And Herodes made a great dinner the day of his natyuyte unto the
princes and great of his court. And his daughter daunced at dinner and lepte
and pleased so well Herod the which said unto her with an oath that she should
axe what she would and he would grant it her and if it were half his realm.
This thing was done malycyously for to have the occasyon to make saint Johan
to die Than herodyane counsaylled her daughter. And made her to say unto the
king Give me in a great dysshe right hastily ye heed of saint Johan baptyste.
And ye king feigned to be wroth for the oath and ye prasence the which there
dyned. And sent to behede in prison saint Johan baptyste And ye heed was
brought in a dysshe and presented unto the lepynge wenche. The scripture makes
mencyon that there were three kings herodes. The first had to name Ascolonita
the which slew the innocents. The second antipa / the which made saint
Johan baptyst to be slain / The third Herod had to name Agrippe the which
made to slay saint James the more. And put saint peter in prison. It is written
in speculo historiali yt a doctor named vincent recites in the said book yt a
holy man by vysyon and permyssyon divine saw in hell ye beforsayd kings
herodes the which were hanged in the fire of hell being in great torments.
And the said harlot was hanged under them more cruelly tormented than the said
herodes. For she had two serpents ye which held her by the breasts / and
bote her. And by punycyon and permyssyon dyuyne his said harlot herodes antipa
bote him in the throat often times as if he would have strangled him Also ye said
harlot had in her heed so many of litell bestes as litell serpents that by his
estimacion as she might have of herys. yt which bestes bote her incessably
etc.

F. Another example how judas / pylate / and this other iewys were homicides
of the death of owre blyssyd savior and redemptour Jesus. lxxvi.
IT is written in the gospellys And in many other books yt judas sold our
savior and redemptour jesus crist unto the jews for.xxx. penyes. unto whom he
said. he that I kiss take and bind him for he it is: and after that he had
lyuered him unto them and betaken by ye said toke^ repented him And yielded unto
them the said pence. More over he despeired ha^ge him self and estrangled.
Than the princes of ye prestes: and the cou^seil of ye iewys sought the ways
and the means to make him to day by envy and coursednes For they se the
miracles and predicacions that he made. And the world went after hy^. They
saw that he was just and good: and yt he reproved them of their sins. And
therefore they sought false wytnes for to accuse him / but they found none. and
they accused him of.iiii. things. The first was that they said that they had
a law. after the which he should deye The second that he deceived / and
moved the people unto ill. The third that he deffended to pay ye tribute unto
caesar The.iiii. that he did again ye majesty in as much as he said him self
to be god. Of the three last things pylate knew well that they lied and they
said it by envy Vnde mat. xxvii. Sciebat eni^ quod per inuidia^ tradidissent
eu^ And therefore pylate restyde at the first: and said unto them. Sith that I
have a law after ye which he should dye the^ judge ye hy^ after your law. Than
they answered him that it was not lefull unto them yt they should put any man
unto death. For to be short in the matter Pylate ne found cause of death in
Ihesus. And for to satysfye unto the Jews said yt he should be punysshed for
his fautes. And made him to be bound unto a pyller and to be beten. and so
much was he broken yt al his body was in blood and wounds. And so betoke him
unto the Jews / but yet were they not content they crowned him with thorns
and put it down with staves / and cried unto Pylate that they might crucefye
him. And by cause yt he said yt he ne found in him cause to make him deye /
they cried. Sa^guis eius super nos: et super filios nostros. That is to say.
His blood be upon us and upon our children. And so it was done. For
afterward Vaspasien beseged the cite of Iherusalem. And they were so
affamysshed yt a woman ete her own child. And they ete their treasoures
wenynge for to bear them away. And when the cite was taken / some deyed of
hongre / some other with the sword / and other take prisoners and sold And men
gave.xxx. for a penye. And one of those accused them ye they had eaten their
treasours. So every man yode to sle his prisoners for to have their money. so
their children had for to do. When men led Ihesus to crucefye ye women of
Iherusalem wept. Unto whom Ihesus said weep ye not upon me / but upon your
children. For the days shall come yt the wombes shall be blyssed ye which
has not borne / and the pappes the which has not given souke. The Jews
were homycydes and the cause of the death of our lord ye which was Iuged
unjustly and condampned of Pylate to be crucefyed / and so suffered death and
passion / and had in his body five thousand.CCCClxxvi. wounds for our
redempcyon. Pylate the which Iuged hy^ abode not unpunished / and deyed
myscheuously. For afterward the Emperor caesar would make him to deye. and as
he was in prison he dyspayred him and slew himself with a knyfe. And for as
much as he slew himself Caesar made a stone to be hanged about his neck and
to cast him in to tybre the which ran by the cite of rome. And incontynente
the deuylles and cursed spyrytes there made such a lyghteny^ge and tempest for
the reason of such a cursed body that man ne woman ne might dure / ne bote /
ne ships durst not thereon go. And when the romans saw such tempest they
made him to be drawn out and cast in to the river of Rosne.

A. Another example how Lucrece made to slay saint Beatryce. lxxvii.
IT is written in the legende of saint Beatrice yt a cursed man named lucrece
coueyted to have the heritage of beatryce. And to the end that he might come to
his entencyon accused her that she was crystyenne. And made her to be slain by
martyrdom but he abode not unpunished. For when he had taken the possession
of the said heritage he reioysed him and made a dynere. And a little child at
the pappe cried. Lucrece thou have slain beatryce and possedeth her heritage.
And you art given in to the possessyon of ye devil And incontinent Lucrece
gaped / the devil entered in him the which tormented him three hours and after
slew him. So it appears that homycydes and thieves covetous ben punysshed in
this world or in the other / or in both.

B. Another example of a man yt slew his fader and his mother / when he was
dronken. lxxvii.
MEn find by writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuarye and says that as a dronken man came from the tavern he met his
fader the which blamed him and repreued of his exces of drink / And then
incontinent he drew out his sword and slew his said fader. And as his mother
herd the bruyte and the clamor she ran theder a great pace / and he did
slay her as he had done his beforsayd fader. Incontynente the neighbors came
out and took him / and led him into a prison. And in the morning there was
great marvel of that that he had done.

C. Another example of a servant that served well his master in youth / and
when he was drunk slew him. lxxvii.
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye of a man yt served a king right
faithfully. And when he was young he governed hy^ well and much pleased his
service unto his master. And he was sent unto a dinner at the which he became
dro^ken and slew the king and his sons. Also when we fast the vices flee
from us and make our service agreeable unto god our king. And when we be
dronken we slay all our virtues / and the king that is our soul and reason.
And the sons they ben his five wits with the which we should govern our
bodies / and do meritoryous deeds.

D. Another example of a daughter the which slew her fader and her mother /
and after had mercy by contrycion and confession. lxxvii.
THe disciple recites in his pro^ptuarye yt Peter says in his second book
de amore that a knight had a fair daughter the which sinned with her. and
her mother knew that they sinned together by euydent signs / of the which men
aduerted her / but they ne would sclau^dre for the confusyon. When ye maid
understood yt her mother knew her sy^ne / by cou^sayll of an old woman she
poisoned her. And the fader had horror of his sin and left her. Wherefore
the daughter poysonned him also. And when she had so slain her fader and mother
she dyspayred thynky^g not to have mercy till unto that she herd preche yt in
contrycyon and confession all sins were pardonned. Albeit that they were the
moo^t grace and fou^^ that man may speak / so m^che is great the b^ounte and
grace of god. Than ye said daughter came to the precher for to confess her /
and for her great dysperacyon ne might declare all her sins in confession.
And after yt he had chered her she confessed truly her sins with so many of
teres and of lamentacyons yt it was meruayll / and said that she was worthy to
have all pain and confusyon. After that she had confessed her and that she had
received penance salutarie she entered in to the church with her chamberere
and fell prostrate in orayson and wept and lamented her sins in so great
dolor and haboundaunce of teres yt she deyed in the place. And afterward as
her confessor preched and desired the people to pray for her he herd a voice
the which said yt he and the people had more great need of great haboundau^ce
of teres she had be puryfyed and washed in like wise as of new baptized and
so flewe in to heaven wtoute the pains of purgatory.

E. Another example how dauyd made to slay Vrye unjustly and committed
aduoutrye. lxxvii
IT is written in the.xi. chapitre of ye second book of kings that dauyd
beheld out at a wyndowe ye wife of vrye as she washed her / and for her
beauty was tempted and deceived. For he her coueyted / loved and slepte with
her. And when her husband Vrye servant of the said dauyd came from the war
to bring tidings to his master / dauyd said unto him that he should go to
lie with his wife And sent after him vyande ryall / but the said Vrye would not
lie with his wife but excused him honestly. Afterward dauyd wrote again unto
his captain a pistyl by Vrye that in the place where the danger of death
should be he should put Vrye in batayl to the end that he were slain / and so
was it done. And it follows incontinent in ye.xii. chapitre ye god sent
nathan unto dauyd unto whom he said. Answer me of a Judgment. Two men were in
one cite one rich and one poor. The rich had oxen and sheep and goods
habou^dau^tly / and the poor ne had but one sheep that he had bought and
nourished. And so much he loved her yt she ete of his bread and drank of his
cup and slept in his bosom And it befell that a pilgrim came unto ye rich
the which spared his sheep and yode to take the sheep of the said poor / and
prepayred of metes unto him / for ye that he was come to him. When david herd
these words here he was much wroth and said unto Nathan. God sees. For he
the which has done this thing is culpable of death / he shall yield the
sheep in four double because he has done this thing. And Nathan said unto
hy^. Thou art he the which has done this thing. god has made the king
and given the of goods yt which has despised his words. Thou haste slain
Vrye by glayue / and also has taken his wife for thyself. For this thing the
glayue shall not depart from thy house. God has said yt he shall send ill
upon the and upon thy house / and shall take thy wives before thyn eyes and give
them unto thy neighbor the which shall sleep with those women. Thou haste
done thy sin secretly / and I shall do all these things before all the
people of Israhell. And dauyd said unto Nathan. Peccaui dn^o. I have sinned
unto my lord. And incontinent as david had reknowleged his fault and that he
had said peccaui / Nathan said unto him. God has translated thy sin thou
shalt not deye / but thy sone yt is proceeded of the shall deye / and so was
it done as it is written in the said chapter. etc.

F. Another example how a knight was strongly tormented in purgatory for that
that he vyoled the chircheyarde / and hurt a man within it. lxxvii
IT is written in ye legende of ye deed that as a knight was laid in his bed
with his wife / and the moon was clear the which entered by the holes / he
meruaylled him much wherefore the man the which is reasonable obeyde not unto
his creator / when the creatures not reasonnables obeyed unto hy^. And began
to missaye of a knight deed the which had be his pryue friend. And the said
knight deed entered in speaking these words in the chamber all suddenly / unto
whom he said Friend have thou none ill suspeccyon of me in any things / but
pardon me if I have any thing sinned in the. And when he demanded him of his
estate he said unto him I am tormented of diverse pains for yt that I have
vyoled the chircheyarde and hurt a man within it / and him dispoylled of his
mauntelles hode / the which is upon me more heuyer than a mountain. And the
said deed man prayed him that he would do make oraysons for him Than he
demanded if such a priest should sing for him. The said deed answered
nothing / yt is he spoke no word / but lift up and shoke his heed in like
wise as he them refused. And afterward him demanded if he would that such an
hermyte prayed for him. And he said I will well that he pray for me. And when
the said knight had promised it him ye deed said unto him. And I say the that
this day two years thou shalt deye. And so was it done. This example denotes
many things. The first is that one man should not say ill of another in as
much as ye deed body repreued him that spoke ill of him. The second is that a
man should keep hy^ to do and to speak ylle in holy ground in as much as the
deed body was in purgatori for that / yt he had vyoled the said church yard.
And also that a man ne should betene do none ill unto his neighbor / for
punycyon follows in this world and in the other. The third thing that the
example denotes is yt the prayers and oraysons of a good person ben more
sooner exalted than those of sinners in sin. It is here understand by that yt
the deed loved the prayer of the hermyte more sooner than of the other
beforsayd. How be it ill priests empayre not the sacrament of the mass / but
those the which accedeth unworthily is unto their dampnacyon.

G. Another example how the angel showed unto tongdalus a valeye replenisshed
with coals of fire in the which were put the homycydes. lxxvii.
MEn find by writing yt a man amed Tongdalus deyed. And yt the angel led
him to se the torments of hell. And afterward brought him again and put
him in to his body. The which recompted many torments among the which the
angel showed / him unto a valeye much horrible and full of derkenesses the
which was right deep full of coals bre^nynge. And above yt valeye was there a
covering of iron in fire bre^nyng in thyknes as of a six fadom the which was
more hoter than the coals the which brenned under it. From thens yode forth
so great stenche the which grieved more ye souls than all yt that they had
suffered before. Under the said couerture descended many souls ye which were
fried as men frye the bacon in the pan. And afterward they were streyned as men
strain wax through the clothe. And so fell they and dyscended in to the botom
of the said valey / upon the coals brennynge / upon the which they were
tormented of a new torme^te. Than said the angel / this pain suffers those
the which have killed faders or moders / systers or broders or other people.
Also ben in this torment those yt which have had will to sle another by
delyberacyon if they might / albeit that they have not done it / and after that
tormente shall be led in to more great.

Homicidium dubium.
A. Examples of homycyde doubtous / and first example how saint Peter made to
deye Ananye and his wife saphyre for that that they fraulded of the price of a
field. lxxviii.
IT is written in the fifte chapter of the deed of the appostles that a man
named ananie his wife saphyre present sold his field and fraulded of the
price his said wife culpable. And bare away one party and put it under the
fete of the appostles. He should all bear for that he should yield it in the
co^munyte without being propryetayre. And saint Peter said unto ananye.
Ananye wherefore haste you tempted satan thyn heart / thou have lied in ye
holyghoost and fraulded of the price of the field / when thou possedest it you
haste puyssaunce either to hold it / or to sell it / wherefore haste thou put
this thing in thy heart. Thou have not lied unto men but unto god. When ananye
herd this thing he fell and expyred / that is he was deed / and was buried /
within three hours saphyre entered the which knew nothing of the deed. / And
saint Peter said unto her. Tell me woman if thou haste sold the field at such
a price. She answered yt ye. And saint peter said unto her. What needs you to
tempte the spyryte of our lord / here be ye fete of those the which has
buried thy husband / the which shall burye the. And she fell deed before his
fete. And the young men took her / and buried her with her husband. And great
dread was made in the church. And so kept these other for to be propryetayre.
Here is example that all relygyous and other shall be punysshed if they take or
witholde of the goods of ye co^munyte.

B. Another example how dauyd made to slay the young man the which lied to say
that he had slain saul. lxxviii
IT is written in the first chapter of the second book of kings that a young
man came to bring the tydy^ges unto dauyd that he had slain his aduersarye
the king saul and his sone Ionathas in wenynge to be welcome. And albeit he
lied / for he had not slain the said Saul Sothe it was yt he had slain
himself / and dauyd demanded of the yongman how know thou that saul is deed
/ he answered and said. I am come of adventure in the mountain of gelboe / and
saul lened him upon his axe / he called me and said what anguysshes held him
of al parts and desired that I would sle him / and I have slain hy^ For I
knew well that he ne might live after the ruin / for his adversaries
approached unto him. And I have taken the dyademe the which was on his heed and
the aournement of his arm / and have brought them unto the. When dauyd herd
these tydy^ges took his clothes and cut them And all they yt were with him
wept and fasted till unto ye euentyde. He was not joyous of the death of his
aduersarye ye which made war on him. Dauyd came again unto the yongman the
which had brought him ye tidings and said unto hy^. Wherefore have thou not
dredde to put thy hand and to slay a king. And dauyd called one of his
servants and made to sle ye said yongman / and said thy blood be upon thy
heed / thy mouth to speak again them saying I have slain saul. etc. By this
example a man should understand yt ill came unto the yongman the which wend
to be welcome for to tell yt thing that he had not done. Also no good
spyrytuell ne proceeds of lyenge / and to vaunte him to have done ylle. Also
this example denotes yt a man should not enjoy of the death perdycyon and
ruin of his adversaries.

C. Another example how dauyd slew Golyas phylystyen incyrcumsysed. lxxviii
IT is written in the.x. chapter of ye first book of kings that the
phylystyens the which made war with the people of Israhell came one time
again them among the which there was one named Golyas the which was
incyrcu^sysed / proud / reno^med / strong / and puissau^t well armed the
which dysdeyned the sons of Israhell. And for asmoche as he was strong he
ne doubted person / defied the children of Israhel / and said unto them that
ye most strongest of them should come to fight again him and he the which
should have the vyctorye should be master of all the other. And for as much
as he was so strongly armed / redoubted and dredde every man fered to assayl
him. etc For end and conclusyon dauyd the which kept beestes was moved unto
ye zele of the law putting his trust in god offered himself unto ye king
saul for to go fight. And Saul armed him and put an helm on his heed. When
dauyd had assayed it said yt he could not in such wise fight / and that he
had not accustomed to bear armoure / so made to unarm him / and took five
stones / his slynge / and his staff yt he had of custom to have after his
bestes and yode unto Golias. When he saw dauyd with his staff he dyspreysed
him and said unto him. What wenyst thou I am a dog the which come unto me
with a staff. And Golyas cursed dauyd in his goods / and said unto him. Come
unto me and I shall give thy flesh unto the birds of the sky and unto ye
beestes of the earth. And dauyd said unto him. Thou come unto me with glayue
/ axe / and armoure. And I go unto the in the name of god of Israhell and thou
shall be slain / to the end that all earth know that there is one god in
Israhell and that he ne saves in axe and armoures. ^han Golyas herd these
words he lift him up and took him to come again dauyd. And Dauyd hasted him
to fight and took a stone out of his pouche and kest it in the foreheed of
golyas / and made him to fall unto the earth upon his forheed he yode upon him
and for that that he had no sword to draw / he drew the sword and glayue
from golyas and cut of his heed / and so had the vyctorye of the phylystyen /
orguyllous incyrcumsysed that byleued in gods strau^ce and mortal. etc.

Ire.
D Example of a woman dampened for Ire without being in will to pardon and to
forgive. lxxviii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermon that there was a woman right full of Ire
and wrath that with pain any might accord with her. But notwithstondynge she
reputed herself to be holy and devout / for she fasted much and excercysed
in fastings and oraysons and in many good operacyons. But she had
pryncypally this vice yt after that a person had only offended her one time
she never loved him after. And no person ne might put her out of that Ire
and vengeance. When she came unto the death she confessed her of all her
sins except of this Ire. And as the priest would have given her the body of
god / she shyt the mouth and turned her toward the wall and said unto the
priest and unto all the men and women the which were present In like and
semblable wise as I turned me from al those the which has offended and
trespassed against me / And that I ne would pardon them with heart I ne might
love them parfytely. And yt I have hold me in Ire in lettyng other. In like
wise god takes and torneth from and shall never look on me mercyfully / ne I
him Ioyouslye in the realm of heaven for mine Ire / but I shall enter in to
hell with the deuylles and with all Irefull where I shall brenne eternelly. And
so the said Irous departed and deyed. etc. By this yt this said woman ne would
corecte her in her life of the said Ire and vengeance / and that she confessed
her not in her death it is to presuppose that she is dampened to consider the
said words yt she spoke at her departing. And a man should here clearly
understand yt one mortal sin dampneth the person the which co^mytteth it /
what good deed so ever he has done in his life. So deyed she without
penance correccyon and amendment vnde ezechielis xxxiii. Iustitia iusti no^
liberabit eu^ in quacu^que die peccauerit. etc.

Odium.
A. Examples of hate / and first example how the lone of a rich man was
dampened for to keep Ire in his heart and for that he would be venged. lxxix.
THe dyscyple recyteth in the book of his sermons and says that a nobe man
had a sone the which yode unto the church and served god in fastnges /
oraysons and in doing good operacyons. And when the said sone was in the death
bed his fader prayed him that he would pere unto him when he was deed if it
pleased unto god for to show him of his estate / and of the merit of his life
/ the which so appeared and said unto him. Fader pray ye no more for me / for
I am dampened / and in so great pains that if there were as many of tongues as
there are of sterres in the sky ne might express the pains yt I have. And
his fader said unto him. And have not thou ben chaste / abstynent / and
devout. etc. He answered ye / but I have lost all the good deeds that I have
done as unto salvation for Ire and vengeance that I have retained in my heart
again those yt which has offended me After that a person had done me ill
one only time I ne might never love him / and venged me all times when I might
/ and for that only vice I am lost and dampened eternally. When he had spoken
these words he departed. This example denotes and techeth that Ire / hate /
and vengeance ledeth unto dampnacyon. For it is again charity and the
commandment of god the which says. Diliges proximum tuum sicut te ipsum.
Men find by writing that the said boy was one time in a tree / and bette
down and took the apples of his neighbor / and a good man the which paste
by made him to dyscende / showed unto him his case / and by correccyon gave
unto him a buffet. And the said boy thretened him and said unto him that he
should yield it him how be it that he tarried / and after that as often as he se
hy^ he showed him with his finger in saying There is he the which bet me / but
when I am great I shall yield it him. The ylle will that he kept in his courage
made hy^ to be dampmned and lost. And therefore for to have salvation it
behooves to put out all hates and rancoures / and to pardon unto another in
like wise as we require of god that he pardon us our sy^nes Also by this
example is to be noted that good operacions ben put in forgetefulnes as unto
salvation how be it that a man ne should withdraw him to do good deeds as many
as he may in this world. / For it serves unto the dymynycyon of ye pain.

B. Another example how hatours the which slew a man in ye church were
punysshed dyuynely. lxxix.
IT is written in the promptuarye of the miracles of the vyrgyn marye that three
knights hated a man the which sought the opportunyte for to sle him And one
time as they would have slain him he fled in to the church consecrate in
the honor of the vyrgin marye for to escape the peril of death / they yode
after entered into the church irreuently and cruelly slew him before the
altar of the vyrgyn Marye. For this thing the vyrgyn emoued her against them
/ and incontinent vengeance of god came upon them for their presumpcyon /
they were embraced with fyren such manner that ye members of every of them
brenned. When they apperceyued ye dyuyne vengeance to be on them they were
constrained to beseech ye vyrgyn Marye of grace / and returned unto her by
great contrycyon of heart. And she the which is fulfilled with pity delivered
them from the fire by the grace of god: but not full health. After yt they
might go they presented them unto the bishop / requyrynge him of penance. And
he enjoined them to bear upon them ye armoures that they had when they slew
him And that they should repent them evermore till unto that that they had
satysfyed unto god and unto the blessed vyrgyn Marye.

C. Another example how the devil did sle a man for the keeping of hate and
would not pardon it. lxxix.
MEn find by writing ye two men neighbors pleded togiders and hated other
so much that their curates knew not what to do at every ester. and one time
the said curate gave them monycyon to pardon the one the other and to love
togyders / or that they ne should receive their creator in the estate of grace
/ and he that had the leest of wrong pardoned him all and put him in his
deuoyre. And ye other would not pardon. And for as much as his curate menaced
hy^ not to give hy^ his creatoure / for as much as he should tarry / and of
dread / of office said with the mouth and not with the heart that he pardoned.
And they received togider their creatoure. After the mass as they yode together
to their houses / for it was their way He the which had lest of wrong
followed the other to have him to dinner with him and right gretely prayed him
and his wife The which answered yt he loved better to dyne with Satan and to
eat with all ye deuylles in hell than with him. Ha said he wenest thou to
play ye knave with me in such wise / when ye feast is past I shall handle the
well enough. And the other said / my neighbor have ye in such wise received
your creatoure / ye have received him in ill estate. After they departed For he
the which had wrong dwelled ferther of than ye other. And when he was nere
to a wodde ye devil came unto him in lykenes of a black man / the which took
him horrybly and said unto him. Thou ill crystyen wors than a sarazyn / or than
I am yt haste not done honor unto thy creator yt you have received in mortal
sy^ne For as much as thou haste not wylled to pardon unto thy neighbor unto
whom thou haste said that thou love better to dyne with the deuylles than
with him / at this hour thou shall come to dinner with them. I am the devil
the which evermore has stered the to do ill. And I ne had never puyssaunce
to sle the unto this day But thy god has given me leave and license / and it
is suffered that at this hour thou have punycyon and dampnacyon. And therefore
thou woman go tell unto thy curate that I command him to come hastily here for
to take the body of Ihesu christ that this cursed crystyen has received /
For to be short the devil slew the said hater. The curate came with great
company of people the which took the body of our lord in like wise as god it
suffered and wylled. And the devil did him honor and yode on knees. And
after took the body of the said man and bare it away. Alsoo men find many
other Examples of haters the which ne would pardon unto their neighbors. And
therefore they dyffyned ylle their days horrybly and myscheuously. wherefore men
presuppose more sooner that they ben dampened than otherwise. For it is written de
pe. di. i. Omnis qui non diligit manet in morte.

D. Another example how the devil we ned to let saint Thybault to pacyfye ye
barons of the champayne that had dyuysyon together.
IT is written in the legende of saint thybault that great dyuysyon was one time
among the barons of ye champayne in such manner that they were ready to slay
each other. And the tidings came unto saint Thybault the which was far from
the country. And for as much as he ne might ride he made to prepayre him a
charyot / and made him to be borne with in it for to go to pacyfye them. And as
he was in a way the horses yode in to a water for to drink. And the devil
enuyous and wroth of the welfare of the country came in to the said water and
took away one of the wheles of the charyot and cast it in to a dyke right
deep. And in spyryte the said saint Thybault saw this thing yt the devil
did. Unto which devil saint Thybaulte said. I command the in ye name of
our lord Ihesu christ that thou serve to this charyot instead of ye said
whele And the said devil was obedyent and ye said charyot yode upon one whele.
And ye devil bare the other part ye ye which was a thing right meruayllous
unto all those that se it. And when the said saint came unto the place where
they were all appointed to sle other. When the princes and people saw
manyfestly that the charyot yode upon one whele as it is said they were
ameruayled / and came before the said saint and them pacyfyed and put in good
concord. And then returned from whe^s he was comen. And when he was in the
said water saint Thybault said unto the devil. Acursed go fetch ye whele and
put it on again and go thy ways. Thou wendest to have had great prouffyte for
to do me this thing / and it has be unto thy confusyon. And the said devil
it appointed upon the said charyot / and afterward returned him. etc. By
these examples before said in this fyfte commandment it appears that a man ne
should commyt homycyde iniustely. And that a man ne should do none ill unto his
neighbor by Ire / hate / vengeance ne cursydnes. etc.

Sextum preceptum.
Furtum.
A* Examples of people the which have committed theft. And first of a thief
named Achar the which was stoned and his substau e brent by the commandment
of god. nc lxxx.
IT is written in the.vii. chapitre of the book of Iosue that a man named Achar
stole again ye commandment of god. And of his capytayne Iosue a right good
mauntell / two hundred pieces of money / and a rod of gold the which was
worth fyftye pieces of gold in like wise as him self confessed. Vnde Iosue.vii.
Vidi eni^ inter spolia paleu^ cocceneu^ valde bonu^: and duce^tos cieclos
arge^ti. regula^que aurea^ qui^q^ginta sicloru^: and concupisce^s abstuli and
absco^di in tra. And by ye sin of the said theft ye people of Israhell lost
a Iourneye agay^ their adversaries / and fled before them. Than their
capytayne Iosue yode unto the temple / cut his vestimentes / and prostrate
couched him upon the earth before the arche where were the commandments till
unto the euentyde. And all the auncyentes of Israhell with him / the which put
of the poudre upon their hedes and humbled them before god / and him demanded
what was to be done. Quid facies magno nomini tuo. etc. And god said unto
iosue. Arise you up wherefore lie you on ye earth Some of the people of Israhell
has broke my commandment. I shall not help you till he that is culpable be
taken from you. Vnde iosue.vii. Anthema in medio tur e^ israel no^ poteris
stare cora^ hostibus tu is: donec deleatur ex te qi co^taminatus e^ scelere.
Than god commanded yt men should seche after him yt had done the sin. An^ yt
he were slain / and all his substance brent and it was done. For the said
Achar confessed ye said sin as it is said. And it was Iuged of Iosue by the
will of god in the manner the which follows. That is the said Iosue made to
hang the said achar thief and all his bestyall / his house / his beds with
all ye other household stuff / and made all to be borne in to a valeye wtoute
the cite. And all the people of Israhel came theder. And than the said Iosue
spoke and said. For as much as thou haste troubled us all / our lord
troubles ye this day. All the people of Israhell shall stone the. And all yt
the which is thine shall be burnt / and so was it done. And after that al ye
said people of Israhell assembled a great mountain of stones upon ye said
thief the which yet is there. And ye Ire of god was appeased for ye punycyon
of the said thief. Here is an example as unto ye text of the bible the which
is gretely to be noted unto all thieves. For by that yt god made to punysshe the
said thief and to take him from among the good / it is to be understand / yt
in like wise shall god make to be departed all thieves at the Judgment And shall
make them to be broyled and brent Vnde mathei. xiii. Exibunt angeli et
seperabu^t malos de medio iustorum and mittent eos in caminu^ ignis. Also here
is an example of people the which have co^muned goods that they ne should
nothing take unto their partyculyer as people of war the which have made
oath to put all in butyn / or boty fellows as were the children of Israhel. And
as ben many sorts of people with goods comunes. And such people the which
draws and pretends unto their partyculer ben thieves And by that that the
children of Israhel were gretely troubled and in like wise vexed And lost a
Iourneye by the said thief / it is to understand yt by an ill person all a
parysshe / or good company is troubled / and has to suffer. etc.

B. Another example of a thief the which was fastened / and abode with his
theft upon the grave of a deed body. lxxx.
IT is written in ye dyalogue of saint gregorye yt in the prouynce of Valerye
was there a worshypfull priest of holy conuersacyon with his clerks to give
preysynge unto / full of good operacyons and virtues. After his death was
buried before the church. And as the clerks were in orayson in a night there
came a thief ye which stole from them a sheep. And the said thief came to
pass with his proy above the grave of the said priest buried And abode there
all still without power to go / ne power to leave ye said sheep. And in the
morning was found with his proye as the deed body held him. And as he ne might
leave his theft the said clerks yode to prayer. And yt pain obtained they
that the said thief might go without berynge any thing away. etc. For to
moralyze upon this example a man should understand by the thief the which was
arested with his theft without power to remeue ne to go / that these thieves
ye which ben dampened bear upon them ye theftes that they have stolen and shall
bear eternally without power to take them away. and shall be holden in ye fire
of hell. It is written ezechielis.xliiii. quod pcto^res portabu^t co^fusione^
sua^ and scelera sua q^ feceru^t / yt is to say yt the sinners shall bear
their sins in confusyon. And the dampened shall se al their fautes upon them.
As men know a company of people yt such is clothed with gray and such with
white / and such and such have white hodes / or black. Vnde eze xviii.
Impietas impii erit super eu^. Et legittur eccle. xi. In fine hoi^s denudatio
operum illius. etc.

C. Another example how the deuylles slew a thief and bare away his soul for
ye that he had witholden the horse of a deed body the which should have be
given unto poor people. lxxx
IT is written in ye legende of ye deed bodies yt Turpyn Archebysshop of Rayns
said that a knight named charles yode in battle for fo fight in arms. the
which prayed one his cousin yt if he deyed in the said battle yt he should
sell his horse and that he should give the money thereof unto poor people. And
when ye said knight was deed / the other withelde for himself the said horse.
And within little time after the said knight deed appeared unto the other knight
shynynge as the son / and said unto him. Good cosyn thou haste made me to
suffer pains by eight days in purgatory for my horse / the price whereof was
not given unto the poor in like wise as I had dysposed / but thou ne art
quyte / for at this day the deuylles shall bear away thy soul in to hell. And
I goo purged in to heaven. And than a cry was herd suddenly in the air of
deuylles the which bare hpm away from thens. etc. This example denotes that
those ye which witholde the goods of deed bodies / ben thieves and dampne
themself as did he ye which withelde the said horse. etc.

D. Another example how a child the which had stolen an halfpeny from his
cosyn was punysshed in the pyt of hell and afterward brought again in to
his body. lxxx
THe dysciple recites in his sermons this example how a child was pre^ent in
Judgment before god after yt he was deed. And the devil accused him and said.
Dn^e iudica secu^du^ iustitia^. etc. Thou lord judge after justice / this
child has stolen from his cosyn germayn an halfpeny the which he has not
yielded / and is deed without doing penance. Would thou well yt I condampne
this child for so little a thing / my justice is not with out mercy. Than some
saints ye which were than present yt the said child had served prayed the
Judge for him. And the Judge said yt he should have pain for his offense. And
after shall be brought again in to his body. Than by the commandment of the
said Judge he was cast in to a pytte of fire wherein he sustained so much of
pain and dolor yt afterward he ne might express it by word. And at ye
prayer of ye said saints he was drawn out of the said pyt of fire / and the
soul was restored within the body and lived afterward And the said Judge gave
him in charge to yield again the said half penny / and the people meruaylled
them of ye yt he had recounted. And they put to faith unto yt that he had said.
For asmoche as he lived afterward much holyly in the dread of god with out
taking apple ne pere ne any thing of other men's. By this example a man
should understand yt this child was accused before god of ye devil of so
little a thing as is an halfpeny / by a more great reason shall be accused
those the which stele a great thing. And if he had so great punycyon for so
little offense / so shall they have that do the great offenses. And by that that
god him commanded restytucyon so should those do ye which has taken fro
other / or else they may not be saved. For it is written in droit. No^ dimittur
pctm^ nisi restituatur ablatu^. xiiii. q. vi. c. Sires. and saint Thomas says
secu^da secu^de. q. lxii articulo.viii. Who so ever lets iniustely another
neighbor in the usage of ye thing the which unto him apperteyneth he
trespasseth the commandment of charity

A. Another example how churl was punysshed of the devil for that yt he had
stolen a little of a hedge in the field from his neighbor. lxxxi.
IT is written in the dyalogue cesaru^ that a carle was in the death bed and
the devil came unto him ye which held a little of a hedge al in fire / the
which enforced hy^ to put it in his mouth. Than the said carle forgote not
his sin. And understood yt the devil did unto him soche pain for a little
of a hedge yt he had taken and stolen in the field from his neighbor / and
had put it in his field unto himself. And for that yt the devil was evermore
before his face in what place so ever he turned him was constrained to restore
the said little hedge / called his friends sent them to promytte to restore
ye said little and to require pardon / unto whom ye master of the said little
said. I shall not pardon him yet / let him be well tormented. And again the
said devil held the said little hedge embrased / and him tormented as before.
And again sent messengers but they ne might have pardon. thyrdly in weeping
sent them. I unhappy I ne may dye ne live / return ye to demand pardon.
Than the other him pardoned and the devil departed inco^tynent. By this example
a man should understand that all manner of thieves yt steleth or wastes ye
goods of their neighbors iniustely shall be punysshed in this world or in the
other Sith that the devil tormented so this man for so little a thing as is
a little of hedge. By a more stronger reason he shall torment those the which
do ye great theftes. This little of a hedge was not worth no great thing. But
it was a great thing as to take it wyttyngly from his neighbor theuysshely
against the commandment of god wherefore he was digne of punycyon. etc.

B. Another example of a servant the which took and stole from his master
fyggues. lxxxi.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and sermons and says that ye body
of saint Thomas is reverently kept / where god unto him has given such
grace that he is yet entere and hole. And when the time comes to admynystre
unto the people one sytteth in a chayer reverently. When the hostyes are
consecrate ye priest puts them in saint Thomas hand / ye which
admynystreth ye people. And if any of those yt receives their creator be in
any sin ye said saint thomas with draws his hand / and shall not be
admynystred till he be in the state of grace. The scripture speaks of a
servant yt stole fygges from his master and eat them without ye knowledge of
his master / and confessed him not of it. So he came to be admynystred as the
other did. And the said saint thomas withdrewe his hand and would not suffer
him to receive it. Then the servant be thought him of the said theft and was
confessed / and after that was admynystred of ye said saint Thomas and was no
more repulsed. And by this all theft is to fle be it great or little. For for
that man is put out of the company of god.

C. Another example of a baylye judge and thief the which took gifts iniustely
and corructe Justice. lxxxi.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says yt a baylye made a
wedding unto his sone / and a man yt which had a great cause before him gave
unto him an ox / and prayed him that he would do for him in his cause. And
when his aduersarye herd it spoken / he sent a fair cow unto the wife of ye
said baylye and prayed her to speak for him. The which did so much against
the said baylye that he promised that he would do for him yt had sent the
cow. And when they were in judgment and that the said baylye ne spoke for him
the which had given the ox / he said / ox speak. Than ye baylye answered.
The ox may not speak / for the cow will not suffer it. etc. The cause of such
iuges the which corrupts justice by gifts promesses and favors shall be
dyscussed and iuged before god the which is souerain Judge / ye which is not
acceptour of persons / in like wise as says the holy scripture. No^ eni^ e^
acceptio personaru^ apud deum. And in the said judgment of god every man shall
be punysshed after that / that he has deserved as the false Iuges and those
the which wy^ne their causes falsely And those ye which possede herytages ill
begoten / and witholde them without restitucyon. Tu reddes cuique iuxta opera
sua / vt dicit psalm. Also god ne shall spare in Judgment the great lords / ne
prayer ne gold ne silver / ne contrycyon ne wrath ne shall do nothing in
like wise as says the scripture. Vn^. prouer. vi zelus and furor viri no^
parcet dn^s i^ die vi^dicte: nec acquiescet cuiusquam precibus: nec suscipieth
prorede^ptio ne dona plurima. etc.

D. Another example how the king of perse made to fle an ill Judge corrupt by
gifts. etc. lxxxi
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye yt the king of perse repreued a judge
for gyuyng falls judgment and for his iniustyce made him to be flayne and to put
his skin upon a stole. And made to sytte upon the said stole his sone and the
iuges the which came after him to the end that they should remember them of the
said ill Judge. And that they should dread to Judge unjustly. etc.

E. Another example how the devil bare away in body and in soul a thief
covetous advocate.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermon that there was an advocate chief of diverse
towns / auarycyous without mercy yt made of grievous exacions in his subgectes
/ and came one day as he yode in a town for an exaccyon ye devil assocyated
with him in the way in lykenes of a man. And of horroure and of the words yt
they spoke togider he understood yt it was the devil and dredde to go with him
/ but in no manner he ne might depart / neither in praynge / ne in making the
sygn^ of ye cross. And as they yode togider they met a poor man the which
led a hog in a band. And as the hog turned from one side to another /
yt poor man was wroth / and cried the devil take the. When the advocate herd
this word he had hope to depart from him by such occasyon. and said unto the
devil. Friend here yt hog is given unto the / go and take him. The devil
answerde / he is not given me with heart and therefore I ne may take him. And
after they passed by another town / and as a child wept his mother was at the
door wroth / and said the devil take the / wherefore tormentest you me thus with
thy wepynges. Than the advocate said here haste you won a soul / take ye
child / for it is thin Unto whom the devil answerde as before. She has not
given it me with good heart. And when they began to approach unto the place
whether they yode. Then the men of ye town se them far of they knew not the
cause / wherefore they yede all together with one voice cryenge the devil take
the. And said unto the devil you art welcome. When the devil had herd this /
he shoke the heed / and in mockyng said unto the advocate. Those here has
given the unto me with all their hertes. and therefore art thou mine. And the
devil rauysshed him in that hour / and what became of him no man can tell. The
langages yt which were spoken / and the things ye which were done in the
way the servant of the advocate declares yt was with him. / By this example
it appears that cursed Iuges and advocates deye cursedly / and that the gifts
and salayres that they have taken unjustly / has deceived and bly^ded their
souls. Also the scripture speaks it in many places. First gifts blind the
eyes of the wise people yt which have justice to govern For they ne se drope
in the good and just cause of those the which ne give nothing. And look right
clear in the cause of those ye which has made them any gift. Also the
gifts peruerteth the words of the justices as says moses / deuterono.xvi.
Ne acciptas munera: nec persona^ quia munera execant oculos sapientu^: et
muta^t verba iustoru^. And he says in ye book of exode. Exodi. xxiii.
Aduersus impiu^ ne accipias munera q^ execa^t etia^ prude^tes: et subuerte^t
verba iustorum Also the gifts put outethe eyes of ye Iuges / and them make
dombe / and take away correccyon as says the wise. Eccle. xx. Dona
execa^toculos iudicu^: and quasi iu^ctus in ore aduertit correctione^ eoru^. Et
gregorius dicit. Non potest consta^ter argui a quo accipitur. Also the gifts
make malediccyon to come unto those ye which for gifts iustefye the ill / and
make their ill causes good / and take away justice from the just and their
good causes make ill. Vn^. ysay v. Ve qi iustificatis impiu^ pro muneribus et
iusticia^ iusti aufertis ab eo. Iteru^ in eodem capitulo. Ve qui dicitis bonu^
malum et masu^ bonum: ponentes amaru^ in dulce and dulce i^ amaru^. Et
deutero.xxvii. Maledictus qui peruertit iuditiu^ aduene: and pupil li et vidue:
et dicet omnis populus amen. He is acursed the which peruerteth ye judgment of
the man strange / and of the orphelyn / and of the wedowe. And all ye people
shall say amen / that is so be it. Iteru^ deuterono.xvii. Maledictus qui
accipit munera vt pereutiat ai^am sanguinis innocentis: and dicitomnis populus
amen. He is acursed the which takes gifts to the end that he stryke the soul
of the blood i^nocent. Et prouerbiorum.xvii. Qui iustificat impium: et qui
condemnat iustum abhominabilis vt vterque apud dominum. He the which
iustefyeth the wicked sinner / and condampneth the Just / the one and the
other is abominable anenst god. and those the which composeth and makes ill
laws to the end that they eschasen the poores in Judgment. And that they make
force unto the cause of the humbles be cursed. Vn^. ysaie.x. Ve qui co^dunt
leges iniquas vt opprime^t in iuditio pauperes et vim facerent cause humiliu^
populi mei vt essent vidue preda eorum* et populos dirumperent. Also the
person the which takes gifts byndeth himself anenst ye gyuer / or else
vnkyndes follows. Munera alliga^t. Also some cursed officers take of two sides
/ as those ye which fissheth with two nets and flatereth with both parties
/ and say unto every of them he has good right / they do treason /
decepcyon / theft / susurracyon / and in scripture ben called bylyngues. For
their tongue speaks two langages. And ben cursed. iegitur ecclesiastici decimo
octauo. Sufurro et bilinguis maledictus: multos enim turbauit pacem habentes.
Sequitur lingua tercia multos commouit: et dispersit illos a gente in gentem.

F. Another example of a tailor named martyn the which stole the clothe in
cuttynge the robbes. lxxxi.
THere was a tayller named Martyn the which had of custom that when he
cut of clothe for to make of robes / or gowns / or cotes. etc. that he stole
evermore some what of the foresaid clothe as colored clothes or fine whytes.
And him thought that he dremed in one night for that ye he stole of clothe
that the devil bare hy^ away in to hell / he showed unto his wife his dreme.
And his wife ye which would withdraw him from evil counsaylled that he should
never take none. Afterward it happened that this taylour cut a fair blewe in
his shop which was nere unto his wives chamber / and by a hole through the
wall the wife beheld him evermore cuttynge. And in seeing her husband the
which had of custom yt when he would stele he whysteled in loky^ge where it
might be yt he might any thing stele. Than ye wife cried martyn martyn
remember the of the devil. And martyn seeing this stole nothing. Afterward
came a fair scarlet to be cut. And yt wife as is beforsayd cried / martyn
martyn remember the of the devil. And he seeing so fair clothe rubbed his
sholdres and evermore that woman said martyn martyn. etc. And he said / if the
devil should bear me a way yet should I have it. etc.

G. Another example how four men of one lygnage were dampened and hanged in
hell / for yt that they posseded falsely an heritage. lxxxi
THe dyscyple recyteth in his book and says that a rich man saw by vysyon
four men dampened and tormented in hell the which were under a dry tree and
saw that one of them hang the first / the other the second / and the fourth
the third / the other abode under ye said tree. The angel the which showed
this visyon said unto the rich man that the three hanged were of his lynage /
that is thy grau^d faders fader / and his fader. And he the which abides
under the tree / that is thy fader ye which taryeth till thou be deed for to
hang the for such heritage the which was ill gotten / the which they have
posseded falsely the one after the other without being in will to leave it. And
thou shalt be hanged as they ben if thou leave it not / For they ne have therein
nothing / no more haste thou thyselfe. Than the said rich man left the said
heretage and did penance. This example denotes yt a man ne should possede
gods and herytages wha^ a man has true knowledge that they ben comen of ill
getynge and purchase. For the false geters purchasers and herytours ye which
possede the said things without being in will to leave them. In the which
they ne have nothing dampne their souls to reteyne and take unjustly the
thing the which is not theyrs. And therefore for to save their souls they
should make restitucyon. etc.

Sacrilegium.
A. Examples of sacrylege / and first example how an earl and many of his
lygnage were damned for that yt they posseded unjustly an heritage the which
had be take away from the church. lxxxii.
THe dysciple recites in his sermons that an earl after the opinion of men was
of good life. After his death a relygyous saw him in the flambes of fire of
hell upon a laddre on the last staff the which was lift upward / and
procedyng from the lower part of hell. And much people were upon the laddre
that grynde the tethe of rage of torments. And ye said relygyous demanded
wherefore the said earl was in such torments on ye said laddre consyderyng
that he had lived so well. And it was told him that it was for an heritage yt
his great grandfader had taken from ye church / and that he was now the
tenthe ye which had posseded it. And therefore all those the which shall
possede the said heritage shall be put on the said laddre with the earl This
example should draw back all persons to get and to possede unjustly the
heritages the which be not well gotten. And pryncypally to take from the
church that the which is given unto it. For god is their judge and sufferer with
whom they have to do. And it behooves to pass under his hand / and his
rod. Vn^ scryptura. No^ est qui de manu mea possit eruere. And therefore it is
great folly to take from his judge yt the which apperteyneth unto him. By this
that this said earl dredde not this thing / and ne made of it conscience ne
restytucyon he put himself in dampnacyon and perdycyon what good deed so ever
he had done of the other part And therefore take heed unto him who so loves
himself. etc.

B. Another example how Helyodorus was punysshed dyuynely in taking the
treasours from ye church of Iherusalem.
IT is written in the book of machabee how heliodorus was sent from the king
solencus to take and to bear away the treasours of ye church of Iherusalem In
the which treasours there were four hundred talentes of silver / and two
hundred talentes of gold as it appears in ye said chapter. And as ye said
Heliodorus was in the church with his complyces / god showed unto him yt he
dyspleased him. For all those yt there was entered hardely were cast by the
puyssaunce of god in dyssolucyon and dread. Unto whom it appeared a terryble
horse upon the which was by symylitude a man on horsbacke aourned with right good
enournements. And with great impetuosite came the horse to stryke the said
helyodorus with his fete. He the which was on horsbacke seemed that he was armed
with armours of gold. And there arrived by symylytude two yongmen / and believe
that they were aungelles replenysshed with great virtue and with great beauty
/ and clothed right specially the which set about the said helyodorus / and
hymbet and whypped without cessynge / till yt he was replenysshed with wounds.
Than ye said Helyodorus fell unto the earth as deed in great confusyon. The
which young men took him in to his lodging where he had lain. He ye which
was come on horsbacke with puyssaunce of satyllytes was borne again without
horses / ne without aid humayne by the virtue of god the which appeared
manyfestly. And so lay the said helyodorus by the dyuyne puyssaunce and
pryuate from all hope of health. And the people of Iherusalem blessed / and
thanked god the which had kept his temple to be pylled and was replenysshed
with Joy the which little before was replenysshed with dread. Than the friends
of the said Heliodorus came unto the sovereign priest of Iherusalem named
onias. And him required that he would pray unto god for the said Helyodorus.
Unto whom he obeyed and prayed god for him. And as the said priest onias
prayed god the foresaid young men clothed as they were before came before
helyodorus unto whom they said / yield thanks unto the priest onias / For for
the love of him god has given the thy life. And thou the which have ben
beten by god denounce and show unto all ye puyssaunce and the great things of
him. Than the said Helyodorus was heled yielded thanks unto god and unto the
said onias / returned unto the said king to tell these things beforsaid. And
them manifested over all where he might. By this example a man should note that
no person ne should take ne pylle the goods of the church. For god will yt
they be employed unto that where unto they ben ordained. And if the said
Helyodorus were punysshed in this world of the punycyon dyuyne / by more great
reason shall those be punysshed in ye other world / the which take and pyl
the chirches. The great thing that they will take ne make not the questyon.
For those the which take little things ben thieves and sacryleges and sin
mortally / as those ye which take great things / but every man in his egall
porcyon shall be punysshed after his deserte. Vn^ psalm. Tu reddes vnicuique
iuxta opera sua. etc.

C. Another example of he punycyon of a man the which denied the silver of the
church the which had be lent unto him. lxxxii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his book and says yt the deane of the church of
Couioygne lent unto his brother carnal five mark of gold of his church. And
after the death of the said deane ye chanons demanded ye said money. And for
that yt they had no wytnes the said brother denied it and forswore him. And
afterward as he returned in to his house he abode immovable and was dombe.
Wherefore he auowed in his heart that he should return where he was pariured /
and that he should show his malice / and yield the said money unto the
church. And by contrycion and penance was delivered. All thieves sacryleges /
and pariured persons should c^rrecte them and make restytuco^n if they
consider well this example. For if the said man were punysshed and his case
manyfested / so shall it be to thieves if they repent them not / and that they
ne done also good and true penance.

D. Another example of thieves sacrileges the which were punysshed for that yt
they had stole the cross. And the goods of the church. lxxxii.
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuary and says ye thieves broke a church
founded of saint martyn. The which took and stole of treasours and the cross
of the church the which was aourned with gold / with precious stones / and
with a porcyon of the very cross of our lord Ihesu And for that yt the said
thieves were many some had the treasours. And two had the said cross and
fled. When the bishop herd the tydinges sent people after them and on al
parts for to seche them. And those the which had the cross ne might goo but
by the great hye way. And god alyened their wits / and made them bide still
in a great way full of mire / and they walked and trod in the said mire without
power to proceed any ferther. And those the which followed them over passed
them first without thinking yt it were they. But wha^ they found them in the
morning there they had suspeccyon / and said in this wise / Good men ye go not
well wherefore go ye not by the hye way. They answered we go well / what have
ye to do with our goy^ge Than the one of them said. I wene that they ben culpable
/ take we them. and they were asked of the theft / they confessed it by
condycyon that they should not deye / and they poynted unto the said cross the
which was in the mire hid / were led unto the bishop / and were let go
for the said promise. But god the which punyssheth the sinners anon after
those thieves broke another church / and were taken and hanged Hec cesarius
dicit.

E. Another example of a relygyous of saint gregorye the which was buried in a
donghyll for that yt he withelde three pieces of gold of the co^munyte. lxxxii
IT is written in the fourth book of ye dyalogue. s. gre. how a monk of ye
relygyous of saint gregorye medecyn hid three pieces of gold / and kept them as
unto his partyculeir without betakynge them unto the communyte. And when it
came unto his death he showed where the said gold was hid / he wept this
thing and so deyed. And when he was deed the said saint gregorye for to show
that he had gretely offended / and for ye example of other made to burye him
and the gold in a donghyll / saying. Thy money be with the in perdycyon.
Albeit after.xxx. days saint gregorye commanded one to sing mass for
him.xxx. days. And he did it. And at the last day the said deed body
appeared unto one of his brederne / the which him demanded of his case. He
answered. I have been ill entreated till unto this day but now am I well. For I
have at this day received communyon. etc. This here is a great example for all
relygyous yt they ne should be propryetayres ne go again the vow of pouerte /
or ill shall come to them And if the said relygyous had not had repentance /
and if he had not manyfested his sin he had be dampened / he was punysshed in
purgatory by penance and by the masses yt were song for him he was delivered.
etc.

F. Another example how a merchant was poor whiles that his brother ye which
was abbot took unto him the goods of the church. lxxxii
SOme masters has written this yt the dyscyple recites in his promtuarye and
says that a monk was abbot of an abbay founded of saint panthaleon The
which abbot had a brother merchant unto whom he gave many times of the
money of his monastery for to increase him in marchaundyse. But ye said
merchant lost all and yode unto naught / how be it that before that he had
received the said money he was a good merchant And also he was right dylygent
in his case. And after that many years he had marchaunded in such wise of the
said gods and that he lost all the said abbot said unto his brother. Wherefore
wastest you so thy substance unto thy confusyon and mine. Unto the which abbot
he said. I live much straytely / and keep my marchaundyse dylygently / but I
can not tell what it ayleth / for my felawes prouffyte and I defayle. Than the
said marchaunte aduysed him and yode to confess him unto a good and wise
priest / yt which told him yt the money yt he had taken was theft by which
al yode to naught. And charged him not to take more ye good of the church /
but that he marchaunded with so little as he had / And that the half of the
gain he should give unto the monasterye for to ful^yl till he had restored. And
that he should live of the other half. And the merchant was obedyent and
accomplysshed the said counsayll. And in short time he became so rich that he
restored all unto ye said abbot And more over he became much rich / and for
as much as the said abbot had meruaylle of the said restytucyon and of ye said
richesse of his brother him demanded from whens came the said rychesses. He
answered when I took ye substance of thy bredern of relygyon yt thou gave me
I ne might nothing get / but was poor / and thou sinned grievously in like
wise as I have found by these clerks. And after yt I have had horror of the
said theft. I have had haboundaunce of goods. etc. by this example all
relygyous should understand yt they offend to give unto their friends of the
goods of the church. The gyuers ben fraulded of their entencyon / for they ne
have given ye said goods for to be employed in such wise / yt is the
substance of the servants of god. And if there be resydue it should be given
again to the poores of Ihesu criste in like wise as says the scripture. Bona
ecclesiaru^ su^t bona pauperu^. etc.

G. Another example how these relygyous ne should give the goods of the
church unto their friends. lxxxii.
IT is written in the life of faders / yt a monk had a poor brother seculer
unto whom he ceased not to give him / so yt he labored not. And the more he
gave him the poorer he was. Than the said monk took counsayll of a good fader
the which cou^saylled him yt he ne should give him no more / and that he
should say unto him. My brother when I had I gave ye go you now to labor / and
of yt that thou shall have give unto me / and all that yt he shall b^^ge unto ye
take it and give it unto pylgry^s / and good auncyentes and them require that
they pray for him. The said monk did this counsayll / and the said seculer
yode heuely to labor. And the first day that ye said seculer came unto the
monk he brought him halpens / the which gave them as it is said. Afterward
he brought unto him of herbs and three loves / the which dystrybute them.
Thyrdly he brought unto him of vytaylles / and of wine and fysshe. / When the
said monk saw it he meruayled / called the pores and fed them. And
demanded of his brother if he had any more need and that he would aid him. He
answered yt nay / and said unto him. All that thou gave me consumed away /
and now I take nothing of the Ihabounde in all goods that god sends me.
Also these seculers shall not be rich for to draw unto them the goods of the
church.

H. Another example of an holy man ye which gave the whyppe unto those that
had taken away his horse. lxxxii
Saint gregorye shows in his dyalogue yt as an holy man named lybertyn was
upon his horse he met an host of men of war yt keste him to the earth / and
took his horse to lead him away / and he said unto them / take this whyppe for
to make him go the better / they departed and lepte upon ye horse / gave him the
sporres impetuously for to make him to goo / but for to be short / they ne
might ferther go / So they byleued that this thing came unto them for the
rauyne that they had done unto gods man / and yielded him his horse again. And
afterward yode their way lightly. etc. This example denotes that the good
lybertyn was right lyberall and pacyent to take unto them the whyppe after that
they had cast him down unto the earth and taken away his horse. And god
showed manyfestly unto the pyllers that they had sy^ned and offended. And that
they ne should trouble ne pyl the people of the church where god them shall
punysshe eternally if they deye without correccyon and amendment. etc.

I. Another example how that thieves sacryleges revoked themself unto penance /
and made restytucyon by the pacyence of an ancient. lxxxii.
IT is written in the promptuary of the dyscyple yt there came thieves to the
monastery of an au^cyent unto whom they said. We are come to bear away all yt
is in thy house. And he said / children bear away what ye will. Than they took
all that they found / and yode their way. And the said ancient found a sack
the which apperteyned unto them / the which they had stolen / he ran after
them and said unto them. Children bear away this yt ye have forgoten in my
house. Than the said thieves were ameruayled of his pacyence revoked them unto
penance / and restored to him all his goods.

Decime.
A. Examples to pay his dysmes. and first example of a lord the which
retained the tenthe of his goods that he gave unto his servant. lxxxiii.
MEn find by writing that a great lord was required of his servant to give
him of his gods. The which lord gave unto him by condycyon to reteyn / yt is
to know / he gave him.x. kye x. sheep.x. geete. etc. and all by tenthes / Unto
whom he said. I give ye these goods here by such condycyon yt I reteyne
the.x. pyece every year. And also I will yt thou them nourysshe in my pasture.
Than he thanked the said lord and took them ioyously / and promised in such
wise to do it. And did it by two or three years / but when he was rich he gave
it with ill will and of ye worst Than the said lord made him come before him and
demanded why he had not given unto him the tenthe of his goods ye which he
had given him / and it was by the admonycyon of his wife. He answered yt it was
by his proprecouetyse and not by his said wife. Than he required pardon and
promised satysfaccyon / and he it pardoned him. etc. By this lord is
understand god the which reteyneth the.x. party of the goods yt he makes
to come / and to grow unto the as you haste herd by ye scryptures. And by that
yt he has paid with ill will denotes unkindness or couetyse. And by this yt he
repented him and promised satysfaccyon is to note yt those the which have ill
paid their dysmes should repent them and reknowlege their fault: and they should
make satysfaccyon / and they shall have pardon of god. Vnde ezechielis.xviii.
Si au^t impius egerit penitencia^ ab oi^bus peccatis q^ operatus e^. etc. vita
viuet et no^ morietur.

B. Another example of a knight ye which dysmed well and his vine bare fruit
two times in the year. lxxxiii
MEn find by writing this ye which follows how ye dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuarye and says yt there was a knight replenysshed with so much of
virtues and of Justice yt in payenge his dysmes he had all good condycyons
pleasau^tes unto god / for he them paid without taryenge / without malice / and
of the best / He had a vine that bare again from year to year about ten pypes
of wine. And it befell one year more of the dyspensacion of god than of the
attempraunce of ye air after that the wine was gadred there ne was but one
only pype of wine. And as the said knight had herd yt he said unto his
servant. That the which was mine and that I should live wtall of the vine god
has taken fro me. And I will not take away his porcyon. Goo and give unto
the priest this pype of wine for his dysme. and it was done. And in that time
as the cosyn germayne of the said knight and a priest past by the said vine ye
which was all full of grapes / yode unto the knight / and repreued him of his
neclygence. Wherefore have not you gadered wine. He answered and said / it is
lately gadered. And ye said priest said that it was replenysshed with fruytes.
Than yode men to se it / and they found more grapes and better than ever they
had done before. And therefore it is a good thing to pay well his dismes. The
said knight was lawful and just to pay well that that he should in obeynge
unto god. Also he ne was unkind / for he reknoleged the good ye god to him
had done. And he was much lyberall to give unto god ye said pype of wine.
And god ye which is the rewarder of ye good deeds that men do unto him he him
restores / and shows that he has done thing digne of praise and of
retrybucyon.

C. Another example of a simple man the which dysmed well / and did miracle.
IT is written in the collocucyons of the faders in like wise as recyteth the
dyscyple and says that after that a holy abbot named johan had done many
miracles there was brought unto him a man the which had the devil in the body
And the said Johan was strongly required of many that he should chase ye devil
from the said man. And for to be short yt said Johan commanded unto the
devil from god that he should go out. The which devil answered that he
would not / and that he ne should go out for him. And upon his words there
arrived a good simple man ill clothed the which bare his tithe unto the
priest the which herd how the devil answered that he ne should go out for
the said abbot / yt which simple man said to the devil. And wherefore ne go
thou out (so thou shall) I command the from god that thou go out. Than the
devil yode out the which said that he ne was gone forth for the said Johan
/ but yt he was constrained by god to go forth for the bounte of the said
simple man. and than the good abbot was a meruaylled ye which demanded of the
simple man of what life he was. And how be it yt he drew back to tell it / he
answered yt he paid well his tithes incontinent that they were deu. And them
put unto prouffyte and paid them Ioyously of the best / and bare them unto
the person or unto ye vycayr I go unto the church said he every day And if I
may there I here every day mass. I keep well the feestes and the
commandments of god / at the begy^nyng of my young aege I had will to be
relygyous and for that that my fader had no more children but me / they ne
would that I were relygyous to the end that to possede their heritage I obeyed
unto them and they married me unto a good woman / we keep well our marriage
together. And if she deyed I have yet the will to be relygyous / it is not yet
changed. There is the life that I am of. Than the said Johan fell on knees
before him and required him yt he would pray for him. etc. In this example is
to be noted yt a good simple man labourer is sometime more nerer unto god and
more holy person digne to do miracles than ne ben ye great bysshoppes doctors
and prelates. When the day of Judgment shall come god ne shall demand have
you be doctor or master in such science or in such / but he shall demand
have thou done ye works of mercy / have thou paid thy dysmes / have thou
obeyed unto ye church. etc.

D. Another example of those the which take of dysmes. lxxxiii
MEn find by writing how saint renobert the which was ye second bishop of
bayeux saw one time that a man took a iauel of corn out of a shefe of dysme
for to give it unto his horse / and saint renobert badde him leave it / but he
would not / wherefore his horse enraged. etc

Tenatitas.
A. Other examples of people to much holding and unmercifully. And first
example of the cursed rich man. lxxxiiii.
IT is written in the.xi. chapter of the gospelles of saint luc yt there was a
rich man clothed with purple and with precious vestymentes / yt which ete and
drank every day delycyously. And there was a lazar full of wounds ye which
let him before the yate of ye said rich / which demanded the cro^mes yt fell
from his table but he gave hy^ none but set dogs on hy^ and they lycked his
fete. So he deyed and ye rich man also / the poor man went to heaven and the
rich man to hell. The ill rich lift up his eyes as he was in torment and
saw Abraham a far of and the lepre in his bosom. He made two requests of
ye which he was denied. The first was of one drop of water. The second to
goo tell unto his brederne yt they might correct them. etc. This rich man is
an example unto all cursed rich men the which use ill of their rychesses /
and this poor is example of all good poores yt have pacyence in aduersite. The
rich was dampened for many things pryncypally for four. The first is because
he was without mercy / for he let ye poor deye for hongre at his gate Cupie^s
saturari de micis q^ cadebant de me^sa diuitis. And therefore god sent him in to
ye fire of hell without pite / and shall say to him at ye day of Judgment. I
have had hongre and thurst and thou have not given me mete nor drink. Et ideo.
Ite maledicu i^ igne^ eternu^. math.xv. The second for because he appetyted
the honors of ye world. And he was proud in heart. And therefore the gospel
says sygnantly yt he was clothed in purple and with precious vestymentes the
which denotes vaynglorye. Induebatur pupura et bysso. The third that he was
much lykorous and yt he nourysshed his belly with metes made dylycatyuely the
which draws unto lechery / and makes the man unmercifully. And therefore
says the gospel. Expulebatur cotidie splendide. He lived after the will of
the body the which ledeth unto dampnacyo^. Vn^ ad roma. viii. Si scdm carnem
vixeritis monemini. He ne lived in this world bu^.xl. years to live
delyciously / and he is in ye fire of hell fro the time of Moses two. M. years
past in so great pouerte yt he ne might have one drop of water / so was it
unto him a right cursed market from ye kechyn The fourth is that he declyned
not from evil words the which comynly he spoke in dynynge. And therefore
sygnauntly he playned that he was tourmented in the tongue when he demanded a
drop of water. What prouffyted unto that man ye rychesses / honors / and
meets when he is dampened. The rychesses delyuereth him not from death. The
metes keeps not his body from worms / and the honors from stynke. Vnde
bernardus. O diuites quid prosant vobis diuitie / quid epule / quid honores
diuitie non liberabunt vos a morte / epule a verme / honores a fetore. Et poeta
dicit. Quid tu^c the sauri / qid aceruus proderit auri Quando pcto^res /
mittuntur in inferiores Malet preterite / quod in omni tempore vite. Pauper
vixisset / quam diuitias habuisset. Et math.xvi. Quid prodest homini si mundu^
vniuersum lucretur / anime vero sue detrimentum patiatur. This saved beggar is
ye example of all good poor folk. He is blyssed in as much as he had
pacye^ce in pouerte. Vn^ luce. vi Beati pauperes quia vestru^ est regnum dei.
Also he is blyssed in as much as he had patience in honger and thurst when he
coueyted to have of the crommes Vnde luce. vi. Beati qui esuritis qr satura
bimini. Et apoca.vii. Non esurie^t neque s^tient amplius. Also he had not the
honors of the rich / but was so abject and dishonored that men set at him
the dogs the which did unto him no harm but lycked his sores. Legitur
math.v. Bti^eritis cum maledixerint vobis homines. etc. Also he had no health
as the rich had but was seek / full of sores / and in sekenes he had pacyence
/ and by that was he blyssed. Vn^ ma. v. Beati pacifici qm^ filii dei
vocabuntur. Also he endured pacyently hete and cold and was evil lodged and
lay before the gate of the rich. And he shall never have hete ne cold. Vn^
apoc. vii. Non cadet super illos sol / neque vllus estus. etc. And the rich
lift up his eyes as he was in tourmentes / and saw and knew the bosom of
Abraham and the lazer. The master of the sentences expounds this in
expressing that the dampened sees some manner the saved in glory / and shall se
till the day of Judgment / to ye end that they be the more tourmented to have
lost the Joys of paradyse. And after the Judgment they shall se nothing. And
in this that Abraham and the lepre saw and knew the rich in tourments is to
understand yt the saved sees the dampened in hell and shall se them them
pardurably / that is also after the Judgment of god to the end yt they have the
more greter Joy that they have avoided the said tourmentes. And the rich the
which demanded one drop of water was denied it. And Abraham said unto him.
Inter nos and vos chaos magnu^ firmatu^ est. To bear unto the a drop of water
it may not be done / for between you and us there is great confusyon and
dyscorde. Ye the which ben ever in tourmentes may not come unto us. Vnde psalm.
Spu^s vadens et non radiens. And we may not go unto you / for we ben confermed
in ye Justice that god has made that we may never have pity ne compassyon of
one dampened. Vn^ david i^ psalm. Letabitur iustus cum viderit vindicta^. If the
saved were sorry of th dampnacyon of their friends they should not have parfyte
Joy / and should go against the will of god. And after the rich required that
the lepre might goo in to the house of his fader to tell to his five bredren
that he was in tourments / and that they should do penance of dread yt they
yode not with him in pains. Abraham denied it and said unto him that they had
Moses and other prophets / and that they might here them if they would. And
the rich said. A fader Abraham if one of the deed arose they should believe
more sooner. And Abraham said. If they will not here the quycke they shall not
here the deed.

B. Another example of dur Durant the which lived without having pity nor mercy
of the poor people. lxxxiiiii
IT is written in speculo hystoriali of a man the which was called durant yt
was not surnamed. For he was hard to do well / in especyall to give unto the
poor / and also too excercyse the works of mercy. And his wife was unto the
contrary / for she was much pytefull / a gyuer of alms / and merciful. When
the poor folk demanded alms of the said Durant / right vylanously he
chased them away. And it befell on a time that our lord came unto him to
demand alms in the symylytude of a poor man. And the said Durant took a
mace wenynge for to have smyten him. Tha^ he wist not where he became / quia
euanuit / but he abode not unpunished. For incontinent great multitude of
deuylles in the form of black moryens came unto him and bare him away in
body and in soul hosed and cladde / and made him to pass the row a little
partycyon of the wall with great tourment. And his wife seeing yt was full of
dread / and in trembling as a lefe ran to tell it unto her neighbors. And
ye servants and children seeing their mother and may stresse run in such
wise they ran after her. And incontinent as they were departed / fire /
lyghtnynge / tempest / and punycion descended in the house the which was great
as a palace / and confounded in to depnes his goods and the said house except
yt the portayle before the gate the which abode in wytnes of that thing. And
ye deuylles came and wrote upon the portayle the words the which follow. Here
was the mancyon of dur Durant / whiles that he was living. Of al wretches
most hard and skante / unto the poor in gyuinge. Of their need he gave no
charge. Wherefore in hell is now his dwelling / in perpetual tourme^t and
rage. Unto that purpose saint James says that the Judgment without mercy shall
be done unto him the which does no mercy. Vn^ iacobi.ii. Iuditia sine
misericordia fiet illi qui non fecerit misericordiaz. When god has given
haboundaunce of worldly gods unto any person / and that he is so unkind yt
he will give nothing unto the poor the which demands in ye name of god /
a man should know that god has such a man in hate. And reputeth yt man
denies it unto himself / as says ye gospel of matthew.xxv. Quod vni ex
minimis meis non fecistis / nec michi fecistis. When a master sends to
demand any thing by his servant and yt he is denied the said master
reputeth that him self is denied. In likewise when ye said Dura^t denied the
poor yt axed in the name of god he denied god. And the evil yt he did unto
them god reputed as done unto himself. And for as much as he was unkind and
without mercy he had well deserved to have punycyon corporel / and that yt is
much wors damnacyon eternal. So it appears that he lost his body / his
goods / and his soul. etc.

C. Another example of a rich man unmercifully yt fled in ye time of famyne
of dread to give al mess unto the poor peop.le lxxxiiii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermens this the which follows thwehiche is
also written in other books and says that there was a rich man without pity and
mercy the which in the time of famyne and of death fled in to an heritage
that he had by a water side. And it was for to avoid the clamor of the poores
the which him required. And the said poores followed hy^ And for that yt they
demanded alms he said. I shall not endure with these dogs / and made his
table behind a chamber on ye side from whens he ne might here their clamor.
And thither came incontinent an armed man the which smote at the gate saying. I
am the messager of god / and I would speak with your master. And a servant
said by the commandment of his master yt he was not there. He answered thou
lie He is gone unto such a chamber to the end that he here not the clamoures
of ye poores And now fro the party of our lord I cite him that he appear
before god / and that he come to yield reason of all the goods temporelles yt
unto him has be taken. The rich man was hastily seek unto the death / than
his friends and parents came to vysyte him and to move him unto penance and
co^fessyon / the which he would not here / and said unto them. I am cyted unto
the Judgment of god / unto whom I have appeared and am there Iuged unto ye
death eternal without any hope of health For in likewise as I ne have
excercysed mercy ne had co^passyon on the poores of Ihesu christ / also without
any mercy am I sentenced / and so ye accursed deyed / and lost his life / his
b^dy / his goods and his soul.

D. Another example how a monk saw rich men hanged in ye fire of hell.
lxxxiiii
IT is written in the dyalogue of saint Gregory that a monk desired to go in to
an hermytage / and before that he demanded lyce^ce to go thither he was seek
and deyed and was led in to hell / but anon he was brought again and put in
to his body. And he remembered him to have seen the tourmentes of hell and
innombrable places full of fire. And within those flambes of fire he saw some
rich men hanged / ye which he had seen and known in his country / and were
stro^gely tourmented. And as he was led to be put within the said fire there
a ryued an angel fro whom proceeded great clerenes the which defended yt he
ne were put in the fire. The which said unto hy^ return in to thy body and
take good head wisely from hensforthe whiles thou lyuest that you come not
hyder. After this voice he returned in to his body / and little and little
came in to conualescence. And afterward put him in so much fastings /
wakinges oraysons / and good operacyons ye marvel it was / for the tourmentes
yt he had seen yt the sinners sustain. etc. This example should move cursed
rich men to restore ye things evil gotten. etc.

E. Example how two men were lepres for yt they despised lepres. lxxxiiii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in ye book of sermons that there was a priest the which
had in so great horror the lepres yt he herd their co^fessyon through a wall
and himself was lepre. Also it is written of a servant the which had in so
great horroure the lepres that he would not bear the^ ne to give the alms /
and he himself became lepre.

Simonia.
A. Examples of people the which have been symonyakes. And first example of
Simon magus. lxxxv
IT is written in the deed of the appostles yt the false and dysloyal simon magus
offered great sum of money unto the apostles wenynge by yt to get the grace
of ye holy ghost yt he saw in them. And understood yt if he might have ye
grace that he should sell it unto other and should receive great fynaunces. But
in figure of all those the which sells or byeth things spyrytualles he and
his money were accursed of god by the mouth of saint Peter. Vn^ actuu^.vii.
Pecunia tua tecum sit in perditio^e. That is to say. Thy money be with the in
perdicion. And for yt he was the first in ye new testament yt would bye
spyrytuall things this espece of theft is named in all holy church symony for
because of ye cursed simon figure of all the dampened symonyakes.

B. Another example of the punycyon of Gyezy yt was symonyake. lxxxv.
IT is written.iiii. regu^.v. ca. how the prophet Helyseus gave health of the
sekenes of lepry to a rich man named Naaman the which offered great gifts
unto ye said prophet after yt he was hole. But for none erthly thing he would
nothing take. Also he knew yt it was symony to sell ye grace of the holy
ghost. And the dyscyple of the said prophet named Giezy was coueytous and
ran after Naaman of whom he demanded money and clothinge. And for to be
short he took two talentes of silver / and two vestementes for ye grace yt his
master had done to him. The which thing dyspleased unto god and his master.
And when the euentyde came ye said prophet demanded of Giezy fro whens he
came. He answered. Thy servant has been nowhere. And the prophet said. My
heart was that you were gone after Naaman and that thou have taken silver and
clothes for to bye oxen and sheep / and for to have servants and maidens.
etc. For as much as you have done this thing ye lepry of Naanam shall draw to
the and to thy sede in perdurabylyte. Lepra naama^ tibi adhereat et semini tuo
in se^piternu^. And so was it done. For he was incontinent mesel / and so he
was punysshed for his symony. This example should wtdrawe each person to bye or
sell spyrytuall things / for it is a great sin yt taryeth not unpunished.

C. Another example of the symonyake Hieroboam the which sold bysshopryches.
lxxxv
IT is written.iii. regu^.xiii. ca. how king Hieroboam took money for to
constytute ye persons to be sovereign bysshoppes. Also it was ydolatry and for
that / yt he was a symonyary and a great sinner for these causes he deyed
myscheuyously and he and all his was put down / degraded / and effaced
Vn^.iii. regu^.xiii. Quicu^que ei^ volebat implebat manu^ hieroboa^ / and
fiebat sacerdos excellorum et propter ha^c causa^ peccauit domus hieroboa^: et
euersa est et deleta de superficie terre. etc. If ye vendycyon of the
prestehode of ydolles was in such wise venged of god that the said Hieroboam
was so punisshed and put down as it is said / it follows well yt they the
which sells the true prestehode shall be cruelly punysshed / for such
people ben thieves. Vn^. johan. x. Qui no^ intrat per hostiu^ i^ ouile ouiu^ /
sed asce^dit aliu^de ille fur e^t et latro. Also they ben sacryleges. For ye
theft yt they done is by vendicyon of holy things. Sacrilegiu^ dicitur quasi
sacru^lede^s vel sacru^ viola^s. It should be a defe thing to say yt he is
sacrylege that steleth a chalyce and yt he is none that steleth the hole
church. Also he that sells a church is a thief / symonyake and sacrylege /
whereby he commytteth great sin. Unto whom it behooves satysfaccyon unto him
yt is culpable / and that desires to be saved.

D. Another example how king Anthiochus was symonyake and proud over
puyssaunce humayne. lxxxv.
IT is written in ye.iiii. chapter of the second book of Machabees / how the
king Anthiochus sold unto Ialon the dygnyte to be sovereign bishop / and
also ill came unto him. He was also proud and lift up over puyssaunce humayne
/ as it is written in the.xvi. cha. of ye said Machabees. And he was punysshed
as he yode he and his army in great pride and furour to sle them of Iherusalem
/ god unto him sent a cruel and right stynkynge sekenes in the guts so yt he
was borne in a lytter / and from that fell in to puddle of mire lyenge on ye
earth. Also he was so stynkynge yt his servants and his host were sore
grieved / and himself ne might endure his own sty^ke. Also he was so seek yt
maugre in his heed he meked hy^ and than deyed in dyspayre.

E. Another example of a man damp^^d yt had many benyfyces. lxxxv.
SOme masters writes this the which follows how ye discyple recites in the
book of his promptuarye and says that one of ye great masters of Paris named
in science was vysyted of ye bishop of paris and admonested at the hour of
his death yt he should leave and resygne many benyfyces that he had vnlefully /
and that he should hold alonely one. And he abode in his opinion full of
error and said. I shall assay if any may be saved with many benefyces. After
his death he appeared unto that bishop at the hour of tyerce as he was in
orayson to pray unto god. And when the said bishop knew yt it was the said
deed body he asked him how it was with him. He answered. I am dampened eternally
without any remyssyon. And he demanded ye cause wherefore. He answered for
elacyon. And ye bishop axed him of the said opinion. He answered that the
pluralyte of his benefyces helped him not / but noyed him. And ye said dampened
him asked if there were mo persons living in ye world. The bishop answered
/ Why demaundest you that / ye which art so great a clerk that thou wenest yt
the world is so sone fynysshed. He answered. Certainly sith yt I deyed there
is dyscended in to hell so great multitude of souls dampened that I would
skantly believe yt there had been so many living in ye world. etc. Unto this
purpose ye prophet Ysaie says / that at the day of Judgment few of the
people shall be saved in regard of al sorts of the ill yt shall be dampened.
And gives this symylytude of raysyns in ye time of their rypenesse and of
olyues in ye time yt they ben gadred. When the grapes and ye olyues have been
assembled and gadered there y^ abides same little thing in the vynes and
olyues forgoten and left. And this little the which there abides is to
compare by symylytude unto the saved / and the great multitude of the raysyns
gadered unto ye dampened. Understand well this the which is here written.
Ysaie.xxiiii. Erunt in medio terre in medio pplorum quo modo si pauce olive q^
rema^seru^t excutiantur ex olera et race^m cu^ fuerit finita vi^demia / huscm
pauci boni saluati lenabu^t voce^ sua^ atque laudabu^t cu^ glorificatus fuerit
dn^s. etc. This man dampened yt had so many benefyces denotes yt the couetyse
of gods and honor of the world deceyueth and dampneth yt people of ye
church. Or cupiditas et radix oi^m maloru^.i. ad thy.vi. ca.

F. Another example that none ought to be constytute in benefyce by prayers
carnalles. lxxxv.
MEn find by wrynge of anabbot when he was in his death bed he made all his
monks to come before hy^. Unto whom he required yt wha^ he should be deed yt
they should choose his neuew for to be abbot after him. The which was done. And
as ye new abbot walked in his gardyn by a well side he herd a voice yt
complained ruthefully. And the said young abbot coniured the said voice in the
name of god yt he should tell him what he was. He answered. I am the soul of
thyn uncle yt am here brent and broyled mestemably in this fountain / for that
yt I have procured carnally yt thou were abbot after me. To whom the neuew
said How may this be that you brennest in a well so cold. Than the voice said.
Go in to the church and fetch ye candelstyckes of copre and cast them in to
this well and you shalt se how I am burnt. Than he did it / and incontinent
ye said candelstyckes were molten as wax within the fire. And when the said
young abbot saw that he called all the monks and renounced unto the dygnyte
and croyse. / and afterward ye said voice was no more herd. By this example a
man should understand that those yt which enters so in benefyces enters not
not by the door / that is Ihesu christ as before is declared. Vnde johan.x. Qui
non intrat per hostium in ouile ouium sed ascender ali unde ille fur est et
latro.

G. Another example how a man seculer should not do the office of the priest in
ye church. lxxxv.
IT is written in the.xxv. chapter of the second book of paralipomenon how ye
king Ozyas lift up in pride when he was in puyssaunce regal / and dyspraysed
his god. Morouer he presumed to be worthy and to do the office of prestes. And
he entered in to the temple of god and took the ensencer for to do the office of
a priest after as ye custom was to do honor unto god. And the master of the
prestes named Azarias entered in to the temple after with great multitude of
prestes strong. The which resysted against the said king / unto whom they
said that it was not his office to do such thing. Vn^.ii. pa. xxvi. No^ est
tui officu vt adoleas incensu^ dn^o / sed est sacerdotu^ qui consecrati su^t ad
huiusmodi misteriu^ / egredere de sctu^ario ne conte^pseris / qr no^
reputabitur tibi ingliam hoc a dn^o deo. And for as much as the prestes
reprehended the king thereof / he thretened them in great ire. And incontinent
before the prestes in ye temple he was smyten with a lepry / and was so all his
life / and dwelled in an house separated from all other / where he deyed a roten
lepre. And for the said cause he was put out of the temple. etc. By this
example and after scripture the seculer people should not presume to do ye
office of a priest / nor meddle to govern the goos^ly things ne the church.
For such things dyspleaseth god.

H. Another example in Alchinus / how lords should not co^stytute people of ill
life to be benefyced. lxxxv.
IT is written in the.vii. cha. of the first book of Machabees how king
Demetrius consiytuted in sovereign priest / yt is bishop a ill man warryour
named Alchinus the which did many euylles / and also he dyed mischeuously /
and he reigned not long in his bysshopryche / after yt he had of eccysyons he
began to dystroy the operacyons of prophets. And incontinent he was stryke^ of
dyuyne punycyon and cursed sekenes / lost his speech and deyed foully / as it is
written in the foresaid book. Vn^.i. macha. ix. Precepit Alchinus destrui domus
sancte iterioris et destrua opera prophetarum and capit destruere Intempore
illo percussus est alchinus and impedita su^t opera illius et obclusu^ est os
eius et dissolutus e^ paralisi: nec vltra potuit loqui verbu^ et motuus est cu^
tormento magna. etc. Alchinus is interpreted / luctus / weeping / For they the
which se^blably entren in to benefyces should weep their sin by repentance.
For they enter not by ye door yt is Jesus christ. No^ intre^t per hostiu^ in
ouile ouiu^ sed ascendut aliunde / et ideo non saluabuntur. etc.

I. Another example of a man the which was bishop unjustly / and he deyed of a
sudden death. lxxxv
SOme masters writes this the which follows how ye discyple recites in the
book of his promptuarye and says yt there was an archedeaken yt coueyted the
bysshopryche / and laid in wait upon his bishop a good man how he might slay
him. And the bishop had of custom to go often times to matynes / and went
before ye other for to great our lady / and he entered by a gate. The cursed
archedeaken put a great stone upon yt said gate. And when the bishop came as
he had of custom and yt he opened ye gate ye stone fell on his heed and
brayned him. And the archedeaken with great labor obtained ye bysshopryche. When
yt he was confermed and that he made his dynera pry^ce served before hy^ at ye
table knelynge. And suddenly the said prince was rauysshed before the chair of
ye sovereign Judge And he saw our blyssed lady with great multitude of saints
and of aungelles bryngy^ge ye said deed bishop / and brought his brain in
their hondes. And ye blyssed virgyn said My right dear sone I show to the / ye
blood broken and the brain of this bishop my friend yt the prodytour has
shed wyllyngly to obtain ye bysshopryche. Our lord answered. Who shall I
send to cite ye said prodytour / and who shall go. Than the blyssed vyrgyn
said. Here is his servant. Unto whom our lord commanded on pain of death yt
he should cite his lord personally to come to answer of so horyble crime. He
returned straight weeping / and trembling / and keste ye keruynge knyfe down
yt he held / and wept sore. He was prayed of the bishop and other for to
tell ye cause / and so he did. And cyted ye bishop as he was charged. And
after that he had brought forth the words / the bishop was smyten
incontinent of sudden death and deyed mischeuously before them al. By this
example a man may understand that he yt sleeth his neighbor iniustly is
homycide of his own soul. For he it da^pneth and byndeth unto punycyon
eternal. If the said archedeaken had not slain the said bishop he had not
deyed in such wise / and he had not be borne in such wise in to perdycyon. He
wened to clymbe hye / but he fell anon. He that cly^beth higher than he should
/ he shall descend more sooner than he would. etc.

K. Another example how a chanon was accused of the patron of ye church. lxxxv.
MEn find in writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says that in a night it seemed to a chanon that god had set hy^
in Judgment and that all ye world was called before him for to receive every
man after his merytes. He saw also that every of them led with him some saint
unto whom they had most served to be advocate toward the hye Judge. And this
chanon thought yt he would pray that saint of whom he had be chanon / and that
he had served in singing and redynge / and that he should go in Judgment with
him before Ihesu christ to the end yt he prayed for him in showing him of his
service. That saint answered / I shall goo with the with good will. And he took
another with hy^ as for witness They came unto Judgment togiders. And when they
were before god the saint said. Lord I require Judgment of this vile lechour
yt by.xxx. years and more has eten and dronken his prebe^de of my church /
and has dysposed his time lecherously and foully / and one only day has not
ended his hours as he ought to do. He here is witness of this thing. Ihesu
christ answered. Take and bind him hand and foot and cast him in to hell. The
chanon awoke as if he had be in a great sleep / and wend for to have been than
in hell. And he said unto that saint. My lord take your prebende / for of it I
will ete no more. For this vysion he converted him / entered in to relygyon /
and saved his soul. etc. By this example people benefyced may understand yt
if they use ill the goods of the church they shall answer before god. And
better it is to be abiecte in this world and to live poorly than after the
death to lose paradyse and to be dampened.

L. Another example how a conuers yt would have been bishop by ye induccyon of
the devil / and he stale an horse and was hanged. lxxxv.
CAsarius dicit. It is written how a monk conuers had learned so strongly the
lettres yt he could read the text. And by the occasyon of this thing was wode
and made to write secretly little books deceptyues / and began to delight hy^
in ye vice of propryete. And as that study was defended to the said conuers for
the love of lernyng he ran in apostasy / and prouffyted little for the aege.
Afterward he was moeued unto penance and came again in to the monastery. And
the devil took him matter for to deceive him. For now he went unto ye scole to
the end yt he were a scoler / now he returned to the monastery / and appeared to
hy^ in lykenes of an angel / and said to him. Learn fast / for it is dyffyned
of god yt you be bishop of such a place. And ye unhappy fool euaded not his
fraud / hoped in hy^ to renew ye ancient miracles. What more. On a day he
appeared unto the conuers in clear voice and Joyous face and said unto him /
such a bishop is deed this day / haste the go in to the cite in the which
thou art predestynate of god to be pastor / his cou^ceyle he ne might change.
Incontinent the unhappy yode our secretly of ye monastery and was lodged in
the house of an honest priest. And to the end that he were put in his syege
gloryously he rose up before the day and stale a right good horse from his
host / lepte upon him and yode his way. In ye morning ye household knew the
damage and followed the appostate. They took him and put him in Judgment and was
drawn with his theft / and by sentence condampned. Not to be in ye chair as a
bishop / but he mounted unto the galowes / and there was hanged as a thief
Take heed unto what end the promise of the devil tends. etc. By this
example a man may understand that one ought to keep him to be deceived of
temptacyons / decepcyons / and lesynges of the devil. For yt that ye said
conuers kept him not and wend to be bishop he was hanged / and yt wors is in
way of dampnacyon.

Vsura.
A. Examples of people usurers. And first example of the punycyon and
dampnacyo^ of an auarycious usurer / out of whose belly proceeded a tree. lxxxvi.
MEn find by wrytinge this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt a rich auarycyous usurer gate much good
unjustly / and for yt he was dampened / as it was showed unto a man yt was
rauysshed. Quasi i^ extasi. yt saw many torments in hell / and there was yt
said usurer prosterned and stretched allow / and from his belly proceeded an hye
tree full of branches / whereon hynge an horyble sort of men and women. And it
was told to the said ra^ysshed man yt the said usurer fro whom proceeded the
tree was an auarycyous / and they the which hanged were of his household / and
of his kynne the which followed him in syn^e / example / counceyle* and
admonyco^n And the which posseded after him yt things ill gotten without being
in will to yield them ne to leave them. etc. This example denotes that it is
great peril to give gods or herytages unjustly. For the geters and posseders
go unto da^pnacyon if they deye Impenytentes without being in will to restore
them.

B. Another example how an usurer that would not restore cried at his death yt
he brent and broyled. lxxxvi.
IT it is written in the sum of penance how an usurer was warned at his death
to make restytucion. And he answered yt he would not / and yt his wife and his
children had need / and therefore he would not restore. The priest would not
give him yt body of our lord and bare it again. Than by the admonycyon of his
friends for to take away the shame did so much yt he promised with mouth for
to deceive the priest / not of will to come to the operacyon. And when he had
received our lord / he cried yt he brent / and the fire of hell was wtin his
body. And in great clamor said I brenne I broyle in body and members / and so
he deyed myscheuously. By this examples a man may understand yt if ye said
usurer deceived the priest by word / he deceived himself much wors by deed.
And if he brenin body in this world. It is to presuppose that he brenneth
cruelly in hell as unto ye soul. etc.

C. Another example of the myscheuous death of an usurer the which in his
sekenes said that he chawed pence. lxxxvi.
IT is written in the promptuary of the dysciple that in the dyocese of Coleyne
a knight deyed yt was renoumed to be an usurer and auarycious. When he was seek
and yt the matter mounted in to the brain he was frantyke. And as he moved
every day his mouth and the tethe his servants said unto hy^. My lord what
ete you he answered. Iete pence. It seemed unto him yt the deuylles put pence in
his mouth. And he said. I may not bear ne suffer these deuyls bring me unto
the church / for peradventure I shall be delivered by the prayers of good men.
When he was there he cried / bear me again / for I se mo deuyls here tha^ in
mine house. The unhappy man was had home / and as the deuyls tourmented him he
deyed myscheuously. etc.

D. Another example of ye horrible death of an usurer. lxxxvi.
ALso the dyscyple recyteth that there was an usurer in the parties of brabant
right cursed / for he dysheryted many noble and puyssant men / and dyspoyled ye
poor of their goods. This said usurer yede often unto the relygyous and
prayed them as in manner of wepinge yt they would pray for him. But he correcked
not himself in no manner. And it befell that he was seek suddenly / and when he
aproched unto his death two terryble dogs of derkenesse came to his bed. And
he drew out of his mouth his own tongue / the which was stretched out as a
foot / and right horrybly he deyed. This example denotes that people the
which lives in sins of cursed life dies horrybly of cursed death. Also the
scripture speaks it. Vn^ psalm. Mors peccatorum pessima. etc.

E. Another example of a woman usurer the which made too burye with her / her
purse and her gold and silver. lxxxvi.
MEn find by wrytinge this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt two systers departed their gods and
herytages after that their mother was deed. And one of them took her porcyon and
departed it unto usury / and there assembled much gold and silver / and had
no compassion of her sister the which was nedy and poor. It befell that the
sister usurer was seek till unto the death. The which called her other sister
for to admynister unto her her necessytees. She served her in hope to have some
thing. When the sister usurer saw that she might not escape the death sent
her sister aside and took two purses full of gold and of silver / and gyrded
them to her bare belly under her clothes. And when her said sister was comen
again she said unto her. I pray the my sister yt when I am deed that you suffer
not that I be dyspoyled of no person / but that you bury me with the clothes
wherewith I am clad: What more. She deyed and was buried as she required. And it
was told unto the lord to whom the town apperteyned yt such an usurer was
deed / and that her gold and silver apperteyned to hy^. He sent incontinent a
messager to seek the said treasour gotten by usury. When the messager had taken
the keys opened the cofres / and that he had nothing found he began to
tourme^t the sister of the said usurer and to inquire for the said gold and
silver. The which had suspeccion yt it should be buried with her sister And for
the words that she had spoken / and for that her body was so heavy. Wha^ yt
said messager understood this thing he required ye priest yt the body were
unburied for to se the said thing. The priest suffered it and the sepulcher was
opened. Marvel it was / for when the body was all naked the priest and the
messager saw a right great and right meruaylous and ferefull serpent ye which
lift up often her heed / and kest in the mouth of the woman fire and sulphre.
Wha^ they saw that they had so great fere and horror that they fled and
cried to make men to cast again the earth hastily / and that it was the
devil the which punysshed the body and mocked it. The messager returned
hastily the which recounted what he had seen. etc. What prouffyted it unto the
said vsuryesse to get the said gold and silver wha^ her soul is tourmented
and damned. It is written mathei. xvi. ca. Quid prodest homini si vniuersum
mundu^ ^ucretur: anime vero sue detrimentu^ patiatur. She got / posseded / and
bare away the thing whereby she is pryued from paradyse / and is in hell
tourmented. In likewise as it is to presuppose for to consider her life and her
death / and that was found after that she was buried. etc.

F. Another example of an usurer the which demanded help of his gold / of
his silver / and treasoure when as he lay at the point of death / with the
which he was tourmented. lxxxvi.
IT is written in the book of examples of an usurer that as he labored in the
later days of his death was prayed of his tre^des that ^e would confess him
and to restore the vsuryes and brought unto him ye priest by two or three times.
But at every time he said / abide till to morrow / and after yt I shall do it.
And at the last after yt he had be strongly warned to be confessed / and that
he had said tarry till to morrow / when the priest was gone he made to bring
before him all his gold and silver / and said to it My gold and my silver I
never ceased to labor to take pain for the till unto now And therefore socoure
me now at this need. And one time there was herd a voice the which said. Go
in to the place where thou sholdest go and we shall goo after the. And
incontinent he deyed / and great thonder and tempest came thither / and the said
gold and silver vanysshed that it was not known where it became. And
afterward by ye suffraunce of god the soul of the said usurer appeared unto a
holy man as he was in orayson the which said unto him that he was dampened /
and that every day he was perforced to drink of the said gold and silver the
which was in the said fire molten brennynge and decourau^t / whereby men may
say unto this purpose yt the which is written. Sapienc. xi. Per q^ peccat ho^ /
per hec et torquetur. In likewise as the said usurer had offended in getynge
and keeping ye said good also of it he was tourmented. By this example a man
may know yt these auarycyous ben well abused to wene yt their gold and silver
shall socoure them sooner than god at death or in sickness / or that it shall
put them in paradyse and deliver fro hell by yt they have loved / served / and
trusted in the gold and the silver more than in god they shall be Iuged and
condampned and by their gold in hell punysshed and tourme^ted. etc.

G. Another example of an usurer ye which commanded his soul unto the devil
for yt it would not abide no more with his goods. lxxxvi.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons how Hubert says in the treatise of the
triple dread that as an usurer labored in his last days he made to be brought
before him his vessel of gold and of silver as cups. etc. And spoke unto
his soul and them unto it promised and many other goods as feldes / houses /
herytages. etc. and that it should abide yet in the world with his body. And as
he said these words ye doloure of the sekenes gryped him / and than he said.
For as much as thou wylt abide no more with me I command the unto the devil
And in saying these words he deyed / and ended his days evil as right was.
For he required not the help of god / but it was of his gods the which
failed him at his gretest need.

A. Another example of an usurer ye which would not restore / and he was borne
upon an ass unto the galowes and there was buried. lxxxvii.
MEn find in writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says that a man an usurer would not restore: howbeit that he
was warned often. And when he was in his death bed he demanded ye
sacraments of ye church of his priest / the which would not give him them if
he would not restore / but he would not. And when he was at the point of death
the said priest was called for to recommaunde the soul unto the aungelles of
god / and yet again he ne would restore. Than the priest said. I recommau^de
him unto all the deuylles of hell / and went fro him. When he was deed his
friends required the said priest to bury him in some corner of ye chyrchyarde
for to save their honor. The which thing he ne would consent / for yt in his
life he would not consent to restore. And the said priest had an ass yt served
for nothing but to bear to and fro the church the books and other things for
the laid priest / and therefore he ne knew none other way. Than the friends of
ye said usurer prayed the priest yt the body might be laid upon the ass and
to let him go where he would / and where the said ass rested the body to be
there buried. And they wened that the said ass would have borne him to the
church or unto the house of the priest / for yt he was acustomed to go to none
other place. This thing was acorded of the priest and of all / and the said
carayne was laid upon the ass / the which bare him all right without
declynynge on any side under the galowes. And there he shaked him so sore yt he
made him to fall before all the people / and there he was buried cu^ patribus
suis. It was no reason that he were in holy earth with good crystyens / for he
had not lived an holy life in obeyeng unto god. And by yt the scripture
approved says yt usurers manyfestes ought to be pryued from sepulture
ecclesyastycall if they deye correccyon and amendment and without restytucyon
made to other. Vt habetur extra de vsuris. capitulo. Quia in omnibus. etcetera.

B. Another example how the ennemy ye devil set him upon the coffre where
the money was of an usurer. lxxxvii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his pro^ptuary how an usurer gave in kepy^ge his
money in an abbay and a relygyous saw ye devil the which set him on the
cofre unto whom he demanded what he did there upon the said cofre. And he
answered. I keep my money. Than when ye abbot herd him speak it he sent again
ye said money and the devil yode his way fro that place. etc.

C. Another example how a man should not pray for an usurer deed. lxxxvii.
MEn find by wrytinge this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt a priest prayed for his fader the which
had been an usurer / and in syngy^ge his hands trembled. And saint Bernarde
prayed god that he would show what ye sygnyfyed. And an angel appeared to him
and said. It is great folly to pray for an usurer the which is dampened. And the
blyssed saint Bernarde defended unto the priest that he should sing no more for
his fader / And after that he had ceased to pray for his said fader his
hands ceased and trembled no more.

D. Another example what became of a church the which was made of vsuries and
extorcyons. lxxxvii
THe dysciple recyteth in his promptuary that after that a man had do make a
church of vsuryes and extorcyons he made the bishop to come for to dedycate
it. And as the bishop accompanied with his clerks did dedycate it he saw
behind ye auter the devil in habyte of a bishop being in a chair the which
said unto ye bishop Wherefore consecratest you my church. Cease the. This
church apperteyneth unto me of good right / for is is edyfyed of vsuryes and
rapynes. Than as the bishop and ye clerks fled the devil dystroyed the
said church with great dau^synge. An almesdede or any thing that a man gives
unto god or unto his church / or unto any of his saints of paradyse should be
of good acquysycyon of good berynge without being made of theft extorcyon or
usury. etc. or it shall not be agreeable unto god. He will not that a man take
away ye goods fro any for to bring them unto him. As the scripture says in
many places. Vn^ eccl. xxxiii. Dona iniquoru^ no^ a probat altissimus / nec
recipit oblatione^ i^i quorum. Et michee. ca. i Intulistis de rapinis claudum
et languidu^ munus / no^ quid suscipiam dn^o debile qr rex magnus ego sum dicit
dn^s. etc.

E. Another example of an usurer yt would not restore. lxxxvii.
IT is written in the book of ye gift of dread how a priest gave warninge of
three things unto an usurer yt deyed. The first was that he should repent him.
The second that he should confess him. The third yt he should make full
restytucion after his puyssaunce. And the said usurer said. I am content to do
the two first things / but ye third how should I do it / for there should
nothing be left unto me / ne unto my children. And the priest said. Without
these.iii things thou may not be saved / as says ye sages and the
scryptures. And he answered I will prove if it be true / for I will nothing
restore. And so he deyed cursedly / and dred more ye pouerte temporal than
dampnacyon eternal.

F. Another example of an usurer ye confessed him / and made restytucyon in ye
end of his days lxxxvii
MEn find in writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says that an usurer fell in great sekenes ye which was warned
by his friends to confess hy^ and to receive all the sacraments. And he said.
What shall it serve me yt have so much deferred to confess and amend. And
the fre^des said. A man should evermore confess him / for peradventure god
shall give you his grace. And the confessor was called / unto whom the usurer
said. My fader espyrytuall I will confess me with good will. But I have
committed so many sins / and therein am so bewrapped yt I can not tell how I
may escape. Unto whom the confessor said. Dyspayre ye not / but confess you
/ for confession well made has such virtue that all sins there ben pardoned.
Than he confessed him / and god gave unto him such grace yt he repented him
and wept so strongely his sins that with pain might he speak by force of
wepinge. He made an entyer confession / restored the said vsuryes and things
ill gotten after ye counceyle of the confessor / and ended well his life and his
days.

Restitucio.
A. Examples of restytucyon. And first example of a man named Fryderyke
tormented in purgatory for that he had not restored ill gotten gods. lxxxviii.
MEn find by wrytinge this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt after yt a knight was deed he appeared unto
a citezyn his neighbor in such manner yt smoke and flambe issued fro his
nosethrylles / and he was covered with sheep sky^nes / and bare a plotte of earth
upon his sholdres. Unto whom the cytezyn said. Ar ye Fryderyke. And he said /
ye. Fro whens come ye / and what betokens the things yt I se. He answered. I
am in great pains for yt I have taken away sheep skynnes from a wydowe the
which I feel now brenny^ge. Also I have drawn unto me iniustly ye party of a
field yt weyeth sore / and bruseth my sholders. But if my children restore my
pains shall be light / so he departed. And wha^ the sons of ye said knight
herd these words of their fader they loved better that he should abide in
pain than restore ye said things. This example denotes that ye said
Fryderycke had contrycyon and confession / but he did no satysfacco^n. And
therefore he was in purgatory. And by yt / that ye said children would not restore
it is to note yt one ought not to tarry for his parents too do good after his
death / but do it himself.

B. Another example of a child yt was in the pains of purgatory / for yt he
restored not money borrowed. lxxxviii.
MEn find by writing this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says yt a duchesses sone of.ix. year old was seek and shrone
him and deyed. And after his death he appeared to his mother / and said yt he was
in great pain in purgatory for that yt he had not paid the debtes borrowed of
the servants of his said mother for to go play. And yt at his death he
remembered not to pay them or make to be paid. And the said child required his
mother that she would pay the said debtes / and that his pain should have end
so yt they be paid. The which said yt with good will she would pay them. And
she made inquysycyon of the said servants. And made them al to be paid the
which had send to her said sone. And incontinent that they were all paid the
child appeared to his mother again in great clerete Unto whom he said that he
was delivered from pain and put in great felycyte. etc. By this example a man
should understand that him behooves to be pure and clean for to go in to
paradyse. When the said child was wtholden and carried from glory alonely for
silver borrowed / how shall these thieves and pyllers enter the which will not
restore / when the said child had taken nothing malycyously was carried. It is
written i. ad cori^. vi. Neque fures neque auari regnum dei possidebu^t. etc.

C. Another example of a man tourmented in the pains of purgatory for the
defaute of.vi. penyes that he ought to a woman. lxxxviii.
IT is written in the promptuary of the dyscyple yt a man ought.vi pence to a
wydowe / the which demanded many times her payment. And the said man dyed
without payenge it / howbeit yt he denied not ye debte. After his death he apered
to a devout person and prayed him yt he would pay ye said.vi. pence / and
that he was much tourmented in purgatory / and endured as many strokes as she
had made steps for to axe him the said money / and yet should sustain till
yt she were paid. By this example it is to be noted that by the defaute to pay
that yt a man owes he is let to go in to paradyse / and is bound to
punycyon.

D. Another example of a relygious that was in the pains of purgatory for an
halfpeny that he owed unto a feryman or passager. lxxxviii.
IT is written in dyaloguo cesaru yt a relygyous conuers of the order of
Cystercie^cis was sent of his abbot for a besynes / and he yode. And when he
came to pass over yt water he promised to pay an halfpeny unto ye passager for
his mede / the which he should have sent unto him / and he was neclygent to
send it. When he came unto his death he confessed him of the neclygence of the
halfepeny not paid / for he cared not for so little a thing. After his death
he had ye said halfpeny before his eyes the which halfpeny became so great
that it seemed him that it was greter than all the world. And when he came unto
the Judgment of god there was found none other thing yt let the said
relygyous to go to heaven. And at ye request of some saint he was sent to his
body and confessed it and restored and was saved.

E. Another example how ye devil lets to restore lxxxviii
SOme masters writes this the which follows how ye discyple recites in the
book of his promptuarye and says that three deuylles came upon a time to a
good holy hermyte. Of whom he axed the names. The first said / close heart For
when any hereth a sermon I close his heart yt he sees not ne repents his
sins The second says. I am called closing ye mouth. For if any would
confess him and avoid our gynnes I close his mouthein lettynge him yt he ne
may confess him. The.iii said. I am called close purs. For I let to restore
the ill gotten goods / and lets to give unto poor of their goods / and so
I close ye purse. We ben assembled togyders to help each other. etc. By this
example it appears yt the deuyls lets a man to repent him / to confess /
and to make restytucion. And it behooves to do the contrary to have salvation.
etc.

F. Another example of an abbot yt sent again money given unto the monastery
/ for yt it was come of usury and cursed acquysycyon. lxxxviii
THe dyscyple recites in his book that an usurer left by testament a great
sum of money about a. M. and. vi.C.li. unto a monastery / whereof many great
possessions were bought. After the death of the abbot was chosen another of
good conscye^ce yt was dyspleasaunt of the said money received. What did he.
He sold his bestyall his moeuables and immouables and sent ye money again to
the executourse to the end yt they should restore to all those the which had been dispoyled and grieved. And for that / yt the said executoures would not take
it but sent it again to the monastery ye good abbot was sorry and made the said
money to be borne to the market before all the cytezyns the which were present
/ and to them said who so will take this money let him take it / yt it is ours
I renounce and refuse it. For I doubt not but yt it be unjustly gotten. When yt
cytezyns saw this thing they were much edyfyed of the deed took counceyle
among them and chose people right faithful the which yielded the said money
pertyculerly to all those yt had been grieved / and of whom the said money was
comen. And in short time god restored unto to the said monastery in double
more of money tha^ they had restored. And where they had but few goods
afterward in great haboundaunce all was replenysshed. A doctor named Wyllyam
witnesses this to be verytable. And yt he saw in the said monastery many of
ye relygyous saints doing miracles and replete with spyryte of prophecy.

Excommunicatio.
A. Examples of exco^munycacyon against the thieves and sinners. And first
example how a white lofe became black and moysty after that it was excommunyed
and accursed. lxxxix
SOme masters writes this the which follows how ye discyple recites in the
book of his promptuarye and says that there was an earl of Toulouse that
sustained and received heretykes / and every such person is accursed by
sentence of right / ipreo fcto^ / with the heretykes. And an holy abbot was sent
to the said earl to wtdrawe him fro the said deed the which ne might be
converted by word ne deed to dread exco^munycacion. Than ye abbot said to ye
earl. To the end yt you and yours know by deeds how the soul is undone yt is
bound of exco^munycacyon I will yt one bring me a white lofe. And than he
said. O breed albeit that you ne haste deserved cursynge to the end yt ye veryte
of our faith be showed in ye / and the cursednes of ye soul that dredeth not
exco^municacio^. Exco^munico te. I curse ye. And as soon as he had spoken ye
word ye said breed yt was white became black / he made it to be cut in two
parties / and it appeared also black wtin moysty and corrupt. Afterward he
said to the^de that ye know also the virtue of the absolucyon / he took the
said lofe and absoyled it / the which became in his first whytenes and beauty.
By this example a man may understand yt ye souls of people exco^munyed or
accursed ben in horrible and foul estate yt has deserved to have such
maledyccyon / when the white breed became so undone and moysty / If a person
exco^munyed knew the great evil and maledyccyon yt is in it / and the pains
the which ben to him prepayred in hell if he deye in such estate / he should
love better to lose all the world if it were his / and that his body were as
small as flesh to pastees than to abide in it.

B. Another example how yt storkes left their nestes the which were upon a
man's house incontinent that he was accursed. lxxxix.
MEn find by writing this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says that the pope Gregory the saint exco^munyed a new earl.
And for yt he contempned ye said excommunycacyon by miracle the storkes the
which had made their nestes upon his house yede to another place / whereof ye
said man meruayled / and made him to be assoyled. And incontinent the said
storkes came again to make their nest upon the house of the said earl.

C. Another example how the sparowes the which made noise in the church yode
out incontinent that they were accursed. lxxxix.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons how in ye church of saint Vyncent the
martyr sparowes and cried and let the dyuyn^ service. And for yt none might
put them out the bishop of ye place cursed the^ and thretened them of death if
they entered after that. And more over if a man took such a bird and bare it
with force in the said church forthwt it deyed.

D. Another example how the flowers of an appletree fell and dried as soon as
the exco^munycacyon was drawn for a portos yt was in it. lxxxix.
MEn find by wrytinge how a thief stole the porthos from a priest And for yt
the said thief was suspended he put ye book in the creues of a young apple tree
full of sweet flowers. The sentence of ye bishop was borne. etc. And the day
that it was cast in going to mass the people saw the said tree floured / and
when they came again from the said mass they found ye said flowers undone.
The tidings came unto the said bishop of this thing / ye said book was
found / and as soon as ye bishop had assoyled the tree ye flowers came again
unto the said apple tree. By this example these excomunyed or cursed may
understand that they lose all the goods spyrytualles the which ben in them /
and also god paradyse / and all good deeds. And also all the consenters and
part takers should dread / sith that the said apple tree the which had not
done the ill lost her flowers. And here a man may understand that the good
deeds lost comes again by the virtue of the absolucyon sith that the apple
tree recovered the flowers.

E. Another example how a raven became hydeous and his feders fell from him
incontinent that ye bishop had cursed for his ring that the said raven had
taken. lxxxix.
MEn find by writing that a bishop drew one time a ring from his finger /
and a raven pryuely took it and bare it upon the house between two tyles And
afterward the said bishop sought his ring and was wroth and accursed him yt
had taken it. And in short time ye feders of the said raven fell from him and
became so hydeous yt it was marvel. And afterward within a little time the
tyler found the said ring / and the truth was known. The said bishop
assoyled and reapelled the said sentence / and incontyne^t the feders came
again unto the raven as before / and was made fair. etc.

F. Another example how excommunycacyon cast Justly or unjustly is too be
dredde as it appeared in two monks the which made the^ to be gelded. lxxxix.
IT is written in vitas patru^ how two seculers made them monks the which had
envy of the voice euangelyst / but not after science They gelded theymselfe
also as for to have the realm of heaven. And when the archebysshop herd of it
he cursed them And they wend to have done well / and they wrothed them against
him saying. We ben gelded for the realm of paradyse / and he has accursed us
/ go we in to Iherusalem to the bishop for to have help against the said
archebysshop. And when they were comen thither and that they unto him had
declared the case he said unto them. And I accurse you of this thing. They
were yet wroth and yode unto tharchebysshop of Anthyoche unto whom they
declared by order all the case. And he them cursed as the foresaid did. And
they said among themself Go we unto rome unto the pope / and he shall venge us
on the said bysshoppes. And thither they yode and said unto ye pope. We ben
comen unto the as chief unto the church and of us all / and they unto him
recompted al unto whom he said. And I you exco^munycate / for ye ben separed.
Than the monks defayled of all excusacyons and reasons. and said unto
themself. These bishops holds together for that they resemble to sennes. But
go we unto such an holy man yt ne takes head unto ye persons. Eamus ad illu^
viru^ dei sctm^ epyphanu^ episcopu^ de cipro qr propheta est et persona^ hoi^s
non accipit. When they approached unto the cite of ye said prophet it was
reveled unto hy^ of their case. And he sent before them and told them that
they ne should enter in to the cite. And than they knew their fault and said
that they were culpable in veryte they repented and would do penance / in
saying they have Justly excommunycate us This man here is a prophet / god has
reveled unto him of us. And they repreued themself right gretely of the gylte
yt they had done. And when god saw their heart repentauntes and knowing their
fault reveled it unto the said bishop. etc. The which made them to enter in
to the cite / comforted them and received unto co^munyon. And wrote again unto
the bishop of Alexandrye that he should receive them and that in veryte they
had done penance and so was it done. By this example a man should understand
that sentence is to be dredde. How be it that they wened to do well and not to
be excommunycate and yet they were. And incontinent they had reknowleged their
fault god would yt they were absoyled and received.

G. Another example how lightnynge consumed one that was excommunyed and
accursed. lxxxix.
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuary that one exo^munycate and obstynate
entered in to the church of the virgyn Mary. And in contynent lightening
entered therein the which slew him / and the other had no harm. A man should
here understand that one exco^munyed or accursed yt gooth unto the church and
to speak and to talk with the good against the defense the which is made / and
for to put the other in sin hurts himself / and better it were unto him to
humble himself and to be solytary. etc.

Another example that one excommunyed repented him and afterward deyed before
that he was assoyled his body appeared as black as pytche. And after the
absolucyon he appeared white as snow.

H. Another example how a gardyn exco^munyed bare no fruit that it was
absoyled. lxxxix.
MEn find by wrytinge this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt the mother of the duke of burgoyne bought
of a priest a right fair gardyn planted with fair trees. And for as much as
the said gardyn bare no fruit ye lady demanded the cause. And it was said
unto her / when the priest song mass on ye sunday in the fruit time the
young men left the mass and the church and yode to gader the fruytes and
brake the hedges. After yt they had been repreued and warned too resyst them and
that they ne would obey he cursed ye gardyn yt it bare no more fruit. Tha^ ^he
duchess made to absoyle the said gardyn by the priest. The which commanded
with that yt it should bear fruit as it was accustomed / and in likewise it was
done. Unto purpose of this example it is written marci xi. quod dn^s maledixit
ficulnee / and statim aruit Our lord Ihesus has given his puyssaunce unto
prestes to bind and unbind. Vnde math. xvi. Quodcu^que ligaueris super terram
erit ligatu^ etin celis. etc. Of good right the gardyn bare no fruit / for it
was a curste. And after that it was assoyled ye ire of god was taken away / and
it fructyfyed. Sith yt ye said gardyn yt had not offended was pryued from
fruit and from all goodness by more great reason a person excommunyed is
pryued. etc.

Malediccio.
I. Examples of maledyccion. And first example of four monks the which slew
a bear. lxxxix
IT is written in the dyalogue of saint Gregory how a good relygyous named
Florentius required god yt he would send him some co^solacyon for to keep his
bestes. And when he yode forth of his oratory he found a bear. The which
when he bowed his wist yt he was sort of god / and committed his bestes to ye
said bear to keep as pastor and said. Keep my bestes yt come aye^ always at.
vi. of ye clock. The bear was obedyent and did so / and came sometime at six
or at noone after the commandment of his master in the time of his young
aege. And it befell that.iiii. monks had envy on the said Florentius for yt
their master did not like miracle and slew the said bear as he kept ye
bestes. When the beer came not again to the house at ye hour acustomed
Florentius was sorry in awaytynge for him And yode in the euentyde to the feldes
and found hy^ deed by the sheep. When he was enfourmed of ye case / and that
he knew how the monks had slain him he bewailed ye beer / and the malice of
his bredre^. And in his wrath cursed the homycydes of ye beer / and said. I
hope in god yt those the which has slain my beer yt did none ill shall
have vengeance in this life. And forthwt yt said monks were smyten with
cruel sekenes / scz morbo elepha^tico. and their members sty^kynge so deyed.
Whereof Florentius was ferefull and wroth / for he reputed himself homycyde /
for yt his his orayson was exalted of god. He wept their death all the time of
his life / to the end yt a simple man ne should presume to curse here after. etc.
This example denotes two things. The first yt punycyon and maledycyon came
upon the four monks for yt they slew the said bear by envy. The second yt a
man should more sooner require salvation and benedyccyon for his enemies than
maledyccyon in as the said Florentius was wroth to have required maledyccyon
on the monks. etc.

Septimum preceptum:
Luxuria.
A. Examples of people yt committed lechery. And first of a woman dampened yt
knew lecherously one of her kynnesme^ and did many other sins / of whom
issued two todes and bestes in confessy^ge her. lxxxix.
MEn find by wrytinge this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says ye two freres yode to preche in ye country
about. Of the which the one was au^cyent and penytencer of ye pope. The other
was young / innocent / and debonayre and came unto the castle of a noble woman
sinner. She confessed her unto the penytencer / and at every sin yt she told
the young friar saw a tode or a be issue of her mouth yt lept and ran
out of the church. And at the last as she would confess a great sin a
dragon put out his heed / albeit he drew it in again / for she had shame for
to confess it / and all the said todes and beestes came again in to her
mouth. And after that the said freres were gone ye young friar recou^ted it
unto the penytencer. Than the said penytencer was wroth and came again for to
warn her to confess her entyerly / and found her deed. They put them in
fastings and oraysons. And on the third day the said woman appeared unto them
in a terryble vysyon. For she bestrode a right terryble dragon / and had two
cruel serpents that enbraced / gyrded / stynged / and bote with their tethe
her breasts And had on her eyes two foul todes / and from her mouth issued
fire and sulphre right stynkynge. Her hands were devoured of two dogs yt
bote them Her eres were replete with arowes of fire Her head was full of
venymous lysardes yt bote her sore. And when ye freres saw this woman for
dread they fell unto the earth. Unto whom she said. Friends of god dread you
not. I am the right cursed woman sinner yt ye confessed before yesterdaye. I
made a confession faint and not entyer / for I hyd one sin yt I had committed
with my cosyn. And ye penitencer coniured her in ye name of god almighty that she
should tell the causes of the pains yt she had. And she answered. The lysardes
the which punysshe me in the heed is for the aournementes yt I bare. The todes
the which punysshe me in the eyes is for the lokynges unlawful. The arowes of
mine eeres is for the herynge of folysshe words. The fyry sulphre punyssheth my
mouth for the blasphemes / detraccyons / songs / vain words and kyssynges
yt I made. For the enbracynges and atouchynges unlawful yt I made the serpents
tourmenteth my breasts. The dogs byteth my hands for yt I have given to he^
that yt I should have given unto ye poor Also for yt I have aourned them with
rings and Iewelles. And I ride this dragon for ye pride yt I had in rydy^ge
and lyftynge me up in clothynges and garments above other / and for the
lecherous thynkynges I am brent intollerably in the members femynyne with the
thyghes knees / and legs. And soodaynly ye foresaid dragon terribly tourmented
her and bare her in to hell / and never after she appeared. By this example is
denoted many things / pryncypally how the said women the which bears on
their hedes undue aournementes / and that makes enbracementes shameful and
unlawful / upon their breasts as it is said in ye example shall have strayte
punycyon. Also by that yt she made not entyer confession for shame the todes
and beestes the which were issued returned again in to her body. That is to
say her sy^nes confessed were not pardoned and returned in her. For saint
Bernarde says. quod su^ma dei pietas vinia^ non dimidiabit / aut nichil / aut
totu^ te penitente dabit. And unto purpose that she had todes and bestes yt
tourmented her / and the fire that broyled her. It is written Ysaie vlti^o. and
marci. ix. Vermis eorum non moritur and ignis non exti^guitur. Et legitur
judith.xvi. Dabit ei^ eis deus ignem and vermes i^ carnes vt vrantur and
sentia^t vsque in se^piternu^. This word vermes / sygnyfyeth two things. The
first ben ye worms todes and bestes of the earth as says catholycon. The
second is the remors of the conscience / for the dampened shall evermore have
remembrance and remors of their sins yt they ben tourmented.

Another example of a curyall the which knew lecherously a daughter yt he had
holden upon the ^onte. lxxxx.
IT is written in the.iiii. book of the dyalogue of saint Gregory yt there was a
curyall in the prouynce of valere that made hy^ self dronken the saturday of
Eester after ye fast / and had holden upon the font a daughter the which he
demanded to dwell with hy^ And he knew her and lost her that night ye which is
a thing horrible to tell. When ye morning came yt he should arise he thought
yt he was much culpable / and that needs he must go to wasshe and bathe him in
likewise as he wysshe him in the bayne he washed the soylenes of the gylte of
his sin. Than he yode to wasshe him and dredde too enter in to the church /
but he dredde ye shame of the world / and the language if at such solempnyte
he yode not in to the church. And if he thider yode he dred the Judgment of
god. Than he dredde the shame of the world / but in dredynge held hy^ in
the^de suspect in regarding unto every of his moeuynges at what hour he
should be given unto the devil for to tourment hy^ before all the people. And
albeit that he dred hugely / he ne had none ill on ye said day And yede forth
Joyous of the church. And the monday he entered in to the church surely
without any grefe or harm. And it was so that by six days / he had never
none evil. And he yode in too the church Joyful and assured in wenynge ye
god ne had seen his sin / or if he had seen it yt he had pardoned him
mercyfully. And ye seventh day he deyed in the church of sodayn death
ho^^ib^y. And when he was buried flambe of fire issued out of his sepulcre /
and was so long space in the sight of all people. And there was in such manner
yt he brenned his body and bones / his sepulcre and all the earth yt had been
thrown and put out. etc. By this man that was punysshed is to understand yt
so shall be the lechours impenytentes. Also by that yt he confessed him not /
and that he did no penance / his case ne should be good to bear. For it is
written luce.xiii. Nisi penitentiam habueritis oe^s simul peribitis. Also he ne
might be puryfyed and made clean of his sin but only by true confession as
says saint Ambrose Nullus pcto^ iustificari poterit / nisi prius co^fessus
fuerit. And therefore he was abused to wene to take the culpe of sin away as
in baynynge him or wasshi^ge. Also for that / ye god punysshed him not forthwt
that he had done ye sin / is to understand yt god the which is mercyful
punyssheth not incontinent that we fail for to tarry us / that we should do
penance. etc.

C. Another example of a woman damned for atyrynge and aournynge of her heed /
and for to show her breasts / and for dauncynge / lepynge / and shameful
enbracementes. lxxxx.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons this the which follows the which is
also written in other books and says that there was a priest yt put himself
ofttymes in afflyccyons and oraysons / and song mass for his mother deed. And
one time as he song mass for her and desired too know somewhat of her estate
he saw her fast by the auter in a basket of fire holden with two deuylles and
bound. Her heed was replete with serpents small as heeres / and had a tode on
her breast that colled her about the neck with her forefete and vometed flambes
of fire in to her face. And had her hands and fete bound with chains of
fire. The said priest meruayled / and asked her of her estate. And she said
that vnprouffytably he prayed for her and yt she was dampened. She said more
over that the pains yt she had in her heed of serpents of fire was for the
aourneme^tes and heeres that she had borne upon her head. And yt she sustained
the tode on her breast for yt that she had showed her neck bare and her said
breast. And that yt the said tode vomyted the brennyng flambes of tire in her
face was for that she had colored and painted her said face. And for that yt
she had offended our lord by enbracementes shameful of her hands and of her
fete to lepe and to dance she had them bound w chains of fire. Than she
departed and went to hell. By this example is denoted that aournementes and
atyrynge full of pride the which apperteyneth not unto the estate of the
persons ben to fle. And also the dau^ces vnshamefull / for in hell they shall
be kept from lepynge / the fete and the hands shall be bound of the Justice of
god. Vn^ mathei.xxii. Ligatis manibus et pedibus proucite eu^ in tenebras
exteriores. Also by that yt the said woman had punycyon of the rode the which
was on her breasts is example for all good women the which will euade punycyon
/ and have salvation that they should hyde their said breasts and fair
flesh. For it is a bayte and the line whereby the devil deceyueth and takes
the persons. Also by ye beholdynge and regard of such things the persons
appetyteth to do and fulfill the sin of lechery that ledeth to da^pnacyon.
Vnde gregorius. No^ licet i^tueri non licet co^cupisci. And sapyence says.
ecclesi. ix. ca. Propter specie^ mulieres multi perieru^t / and ex hoc
concupisce^tia quasi ignis exardescit. Et hieronimus dicit. quam gladius igneus
est species mulieris quasi ex omni part sui sagittas mittunt / scz ad animas
decipiendas.

D. Another example how.xxiii. thousand men were brent with ye fire celestyall
for the syn^e of lechery. And Balaam gave the counceyle. lxxxx
THe hystory of Balaam is wryte^ in the bible in the.xxii. and.xxiii. chapter
of ye book of nombres. In the beginning of his life he was good and prophesied
ye coming of our redempcyon. For he said yt a sterre should go out of Jacob.
Orietur stella ex jacob / the which denotes the blyssed vyrgyn Mary. etc.
Also he had such gift of god that those yt he blyssed were blyst / and those
that he cursed were cursed. And for yt ye Balaac made war with the children of
ysrael / and yt he might not surmount them he sent to seche the prophet Balaam
for to curse the said people of ysraell. And for the great honors and
rychesses that the king Balaac made to offer him / he was perverted and
overcome so strongly that he demanded of god by two times yt he might go to
curse the said people. And god not so accorded. For his request was unjust and
ill in two manners. Primo. For that he would curse ye people ye good had
blyssed. Secundo. for to to have gold / silver / and honors worldly. Vnde
marci. xxii. dicit dn^s. No^ ire cum eis / neque maledicas populo qr bn^dictus
est And after yt Balaam had excused him to ye messagers of the king / he was
yet so gretely desired and overcome for worldly honors that he lept upon his
ass for to goo and speak with the king. But ye ass yode backewarde and would
not go his way / and yede ouerthwarte the feldes and drew him among breres
and thorns. He bette him / but for nothing he would go forward. And by the
virtue of god the ass spoke and him demanded. Wherefore smytest you me. He
answered. Thou have deserved it / and thou mockest with me. And Balaam aduysed
ye angel ye held a sword all naked. Than Balaam worshypped him upon the
earth hastily. And the angel him demanded wherefore he had beten thyrdely
his ass. I am come for to persecute the. And if thyn ass had not gone back
against thy will I had slain the / and he had lived. And Balaam said. I have
sinned. I knew not that you was against me. And if it dysplease the that I
thither go I shall return. And the angel said unto him. Go with these messagers
/ and keep the that you speak nothing but that yt I shall co^maundethe. Than
Balaam yode. And wha^ he was in the cite the king sent unto hy^ gifts and
princes / and was received in great honor. For to be short Balaam made to
edyfy by three times auters / and in three places for to do sacryfyce to god of
lambs and bulls to know if god should consent more sooner in one place than
in another for to curse ye people of Israel. But god yt is not varyable
consented no more in one place than in another Afterward for to obey to ye
king Balaam counceyled hy^ how he should make to commyt fornycacyon in ye men
of arms of ysraell: whereby god should be wroth with them: and right cruelly
punysshe them. And ye manner of ye counceyle was yt they prepayre all the fair
maidens of the cite assyeged of ye ysraelytes / and that those fair women
should hold them at their doors / and their ydols by them. And yt when the
cite were take ye me^ of arms would go to ye fair women. And so god wrothed
against the^. The ill counsel of the said Balaam was done and the sin
acco^plysshed. And god the creator wrothed him against the said children of
ysrael in such manner that fire celestyall descended upon them the which
bre^ned.xxiii.M. In likewise as expounds Haymo upon the words of saint Poule
the which ben written.i. ad cori^. x. Neque fornicemur sicut quidam eorum
fornicati sunt et cecideru^t vno die viginti tria milia. And yet of the above
said children there was yet a thousand of the princes the which were hanged
by the commandment of god and of Moses as it is written numeri.xxv. And the
Ire of god was appeased by that ye one of the children of Ysraell named Fynees
rose up and slew in the zele of god and of Justice a man and a woman in
co^myttynge fornycicaon. etc. All this said punycyon and this sin was by the
counceyle of the cursed prophet Balaa^ the which required of god that he
might deye as the Just men. Vnde numeri.xxiii. Moriatur ai^a mea morte
iustoru^ / et fiant nouissima mea horu^ similia. He would deye well / but he
would not live well. And therefore his request was not Just for to have well
without deseruynge it..

Stuprum.
A. Examples of deflouringe of vyrgyns And first. Example how a vyrgyn was
corrupt of a young man / and by malice imposed the sin upon saint Machaire yt
was pacyent. lxxxxi.
IT is written in the life of faders how the devil tempted a vyrgin the which
was defloured. And when she was great her friends asked her of whom she had
con^eyued. And she answered. This solytarye has slept with me. And her friends
and men of the street took Machayre / and hanged pottes and kettilles about his
neck / and led him betynge through the streets. And so much they Iniuryed
him / bette and oppressed that he was in likewise as half deed / and he bare
all pacyently. And a seculer man yt had mynystred unto him his necessytees was
also rebuked in saying unto him. Thou said yt he was an holy man / and he has
defloured our daughter. For to be short they would not leave to beat the said
Machayre till yt ye said man had pledged that he should nourysshe the daughter.
And after that he was pledged Machayre said unto himself. I find a woman it
behooves me to nourysshe her. And he put himself to work night and day and
made baskettes. And the price that they were sold for he made to be born unto
the said woman / and he bare all pacye^tly. And when the said woman should
child she was sore seek / and so longly to travail that it was marvel. And
she was demanded ye cause wherefore she chylded not She answered. It is for
that / yt I falsely has imposed the sin unto the solytary the which is
innocent / such a young man has committed the deed. When the man pledge of
Machayre herd the case he bare tidings that the woman might not child for
the false crime that she had imposed and that all the people came unto him to
cry him mercy and to do penance. When Machayre herd these tydy^ges here to
fle vain glory he abode not till the people came unto him for to gloryfye him /
he fled in to another place solytarye. etc. By the said daughter the which
was punysshed for yt yt she had imposed the said sin by lyenge upon saint
Machayre is for to understand that liars and ill sayers shall be punysshed of
god. And that their lesynges shall be dyscouered and showed before all. Vn^ in
euangelio. Nichil occultu^ est quod non manifestetur: nec absco^ditum quod no^
co^gnoscatur and in pala^ veniat. And by that yt Machayre had pacyence when he
was beten and iniuryed denotes yt in aduersyte a man should be pacyent. And
that / yt Machayre dred vaynglory denotes yt we should fle it and not abide to
be honored and praised of ye people. etc.

B. Another example of a knight dampened and tourmented in hell yt took the
maydenhede of a vyrgyn. lxxxxi.
MEn find by wrytinge this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt a knight dyspoyled and took the mayde^hede
of a vyrgyn. And after that he was deed she prayed for ye soul of hy^. The
said knight deed appeared unto her vysibly in voice right rough and horrybly.
The which as she demanded the cause of his horsenes / he answered that it was
for that / yt he gloryfyed himself in ye swetenes of his voice in syngy^ge the
songs lecherouses and seculers. And she him demanded wherefore he had in such
wise the thyghes and the legs right black / scalde / scabby and full of
wounds. He answered / for that yt I gloryfyed me in ye beauty of my thyghes
and stretched them out and has enorned them proudely by the custom of a
knight. Now I walked among the thorns and am tourmented and prycked and
fulfilled with wounds. And she asked hy^ of thestate of his body / for he had an
huge tode styckynge on his breast in such manner yt with his two fore fete
strayned his neck and his mouth Joined to his / and his womb stretchynge
upon his womb / and with his hinder fete held and strayned his genytoryes and
wrong him terrybly. He said I suffer the kissing of this tode for the
lecherous kyssynges yt I made upon the and on ye other women. And for the
embracementes this tode enbraceth me. And for the operacyons of lechery I am
tourmented in my genytoryes without ceasynge. And she him demanded if he should
be delivered fro the said pains. And he answered pray ye not for me / for it
shall prouffyte me nothing / for I am dampened eternally / and for that yt I
have despised the medycyne of penance. And when he had spoken these words he
departed. And after this said vysyon ye woman chose to be enclosed and there
wept her sins.

C. Another example how Ammo^ ye sone of Dauyd was slain of Absolon for yt /
that he had defloured his sister named Thamar. lxxxxi.
WE find written in the.xii. chapitre of the second book of kings that Ammon
loved dysordonately his sister Thamar. And for the co^myttyng of the said sin
a man named Ionadab his friend cou^ceyled him yt he should feign hy^ to be seek
in his bed / and that he should demand yt his sister Thamar should visyte
him / and apply him to ete / and so it was done. When Thamar had applied him
to ete he put all the other out of the chamber / and there he prayed her of
dyshonoure. She answered. My brother do not this thing / it shall be a cursed
renown in Israel / do not this folly. I ne may bear this rebuke and thou shall
be as one of the foles of Israel. Ammon would not believe her / and was
stronger than she and took her by force and defiled her. And he hated her more
than he had loved her before and chased her and put her out rygorously. Than
she said. The evil yt thou do me now is more greter than that / yt thou
dydest to me before. And she dispoyled her of her clothes of vgynyte / and took
other and so yode away weeping and cryenge. And her brother Absolon unto whom
she told all ^he deed comforted her / and had Ammon in hate / and said
nothing to him. And two years after Absolon made a great dinner / unto the
which he badde Ammon and at the said dinner made him to be slain. And for
because that he had defloured his said sister Thamar. etc. And therefore many
euylles comes by harlottryses. The said Ammon committed incest to know his
sister / and defloracyon to break her vyrgynyte. These ben two sins reserved
to ye bishop. And the third came after ye was much great that absolon made
to sle his own brother. And the said Absolon was slain and deyed myscheuously
as it is written before in the fourth commandment. And it is to be noted that
yt the said lechery was committed by the cursed counceyle of Ionadab the which
seemed too be the fraud of Ammon. etc.

D: Another example how Sychem the which defloured Dyne the daughter of Jacob
was slain and his fader Emor / and those of the cite. lxxxxii
IT is written in the.xxxiiii. chapter of genesis how Dyne ye daughter of Jacob
yode forth of her faders house to the end that she would se ye women of the
regyon. And when she was in ye town Sychem ye sone of Emor prince of that
land beheld her / and coueyted and took her by force and slepte with her. And
after he loved the vyrgyn so much yt he said unto his fader. Demand this
maiden yt she may be my wife. Than he yede to demand her of Jacob as his
sons came from the feldes / the which were angry of ye defloracyon of their
sister. And the answer under treason was made unto Emor yt they ne might give
their daughter unto a man incyrcu^cysed / but if the males would be cyrcu^cysed
yt they should give together their children in marriage / and they should be one
people. This thing pleased well unto Emor and unto Sychem and to all ye
people. And they made all the males to be cyrcu^cysed. And on the third day
after as their wounds were sore grievous ye two sons of Jacob Symeon and Leuy
entered the cite and drew their glayues and slew Syche^ and Emor and all the
males of the cite yt had be^ cyrcu^cysed. After they took their sister Dyne in
the house of Emor. And the other sons of Jacob yode afterward in to ye said
and dyspoyled it in the vengeance of the said sin / and wasted the sheep /
the asses / and ye bestyall yt were in the houses and feldes / and led the
women and children in captiuyte. When this was done Jacob said to his sons. ye
have troubled me and put me in hate with ye chananyens and e^habytauntes of this
land / we ben few / they shall assemble them and beat me and my house shall be
broken. They answered. Shall we leave our sister a brothell and abused. Than god
spoke to Jacob and said. Arise you up and go in to Bethell and abide there.
Jacob was obedyent and yode in to Bethell and sacrifyed there to god. And the
terror of god beset about so strongly his enemies yt they durst not follow
hy^. By this example is seen yt for to commit the sin of lechery great ill
comes. For a little to have ye company of the said daughter only great murdres
and debates proceeded without the danger of the loss of souls.

E. Another example of him yt kyssed and enbraced the ketles of ye kechyn
weny^ge to enbrace vyrgyns. lxxxxii.
IT is written in the sum of virtues and vices how the provost of the town of
Rome made on a time to take the vyrgyns for that they believed in the christian
faith And the said provost made them to kept in the kechyn to the end yt he
might enough enbrace them. And as by night he entered with them in the said
kechyn he was assotted in his my^de in such wise yt he thought to enbrace them
/ and he enbraced the ketylles and the pottes of the kechyn and kyssed them And
so much he enbraced and kyssed them yt he was filled of lechery and was as
black as coals. Afterward he yode to his servants the which tarried him
without not knowy^ge that he was soyled and affoled. And when they saw him so
black they wend that he had be changed to a devil. So they bette him and
after they fled and left him. And as he meruayled by himself what it was /
he yode unto the emperor to the end yt he should make queremony. And they fled
al as from the face of the devil and bette hy^. And when he had understand of
other what it was he went home and washed him. And after made to bring ye
said vyrgyns before him and commanded to dispoyle them yt he might enough
behold their beauty but by gods power their clothes held so fast to their
bodies yt by no force none might dyspoyle them. And so god kept them from
defame and fro the fylthe of lechery / and the said provost was shamed. And
therefore they yt will live chastely should require the help of god as the
vyrgyns did yt god kept.

Consilium malum.
F. Example how an old bawd cou^ceyled ill and deceived a young woman. lxxxxi
THe dyscyple recyteth in the book of his promptuarye of a man yt had to go to
Rome. When he departed he left the gouernyng of his house unto his wife the
which was young fair and chaste. And as she governed her wisely a young man
beheld her beauty / and coueyted to have her by folysshe love / and her
desired by him and by other But he was despised / and she set naught by all his
gifts. And on a time an old baude him demanded the cause why he languysshed
and wept. He to her declared the cause of the said love / and she him promised
yt she should make him to have her. And for too do that she made a little
bytche yt she had to ere mustarde confycte with breed for to make it weep. And
she yode unto the house of yt said young woman / the which received her
benygnety in weny^ge yt she was a good woman. And the young woman demanded of
the old the cause wherefore the whelpe yt she had brought wept so. And she took
her to weep saying. This little bytche whelpe was my daughter right chaste and
right fair that god has changed in to a little bytche / and it deputed for
to weep so for yt she had let a young man deye yt languysshed of her love. And
the young woman declared unto the old yt such a young man had required her in
likewise as it is said. And the old said / behold how god has done in you
great mercy / ye may know it by ye wound yt he has made unto my daughter.
And take heed yt there ne come unto you se^blable thing. And by the causes of
yt said old woman the young wife consented her unto the love of the young man
and committed ye sin with him. etc. The said old bawd lecherouse in thought
but dyspised by her foulness was wors than yt devil / so ben these other
bawdes / for where the devil might do nothing by his temptacyons the said
old bawdes there works as did the beforesayd. And for that yt they have the
manners and condycyons of the devil the which ne counceyleth but evil they
shall go with h^^ in to dampnacion and perdycyon eternally. etc.

Adulterium.
A. Examples of aduouterers. And first example of a woman dampened the which
used her life in lecheries and glotonyes and her husband was unto the contrary
the which lived sobrely. lxxxxii.
IT is written in the life of faders that there was a man yt besyly labored his
land / he was attemperate / soft / of good manners / weyke / and sekely of his
body holden in his bed by langoure and lived great time / he kept tacyturnyte
and scylence in such manner that they the which knew him not had wend that
he had be dombe. And his wife was unto ye contrary / for her words moeued unto
all persons and unto all purpose that a man had spoken as her body had be a
tongue. Noyses sourded up often times among many for her. And she abode in
dronkenes with lecherous men / and so much was she given unto sin yt few
men of the street might escape her lechery. In her body she had never dolor ne
sickness. It befell on a time yt her husband dyed / and forthwt the air was
moeued by three days so much that it rayned on his bed and thonders and
wyndes were so strong yt he abode unburied those three days. And ye said woman
was unto the contrary / for after that she had lived long time she deyed and
it was fair weder / clear / and peasyble. And they had a fair daughter yt
considered the life of her fader and that of her mother for to choose which she
might take / and to believe that yt she had seen with her own eyes / or to believe
that yt she had herd tell of clerks. Than she slepte and there came before
her as a great man of body and of look terryble the which said unto her. Come
to se thy fader and thy mother and afterward choose to live of whyder thou
will. And led her in to a great field full of many flowers in paradise and of
diverse fruytes / and of diverse trees and of beautees inenarrables the which a
man ne may recompte. And she saw her fader in Joy and spoke unto him and
desired to dwell in that place there with him. Than he that led her took her by
ye hand and said that she should come to se her mother / and led her in to
hell the which is a place much low / dymbe and derke full of brennynge fire
stynkinge as sulphre / and there knew she her mother in the said low place /
and plonged in the fire up to the neck the which cried and wept / strayned
and grynded her teache of rage and of anguysshe / and had worms about her
neck the which bote her. And as she lift her eyes upward she knew her said
daughter and said unto her in cryenge. Alas my daughter for mine own operacyons
I bear these tourmentes. It seemed me that the life of sobrenesse and chastyte
was but mockery. I believed not that ye life of lechery and rybaudry gave such
torments. Lo for the little delectacyon of lechery and of glotony / and for
the delytes and worldely Joy yt I had I suffer so great cruelte of fire and
tourment. And as she required her daughter for help he yt led her took her
and set her there as he had taken her / and said to her. Choose now which life
thou will / either of thy fader or of thy mother. Than she took relygyon and
was saved. By this example it appears yt this woman yt lived after her body
was dampened. For ye little delectacyon yt she took she brenneth and shall brenne
eternally and shall be in so great pains that there is no writer that it ca^
write ne clerk / ne tongue tell it. And her husbonde the which lived sobrely
is in Joy eternal. etc. Tu reddes vnicuique iuxta opera sua: dicit david in
psalm.

B. Another example of the dampnacion of a burgeys aduoutrer and of another
woman married. lxxxxii.
MEn find in writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuarye and says that an holy man prayed for his wife departed and deed.
She appeared unto him and led him in to a place obscure. In the which he saw
deuylles horrybles / the which keste in a tonne of fire full of metal
boylynge a burgeys deed being of her town and the wife of another man / and
they were bre^t and bayned in the said metal and they swy^med wtin it as
peasen in the pot boylynge and they cried both twain / maledyccyo^ /
maledyccyon. And the said holy man was admeruayled. The said woman said with
those here I had been bayned if the mercy of god had not called me unto penance
/ and afterward said. These two here has left their propre maryages and has
drawn them unto sin long time togyders. And I have been their example and
mean and unto them I have taught the way to ask pardon of the said sin of
aduoutrye / but they ben deed without penance salutary. For the confession that
they made was without charity and for the dread of death. And my confession was
salutary and agreeable unto god / I made in it charity of the love of him. This
example denotes that punyssyon and dampnacyo^ follows to commit lechery. And
for that yt the confession of the burgeys / and of the woman was not good it is
to understand yt in confession a man should have true co^trycyon and
repentance to have offended god by sin and to be against his commandments
For those the which repent them for ^rede to be dampened / and alonely they
love but them self they ben out of the love and charity of god. For they ben
not wroth ne sorry to have of offended god by sin as the said woman the
which made confession in charity and she was saved. No good deed done is
merytoryous when charity there fails. As it is written.i. ad. cor. xiii. ca.

Another example of an aduoutrer that ye deuylles posseded at the enter of ye
church. lxxxxii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons of a man that after yt he had committed
aduoutry entered in to the church / and forthwith ye deuylles posseded him and
tourmented / and so myscheuously deyed he impenytent before the people.

D. Another example of a woman aduoutres dampened that two dragons tourmented.
lxxxxii.
IT is written in the book of gifts yt an honest man with his wife gave to gods
service any child if it unto them were given of god or sent. And they had a
sone ye which was good and relygyous. Than the fader and the mother did great
almesdedes / but the mother was deceived and chylded.ii. children of other than
her husband yt she slew secretly: and so she deyed without confessyo^. And as
her sone prayed for her in his mass she appeared to hy^ in great tourment and
had two foul drago^s yt bote her pappes. She was required to tell of her
estate. And she said / I am dampened. Than as her sone was heavy she said. I
trusted me in ye almesdedes yt I did and am deed without confession and charyt
These two dragons yt biteth me is for the two children yt I had in aduoutry
which I should have given souke and nourysshed and I slew them. By this
example is denoted yt dampnacyon comes for co^myttinge of aduoutry and bawdry.
And for that the said woman trusted in almesdedes yt she had done a man should
understand yt mortal sin brings to naught and makes to forgete the good
operacions done unto salvation and reward eternal and so dampneth the
persons the which so deyeth without correccyon penance and amendeme^t. Howbeit
that those the which has done in their life of good operacyo^s has not so
many pains in hell as if they had done no good deed And therefore none should
wtdrawe to do good deeds. etc.

E. Another example of ye pain of a man the which knew the wife of his
neighbor. lxxxxii.
SOme masters writes this the which follows how ye discyple recites in the
book of his promptuarye and says that a young man sinned with the wife of his
neighbor / unto whom god sent a plaghe and he deyed of sudden death without
confession and without receyuynge the sacraments. The which by ye suffraunce of
god unto the terror of other aduouterers he appeared unto his rybawde after his
death in great tourment and pain. And ye said woman asked him of his estate.
He answered I am dampened for the aduoutryes yt I committed with the. And he said
after. Wylt you se how I brenne without and within / and keste of his urine ye was
as metal molten in bre^ninge fire. Of this vysyon the woman had so great fere
yt she went to confess / correct / and amended her life.

F. Another example how a man saw a woman punysshed for ye aduoutry yt she had
committed. lxxxxii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons that he has read that a man was
rauysshed before the gates of hell the which saw a woman right grievously
tormented / and a flambe of fire enuyroned her and beset about in all parts.
And the man demanded wherefore yt woman was tormented so grievously. The answer
was given that she suffered such tourmentes for the rybaudryes yt she committed
with strange men.

G. Another example of a young man yt sinned with a wedded woman. lxxxxii.
ALso the dyscyple recyteth in ye book of his promptuarye and says that a
young man sinned with a woman married and perjured himself. The which was seek
/ the body of Ihesu christ was brought unto him / but he would never receive it
till he had made confession verytable of the deed / after he amended him and
correcked his evil life.

H. Another example how two aduouteresses bette each other in the departy^ge of
a pyece of lynnen clothe that was given to them. lxxxxii
ESope says in his book that two harlottes married habandoned them with a man of
auctoryte that governed him not wisely ne holyly. After that he had sinned with
the said women / and with the one more than with the other he gave unto them a
pyce of lynnen clothe to depart between them for their hyre. And when they
were in ye street there was noise between them to depart the said clothe. And
the one of them said yt she should have more than the other / for she had been
there longer. They reuyled each other and called harlottes as they were. And
their husbands the which knew nothing of ye cause of them came to defend
each of them their wife and bette each other strongly. And as they were in
such debate there came one Quidam yt departed them / and said. Syrs it is no
matter here but to depart from hens. It apperteyneth well yt wise men here them
speak / and so they deparded. And the said lynnen clothe was put in hand
sequestered till ye said matter be dyscussed in judgment. etc. By this example a
man should understand yt the matter of them yt co^mytteth lechery shall be
dyscussed and iuged before god if it be not effaced by penance. And in
likewise as the said women were defamed before ye world and openly showed
their sin / all the sins of al sy^ners openly shall be showed in Judgment
before all. And that yt the said harlot said yt she should have more than ye
other for yt she had be^ there longer denotes yt so much more as a person
has done of sins and has lo^gest abyden in them shall have in hell ye mo
torments / and unto him shall be given more punycion than he yt has done but
one syn^e anon past. Vn^ apoc. xviii. Quantu^ glorificauit se pcto^r in pcto^
suo et i^ delicus: ta^tum date illi tormentu^ and luctu^.

I. Another example how a queen rode upon Arystotle yt was wise and a great
clerk. lxxxxii
THe dyscyple recyteth in his pro^ptuary yt James de vitre say^h yt Arystotle
taught king Alexander that he should refuse to accede often times unto his wife
the which was right fair yt his courage ne were let to puruey unto the
charge of the comune yt he had. And Alexander unto him obeyed. When the queen
knew it she was full of sorrow and began to draw Arystotle unto her love /
for she passed by him often times all alone barefoted and her heeres vntressed
hanging down to the end yt she might draw him to her love. In the end
Arystotle was tempted and began to desire her carnally / the which said. I ne
will do it in no manner what so ever it be if I se not in the some tokens of
love that you tempt me not. Than come in to my chamber rampy^ge with fete and with
hands as an horse in bery^ge me and I shall know if you mockest with me And when
he consented unto the condycio^ she denounced this thing unto Alexander / the
which hyd hy^ and took Arystotle as he bare ye queen. And as he would have
slain him Arystotle said in excusing hy^. If it be so happened unto a wise
ancient yt is to me yt has be so deceived of a woman you may well se and
know yt I have well taught the / how may it come unto the that art young.
When ye king herd these words he spared and made an end of that / that he
had begone after his doctrine. etc. By this example here a man should
understand that ye most wisest ben as soon deceived by lechery as the simple
people. Also it is to be noted that the said Arystotle had offended before
god and was culpable as and if he had accomplysshed the said lechery / for he
had broken the commandment of god. No^ concupisces vxorem proximi tui. etc.

K. Another example of a woman aduoutresse yt bare an hot iron. lxxxxii.
IT is written in the sum of penance yt a woman married aduoutres was
susspeccioned of her husband / the which yode unto confession to weep her
sins / and after her confession bare an yren al reed before her husband for
too show yt she was clean and pure. And after yt she had done the said
miracle she enpryded her and assured returned unto her sysie as before. And
ones her said husband apperceyued her with the said sin / and hete secretly
the said iron and put it in the place where it was. And afterward said unto
his wife. Give me such an iron / where is it. Than she ran to take it with her
hands and she brenned them. etc. By this example is denoted yt by the virtue
of confession her sins were effaced and pardoned and did miracle / and for
to return unto sin she lost all and was wors than before

Peccatum in matrimonio. quere exempla.xxxvi. e. f. g. h. i.
A. Examples that in the solempnytees a man should abstain from operacion of
marriage. lxxxxiii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons of a man yt a man knew his wife the
vygyll of Eester. The which when the priest put the body of god in his mouth
on Eester day it lept out. And as the said man saw yt he was confessed / he
repented him / confessed / and was houseled.

B. Another example how the children of a man and of his wife ne might have
baptysme for the sin yt they committed n marriage. lxxxxiii
ALso men find by writing that a man and a wife contempned not honestly in
the operacion of marriage. And they had three children the which could not have
baptysme. And for to find remedy and counceyle they yode unto an holy bishop
to confess them. Unto whom they said that their children might never have
baptysme. And he axed them one after another / each of them by their self if
they made any dyssolucion or dyshoneste in the operacyon of marriage. And they
answered ye one after ye other / ye / thus and thus. Than ye said bishop said
unto them that it was ye cause wherefore their children had not baptysme for
doing that sin. And therefore a man should conte^pne honestly in marriage /
and to accede the one with the other / or to make lygnage / or for too yield the
debte of marriage on her party / or for to fle and avoid sin.

C. Another example how a woman chylded.ix. children at a burden. lxxxxiii.
SOme masters writes this the which follows how ye discyple recites in the
book of his promptuarye and says that there was a clerk a good child
approved of good manners the which converted all unto the praise of our lady.
By ye which he was bishop of coleyne / and ye said bishop arose on a night
for to give lauds to god and our lady. And after yt he had walked through his
hall he beheld out at a wy^dowe women yt bare in a panyer.viii. children borne
in yt night of a noble matrone of the cite. The which for shame retained one
and gave great sum of money unto ye women for to go drown. viii. The said
bishop took the said children / baptized them and made them to be nourysshed
secretly / and made them to be instruct in lettre and in song.x. or.xii.
years. The bishop made his occupacyons with a burgoys yt took the children and
they followed him. In the end ye said bishop reveled ye deed unto the burgoys
and unto ye mother of the children. And by ye grace of god a cloister was
edyfyed / in ye which the bishop and the children yielded them unto god. etc.

Sacrilegium.
D. Examples of men of the church lecherous. And first example how a priest
fornycatour deyed suddenly. lxxxxiii
IT is written in the life of saint Loye bishop how a priest of his
bysshopryche was infamed of fornycacyon for a concubyne yt he held with him.
And after yt the said priest was often times warned to abstain him from yt
sin / and that be would not the said bishop exco^munycate him and defended
him to sing mass. The priest despised the sentence and prepayred him to sing
mass. And when he was at ye auter he fell toward it and was strangled of the
devil and deyed suddenly before al ye people. This example denotes many
things. The first first is yt these lechours yt will not correct the^ and
amend when they ben warned shall be punysshed of god. The second is yt people
of the church ne other should attend to receive their creator in sin / and
without to have will dysposed to abstain them fro ill. For ill came to the
priest. The third is yt exco^munycacyon is much to dread and for as much as
the said priest dredde not ill did come unto him both unto body and unto
soul. etc.

E. Another example how two relygious were appostates / lecherous / and after
did penance. lxxxxiii.
IT is written in the life of faders that two relygyous were tempted of
fornycacyon / they yode in to ye world and took two wives. Afterward they
said togyders. What have we won where as we have left the order angelycke for
to come to this immundycyte and uncleanness / and after these things we shall
come unto the fire of tourmentes Than return we unto our hermytage / and do we
penance of things yt we have presumed. And they went in to ye hermytage and
prayed the faders yt they would receive them confessing and penytentes of
things yt they had committed. They wete tha^ received and enclosed an hole
year. And by penance men gave unto them breed and water by measure. In
beholdynge them they were semblables of one replexym. When ye time of their
penance was accomplysshed they issued. And the one was pale / lene / and
sorrowful / and ye other fair and ruddy. And each had marvel for they had
egally breed and water And they axed hy^ yt was lene and heavy what he did with
the thoughts when he was enclosed. He said I thought yt I should go in to
pains for the euylles yt I have committed and my bones harded them to my
flesh for great fere yt I had. They demanded ye other what he thought when
he was enclosed. He answered I yielded thanks to god yt had wtdrawen from me
the soylenes of ye world and the pains of hell / and called to ye
co^uersacyon angelyke. And I rejoice wha^ I think on my god. And the au^cyents
said yt the penance of both twain was egal toward god. By this example
those the which has committed sin should return unto god and do penance
as did the said relygyous. What shall it prouffyte unto a person to do sin
at his pleasure / and after to be dampened. etc.

F. Another example of the punycyon and dampnacyon of a nonne that committed
lechery. lxxxxiii.
MEn find by wrytinge this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt a nonne slew her child in her womb /
and so deyed without co^fessyon Afterward she appeared unto her cosyn yt prayed
for her and held a child of fire in her arms / unto whom she said. I am
dampened / and this child of fire yt I bear I have conceived and slain it. And
I must bear it eternally by punycyon.

G. Another example how a pilgrim saw a prelate cast within the depnesse of
hell. lxxxxiii.
ARnoldus and the discyple recyteth in their books yt there was a pilgrim yt
sold his robe to drink strong wine. And he drank so much yt he was dronken
and lost his wit / and yt men esteemed yt he was deed And that hour his soul
was borne in too hell in the place of tourmentes / and specially in to a pyt
brenny^ge and covered with a lydde of iron enbrased in fire. And there was ye
prince of derkenes / and the pilgrim saw aprelate yt was presented unto y said
devil the which greted him / and him presented to drink of a cup enbrased
full of soulphre in fire molten. And when the prelate had dronken the lydde of
the pytte was taken away: and the prelate was cast within ye pytte of fire. And
when the said pilgrim saw yt he had great fere. And the devil cried on high.
Bring me hyder yt pilgrim yt has sold his vestement and made himself
dro^ken. And when ye said pilgrim herd those words he beheld his good
angel yt had brought him thither / required his aid / and promised unto god
and him that he would neuermore be dronken so yt he would deliver him at that
hour. And forth with his said soul was put in to his body. And the said pilgrim
noted the hour and the day yt it so befell and went in to his country and
found yt the said prelate deyed at ye day and at the hour that he was borne
in to hell. For he was of his country whereby he wist yt it was very table. And
therefore the excess of meet and drink is to fle. etc.

H. Another example of a relygyous woman dampened the which in her life gave
great alms / but she conceived a child and slew it. lxxxxiii.
MEn find by writing this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says that the daughter of a king was so much devout / so
good an almeswoman and chaste yt it was marvel. She nourysshed all ye days
of her life a nombre of poor folk / of wydowes and of orphelyns. And it befell
that by folysshe look that she made upon one of her servants she coueyted to
lie with him / and conceived a child. And by the counceyle of an old woman she
dystroyed and slew it. After that she had no more Joy and required to be put
in relygyon. Her fader put her / and there she was solytary without laughing or
playenge the which was ye example unto other in all bounte and relygyo^
Afterward she deyed without confessyng her of yt sin / and within.xxx. days
she appeared unto her abbess to whom she said yt she was dampened. And the
abbess said. Alas tell me the cause wherefore / for you was so good that you was
our light and our example in all goodness. Than she told yt for ye said syn^e
committed she was dampened. Moreover she said yt if she had be confessed of it
yt she should have had pardon and if she had committed it a.M. times. By this
example a man should understand yt the good operacions saves not the persons
if they deye in mortal sin without confession and correccyon. It is that / yt
the prophet Ysaie says. Iusticia iusti non liberabit eu^ in qua cu^que die
peccauerit. etc. Also note well yt no person ne should draw back to do good
deeds: and also he should do as many as he may and albeit he should dampened for
he shall have the less of tourmentes in hell. etc. as it is declared before.
Quere. xlii. b. Also a man should understand by this example yt by true
co^fessyon all sins ben pardoned. etc.

Castitas et bonitas.
A. Example how a vyrgyn saw a priest chaste / pure / clear and fair in
synginge mass. lxxxxiiii
IT is written in the promptuary of ye dyscyple yt there was a virgyn religyous
named Oda in the town of Benda^ce yt saw yt as a priest of ye vyllage sa^ge
mass his body and his holy vestements were decored honorably. And when he
lift ye hostye and put it on the corporas the angels took ye sleues yt they ne
touched ye said hostye. And lyfted their hands enclinynge their hedes with great
reverence and worshypped ye body of god. When time came to receive the
sacrament the vyrgyn was also rauysshed out of her thought / and saw the body
of the priest so pure and clear that she saw ye body of god as by a fyole of
crystal. When ye mass was ended and that ye priest had put of his clothes the
vyrgyn came again unto her self and saw the body of ye priest little and
little thycken and return in the first form. And ye said maiden had such
grace yt she saw those the which received their creature worthily. And she
saw on an Eester day yt all only.x. persons received their creator worthily
in a church. etc. This example should moeue the prestes to accede in the holy
sacryfyce of ye mass worthily and holyly in estate of grace for to have ye
grace that the said priest had. Also the virgyns should keep holyly their
chastity and maydenheed / and to live devoutly in doing good works as did ye
the said vyrgyn for to get grace toward god. etc.

B. Another example how two relygyouses were from crystmas till unto ye feast
of saint Johan to speak of god / and they wened not to have been but the space
of two hours. lxxxxiiii.
IT is written in the book of ye dyscyple and in many other places approved yt
two young vyrgyns relygyouses felawshypped togyders the night of crystmas after
the mass of mydnyght entered in to an hall deserte nere unto the cloister and
bare with them three pylowes otherwise called cuysshyns. And one of them
demanded of the other wherefore she bare two cuysshyns. I shall sit on the one
and ye other shall be between us yt the child Ihesus also may sit. For he has
said when two or three ben assembled in my name I am in ye myddle of them Vn^
math. xviii. Vbi sunt duo vel tres co^gregati in noi^e meo: ibi su^m medio
illorum. The two vyrgyns sat and spoke of the natyuyte of Ihesus and of good
words / and were in the said place without enoyenge them till unto ye day of
saint Johan baptyst fro ye night of crystmas. And their abbess demanded them
and made to seek them over all. And it befell yt a vacabonde the which walked
by the cloister the vygyll of saint Johan entered in to the said halle and saw
ye two vyrgyns speak / laughe / and enjoy the^ and in the myddle of them there
was a right fair child. The said man bare the tydinges unto the abbess of ye
relygyouses that she demanded. And she came in to ye said hall and saw the
fair child and her relygyouses the which enjoyed them. Than she demanded
them what they did there. They answered yt they tarried till mass were rongen
of the day. And they wened to have be^ there but a little while as two hours.
The child departed and the abbess led them with her. They were demanded
where ye said little child became. And they answered yt they had not seen him.
And ye abbess said. Systers have no dread / in your company has be ye child
Ihesus yt ye have not seen I have seen him. He has holden you in such Joy fro
crystmas till ye vygyll of saint Johan baptyst yt is this day without ho^ger or
thyrste. These relygyouses had great Joy thereof / and of their systers that
they demanded. etc.

C. Another example how a bishop chaste and pure saw on Eester day some men
confessed the which were black and other white. lxxxxiiii
IT is written in the promptuarye of ye dyscyple and in the book of gifts that
an holy bishop prayed god the day of Eester to know ye merytes and the estate
of them yt received their creator. And god exalted his oraysons / and in
beholdynge the people there came some black as pytch / some enbrased as iron
al reed as blood / and the other white and shynynge as the son. And the
angel of god appeared unto him and told him that the black were lecherous
and proud. And they the which were enbrased were auaryous / and the blody
were dyse players and blasphemers. And said unto hy^ yt all they were unworthy
/ and that unworthily they had received their creator / and that all be it yt
they had had contrycyon and made co^fessyon / yet had they no purpose to
abstain them fro sin in time to come. And said afterward yt all the other
the which where white and clear ben those the which had acceded worthily with
ferme purpose to abstain the^ fro sin and to amend their life. etc.

Another example. It is written in the life of faders yt two men were sklaundred
to be aduoutrers and dyshonestes. And for as much as they were of the nombre
of good people the bishop prayed god yt he might know if the sklaunder were
true. And as ye people acceded to receive their creator after the consecracion
the said bishop knew the deeds of one and of every of them / and ye souls in
beholdynge their faces. And he saw the faces of the sinners as black as coals
and their eyes replenysshed with blood He saw the other the which had the
vysages clear and clothed in white. And wha^ they had received the body of god
he saw light in some vysages / and in some flambe. And to the end yt he knew
of those of whom he herd the sklaunder he gave unto them their creator. And
he saw yt the one of the^ had the face clear and honorable / and was clothed
with white clothes. And the other had the face black and horrible. And after
yt they had received the light and the beauty of the one shone clear / and the
other brent as flambe. And the bishop prayed god yt he were ensygned of these
two here. And the angel came unto him the which told him yt the sklaunder
that he herd of ye men was true but the one was yet in sin and in will for to
sin and therefore you have seen him black / and enbrased with flambe: The other
was as you have herd / but for that / yt thou have seen his face shine is for
that he has recorded his sins yt he has done and has renounced unto those
operacyons with waylynges and teeres in requyringe the mercy of god / and in
promysy^ge yt he should not return unto his sins if they unto hy^ were
pardoned And therefore his sins ben effaced and put out / and is comen unto
such grace as you have seen. And as ye said bishop meruayled hy^ of the grace
of god for that / yt he had been so much foul and the man of tourmentes / and
with yt he had cored and besene him with so great honor. The angel
answered hy^. Well may thou marvel for thou art a man / and our lord is
natural god and mercy full. They the which cease of sins and ben penytentes
and truly confessed god the^ shall pardon and leave / not alonely the
tourmentes but he them makes dygne of honor. God has much loved the world
yt he has sent his sone to suffer death for the redemption of sinners yt will
repent. etc. This example denotes yt all they the which has been confessed at
Eester received not their creator in estate of grace / for they have not the
condycyons yt ben requysyte unto true confession. That is contrycyon of heart /
co^fessyon entyer and true / and satysfaccyon of work by doing penance / and
abstynence from sin. etc.

Peccatu^ sodomiticum.
A. Examples of the sin of sodomye. And first example of the lechery and
p^nycyon of those of Sodo^me and of Gommore. lxxxxv.
IT is written in ye.xix. chapter of Genesis that in an evening as Loath sat
in the market of ye cite of sodom he saw two young me^ coming / the which
were two aungelles. He arose and yede before them / he worshypped them and
prayed them for to go lodge in his house / and said to them. Ye shall wasshe
your fete and in the morning ye shall go your way. And for yt they ne would go
and wo^de abide Loath them coged and they yode he washed their fete and
apparayled them well to suppe. And before that they went to bed the men of
sodom came to demand of Loath the two men the which entered into his house
that they might know them lecherously and dyshonestly. The good man Loath would
not deliver them / and was angry because they would committee so great syn^e /
and said unto them. I pray you my bredren yt ye do not this sin here. I had
lever take you my two daughters vyrgyns than ye should committee this evil
sin with these two men the which ben entered under the shadow of mine
assurance. And the said sodomytes would not leave / but said to him Shall thou
be our Judge / we shall torment the more sooner than the men. Than they made
great force unto Loath and almoost had broken his gates. And they ^ut bette so
strongly yt they ne might find ye door. And the two aungelles said to Loath.
Have you here none of thy sons in law / ne sons / ne daughters / take with the
al thy friends from this cite. For we shall dystroye it for that yt their
clamor is before god yt which has sent us for to lose them. And Loath showed
this thing unto his friends the which nothing believed it. When the morning
cam^ ^he angel said unto Loath yt he should depart lest that he perysshed not
with the sy^ners. And for that yt he deferred they took hy^ by ye hand / and his
wife and his two daughters and led them out of the cite for that ye god had
spared them. And the angels said unto him. Save thy self and look not behy^de
the. The wife of Loath had mind upon her goods / and looked behind her / and
forthwt she was changed in to a salt stone. Wha^ Loath was gone forth god made
to rain fire and sulphre from heaven upon Sodom / go more / segor / bom / and
oleale. These ben the.v cytees that he lost / and dystroyed / and the
inhabitauntes the which were within them. etc For yt Loath was merciful god
suffered not yt he perysshed with the ill. And for that ye Loath loved better to
give his daughters than the two men is for the gretenes and horror of the
sin / for it is a sin yt cries vengeance unto god. Vnd gen^. xix. Clamor
sodomorum clamat ad me. And by that yt god them punysshed by fire and sulphre
yt is stynkynge is to understand the vylete of the sin wherein they lived.
The rain yt descended upon them was not water of grace and of nuriture / but
it was of fire and sulphre Whereof says the psalmist. Pluet pcto^res laqueos
ignis sulphre. Their lechery was anon past / but the tourmente is eternal.
Mome^taneu^ est quoth delectat: sed eternu^ quoth cruceat. Iterum psalm. Subito
defeceru^t and perie^u^t propter iniqitatem sua^. They be al perysshed for
their sin. etc.

B. Another example of ye slaughter that was made upon the sodomytes Beniamyn
for the lechery yt they committed in ye wy^e of Leuyte pilgrim. lxxxxv
IT is written in the.xix. chapter of the book of Iuges yt an ancient man of
the cite of Gabaa lift up his eyes in an euentyde / and saw a pilgrym with his
wife and his asses in the place of the cite. He axed him and knew yt he came
from Bedleem and that he ne had found any that would lodge him. Than ye
ancient desired him to lodge in his house and said unto him Pax tecu^ sit ego
preleo oi^a q^ necessaria sunt / tm^ queso me i^ platea maneas. That is to say.
Peace be with the I shall take the all thy necessytees. I pray yt alone ly that you
abide not in the street. He brought in the pilgrim / washed his fete /
applied unto his supper / and all that yt to him was necessary. And as they
took their refeccion ye sons of the cite chy^dren of the devil came cryenge to
the ancient yt he should deliver the man yt was entered in to his house for to
know him lecherously. And the ancient yode unto them and said. My bredren do
not this ill here / for I have lodged him / cease you of this folly I have a
daughter vyrgyn and he has a wife I shall bring them unto you to the end that
ye acco^plisshe your lechery. I pray you do not this syn^e against nature in
man. But for yt they ne would obey unto the ancient in no manner. The pilgrim
betoke them his wife the which abused and committed so strongly their lechery
all the night in the said woman yt in ye morning she came to deye at the door
where her husband was. When he found her deed he charged her upon his ass
and bare her in to his house / and afterward brake her body in.xii. pyeces and
bare them in to all the ends and parties of Israel and told unto them the
case and said that they should make Judgment and sentence. Than.xl. M. men on
foot of the children of Israel ass^mbled them and made recenser to understand
of Leuyte husbonde of the deed woman as ye deed was done And after yt he had
again recounted all ye people of Israel of one accord and will said yt they
should never enter in to their houses till the sinners were punysshed: They
constytued people for to bring them vytayles And sent messagers in to the cite
of Gabaa to ask them wherefore they had committed so great sin / and that
they should betake the^ those the which had committed the syn^e for to take
away the ill from Israel. Those of the cite would not / and made their
alyaunce for to defend them. But to be short great war was made for yt
sin. And they moved the^ in such manner yt great murdre was made on both
parties. But in conclusyon all the harlottes and all those the which sustained
in their quarrel were slain and degraded. In ye first battle there was.xxii.
thousand men. In ye second.xxv. M. and an hundred men. At the third when ye
town of the said harlottes sodomytes was taken there was.xviii. M. slain
and.v. M. of them the which fled. After that as they proceeded ferther they
slew two thousand / and brenned all the towns / streets / and houses of the
said sodomytes. Also they slew bestes and people the which were in them / and
by the will of god / as it is written in the.xix. and.xx. chapter of the said
book of Iuges. By this example men may se that great occysyons came for the
horrible and abhomynable sin that was committed in the said woman. And not al
only were punysshed those the which had committed the said syn^e but with
that all the consenters and alyes. and all that the which unto them apperteyned
was wasted. And so it appears yt great multitude of bodies / of goods / and
of souls yode unto perdycion for sin committed in a woman. etc.

C. Another example of a man ye used his wife sodomytly. lxxxxv
THe dyscyple recyteth in his pro^ptuary yt a man knew his wife sodomytly. And
much it displeased unto his wife. An^ on a time against her will he committed
in her the said sin. And incontinent after he arose from his bed for to go
in to the chambres in the which his guts fell from him and descended by ye
foundeme^t with great tourment. Than he took him to cry. The people came / and
of dolor that he felt showed his sin / and that god venged him / and he
stanke and myscheuously deyed etc. as reason was to commytte so horrible sin
in his own wife / and to soil the holy sacrament of marriage.

D. Another example how a sodomytike deyed impenytent and dyspeyred him / the
which said that he saw hell / ye torments and the deuyls. lxxxxv.
ALso the discyple recites in his promptuary yt a Sodomytyke was stryken of
god / and when he came to the death he was warned to repent him / to confess
and receive the sacraments of ye church. And in dyspayre he answered.
Wherefore shall I call on me the aid dyuyne I se now late ye tourmentes in hell
and the deuylles presents apparayled to rauysshe me. And as ye people present
bad him make the sign of the cross the myscheuous deyed in likewise as he had
given no force / and he turned his face / closed his eyes / and with a great
and horrible clamoure he yielded his ghost and deyed. etc.

E. Another example how a woman Sodomytyke was unburied and drawn horrybly.
lxxxxv.
SOme masters writes this the which follows how ye discyple recites in the
book of his promptuarye and says that a woman culpable of the sin of
sodomye deyed and was buried. And the night following a sow right black with
seven black hogs were seen openly wrote and dyggynge the earth from her
pytte and brake membre after membre of the said woman / and drew the guts
alonge and brake them. When this was done the said sow and her pigs departed
them and kest great stynke.

F. Another example how ye deuyls have horror of yt sin. lxxxxv.
ALso it is written in the book of honey bees yt a woman sodomytike laid her in
her bed / and when she sinned in herself she herd the devil between her and
the wall the which cried fie / fie / fie. And when she herd the devil in such
wise cry she had fere / yode unto confession / did penance more than she had
charge. By these examples it appears yt the sin of lechery is a sin yt
much dyspleaseth unto god the which makes to have great punycion and
dampnacyon eternal. And therefore every person should wtdrawe to do the said
thing and obey to god for to get paradyse and escape punycyon eternal.

Octauum preceptum.
Testimonium.
A. Examples of falls witnesses. And first example of a christian man yt forsware
him cautelously on the awter of saint Nycholas. lxxxxvi.
IT is written in ye legende of saint Nycolas that a Jew lent money unto a
cryste^ man. When ye term came yt he should yield the money the christian man
said yt he had yield it unto hy^. And for yt the Jew ne might prove it he gave
it him upon his oath if he would swear upon the auter of saint Nycolas. Than
the christian man put the said money wtin his staff cloven and perced craftily.
And wha^ he was ready to swear he took his said staff unto the Jew whiles yt
he should swear. And so swear surely yt he had taken him ye said money. His
malice shall be dyscouered. For as he yode in to his house he slepte in the way
/ and a carte passed over him and slew him and brake the said staff whereby
the money and ye malice was known. The deed man was raised by the merit of
saint Nycholas / and the Jew converted him the which had his money. etc. A
man should understand here yt the christian man was perjured and that his
cautele excused not his sin. For god yt knows all took the thing after the
truth and not after the malice and cautele. Legitur math.x. Nichil occultu^
est quod no^ sciatur / neque absco^ditu^ quod no^ manifestetur. There is
nothing so hyd but yt it shall be known / ne nothy^ge hid but yt it shall be
showed. The sins hydeth them in time / and also appear in time. Vnde catho.
Te^poribus pcta^ latent et tpere parent

B. Another example how those the which kept the tomb of Ihesu christ took
money for to witness falls yt the dyscyples had stole his body by night. lxxxxvi
IT is written mathei vlti^o. yt wha^ Ihesu christ arose ye gardyens of ye tomb
had such fere yt they were as deed. Pre ti^ore au^teius exterriti su^t
custodes and fcti^ su^t. etc. And the maryes the which yode unto ye tomb
there found an angel yt had the face as lyghtnynge and his clothes white as
snow the which said unto them. Dread ye not I know that ye seek Ihesus
crucyfyed / he is not here / he is risen / go ye and tell it unto ye dyscyples.
When the maryes were parted some of the gardyens of the tomb yode in to the
cite of Iherusalem and denounced unto the princes of the prestes the things yt
which had been done / and how Ihesus was risen. And they assembled with the
ancients and took counceyle to give great some of money unto the knights the
which kept the tomb for to say and wytnes yt the dyscyples of Ihesus came by
night as they slept and stale from them his body. And if the presedent here
speak of it we shall persuade hy^ of this thing / and we shall do so much yt
ye shall be sure without harm. And ye knights took the money and wytnessed
falsely as they had been taught. And this thing was dyuulgued and is yet among
the Jews / whereby they ben without faith and believe not in Ihesus. And by the
said witnesses ye people is without believe and descend in to hell in
perdycyon. etc. And shall descend till unto the time of Antechryst yt they
shall know yt they have been deceived / and than they shall repent them and be
saved / in likewise as the scripture says. In diebus illis saluabitur judah /
and israel habitabit co^fidenter. etc. A man may than know clearly yt by falls
wytnessy^ge beforesayd innumerable people is gone and gooth to perdycyon and
dampnacyon. Also it happens sometime yt by falls wytnessynge of some a good man
leseth his heritage and his good cause / whereby dampnacyon. etc follows / not
all only to the false witnesses but also to those the which shall possede the
said heritage unjustly yt is not theyrs and know it well and it wtholde without
restoryng.

C. Another example of falls wytnessynge yt two auncyents made against Susanne
and ill came to them. lxxxxvi.
IT is written in the.xiii. chapter of the book of Danyell yt two ancient
prestes in ye time coueyted to commit lechery with the fair Susanne and watched
her and took her on a time al alone in her gardyn under ye foot of an apple tree
/ unto whom they said. Loathe doors of the gardyn ben shytte no person ne may
se us / wherefore consent you unto us yt we may have thy company / and if thou
wylt not we shall make falls wytnes against the yt a young man has had thy
company. Than Susanne wayled and was sorry and said Anguysshes ben to me on all
parts. If I do this that ye say death is unto my soul. Si eni^ hoc egero
mors michi est. And if I obey not unto you I shall not escape your hands that
is your falls wytnessynge and the death corporal. For in yt time ye women the
which commyted lechery were stoned and slain. And Susanne said. Better it is
to me without operacyon to fall in your hands than to syn^e before god. Than she
took her to cry for help. And also the said anncyentes cried against her. And
the servants ran unto the cry. After ye every of them had told their case
/ for to be short ye said Susanne was put in Justice / the which wept lokynge
to heaven and had her heart and her trust in god / the which leueth not his
servants. Than the auncye^ts put their hands on her heed and before all the
people showed yt they saw the said Susanne commyt ye said sin of lechery with
a young man yt was stronger than they and fled. The people believed yt the said
auncyentes said true for they were Iuges. So they co^dampned ye said Susanne
unto death. Than she cried unto god by a great voice and said. God eternal ye
know the things hid and all things before yt they ben made / you know
that they have borne falls witness against me ^ I deye. And so it is yt I have
nothy^ge done of the things that those here has composed malycyously against
me. And god exalted her orayson. For as men led her unto the death y^ holy
ghost spoke by ye mouth of a little child named Danyell and said with an hye
voice. I am clean of this blood. And the people him demanded who it was ye
which spoke. He answered and said to them. The foles of Israel the which has
Iuged and codampned Susanne unto ye death has not known veryte. Return
lightly unto Judgment / for they have spoken falls wytnessynge against her. Than
they returned hastily / and the said falls wytnessers were separate and
conuaynquisshed to have made falls wytnessyngr. For the one of them said yt he
had seen them committee the said sin under an holyn tree. And ye other said
under a plom^e tree. The people blyssed god ye which saves those yt trust in
him / and they took the two falls ancient prestes the which were Iuged unto
death and slain as reason was. For saint Ysydore says. Iudiciu^ quoth aliis
imponis spree portabis. Et pauius ad romanos.ii. In quo ei^ iudicas alteru^
teiprem conde^nas: eade^ eni^ agis q^ iudicas. The said Iuges had iuged Susanne
unto death for the sin of lechery. And for yt it was round that they were
culpables of ye said ^yn^e they also condemned theymselfe to bear and to have
such pain. And therefore of good right they were slain. Also our lord says
in the gospelles of saint mathewe.vii. and iuce. vi. Nolite iudicare scz
unjust and non iudicamini in quo ei^ iudicio iudicaueritis iudi bimini. Iteru^
in eode^ loco. Nolite condemnare scz unjust: and no^ comde^nabimini. That is
to understand. Ne Judge ye iniustly and ye shall not be Iuged. Certainly ye
shall be Iuged in ye Judgment that ye have Iuged And will ye not to condemn
other and ye shall not be condemned. For ye shall be co^dampned of yt
condempnacyon yt ye conde^pne other as y Iuges were. This example denotes yt
the two auncyents were harlottes / falls wytnessers / falls Iuges / and
homycydes. And the blyssed Susanne was chaste / clean / and good / the which
loved better to be dyffamed and slain than to commit lechery and to dysobey
unto god. In likewise should honest women do / and they shall have praise and
reward eternal in paradyse. Susanne was never so much shamed as she is loved
/ praised / and rewarded of the said deed. etc.

Periurium.
A. Examples of people perjured. And first example of three persons the which
perjured them for to impose falls crimes against a patryarke lxxxxvii.
IT is written in thy story ecclesyastycall that in Iherusalem there was a
patryarke right Just and good. And some of his subgectes hated him for yt he
held good justice. And three persons imposed on him falls crime yt they
affermed with oath. And the first said. If it be not so I perysshe by fire For
they were not believed for the excelle^ce of the patryarkes life. And ye second
said I be hurt and seek of a sekenes / scz morbo regio. The third said. I
lose the eyes. And all hapened as they had required for their periury^ge and
lyenge. The first falls wytnes was brent with all his house / progeny / and meyny /
and his goods. The second was consumed of the said sekenes from head to fete.
The third when he herd what was become unto his felawes dredde and showed
all. and wept so much yt he lost his eyes. etc. By this example is denoted yt
the three men beforesayd were detractours and ill spekers to take away the good
renown of the patryarke. Also they were perjured / liars / and falls witnesses
/ and therefore of good right god sent unto them such pain as they had
required / but the punycyon infernal is yet more to dread for it is eternal.
etc.

B. Another example of a man the which perjured him / and he might not draw
back his hand. lxxxxvii.
MEn find by wrytinge this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt a man perjured him on the sepulcher of
saint Pancrace / and forthwt he ne might draw his hand back. And so appeared
his malice and lyenge before all / and so was co^fused. And as it is said / he
yt lyfteth his hand or that touches the gospel or the holy things and
periureth him the said hand apperteyneth unto the devil till yt he be repented.

C. Another example of a man yt would for were hy^ for borrowed money. lxxxxvii
IT is written in the promptuary of the dyscyple yt a cytezyn lend unto his
neighbor a qua^tyte of money. And when the term came to pay the borower
denied the debt. And for hat he was cyted again in Judgment he denied it and
would swear. And as he bowed the kne he lost speech and might nothing say.
After he was redressed and the speech came to him. Secondly he would swear in
denye^ge it / and as he kneled again he lost the speech / and so it was known
to all that he would pariure hy^. and before god he was pariured as it is written
in ye decrete. Paratus iurare falsu^ ia^ pariurus est.xxii. q. v.

D. Another example of two men ye which pariured them / and the one was lepre
and the other seek of ye fire of saint Anthony. lxxxxvii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons this the which follows the which is
also written in other books and says yt an usurer repented in his death and
prayed his fre^des to restore the money yt he had taken of them. And the first
promised and said Else be I stryken with the fire of saint Anthony. The second
promised and prayed / else be I a lepre. They were neclygent to restore after
his death / and would win some thing or they restored and forthwt they were
seek as they had prayed. This example denotes yt a man should hold promise
and restore to other / or punycyon shall follow. And it is to note yt semblably
as ye prayers of the good ben exalted to their honor and praise of god: so
wha^ ill me^ defayle of their promise on pain of punycyon god exalts their
requests to their co^fusyon.

E. Another example of a king and many of his people yt pariured them and
deyed suddenly. lxxxxvii.
SOme masters writes this the which follows how ye discyple recites in the
book of his promptuarye and says that a king of France named Troatarius was
acursed for a sin / and he yode to the pope with many lords and excused him
with oath that he was not culpable. And the pope assoyled them all and them
admynystred by condycyon yt if they had sworn falls and unworthily accede unto
the eucaristie yt they should deye wtin the year. And unto them there came of
vengeance dyuyne. For the said king and the nobles and the part takers in
retournynge from the court of the pope deyed of sudden death wretchedly.

F. Another example of Maryners the which forsware them for dread to give
alms to a poor man. lxxxxvii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his pro^ptuary that a poor man demanded alms of
maryners. And yt master of them made an oath that they had not in their ship
but stones / and that he should cease to demand of them. Than the poor man
said. And sith yt ye swear all etynge things be stones. And even forthwith all
yt was to be eaten in the said ship was changed in color and form of
stones / these things abiding as they were before. The said maryner was a
liar / perjured / and evil speaking wout mercy / and therefore the prayer of ye
poor man was herd so that yt the which was to be eaten became stones. etc.

G. Another example of him yt constrained a man to swear and knew well that he
should forswere him. lxxxxvii.
IT is written in the sermons of ye dysciple yt a man made to cite in Judgment
another for money le^de the which he denied. And the lender him constrained
and made him to swear / howbeit that he was certay-yt he should forswere hy^.
And in ye night folowy^ge ye said lender was rauisshed by vysyon in the
Judgment of god / and there saw Ihesu christ yt sat in his syege of mageste yt
which him demanded the reason of the soul of him that he had made to
forswere of his propre soul. The which were both twain to condemn to
perdycyon. And the Judge him demanded wherefore he had received the oath sith yt
he knew well that he should be forsworn. And he said / for he denied me my
thing. And the Judge said Had it not ben better unto the to have lost that
thing than thy soul and his. Than the Judge made to beat him. And he awoke and
recounted and showed his wounds and brusy^ges in his body the which ne might
heel till that he was repentaunt of the deed with confession and penance. This
example denotes yt a man should love the salvation of his neighbor as of
himself. Diliges proximu^ tuu^ sicut teiprem. And that a man should sooner
let to lose any thing temporal tha^ to constrayne any to swear / when he is
certain that he should forswere him and shall be dampened. etc.

H. Another example of a chorle the which gave unto the devil that yt he had
to eat as two clerks him demanded ye alms. lxxxxvii.
MEn find in writing this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuarye and says that an hermyte dwelled at the foot of a mountain. And
before his wyndowe in a corner the deuyls held their syege and chaptre and
devised of their works / and of the ruynes of persons. And the master devil
asked of a devil if he had brought any thing to ere. And he answered / ye / yt
is of wheet / of breed / of butter / and of meele / and that a chorle had given
hy^. And yt he it brought unto wytnes against his corswery^ge. For as two poor
clerks demanded him asmesse / he swear by the holy charity of god yt he had
nothing to ete yt he might give. And as they again demanded he said. I give
al to ye devil yt I have to ete. And I have brought yt he has given me in the
reprefe of his periurynge. When the deuylles were gone the hermyte made to cast
the said meet in a dyche yt no person should taste it. This example denotes
yt ye said churl was without mercy / he was pariured and a liar / and that the
devil forgeteth not the things ill done and spoken. Also it is danger to give
any thing to the devil / ye gift is soon preferred / but it is not soon
forgoten and effaced.

Mendacium.
A. Examples of lyenge. It is to be noted yt all falls witnesses and pariurers
be liars How saint Iherome made a lie before god the which commanded yt he
were beten / and after the said Iherome did penance. lxxxxviii.
IT is written in ye legende of saint Iherome yt the begynny^ge whereby the said
Iherome studied holy scryptures and took strayte and parfyte life was yt in his
young aege he was seek of a fever and came to the death / his soul was
rauysshed in Judgment before ye chair of the Judge. And in yt place there he
had so much light and clerete of them ye which were present yt he was cast
unto ye earth and durst not look upward in heyght. And he was asked of what
condycyon he was. He answered I am crystyen. And he ye which preceded said to
him. Thou lie / thou art cyceronyen and not cristyen. He held his peace. And
ye said Judge commanded that he were beten. And as they bet him he cried.
Miserere mei dn^e miserere mei. That is to say. Lord have mercy on me. And
those yt which sat with the said Judge yode on knees before him and prayde hy^
yt he would pardon his youth / and that he would give him place of penance
unto his herrour. In yt time he studied the book of Tulye and of Platon / the
books seculers and fables hy^ pleased. And he would not study the books of
prophets And he began to swear and to say to our lord Sir if ever I read
seculer books I shall renye the. And was left in his word by his oath and he
reuyued suddenly. And he found the traces of his betinges yt he had between
his sholdres tyght horrybly. And after he read and estudied the books dyuyne /
he did penance / wept right bytterly / and made so many books yt he is one
of the four doctors of the church. This example denotes that all lyenge or
lesynges ben to flee. for god it sees and knows. Also it denotes that the
clerks should study science dyuyne and not worldly science deceptyble and
those of fables. etc. For such science is folly anenst god this says
scripture. Vnde sapientia huius mundi stulticia est apud deum. Also the amyte
of this world is the enmye of god and those the which it studyeth. Vn^
jacob.iiii. ca. Amicitia huius mundi mimica est deo. Et quicu^que voluerit
amicus esse huius seculuminicus dei constituitur. And for that saint Iherome
was culpable he was reproved of lyenge and beten.

Detractio.
B. Examples of detraccyon. And tyrue example of some relygyous the which made
detraccion of their brother the which deyed. lxxxxviii.
SOme masters writes this the which follows how ye discyple recites in the
book of his promptuarye and says that one of the relygyous of the monastery
of saint Gregory deyed by the sekenes of brennynge ague / and as he was in the
last pange to yield up his spyryte some monks the which were there presents
left to say ye psalmody for to speak and make detraccyon of him. After he
reuyued and said to ye monks. Bredren god pardon you of that yt ye have made
of me detraccyon. Ye have engendered me lettynge / not a little but much great.
For I have been accused as well of you as of the devil all in one time yt I
newyst unto what sklaunder first to answer If ye see any in time to come yt
deyeth make no detraccyon of him / but have ye him in compassyon / for he gooth
in Judgment where he shall have much to a^swere of his accusatours. etc.

C. Another example of a detractour damned for his detraccyons. lxxxxviii.
MEn find by wrytinge this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt there was two clerks felawes / whereof the
one was detractour and a liar so ill yt he ne spoke well of no person. As he
came unto the death he was warned of his said felawe to confess him and
amend. The which did not and conte^pned his said admonycyon. And when he
approached the death he promised his felawe if yt it pleased god to appear to
him wtin.xx. days / and so he departed and dyed. And soon after on a day by
the suffrau^ce of god to give example to other he appeared to his felawe black
all enbrased with fire within and without. And wha^ his felawe saw him he defayled
for feere yt he had / unto whom he said. I am the cursed thy felawe for whom
thou prayest vaynely / for I am dampened perpetually. And he axed how it was with
him at the death. He answered. As I was in ye last pange I was brought before
the Judge / and as I held my peace for dread I saw many souls clerer than ye
son the which stretched their hands out against me unto the Judge and cried
Lord venge our blood on this liar detractour the which has us dyffamed by
lesynges before the men. At this voice the Judge beheld me with vysage wroth /
and in beholdy^ge him I was all ferefull and confused of the ylles that men
spoke against me in seeing that I was culpable I forgate my self and dyspayred
me of the mercy of god and was Iuged and am dampened eternally. By this example
a man should understand that detraccyon is a great sin / for ye good
persons detracted demanded vengeance and punycyon and it was done. With
great pain is that sin pardoned / for it behooves to restore the good
renown as after shall be declared. Et ideo hieronimus. Non facilis venia praua
dixisse deiectis ho^mibus To much speech noyeth. For there ensues punycyon
and dampnacyon.

D. Another example of a detractoure yt had his tongue among todes. lxxxxviii.
MEn find by writing this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says that there was a man a right great detractour of relygyous
/ clerks / and of other good men he departed and deyed. And after in great
time as a man dug in his sepulcher men found all his body in earth and dust
/ but his venomous tongue was hole among todes the which remoeued it and
would gnawe it but they ne might / in showing yt the tongue was not worthy to
return in to earth for that yt it had hurt many a man / and yt the cursed man
that owed the said tongue was tourmented in soul and after the Judgment shall
be in body and in soul eternally without to be consumed. Vn^ apoc^. ix.
Desiderabunt mori et mors fugiet ab eis.

E. Another example of a detractour yt bote and wasted his tongue. lxxxxviii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his pro^ptuary that a priest was so aba^doned in vice
of the tongue that almoost he made detraccyon of all and infamed grievously other
men. When it came before his death he was furyous / and in his furour bote
himself / brake and wasted his cursed tongue venymous in showing before all
that his tongue had spoken cursed words dygne of punycyon and pain.

F. Another example of a fader yt slept as he herd detraccyon. lxxxxviii.
IT is written in the life of faders of a good ancient fader named machetem the
which was much solytary / unto whom god gave such grace that as often times
as he was in convent with the other bredren for to here the service and collacyon
espyrytuall he never slepte and if he had been there the long day and the
night. But as soon as any spoke word of detraccion / or idle word he was
forthwt aslepe. Unto thexample of this good fader a man should keep hy^ from
slepynge in ye service and predycacyons / and from herynge of evil words.

G. Another example yt as a knight made detraccyon of a deed man he appeared
unto him. lxxxxviii.
IT is written in the legende of ye deed be dies yt as a knight was laid in his
bed by his wife he made detraccyon of another knight deed. The which appeared
to him suddenly and said. Friend pardon me and cease too make detraccyon for I
am in great pains in purgatory. And he him demanded / may a man help ye. He
answered / ye. And he demanded him / wylt thou yt such a priest or such pray
for the. Than he shoke the heed in token yt it pleased him not / for that yt he
was in mortal sin. Afterward he demanded if he would yt such an hermyte
prayed for him. He answered I would well / if he prayed for me lightly I should
be delivered. These examples denotes yt a man should cease hy^ of detraccyo^ /
for it is a vice yt dyspleaseth unto god and unto the saints of paradise. And
in that yt the deed body desired the prayer of ye her myte and not of the other
is to understand yt ye prayer of good folk is exalted and not they of
sinners. But the holy sacrament of the mass enpayreth not for an ill priest.

Loqui.
A. Examples of some the which has vttred cursed words. And first example of
a man letygyous full of strife and dyscorde the which said at his death yt all
those that he had troubled them opposed against him and enforced to sle him.
lxxxxix.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his book yt Guilliam says yt there was a man so
letygyous full of strife and furyous that from his young aege he ne might live
in rest with his own kynnesmen but dyscorded with all them in his house and
without the which was grievously seek and in ye death bed he took the
sacraments of the church unworthily. And hastily among ye people the which
were present he cried horrybly. Arise ye al and take armoures and keep me for
all them the which I have troubled oppose them against me and enforce them to
sle me. And without taryenge his eyes turned terrybly / and in cryenge
myscheuously he deyed. This example denotes yt the just men and saints of
paradyse arise in Judgment against the sinners the which them has troubled
and that has brought forth cursed words against god and taken away their
goods. Whereof it is written sapientie.v. Stabunt iusti cu^ magna co^stancia
aduersus eos qui se angustiaueru^t / et qi abs^uler^t labores eorum. And by
this a man should keep him from speaking ill of another and to do him ill. For
none ill shall bide wout punysshement.

B. Of a woman full of wrath yt myssayed her maiden. lxxxxix.
IT is written in the promptuarye of the dyscyple and in other books yt there
was a lady yt often times herd the predycacyons / but she was so impacient yt
when she came fro the church she stryued with her maiden that was good and
devout. This said lady wrothed her for nothing and without cause / and
myssayed her said maiden. The which maiden on a time required her lady that
she might go to here the predycacyon that a relygyous well renowned should
make. And she answered by courage wroth and hearty. Abide at home and keep the
house. ^he was obedient and tarried. And as she ^as in the kechyn with great
affection to her^ the word of god she made a request unto our lord in saying.
My lord Ihesu christ teache me to do thy will. And forthwt Ihesu christ appeared
unto her in saying. What coueytest thou. And she answered to here the word of
god. And Ihesus began to preche unto her and said. Keep three things that I
shall tell the and you shalt be saved. Hold thy peace in maledyccyons / be you
pacyent in trybulacyons and aduersytees / ne yield thou evil for evil / but do
good unto those that shall do the evil. She answered I shall do it with a good
will / and incontinent Ihesus departed. And wha^ her maystresse came again
from the church she missayed her. And the said maiden held her peace and gave
her no word to a^swere. And the maystresse was moeued with Ire and bette her.
And the maiden said to her self / in trybulacyons thou sholdest be pacyent.
The lady said. What is that / that thou spekest. She answered. I have kept
better ye sermon yt the man made me this day than ye ne do many where ye have been this year / for ye be not amended. Than ye said maiden showed unto her
maystresse how Ihesu christ had preched unto her and that she would keep his
word all his life. When the lady had herd the said words she thought unto
her self of the case and was afterward pacyent. etc. By this example is much
to be noted in regard to do three things the which god told unto the
maiden. And it behooves to understand that she was so good that she unto him
suffysed to do the said things / for god sees and knows all. Also it is a
great thing of pacyence / and to here the word of god / And to se good
example by the good life of the maiden the maystresse correcked her self and
became humble and pacyent toward echone.

Another example the dyscyple recyteth in his sermons that there was a vyrgyn
so much chaste devout / a gyuer of alms / and charytable that meruaylous
it was to wete / but impacyente she was in things that came unto her. And the
angel appeared unto her and said. Thou labourest much lawfully and do of
good works and operacyons for to possede the Joys eternelles / but thou ne
may be saved for thyn impacyence and thou labourest for naught. And she
required the said angel that he would pray for her yt god would give unto
her patience / and he prayed for her Afterward she corrected herself / and
was so pacyent yt all men meruaylled and well she fined her days. etc.

C. Another example of him the which said unto his servant pull of my hose
devil / and forthwith the devil vnhosed hy^ in his house. lxxxxix
IT is written in the dialogue of saint Gregorye that a man named steue^ weary of
walking came in to his house / and in his we called his servant and said unto
him come devil and vnhose me. And forthwithin haste at that voice the points
began to vnknytte and undo to the end that appertly he appeared as the devil the
which was called was ready to draw of his hoses and that he obeyed him. And in
contynent that the said Steven saw yt he had hugely fere and took him to cry
and to say. Depart thou acursed fro me. It is not unto yt that I spoke it is
unto my servant. And forthwith at the said voice he ceased. And therefore a man
should not call the devil in Ire / for he is not far of he is by the for to
tempte the / for to deceive the / for to counsayll the ylle ^^^d for to draw
the back to do or goo^ d^d^s. Also if thou call him by Ire ^ sin and
cursednes / he is ready and appar^yll^d for to serve the as he vnhosed y said
Steven and incontinent that he sees that a man repents him he draws him
back as he did when Steven had fere and said unto him that it was not he to
whom he spoke and that it was unto his servant. After the examples and
wrytynges that men find it is great danger to speak often of ye devil / or
to call him / or to put in him his faith / his hope and his love / or to give
himself unto him / or to make alyaunce and covenant with him and to byl^ue in
his effects. For in so doing men renounce unto god and unto baptysme that man
h^the received in saying. Abrenuntio sathane et omnibus pompis eius. Also a
man is private from paradyse / from the company of god and from his saints /
and from all things celestyelles and spyrytuelles / and draws to the man
with the devil and with the dampened of maledyccyon and perdycyon. And man
byndeth himself unto pain and punycyon eternell. etc.

D. Another example of a man the which said unto his wife go thou in the
deuylles name. lxxxxix
IT is written in the dialogue cesar^ that a man full of wrath say^ unto his
wife in his Ire / go^ thou in the deuylles name. And forthwith the ^^u^l entered
in to her and tormented her greuou^ly / of the which thing the man was much
wroth / and promised that he sh^^^e never curse / ne his wife ne person / nor
other creature what so ever they were. etc

E. Another example of the woman the which put dyuysyon in a good marriage
THe disciple recyteth in his sermons that a man and his wife lived
togyders.xxx. years in peace without that that the devil might put between them
hate ne dyscorde one only time. And when ye devil saw that he might nothing
do he came unto an old woman unto whom he promised a pair of new shoes so
yt she could find the mean to put dyscord between the said man and his wife.
And she promised to do it. Than she came unto the man unto whom she said that
his wife loved more another man than him And that she should slay him if he
provided not wisely in his case. And the said man ne would believe it. The old
woman yode unto his wife unto whom she said. Thy husband loves another woman
better than the. And when souper time came they beheld other with indygnacyon
Than both tweyne put faith unto the words of the old woman. And the other
day the said old woman gave cou^sayll unto the said wife that she should take
ye great knyfe of her husband and that she should were it in holy water and
after put it under her husbands bedheed and that he should love her as he did
before / so yt he slepte upon it. And afterward ye said old woman yode unto
the husband / unto whom she said that he should wake by night and that he
should take heed unto his case or else his wife should kill him By this token
yt he should find his knyfe under his beds head. And he byleued ye said old
woman / found his knyfe under his beddeshede / and stroke it in his own wife.
Than ye devil put a pair of shoes at the end of a staff / and took them
unto ye said old woman as he had promised her Unto whom he said. I dare not
approach unto the of dread that thou ne deceive me as you have done ye man and
the wife. Such people ben wors than the devil and unto them apperteyneth more
great punycyon. For where the devil ne had power to put dyuysyon and to
trouble the said marriage. The old woman it wrought and more strong was the
homycyde of the said woman. And therefore a man should here note that the said
old woman and her semblables the which in such wise put diuysyon where there
is good love demand penance a man ne should deny it them but a man should
give unto them plain punycyon and penance without any mercy. For it is a
sin the which is again the sin of ye holy ghost. Inuidentia fraterne
dilectionis the which has not of remyssyon as unto the pain ne in this
world ne in the other. Also if such people will go in to paradyse before yt
they there enter it behooves that they have true contrycyon / confession / and
full punycyon for by satysfaccyon by penance in this world / or in purgatory
/ and if they deye without correccyon and amendment they shall have in hell
punycyon and dampnacyon eternell without any mercy.

F. Another example of the woman the which had the party upward brent in the
church after her death for her cursed tongue. lxxxxix
IT is written in ye.iiii. book of ye dialogue of saint Gregorye / how that a
no^ne was chaste in ye law parties / but she had cursed language / when she
was deed she was buried in ye cathedral chirch And in that night the gardyen of
the church saw by vysyon yt she was taken up and borne before the great
altar and cut by the myddell and that the one party was burnt and the other
was not. When the morny^ge came he told the said thing unto his brederne / the
which yode before the said altar in the church / and found the appearance of
the brennynge in the stones as if the said woman there had be burnt corporelly.

G. Another example of an advocate yt which lost his tongue in his death for
he had habounded in ill langages. lxxxxix.
MEn find by writing in the book cesarii this yt which follows how the
disciple recyteth in his promptuarye. And says yt when an advocate was deed /
men ne found of tongue in his mouth. And of good right he lost his tongue in
his dyeng. For in his life he sold it many times in defending causes unjust
and in calling them in wyttyngly by favors and by gifts that he took
unjustly / in like wise as recompteth cesarius. By this example it is to be
noted that a should wtdrawe him from ill speaking. For when a person
haboundeth wyllyngly in his life in cursed languages / in his death he leseth
his speech / and he ne may confess hy^ to cry god mercy and to dispose of
such things as he should do. Also in the membre wherein a person has most
offended / in the same membre shall he suffer the most of torment. That is to
understand if an advocate be dampened for his cursed tongue / he shall feel the
mo of torments in his said tongue than in other members Vn^ ber. In quo au^t
me^bro magis creator offe^ditur: in eo grauius pcto^r torquetur. The cursed
dyues habounded in cursed langages in dyenge. And therefore signantly the
gospel says that he playneth him that his tongue was burnt more sooner than
another membre. And also saint (...) makes mencyon in the appocalypse o^^
dampened tormented for cursed word^s / Et dicit illud apo. xvi Co^manducaueru^t
linguas suas pre dolor: et blasphamaru^t deum pre doloribus suis. etc.

H. Another example how the angels ben present when a man speaks of good
words / and when ill words ben spoken the deuylles ben ready. lxxxxix.
THe dyscyple recyteth in the book of his sermons that a rich man badde one
time many of his parents and neighbors unto dynere with him. The which he
put at one table / and in a second table he set and put many poores. and one
of those poores the which was a holy man saw that they said benedicite / and
as they ete the first two loves / the aungelles were among them the which
enuyronned and beset about at the said dinner / they spoke of god and of all
good words. And afterward they began to speak of worldly things and vycyous
and of detraccyons. And incontinent the said holy man saw that the deuylles
were present by them / and the au^gelles fled fer of and gave place unto the
deuylles the which lepte and enjoyed them and beset them about. Than the
said holy man began to weep bytterly. And after in the end of the dinner they
took them to speak of god and of good manners salutaryes and the said au^gelles
came again right joyous and the deuylles fled. And when the said man devout
saw this thing he began to laugh gretely. And after that graces were said the
said man devout was asked ye questyon wherefore he had wept and afterward
laughed. Than he told them the cause in admonestyng them yt in etynge and
drynky^ge they should speak of god / for god and his au^gelles there ben
present. And unto the contrary ye deuylles ben present in detraccyons and
cursed words. Unto this purpose it is written math. xviii. Vbicu^que fuerint
duo vel tres congregati in noi^e meo / ibi ego su^ in medio eoru^. etc. That is
to say when two or three men ben assembled in ye name of god in spekyng of him /
god is in the medyll of them. etc.

Audire.
I. Example for those the which here cursed words. And how the sister of
saint damyen was tormented for that that she had taken pleasure to here the
song of daunces. lxxxxix
THe dyscyple recyteth in his book and says / that ye sister of saint damyen
appeared unto him after her death. Unto ye which damyen she said that she was
in great pains in purgatory. And the said Damyen demanded her ye cause. She
answered yt it was for that / yt she being ones in her chamber herd ye song
of those the which daunced. And she therein took pleasure and dylectacyon of
the which dylectacyon she ne did penance in this world / and for that
cause she should be punysshed.xv. days in purgatory. By this example a man
should understand yt it is great danger unto the soul as to here vaynwordes
or ill sith that ye said woman had such punycyon. Vn^ sapiens. ec. ix. Cu^
saltatrice ne assiduus sis nec audias illa^: ne morte pereas and efficatia
eius. etc.

K. Another example how two merchants said unto their curate that they could
nothing sell without oaths and lesynges.
IT is written in the dyalogue cesarii how two merchants of coloyne confessed
them unto their curate yt almoost they ne might sell nothing without lyenge /
swerynge and pariurye / and the priest said unto them. Use ye of my counsayll
and ye shall do the better. Keep you from swerynge and leyenge in selling this
year / and ye shall se how it shall be with you. They promised him and did so
/ And the devil let so the byars that in all the year they sold as
nothing. And afterward said to their curate when they came again unto him
that the obedyence had been unto them right do^mageous / for that yt they had
nothing sold. And the said priest them co^fermed in the faith / and said unto
them Persevere ye in such manner that for none aduersyte ne pouerte ne swear ye
/ nor lie and god shall bliss you. And so they promised to do it. And
incontynente god appesed their temptacion and sold more than all the other /
and in short time they were much rich. etc. This example denotes that the
deuylles ben wroth when any wtdrawe them fro sin as to swear. It is here to
be understand yt by that yt the devil lets the merchants to sell / if
any be ferme in the faith for to resyst well / ye devil is vaynquysshed and he
departs as he did when the said merchants byleued their curate / and swear
not: ne lie more for pouerte the which unto them may come. In like wise should
these merchants withdraw them from swerynge and well shall come unto them /
both temporelly and spyrytuelly.

L. Another example how a bishop was tormented in purgatory for that yt he
had herd detraccyons of his clerk.
THe disciple recyteth in his sermons that a bishop was borne in to purgatory
to do penance / and he was gretely tormented of the stynche of his clerk
bey^ge in hell the which mounted till unto him for that yt he herd sometime
his detraccyons / and had not him enough egrely corrected / how be it that of
other things the said bishop had be good. This example denotes that punycyon
follows unto them the which hereth with good will detraccyons and ill
words. Quia age^tes and co^se^tie^tes pari pena punientur. etc

M. Another example that ill came unto king Roboam ye which gave answer
proud unto the children of Israhel / and byleued ye folysshe cou^sayll of
young men.
IT is written in the.xii. chapter of the third book of ky^ges that after the
death of king salamon the people of Israhell came unto Roboam the sone of the
said Salamon for to constytute him king. And the said people made unto hy^ a
request in saying. Thy fader us has gretely kept under and given us great
charges / now dymynysshe us a little of ye said charges and we shall serve the.
Than the said Roboam said unto them that on the third day he should give them
answer / And first he counsaylled with the a^^cyentes and wise counsayllers of
salamon / yt which said unto him. If thou obey at this day unto the people /
and that thou accord unto their petycyon / and that thou speak sweet words
unto them they shall serve the in all times. Afterward the said Roboam
counsayled him with young men the which had be nourysshed with him / the which
counsaylled him that he should say unto the people. My little finger is more
great than ye back of my fader / my fader has bet them with staves / and I
shall put to above that and shall flayle you with scorpyons. Than when the
third day came he left the cou^sayll of the auncyentes and wise / and gave
unto the people a proud answer of young men folysshe cou^sayllers. And for
this proud answer the people of ye two lygnees of Israhell was moved in ire /
and made another king named Hierobam. And of the said people of Israhell ne
abode with Roboam but the people of the lygnee of judah and of benjamin and
war was between the said Roboam and Hierobam in all their lives. Also it
appears as for to believe the false counsayll of young men the which were
proud / ye said Roboam was not lord of his people and had war all his life.
etc.

N. Another example of an earl replenysshed with many sins that ye devil
bare away. lxxxxix.
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuary yt in a solempnyte as the abbot of
Clugny and many other were in the palace of an earl / a man not known on
horsbacke entered suddenly in to ye palace before them all / the which
commanded ye said earl that he should rise up and follow him for he had to
speak with him. The earl ne would resyste rose him up and yode unto the door of
the palace / where at he found an horse ready for to lepe on / then the earl
lepte upon his back / and he that was come took the rain of the brydell and
lift hy^ up in to the air before them all and bare him away. And the said
earl cried myserably. Succurrite ciues succurrite. He byleued in the cytezyns
of the town yt they should socoure him / but they ne might for anon he was
run out of their sight / and borne away of deuylles in body and soul / and
was no more afterward seen ne found. If the deuylles lift him in to the air
it was for to make him fall allow and for to punysshe him in hell for his
sins.

O. Another example of a woman impacyent yt the devil bare away. lxxxxix.
IT is written in the dialogue cesarii of a woman impacyent in her ire / as she
was troubled put her fete in a bacy^ and afterward lepte out bakwarde / and
said I lepe in such wise from the puyssaunce of god in to the puyssaunce of
the devil / and incontinent the devil took her and bare her away through the
air in ye sight of many the which were present and never after was she seen.
etc.

P. Another example of a man the which condampned himself unto the devil for
his impacyence. lxxxxix.
THe dysciple recites in his sermons that an archedeken and his dyspencer
^^^oue as they yode unto rome for the dyspence of the goods of fortune. And ye
said dyspencer was impacyent and commanded himself unto the devil / and in
that iourneye as he past the water. the devil drowned hy^. And wtin a little
time after his death he appeared unto a chanoyne his friend unto whom he told
all the case before said / and that he was in great pains and torments for
his impacyence / and also for that yt he was commanded unto ye devil.

Q. Another example of a clerk impacyent yt wrathed hy^ again god. lxxxxix.
THe disciple recites in his sermons that a clerk was four year seek. and in
his sekenes was impacyente / and said unto god. Thou have taken my body and I
shall take the soul and shall give it unto the devil. And in his impacyence
said Devil take my soul. And it was done forthwith by ye dyuyne Judgment of
god

Nonu^ preceptu^: et decimu^.
cogitatio mala
A. Examples of ill thoughts / and first how a woman a great gyuer of
alms was dampened for ye delyberacyon of will to commit lecherye. C.
IT is written in the some of penance yt a woman devout and a gyuer of alms
confessed her often unto the bishop of ye cite / and therefore he loved her
much because of her holiness. It happened one day she beheld a young man by
concupyscence carnal and by reason dysposed and fyxed had the will to have his
company without other thing / but by many times that she confessed her / and
also in the death she had it in remembrance / she had shame to tell it and
excused her unto herself saying. Since that I have not done ye deed that it
was nothing / and that she would not speak it. And so she deyed without
confession and contrycyon. After her death ye said bishop made her honorably
to be buried in his chapel where of custom he made his prayers / for asmoch
as she was of great people. And that he loved her for the holiness of her. And
in the night after that she was buried before matyns ye said bishop wend to
make his oraysons in ye said chapel. And as he approached it seemed unto him that
it was full of fire / in likewise as a brennynge oven. Albeit he put his trust
in god and approached and saw upon the tomb of yt woman a gyrdyron of fire and
a body stretched above it and all full of fire and the deuylles with instruments
of iron the which embraced the fire in tornynge her from one side to another.
And when the said bishop saw that it was ye said woman coniured her and her
demanded wherefore she was dampened. And she answered and said yt it was for the
thought of lechery that she had not confessed her of. etc By this example a man
should understand yt god dampneth and punyssheth the persons for the ill
thoughts. And by more great reason for the ill operacyons.

B. Another example how a woman desired a clerk to use of her embracements
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye and says yt a woman cast her eyes
on a clerk unto whom she said if thou wylt consent to use of mine
em^racementes all my goods shall be thine. by many times he refused her / and
she yode to accuse hy^ before the Iuges of oppressyon done unto her. Than the
judge made him to be put in prison / and the said woman was so prycked with
lecherye yt she mounted upon a wall with a laddre and let herself fall where
the said yongman was and desired him to committee lecherye / the which ne did
it. And the iuges herd tell that ye said woman was in the said prison made the
clerk to go out and wend yt he had be an enchauntour and full of malices /
they made to alyght a great fire / wherein he was cast. And as he brende and
that the sides were than dyscouered and that men might se his lyghtes he cried
aue maria so hye that all herd him. Than one of ye cosynes of ye woman
fastened a staff in his mouth and said unto him. I shall take fro the thy
oraysons / and him strangled in such wise and stopped his brethe. And the
bones were buried in the field / ye wiche did many miracles. And over his tomb
a fair church was made. And by this example a man may understand yt the
said young man was chaste and good the which loved better to be in prison /
dyffamed burnt and to dye a martyr than to break the co^mau^demente of god by
co^myttynge lecherye. / Also it is to be noted yt the said harlot sinned
mortally / and brake the commandment of god. Also she was homycyde of his
death dygne of punycyon and dampnacyon And the yongman gate praise / paradyse
and Joy eternell / ^ so should we do / and the woman deserved shame and
punycyon. etc.

C. Another example how a noble woman brake this commandment when she desired
and required her porter to committee lecherye ^ albeit that she did nothing /
for he would not consent. C.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuary that a noble woman as she was a^one
upon a day in the castle where she dwelled was suddenly enflambed with
lecherye that she ne might bear the fire of love. And she dyscended down unto
the porter of the castle and prayed him by great instaunce that he would meddle
with her / unto whom he answered. Madame what is that yt thou spekest / where is
thy wit / behold god and take heed unto thin honor / but of al these
things she forced her nothing. And when she saw herself in such wise
repulsed of the said porter / by inspyracyon of god she issued forth of the
castle and ran unto the water froson under the castle / and therein kept
her so long that all the flambe and embracement of lecherye was quenched / and
afterward came unto the said porter and yielded him thanks and praysynges that
he had in such wise repulsed her and said unto him If you would give me a
thousand mark of gold I ne should suffer now that thing whereof I prayed
the not long ago. and she returned in to her place. The said porter is to be
loved before god and the world / For by his resystence ye lady corrected her
and resysted and loved him after more than if he had committed the sy^ne. This
here is example for to gaynsaye those the which pray to do ylle. Also for to
hold him in coldness for to resyst again ye embrasyng of lecherye as did the
said lady within ye said water. etc.

D. Another example of a friar ye which delyted him in the thought of
fornycacyon without resystyng unto it. And therefore his angel was sorye / and
the orayson of the holy fader was not exalted. C.
IT is written in the life of faders yt as a friar was tempted of the spyryte of
fornycacyon he yode unto a great ancient fader unto whom he said. Fader show
me thy charity and pray for me For I am tempted and solycyted of fornycacyon.
And the said ancient fader prayed for him. And secondly again that friar came
unto the said ancient and repeted ye said words. And the au^cyent ne
dyspraysed him but prayed god for him and said My lord god reuele me of this
thing of fornicacion the which is in this friar / for I have prayed unto the
/ and he ne has of rest ne of aid again the spyryte of fornicacyon. And god
reveled that thing the which was again that brother. And the auncyente saw
ye brother the which was set and the said spyryte by him that played with him
/ and the angel the which was sent unto his aid was there / the which had
indygnacyon against ye said friar / for he ne enclyned him toward god / but
more sooner delyted him in his thoughts / and enclyned all his thought. And by
yt the au^cyent knew that the cause proceeded of ye said friar yt his orayson
was not exalted. And he showed it unto him saying / thou consentest the in thy
thought. etc. Also he taught him to resyste against those thoughts / and was
delivered thrughe ye doctrine of the said ancient.

E. Another example of a man the which ne resysted again his sy^nes and for yt
an of an hermyte was not herd. C.
IT is written in the life of faders yt a man the which left the world for to
serve god in hermytage was devout and proved a good hermit. And when one
seculer his compaygnon herd the renown of him yode to vysyte him. And bare
unto him bread in a sack. And required him that he would pray for him to
absteyne him from his sins. The which hermyte him promised / but he prayed
hy^ that after.xv. days he would return unto him. And when he was come again
at the said term / the hermyte demanded him if his sy^ne pleased unto him yet
as before. He answered that he was wors than before time. And the said hermyte
prayed him yt he would yet return at ye end of.xv. days / and within the
term the said hermyte put him in great oraysons and afflyccyons more than
before for the said man. And when he returned and yt he told him that he was
yet wors ye said hermyte understood yt for his neclygence and for yt that his
sin pleased unto him without resystynge unto the contrary that his orayson was
not exalted. Than the said hermyte took ye said sack wherein he had brought the
bread / and filled it with grauel and afterward prayed him that he would put
the sack upon his sholders / and that he would bear it. And as he wend to do
it the hermyte drew unto the contrary. And he apperceyued that the hermyte
drew unto the contrary unto him. Than he said unto him I may not lift up the
burden for that that thou drawest it again me / And the hermyte said unto him
/ rise up now and I shall aid the. And when they lift both twain of one
accord they lift it up right easily. Than the hermyte said. In like manner I
ne may aid the to take the away from sin. For thou resystest again me.
Thou have thy desire agreeable and thou resystest not again it. But put thy aid
to resyst again thy sin / and god and I shall help the / For if thou help
not thyselfe we can not aid the nor save the. etc. This example denotes that
ye sinners the which will be saved should do yt that is in them for to take
them from syn and for to resyste again it. For for nothing sets him the
good man in ye arse of his carte all myree if his beestes ne draw hy^ That is
to say thou shall not be saved by another / if thou put not pain of thyselfe

A. Another example of a monk unto whom god sent every day of good bread and
fair / and after that he had of thoughts foul and lecherous / and of elacion
he lost the said bread. C. i.
IT is written in the life of ye faders that there was a monk aourned with so
much of contynence / good operacyons and of virtues that god would send unto
him some remuneracyon in this world. And when he was in oraysons and hymns /
god made to be borne unto him of bread upon his table fulfilled with meruaylous
swetnes / and whytenes / of the which he took his refeccyo^. And after yielded
graces unto god of his bounte / and returned in oraysons and in hymns. This
monk had many reuelacyons of god / and many admonycyons of things to come.
And as he was in such things he began to gloryfye hymself^ of his merytes.
And in contynent neclygence and slouthe entered in to his heart so that he was
slouthefull for to go in orayson as he was acustomed And his soul was weary in
such wise as of to great labor / and would rest him / his thoughts
rauysshed him by diverse things. And one foul and vile thought entered in to
his heart albeit after the oraysons he yode as he had be of custom and found
of bread and took his refeccyon / but he ne cared not to amend his ill
thoughts / and apperceyued not the dommages of his mutacyon. And in that day
he was prycked gretely and embraced by thoughts lecherous and of foul
concupyscence that he rauysed him to return in to the world. And he kept
him that day to return. And as he had be of custom made his oraysons / and
afterward yode to take his refeccyon and found of bread but more soylled and
foul than he had had of custom / than he meruaylled him and was sorry. And he
understood that the lyknes of ye monstre that he had thought beheld him Albeit
he took his refeccyon. Afterward the third day foul thoughts prycked him /
and was in his thought in such wise as with a woman present and lyenge
together. And him thought that he embraced her / and that he was couched for to
commit the operacyon unclean. Albeit he proceeded the day following / and he
yode in orayson / but he had the eyes wandrynge / and the thought chetyue. When
the euentyde came he yode to take his refeccyon / found of bread but soylled
and dry. and in like wise as gnawen with rattes and dogs. Than when he saw
it he took hy^ to wayll and to weep / not as he should do with heart for to
quench the flambe of such lechetye / albeit he ete of the bread / but not so
much as he would / ne so much as he had acustomed. And afterward as the
thoughts prycked him they drew ye che^^^e unto the world departed by night
And after yt he was much weary of walking / would rest him / and found there
dwelling some freres. The which when they saw him / ran before him and
received him in like wise as an angel / washed his fete / linuiterent /
exorted them to go unto orayson set the table and accomplysshed the offices of
charity. After that he had his refeccion and that he was a little rested the
freres demanded him some word of edyfycacyon so as of a great wise fader and
instruct and asked him how any might escape the bands and temptacyons of the
devil / or if there came unto them the thought of foul temptacyons / how they
should call them again. Than he was compulsed to teache them of ye said
temptacyons and thoughts he them instruct and taught suffycyently. And
understood in himself the said temptacyons / and reknowleged his defaute and
said. how I teache the other and am deceived myself / or how shall I correcke
the other and a mende not myself / acursed first do thou that that thou
techest unto other. When he had reknowleged in his heart his fault said adieu
unto the freres and ran hastily in to his de^ne from whens he was departed
and said. If god ne had aided me I had be descended in to hell. By the aid of
god and of the freres the which has made me to reknowlege I am come^ again.
And he abode in his place all his life in wepynges and in wayllynges to do
penance and lost the bread celestyall / and labored ye time of his life for
to have his sustentacion. This example denotes many things. The first that
god gives unto his servants reward / grace / and glory in asmoche as he
sent of bread unto the monk. The second is yt by sin a man leseth the said
reward and the grace of god and all goods. For he lost ye bread. The third
is to instruct other a man saves himself as deed the said monk the which
reknowleged his fault and corrected hy^ by that yt he taught ye said freres and
by penance he saved himself. etc.

B. Another example how a friar ye which was tempted in his thought of the
esperyte of fornycacyon and god suffered that he saw it in a foul woman. C.i.
IT is written in the life of ye faders that a holy man had nourysshed a man
child in a forest. The which when he was grown he was tormented with ye
spyryte of fornycacyon. And would go in to the world for cause of lechery. and
when the holy fader saw that he was wroth and by two years retained him by
fair words in comfortynge hy^. In the end he said that he was prycked that he
ne might no more bear it. And the holy man said unto him. Goo than in to the
world and mary the thou may be saved. Than the young man waxed Joyous / but
ye holy man said unto him I demand the one thing of grace the which is that
thou go first unto a fou^tayn in such a forest / and that you fast there forty
days in requyrynge the aid of god yt thou may chese a good woman For it is
a great cure whereof speaks the wise. eccle. xxviii. Multeris bone beatus vir.
More over the said holy man bad hy^ take of bread as much as he would / than
he was obedyent. And when he had fasted.xx. days as he was in orayson he
felt great stenche. The which as it creased by two hours with great pain
might he bear it. And there came unto him a right foul woman / black / vile /
loathsome / sty^kynge blered / full of scabbes / from whom the said stynche
proceeded / and she came unto the said young man / unto whom she said. Where
art thou my friend / by great time I have sought the. I love ye much. I
appetyte the above all men. And ye said yongman demanded her. What will you
right foul stynkynge intolerable / and she said I would have the to lie with
me Than the said yongman spytte in her face and said be it never so that I have
such a love so loathsome foul and stynkynge. And the said yongman demanded
her / what art thou / from whens come thou / and how do men call the / and
she answered. I am the sin of lecherye. And it is now two years that I ne
cessed to seche the / and it was when thou feltyst first the temptacyons of the
flesh. And ye said yongman said. If I had wist yt the sin of lechery had
be so stynkynge and so much abhomynable I should not have wylled to return in
to the world. And from now forth I shall keep unto god vyrgynyte. And he
returned unto the holy man / unto whom he recompted ye said vysyon. And he
said unto him / if thou had abyden unto forty days / mo great things had
be reveled unto the. And the said yongman served unto god in vyrginyte and
dwelled in relygion. etc. If sorts of people lecherous should consider well
this example / and how lecherye is stynkynge / vile / and abhomynable before
god and the ylle the which thereof proceeds in the end of ye days / they
should correct them as did the said young man. etc.

C. Another example of a young man ye devil walked with because of his thoughts
that were ill. C.i.
MEn find by writing here how that he dyscyple recyteth in his sermons and
says that one time a man had of ill thoughts in walking / and forthwith
the devil assocyate himself with him in semblaunce of a man and yode with him. And
as they yode togyders the said man dred / entered in to a church that they
found he repented him and yode to confession / for it was lent. And when he
yode forth of the church he found the devil at the yate / the which beheld
those that came forth of whom he demanded his compaygnon. And he said loo I
am here the which came hither with the / goo we our way. And the devil
answered him thou art not my fellow that came with me The devil knew him not
for that / that he had confessed him and that god had pardoned him. And by
that confession effaceth the sins and separeth from ye devil. Also ill
thoughts ben to dread / for ye devil is not far of. etc.

D. Another example how it behooves to yield account at ye day of Judgment of
ill thoughts. Ci.
IT is written in the epystyll of a bishop named Cirulius how saint Iherome
areysed a deed man / ye which told that when his soul was separate from the
body it was borne before god in judgment. Also soon as a man may shytte ye
eye / and that all the sins that he had done / spoken / and thought in all
his life appeared clearly unto the Judge and before all / as if they had be
present so that there abode not the most little thought / but that it appeared
clearly in like wise as it had be thought. etc.

Cogitatio bona.
A. Examples of thoughts / and first example that a friar won seven crowns
a night in resystyng again ill thoughts and temptacyons the which came unto
him. Cii
IT is written in the life of the faders that an au^cyent fader had a dyscyple
proved. And this said fader had of custom in ye euentyde to teache his said
dyscyple / and after to give unto him his benedyccyon / and than suffered him to
sleep and it befell one day that some relygyous came unto the said ancient /
and after that he had recom^orted them and instruct they departed. After he
came in the euentyde to teache his said dyscyple as he had accustomed to do. And
for as much as he was weary he slepte. And the said dyscyple sustained and
would not sleep ne leave his said master till that he had had his benedyccyon
and leave of him and that he was waked. And the devil tempted him in his
thought by seven times that he should depart and that he should go to sleep /
but he resysted virtuously unto the said thoughts / and never remeued. And at
mydnyght the ancient awoke and found his said discyple by him / unto whom he
said Sone haste not thou departed till unto this hour. And he answered no /
for thou have not given me leave. And the ancient said / wherefore haste thou
not waked me He answered. I had dread to dystourbe ye The said ancient rose
him up / said matynes and instruct his dyscyple / and afterward gave unto him
leave for to sleep / and as the said ancient satte him alone he was as in a
trance. And he saw an angel the which showed unto him a glorious place and
a syege in yt place / and upon the said syege seven crowns. And ye said
ancient asked him ye which showed unto him that thing in demanding unto
whom the said syege was and ye crowns. He answered unto thy discyple / he
has deserved to have the place and ye syege for the good conuersacyon of him
/ and he has deserved to have the seven crowns in this night. And the said
ancient had meruayll / called his dyscyple and demanded him what he had done
the said night. He answered that he had nothing done. And the ancient wend
that by humylyte he ne would confess unto him / and said unto him. I shall not
be content with the if thou tell me not what thou have done or thought this
night. And ye said dyscyple doubted and thought that he should answer / and
for that that the auncyente had commanded him to tell. He answered I have
done none other thing but that I have thought seven times and was much
impugned in my thought that I should go my way and that I should sleep before
that thou had give me leave / but for that that thou had not give me leave I
yode not but sustained and resysted till that thou were waked and yt thou
had given me thy benedyccyon. When ye said ancient herd these words he
understood that at all the times that he resysted in his thought as many times
he deserved to have crown of god. And therefore a man should resyst unto all
ill thoughts for to have vyctorye again the devil / and for to have reward
in paradyse. etc.

B. Another example how that a relygyous apostate the which repented him it
appears that the will of a body is reputed for the deed. Cii
IT is written in libro cesarii yt s^ynt bernarde had a monk the which left
the habyte of his order by the admonycyon of the devil and took to govern a
parysshe. And engendered a sone and a daughter on a concubyne. Than it befell yt
after that he had dwelled there many years his abbot past by the parysshe
wherein the said monk enhabyted / and came to lodge in his house without that
yt he knew any thing and without knowing him Albeit the monk knew him well
and received him also proprely as his own fader / and unto him he admynystred
and unto his compaygnons and unto their marys all haboundauntly in their
necessytes. Erly in the morning when saint bernarde had said matyns he was
prepared to goo his way. And had not spoken unto the monk for that that he
was gone right erly unto ye church. He said unto ye priests sone. Go and bear
such message unto thy master / and that child was dombe from his natyuyte
the which was obeyssaunte at his commandment and apperceyued in the virtue
of the co^maunder ran unto his fader and brought absolutely the words of
saint bernard and said. The fader abbot commands the such things and
such. When the fader herd the first voice of Joy took him to weep and
secondly and thyrdly made him to repete the words. And inquired dylygently
that yt the abbot had done / unto whom he said / he has done none other
thing to me but yt he said unto me. Go and tell unto thy fader these words.
Than the priest was co^tryte of so great and euydent miracle / and came
hastily unto the holy man and fell prostrate at his fete in weeping and said
unto him. My lord fader I was your relygyous in such wise am I named and I
departed at such a time. Than I pray your good faderheed that I may goo
again with you unto the monastery for god has vysyte mine heart in your
coming unto whom saint bernarde answered and said. Abide me here. And when I
have done my besynesses I shall come anon this way / and I shall led the
with me. And the said monk dredde ye death / the which he had not dredde
before / and said. My lord I dread to deye in the space of this time. And he
him answered. / Know thou for certain that if thou dye in such condycyon and
purpose thou shalt be found to be monk before god. And so he departed. When
yt abbot came he found him deed and newly buried. Than he commanded that men
should open his sepulcre. And those the which present were demanded what he
would do. He answered I will se if he lie in the sepulcre as monk / or as
clerk. They answered we have buried him as a clerk in habyte seculer. Than
the earth was taken away and ye monument open wherein he had be buried. And he
appeared before al in tonsure of monk. And god was magnified of them all the
which reputed and took the will for the deed. etc.

C. Another example how a thief came unto an hermyte in good will to amend him
/ the which hermyte dysdeyned him wherefore evil came unto him. C.ii.
THe dysciple recites in his sermons that a thief was much sorrowful of his
sins and had good will to amend him the which prayed an hermyte that he
would receive him in to his felyshyp / for he purposed never to commit tho
synes and to serve god evermore. And ye hermyte ne would receive him / and
dyspraysed hy^ in his heart and let him go without consolacion. And as the
thief would have made him an hermytage a tree yt he hewed fell upon him and
slew him. And in such wise he deyed in great contrycyon of heart. Than the
said hermyte saw that angels came and bare the thief in to heaven / and was
sorry and said. Wherefore make I my dwelling here in this hermytage. This man
has be a cursed thief / and for his good will he is now mounted in to heaven.
And I have be here so long and I ne may enter. And in that co^mocyon said. I
go in to the world and I shall be a thief / and in the end I shall be saved /
and as he excercysed him to commit theftes he was pursued of the people of the
cite. and in fleing he fell and slew himself and the deuilles came the
which took the soul and bare it in to hell. etc. This example denotes that
by the contrycyon and good will that the said thief had he was saved. Also it
is written ezechielis. xviii. / Inquacu^que die ingemuerit peccator oi^m
iniquitatum eius non recordabor. And ye said hermyte was dampened by that that
he changed his life from good in to ylle Vnde ezechielis. xxxiii. Iustitia
iusti non liberabit eum i^ quacu^que die peccauerit. etc

Eucharistia.
D. Examples of the eucharistie. And first example of an abbot ye which said
that the hostye consecrate was not the very body of our blessed lord Ihesu
christ / but that it was his figure. Cii.
IT is written in the life of faders yt an abbot was great in life actyue / the
which perseuered in great labors / but he was simple in the faith. For he
erred and said that it was not naturelly the body of our lord Ihesu christ
the hostye consecrate in the mass yt we receive / but said yt it was his
figure. And when two auncyentes herd tell that he spoke such words
considering his life and conuersacyon how symply and ygnorantly he spoke the
said word / they came unto him and said. Abbot we have herd tell that an
infydele has said that the bread consecrate in the mass that we receive is
not naturelly ye body of Ihesu christ / but that it is his figure. And he said
it is I ye said it And the said auncyentes gave unto him ensygnementes and
techynges that he said not well. And he said unto them that if he ne might
know manyfestly the said thing that he would nothing believe / and the said
auncyentes said. Pray we unto god this weke and we believe that he will reuele
it unto us. The said abbot was co^tente / and all three yode in to their houses
/ and put them in orayson. And when the said weke was acco^plysshed / these
abouesayd came in to the church on the sunday the which put them in a place
apperynge as in the pulpyt from the which they se al ye secrets of the
priest. And ye eyes of their vnderstondynges were open. And when the loves
consecrates were put upon the altar they saw in like wise as three children
lyenge on the altar. And when the priest put forth his hand for to break the
said bread consecrate the angel of our lord and redemptour dyscended from
heaven upon ye said altar ye which had in his hand a knyfe and cut that
child and ye blood ran in to the chalyce. And when the priest brake the
bread consecrate in little parties. In like wise the angel cut the members of
ye child in little parties And the said abbot approached for to receive the
holy co^munyon. It was given unto him seule in form of flesh soylled with
blood. And when he saw it he dredde and took him for to say and to cry. I
believe my lord that ye bread the which is consecrate on the altar that it is
thy body. And ye wine the which is consecrate in clalyce / that it is thy
blood. And forthwith ye flesh that was in his hand was changed into the
lykenes of bread after ye mystere / and after the said abbot received his
creatoure / and yielded unto him graces and was confermed in the law. By this
example a man should understand that after that ye words sacramentalles ben
pronounced that the hostye is no more bread / and that it is the precious body
of Ihesu christ he ye which is borne of the vyrgyn marye / and the which
has suffered death on ye cross for to redeem us. Before the consecracion the
hostye is bread. And after the consecracyon the said bread is transmuted unto
ye precious body of Ihesu christ. And note well here that thou ne sholdest
worship ye hostye ne join the hands for to do it honor till that the words
sacramentales ben pronounced / that is till that the priest lift up the hostye.
For that should be ydolatrye to worship the bread the which is one of the
creatures of god / and to give unto it the dyuyne honor the which
apperteyneth alonely unto god. Incontynente that the priest has consecrate he
lyfteth up the hostye / and than thou it sholdest worship and believe steadfastly
that it is the precious body of Ihesu christ naturelly not a lonely his figure
as byleued the abbot. It is written ioh. vi. Ego su^ panis viuis qi de celo
desce^di. Si quis ma^ducauerit ex hoc pane viuet i^eternu^. That is to say. I
am the bread of life the which am dyscended from heaven / who so eteth of this
bread / yt is to understand in the estate of grace and that he persevere in
such wise till unto ye death he shall live in perdurabylyte. And that chapter
iohannis.vi. is written. Caro mea vere est cibus et sanguis meus vere est potus.
That is to say certainly my flesh is the viande and nourysshynge of the
soul. And my blood is the drink by the which she is replete* Also we read.
ioh ii. capit. yt god changed the water in to wine at a wedding. He has
also puyssau^ce to change the bread in to his body / and ye wine in to his
blood after that it is his will. When the priest pronounces ye words that he
has instytute ye which ben written in the euangelystes. Hoc est eni^ corpus
meum. Hic est eni^ calix sagui^s mei. etc A man should not abasshe him if ye
hostie change his nature and that it be transmuted unto the precious body of
Ihesu crist We read more strongly. Moses the which was man mortal changed
many times his rod in to a serpent before pharaon. And when he would the
serpent became a rod. Also we read that moses made great haboundaunce of
water to issue out of a roche for to give unto the people of Israhell the
which murmured. also the waters of the children of Israhell were so bitter
that beestes ne people ne might drink it. And at the commandment of moyse ye
which put his rod with in the waters they became sweet and changed their
natures Also we read yt an axe ye which was without hafte and fell in to deep
see came again unto the hafte and swa^me again nature at the voice and at the
commandment of ye prophet helyseus the which held the said haft of wodde.
The iron of his nature is heavy. And albeit at the commandment of a mortal
man it swa^me upward on the water. Since that it is so yt mortal men ye which
ben ye creatures of god has done the said things it follows well that god
the which is ye creator of all things may change ye bread in to his
precious body. It is more great thing to create than to change. Also
notwithstondynge yt there ne is but one god / so is he entyer^y in all the
hostyes with out dymynucion. verbi gratia. When any man speaks his voice is
hard and enters in every of the auditors. Also when the priest brings
forth the words of god it enters and extends in to all the hostyes and ben
consecrate / and god is entyerly in every of them without any dymynucyon. Also
if all the men of the world held every of them a glass in their hand when
the sone shyneth every man should se the sone in his glass / and it ne is but
one son. Also it ne is but one god the which is verytably in all the hostyes
consecrate. Sithe yt the hostye is the very body of Ihesu christ the sone of god
celestyall and borne of ye vyrgyn marye a man should receive him honorably and
holyly / and him behooves to purge his conscience of sin. Vnde paulus.
Expurgate vetus fermentu^ vt sitis noua co^spersio. That is to say. Take away
ye old leuayne / that is sin to the end that ye be newely spryncled. Et
legitur ad romanos.xiiii. Abiiciamus opera tenebraru^ and induamur arma lucis.
Put we out ye operacyons of derkenesses tho ben of sins And put we out the
arms of light tho ben of virtues and charity. etc. Men put not of wine in a
foul vessel to the end yt it be not lost / ne of roses / ne of fair flowers
in the trough before the hogs to the end that they ne be soylled ne wasted.
also a man ne should put the precious body of Ihesu christ in a body fulfilled
with sins. etc. vnde mathei.vii. Neque mittatis margaritas ante porcos ne forte
co^culce^t eas pedibus suis. Ite^ in code^ capitulo. No lite setm^ dare
canibus. When a lord temporell comes to lodge in thy house / thou make it
clean / prepayrest it and take away all immu^dicites and things fylthy and
unclean. In like wise sholdest thou do when thou will receive thy creatoure.
/ For if thou receive him in mortal sin unworthily that is unto thy
dampnacion Thou receyuest him the which shall judge the and condemn the. Vnde
pauius. i co xi. ca. Qui eni^ ma^ducat and bibit i^digne iuditiu^ sibi ma^ducat
et bibit. sequitur. Reus erit corporis and sa^guinis dn^i. And therefore prove
well thy conscience to know if it be well made clean by confession before that
thou receive thy creatoure. Vn^. i. ad co. v. Probat au^t seipsu^ homo: and sic
de pane illo edat: et de calice bibat. The good and ye ylle receive him / but
dyfferently. For the good receives him unto their salvation And the ill unto
their dampnacyon. Sumu^t boni sumu^t mali sort tame^ inequali vite vel
i^teritus. Example yt judas ye which received his creator in mortal sin And
incontinent yt he had received him ye devil entered in to his body. And he had
more great puyssaunce in him than before. Vn^. ioha^nis. xiii. Cu^ jesus
inti^xisset pane^ dedit jude and post bucella^ tu^c introiuit i^ illu^
sathanas. etc. And incontinent judas rose him up and yode unto the Jews for to
take and deliver our lord the which was great maledyccyon for him. Vn^ luce.
xxii. Te homini illi per que^ filius hominis tradetur Our lord said unto his
dyscyples. I have ch^se you twelve and one of you is a devil Vnde ioh. vi. Ego
vos duodeci^ elegi: et vnus ex vobis diabolus est. That was judas that our
lord called the devil / he was his dysciple. And for his couetyse to have. xxx
pence he was perverted he was traitor thief / fayntyf and betoke and delivered
his own master in the hands of his enmyes the which was innocent and just
for to put him unto death. And therefore in the end and conclusyon all
maladyccyon / da^nacyon / and perdycyon / came upon the said judas. Vnde
mathei. xxvi. Melius esset illisi natus no^ fuisset homo ille. Quia dixit. Quid
vultis michi dare et ego eum vobis trada^. Et legitur mathei. xvii. Peccaui
tradens sa^guine^ iustu^. Sequitur. Proiectis arge^teis in te^plo recessit and
abieno laque se suspe^dit. It had be better unto him that he had never be borne
/ for he hanged him self / his entraylles fell out of his belly / and is
dampened. legitur actuum. i. De judah qui suspensus crepuit medius and diffusa
su^t oi^a viscera eius. By his sin he slew himself as it is said / and was
deposed of his prelature of his office and sent into hell in to ye place yt he
had deserved to have. And another had his said prelature. And in likewise shall
it be done of the ylle the which follow his life / his manners and condycions
Legitur in actibus apostoloru^. Fiat habitatio eius desserta and episcopatu^
eius accipiet alter. Et david i^ psalm. Fia^t dies eius pauci et episcopatu^
eius accipiat alter. etc.

F. Another example of a woman ye which took her to laughe as saint Gregorye
admynystred unto her on Ester day. Cii
IT is written in the legende of saint Gregorye / yt on an ester day as the said
saint Gregorye admynystred ye people / when he came unto a woman and that he
said / corpus dn^i nostri jesus christi. etc. she began to laughe. When saint
gregory saw ye said thing he withdrewe his hand and put the hostye on the
altar. And after that the other were admynystred he called the said woman and
demanded her wherefore she had laughed. She answered I laughe for yt that thou
have said yt this little portion of bread that thou would give me that it is
the body of Ihesu christ / Than the holy man made a sermon unto the people /
and warned them to go in orayson and to pray that it would please unto god to
show the truth of this thing and for to take away the error from ye said
woman. And when ye orayson was accomplysshed saint gregorye yode unto the
altar and the said hostye appeared vysybly before all to be corporell in
flesh. and the party of the little finger was blody / Than saint gregorye
said unto the woman. From now forth believe thou truly the words of god. Panis
que^ ego dabo raro mea est pro mundi vita. That is for to say. The bread that
I shall give unto the it is my flesh for the life and redemcyon of the
world. After that at the prayer of the said saint and people the hostie came
again in symylytude of bread / and the said woman was confermed / and byleued
in the sacrament. etc. God will yt ye hostye appear unto us in lykenes of bread
for two causes. The first is to have retrybucyon to believe yt that we se not.
The second because it should be unto us cruelte to ete uncouth mete / as raw
flesh. and therefore we should believe without doubt in the consecrate hostye.
etc.

G. Another example of a cursed priest yt received ye hostye wrongfully. Cii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says that as a seculer priest
sange one time mass / another stondynge by saw in the patent in the time to
receive not ye lykenes of bread / but of a child / the which when ye priest
would have received him he turned his face and resysted with his fete and his
hands yt he should not enter in to the mouth of the said priest. And this
devout man saw this thing not alonely one time but many. Unto whom the
cursed priest one time among other said. All times when I take the body of
Ihesu christ I take it with so great dyffyculte that I meruayll thereof. And ye
devout man said unto hy^ I cou^sayll the that thou correct the / and I have
seen that of the. Than the priest corrected him. And as he song afterward the
said devout man saw the child the which joined the hands / assembled the
fete and entered in to the mouth of ye priest hastily and easily etc. By this
example a man may understand yt god dwells not ne yet will dwell by grace
with ye sinners in the sin / but will dwell and enhabite with the good the
which ben in ye estate of grace. And therefore every man should correct
himself and amend. etc.

H. Another example of a child of.ix. years the which was admynystred at his
death. Cii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his book and says that as a young child seek
replenysshed with the holy ghost required that the body of Ihesu christ should
be brought unto him. And as his friends refrayned it he cried strongly. Give me
the body of our lord / give me the body of our lord. When this thing was
spoken unto the priest he answered. That it was no sure thing to give ye body
of Ihesu crist unto such a child the which knew not what it was. And the
priest took an hosty vnsacred and bare it unto him and said. Here is the body
of our lord. And god inspyred the child for to dystroye the falsnes and
infydelyte of many the which use them ill. And answered. Wherefore will thou
deceive me this is not the body of our lord that ye offer me. Than the priest
was meruaylled of this thing and ymagyned yt this child was enspyred dyuynely
/ yode to fetch unto him the holy co^munyon / and that child received it
enough devoutly.

I. Another example how that a horse / an ox / and an ass knew Ihesu christ
with in the sacrament and did him honor. Cii
IT is written in the promptuary of the dyscyple yt a devout bishop and an
herytyke strove togyders of the veryte of the body of Ihesu christ. And for to
prove this thing they put of otes in a vessel and put the eucharystye upon ye
otes by cautell. And afterward led theder a horse an ox and an ass the
which ne touched unto the prouende / but bowed the knees and worshypped our
lord. In likewise as if they had used of reason. When the said heretyke had
seen that he converted him and after was faithful / unto purpose of this
example it is written ysaie.i. Cognouit bos possessore^ suu^: and asinus presepe
dn^i sui: israhell au^t me no^ cognouit et populus meus no^ intellexit. That is
to say. The ox has kowen his possessour. And the ass the crache of his
master. Certainly Israhell has not known me / and my people has not
understand me. That is to understood that the beestes irreasonables known
their master. And the men reasonables ne know their god lord and master. etc.

K. Another example of the horse of a Jew the which knew Ihesucryst in ye
sacrament of the eucarystye. Cii.
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye that as a good priest bare the body
of Ihesu crist for to admynystre unto a seek body he met a Jew upon a fair
horse / and the said horse bowed ye knees before ye body of Ihesu christ. And ye
jew ne might make him to pass for the strykynge with the sporres till that
the body of Ihesucryst was paste. And a voice from heaven was hard. Know thy
creatoure yt thou denyest to be borne of ye vyrgyn marye. And when the Jew
saw that he repented him byleued in Ihesu christ and received baptysme. Also
you infydele when thou see these examples here thou sholdest believe steadfastly
in ye holy sacrament to worship it and to convert ye unto god as did the
Jew. etc.

L. Another example of a woman the which put the body of Ihesu christ before
the hogs. Cii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his book and says that in the time that alberte
reigned in his bysshopryche a woman came unto him to confess that the devil ne
would suffer yt she should believe in the sacrament of the altar yt it was the
body of Ihesu crist: and put it before hogs For all the hogs bowed ye knees
and worshypped the sacrament. And ye cursed woman would se the experyence and
put the body of Ihesu christ upon the broche and roast it afterward with fire as
roste. And afterward ye drops of blood began to drop / This thing done she
was not yet content She took the body of Ihesu christ and buried it in the earth
/ and much of blood issued above the pit / in like wise as in boyllynge out
of the earth. At this thing ye said woman repented her and byleued the very
body of Ihesu crist to be in the sacrament of the altar and confessed this
thing unto the said bishop and her sy^ne / and received perpetual penance
of him. This example should withdraw al unfaithful from error / and should
worship their creator / or they shall be wors than hogs the which yode on
knees. Be ye not so incredule and without believe as was the said woman the
which would nothing believe till that she had seen the experyence of the
deed. etc.

T. Another example of a maiden the which shed ye body of Ihesu crist upon
the cabysshe and cole wortes. Cii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says that it happened in the isle
of saint James that a maiden seculer was posseded of ye devil. And a pressed
demanded of the devil the which was in her wherefore he tormented her so
cruelly and so longly the said woman. He answered by the mouth of the maiden /
she had well deserved it. And ye priest demanded him wherefore. He answered for
that that she has laid the right hye god on the cabysshe herbs. And because
that he understood not this thing and that the devil ne would expound it to
him. He demanded of the woman if she had understand that yt the devil had
spoken yt she would expound it to him / and incontinent she confessed her
sin and said. When I was young. I entered in to a little gardyn to gadre
cabysshe herbs that ye little worms ete. And I loged a woman tourmented on
night unto whom I expounded ye do^mage of my gardyn yt these little worms ete
my cabysshe herbs. She answered that she should teache me a good medecyne. Take
the body of Ihesu crist and afterward break it in little parties and shed them
upon the cabysshe herbs / and incontinent they shall cease them. And I
myscheuous has had more curyosyte of my little court and gardyn than of ye
sacrament and byleued the woman. And when ester came I drew ye body of Ihesus
from my mouth / and did as I had be taught. And the said thing that I did
made me to be put in torment in like wise as witnesses the devil. etc. A man
may here under stand that ye said old woman gave cursed counsayll the which
a man should fle And the young woman was infydele and right ill to do the said
cou^sayll. And therefore she had deserved to have punycyon and torment / and so
done all unfaithful people And therefore they should dread punycyon and
dampnacyon eternell. etc.

N. Another example yt the oxen knew Ihesu christ in the sacrament in ye field.
THe dysciple recites in his sermons how thieves brake a church and took the
shryne the which is called custodye and ye body of Ihesu christ and yode their
way And when they ne found but relyques with in it and the body of Ihesu christ
they gave no force / and left it in their neighbors field. When the morning
came the labourer with his oxen came to labor his land. And when the oxen
came nere unto ye said cheste or pyxe / as all abashed houed still in such
manner that for pryckynge ne for strykynge ne would they go no ferther so much
yt the labourer wrathed him again them and said the devil was in his oxen.
He ne saw clear for it was right erly. and auysed the box or pyxe before ye
fete of his oxen. Than he understood the cause of his rebellyon / left all in
the field / yode unto his town to tell the case unto the priest and unto
other. They came unto the said field with the cross / encenser / and tapres
and brought again the body of Ihesu christ. etc. Thou infydele if thou ne do
honor unto thy savior the which is in ye sacrament thou art wors than the
oxen / and beestes dombe the which ne would go no ferther for betynge ne
otherwise agay^ their creatoure.

O. Another example how ye honey bees made unto Ihesu christ a chapel and an
altar in doing him honor. Cii
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye and says that as a woman nourysshed
many bees that deyed and prouffyted nothing / she sought of remedy / and it
was told her that if she put by them ye body of Ihesu christ that they should
prouffyte without death. Than she yode unto the church and feigned that she
would be admynystred / took the body of Ihesu christ bare it and put it in a
hyue of bees. Understand the great meruayl and puyssaunce of god. The bees
knew their creatoure / the which made him a right fair chapel about him of
the swetnes of wax and honey that they gadred. And in that chapel made an
altar of the self matere and ^ut above it ye holy body of Ihesu christ. God
blyssed their operacyons. And at ye time when the said woman opened the hyue /
and that she had seen so fair enoratorye she had shame / ran unto the priest
and confessed unto him all that yt she had done and seen. Than the priest took
the parysshynge with him came unto the vessel / ye bees flewe away and in
lauding their creator keste a cry. They found a fair little chapel made
of the matere made with the bees the which was of great artyfyce and craft. For
it had of fair little walls and covering / wyndowe / door / alter They
meruaylled them and bare it with the body of Ihesu christ unto their church
with great loving and praysynge. etc. if the said bees did honor unto their
creator / so sholdest thou do or thou sholdest be more insensyble than they.
etc.

P. Another example of ye sone of a Jew the which was preserved from
brennynge / for that that he had received the body of god. Cii.
MEn find by writing that in the town of cerram there was two Jews the
which dwelled among the crystyens in a street. And the day of ester the
sone of one of the Jews was moved in great devotion unto the sacrament / The
curate seeing his steadfast purpose / gave unto him his sauyoure. And when the
fader of ye said child herd tell what his sone had done he was wroth and bet
hy^ And at that hour the Jew baked of bread. And the oven was all embrased
with great fire / took his child and kest him with in the oven. The mother of the
child the wh^che saw the said thing ran unto the said oven / and many
other looked with in it and saw the child the which played without having
ill within the said fire. The miracle was incontinent showed over all the town.
The people ran theder the child was drawn out without having ill. And in no
manner of ye world the Jew would not convert him. And for his infydelyte they
took him and was cast within the oven / and he was forthwt burnt.

Q. Another example of a man the which ne would leave his sin / who came to
receive his creatoure again the defense of the priest. Cii.
THe discyple recyteth in his promptuary that a priest knew in confes^yon how
a sy^ner was not contryte / for he had no will to absteyne him from his sin.
And therefore he defended hy^ to receive his creatoure. And upon this thing
trembly^ge he thereto acceded. And ye pressed said unto him. God be Judge between
the and me / and gave unto him the body of god. And incontinent that he had it
in his mouth his throat brake and the body of ihesu christ yode forth and
suddenly he deyed.

R. Another example of the punycyon of one of the relygyous of saint bernarde
ye which received his creatoure in mortal sin. Cii.
MEn find by writing how saint bernarde knew that one of his relygyous was
in mortal sin / whom he admonested gretely in confession to put him in the
estate of grace etc. but the sinner ne would confess him. And at ester he
presented him at the table of our lord as the other did. When it came to
receive him in his order the said saint bernarde said generally that none ne
should receive his creator in mortal sin. And ye sinner said appertly give
me that the which is mine. Than saint bernarde understood that he was
obstynate and steadfast in his sin made the cross before him and said. God
be Judge between the and me. / And when he had received the body of Ihesu
christ in the mouth fell deed before all suddenly. This example here should
move the sinners to purge their consciences of sy^ne before that they receive
their creatoure. etc.

S. Another example of a holy fader ye which drew back the sinners to
receive their creator in sin. Cii.
IT is written in the life of ye faders that god gave so great grace unto a holy
fader named Eulogium that he apperceyued the merytes and the sins of those ye
which came to receive their creatoure. And he withelde some monks the which
would accede unto the table of our lord to whom he said. How are you so hardy
to come unto gods board. First he said unto one. Thou have had thought of
fornycacyon this night / and said in thy heart there is no dyfference between
the just and the sinner to accede unto the sacrament. And said to another thou
have made a doubt in thy heart how a man may sanctefye the co^munyon. And the
said holy man put a part those the which were in sin / and said that they
should repent them and do penance or that they were acceded. etc.

T. Another example of the punycyon of some the which returned unto their
glotonyes and sins after ester. Cii.
THe dysciple recyteth that it is written in the book of the sovereign
bysshoppes ye some men after the feast of ester that they had received their
creatoure returned unto dronkennes / plays / folyes / and sins / but they
ne abode unpunished. For from their mouths there ra^ne stynkynge blood the
which entered with in their bodies and choked and drowned them. Also suddenly
water and rain descended from heaven the which them moysted and marde / and
dystroyed all the corns and fruytes of their possessions / and with yt water
proceeded dragons so venymous yt the people ne might go ne come / but that they
were in danger of death. For to take away the said punycyon an holy man
prayed for them deuoutely. Unto whom the angel of god appeared and said. I
pray the tell me what should a man do with those the which enclose the sone of
ye emperor in a right dark prison and stynkyng for to waste him. The man of
god answered yt a man should undo those the which do such thing. And the
angel said unto hy^ What should a man do with him the which puts the body
of god in the stynkinge mire. And the man of god said unto him ye men should
brenne him. And ye au^gel said unto him. Those for whom thou prayest have not
they done such a thing on the holy day of ester. They received the holy
co^munyon and afterward yode to daunces and dronkenesses again the holy
sacrament that they had received / and th^rfore god is wroth again them.
When they herd this thing many repented the^ and appesed the ire of god. Unto
the purpose of this example a man may take the words of the gospel the which
ben written mathei. xii. Cu^ immu^dus spiritus exierit ab homine: scz per
co^fessione^ ambulat perloca arida quere^s requie^ and no^ i^uenit: tu^c dicit.
Reuertar in domu^ mea^ vn^ exiui vadit and assumit septe^ alios spu^s secu^
nequio res se et i^trantes habitant: ibi: and fiu^t nouissima hoi^s illius
peiora prioribus. That is to understand when ye ill spyryte is issued from the
man by confession he walks on ye one side and on the other for to deceive hy^
And if the said man return unto sy^ne or if he delight him / or if any sin
be not well confessed / the ill spyryte says. I shall return in to my house
from whens I came. Therder he gothe and takes seven other spyrytes wors than
he / and they enter and dwell there and the last things of ye said man ben
made wors than the first. So took it unto the said people the which returned
unto sin after ester. etc.

V. Another example how the eucharistie prouffyteth unto those that been deed /
and first example of a man the which was delivered from purgatory by the
sainge of three masses. Cii.
IT is written in dialogo cesarii that a young man was received in ye relygyon
of cleruaulx / which kept sheep / and as he was in the field with his sheep,
one of his parents lately deed appyered unto him. And ye said yongman him
demanded from whens he came. He answered I am deed and tormented in great
pains. And the conuers him demanded if a man might help him. He answered if
I might have three masses in your order I should be delivered. And ye said
conuers yode to tell the pryour of the house yt that he had seen and herd.
When the pryour had herd this thing with good will he said a mass and also
commanded to two of his brethren. And incontinent after ye deed body appeared
unto ye said young man yielded him thanks and said yt by ye benefyce of three
masses he was delivered from purgatory.

X. Another example of a friar the which should be.xv. years in purgatory and
he was delivered by one mass. Cii.
IT is written in the life of faders of the order of prechers this the which
follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his sermons and says that there was a
fader pryour prouyncyall in the holy land / humble / gracyous / and devout.
And as he was one time in orayson in the church of the freres after matyns he
lift up his eyes again the wall with heart / and he saw in like wise as the
shadow of a friar in being and had habyte black and soylled. And as he
demanded what he was he answered I am such a friar the which of late deyed.
And when I lived I loved the much. And he demanded of the said friar how it
was with hy^. He answered ill and hardly. For I should be in hard pain till
unto.xv. years. And he him demanded wherefore he should so hardly and longly be
punysshed the which had lived so relygyously and devoutly. He answered / ne
demand that / for after the just judgment of god the creator I have well
deserved such pain / but I pray the aid me. And he him promised that so he
should do unto his power. When it was day the prouyncyall began to sing
mass for the deed body And after ye ostye was consecrate and lift up in
holding it in his hands began to pray god so as in this wise saying these
words. My lord Ihesu christ if the soudan the which is king of paynyms
held a prisoner in bonds and that his chamberere the which had served him
twenty years demanded him the said prisoner for his service the said soudan ne
should hyde him lyghtely My lord be no more hard than the soudan of ye
sarazyns. I am thy chamberier and have served the by many years. thou hold
this friar my friend in captyuyte and bonds I pray the yt thou give him me of
thy great debonayrte for my service. And in great teres and lamentacyons in
repetynge ye said words many times ended his mass / and the night following
after matynes he saw the deed friar before him being in habyte white and
right clear. And he hy^ demanded what he was he answered I am the friar ye
which appeared yesterdaye unto the. And he him demanded how it was with hy^.
He answered well by the grace of god. Thou haste demanded me of god and he
has given me unto the. And I am delivered from purgatory. I yield ye graces
and louynges and I go with the felysshyp of saints / and forthwith he
departed. etc.

Another example is written in dialogo cesarii of a man ye which should be in
purgatory two thousand years and was delivered in two years by the suffrages
/ masses / and good operacyons of a bishop / and of other good men.

Perditio bonorum.
Y. Example yt in like wise as water departs from ye pot perced or broken.
In like wise does the virtues of a man by mortal sin. Cii.
IT is written in the life of faders yt that a good fader named arreneus would
se the operacyons of the world / and as he was in his oratorye he herd a
voice the which said unto him. Arreneus go by the country to the end yt thou
behold the operacyons of the world. And when he was gone forth of his
oratorye he saw a man the which drew water of a well and put it in a vessel
perced and holed from the which it ran incontinent. And therein ne abode
nothing. And the said arreneus passed ferthermore and saw a man ye which
made and assembled a burden of wodde / and when he had made it he assayed to
lift it and to lie it on his sholdres / but for that yt he ne might lift it
and that he found it much heavy he yode yet to assemble of wodde / and put it
yet within that burden or faggot / and made it in such wise two or three times /
and the less might lift it on his sholdres. Afterward ye said arreneus yode
ferthermore and saw two young men upon two horses before ye gate of the cite
the which bare before them alonge logge ouerthwarte / and wend to enter in to
the cite by the said gate / but they ne might for the said logge / for they ne
obeyde the one unto the other for to enter within. And after yt the angel
came unto the said arreneus / unto whom he demanded what he had seen. And he
answered as it said is of the man the which drew of water. And the angel
expounded unto him the said things / and said unto him. By the man the which
drew of water is to understand that the man the which does almesdedes and
good operacyons in mortal sin / anon it departs from him for the sin as
does the water from the vessel perced. And the second man the which thou
haste seen the which assembled of wodde / that is to say that the man the
which assembleth and co^mytteth sy^ne upon sin ne may mount in heyght for
the weight of ye sins. and by those the which ne might enter in to the cite
that bare the wodde overthwart ben understand proud people and hateful the
which ne will humble them and to concord togyders ne shall enter in to the
cite of paradyse. This example denotes three things. The first that mortal
syn chaseth away the good operacyons from ye persons. The second is that
sin is of itself so heavy that it lets to mount in to paradyse and makes
to fall in to the pyt of hell as did satan ye which fell from paradyse. Vn^
luce. x. Videba^ sathana^ sicut fulgur de celo cadente^. And that that a man
puts yet more wodde in his burden and yet the more heavy he fyndeth it and
more ill to lift upon his sholdres denotes yt when a man co^mytteth sy^ne
upon sin. And more shyftly a man falls in basse / and the less a man
mou^teth in paradyse. The third is that hatred and discord the which is
between neighbors lets to enter in to the cite of paradyse.

Finis iniquorum est peccatum.
z. Examples that mortal sin is a line by the which the devil holds ye
sinners. And first how the deuylles held a man bound with a chain and led
him with great joy. Cii
A Doctor named Vyrydarias says in a sermon this the which follows how the
dyscyple recyteth in his book / and says that god gave unto an hermyte this
gift to know the hertes of men the which came one time unto the church where
the priest confessed. And ye said hermyte saw that the men entered in to the
said church black and horrible / ye which were accompanied with deuylles the
which were joyous. And the angels the which them kept were sorry and
separate ferof. And as they returned from confession than ye deuylles were
sorry and departed from them / and the angels were joyous the which approached.
And among the other ye said hermyte saw a man the which was bound by the
neck with a chain that the deuylles led with great joy. And his angel
followed far of And this said man yode unto confession as ye other / but he
came again more blacker than before. And the deuylles bound him more strongly
than he was And wha^ the said hermyte saw that approached unto the said man /
and told unto him that yt he had seen. And the said sinner had great dread and
said. I have offended god in many manners. And also I have hid a great sin.
He returned unto confessyo^ and came again clear / and the deuylles were sorry
and the aungelles joyous. So by true confession and repentau^c^ he was
unbound of his sins and of the deuylles / and was assocyate with the good.
etc.

and Another example that a man being in mortal sin is so bound that he
may not do no good operacyon the which unto him is merytoryous. Cii
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says that as master thomas
theologycyen should deye he being in his bed he saw the devil fast by him
/ unto whom he said / What do you here blody be. Tell me what thing it
is the which noyeth you most. And as he held his peace he adioygned and said.
I conjure the by the god living the which shall come to judge the quycke and
the deed yt thou tell me the truth. And the devil answered and said. There is
nothing the which takes away so much our force as contrycyon and
confession oftentimes made. For when a man is in mortal sy^ne all his members
ben so bound that he ne may move him for to do good operacyo^ the which unto
him is merytoryous / and when he confesses his sins he is afterward franc
mouable and unbound for to do all good operacyons. This example denotes two
things. The first is that by mortal sin a man is terrybly bound with the
hands of the devil. The second is that by confession a man is vnbou^de as it
is said. etc.

r. Another example how the devil lies out his snares for to deceive us. Cii
IT is written in the life of faders yt as saint Anthony was in orayson upon a
hye mountain he saw al ye world replenysshed with halters of the enmy of
hell. And he took him to weep and said / what shall that man be yt may pass
and escape the snares here. And a voice from heaven came unto him ye which said
/ anthony seule humylite passes and escapes these laces. Here when a man
has humylyte the snares ne may touch him for his humylyte. This example
denotes two things that the snares of the devil ben cast out for to deceive
us. And therefore him behooves to keep him from falling in to sin that a man
ne be taken The second is that a man escapes over all in having humylyte.
etc.

Mors bonorum.
A. Examples that those which has acomplysshed the will and the
co^mae^dementes of god and ben departed of good death / has had consolacyon
of god and of ye saints of paradyse. And first example how a holy fader saw
in his death ye prophets and Ihesu christ. Ciii.
IT is written in the life of faders of a holy fader the which at the hour of
his death his dyscyples present began to enjoy him and appeared fair and
white and spoke joyous words. Than his discyples him demanded unto whom he
spoke. he an^wered. Ne se you not the holy patryarkes and again as he spoke
ioyously was asked unto whom it was. He answered. Ne se you not the holy
prophets. Thyrdly he said. The holy appostles come. Fourthly he said the
aungelles come. And lastely he said. Rise ye up for Ihesus is come / and in
saying these words he deyed. The death of this good man was right glorious
and blyssed. And also such is it of al those the which deye in the estate of
grace. Vn^ apo. xiiii. Beati mortui qui in dn^o moriu^tur. Also his death was
much precious before god / and so is that of the just persons. Vn^ psalm.
Preciosa e^ in co^spectu ^n^i. The just persons the which has lived well in
this world / and also perseuered till unto the death has three joys at their
departing. The first is that they se all the good deeds that they did ever in
ye state of grace / that is to understand all the almesdedes / oraysons / and
works of mercy And all the trybulacyons yt the body has borne pacyently in
doing fastings / abstinences / to wake late / to rise erly / to lie hard /
to be poorly clothed and such other things. etc. Vn^ ezechi. xviii. Iustitia
iusti erit super eu^: and impietas impii super eu^ erit et ysaie.xxix. Erit
nobis visio oi^m quasi verba libri signati. Examples of some the which has
seen the good and the ylle that they have done. Quere post. c. xxii. d. The
second joy is that they se the deuylles co^fused degetted and also to depart
as wroth In like wise the just love and praise god / Vn^ psalm. Benedictus deus
qui non dedit nos in captione^ dentibus eoru^. Example. Quere. lvi. f. The
third joy that the just shall have at their death is yt they shall se Ihesu
christ yt they have received worthily in the sacrament. And the aungelles
assystentes to comfort them and aid them and for to present them before god
the which unto them is great joy. Also often times they have of the saints of
paradyse after ye will of god / as had the good man beforsayd. Innocent says
in his third book of the vylyte of humayne condycyon that the good and the ill
se Ihesu crist as he was put on the cross before that the soul parted from ye
body / ye good unto their consolacyon / and the ill unto their confusyo^ to the
end they have shame yt they be not redeemed and part takers unto the merit of
his passion. Vn^ legitur apo. i. Videru^t in que^ pupugeru^t. And a man ne
should understand that if a just man dye soday^ly tha^ the sudden death
takes away his merytes and his bounte / and that he ne may be saved. Vnde
poeta. Mors iusti subita qua^ precessit bona vita. No^ tollit merita: si
moriatur.

B. Another example how the saints of paradyse and the au^gelles and god came
unto the departing of a holy fader. Ciiii.
IT is written in the life of ye faders that when the time came that the abbot
Sysois should deye many au^cyentes came to vysyte him / the which saw him
shine in the face / and he said unto the^ Brederne comfort you here is the
abbot anthony the which is come unto us here and a little while after said.
Here is the company of prophets. And again his face shone more clear than the
day / and he said. The blyssed appostles ben present / and the auncyentes the
which present were beheld and understood that he spoke unto some body. The
which said unto him that he should declare with whom he spoke. And he said
the aungelles be come to fetch my soul / and I them supply that they tarry a
while for to do penance. And the faders said unto him. Abbot thou ne haste of
indygence to do penance. And he answered them. I say you in veryte yt I ne
remember me yet to have take ye beginning of penance. They apperceyued by his
speaking that he was perfyte in ye love of god. Than his fa^e shone as the sone
and said unto them. Behold behold for our lord is come. In this word he
died And all the place was replenysshed with good odor. By this example a man
should understand that the death of the good is much precious before god /
after the saying of the psalmyst. Preciosa est inco^spectu dn^i mors scto^rum
eius. And also that they ben comforted and received swetely of aungelles and
saints of paradyse / and set in Joy eternell. etc.

C. Another example how a woman saw Ihesu christ in her death. Ciiii.
Saint gregorye recompteth yt wha^ a woman named tarcille came to ye ^aite day
of her death she looked upward and saw Ihesu christ come. And with a great
courage she began to cry to them ye were by her / depart ye depart for
Ihesus is come. And as she understood in hy^ that she see / her holy soul
part from her body. And so great swetnes of odor meruayllous there followed
that that odoure showed unto all that Ihesu christ was come theder. etc.

D. Another example how a friar showed Ihesu christ with the fyngre at his death
in singing. Ciiii.
IT is written in the life of faders yt there was a friar of the order of
prechers grievously seek and for that yt he approached unto ye death / and that
he had a joyous face a friar him required that if he had / had any consolacyon
spyrytuell in heart yt he would tell it him. He answered. For ye great Joy yt
I have I ne may hyde it / this day I have taken it for my lord jesus christ
has promised me to be in presence at my death. And ye friar him required in
the name of Ihesu christ that when he should se him that he would show him by
some tokens or with the finger. He answered that so should he do if it
pleased god. The three days after the sekenes groged him men stroke on the
table for to assemble the freres as it was of a custom / And the freres ran
in to the fermery / and as they were in orayson in abiding his death the seek
man stretched forth his fyngre in a certain place. And as his eyes were
confused at the death he took him to sing and to say in singing joyous. In
galilea^ jesus videbitis sicut dixivobis. that is to say yt ye shall se Ihesus
in galilee / yt is in paradyse as he has told you / wha^ he had fined these
words he deyed in good consu^macyon / for he had lived in this world of a
holy life. And by that reason it was yt he dyffyned well his days / unto this
purpose saint austyn says. Morte mala mori no^ potest qui bona^ ante duxerit
vita^. Et iheronimus dixit. No^ memi ni me mala morte vidisse homine^ qui bonam
ante duxerit vita^.

E. Another example how a good relygyous woman was comforted of saints of
paradyse the which were at her death
IT is written in the fourth book of ye dyalogue of saint gregorye that a good
relygyous woman named rachetee had two relygyeuses of her habyte with her her
dyscyples of the which the one had to name romula. These three religiouses
woman dwelled togyders the which lived of a holy life replenysshed with good
manners and with virtues / but a poor life corporell they led. And ye said
romula was replenysshed with great pacyence / of sovereign obedyence / kept
scilence of her mouth and took head much unto the usage of orayson the which
was seek in bedd^ by many years / and in a night the said romula called her
said maystresse rachetee and said unto her. Matter veni. Matter veni The which
came with the other sister / and at the hour of the very mydnyghte as they
were in one bed / light celestyal descended in to their house ye which it
replenysshed all. And the said light was so great yt the presents had great
dread And as they were in that dread and light they herd noise as many men
entering in the house. But for the great fere and light they ne might se those
the which entered in to the said house with the said light. And there entered so
sweet odoure yt it was meruayl And the said Romula began to comfort her said
maystresse and her sister ye which were in fere and said. Noli timere matter
no^ morior modo. And after yt she had said that she should not deye at that
hour the said light dymysshed little and little but the great odoure abode. And
so it passed the second and the third day that the said odor abode. And
the.iiii. night the said romula called her said maystresse / and when she was
come she demanded ye body of god and received it. And before yt they parted
from bed there arrived before the door of the house two companyes / the one
of men / yt the other of women ye which song melodyously. The men song ye
psalmodie. And the woman answered in doing the service celestyall of exeq^yes
of the said romula she deyed. And her soul yode with the aungelles and saints
the which came to fetch it. And of asmoche more as they mounted in to the
sky / so much the less herd they of the song of the psalmodie. And the
said odor also departed. etc.

F Another example how a holy bishop was comforted at his death of the saints
of paradyse. Ciii.
IT is written in the dyalogue of saint gregory of a good holy bishop named
probus. When it came unto his death his fader assembled many physycyens for to
hele him. The which said after that they had vysyte him that he should deye.
And than the good bishop said unto al those that they should go with his fader
to take their refeccyon after their labor. The which theder yode / and
there ne abode with him but one young child / and after that the said child
saw some come enter clothed with white and their faces clear and shynynge as
the son. The which child after that he was stryken with the great light the
which proceeded of them he took him to cry and demanded of them what they
were. At the which voice the said bishop was moved / beheld them ye which
entered / he knew them and began to comfort the child the which trembled for
fere and said unto him. My sone dread the not for saint Iuuenall and saint
Eleuthere martyrs ben come unto me. And ye said child ferefull of that vysyon
ran out and told to the physycyens and to the fader the said vysyon. The
which ran and found the bishop deed. For his soul yode with those that
the said child had seen* etc.

G Another example how a maiden named gelyne was comforted at her death of
saint peter. Ciii.
IT is written in the dyalogue of saint gregorye of a good noble maiden named
Gelyne / the which was married / and was one year with her husband the which
deyed. And when she was wedowe she put her unto ye service of god in the
church and monastery of saint Peter. And there lived holyly in all symplesse in
making oraysons and great almesdedes. When it came to the end of her days that
she was weary of sekenes in a night as she had two candelles light by her bed
saint peter appeared unto her between ye two foresaid candelles. And she enjoyed
her and said unto him. Who is there my lord ben my sy^nes pardoned. Unto whom
he said benyngly in bowynge down the heed. They ben pardoned ye / come thy
way. And for as much as in ye said monasterye there was a holy relygyous that
she loved before the other she required unto holy peter in saying. I pray the
that my sister named benet come with me. and he answered ye shall not be so /
but such one in this wise named shall come with the And she that thou
requyrest shall come after the / the thyrty day. Than the said appostle
departed. And her mother abbess was called: unto her she recompted ye said
vysyon. And she deyed the.xxx. day with her that the appostle had said. And
ye.xxx day after she yt she had required followed her and also deyed. etc.

A. Another example how a priest fled ye company of a woman yt was comforted at
his death of saints of paradyse. ciiii.
IT is written in the dyalogue of saint gregory of a good priest ye which i^
the dread of god governed a church fl^dde the famylyaryte of a woman / and
would not yt the woman of his house should admynystre any thing unto hy^ / And
absteyned him from all thing unlawful / and also lived of a holy life. When it
came that he labored at the death / and that he ne might almoost speak he
apperceyued yt the said woman of his house put her hand unto his nose for to
know if he were deed / and his spyryte fervently came again and began to say.
Recede a me mulier: ad huc igniculus viuit. Depart thou fro me woman yet a
little fire lives take away the straw. Than the woman departed. / And ye
virtue of his body all grew / and with great gladness and Joy he took hy^ to
cry / ye ben welcome my lords. Wherefore have ye wylled to come unto one so
little your servant. I come. I come / I yield you thanks. And for that ye he
repeted ye said words his friends were by hy^ demanded him unto whom he
spoke: Unto whom he said as in meruayllyng And se you not the appostles saint
peter and saint poule ye which ben here come / And he turned toward them
and began to say. I go. I go. And as he spoke these words he yield up his
spyryte.

B. Another example how a friar fled in to heaven as soon as an arowe. Ciiii.
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye that a friar of the order of prechers
appeared with great Joy after his death unto another monk the which was his
friend famylyer. And as he was asked of his estate among other things he said
/ that never arowe shot out of a great bow fled so sone in to a place as
my soul fled before god when to departed from the body. For I had lived
fyfty years in the order to serve Ihesu cryst^ in good conuersacyon. etc.

C. Another example of the death of a pilgrim the which was comforted of ye
aungelles of paradyse. Cii i
IT is written in the life of faders of a holy man relygyous so much loved of
god that yt the which he required in orayson unto him was granted. And he
prayed god that he might se the soul of a sinner and of a just man how they
ben drawn from their bodies at their death And as he was in his oratorie there
entered a wulfe the which took his vestyment with his mouth and drew it. Than
the said friar rose him up and yode after the said wulfe / the which led him
fast by a cite and left him there by a monasterye. In the which was a man
that had a great name and was reputed solytayre and good of the worldy people
but he was an ypocryte / ye which was at deyenge. And the fader ye which was
theder come beheld yt men made unto him great lyghtes of tapres and lamps
for his buryenge. And at ye hour of the said death he saw the devil the
which held a brased hoke and put it in his mouth and tormented him long and
said / In like wise as this soul has not suffered me to rest one hour. In
like wise ne shall I have of mercy of it till that I have seized it horrybly.
And he seaced it and bare it away. Afterward the said fader yode in to ye
cite and found a pilgrim seek / and laid on the earth of whom no man took
head / and there was one day to behold him. And when the hour of death came
he saw saint Myghell and saint gabryel ye which dyscended by the said soul
ye one on the right hand and the other on the left hand and prayed the said
soul yt she would come forth of ye body and she came not forth so as she ne
would leave her body. And gabryell said unto Myghell. Take this soul that we
may be gone. And myghel answered. God us has commanded that it go forth
without dolor. And therefore we ne may take it forth by force. And mighel cried
with a great voice unto our lord and said unto him. What will thou that we do
with this soul / for she ne will come forth to go with us. And a voice came
theder the which said. I send unto you dauyd with his harp / and all those
the which sing the salmodye of Iherusalem to the end that at the sweet song
she come forth of ye body. And incontinent they dyscended by the said soul /
and at the sweet song she came forth in to ye hand of saint mighell / and
they yode their way with great joy

D. Another example how a knight saw ye death of an ill man. And more over the
death of a good man that the angels bare in to heaven. C.iiii
IT is written in the book of the dyscyple that a noble knight would enter in to
relygyon. The which sent his servant to tell unto the abbot yt he would be
relygyous in his abbay. And gave him in charge that he should say that he was
dombe / but ready to obey unto al things And thought that if he held not peace
his tongue should lose him all the good deeds that he should do. And that
knight there was received. And men wend yt he had be dombe. And one time he
yode with the abbot unto a knight the which labored unto ye death. And he
saw yt the deuylles drew the soul out of the body of him ye which deyed
horrybly / and he had pity and wept. And as they came again from thens
another knight came unto ye abbot the which him promised that he would
renounce the world and that he should be a monk. And as he yode before the
said abbot on an ill bridge for to prove ye way he fell before ye said abbot
and was drowned. And the said knight saw his soul in habyte of monk that the
aungelles came to fetch and to bear in to heaven he was all replenysshed with
joy. And when the abbot was in the cloystre he said unto the knight that he
commanded him in ye virtue of obedyence that he should tell him if he might
speak / wherefore at the death of the two said men he had in such wise
co^tempned / unto whom the said knight said. Thou have done ill. For again
my purpose thou have made me speak / but I shall tell it the. And he unto him
recompted all by order how he had seen the soul of the one that the deuylles
had taken horrybly from the body and bare it away and that the aungelles had
borne the other. Than the abbot fell at his fete on knees. etc. And the said
knight refused his promesses and good deeds yt he unto him would do / but he
would be enclosed in some place to the end that he might keep his purpose yt he
had to keep taciturnyte and scylence.

E. Another example of a holy fader the which deyed in the dread of god. Ciiii.
IT is written in the life of faders yt a holy fader was seek ye which as he
was seen to dread the death / the freres him demanded wherefore he dredde. and
he answered in this manner. Brederne I have kept the commandments of god
after my puyssaunce / but I am a man and I know not if my operacions has
pleased unto god or nay. And therefore I ne am sure till unto that that I come
unto him. etc.

F. Another example of a pryour relygyous that said that he dyed lawfully
faithfully / amyably and ioyously.
IT is written in the life of faders yt the pryour of a covent was in a grievous
sekenes replenysshed with meruayllous pacyence. And he said oftentimes one
thing the which is written in ye cantycles with great dolor of devotion.
Dilectus meus michi and ego illi donec aspiret di es and i^clinentur vmbre.
Also he said unto his brederne.xv. days before his death that he should deye
of that sekenes in ye solempnyte of the feast of the vyrgyn Marye the which
thing was done. For at the first even song of the natyuyte of the vyrgyn
Marye he deyed / and was buried that day He had song the last mass of the
vyrgyn Marye. And also of her he had made his last predycacyon. When he should
deye anon he made to assemble before him his brederne unto whom he said.
Know ye my brederne yt I deye lawfully / amyably faithfully and ioyously. And
expounded it in this wise. I deye lawfully. For I deye in the faith of Ihesu
christ and of the sacraments of the church. Amyably / for I have perseuered in
the dyleccyon of god unto mine advise sith that I entered in to ye order. And I
have studied how I might best please him. Faithfully for I know well that I go
unto god. Ioyously for I go from one land replenysshed with myserye unto a
good country. I pass from wepynges unto Joy sempyternell. etc.

G. Another example of a monk the which was chosen to be bishop and he
refused it and deyed well. Ciiii.
IT is written in the promptuary of the dyscyple that Arnoldus says that a
monk of cleruaulx was chosen to be bishop / the which refused it against the
will of his abbot / and of ye bishop / and sone after he deyed. And he appeared
after his death unto his famylyer / ye which demanded him if the
dysobeyssau^ce beforsayd had noyed him. He answered yt nay and afterward said.
If I had taken the bysshopryche I had be dampened. And said more over an
horrible word. The estate of the church is come unto that yt she is not dygne
to be governed but of ill bysshoppes. etc.

H. Another example of the death of many holy persons of the which the Bible
makes mencyon. Ciiii.
THe holy scryptures makes mencyon of the death of many holy faders that it
should be long thing and confuse for to write. And for to be short who so
will se in the bible let him study in the chapytres the which follows
here. / First it is written of the death of abel genesis.iiii. cap. Of ye death
of abraham. ge. xxv. of the death of Ysaac genesis.xxxv. of the death of jacob
gene. xlix. of the death of Joseph gene. l. Of the death of Aaron numeri.xx. Of
moses the which deyed in the land of Moab yt our lord buried / and never
man ne knew his sepulcre. In like wise as it is written deuterono. xxxiiii. Of
the death of david it is written primo paralipo. xxix. of the death of zachary
it is written secu^do. paralipo. xxiiii. of the death of Thobye it is written
thobie.xiiii. of the death of his sone it is written thobie vltimo / of ye death
of job / it is written job. xlii. of the death of mathathias.i. machabioru^ ii.
of the death of saint Johan baptist mathei xiiii. Of the death of the poor
lazar beggar yt the au^gelles bare in to Abraha^s bosom it is written luce.
xvi. of the good thief the which deyed when our lord deyed it is written
luce. xxiiii. of the death of saint Steven the which was stoned / it is written
actuum.vii. etc.

Mors malorum.
A. Examples of those the which has not wylled to do the will of god ne to
acco^plysshe his commandments ben deed of an ill death in pains and dolours
/ and first example / how the devil drew the soul of a cursed rich man
with a crochet and a woman wedowe was comforted of the vyrgyn marye and of the
vyrgyns. Cv.
VYcent says in the.viii. book of ye myrrour hystoryall yt there was a rich
curate vycyous in a parysshe ye which had under his cure a noble rich man and
a poor woman wedowe / the which deyed in one time. When ye said rich man was
seek he sent to seche the curate to vysyte him and to admynystre the
sacraments the which curate theder yode quykly and was much more curyous to
have ye said rich man couched on feders in a fair bed covered with purple
with precious vestymentes / and aourned with gold and with precious stones. And
also he found many seductoures the which gave unto him consolacyons of
flateryes / and his wife / his children / and household the which lied. And in
this thing hanging there came a messenger unto the said curate from the said
wedowe strongly seek for to confess her and to vysyte. And the said pressed the
which put all his entente for to sowke the rich sinner ne answerde nothing
And a deacon ye which was present had pity of the poor wedowe and dredde yt
she should deye without receyuynge the sacraments / spoke unto the curate the
which answered by great furoure. O that thou art of little counsayll ye
which wylt that we leave this noble man our patron for to go unto ye old
wedowe. And the deacon answered. Ne trouble you not / if you command me I
shall vysyte her. And the deacon yode theder by his commandment And bare the
body of Ihesu christ. The wedowe was gretely poor of worldly gods / but full
of good operacyons. She was prostrate upon the earth / and a little of straw
under her. When the deacon was at the door he was meruaylled and rested him.
For he saw there the vyrgin marye / and great company of vyrgyns standing by
the wedowe / and marye chered her / vysyted and with a clothe wyped the
swetynge from her vysage. And when ye queen of heaven and the vyrgyns saw the
body of our lord Ihesus they yode on their knees and worshyppeth the
sacrament / When they were redressed they assured affably the deacon that he
should enter. and the vyrgyn mary said that he should not dread. And that he
should confess and admynystre the said wedowe and so he did / And afterward
he said of the psalms to command the soul with great joy to depart. After
came in to the house of ye said rich man. When he was at the door he saw of
black cattes by the bed of the said rich man ye which cried take away
these cattes comen to this wretch. And in the end a devil black as an
ethyopien horrible of face and of voice menassable held in his hand a hoke
the which he put in the throat bolle of ye sinner for to draw out his soul.
The which ne found in all his vysytacyon of refresshynge in his conscience.
Than the death occupied him he had fere and trembled / and the devil iuryous
drew hugely the soul out of the throat bolle with his crochet. And the
caytyf kest an horrible sygh and so deyed / and the other deuylles stroke upon
ye soul / and bare it unto the place of derkeres and of death eternell. And as
the deacon beheld and saw this thing by the suffrau^ce of god he had so
great fere that he fell unto the earth and was as half deed. And incontynente
the vyrgyn marye appeared unto him ye which laid unto him. Right dear friend
dread the not / for ye cursednes byabolyque ne shall noye the / beatytude
celestyall is apparaylled unto the / and he him redressed in yeldynge graces
unto the vyrgyn marye and afterward prouffited much for ye said reuelacyons.
By this example a man should understand yt the death is much cruel and ill
unto sinners in like wise as says the scryptures. Vn^ psalm. Mors pcto^rum
pessima. O mors quam amarae^ memoria tua homini i^iusto. O death how bitter is
the remembrance of ye unto the man v^ius^e / These sinners inobedyentes shall
have pryncypally four dolours at their death the which also may be taken upon
ye words of dauyd yt says in psalm. Circu^^ederunt me dolores mortis et
torre^tes i^iqitatis conturbaueru^t me: dolores i^ferni circu^deder^t me:
preoccupauer^t me laquet mortis. That is to say the dolours of ye death has
me enuyronned and beset about and the ryuers of iniquyte me has troubled the
doloures of hell has me compassed about / ye panges of death has me
usurped. The first dolor yt these sinners inobedyentes shall have at their
death is sekenes corporell yt shall be so cruel yt it shall perturbe all his
members / and shall separate ye soul from ye body ye which shall be so great
doloure and bytternes yt the heart of man ne may think it. There was never man
in this world endured so horrible dolor as is the death / and the soul shall
draw all his strengthes not thinking of his nourryture bodyly but on his
doloures as it is said. Circu^deder^t me dolores mortis. Also great doloure
shall be at the departing of the body and of ye soul. For they were gretely
delected and enjoyed togiders Also it shall be great dolor to leave the wife /
the children / the gold the silver / the herytages / manors / houses / rentes
/ lands and possessions. Also to leave the wine / ye ale / the flesh / and
the other lyuynges for to go dwell in a place where no good is sowe^ gadred ne
found / not so much as one drop of water. Example of the cursed rich man
the which was denied of one drop of water. For to be short it shall be
dolor to leave the pleasau^ces and dylectacyons of the body and of the world.
Catho^ says. Non eodem cursuco respondent vltima primis. The last things ne
answers unto the first in one self course / Also the euangelyst says yt
the last things of a man ben made wors than ye first Vnde mathei. xii. luce.
xi. Fiunt nouissima hominis illius peiora prioribus. The se^^nde dolor that
the sinners shall have in their death is to understand by that yt dauyd says.
Torentes iniquitatis conturbauerunt me. That is to say that they shall se and
know in them and upon the^ all ye sins that they have commit and done for
the which they shall be punysshed iuged and condampned / the which shall be
unto them dread and doloure. It is written luce. viii. Nichil est occultu^ quod
non manifestetur: nec absconditum quod non cognoscatur et i^ palam veniat.
There is nothing so secret but that it shall be manifest / ne hid but that
it shall be known and that it shall come openly and appear before all. Also in
the end of the man all shall be discovered so that a man shall se appertly
all his operacyons good and ill Vnde eccle. xi. In fine hominis denudatio
operum ulius. In beholdynge a multitude of people a man knows that such one
is clothed with gray / with black / and with white. etc. Also at the judgment
and when the soul shall be separate from the body a man shall know yt such
one was lecherous / thief / or murdrer. etc. as if the sins were painted upon
the person. / Vnde ezechielis.xviii. Iustitia iusti erit super eum and
impietas impii super eu^ erit The justice of the just shall be upon him and
the sin of wicked shall be upon hy^ Also the sinners shall bear their
confusyo^ and their sins that they have done. vn^ ez^. xliiii Peccatores
portabu^t confusionem suam et scelera sua que fecerunt. Et ysaie.xxix. Erit
nobis visio omnium quasi verba libri signati. And when ye sy^ners shall se that
they have not done of penance / and that they shall have no more no time nor
place to do it / their sins shall trouble them and give great bytternes /
The third doloure is to understand by dolores inferni circumdederunt me. For
the unjust sinners shall se the pains the which unto them ben prepayred for
to punysshe them and torment. And for to sustain pain corespondent unto
every sin commit. Example of a mad man the which in his death saw hell
open / and the fire and the torments the which unto him were prepayred for to
punysshe hy^ and said that his judgment was then made. Quere. lxvii. ca.
Another example of a sodomytycque the which said at his death that he saw
hell open appertely and the torments and ye deuylles present for to rauysshe
him. Que. lxxxxv. d. The.iiii. dolor is to understand by preoccupauerunt me
laquei mortis. That is that these sinners shall se at their death ye deuylles /
in their foul figure the which shall be to them an horrible torment. Example
of a sone the which saw them at his death. Quere. lxii. b. Also the sinners
shall have another great dolor at their death / in like wise as says some
doctors. For they shall se Ihesu christ in like wise as he was crucefyed unto
their confusyon to the end that they have shame that they ne be redeemed and
partakers unto the merytes of his passion for their sins committee. Vn^ apo.
i. ca. Videru^t in quem pupugerunt. And ye blessed Ihesu shall demand them
reason of their operacyons. And by that they shall have great dolor at their
death when they shall se and know their damnacyon and perdycyon eternell. etc.

B. Another example how a rich sone deyed impenytent ye which said that his
judgment was made / and that he saw the deuylles. Cv.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons that there was a young man the which
lift him up against god and against his own health the which committed many
euylles in saying / in playnge / in co^myttynge lechery / and in living after
the voluptuosytees of his body. Afterward he fell in to a grievous sekenes / and
as he lay and that men apperceyued in him no contrycyo^ his cousyn that satte
by him said to hy^. Thou art sore seek prepayre the unto god by true contrycyon
/ confession / and in receyuynge ye sacraments / and call him the which has
suffered for the on the cross yt he will pardon the thy sins. And he answered
in dispayrynge hy^. What tellest you me of confession and to receive the
sacraments. I never in my life received god verytably / but I have al way lived
against god / and also I have called god in ire. Than am I now left of him so yt
I never may find grace / for I am setenced eternally unto the fire pardurable
/ and unto the death eternal. And I am now in the puyssaunce of all the
deuylles / and afterward said. See you this great garner of wheet / I tell
the yt there are mo deuylles assembled about me that there ben corns in ye
said garner. Than he deyed and yielded his soul to the deuyls the which carried
him.

C. Another example of a monk ypocrite yt eat in secret and feigned to fast /
and the infernal dragon choked him. Cv
IT is written in the dyalogue of saint Gregory that a monk was by estymacyon a
good relygyous For men wened yt he was replete with virtues and good manners but
in the end he showed that he was none such. When his bredren wend yt he had
fasted he eat secretly and also showed wtoutforthe other than he was within.
When it came unto his death his bredren of his relygyon came thither wenynge yt
he had said good words and salutaryes / but he took him to tremble and to be
in great confusyon and to say. When I was with you and that ye wend yt I
fasted I eat secretly / and I am now given unto a dragon for to devour me the
which byndeth my knees and fete with his tail / and puts his heed in my
mouth and draws my spyrite out. And after yt he had spoken these words he
deyed / and the dragon gave him neither time ne space to do penance. God
suffered that this thing was manyfestly showed to the end yt al ypocrytes
fayntyues know that they shall be dampened if they correct them not in time and
in place.

Iudicia dei:
A. Example how a monk required of god yt he might se his Iugementes / the
which saw them and knew them that they were Just and hard to know. Cvi
IT is written in the life of ye faders that a monk solytary of the parties of
egypt required of god too show him his Iugements. And for as much as he
continued to beseech god to se this thing / god sent unto him an angel in
semblaunce of an au^cyent fader the which said to him. Come go we se the holy
faders and require we them the holy word and their benedyccyon. And after that
they had sore labored and walked they came to knock at the door of an holy
fader the which received them benygnely and after orayson washed their fete /
them refeccyoned and gave of that yt he had charitably. And in the morning in
great Joy gave them license. And when they departed the aungel took and hid
a platter wherein they had eaten and bare it away. And the monk began to
murmr against the angel wherefore he had taken the platter of so good a man
the which had done to them so much goodness. And as they walked ye sone of ye
good man came after the^ to demand the said platter. And the angel slew hy^
When the said monk saw yt he was sorry and said. Maledyccyon is with me that
such a thing is done unto so good a man. It suffysed not to take from him his
platter / but more his sone has be slain. And after that they had walked yet
three days they came to the door of an ancient the which had two dyscyples
and struck at the door. And the ancient sent one of his dyscyples demau^dynge
them what they would and what they were. They answered / we ben of labor and
would have thy benedyccyon / and to here thy word. And the said ancient sent
them word yt he might not entende and that they should go their ways. And
they him prayed yt he would lodge them to pass yt night for they were weri.
And he sent unto them that they should go their way / and asked why they held
the^ not in their place and that they should go as vacabondes. And they prayed
him again yt he would lodge them for the night alonely. And said it is night
and yt they dredde to be devoured of evil beestes. And he commanded his
dyscyple that he should put them in the stable. And in ye even tide they ne
might have no light ne other thing of the said master. But one of the
dyscyples bare unto them a little breed and water / and prayed them that they
should say nothing unto his master. And they abode so all the night. And when
the morning came the angel of god said unto the said dyscyples. Pray ye unto
your master that he give us orayson / and that we have a gift to give him.
And when that he herd that he should have a gift he descended. And the said
angel gave unto him ye platter that he had taken of the good man And when he
had taken it he returned in to his chamber and shytte the door unto him. And
when the said monk saw yt he was indygne toward him that yode with him and
knew not that he was an angel / unto whom he said. Depart thou fro me / for
I shall goo no more with the. Thou have taken ye platter of a good man the which
has done unto us so much of goodness and have given it unto so ill a man. And
morouer thou have slain the son of the good man that did to us so much
charity. And the angel answered. Thou have prayed god that he would show the
his Iugementes / and he has sent me to show them the. The platter yt I have
taken from the good man was not comen of good inquysycyon / and it was not
conuenable that so good an holy man had in his house any evil thing. But that
the which is comen of evil is comen to him yt is unto his ruin. And I have
slain the sone of the good man / for if I had not slain him he ha^ slain his
fader this night And when the monk herd those words he yode on knees before
the said angel / and knew that it was the angel of god / the which
departed incontinent from him. And he knew that the Iugements of god ben
just. etc.

B. Another example that an hermyte murmured against god for his diverse
Iugementes. Cvii
MEn find by wrytinge this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt an hermit murmured in his heart of the
diverse Iugementes of god for that / yt those the which lived ill had gods And
unto the contrary those the which lived well had of trybulacions / and sometime
those the which had led a good life had in the end death abiecte the ill the
fair end. And the good lost often the temporal gods / and ill had
prosperyte. And as the said hermyte thought much on the said things he prayed
god yt he would show hy^ his Iugementes. Than an angel came unto him and
said that he was sent from god for to show them unto him / and that he should
come after him. The said angel was in form of an hermyte pilgrym. When they
had walked they came first to the house of an hermyte the which they found
broken and wasted with wolves. Of this thing the said hermyte was much
admeruayled and said. This here was an holy man the which lived here
solytaryly fyfty years to serve god. And god has suffered yt he has be broken
with beestes. And the angel of god said unto him. Thou see here one of the
Iugementes of god. Secondly they came unto another yt had his house set on an
high roche above these / unto whom the aungel preched of pacyence against
aduersytees and trybulacyons against impacyence. And in weeping and great
contrycyon he confessed yt as he had been there by the space of.xl. years with
great afflyccyon of penance at the last he was vaynquysshed so strongly in
his my^de that he would leave his good life and return in to the world. And
when the said angel saw him very contryte he took him and kest him in to
the sea and drowned hy^ And when the hermyte saw this he was in great fere and
fled / but the angel called him again and said to him. Dread thou not god
had showed the here his second Judgment. Thyrdly they came in to the house of
the third hermyte yt received them gladly and gave them drink in a cup of
silver yt he had. And ye aungel took the said cup secretly and put it in his
bosom and bare it away Afterward they came by night to ye house of a knight
robber and with great pain they were received to lodge and evil entreated and
tourmented of reproaches and rebukes / and notwithstanding men gave them
somewhat and a bed ill apparayled. In the morning ye angel would not depart
till he had spoken with his host. And he drew out the said cup and gave it
him. When thermyte saw yt he was admeruayled and murmured in his heart of yt
he had seen. After in another night they came to ye house of another knight yt
received them right well / albeit he treated them right meanly. And in the
morny^ge wha^ they should part he was prayed of the angel yt his only sone
engendered shol conduyte them on the way. And as ye child led them he took
and slew him and kest him in to a dyche. When the hermyte saw that he fled
and said. Thou art none au^gel thou art a devil. And the angel said to hy^.
These things that you have seen ben ye Iugements of god occulte and hyd that you
required too know. Understand you the causes. The first hermyte that we found
devoured know you that it was comen unto him in crown of martyrdom yt he has
deserved to have by long time and required of god by great prayers. The
second hermyte yt I kest in to the sea after yt he was converted unto god and
that he had contrycyon and good repentance / so he is well deed and is gone to
god without hauy^ge other pain but only ye death yt I have given him. And if he
had not be slain when the temptacion was to men again he had accomplysshed
that / yt he had conceived and had been lost. The third hermyte is a
contemplatyfe and of good prayers. But the devil by his cautele had procured
hy^ lettinge in his oraysons and has ordained yt a rich man gave unto him ye
cup of silver for to pray for him. And I have taken it from him / for when he
would pray there came unto him of thought what he might do with the said cup
that ye thieves ne should stele it from him / so the thought of the said cup
let his heart to pray god. And by that he shall return in to oraysons
accustomed without hauy^ge any lettynge. The first knight where we yode is an ill
man yt is not worthy to have remuneracyon celestyall / and for a little goodness
yt he did unto us we gave unto him remuneracyon temporal in gyuynge him ye
said cup. The second knight was a good hospytaller yt did great almesses /
and for that he had none heir he prayed the relygyous men yt they would pray
unto god for him yt he might have lygnage. And god has given unto him this
sone yt thou have seen yt I have slain / he is returned to do ye works of
mercy that he had left to do unto ye poores / and also he has left to do many
ylles that he did for to assemble te^porall goods unto his said sone. Also we
have procured their health that they should convert them unto god and shall do
good deeds after the death of their said sone. By these things before said a
man may know yt the Iugements of god ben Just and hard to know as unto us.
And therefore it needs us not to inquire forther ne to know than our
entendement ne may comprehend. Non oportet sapere plusquam sapere oportet. etc.

C. Another example how a holy bishop was punisshed by the Judgment occulte
and hid of god for that / yt he received a vestyment of an usurer. Cvi.
IT is written in ye legende of saints that after yt saint Fortyn bishop was
deed he saw two angels yt came unto him to bear his soul / and the third
angel came with a white bokeler and with a sword shyny^ge yt yode before. And
afterward he saw the deuylles the which cried / and herd that they said. Go
we before and make we battle before hy^. And when they were before they keste
brennynge darts / but the angel yt yode before received them on his bokeler.
Than the deuylles put them against ye au^gelles and said. This man spoke often
of idle words / and he ne should without having pain a blyssed life. And the
aungel said unto them. If ye ne bring forth the pryncypal vices against him
he ne shall perysshe for the small. And the devil said. If god be ryghfull
this man shall not be saved / for it is written. If ye be not converted and do
in likewise as one of my little ye shall not enter in to ye kingdom of heaven.
Vn^ math. xviii Nisi co^uersi et efficiamini sicut peruuli no^ intrabitis in
regnu^ celorum. And the au^gel in excusing him said. He had indulgence in his
heart but the customaunce of men co^tynueth. And the devil said. In likewise
as he took ill by custom so shall he receive vengeance by the sovereign Judge.
And ye angel said that he was Iuged before god And than the angel began to
fight and the adversaries were confused. And the devil said. The servant the
which knows ye will of his master and lord and does it not shall be by
many wou^des and plages / as it is wryted. Luce. xii. Seruus sciens volu^ tatem
domini sui et non faciens plagis vapulabitur multis. And the angel said. What
thing has not this man accomplysshed of the will of his lord. And the devil
said. He has received gifts of an evil man. And the aungel said. He believed
that each one had done penance. And the ennemy said / he should have proved the
perceueraunce of penance before yt he had taken ye gift The angel said / go
we before god / but the devil was vaynquysshed. And the devil again came to
fight and said. Wene ye yt the Judge be very god the which promised yt all
sin that is not punysshed in this world shall be punysshed in perdurabylyte.
This man had a robe of an usurer and he was never punysshed / where is than ye
ryghtwysnes of god. And the angel said Hold thy peace / for thou know not
the secret Iugementes of god / evermore when the soul will do penance ye
mercy of god is with him. And the devil answered / there ne is here no place
of penance. Unto whom ye angel said. Thou know not the profundyte of the
Iugementes of god. And than the devil smote the said bishop so hard yt after
that he was restablysshed to life the trace of ye stroke abode still. And the
deuyls took one of the dampened yt they tourmented in the fire of hell and kest
him against ye said bishop in such manner that he had the cheke and the
sholder brent. Than the said bishop knew yt it was that man the which had
given unto him the said vestement. And the angel said unto him. If thou
had not take ye gift of this man the which is deed in sin this pain had
not burnt in the / and thou have this pain of bren^ynge to suffer for that yt
thou received the gift of the vestement of the said usurer And the devil said.
Yet he rests to pass by the strayte gate / whereby we may hy^ surmount / and
the devil said unto the angel. God commands to love his neighbor as
himself. And the aungel answered. This man has done many good works unto
his neighbors. And the aduersarye said. It suffyseth not if he has loved the^
as him self. Unto whom the angel said. The fruit of love is also well to be
done / for god shall yield unto eueryche after his operacyons. And the ennemy
said. But he shall be dampened for that / yt he has not accomplysshed the
tokens of love. Than the company of the deuylles the which fought with the
aungelles were vaynquysshed. etc. In the end the said bishop was brought again
in to his own body / and his neighbors wept the which wend that he had been
deed. After that he ouerlyued by sometime and fined his days in good rest /
peace / and manners.

D. Another example of the Judgment and horrible punycyon the which was done
of an archebysshoppe that was named Vdo. Cvi.
MEn find by wrytinge this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt it is all known and manifest in the
country where is happened / how in the country of Saxony there was an
archebisshoppe Metropolytayne named Maydenburc founded of saint Mauryce. In
that cite studied a scoler named Vdo the which had hard engyn and wit / and
might nothing learn / and therefore was he beten and much tourmented of his
masters of the scole. And on a time that he had be much beten he went out of
the scole and entered in to the church of saint Mauryce in the which he fell
prostrate and put him in great devotion to require the debonayrte of ye queen
of heaven and the aid of saint Mauryce for to enlumyne his entendement. And as
he was there in prayers he slept somewhat / unto whom appeared the mother of
mercy and said unto him. I have herd thyn orayson I give unto the not alonely
the gift of science / but with that you shalt be archebisshop of my prince
Mauryce after that ye archebysshop that is shall deye. And if thou govern well
the church you shalt have great reward. And if thou do unto the contrary you
shall deye in body and in soul. When these things were spoken the vyrgyn Mary
departed. And the young man arose up and yode to study the lesson yt he had
accustomed. And when he came to speak and to dyspute he surmounted the other
and appeared right sage and expert in all science / and they all meruayled that
herd him and said. How this man here is enspyred in all scyences / is not this
Vdo the which was beten yesterday as a be / and this day he is approved to
be even as a phylozophre. Two years afterward ye archebysshop deyed / and Vdo
was elect of all to be metropolitayne. After yt he was confermed and put in
honor he lived well some little time. And for as much as honors change the
manners he was neclygent to perceuer and to live after the counceyle of the
vyrgyn Mary / and forgate his health. Morouer he habandoned his body unto
voluptees / and wasted the goods of his church / and vyoled not alonely the
women seculers but those of relygyon. And morouer ye which is worse he suffered
those of his dycc to commyt all vices without any dread / so yt his life was in
hate and unto al detestable. And many years after yt the said archebysshop had
broken the air by his sins / in a night as he had in his bed with him an
abesse relygyouse of the order of Cystercienses issued of the castle ryall /
he herd a voice yt vttred terrybly the words the which follows. Fac finem
ludo / qr lusisti satis voo. That is to say. Vdo make an end of thy play / for
thou have played enough. These thing herd Vdo had suspycyon yt they were
mockynges fayntyfes. And in ye morning in perseueringe he returned unto
delyces / so that he was hard and durate as a stone without correccyon / without
having compunccyon ne dread for the voices thretenynge that he had herd. The
night following he herd a semblable voice. And the fool was persevering in
his malice as before. The third night he lay with the said abbess / and as he
excercysed ye foul and stynkynge work of lechery the words beforesayd were
brought forth in great terroure Facfinem ludo / qr lusisti satis vdo. When he
had herd this third voice he was abashed and wayled a little / but he
refused not. Certainly the acursed was nere his da^pnacyon and he hasted him
not to go unto penance. I will tell a thing meruaylous / and but words
verytable. And if all the people of Saxonye where this thing was done held
their peace / all the elements would cry that these things here after ben
manyfested. Three months after one of the chanones of the said church
metropolytayne named Frederycus much venerable and of great holiness / in a
night as he was in ye quere of the church of saint Mauryce fervently in
oray^on and besought god the creator for the holy church universal / and
pryncypally for his own metropolytayne yt the conductour of all and the Just
Judge either yt soon he would make to deye their chyef archebisshop Vdo / or
that he would change him to better. His prayer and his word had effect / for
a vysyon terryble followed. He saw that a great wind came in to the church yt
blewe out all the lamps of the same. So he took a place / his heeres stood up
/ the voice was enclosed in the faucettes of his throat. Afterward came two
young men ye which bare two tapres the which set them on the corners of the
great auter. And all ye place was replenysshed of their light. After them
entered two other / and one of them bare tapytes the which they spread honestly
before the auter. And the other set thereon two chayres of gold. After them
came one alone ye held in his hand a sword al naked And he standing in the
mids of ye church cried strongly in sayng. All the saints of whom the
relykes ben here arise ye up and come unto the Judgment of god. These things
spoken there appeared right great multitude of the one sex and of the other
right clear. Some ordained in habytes as knights. Other in pontyfycall vesture
of chasubles / and they all entered in to the quere and set them there on the
one side and on the other by order after their merytes. Afterward there
appeared.xii. men and in the mids of them there went one clerer than the sone
/ the which had the crown of a king and scepter ryall. When the saints saw
hy^ they worshypped him hastily and made him to sytte in the chair. And ye
queen of heaven aryued more clerer than the moon and the sterres after whom
followed a clear turbe of vyrgyns. All the saints worshypped ye mother of god.
And Ihesu christ came before her / took her by ye hand / and set her
honorably by him. Finally saint Mauryce glorious duke appeared with his
legyon.vi. M vi. C. lx. and. vi. the which of one courage prostrate them and
worshypped our lord saying O rightwyse Judge and conduter of the heue^s give
Judgment. These things spoken they stood up and him required reverently. Unto
whom our lord Ihesu christ said. I know well what ye require give unto us the
archebysshop Vdo. And incontinent some of the presents departed and drew the
cursed Vdo from the bed of the said abbess a led him myserably. When saint
Mauryce saw him he said. My lord ryghtwyse judge / Judge justly / here is Vdo he
is no bishop but a wulfe / no pastoure but a rauyssher / a sleer / and
deuourer of thy flock. This here is also he unto whom thy lady mother has
given science to whom she has reco^maunded this church made in thonour of
thy name and of me and of my felawes: and him before warned and said. If thou
govern the well thou shalt have life pardurable. And if you govern the ill you
shalt deye in body and in soul. Morouer he has be warned three times and he
would not correcke him / and he has profaned and brought unto naught not all
only this church but himself and the souls the which were unto him
committed / and with that has vyoled folyly and foully thyn espouses. Than you
ryghtwyse judge / Judge justly. These things spoken our lord yt preceded in
Judgment in beholdynge ye saints said What think you of this to be done. The
champyon yt held the sword al naked cried with an hye voice saying. He is
culpable of death. And the Judge and all the saints the which were present
concorded in sentence and treated togyders what manner of death he should
suffer. Than ye judge said / he has deserved to lose his heed. That is to have
it smyten of. When these words were spoken the champyon bad Vdo hastily to
stretche out his neck. When Vdo had stretched it and yt the champyon had lift
up the sword to give ye stroke one cried and said. Hold thyn hand till the
relykes ben taken from him Than one Quida^ came unto Vdo holdy^ge a chalyce.
And the champyon smote many strokes with his fyst upon the neck of Vdo / and at
each stroke an hostye soyled issued out by ye mouth of Vdo and fell in to the
chalyce. The which hostyes our lord took reuere^tly and washed them for to
take away ye fylth Afterward he put them wtin the chalyce upon the auter /
and enclyned him besemyngly with his company and yode his way and departed. And
after that the said champion took the myscheuous Vdo and beheeded him. And than
all that company departed. Certainly the beforesayd chanone a Just man the
which saw this thing / not in dreme but with eyes open abashed trembling
found fire in the place of the relykary and lyghted again the lamps of the
church. And as he was yet abashed of the deed and admeruayled him / little and
little he took hardynes / approached al in peace unto the place of Judgment / and
saw upon the awter ye chalyce with the hostyes and the heed cast far from the
body and the pauement wette of ye blood Than he began to cry and to say. O
traytre behold. O great miracle. O that ye Judgment of god is to dread. O yt
it is a thing horrible as to fall in to the hands of the lyuy^ge god. For of
those the which endures longly to the end that they convert them when they
will not convert them they da^pne themself more hardely. After all ye things
beforesayd the said chanone shytte the gates with the keys. And suffered not in
any wise that none entered till unto the time of the rysynge of the son that he
called all ye clerks and lay men. Than he opened ye gates and shew^d unto all
the meruaylous and cruel vengeance how god ye creator had Iuged and
punysshed the archebysshop Vdo And recounted by order all the deed in likewise
as it is before written / how it was done. And the same day one of ye chapelayns
of ye said archebisshop named Brunet wha^ he had made parfayte and
accomplysshed his lygacyon co^mysed by the prouynce sent his servants before
/ and he was oppressed grievously to sleep. He auysed a tree well shadowed and
derke descended from his horse and teyed fast the rain of his bridle unto his
arm and slept. When he was in rest he saw in vysyon a gadery^ge of horrible
black spyrites with busynes / trompets / tympanes / speres / glayues / and axes
/ the which hasted the^ to come unto the place. When they were altogyder there
was one of the^ prince and most horrible of stature. And they made a chair and
set him in it. And without long tarienge an other multitude of spyrites as great
as the other appeared cryenge / mocking / and dauncynge / whereof one came
hastily cryenge. Give place / give place here is our pry^ce Vdo yt approaches.
After this saying ye satalytes of Satan led unto their pry^ce the soul of
the cursed Vdo in semblaunce corporal having a chain of fire strayte about
his neck / against whom Satan arose and salued him by words peasybles in
ill and treason. Thou art right welcome O prince aydour and delatatour of our
realm / here we ben ready to yield unto the ye reward equyualent for thy
deservings / and also unto all our faithful friends. And as Vdo held his
peace Satan said to ye presents. Our friend is right weary in his cominge hyder
/ and therefore it pleases unto us yt he be chered / give unto than to ete / he
refused it and turned his heed. And his mynysters constrained him vyolently to
ete of todes and serpents / and after they made him to drink of ye lycoure of
sulphre / yet he spoke not. And Satan commanded him saying. Such a prince be
led to be bayned and incontinent brought again. And there was a well not
far of that had a coueringe on the mouth. When it was uncovered flambe
devouring lept up unto the heaven The which wasted noc all only the trees and
mountains and stones / but the water being nere unto it dried and consumed.
The deuyls kest the soul of the said Vdo wtin the laid well / and afterward
drew him out ye which was all on fire as iron enbrased and reed / and bare
him unto their prince / ye which laughed and said. Have you not had a soft
bayne as a prince. Than Vdo saw himself dampened. And began to blaspheme and
say. Satan cursed be you / thy felawes / and thy subgectio^ and thy reame.
Cursed be god yt has created me. Cursed be the earth the which bare me:
Cursed be my parents that begat me and cursed be all creatures in heaven and in
earth. Than all the deuylles with their pry^ce clapped their hands and said.
Truly this man here is worthy too dwell with us / for he can well our cantycle and
our office. Than be he put to our pryncypall scole of the dampened to the end yt
he se / here / learn / feel / and frothensforthe never to issue. Scantly had he
ended his words yt the deuylles took that cursed soul and kest it and plonged
in to hell with so great shoutes and noise as if ye heaven and the earth and all
the mountains of the world were moeued to smite together When the chapelayne
beforesayd had seen and herd the said things he dredde hugely Than the prince
of derkenes showed him with the finger and said. Take heed that ye clerk the
which beholds us fle not the which has been evermore defensour / messager
and currour of his euylles. Than in likewise as he has been encreaser of his
sin so let him be partener of the vengeance / and therefore be he plonged in
the well with his lord. When he had spoken that as the deuylles would rauysshe
him he enforced him to fle and awok suddenly / and his horse was so aferde yt he
lepte hyder and thither and ran drawing the meschaunt man till that he was
unbound of the rain yt was about his arm. And with great dyffyculte he lepte
upon his horse and came to the cite metropolytayne And when he knew yt his
lord was deed he approved the vysyon to be true / and recou^ted all the things
the which unto him were comen in the way / and all that / yt he had seen and
herd. So they knew the thing to be veritable. When the cytezyns had seen and
herd this terryble thing they drew ye carayne of the body far fro the cite
in a place full of fylthe. And for ye in the said place bestes infernalles were
by wise counceyle ye cursed body was brent and the ashes casten in to a water.
A thing meruaylous men tell yt all the fysshes left the place and yode in to ye
see and were there till god was apeased by fastings and letanyes. Ten years
after scantely came they again. The demonstr^u^ce of the said horrible thing
appears on ye white pauement where the said Vdo was beheded. For the cruour of
the effusyon of ye blood enharded so strongly in the stones of the pauement yt
it seems that the said blood be of thessence of ye stones the which ben there
yet. And over yt place where the decollacyon ben always tapytes spread. And wha^
they sing (Te deu^ laudamus) upon a bishop chosen he is borne unto the said
place and there they prosterne them in orayson to ye end yt the bishop that
is chosen behold ye said thing / and also to keep hy^ yt he perysshe not as
did the other. This thing was done of our lord to the terror of bisshops
and ill prelates to the end that they tremble to here the terryble Judgment and
the cruel vengeance of god. This example denotes many things. First yt the
said Vdo used ill the science and the counceyle yt he had of the vyrgyn Mary.
Also those the which use ill the science that they have of god be^ to punyshe
and sin gretely. Vn^ jacob. iiii Scienti bonu^ facere and non facienti pctm^
e^ illi. Also he used ill of the prelature and of the goods of the church yt
god had given unto him. He should be the light of virtues and of bounte / and
he was the sklaunder of ye people / and the example of derkenesses and of
sin. Also he used his life in lecheryes and was corrupter of vyrgynyte and
chastyte / and therefore he was worthy of punycyon. Also he would not correke
him and yet he was warned from god. And for yt he was so obstynate and harded
in sin and replete of carnal pleasaunces yt he would not correcke hy^ of
good right he was iuged and punisshed in body and in soul as it is said. This
here is the example of all prelates / curates / and people of the church /
they should understand here if they use ill of the dygnyte and charge that
they have yt god shall punysshe them cruelly more than these simple persons
ye which ne knows / a / ne / b. And therefore who so loves him keep him from
doing ill. Another example in mani books how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says yt in the dyoc and archebysshopryche of Maydenburgh /
there was an archebisshop named Loye / the which was in a dance the which
was in a town of his said dioc and of his sygnoury of women vyrgyns and of
other of masculyn sex. And by ye suffraunce of god as men said the fire took
in ye base court of the house where the dance was / and the said fire brent it
and no person ne deyed among so great nombre of men and women the which were
there / but ye archebysshop and a maiden yt he had led in the dance And
albeit some persons fell by the wyndowes and ne ran in point of death.

Peni inferni.
A. Examples how mortal syn^e makes the sinners inobedyentes to have many
pains and doloures wtin the fire of hell. And first example of a fader of an
household the which saw two pondes and the tourmentes of hell. Cvii.
MEn find by writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says that ye fader of a household yielded his soul
to god / and all his household watched him and kept his body by night / by the
dyuyne mercy he reuyued and yode unto ye church to yield thanks unto god. And
al yt he had he gave to the church and to the poores. Afterward he yode unto
an hermytage / and by a water made his dwelling / and entered wtin ye said
water and let his clothes to be ysy and frosen nere unto his flesh. And
after yt he entered in to a bayne right hot / and sustained such pain till
unto the death. And when he was repreued to endure such pain he said. If ye
had seen that yt I have seen ye should do with me that I do / or more greter
thing. And he recounted terryble things of the pains of hell in saying yt
when his soul departed fro his body an angel led him in to a valey of
infynyte gretenes. In the which there were two pondes / the one was full of
worms and of flambes of fire eygrely brennynge and hot. And the other ponde
was frosen / and there was terrible coldness of snow and of hayle. And these
two pondes were full of souls terrybly tourmented / ye which when they might
no more sustain the great cruelte of the fire they passed in to the cold. And
they yt might not sustain ye coldenes passed in to the hot. etc. Afterward
the angel led him by derkenes right thycke and there saw little flambes
and little hepes and assemblementes of fire the which proceeded from ^he
furneys of hell and mounted as hye as sperkles of fire and men of fire through
them proceeded / and there felt stynke intolerable / and there herd wepynges
/ waylynges / and howlings incomperables and saw the deuylles right terrybles
yt held hokes of fire / the which coueyted to catch ye fader of the
household to cast him in ye furneys / but ye angel defended yt they should
not touch hy^. For ye judge had commanded yt he should return in to his body
for to do penance. And there he did such penance yt it passed man's
reason. After he deyed ioyously. etc. To ye purpose of this example yt speaks
of ye fyry ponde saint John^ says apo. Qui no^ est i^ue^tus i^ libro vite
scriptus missus e^ i^ stagnu^ ignis arde^tis and sulphuris. He the which is
not found written in ye book of life when he is deed is sent in to a ponde of
fire brennynge and of sulphre. This ponde here whereof speaks saint Johan is
not of cold water or boylynge wherein the sinners ben plonged / drowned / or
boiled / as falls money makers / but it is by symylitude as a ponde or a cawdron
of fire and of sulpre molten brennynge and boylynge wherein the dampened ben sent
there to be plonged / smored / brent and broyled the which is the second
death that comes after the death corporel / whereof speaks saint Gregory in
his moralles. Fit miseris mors sine morte / finis sine fine / defectus sine
defectu. etc. Example of a fader and his sone the which were seen in hell in
tourmente of fire brennynge boylynge as does the peason in a pot on the
fire. Quere.lxxiii. Also saint Johan says in the appocalyps that the
homycydes fornycatours / enuenymours / ydolatres / and all liars shall be sent
in to a ponde brennynge of fire and sulphre the which is the second death.
Vn^ appoca. xxi. Pars illoru^ erit i^ stagno ardenti igne et sulphur quod est
mors secunda. Unto ye purpose of the second po^de the which was frosen and
that the dampened passed from the ponde of fire in to that of the cold. It is
written job. xxiiii. Ad calorem nimium transiet ab aquis niuiu^. And from the
great cruelte of cold and of torments that the dampened have god says in ye
gospelles yt they shall weep and grynde their tethe of great pain yt they shall
endure. Vnde math. viii. xxiiii. Et luc. xiii Ibi erit fletus et stridor
dentium.

B. Another example how a rich man was put in a chyare of fire. Cvii
THe dyscyple recyteth how a devout man saw by vysyon a rich man led in to
hell yt had been much honored in this world and exceded in worldly glory / in
glotony / lechery / in songs / and in diverse solaces. And the prince of the
deuylles rose up from his chair / came before him / and made him to sytte in a
chair all of fy^^ / and said unto him. Sit you here for the honor that thou
have had in the world. And was constrained to drink of lycour right bitter /
stynkynge / and foul. And they said to hy that it was for yt he had dronken in
ye world the drynkes full of swetenesses / and two deuylles were there with
trompettes the which blewe in his eeres yt the flambes of fire yode out by the
eyes / nosethrylles / mouth / and eres. And it was said unto him yt it was for
the bayne / and songs that he had herd in ye world. And they put serpents
about his neck and unto his arms / and said unto him yt it was for the
embracements of women that he had had in living lecherously. etc.

C. Another example of a woman that saw ye pains of her husbonde and of other
dampened. Cvii
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons this the which follows the which is
also written in other books and says yt a knight right puyssaunt was abandoned
in tourneyments the which lived myserably / and myscheuously deyed. His wife
the which abode wydowe was right devout and holy. The which recompted unto
her brother Albert master of the order of the prechours that after ye death of
her said husband she was rauisshed in spyryte and saw by the soul of her
said husband great multitude of deuylles assembled. And the one of them the
which appeared to be master commanded unto his companyons and felawes yt they
should put a pair of hosen on his fete of the which the pryckes otherwise
called darts perced him from the plant of the feet till unto the brain.
Afterward he made him to be clothed in a haubergyon whereof the pryckinges
perced all his body on all parts before and behind Afterward he made to put
on his heed an helm of the which the pryckes in descendynge perced him till
unto the plant of ye foot. Afterward he made to put upon his sholder a shield
otherwise called a mark or token the which was so heavy that al his members
were frusshed. After yt the prince of the deuylles had made all these things
to be done to the said cursed soul he said again unto the said deuilles. The
custom of this man was yt after his tourneyme^ts that he used baynes / and
after his baynes that he was laid in his bed and by him a tender maiden the
which he enbraced and with her meddled / appropre ye him semblable things. And
without taryeng the said soul was much tourmented bayned in a bayne of fire /
and afterward laid in a bed of fire brennynge and fast by him a tode of the
gretenes of ye bed the which was so horrible and had so terryble eyes yt of
the enbrasynge and of the atouchynge and of the kissynge that the said tode
made and of the horrible lokes he was more brent and tourmented than he ne had
be before of the said armoures / of the bayne / and of the bed. Alas what
pains have those the which in such wise ben tourmented. That blyssed woman
yt saw by the dyspensacyon of god the things before said vnte ye soul of her
said husband was so much tourmented that marvel it was all the days of her
life of the recordacyon of the vysyon before reherced of her husband.

D. Another example how a servant saw his master the which was led in to
pains. Cvii.
MEn find by writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says that there was a noble man oppressor and persecutour of
poor people and loved the world. The which as he rested him in his bed his
servant the which lay before his chamber was rauysshed by vysyon before yt
throne of god. And there saw his said master yt was accused of all ye things
yt he had done / and for them sentence of dampnacyon was given and was led of
deuylles before Lucyfer with great dauncynge. Unto whom Lucyfer said. Approach
unto me mine own faithful servant yt I may kiss hy^ And when he was before
hy^ Lucyfer said Peace be not with the in eternyte. Again Lucyfer said. He had
of custom too bathe him / led him unto the bayne. Than was he bayned of a
bayne infernal and much tormented with the nails of the deuylles / and some
kest fire upon him. After he was laid in a bed infernal. And Lucyfer
commanded that after the bayne men should give him to drink in the chalyce of
ye ire of god. And he was constrained to drink of fire and sulphre molten
togyders. And as he cried it suffysed Lucyfer said. He had of custom to here
symphonyes. So there arose up two symphonyatours the which were two deuylles
with instruments full of fire the which blewe against him in such manner that
from his eyes and his mouth and fro his nose the flambes of fire yode out.
After Lucyfer made him to be brought and said to him. Thou have song of so^ges
sing me one. And he said. What shall I sing / but that cursed be the day yt I
was borne. And Lucyfer said unto him. Sing a better song. And he answered.
What shall I sing / but cursed be the fader that begat me And lucyfer said
unto hy^ / sing yet a better. And the accursed said / but that cursed be that
god the which has suffered that I was borne upon ye earth / unto this purpose
says the psalmyst. No^ mortui laudabunt te dn^e: neque oe^s qui desce^dunt in
i^fernu^. And lucyfer said / here is the song that I would have / led him
unto the place yt he has deserved. And he was cast in to a pytte of fire.
Than ye deuylles made so great daunsynge that it seemed that all should fall.
And at the said daunsynge the servant of the said man awoke. The which ran
unto ye chamber of his said master and found him deed. Than he told the said
vysyon. etc.

A. Another example of a scoler of Paris the which appeared unto his master
after his death in great torments. Cviii
IT is written in ye legende of ye deed that one of the masters of Paris named
scilo prayed right gretely his scoler that if he deyed that he would appear
unto him after his death for to denounce unto him of his estate if it pleased
unto god. And one time after he appeared / the which was clothed with a cloak
of parchemente all written withouteforth of sophyms / and within enflambed with
fire / and the said master demanded him what he was He answered I am he the
which has promised to come again unto the and he was axed of his estate he
said. This cloak weyeth more on me than a great toure / the which is given me
to bear for the vaynglorye yt I took in the arguments / of sophistrye / yt is
to say fallacyous. And the flambe of fire ye which brenneth me is given for
the furs delicyeuses that I wore. And as the said master said that such
pain was light to bear. The deed body said unto him that he should s^retche
out his hand and that he should feel the lyghtnes of his pain. And when he
had stretched out his hand ye said deed body let fall a drop of his sweet
the which perced the said hand more sooner then should do an arowe / and
said unto him. I am all such. And the said master felt so horrible torment
that he was so ferde that he left the world and entered in to relygyon. In
like wise as tells the chaunter of paris. etc.

B. Another example of the soul dampened yt wept the time yt he had lost.
IT is written in the book of dread yt as a holy man was in orayson he herd by
the will of god a voice horrible weeping. He demanded who it was yt in such
wise wept. Answer was made the which said. I am a soul dampened. And he
demanded wherefore wepest thou so bytterly. He answered and said that one of
the things wherefore he and all the dampened sorrow most fore is that yt they
have lost and consumed the time of grace vnprouffytably in synnynge / where in
an hour by repentance they might have gotten grace and escaped the torments
wherein they be and shall be eternally. By this example these sinners should
understand that it is the most great good deed that may be in them as to be
in the state of grace well confessed / and repentaunte of their sins. Also by
that that this soul wept in hell is unto the purpose of that that the
euangylles say that the dampened weep in hell Vnde mathei.viii. Et luce.xiiii.
Ibi erit flet^s et stridor dentiu^. Unto this purpose tongdalus ye which saw
the torments of hell and afterward was brought again told yt he saw in
hell a torment of an yzy ponde where the souls the which therein were
tormented cried so horrybly that they were herd unto heaven. And after where
the said tongdalus spoke of the pytte of hell he herd great cries and
howlinges of souls and thondre so horrible that no man ne might think ne
tongue declare the horrible cry and the noise ye which was in the said
torment. etc.

C. Another example of two men ye which were in pains when saint taurayn
areysed them. Cviii
IT is written in the legende of saint taurayn ye tidings were brought unto a
right honorable man that his sone and his squyere were deed. And for to
abredge the matere saint taurayne areysed the said sone. The which yode
incontinent on knees before saint taurayne and required him to be baptized. And
after that he was baptized said unto his fader Halas fader thou know what
miserable life we led and what pains those sustain the which ben semblables
unto us And what glory is unto those ye which love and serve unto that god
the which is to be honored of man. Certay^ly I have seen him to be in the
company of aungelles and to pray unto god for us. And when ye said sone
arey^ed had spoken these words and many other unto his fader he yode on knees
before saint tauryn and caused him to baptyze him. And also his wife mother of
the said raised. And for to be short in that day so many of great lords as
of little people a thousand and two hundred persons were baptized. And
afterward at the request of the said sone areysed saint tauryn areysed also
afterward the squire ye which wytnessed that he was in great pains when a
messengere came to tell him of the sovereign master that he were brought
again and taken unto saint tauryn. And this said squire areysed said unto the
said sone. He the which has brought me again heder commands the that
thou dispose the to return unto him. And incontinent a fever took him / and
after the commandment deyed.

D. Another example of.iii. deed men areysed the which recompted of ye pains
of purgatory and of hell / and how they were in judgment before god. Cviii
IT is written in the epystyll of ye holy bishop named sirillus that by ye
merytes of saint Iherome the which appeared unto saint eusebe three deed bodies
were areysed for to take away a great error the which reigned in ye time
among the greeks yt it came in the latyns of ye heretykes yt said that the
ylle persons ne should have of torments in hell till unto ye day of Judgment
yt the body and the soul should be remyt togyders. The three deed bodies yt were
areysed lived.xx. days / ye which were demanded why they wept so sore. And
the one of them said unto hy^ yt asked it. If thou knew the pains the which
before yesterday I endured thou sholdest have evermore cause to weep. and he
was required to tell what pains he had endured and suffered within hell. /
He said that the dampened and those in purgatory have so great pains yt if a
person should endure in this world all ye pains / torments / and
afflyccions that a man may think / that ne should be but consolacyon to endure
all that / in regard of the leest pain of purgatory / or of hell. Also he
said / if any living had felt the experyence of the dolor the which is in
hell or in purgatory / that he should love better to endure till unto the end
of ye world without any remedy togyders all the pains and torments that all
the men and women has endured one after another sith Adam unto now / than to
be tormented one day in the leest pain that is in hell or in purgatory. And
therefore if ye axe me what ye cause is wherefore I weep. It is for that yt I
knowledge me to have sinned against god / and that justly he punyssheth the
sy^ners. Wherefore I weep to have deserved such punycyon. Afterward he was
axed wherein dyffereth ye pains / and torments of purgatory / and those of
hell. He answered that they ne dyffere as unto ye qualyte and quantyte of
pains they ben of one self gretenes / but they differe in asmoche as the
pains of hell have none end. And also the dampened shall have augmentacyon of
torments in Judgment when they shall there be tormented in body and in soul.
And the pains of purgatory shall have an end. For wha^ the penance is
accomplysshed / those of purgatory ben delivered. Also he was asked if those
the which ben in purgatory and in hell have egalle torments or diverse. He
answered that the one have more great torments and diverse than the other
after the quantyte and gretenes of sins that they have committed. And also
the dampened albeit that they ben in a place of pains / yet feel they more
great torments the one than ye other / after the quantyte / and qualytees of
sins that they have committed. For in the person where there is more of
matere of sin / and more strongly the fire him takes and bre^neth more
cruelly. Also he was demanded how he bare the deed when the soul^ issued out
from the body. He answered / When mine hour of death came in place where I
was he found so many of deuylles that a man ne might nombre the^ for the
great multitude the which were so horrybles to behold that a man ne can
think more great pain than it is. Any man had lever cast himself more sooner
in a fire flambynge and brennynge than to behold them with the eye / the
which deuylles came unto me and brought again unto my mind all ye cursed
operacyons that I had done again god esmouynge that I ne had more of
esperaunce of ye dyuyne mercy the which I have gretely offended. And certes
know ye yt if ye mercy of god ne had aided me I ne might have resysted unto
them. For when my spyryte was destytute of all force little and little I me
consented unto their words / and saint Iherome arrived more clear than the
son with great multitude of angels the which came unto mine aid. And the
said saint Iherome blamed them / and they departed with great howlings and
clamours. etc. For to abrydge this matter the said areysed said that his soul
was borne before god in judgment in like wise as a man may shyrte the eye /
but how ne of whom he ne knew. More over he said all the sins that he had
done / spoken / and thought in all his life appeared clearly unto the judge and
before al in like wise as they had been present / so that there ne abode ye
most little thought but that it appeared / so it had be thought. Also he said
that he was replenysshed with so great fere that meruayll it was. And that
great multitude of deuylles were there present the which witness the ylles
that we have done in declarynge the place / the manner and ye time and the ylles
that men spoke against us / we ne may again say them in no manner. For the
judge knows and sees al Also the iustes and presents it seen and know. Alas
what shall I say / we ne abide more than the sentence to be brought forth
again us. For all the presents cry unto the judge yt we ben dygne of
torments. And almoost no good deed appeared wherein we had esperaunce to have
the mercy of god. And when he ne resysted more as to bryngforth the sentence
ye which is justly given again the sinners ye blyssed saint Iherome was
present. Also were present saint Johan baptyst saint peter / and great
multitude of aungelles the which required of the Judge that our sentence were
yet dyfferred a little of time for ye reverence and devotion that we had made
unto the said saint Iherome / And for to destroy the error the which reigned
in the world. And he was accorded unto the said saint Iherome that yt he
required. The which led us with hy^ And showed us the glory of ye blyssed
souls and the pains of hell and of purgatory / to the end that we might
wytnes certain that thing yt we have seen. The which things be not here
written for because of shortness. And would that we were put within the pains of
purgatory to the end that we should prove the experyence of the pains the
which there ben in ye which we were put. For to abrydge the said saint
Iherome us commanded that we should come again in to our bodies And that we
should wytnes that that we had seen / and us promised that on the.xx day if we
did dygne penance of ye sins that we had committed that we should deye
again with saint Eusebe the which should deye on the said day and we should
have glory. And so our souls were in contynent within their bodies. etc.

E. Another example how a devil said that the soul of the earl Guyllaume was
in horrible pain. Cviii.
IT is written in dialogo cesarii this the which follows how the dyscyple
recyteth in his book and says that as a knight was at the death in his bed
all alone the devil appeared unto him vysybly in form and semblaunce of a she
ape the which had the horns of a got. And when he se hy^ there in such wise
he had fere and him demanded what art thou and what sekest thou. He answered I
am a devil the which am come for to fetch thy soul. Unto whom the said
knight said depart thou fro me cursed there / I have commanded it unto Ihesu
christ that I have received in the sacrament. And ye devil said. Varlet if
thou will do me homage I shall yield unto the health and I shall enryche the
above all thy parents And the knight him demanded where ben thy tresours. He
answered treasours infynyte ben hid nere unto thy court / And the said
knight asked him / tell me where is the soul of the earl guyllaume ye which
is lately deed. He answered. It is in hell in so great fire that if the most
great mountain were there it should be consumed in less of time than to close
ye eye. And that pain there is but a bayne of milk in the regard of the day
of Judgment where he shall receive the pain And he asked him of another man.
And he answered he has be.xxxi. years in pains / but a monk and a mynchen
has delivered him by good deeds. And again he demanded the devil. From whens
came thou when thou came to me. He answered. I and my fellows were at the
death of an abbess awaytynge her soul. And ye knight him demanded. How many
ben ye. He answered that the most great forest of the world has not so many
of leaves as we were. And the knight demanded him. What have ye done. He
answered Alas nothing / she was a good relygyous / and saint Myghell came
theder the which beat us and departed in like wise as departs the poudre
before the wind / and he was axed if he were at the death of such an abbot.
He answered yt there is not so much of gravel in the sea as there was of
deuylles / but we ne did nothing / for the vyllaynes monks ye which there
were and groned as hogs ne would let us to approach. And the said knight
said. how dare ye go unto the death of so holy a man And the devil said I was
at the death of the sone of god / and set me on the arm of ye cross /
wherefore dare I not than go unto the death of such a man. etc.

F. Another example how a relygyous would more sooner enter in to a fire than
to behold the devil. Cviii
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says yt one time a relygyous
came unto ye death ye which cried horrybly / cursed be the hour that ever I
was relygyous / and after held his peace And within a little while afterward
he began to laugh with a Joyous face and said Nay. But blessed be the time
that I entered in to the order. And blyssed be the glorious mother of Ihesu
christ that I love and again held his peace. The freres ye which were by him
and herd these words wept and prayed for him. Two hours after he said unto
a friar the which was by him / call my bredern. For god has exalted their
prayers. And he said unto them when they were entered. My bredren ye were
troubled of the first word I said unto you / but the cause of ye word was
for that that the deuylles horrible appeared unto me / the which would rauysshe
my soul. And for the dread I was rauysshed out of my self and cursed ye hour
that I entered in to relygyon I tell you yt if a great fire were here melled with
brymstone / and that I had to chose to put me within it or else to behold
again ye deuylles in ye form that I have seen them I should chose more
sooner to put me in the fire than to behold them afterward the queen of heaven
and of mercy came the which chased away the deuylles. And when I se her I
conceived esperaunce / and for the great joy that I had I have laughed and
blyssed the hour that I entered in to relygyon and the vyrgyn mary When he had
spoken these words he deyed debonayrly. etc.

A. Another example how the vysyon of the devil is horrible. Cix.
IT is written in some books this ye which follows that the dyscyple recyteth
in his promptuarye and says yt the abbot of saint agathe came unto coleyne
with one of his monks and a conuers with a woman demonyacle. And when ye abbot
asked the devil of some things he ne would an^wer. The abbot said afterward.
I conjure the by him that I have trayted in the mass that thou answer me. And
incontinent the devil answered unto tho things yt men demanded hy^ After the
abbot coniured him yt he should go forth of the woman. The devil answerde.
And wheder shall I go. The abbot said I have opened my mouth to ye end that
thou there enter. The devil said I ne may there enter / for this day the right
hault god there entered. Than ye abbot said. Lepe upon my two fyngers / my
thombe and that next it. The devil answered I will not for you have this day
trayeted the right hault with them. And he said unto him that he should go forth.
The devil said the right haulte ne will it not / I shall be yet two years in
her / and than she shall be delivered. And so was it done. / Than the monk
and the conuers prayed ye abbot that he would show himself unto them in form
naturell. And he first refused it afterward he would it and said unto the
devil. I command the in ye virtue of Ihesu christ that thou appyere unto us
in thy natural kind. And the devil said And will ye not depart if ye se me
not / and the abbot said nay. Than the devil showed himself so horrible
within ye body of the woman that it was meruayll to se / his eyes sparcled as a
furnayse embrased in fire smokynge. When ye said monk and conuers saw yt they
fell unto ye earth as deed for fere / you abbot had also fallen if he had not
commanded ye devil to take his first form. The which things he did and
the devil said. Thou never commanded me so folysshe a thing / know thou
for certain yt if you had not received this day the dyuyne things / none
of you ne had reported unto any man that ye I have showed / wenest thou that a
man may seem and live / nay. In the end the monk and the conuers were reuyued
by cold water. etc.

B. Another example how a man considered if after a hondreth thousand years
the dampened should be delivered from hell. Cix.
THe dysciple recites in his promptuarye and says that as a man much
seculer and delycatyf thought one time unto himself if after a hundred
thousand years the souls of ye dampened should be delivered from pains. And
his thought answered him that nay And after a hundred thousand years nay.
And if after as many of years as there are of drops of water in the sea nay.
And in thinking such things he was much troubled. And as he was ferfull he
began to understand and to apperceyue that the lovers of ye world acursed and
in derkenes the which run in pains eternelles for a little of time that
they live in this world in joys transytoryes in the will of the flesh. A
man should here understand yt when the sinners deye impenytentes / obstynate /
and abide in their sins and them bear with them with taking away the gylte
of the said sins by contrycyon and penance ne without asking any grace ne
mercy of as much as when they live in this world and that they have the time
and the place that to do. And for as much as the soul is eternell and
immortal the which shall be sent in to the fire of hell there for to abide /
and that she shall have with her evermore sin the which is ye matere of the
fire that it shall brenne. In like wise the soul shall evermore suffer pain
and evermore shall brenne with ye said fire the which never shall have mercy
nor grace. etc.

C. Another example that it enjoyed unto a person to be in a good bed wtoute
departing. Cix
IT is written in the promptuary of the dyscyple yt the bishop of marseylle
said unto himself. When I was a lover of the world / and had given me unto
worldly vanytes I began to think one time of the eternyte of the pains of
hell. And I said in my heart. If thou were establed to lie the evermore in a
bed soft and delycatyf in such manner that you sholdest not depart for any
occasyon so ever it should be / with great pain sholdest thou sustain that.
How may thou than lie and brenne in such pain eternell / intolerable in
hell if it fall that thou be theder sent. By this occasyon I left all and
made me monk. etc.

D. Another example how a yongman made him relygyous for to think if his fair
members should be the pasture and the matere of the fire of hell. Cix
IT is written in some books this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth
in his promptuarye and says that one time as master iordayn persewaded a
young man noble fair of members that he should enter in to the order of
prechers / he found him that he was not prompte that to do. And he said unto
hy^ in the end of ye words. I pray the that thou do it incontinent for the
love of god or behold thy hands and the other fair members / what do^mage
shall that be if so fair members shall be the pasture of ye fire eternell. And
he did it. For for this thing he entered in to ye order and so contemned
himself for the love of god.

Rapina.
E. Another example of ye punycyon of a knight the which took away ye cow
of a woman wedowe. Cix.
SOme masters has written this the which follows how the dyscyple recyteth
in his book of sermons and says that one time a knight took away the cow of a
woman wedowe / and as she wept and prayed him to restore it for to nourysshe
her children. The knight answered. If I took her not another after me should
come the which should take her After her death by the suffraunce of god the
said knight was seen that first many great deuylles hedeous and black hy^
tormented right cruelly and horrybly / and specially one amongst all the
other ceased not to beat him and to torment hy^ with out being weary / or
without leuyng him Than the said knight him demanded Wherefore tormentest thou
me more than all the other deuylles the which ben here He answered / if I
tormented the not another should the torment as thou saydest to the good woman
of her cow that thou tokest away / if thou tokest her not another should take
her. etc. By this example it is to understand that the said knight was right
dygne of pain and punycyon For he did unto the good woman that yt he ^e would
a man should do him again the commandment of god the which is love thy
neighbor as thyselfe / ne do unto another no more than thou woldeste a man
should do the. Vnde leuitici.xix. and ma. xxii. Diliges proximu^ tuu^ sicut
teipsum Et thobie.iiii. Quod ad alio tibiodis fieri. vide ne tu aliqn^ alteri
facias. Et ysido. Quod non vis pati no^ facias quod no^ vis tibi fieri alteri
nu^quam i^feras. Non inferas alii mala ne patiaris similia. The said knight had
no will that a man should take away his cow as he did unto ye said wedowe.
And for yt was he punysshed etc.

F. Another example of a rauyssher in pain the which took ye got of a woman
wedowe / and did of great oppressyons unto his subgectes. Cix.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says yt a relygyous of the
order of cysternencis labored unto ye death / he saw saint benet the which
came unto the seperacyon of his soul / the which showed unto him many houses
of the saved and of the torments of ye damned. And among ye other he saw a
great prince borne brennynge and resydente in a chayer of fire. And before him
there was of fair women ye which put their faces of fire in his mouth / and
he brenned till unto the nombryll / and he was bette horrybly. This said man
had be a puyssaunt princes lecherous. After ye said lecherous he saw another
that ye deuylles did fle / And afterward they cast and spryncled of salt
upon him. And upon a gyrdyron of fire burnt him and roasted. This said man had
be a lord cruel the which made of great oppressyons unto his subgectes /
and made of demau^des unjust unto ye poores Afterward ye said relygyous saw
another the which rode a horse of fire and had a token of fire the which
otherwise men call a bokelet / and bare a got of fire. And after the tail of
the got he bare an habyte of a monk. This said man was a rauyssher the which
took the got of a woman wedowe. And when he was seek he received ye habyte of
a monk / not by charity ne by will to abide in the order if he might be hole.
But by theadmonycyon of his friends / and for that he drew the habyte of a
monk after him. Afterward ye said relygyous saw many other people the which
sustained many other pains after the symylytude of the manners that they had
sinned in this world. It is that whereof the sage speak. Sapie^.xi. Per q^
peccat homo: per hec et torquetur. By ye thing that a man synneth by that shall
he be tormented to the end that he have evermore remors in his conscience that
ylle that he endures its given unto him for his propre sins. Vnde Ysaye
vltimo: et marci. ix. Vernus eoru^. s. morsus conscie^tie non moritur and ignis
no^ extinguitur.

A. Another example how a myller was borne to se the torments of hell and
after was brought again in to his body.
MEn find by writing this ye which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in his
promptuary and says that as a man preched of the cross a carle usurer bought
again a vow for money that he had made unto ye sepulcre of iherusale^ And
yode unto the dyspensatour fraudelently / and gave unto him for his said vow an
hundred shelynges as he might well give xlviii.li. without dysherytynge his
children. And as this said carle sat at the tauernes he said unto the other the
which had made of vows. Ye foles shall pass the sea in peril of your
lives and shall dyspende your substance I have bought my vow for five pound /
saved my life and dwell sure in my house. And also I shall have semblable
reward as you. And in a night as he was in his bed with his wife he herd in
his mylle mouynge tempeste In like wise as the wheles gryndynge / And he said
unto his sone goo se who is in the mylle He yode and returned anon with great
fere. Of whom the master demanded. What have thou seen. He answered I had so
great fere at the door of the mylle / that I must nedely come again. And he
said if the devil were there yet should I go to see what it is. Than he cast
his vestiment upon his sholdres and yode unto the myll / he was all naked but
of the said vestyment. He opened the door and looked within / and saw two
horses right black / and a black man by them and said unto ye carle have the
lepe upon this horse the which is brought unto the. That carle had fere / and
the black man said unto him / what taryest thou / cast away thy vestymente
and come / there was on the vestyment a cross. He was dyspeyred at ye voice
and calling of the devil kest away his vestyment and lepte upon the horse.
And ye black man lepte upon the other horse / and they were led incontinent
in diverse places of pains. In the which ye acursed saw his fader and his
mother. And many other yt he had known. And he saw a knight named Helye of the
castle Horst the which was mounted upon a cow his back toward the horns.
The which cow ran on the one side and on the other and tormented horrybly the
said knight in strykyng him with her horns on the back. And ye carle him
demanded wherefore he sustained such pain / and he answered. I have rauysshed
this cow and taken away from a woman wedowe without mercy. And therefore she
me tormenteth without mercy. Afterward there was showed unto ye said carle a
sege of fire and it was said unto him. Thou shall return even now in to thy
house. And after three days thou shalt come again in to this place here / and
thou shalt take thy reward in this syege. After these words here the devil
brought him again in to his mylle And he found his wife and his household as
half deed / unto whom he told that / that he had seen. And how it happened.
The priest was called for to chere him and to counsayll him to confess him /
and to have contrycyon. And he answere^ what proffyte me these words here I ne
may repent me. For I se that in vain I should confess me. And I know that
of necessyte it is to accomplysshe in me yt the which is dysposed. And the
acursed deyed so without receyuynge the sacraments of the church. etc.

B. Another example that a knight deyed / and after was brought again in to
his body / the which recompted of a bridge right strayte upon a water by ye
which him behooves to pass. Cx.
IT is written in ye dyalogue of saint gregorye that a knight deyed and within a
little after came again in to his body ye which told yt he had seen a bridge
under the which bridge ran a water stynkynge and dark. And on the other
side of the bridge there was meadows smelly^ge sweet and aourned with all
flowers And in those meadows were assembled of people clothed in white the
which were fulfilled of swetnes and odor of the said flowers. And at the said
bridge there was such probacyon that when any of ye unjust there passed he
fell in to the black water stynkynge / and the just passed till unto the
place delectable. And ye said knight saw there without the bridge a man named
peter bound with great weight of iron / And he demanded wherefore he suffered
such pain. Answer was given yt when men gave him any for to do vengeance he
desired it more to do by cruelte than by obedyence. Also the said knight said
that he saw a pilgrim ye which passed upon the bridge all over of also great
auctoryte as he had lived in the world clenely. and he saw another named
steven ye which as he passed the said bridge his foot slode in such wise that
he than fell of the said bridge in like as half. And then some men right
black lift them up from the said water the which drew him downwarde by the
thyes. And some men right fair clothed in white took him by the arms and they
drew him upward / and as this strife was ye said knight was put agay^ in to
his body. And he ne knew which of them should vaynquysshe / but saint
Gregorye says that it is to understand that the ylles that he had done strove
again the almesdedes. And by the other the whithe drew him downwarde appeared
yt he had not parfytely resisted unto the sy^nes of the flesh. This example
ought to draw all persons to live clenely / purely / and holyly to the end
that they may pass ye said bridge unto the place delectable without falling
in to the torment beforsaid. And the sinners should also correct them of ill
and to do penance / or they shall fall of the said bridge in to the said
water / wherein they shall be punysshed.

A. Another example of the vysyon of Tongdalus ye which suffered many pains in
purgatory and saw of the torments of hell and after was brought again in
to his body. Cxi.
IN the years of our lord a thousand.xlix. There was a man named Tongdalus in
a cite of the land of Irlo^de. This said tongdalus was noble of lynage / a
fair man young of age / curteys of all goodness and of great honor. He was
great and right appert of the art of chyualrye. Also he was well speaking /
and good in dysportynge / and of asmoche more as he trusted in his beauty and
his force of asmoche the less was it unto him of the health of his soul And
if any man said any thing to him for ye health of his soul he was greuid with
hy^ / he dyspyted the holy church / he ne daygned to behold the poores in
their indygence. More over he gave that yt was his in plays for to have the
preyse of the world and many he had of friends and of compaygnyons. And it
came one day that he sat at table with one of his compaygnyons for to eat. And
incontinent that he had taken of the mete he deyed of death sudden and the
body fell unto the earth / In like wise as it never had had soul. The
servants ran unto him / the meet was taken away / wepynges / and
lamentacyons were made / men range the belles The people was much ameruaylled
of the death the which had taken this noble man so suddenly. He dyed the
wednesday about ye hour of none. And from that hour till unto ye saterdaye at
none he abode so the body without buryenge for that that in the left party he
had a little of hete. And on the saterdaye at none the soul came again unto
the body. And so by the space of an hour he beheld those the which were by
him / unto whom he made a token that he would have the body of god. And after
that he had received it he began to praise god and to yield unto him graces and
said. Sir all puyssau^t more great is thy mercy than all my sins. And
afterward said this word the which is written in the psalter That is to say.
How many trybulacions and ylles have thou showed unto me / and I being
converted thou have quyckened me. And have brought me again from ye depnesse
of the earth. And incontynente yt he had spoken tho words he departed / and
gave unto ye poores that that he had and promised above all things to leave the
life that he had before led / and all that he had seen and suffered he
recompted it unto us and said. When my soul issued out of my body she knew
and saw ye sins that she had done. And so began she to doubt. But she
knew not what it was yt she should do. And she would rentre within my body /
but she might not / But she ne durst goo out / for she dredde her sins of
al parts / and she ne had trust in nothing but unto the great mercy of god.
And so began to weep and to tremble / and she knew not what she should do /
and anon after / she saw come unto her so great nombre and multitude of
deuylles that all the house streets and places of ye cite were full the which
enuyro^ned her on all parts / the which deuylles said. Singe we unto this
soul the song of death / that we unto her should sing / for she is the
daughter of the death pardurable and the vyande of the fire extynguyble enemy
of the light and friend of derkenesses. And afterward and again her they
grynned and whetted their tethe and said unto her. Unhappy soul here is ye
people that thou haste chosen with whom thou shalt enter in to hell in
pardurabylyte / Thou haste ben a nouryce of sclaundre / a lover of dyscorde
that we love. Wherefore art you not proud / wherefore ne know you not thy
lecherye / where is thy vanite and vain gladness / where ben thy laughynges
right vntempred / where is thy force wherein thou trustedest so much. Wherefore
ne shyttest thou not the eye / wherefore ne tryppest thou with thy foot.
Wherefore ne thynkest thou the great malice that you were wont to do in
vanytees and sins. And as these foresaid deuylles said these words I looked
toward the heaven and saw a far of a light ^^scende in like wise as it had been a sterre right clear and shynynge In the which I had esperaunce that
there was some aid that god sent unto me. And as it approached unto me I
apperceyued well that it was the angel of god the which had kept me in this
world. And when he approached unto me he also greted me swetely and said. God
the salve Tongdalus. And when I saw so fair a yongman ye which greted me so
swetely by my propre name / by great Joy I answered. Alas my lord the dolours
of hell has besette me about. And the panges of death has occupied me /
as it is written. Dolores inferni circumdederunt me: preoccupauer^t me laquei
mortis. And the angel answered. Thou call me now lord and I have be
evermore with the / but Judge you not that I were dygne of such great honor.
The soul answered. Sir I never se the before. And the aungel said. From ye
hour that thou were borne I have evermore be with the in all places where thou
were And thou ne would never bileue my cou^sayll. Than the angel lift up
his hand among the deuylles and showed unto him one the which did unto him
wors than the other and said unto him that is he the which cou^saylled the
which thou byleued and did his will / but be thou sure that thou shall have
the mercy of god / and thou shall suffer a little of torments that thou have
deserved. Come thou after me / and that yt I shall show the so keep thou it
and put thou it in thy memory / for thou shall return again within thy
body. / When the soul had herd this she was much ferefull and she
approached unto the angel. When ye deuylles herd this word they were mad.
For they saw that they ne had of puyssaunce to do ill unto the soul an^
blasphemed god in sayng yt he was not ryghtfull / for he yielded not unto every
man after his deserte. And of the great woodnes whereof they were full they bet
each other. And they departed from thens sorye and heuye as enraged. Than the
angel said unto the said soul. Come after me. A sir thou go before /
these deuylles shall take me behind and shall led me in to hell. The angel
answerde / Have thou no fere for we have more great aid than they ne have. Si
deus pro nobis qis co^tra nos. If god be for us there is none that may noye
us. It is written by ye prophet david Cade^t a latere tuo mill et dece^ millia
a dextris tuis: ad te au^t non appropi^quabit. veru^tame^ occulis tuis
co^siderabis et retributione^ pcto^rum videbis. / That is to say a thousand
shall fall on thy left side / and ten thousand on thy right side. Certainly
they shall not approach unto the. Albeit thou shall consider by thyn eyes and
thou shalt see the retrybucyon of thy sins. And when he had said these
words they yode forth.

B. Of the valeye.
When they were gone longlye togyders by so great derkenesses yt they had no
light / but yt the which proceeded of the angel / they came in to a valeye
much horrible / ye which was right deep and full of brennynge coals. And above
that valeye there was a covering of iron brennynge of thyknes six fadome the
which was more hot than yt which burnt underneath. From thens issued so
great strenche the which grieved more ye soul than all that yt he had before
suffered Above the said covering dyscended many chetyues souls the which
there were fried as a man fryeth bacon in the pan And afterward they were
strayned through the coueryng as wax / and fell and dyscended in to the well
of the said valeye / upon the brennynge coals where they were tormented of a
new torment / thus said the angel. This pain suffers those the which have
killed faders or moders / or other people by delyberacyon or deed. and after
this tormente they shall be led in to more great: but thou ne shall suffer
this said torment albeit that thou have well deserved it.

C. Of the beast horrible.
AFter they entered in to a way much horrible crooked and hard. And when they
had gone long in derkenes / ye soul saw a far a be much horrible and
ferefull of ye gretenes incredyble / more great than all the mountains yt he
had before seen. She had the eyes as great fyres brenny^ge / and had the mouth
so great yt it seemed unto him yt there might well enter.x. M. men of arms.
There issued out of his mouth fire inextynguyble / and stynke incomparable.
Great multitude of souls entered by ye mouth in to the womb of the said be
the which souls cried horrybly of torments that they were in. And before the
said be there was great multitude of deuyls the which bette and tourmented
the said souls and after put them within ye said be And when the soul had
long beholden ye said be she was much ferefull and said to the angel.
Sir wherefore approach we unto this tourment. The angel answered. We may not
go by other way / for none escapes this tourment but those that god has
chosen to be in his company. This be that you see is called Acherons the
which tourmenteth all the auarycyous. Of this be it is written. Absorbebit
fluuiu^ et non mirabitur / and habet fuditiam quod influat iordanis in os eius.
That is to say. He shall swalowe a streme or water and it shall be no marvel
/ and also have affyaunce that the water of Jordan renneth yet through her
mouth And when they had spoken this they came before the said be / and the
angel departed and left the soul among the deuylles. And incontinent the
deuylles beset her about and there tourmented her with great tourmentes as
wood dogs. And afterward they led her with them in to ye womb of the said
be. Therein she suffered many bytynges of dogs / of beres / of lions / of
serpents / and of other beestes that she had never seen ne known before / and
there had of great tourmentes of deuylles / brennynge of fire / sharpenes of
sulphre / derkenesse wounds / to plundge / to cry / and great habondaunce of
disease and of trybulacyon. There was the said soul accused of her sy^nes yt
she had committed. And for the great heaviness whereof she was full she struck her
self on ye chekes tare them with ye nails of her own hands / and wend
there to be dampened pardurably. And anon she found her self out of the said
be / but she wist not how she came out / and she was laid far of much
feeble. Afterward wtin a while of time she opened her eyes and saw her aungel
by her. Than had she great Joy albeit that she was much tourmented / and
began to give praysynges unto our lord of his mercy And the angel touched
her and comforted her. etc.

D. Of the oven with the flambe.
Afterward they yode another way / and when they were gone longely by
derkenes they saw an house much high the which was round as an oven. In the
said house there was well a thousand wyndowes / from the which issued fire
strong / sharp and much hot. When the soul saw ye said house she had great
feere and said unto the angel. A sir we approach to the gates of death Alas
caytyfe who shall deliver me fro this tourment. The angel answered. From ye
fire the which yssueth out by these wyndowes thou shall be delivered / but in
to the house it behooves to enter. When they were approached they saw wtin the
said house in the mids of the fire great multitude of deuylles the which
held axes / knyues / hachettes and other instruments of iron sharp for to
tourment the souls yt were there of the which souls there was great
multitude. Than said the soul unto the aungel Sir I pray the if it please the
yt thou deliver me fro this tourment / and in all the other where thou shall
led me I grant me to be there tourmented. And the angel said This tourment
is greter than al those that thou have seen / but yet shalt thou se greter Now
enter here for the devils tarry for ye as dogs enraged. Than the soul began
to quake and to tremble of ye great feere yt she had and prayed the angel
much yt he would make him to pass the said tourment / but it vayled him
nothing. And when the deuylles herd yt she was granted unto the^ for to
tourment they took her with their instruments and tormented her sharply. The
master of this house had to name Phisternus. His house was full of fire brennynge
in the which souls strayned their tethe and wayled for the great doloures
that the suffered. And there were men and women / not al only of people of the
wor^de / but also of relygyon. There was this soul tourmented the which said
yt she had well deserved that yt she had suffered. But when it pleased god she
found herself out of the said tourme^t and she wist not in what manner. Th^n
she aduysed her angel by her to whom she said A sir where is the word that
the prophet Dauyd spe^^th. Mia dn^i plena est terra. That is to say. The earth
is full of the mercy of god. Than the angel answered and said. By those
words many souls ben deceived. God is ryghtwyse though that he be full of
mercy / and many sins he vengeth and punissheth / and also he pardons. If
god pardoned all the sins wherefore should ye man be Just. And if a man ne
dredde ye torments wherefore should he dread to do syn^e and his will. And what
should it need yt these sinners should repent them and confess them of their
sins if they ne dread god. God by his great mercy spares ye sinners in their
life and tarieth them for that they should do penance. But if they ben
obstynate in their sins and will not reuerte he them punyssheth for their
sins after their death. And god sometime takes away the goods temporelles
from the Just for to punysshe them temporally of some outrages that they have
done / and also to the end that they enpryde them not. But he keeps unto them
the goods perdurables of his glory.

E. Of the cruel be and of the ysy ponde.
After the angel led ye soul in to another place wherein they saw a be
much meruaylous the which had two fete and two wings and the neck right
long. And his neb and his nails were as yren / and from his said neb issued a
flambe a fire by right great sharpenes and force. And the said be was upon a
ponde full of strong yse. The which be devoured ye souls within his womb
in such manner yt they became as unto nothing by the tourmentes yt they
suffered. Afterward he put them out of his womb wtin the yse of the said
ponde. And there were they tourmented of new tourment. And all the souls the
which into ye ponde descended were in throws in likewise as women with
child. And not alonely the women / but also the men as the women. And within
their belyes they felt the sharp bytynges that the serpents made / of the
which they were engryped. And there were the caytyues souls tourmented. And
when ye time came and approached that they should child they cried so horrybly
yt they filled hell of noise and of howlings. Than they chylded serpents as
well the men as the women. And the said serpents issued not only by the
members whereby ye women child naturally. But also by the arms / the fete /
and all the other members issued out the horrible beestes ye which had hedes
of fire brennynge much sharp / wherewith they tourmented right cruelly the
said souls from whens they issued. And the said beestes had horrible tails
and nedles about their tails made as they were crochettes and hokes made as if
they were crochettes. And when they issued from ye said caytyues souls if they
might not draw their tails after them for the hokes they returned they nebbes
and smote the souls and gnawed them unto the synewes and bones / and of the
great pain and tourment that they suffered they keste so great and horrible
cries that they were herd unto the heaven. Morouer ye said souls were
replenysshed of diverse manners of beestes on their members the which did them
ete and gnawe unto the bones. And they had tongues the which fastened wtin ye
said souls till unto the lyghtes. This pain sustain the false monks /
chanons / the false nonnes and these other benefyced of holy church the which
have not well kept their bodies from evil doyenge / ne their mouths from
evil saying and speaking. Also those the which has used lechery sustain
this pain and tourment. And for that / yt thou art culpable it behooves the
to sustain this said tourment. When the deuylles herd this word they took
the said soul and gave it unto the said be to torment and to devour. And
when she was in tourme^t as the other souls and yt she was engriped with
serpents as the other / and when the time came yt she should child the
angel came unto her and touched her / and she was incontinent hole / and said
unto her / come after me.

F. Of the valey of smythes.
Afterward they yode in to another way much horrible and dyseasefull full of
so great derkenes that they had no light but of the clerenes of the angel.
And it seemed yt they descended from a right high mountain in to a great and
deep valey. And the more that they yode the less had the soul of esperaunce
for to return unto life. Than the soul said unto the angel. Sir whyder go
we. The angel answered. This way ledeth unto death. And ye soul said. What
is that than that the scripture says. Lata est via que ducit ad mortem et
multi su^t quuntrant per ea^. That is to say that the way the which is large
ledeth unto death: and many there ben the which enter and go by that way. The
angel said. Of this speaks not the scripture / but of the cursed way of the
world whereby men comen (...) to this way. And when they were descended in to
the said valey much deep they saw there of forges. Than the angel said unto
ye soul. The master of this valey is called Vulcain the which by his engine
and falsenes has casten many souls in to pains and tourmentes. Than said the
soul unto the angel. Sir shall I suffer this torment The angel answered /
ye / thou shalt suffer this tourment. And when the deuylles herd that word
they beset the soul about and took it with their Instruments of yren that they
held / and said unto the holy angel none harm / and keste it in to a
chymney full of fire brennynge. And began too blow the fire of their furneys
in likewise as men blow when the yren is in the furneyse. And so they
tourmented the souls yt which were there till that they came as to nothing.
And when they were so brent and tourmented they took the said souls with their
Instruments of yren.xx. an ho^dred or two hundred and laid them on an hepe
upon an anuelde of yren / and the deuylles the which were in other forges
said. Cast unto us these caytyues souls we shall yet tourment them again.
Than the deuilles kest them unto them again the which werein the other forges.
And after that they had been there st^ongly payned and tourme^ted they kest
them vyolently unto thosof the first forges. And before that they came to the
ground they were taken again and so they keste them from one unto another
and tourmented till unto that / yt the skins / the flesh / and the bones
came as unto nothing. Of this matter is written. Prouerbioru^.ix. Parata sunt
derisoribus supplicia / et mallei percutientes stultorum corporibus. After that
the caytyues souls were so tourmented as it is said they desired the death but
they might not deye. Unto this purpose it is written. Apocalipsis.ix. In diebus
illis querent homines mortem et non inuenient eam / et desiderabunt mori et
mors fugiet ab eis. And when the said soul had suffered longly these tourmentes
the aungel came unto her and took her and had her out of the fire where she was
/ and said unto her. How felest you thy self now Remember the that for as much
as thou have done thy will and the delight of thy body thou have suffered so
great tourmentes. But the soul had not so much force that she might answer
one word for the great tourment that she had souffred. Than the angel said
unto the soul. Illud psalmi. Dominus mortificat et viuificat deducit ad
inferos et reducit. Comfort the / for our lord quyckeneth and mortifyeth /
ledeth in to helles and brings again. And al be it that the tourmentes that
thou haste seen ben much great yet shalt thou se much more greter from the
which thou shall be delivered by the mercy of god. And know thou that al
those souls that thou have seen here abides the Judgment of god. But those
the which thou shalt se from hensforthe ben all ready Iuged. Goo we now
forward for thou arre not yet comen unto ye pains of hell. And the aungel
touched her and heled as he had been accustomed for to do. etc.

G. Of the pytte of hell.
After that they entered in to a way / and when they were a little gone
forward in speaking one unto the other there came to the soul sudden horror
and cold intolerable and stynke and derkenes more thycket than those before /
trybulacyon and anguysshe so great that it seemed unto ye soul that all the
foundementes of the earth trembled under her fete and said unto the angel.
Sir wherefore is it that I ne may hold me on my fete as I have acustomed to do.
And when she had said this she ne might remeue from the place for the great
feere that she had / and incontinent the angel departed in such manner that
she might no morese him / and forthwith she began to dyspayre For she found
that the which is written. Ecclesiastes.ix. Nec opus / nec ratio / nec
sapientia / nec scientia erunt apud inferos que tu properas. That is to say
that in hell there ne is operacion / ne reason / ne wisdom / ne conny^ge
whereby man may aid him. The caytyf soul was in likewise / for she might not
help herself / the which herd terryble cries and howlings of souls / and
thonder so horrible that no man may think it ne tongue declare the horrible
cry and the noise that there was. Unto this purpose god speaks in the
gospel. Illud math.xxii and.xxiii. Ibi erit fletus et stridor dentium. Than ye
soul looked about her for to know if she might se the way whereby they were
comen / and she saw a great square dyche in likewise as a cysterne. And from
that dyche issued out a pyler of flambe and of smoke togyders much horrible
and stynkynge. And that pyler of fire was so high that it stretched unto the
heuens. And in yt flambe there was great multitude of souls and of deuylles
togyders the which mounted with the said flambe in high in likewise as little
flambes. And of tourmentes the which they suffered they came as unto nothing /
and after that they fell again in to the dyche till unto the botome. Unto the
purpose of this says the psalmyste. Tu vero reduces me in puteu^ interitus.
And when the soul had beholden this she would have drawn her abacke / but she
ne might lift her fete from the ground. And when she had assayed many times to
remoeue her and that she might not she was much ferefull / and of the great
wodenes yt she had she tare and rent her chekes with her own hands and
nails and cried. Alas caytyfe wherefore may not I deye. And the deuylles the
which mounted with ye said flambe herd ye said soul in such wise cry so
they be set her about with their instruments of iron wherewith they tourme^ted
the souls and said in this wise. Caytyfe soul worthy of pain and tourment
from whens art thou comen hyder / thou ne have yet nothing felt ne suffered /
thou shall endure now that yt thou art worthy by ye sins that thou have
committed. From the which tourment thou ne may never depart ne within it
deye / but evermore thou shall live and brenne in tourment without light /
conforte ne help. And from now forth thou ne may have mercy. For thou art
comen unto the gates of death / and thou shalt be borne straight in to the
tourments of hell. He that has brought the hyder has deceived the / now let
him deliver the from our hands if he can / for thou shall se him no more. And
they said the one unto the other. Wherefore tarry we so long that we ne ne give
this soul unto Lucyfer for to devour it / and so they thretened it of death
pardurable. And these deuylles above said were black as coals with horrible
lokes / and their eyes were as the lamps brennynge. And their tethe as white
as the snow / and they had tails like as scorpyons / and their claws of
yren and great large wings. And when they had said these words the holy
angel appeared unto the said soul and said unto her. Enjoy ye daughter of
light for thou shalt have mercy and not Judgment. Thou shall se of great
tourmentes and pains / but thou shalt suffer none. Come than after me and I
shall show unto the the right cursed enemy of humayne lygnage. Those the
which ben there have no light and they shall not se the / but thou shalt se
them well and their tourmentes.

H. Of the princes of derkenes and of their cursed felawes the which ben in
pains.
After these things spoken and seen the the soul approached unto him and saw
the prince of derkenes in the botome of hell. and what and how great
tourmentes she saw there the entendement ne may comprehend it / and a man ne
may express it ne declare. That is to say if he had an hundred hedes / and
that every heed had an hundred tongues yet they might not recompte the pains
of hell. There was one the right worste devil the which was more greter than
all the beestes that he had seen before. The which was black as a raven. He
had the form of the body of a man from the fete unto the heed except that
he had well a thousand hands. And he had a tail well an.C. cubytes long /
and.x. of gretenes. And he had nails of yren great and long as well on the
fete as on ye hands longer and greter than the speres of knights. His nebbe
was much long and great. His tail was right long and sharp all full of
pryckles sharp poynted for to grieve and tourment the myserables souls. And
that most horrible devil lay upon a gredyron of yren / under the which
there was great habundaunce of brennynge soles. Also there was great multitude
of deuylles the which blewe and kyndeled the fire. About that ennemy there
were so many deuylles and of cursed and miserable souls that no man might
believe that of all ye world from the beginning might be issued and brought
forth so many souls. And that devil was bound by every Ioynture of al his
members with great chains of yren and of copre brennynge. And of the great
tourment and vehement woodnesse whereof he was full he turned him from ye one
side unto the other / and stretched out his hands in the multitude of the said
souls and took them and streyned them in likewise as men may do a clustre of
grapes in their hands for to make the wine come forth. And in such manner he
strayned the^ that he either brake their heedes / or their fete / or hands /
or some other members. Afterward he syghed and blewe and dysperpeled the said
souls in to many of ye tourmentes of the fire of hell. And incontinent that
pytte or well whereof we have before spoken kest stynke and horrible flambe.
And when that cruel be drew again unto him his brethe all the said
soulles that he had shed with flambes and sulphre fell and entered in to his
mouth / the which he devoured. And when some souls escaped him by adventure
between his hands he smote them with his tail. And that devil the which in
such wise tourmented ye souls horrybly was tourmented above all other. Than
the angel said unto the soul This devil that thou see here is called
Lucyfer the which is the first creature that god made the which was in the
delyces of paradyse before that he descended from heaven / and if he were not
bound he would do many euylles and perturbacyo^s. And they the which thou
see the which ben with him there are a party of the aungelles of derkenesse.
And the other party ben men and women the which ben descended from Adam the
which ben all ready Iuged the which abide many the which have renyed Ihesu
christ / or does the operacyons of them the which renye him. Here ben the ill
prelates and princes of whom it is written sapientie.vi. Potentes potenter
tormenta patie^tur / fortioribus aute^ fortior instat cruciatio That is to say
that those that been mighty in dygnyte and in power shall suffer tourmentes with
great puyssau^ce. That is where as they have myscheuously used the puyssaunce
that god has given unto them. All the other tourmentes that thou have seen al
be it that they ben right great yet are they nothing to compte in regard of
this here And the soul said. Certes sir thou say true / for I am more
grieved and tourmented to se alonely the tourment and to feel ye stynke the
which is there than all the tourmentes that I have suffered hyder to. Wherefore
I pray the if it please the that thou take me from hens. Also I se many of my
felawes that I loved much and held their company much dear where as I have
now great horror for to se them. And certainly I understand and know that if
the great grace and mercy of god were not my socour that I have deserved for my
sins to be punysshed and tourmented eternally as they ben. And the angel
said unto him. O my blyssed come and convert the in thy rest / for god has
done well unto the / thou shall not suffer these tourments here. And thou shall
se them no more if thou forgete not the things that thou have seen / and if
thou deserve them not again. The soul of the said Tongdalus saw many other
tourmentes / and of the Joys of the saved the which has be left because of
shortness for they ben much long to recounte and write. By the scriptures and
examples before said it does appear that the sinners inobedyentes unto god
should correcke the^ and amend whiles that they live in this world if that
they will escape and eschew the inestymable tourmentes of hell and get the
realm and the glory eternal. Unto the which glory we may goo cum illo qui
est benedictus in infinita secula seculorum. Amen.

Ihesus.
A. Examples that the name of Ihesus does many goodnesses. And how it
delivered a man fro many perils and tourmentes. Cxii
IT is written in many books that as saint Patryke preched in Irlonde he prayed
god devoutly that he would show him some token by the which the wicked ill
men might have feere and also repent them. And suddenly a right great hole or
pyt appeared / and it was reveled unto him that ye place of purgatory was there.
In the which place if any would descend he should have none other pain. Many
the which herd this thing therein entered the which came never again. And a
man named Nycolas the which had committed many sins there descended too
the end that he might repent him of his sins. And he found first an oratory
and white monks the which said unto him. Be thou steadfast and co^staunt. For
it behooves the to sustain many temptacyons. And he them demanded what
remedy he might have against the said temptacyons. They answered when thou
felest thyselfe tourmented with pains cry hastily. O jesus christ adiuua me.
That is to say. O Ihesu christ help me. And wha^ that he was departed from them
the deuylles ran suddenly upon hy^ in likewise as wild beestes famysshed.
And as they did in this wise unto him he recorded him of his counceyle and
said. O jesus christ adiuua me. And incontinent he ne wist where the beestes
became. He yode ferdermore and found a right great fire / in to the which the
deuylles kest him. And incontinent that he had said. Jesus christ adiuua me /
forthwith the fire was put out and quenched. He walked yet ferder and saw a
well right deep from the which issued smoke and great clamor of souls the
which were tourmented. And wha^ the deuylles had casten him within it he
cried Jesus christ adiuua me. That is too say. Ihesu christ help me / and
forthwith he was delivered. At the last he saw a bridge that was right narowe
and strayte. And there he had great terroure / the which bridge him behooved
too pass / but he might not. And he set one of his fete upon ye bridge and
said. Jesus christ adiuua me. And so he said at every step till that he had
passed the bridge on the other side. And wha^ that he was past he came unto a
fair medowe wherein grew many fair and delectable flowers / of the which
flowers and me dowe proceeded good odoures and smelles. And afterward he came
again unto life and.xxx. days passed he came unto paradyse by the inuocacyon
of our blyssed savior and redemptour Ihesu christ. Unto the example of the
abouesayd man the which was delivered from all tourmentes and pains
incontinent that he had called ye help of Ihesus. In likewise thou man and
woman call devoutly the name of ye blyssed lamb Ihesus in all aduersytees /
fortunes tourmentes / losses / temptacyons / sekenesses / necessytees /
anguisshes / perils / infyrmytees / and things doubtables and well shall
come unto the. This name Ihesus is interpret savior. Jesus i^terpretatur
sa^uator. For by ye merit of his passion he saved al ^he world. He brake hell
/ saved and delivered all the good persons the which were in the lymbe of the
holy faders and opened paradyse unto all good crystyens. Also Ihesus is the
king of kings / the Judge of Iuges / and of all great and little. It is he
that gives Joy and beatytude eternal unto the good / and that punyssheth and
damneth the evil. Ihesus is holy and debonayre unto the good / and also he is
terryble and ^ruell unto the evil. And therefore says ye psalmyst. Sanctu^ et
terribile nomen eius initium sapientie timor domini. Also the name of Ihesus is
in excelle^ce above all other Vn^ paul. ad phyl. Vocatu^ est nomen eius super
oe^ nomen. Also the name of Ihesus is loved and dredde above all names / and in
namynge him all creatures reasonables should bow the knee / be it in paradyse
/ in this world / or in hell. Vn^ paul. ad phi. In nomine jesus omne genu
flectatur celestrium / terrestrium / et infernorum. The men and women of this
world call him in their besynesses and necessytees / and the deuylles of hell
dread him. For to be short the name of Ihesus ought to be loved / honored /
called / dredde / and redouted / for it is replenysshed with bounte / beauty /
and holiness infinyte and inenarrable. That is the which passes all
entendementes. etc.

B. Another example how the devil was chased from a woman in ye name of Ihesus.
Cxii.
MEn find by writing this ye which follows how the dycyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says that a woman demonyacle was on a time brought
unto saint Bernarde unto the end that he should hele her. And the devil before
many the which were present said. O that I would goo out with good will from
my little lamb here. My lord will not that I go out. And saint Bernarde said.
Which is that lord. He answered The creator of all. And saint Bernarde said.
Saw thou him ever. And ye devil said. I have seen him in glory. And ye saint
said. Thither thou would return. And he said in mocking. The hour is to
late for to go thither. Than saint Bernarde commanded him in the name of Ihesu
christ that he should go out. And the devil said. O name terryble thou me
constraynest to goo forth / and incontinent he went out and the woman was
heled of her infyrmytee. etc.

C. Another example how that the name of Ihesus vaynquyssheth ye te^ptacyons of
the devil. Cxii
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons this the which follows the which is
also written in other books and says that a man was meke and had of custom
that every time yt the devil gave unto hy^ any temptacyons he yode unto prayer
and called god in say^ge. Jesus dulcis miserere mei. Sweet Ihesus have mercy on
me and help me. And forthwith the devil departed from him. And on a time a
holy fader herd that the devil said that the deuylles were repelled by the
virtue of this word Ihesus.

D. Another example how ye name of Ihesus gives many virtues. Cxii.
SOme masters writes this the which follows how ye discyple recites in the
book of his promptuarye and says that a young man much devout and Innocent
made orayson and prayer in demanding that he might have ye love of god. And
the angel of god gave unto him a little scrolle written in this manner. Jesus
christ fili dei viui propitius esto michi pcto^ri. And said unto him. Open thy
mouth and eat this writing / by ye virtue whereof the deuylles shall be
vaynquysshed / the heuens ben opened / the sins be^ taken away / the trynyte
is drawn to / and the aungelles serves him devoutly. When the young man had
eten the said writing he had in him all tho things as he was informed.

E. Another example how by the name of Ihesus a clerk was delivered and a
thief converted him. Cxii.
IT is written in the promptuary of the dyscyple that there was a clerk
lecherous and vycyous ye which as he would go to commyt his sin it befell
that as he passed by a forest wherein there was hid a thief ye which spared
no person but yt he slew hy^ or dyspoyled him. And when the said thief herd
him pass he said. What art thou yt passest here by. The clerk answered. I am
the poor servant of Ihesu christ for dread that he ne knew what to answer.
Than the said thief said. I demand the what thou art. The clerk answered. I
am the indygne servant of Ihesu christ. The thief demanded him thyrdly / what
art thou. And the clerk said again. I am the vnprouffytable servant of
Ihesu christ. And ye thief thought unto him self / of whom art thou servant
/ and he said unto the clerk. For the love of Ihesus goo thou in peace. And the
thief in mummelynge said unto himself. Ihesus. Ihesus. Ihesus. And by the
virtue and power of the holy name Ihesus the thief was converted. And after
that he never committed theft ne homycyde. In the morning he yode to
confession and said that for heryng the name Ihesus he was converted / and the
clerk in the namynge of Ihesus was preserved. The which said blyssed be ye
name of Ihesus / for by ye name of him I shall absteyne me from sin.

F. Another example how a relygyous was heled of the fevers by the virtue of ye
name Ihesus. Cxii
MEn find by wrytinge this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt a friar mynour had herd many miracles of
the name of Ihesus. And as this said relygyous was tourmented of ye evil of
fevers he wrote this name Ihesus within the water and after drank it and
incontinent the fever left him. This thing happened in Irlonde

G. Another example how by the name of Ihesus a woman pardoned unto her
enemies. Cxii
IT is written in the book of gifts that a woman ne might be apeased. And her
husband wrote in her forhede the name of Ihesus / and in contynent she forgave
all.

H. Another example ye one would not pardon for the love of Ihesus. Cxii
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuary yt there was a man obstynate unto
whom men said on a time. Pardon thy rancoures / and enmytees for ye love of
Jesus He answered. Neither for god ne for ye devil I ne may pardon them though
that I should enter in to hell perpetually. And a friar approached unto him with
devotion and wrote in his forhede with his finger Ihesus nazarenus / and
incontinent the sinner began to weep and said. For the love of Ihesus I pardon
all.

I. Another example how the temptacio^ of the devil was taken away with ye
token of the cross / and in ^amynge ye blyssed Ihesus. Cix.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons this the which follows the which is
also written in other books and says that the devil tempted a man and his wife
so terrybly yt they would hang themself to the end that they should euade the
miseryes of this world. And as they were heavy of their temptacyons of the
devil yt they ne might sleep ne ete the one demanded of ye other the causes
of their heuynesses. And they said each to other yt they would hang themself.
And after yt they appointed their cords for to hang them the woman counceyled
her husbonde yt they should drink of good wine yt they had before their death
to the end yt they might deye the easelyer. And so they agreed / and as they
would drink made the sign of the cross in ye name of Ihesus. The devil
fled and the temptacyons were taken away. After contrycyon they did
penance / and well they ended their days.

K Another example that in namynge ye name of Ihesus the devil is repelled and
his temptacyons and persuacions taken a way. Cxii.
MEn find by writing that ye devil tempted often times a man the which by
ye counceyle of sages yode in orayson and call ed the name of Ihesus as soon as
had perceived the temptacion and said. O sweet Ihesu have mercy on me and help
me and forthwith the devil departed and the temptacyon left him.

L. Another example of a noble man the which pardoned ye homycyde of his
brother. And the crucyfyx enclyned his heed in the church Cxii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his book that it is written that a man slew the
brother of a noble man and afterward fled and left the country. And it befell
that as ye noble man yode through the country with great company of people
without thinking on the said deed met in a field the homycyde the which had
slain his brother. He drew his sword hastily for to sle him. And ye said
homycyde fell prostrate unto the earth and cried. Right noble man have mercy on
me for the love of Ihesus the which is pyteable and has redeemed the world by
his death. Hastily the said noble man took him to weep and withdrewe his hand
and his sword without strykynge him. And as he was reproved of his taryeng and
folly of the people again he stretched out his hand for to smite him the
which was prostrate / and the culpable demanded pardon and remissyon of his
mysdede in the name of Ihesus And secondly he withdrewe his hands. Thyrdly he
was blamed of his people for yt he had not slain him. And ye unhappy dredynge
yt death humbly required pardon again. And ye noble man of war and nobler of
heart said. I pardon the the death of my brode^. And without tarienge he herd
ring to a mass yt day and entered in to ye church And the times he bowed his
knees before the crucyfyxe. And an holy man yt was in the church saw yt the
crucyfyxe enclyned the heed humbly at every of the said times yt the said noble
man bowed ye knees. Tha^ he that had seen alonely the said thing called and
drew aside the said noble man and demanded him what he was. I am borne in the
land / and said a noble knight. And the holy man said. Dear friend hyde you
nothing fro me. Wherein trustest thou most to have deserved unto the dyuyne
mercy. Than the knight said. I am a sinner and have given me to the world /
and nothing is aduysed in me but yt such a case happened me this day. And he
it unto him declared. Also the holy man told unto him that yt he had seen /
and exhorted him to be pyteous / merciful / and good. Her Guillermus dicit.

M. Another example how Ihesu christ would not pardon one deed till that he had
demanded pardon of his brother yt he had offended. Cxii.
IT is written in the life of faders that the prouyncyall of the prouy^ce of
Rome of ye order of prechers admonested the treers that they should keep them
dylygently fro troubly^ge one another / and unto them recou^ted this example
the which was comen in this wise. A friar troubled me on a time iniustly / and
afterward within a few days he deyed from this present world with out
being at peace with me. And in a night in slepy^ge he appeared unto me for to be
pardoned. And as he demanded me pardon I me aduysed that he was deed / and I
said unto him. Go brother and demand pardon of our savior and redemptour
Ihe^u christ in whose hand thou art. The which departed fro me. And as he
demanded pardon of Ihesu christ in likewise as I said to him. Our lord Ihesu
christ answered unto him. I shall not grant the pardon but if thou demand
pardon first of him that thou have offended. And in that night the said body
came again unto me and brought me again the words of Ihesu and again
demanded me pardon and had it. Afterward he said unto me. Brother Nycolas
behold what ill it is as to offend his brother / and that it is a grievous
thing as not to be at peace and faithful accordau^ce with him. etc.:

Natiuitas christi.
Examples of ye natyuyte of Ihesu christ And first example how that a nonne yt
which habandoned herself unto sin had mercy in requyrynge the sone of the
blyssed vyrgyn Mary on ye day of Crystmas. Cxiii.
MEn find by wrytinge this yt which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in the
book of his promptuary and says yt a nonne left her order and was an open
harlotte. And many years afterward she came again unto her monastery and gave
herself unto penance. And as she thought on the Judgment and on ye Justice of
god and on the horrible pains of hell she despayred / as who says that she was
not worthy to have pardon for ye multitude and greten^s of her sins. And as
she thought on the Joys of heaven she defied herself that no soylenes ne
corrupcyon of syn^e there should enter. And as she thought on ye passion of god
she regarded how many of pains he had suffered for her in wepy^ge she cried and
said. Quid retribua^ dn^o pro oi^bus que retribuit michi. What thing shall I
grant unto god for all the things yt he has given unto me. And in one of
the solempnytees of the natyuyte of our savior she wept and thought Quod puer
natus est pro nobis. That is to say yt the child is borne for us. And that a
child is appeased with a little thing when he is offended. Than she yode before
the image of the vyrgyn Mary the which held her child between her arms and
thought on the chyldhode of our sauyoure / and there was moeued in great teeres
by bitter contrycyon of heart that god gave unto her. And with all her heart
and might in weeping required pardon of our lord for his benygne chyldhode
that he came in to this world to save the syn^ers Than she herd a voice the
which said unto her yt for the benygnyte of his infancy yt she alleged she
should know yt all her sins were pardoned. After these words here she
amended her life ryally and fined well her days. etc. Unto the example of this
synneresse yt demanded grace and obtained pardon in the name of the natyuyte
and infa^cy of Ihesu christ / so should these sinners do and they shall have
grace if they have gretely offended / for so did ye nonne. When a child is
wroth he is lightly appeased / and so is Ihesu christ. Vn^ ysaie. lv.
Derelinquat i^pius viam sua^ and vir iniquus cogitaciones suas and reuertatur
ad dominu^ and miserebitur eius Also when our lord Ihesus was borne ye
aungelles gave glory unto god and song / peace unto men of good will. Vnde
luce.ii. Gloria in excelsis deo: and in terra pax hominibus bone voluntatis.
And you sinner yt have commyt lechery / theft. etc. if thou wylt repent the and
demand g^^ce as it is said you shalt be pertener unto ye natyuyte of Ihesu
christ and of the nombre of those for whom peace was song. And unto the
contrary if thou be obstynate in sin peace shall not be song between god and
the. And also you shall not be partener unto the redempcyon of ye said natyuyte
of Ihesu christ the which natyuyte was right meruaylous when the little child
Ihesus yt had be conceived of ye holy ghost in ye vyrgyn without corrupcyo^ /
sede / ne atouchement of man as ye scripture says. Vn^ cantatur. Bn^dicta et
venerabilis es virgo maria: q^ sine tactu pudoris inue^ta es matter saluatoris
and in vua. An^. Nescie^s matter virgo viru^. etc. He was borne of the vyrgyn
Mary without pain ne dolor / and without fraccyon ne ouerture. Peperit sine
dolor saluatore^ sclorum iprem regem angelorum sola virgo lactabat vbere de
celo pleno. In likewise as the face of man is wtin the myrour or glass / and
the son passy^ge through ye glass wyndowe without any fraccyon / semblably
Jesus the sone of god entered within the vyrgyn Mary when he was conceived of ye
holy ghost. And yode forth of her womb in the chyldynge without fraccyon ne
opening / ne without having any pain ne dolor / and was vyrgyn before the
chyldynge / in the chyldynge / and after ye chyldynge. And so she was mother
and vyrgyn together. For she chylded as it is said the savior of the world /
the king of aungelles / and gave him souke of her breasts the which were full
of the milk of paradyse. Vbera de celo pleno. etc.

B. Another example how the chyldehode of Ihesu christ delivered a relygious
from temptacyon. Cxiii:
THe dyscyple recyteth in his sermons this the which follows the which is
also written in other books and says yt a clerk found himself in necessyte
yt which vowed unto the vyrgyn marye yt he should enter in to relygion / and
he entered in to yt of the freres prechers. Afterward he was tempted horrybly of
apostasye. / Than he worshypped the enfance of god on our ladies lap / and
required him that he would aid him / or give him license to go in to another
relygyon. And in weeping and wayllynge he kyssed devoutly the fete of the
image. And hastily he apperceyued such consolacyon that he perseuered in the
service of god in relygyon.

C. Another example that Ihesu christ appeared unto a woman in the lykenes of a
right fair child. Cxiii
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye and says yt a devout woman had
affection specially toward ye enfance of our lord in the time of the
natyuyte of Ihesu christ and prayed our lord that he would show unto her the
face of his enfance / and after some days a fair child assysted as she abode
in the church in orayson in like wise as she had accustomed / of the which
enfant she demanded / if he could his aue maria. The which answered. Say it
unto me before / and when she said benedictus fructus ventris tui / the child
said I am he / and he vanysshed out of her sight. Than the said woman cried in
enioyenge her / come again child right dear / right sweet / and right
well-beloved. And so ceased not to call by xxx. days / and the.xxx. day Ihesus
came the which said. I the which am called am comen unto the / now thou
shalt come after me and shall regne with me / yt which in enioyenge herself
deyed debonayrly Another example.lxxxxiiii. b. quere a^te.

Passio christi.
A. Examples of the passion of our savior and redemptour Ihesus. And first
example of a great sinner the which bare unto his death sekenes for his sy^nes
in the remembrance of the passion of our lord Ihesu christ. Cxiiii
THe disciple recites in his sermons and says that a great sinner was
constytute unto the death / and he took his sykenes in reparcussyon of his
sins as he said. It is good reason that I endure ill in all my members yt
which has offended god by sin. And in such anguisshe he gave him to
think on the passion of our lord Ihesus. That is to understand if he endured
in his heed and here it was of good right / for he had aourned his said here
and offended god the which for to redeem him had endured ye crown of thorns.
And also his eyes the which had made the false lokes were derked and suffered
and that was of good right. For our lord endured for to redeem him that his
eyes were bended with a kerchyef / and his face stryken and buffeted. And if
his body yt which had committee the lecheryes pleasau^ces carnalles and sins
suffered it was good reason. For our lord endured for to redeem him that his
body was rent beten and hewn. And also his mouth the which had spoken ill
words and dronken to exces suffered pain it was of good right. For our lord
endured for to redeem him to drink vynagre and gall. And so of ye other
members as the hands yt which had done of cursed operacyons. And the fete the
which walked ill ways and he bare ye said sekenes wyllyngly for his own
sins in thinking that god had had the fete and the hands perced and endured
death for to redeem him. And it is not to doubt but yt he had health with ye
good thief when his soul parted from this world. etc. This here is a great
example to instruct al persons for to do penance as did the said man when
they shall come unto ye bed of death. For if they take patiently ye said
sekenes and the death for their own sy^nes in sayng yt they have well deserved
punycyon and their me^bres yt have offended god as it is said in the example.
Such punycyon corporell by sykenes shall serve for penance for the sins
committee after confession / and shall be agreeable unto god. saint gregorye
says. Si passio christi ad memorie^ reducitur nihil e^ quod no^ equo ai^o
telleretur. If ye passion of Ihesu christ be brought unto mind / yt is to
understand yt he has endured for to redeem the from hell with much pains.
There is none aduersyte so hard but yt thou shall endure it with good courage.
If the king bear a great maste for the love of the / thou sholdest bear for
the love of him a straw. The good thief yt was hanged on the right hand of
Ihesu christ bare the death agreably and blamed the ill thief. vnde luce.xxii.
Nos quide^ just: na^ digna factis recipimus morte^: hic vero: scilicet xpu^s
nichil mali gessit He said that he received the death Justly / and that he
had well deserved it for his propre deeds. In so saying he confessed that he
was a sinner and that he took it wyllyngly in gre by penance and punycyo^ for
his own sins / so he had confession and did penance. It is gretter
penance to endure the death for his sins / than it is to fast and to say
oraysons. Also when a man confesses openly in judgment his sin as did the
good thief / it is more great thing than to confess it unto one only / but
the custom is to be absoyled of him the which has auctoryte. God absoylled
ye said thief and gave unto him pardon of his sins in considering ye great
contrycyon / confession / and faith that he had in saying unto the ill thief.
No^ times deu^ et meme^to mei du^ veneris in regnu^ tuu^. Also it was great
penance as it is said yt he took the death for the punycyon of his sins. And
therefore of good right god said unto him. Thou shall be with me this day in
paradyse. Hodie mecumeris in paradyso. Before that a man dies him behooves to
demand grace and pardon. For it should be to late after ye death. Vn^ eccle.
xviii. Ante la^gore^ adhibe medicina^: et ante iuditiu^ i^terroga te ipsu^ et
in co^spectu dei i^uenies propitiatione^. That is to understand / take
medecyne / that is penance before that thou fall in to langour in hell and
ask thy conscience before yt the Judgment be made of ye. And you shall find of
debonayrte and mercy before god and saint gregorye says. Qui tpres age^di
penite^tia^ perdit: frustra ante ianua^ paradisi cu^ precibus venit. He the
which leseth the time to do penance / comes as void and for naught before
the yate of paradyse with prayers to demand life eternell. etc.

B. Another example of the swetnes of the passion yt a man had yt said five
times pater noster. Cxiiii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his book of sermons and says yt there was a man the
which loved much god for ye reverence of the five wou^des of Ihesu crist he
said every day five pater nosters / and one time our lord appeared to hy^ and
gave him five meruayllous swetnesses / so that he studied alonely for to serve
god: / And he prouffyted gretely in good operacions and virtues / and in the end
he fined well his days / and yode in to paradyse. etc.

C. Another example of a knight ye which ne might deye on the gybet for that
yt he said every day three pater nosters in the honor of ye passion of Ihesus.
Cxiiii
IT is written in the dyalogue cesarii yt a knight was accused unto the emperor
yt he dyspoyled and wasted his land ye which knighte was taken and hanged by
the commandment of the said emperor / and on the third day ye cosyn of
the said knighte hanged passed thereby with his servant the which had co^passyon
of him / for he was a fair man and a noble approached unto the gybet for to
vnhange him and to burye him. And he spoke unto them on the gybet and said /
vnhange me for I am yet alive. They wend yt it had be a fantasye And he the
which hang again said / ne doubt you not / certainly I live yet by ye grace
of Ihesu christ and by the aid of the vyrgyn Marye. The which was vnhanged
and led in to the cite / at whom ye people meruaylled. And the said knight
vnhanged demanded the priest and the sacrament of the altar. And in great
contrycyon of heart and of teres he confessed him and after received the
creator. More over ye priest demanded him before the people yt he should tell
the cause wherefore god had done unto him such grace to hang three days
without deyenge / he answerde / because yt I did unto god a little service /
yt was / to say every day five times pater noster / and five aue maria before
yt I did any other thing / in the honor of ye passion and of the five
wounds of Ihesu christ. And one pater noster in the honor of the sacrament
of the hostye the which is the very body of Ihesu christ yt the people
receives every day in requyrynge of god that in the end of my days I might
receive him / the which thing our lord Ihesus gave me by his mercy* and that
I ne might deye till that I had received him. After that this said knight had
said thus and that he had true contrycyon of his sins made confession and
received his creator as it is said he deyed and ended well his days. Wherefore
it is a good thing as to serve god and to have in remembrance his blyssed
passion. etc.

D. Another example ye it took well unto a man the which made memory of ye
passion of our lord in his lyenge down and rysynge from his bed. Cxiiii
THe disciple recyteth in his sermons yt a man was accustomed as often times as
he laid him down and rose from his bed he prayed god yt when he should dye
he might have true confession and said this title. Jesus nazarenus rex iudeorum
miserere mei / and made the token of the cross with his thombe upon his heed /
his face and his breast in saying In noi^e patris and filii and spu^ssancti
amen. And god suffered that he deyed suddenly / and as the deuylles would
rauysshe him there came a man shynynge and clear the which chased them And as
he led him through the derkenesses suddenly he departed / and there proceeded
great light from thens as he was wont to make the crosses. Afterward there
came deuylles yt would take him / but they durst not for because of the
crosses on hy^ Than the said man bright and shynynge suddenly appeared unto him
and said. Albeit that thou have well won to be Iuged and condampmed after the
exigence of thy sy^nes nevertheless the sovereign Judge spares the and wylleth
that thou return in to thy body for the devotion yt thou haddeste toward
his passion and that you caldeste his name tryumphall in the said title and for
the impressyon of the cross. And the said Judge wylleth yt thou confess thy
sins and that thou amend thy life / and so he did For after he lived and
ended well his days. By this example a man should understand that the cross
makes ye deuylles to dread / it chaseth them / it takes away their force /
and sets them at naught. etc.

E. Another example of a woman the which loved the passion of Ihesu christ the
which deyed on the good friday and was saved. Cxiiii
THe disciple recyteth in his sermons that it is written that a noble woman
matrone loved the passion of Ihesu christ / and for the honor of him and of
his passion she took afflyccyo^ on her body on the frydaye / desiring to goo
bare foted but because she was noble for to keep honor she yode not / but put
bygge gravel in her shoes in the honor and reverence of ye passion. Also
when her husband was out by any days she lay not on no feder bed. And
among the prayers that she made to god / she required him yt he would give
her grace yt she might dye on yt day and in that hour yt Ihesu christ was
crucefyed / to the end yt in the honor of his passion her body had
afflyccyon on yt day / and so it happened. For at ye same hour she chylded a
sone the which lived after / but the said matrone deyed of the great pain.
And as a friar precher the which had confessed her prepayre him to sing ye
mass of requyem for her the saturday afterward the vygyle of eester / he was
weary of the service and slepte. And in slepynge she appeared unto him and said.
Thou shall not sing mass of requyem for me / but you shalt sing gloria in
excelsis / for I am in the glory of the saints of paradyse / When the said
relygyous was waked he ne would put no faith unto his dreme / and the pryour
sent unto hy^ forthwith a messenger that he should sing for her mass of the
day. The said relygyous wend to have excused him and prayed yt it were
reco^maunded unto another but ye pryour would not / and said that in that day
he should sing the mass of the day unto ye covent And it was done after ye
word of ye said matrone ye which had appeared in slepynge. etc.

F. Another example that oraysons the which ben made in the remembrance of
the cross and of the passion of our lord ihesus pleases him much. Cxiiii.
THe disciple recites in his sermons that it is written that an hermyte of a
holy life prayed god perseuerauntly yt it would please him to show unto him
what service pleased hy^ most amongst all seruyces. And for as much as the
orayson of one Just is much worth in like wise as says the scripture.
Multu^ valet deprecatio iusti assidua. It befell one time that as the said
hermyte was in his little mansyon and honored god in praynge he herd the
voice of a poor man / he yode to se what he was / and when he saw him he
meruaylled / for he was as a poor man all naked ye which trembled for cold /
and bare a great cross on his sholdres / and the said hermyte him demanded
what he was / and from whens he came / he answered I am come from heaven / and
am Ihesu christ the sone of mary / Then the hermyte said. O good Ihesus what
do thou here before me cursed sinner / he answered thou have made me to come
heder by thy prayers / you haste prayed unto me longly yt I should show unto
the what service I had agreeable among al seruyces / and I am come to show it
unto ye. See thou this great cross that I bear upon my sholders it is the
service the which unto me is most agreeable yt thou and every man ne may do /
that thou bear my cross upon ye in remembrance every day of my passion. For
it is the service most agreeable unto me. etc. This example ought to draw unto
us to remember the blyssed savior Ihesus yt endured to redeem us. five.
M.CCCC.lxxv. wounds and the death. Vnde versus. Septuagi^ta qui^^quatur centu^
millia quinque: tot fertur xpres pro nobis vulnera passus. etc.

G. Another example of a friar yt honored the passion of Ihesu christ and well
came unto him. Cxiiii
IT is written in the life of faders yt a friar had of custom from his enfance
to have the passion of Ihesu christ and his wounds in great reverence and love
/ And every day he said at every of the five wounds Adoramus te christ and
been dicimus tibi qia per cruce^ tua^ redemistri mundu^. Also he demanded five
times pardon in sainge as many pater nosters and in prayenge Ihesus yt he would
give unto him his love and his dread. After Ihesu christ appeared unto him
vysybly in like wise as himself tells afterward and gave unto him a
meruaylous swetnes of every of ye wounds. And when he had tasted the swetnes
the consolacyon of the world unto him was converted unto bytternes. etc

A. Another example that ye passion of Ihesus moves to have ye virtues and to
resyste again the devil. Cxv
THe discyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says yt a person ye which
thinks on the passion of Ihesucrist ne may be surmounted of the devil / but
that it be with great pain. Example of a good man yt put him in a place
secret / and also remembered with all hi^ puyssaunce how Ihesu christ was borne
and conuersed in the world / suffered many rebukes / iniuryes / betynges and
the death for to redeem us. And he said that it had more prouffyted unto him in
goodness than all that yt he had done other times. Vn^ bonauentura. Si vis homo
vt de vtute i^ virtute^: de gratia i^ gratiam de bono i^ melius profitias
quotidie nullo fatigatus i^pedime^to quamta potes deuotione percurras and
mediteris domini passionem.

B. Another example that the token of the cross was found in ye heart of a
martyr. Cxv
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuary yt as men led a holy man to be
martred / he was asked of ye tyrante wherefore these christian men and women
desired to receive martyrdom with Joy / He answerde for the token of the
cross i^ prynted in their hertes. And therefore it is no meruayll though they
follow Ihesu christ crucyfyed with Joy. The tyrant answerde. I shall prove yt
which you say of mouth. And when the saint was slain he found the prynte
of the cross in his h^ert And when the tyrant saw that miracle he made him to
be crystened.

C. Another example yt a conuers had the life and passion of Ihesu christ for a
lesson in ye table when he dyned or ete. cxv
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye and says yt a conuers was required
of the pryour one day yt he should tell what he thought so at the table
because he took no head unto the lesson that was read at the table. He
answerde and said. I have read a right good lesson at the table. When I begin
to ete I think how the sone of god was anounced of ye angel for me and
conceived of ye holy ghost in the womb of the vyrgyn marye in entreatynge that
in my thought I found the first little lefe. Afterward I thought how he was
borne / how he was wrapped in little clothes and cloutes and laid upon a
little of hey in the crache. And how ye au^gelles enjoyed them and sange
melodyously when they appeared unto the shyppardes when I have read this in my
thought that is the second lefe. In this manner I run unto the cyrcumsycyon
and coming of the kings / unto the oblacion made in the temple / unto the
baptysme / unto the fasting / unto the passion / resurreccyon assencyon / unto
the sendynge of the holy ghost / and in the end on the Judgment. this is my
daily lesson and the end of my dinner. Unto the purpose of this relygyous the
which thought the mysteryes of god. david in psalm. Beati qi scrutantur
testimonia eius in toto cord exquiru^t eu^. Et sapiens dicit eccle. xiiii.
Beati qui i^ sapie^tia morabitur and qui i^ iustitia meditabitur: and i^ sensu
cogitabit circu^spectionem dei. Et psalm. dicit Beaus vir euius e^ nome^ dn^i
spes eius: and no^ respexit i^ vanitates and i^ sanias falsas. Et mathei. v.
Beati mu^do cord qm^ ipsi deum videbunt.

D. Another example of a relygyous yt which learned three lettres yt which he
recorded often. Cxv
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye and says yt there were two germayns
in one monasterye of the which the one was a clerk and the other lay / The
clerk applied his time to read and to write the which asked one time his
brother lay how he wasted his time. The which answerde I have learned three
lettres on the which I think every day / and return them. The first is
black. The second is read. And the third is white / Then he axed him their
names / and he said The first is of the recordacyon of my sins the which is
so heavy and grievous that I am gretely tormented. The second lettre is the
recordacyon of the precious blood of Ihesu christ yt he has shed
haboundauntly and mercyfully by his wounds / and the death yt he has endured
on ye cross for to redeem me. The third is the desire of the Joys celestyall
and of those the which follow the lamb in aubes yt is of the saints yt
follow Ihesu christ. When the friar the which was clerk herd these things he
had shame / wayled and reputed all his science as naught. And afterward
employed his days in devotion.

E. Another example of an abbess ye which when she should deye she caused ye
passion of our lord Ihesu christ to be read unto her. Cxv.
IT is written in the book cesarii yt there was an abbess loved the rule of
Justice and of all dyscyplyne reguliere ye which when she should deye she made
ye passion of Ihesu christ to be read unto her. And when that a man came in to
ye place she said. In manus tuas dn^e co^me^do spiritu^ meu^. Incontynente she
yielded up her spyryte and deyed. And after her death she appeared unto a good
relygyous ye which axed her of her estate / and she answered Incontinent that
my soul departed from my body it flewe in to heaven. Also the said abbess
appeared unto another sister being in orayson and she axed her of her estate.
She said in singing these verse of dauyd. Sicut audiuimus sic vidimus in
ciuitate dn^i virtutu^. and she said nothing more but departed before the eyes
of her said sister.

F. Another example how Ihesu christ showed unto a yongman his hands and his
side perced. Cxv.
THe discyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says yt a young man lecherous in
cursed entencyon entered in to a wodde in the which were of harlottes / and the
devil met him and demanded him whether he yode / and he told him his
entencyon / unto whom the devil said go before me and I shall pay the well in
time And as he entered more forward he met Ihesu christ in habyte of a monk
which demanded him in like wise. Wheder g^ ye my sone. He answerde and said
unto him ye be not my fader. Unto whom ye monk said. Certes thou art my
sone. He answered with indignacyon that he was not his sone. And the monk
opened his habyte and showed unto him his hands and his side perced / and in
bledynge as men paynt the crucyfyxe. Byleuest thou now that I am thy fader /
the which cried and said / you art my lord and my god. Than Ihesu crist said
unto him / goo thy ways and confess the. For he yt thou have met before me is
ye devil the which abides the to the end yt he break thy neck. And as he
yode forth of the wodde with purpose to confess hy^ the devil knew him not.
And he axed ye devil whom he tarried after. The devil answered / certes it is
not thou. He that I tarry fore was all ours. And puyssaunce has be given unto
me upon him / that I might sle him. Thou art another / and the yongman
understood the grace and mercy that god had done unto him entered in the
cloister and confessed him / and fined his life in goodness. etc.

G. Another example yt Ihesu christ revoked a postate for to show hy^ his
wounds. Cxv.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuary yt a young man delycious entered in to
relygyon / and for the hard life the bread seemed unto him black and hard and
the wine sour. And he demanded of his prelate license to return in to ye
world / unto whom the pralate said. Brother ye ne may return for ye be
profeste in this relygyon / but have ye affiau^ce in god and require ye him
that ye may bear ye burden with the other / and he did so / but after he was
tempted of the devil on new / he changed his habyte and yode in to the world
And as he yode his way Ihesus appyered unto hy^ in semblaunce of a yongman and
followed him by that way he hasted him in such wise as dyspeyred / and knew
not wheder he should go. And Ihesus the which followed him cried / tarry me /
and he ran more strongly. And Ihesus called him by his name and said unto him
Brother tarry me and I shall go with the / The yongman wrathed him the which was
called brother and monk and had shame and meruaylled that he called hy^ by his
propre name. Than he tarried / and Ihesus asked him wheder he yode. He answered
yt he had left his relygyon and that he should return in to the world. Than
he lift up his vestyment and his arms. And he saw the blood the which
issued out of his side perced and said unto him. Return in to thy monasterye
/ and when you shalt find the bread to hard and the other things grievous
touch them with my side perced and all shall be soft to the and good to
bear. Than he returned and lived afterward holyly. Vn^ grego. Si passio
christi ad memoriam reducitur: nichil est quod non equo animo tolleretur.

H. Another example of a thief murde. rer yt repented hy^ made confession and
had penance a pat nr^ to say before ye cross. cxv
THe disciple recyteth in his sermons that it is written of an hermyte ye which
led a sharp life by long time And one time a thief came unto him the which
had dyspoyled the men by long time and had gotten many theftes / he repented him
/ made confession / but he ne would have but short penance. And the hermyte
charged him that all times that he found any cross in the way yt he should
say a pater noster knelyng on his knees The thief said that he would do that
penance with good will. And after that he had taken his penance / and that he
was departed a little from the hermyte he saw his enemies yt sought him of
whom he had slain the parent. Incontinent that he saw them he took him to
fle. And as he fled he saw a cross lift up in the way. And he bowed the
knees and said his pater noster. And how be it that he had right little to
fle and escape the death. Nevertheless he had lever to deye than to leave to do
his penance yt was enjoined to him. So he gave his life unto god / and unto
him reco^maunded his soul / and prayed yt he might have the said penance
exceptable for all his sins. And as he was slain of his enemies in yt place.
Than ye hermyte saw yt the au^gelles took ye soul of the said thief and with
great Joy they bare it in to heaven. etc.

Signum crucis.
A. Examples of the cross / and first how it was showed to Constantyn / and
raised a deed man and heled a woman. Cxvi.
IT is written in ye hysto. eccle / and in ye inuencyon of ye cross yt maxence
assembled an host of the empire of Rome And the emperor Constantyn with his
army came nere unto the bridge of the water of Anubie for to fight with ye
said maxence. And as he fered / he lift up his eyes toward heaven and saw the
sign of the cross resplendysshe in semblaunce of fire / and he saw after the
angel that said to him. Constantyn thou shall vaynquysshe by this sign. And
the night following our lord appeared unto him with the sign yt he had seen
in the sky and commanded him that he should do make the figure of the said
sign and that he should have aid against his enemies. Then constantyn was
joyous and assured to have vyctorye / made him to be marked in the forhede with
the sign of the cross. And made to change all his baners of war in to ye
sign of the cross. And required god that he might have vyctorye without
effusion of blood. And so was it done. For maxence commanded them of his
ships to go saw the posts of the said bridge. He forgate the thing that he
had made to make and ran hastily against constantyn with few folk / but he
commanded yt the other should follow him. Then he mounted on the said bridge /
fell in to ye water and was drowned before his host wtoute any might socoure
him. And the ylle yt he would have done unto constantyn came on him self. Then
ye said constantyn was received lord of all / and had thus the vyctorye. After
constantyn sent his mother Helene in to Iherusalem for to seek the cross of our
lord. When she was gone theder she made to come all the wise jews of ye
regyon / for to inquire of the place of caluarye and of the cross of Ihesu
christ. And because yt they would tell nothing / she commanded yt they should
be burnt. For to a bridge they gave a man named judas yt in the end showed
the place of caluarye / and made to dygge in the earth / in ye which was
found the crosses / ye which were borne in to the place of the cite. And
because yt he could not chose the cr^sse o^ ihesus from them of the thieves /
Judas put the first and the second upon a deed body and it remeued not. And
incontynente yt he had touched the cross of Ihesus he rose him up all on live.
Another example / Men read in the historye ecclesiastice that a woman the
which was lady of the cite of Iherusalem was syke and as half deed And the
bishop of Iherusalem took the first and the second cross and laid them
upon the syke body and they prouffyted nothing. And incontynente that the
cross of christ touched her she was hole. By these examples here a man may
^now that ye cross of Ihesus is much dygne yt w^iche reyseth in such wise
the deed and heleth the syke. And we should praise it / love it / and honor it.
For by the cross ye deuylles ben vaynquysshed / and by the ^^ecyous blood of
Ihesus the which was shed on ye cross we have been redeemed. And therefore we
should enjoy us to se the cross. vn^ canitur i^ vna. an^. Nos au^t gloriari
oportet i^ cruce dn^i nr^i thu^ christi. etc. Also the cross makes ye
deuylles to fere / chaseth them away / it takes away their force and
sets them at naught. And when any person is tempted of the devil or that
he has fere or dread / or that he find himself in any danger. etc. He
should make the token of the cross and call deuoutely the aid of Ihesus and
of ye vyrgyn marye and he shall have incontynente socours / in likewise as men
shall fyn^e here after by examples Also men should make ye token of ye cross
when they lie down and rise or whan^y men would ete or drink / or do any
operacyon. For the token of the cross is prouffytable ouerall again all
inconuenyences the which may come unto ye body or unto the soul. etc.

B. Another example how saint Iustine resysted and had vyctorye again the
devil by the token of the cross. Cxvi
IT is written in the legende of saint Iustyne that ye devil tempted her by
many times to love vnlefully a man named Cypryen. By two times he tempted her
inuysybly of love unlawful. And in contynent yt she perceived the said
temptacyon she commanded her unto god devoutly and made the token of the
cross / And the d^^yll was so aferde that he fled Also the devil tempted her
another time vysybly in semblaunce of a vyrgyn / And when she had made the
token of ye cross and blewe against him he departed and had no more
puyssaunce. Also the devil transformed him in a yongmans lykenes and entered in
to her chamber / lepte upon her dyshonestly as she lay in bed / and would
have had to do with her. And when she saw that she considered yt they were
ylle spyrytes / she marked her with the cross and the devil departed. and.

C. Another example of a man of war penytent yt resysted again the
temptacions of devil by making ye cross. Cxvi
MEn find by writing yt after yt a man of war had done many ylles and
sins / he repented him confessed / and had in penance to be one night in
the church without drink / and should say. My redemptour Ihesus have mercy on
me / and in that night the deuylles tempted him in guyse of merchants / but
he overcame them with his prayer and in making ye cross. Afterward two
deuylles came unto him in semblaunce of the woman and her child / and tempted
him strongly / but he had the victory by the token of ye cross and in saying
the words beforsayd. Thyrdly the deuylles tempted him in guyse of a bishop
the which had confessed hy^. etc And he had vyctorye as it is said before by
the tokyn of the cross and in saying. My redemptour Ihesus have mercy on me. /
Lastly the deuylles in guyse of beestes bet him and he was pacyent without
remeuynge And after he was a good man and a holy.

D. Another example how the token of the cross served unto a Jew again the
deuylles yt held their chapter. Cxvi.
IT is written in ye dyalogue of saint Gregorye yt as a Jew yode by the
country in defaute of hospytall yode for to lie in the temple of ye ydoles /
and made ye token of the cross. And by night the deuylles came to hold their
chapter in the said temple. And there devised of the ylles yt they had done.
And as the said jew was in a corner and herd them in trembling of dread the
prince of deuylles commanded unto the other yt they should go to se him that
had presumed to lie there. They yode and afterward said unto him Ve ve vas
vacuu^ sed signatu^. maledictu^ It is a vessel yt is a man void of virtues
and of goods spyrytuel / but he has the token of the cross. Than all the
deuylles departed without doing any ill unto ye said jew / because he made
the sign of the cross. etc.

E. Another example how a man showed at his death that he had received ye
cross and the devil fled. Cxvi.
THe disciple recyteth in his promptuary yt a knight a great sinner would have
remyssyon of his sins / received the cross. And the devil appeared unto him
in his sykenes and said unto him thou art mine. Unto whom the knight said / yt
am I not / for I have confessed me and have received the cross / the which he
uncovered and showed him saying / here is the token that I have received unto
the defense of the faith. When ye devil saw that he vanysshed away.

Aqua benedicta.
A. Examples of holy water / and first example yt the deuylles ye were in the
house of a syke man were chased away by holy water. Cxvii.
THe disciple recyteth in his sermons and says yt as a man lay mad of new
a conuers was in a monastery in the article of death he saw all the house
replenysshed with deuylles as persons with long nebbes. And when the said syke
body had sygnyfyed it unto his gardyen he understood that they were foul
spyrytes he made to bring of holy water in a vessel and bespryncled all the
place. And as he did that the syke man took him to cry that he should cast
strongly / and that the deuylles fled so hastily yt they strove who should
first goo forth and that for haste one fell over another. Than the said
gardyen more strongly cast the holy water. So ye sykeman was delivered of the
deuylles / the which wend to deceive him for to dampne him. Unto this purpose
a man should understand yt the holy water is much dygne and prouffytable. For
it puts away sins venyelles / and chaseth away the deuylles and
fantasyes dyabolyques / and therefore many has of custom to have of holy
water by their beds / and also to cast holywater at their lyenge down / and
arysynge / and when they ben syke to the end that they ben puryfyed / made clean
and kept from temptacyons and fantasyes dyabolyques as it is said. Vnde dauyd
in psalmo. Asperges me dn^e ysopo and mu^dabor lauabis me and super niue^
dealbabor. That is to say. O thou lord thou shalt besprynkyl me with the
holywater styk^ and I shall be made clean / thou shall wasshe me / and I shall
be more white than ye snow / yet again says dauyd. Thou have in likewise
troubled the heedes of the dragons tho ben of the deaylles in the waters.
Iteru^ psalm. Cotribuiasti capita drachonu^ in aquis. etc. Item it is good to
sprynkyll with holy water a woman when she trauaylleth of child Also when a man
receives the holy water devoutly it dysposeth the persons to devotion and to
do well. For to be short it is a great thing as to receive the holy water. And
those that refuse it or fle it / they ne ben good catholyques / for they done
in like wise as did ye deuylles yt fled from the house of the syke man for
the holy water. etc.

B. Another example how the devil ne might enter in to the mouth of a
dronkenman for a drop of holy water that therein fell. Cxviii.
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye and says yt a drunk n man met in
his way a demonyacle. And the said dronkenman said unto ye devil enter in to
me and leave this man. And the said devil answered. I may not / wherefore said the
dronkenman. For thou haste ben this day in ye church and one drop of
holywater is fallen in thy mouth. etc.

C. Another example that as a knight bespryncled him with holy water the devil
cried touch me not. Cxviii.
ARnoldus recounteth in his book and says yt as a knight strong in arms
would approach unto a place where a maiden demonyacle lay the devil began to
cry. Here is my friend come. And as he was entered said. Go ye back let my
friend approach. Thou devil thou art a fool / wherefore tormentest thou this
maid innocent / come with me unto the turneymentes. And the devil answered and
said. I shall go with the with good will / if thou suffer me yt I enter in to
thy body or that I be in the sadell or brydell / or in any party of thy body.
And the knight had compassyon of the noble maid / and said if thou will go
forth of this maid I shall grant the one party of my mau^tell by such
condycyon that thou hurt me not / and that you shalt depart incontynente that
I shall tell the. And he promised hy^. Than he yode forth of the maid / and
yode in to the oylet hole of the mauntell. From that hour so much of glory
came unto the knight that those yt he would he them surmounted and wasted and
those yt he would he took. And one day as ye knight prayed longely ye devil
said unto him / thou murmurest to much. And as he spry^cled him with holy
water he said unto him / take heed yt thou touch me not. And one time when the
knight yode unto a place where a man preched of the holy cross ye devil said
what do thou here. The knighte answered I will leave the and serve god And ye
devil said what thing has dyspleased the in me I never hurt the / but I
have enryched the and thou art become much glorious. And the knight said
depart thou and come thou no more again to me I command the in the name of
ihesus. Than ye devil left him and the knight marked him with the cross /
and served Ihesu christ two years beyond the sea / and when he was comen
again he made to edefye an hospytall / in the which he admynystred unto syke
bodies their necessytees and well defyned his days. etc.

D. Another example that when a sinner obstynate had drunk of holy water / he
repented him and confessed and changed him from ill unto good. Cxviii
THe dysciple recites in his promptuarye that a knight did many ylles and in
the end fell seek and his priest warned him to confess him / and to receive the
sacraments as a good catholyque / and he ne might enclyne him neither by
prayers ne by menaces. And reputed his words vain / and that he ne forced ne
cared. And as he demanded of water for to drink the priest yode to bliss the
water without that yt the seek body knew any thing of it and gave it him to
drink. When he had drunk incontynente by the aid of the holy ghost he cried
unto ye priest in requyryng him that he were confessed. And he confessed him
purely he was admynystred and ended his days well.

Maria.
A. Examples of the vyrgyn Marye / and first example how the vyrgyn Marye
delivered an abbot and many other from peril of death for to say this
responce. Felix namque. Cxv^ii
VIncent says in the.xviii. book of the myrroure hystoryall in the lxxxix.
chapitre. That an abbot with many other were in the myddest of the sea of
Brytayne in so great tempest of time oppressed that they all dyspeyred of life
/ so ye some called saint Nycholas unto their aid / and the other saint
Andrewe. And every of them called the saint yt most famylyerly he called unto
his necessyte. And when the abbot saw that none of them called the blyssed
vyrgyn marye mother of mercy yt has puyssaunce above ye heaven and the earth he
said. Brederne what do ye to call any saints and leave ye mother of god yt has
puyssaunce above all tho saints ye ye call. I say not that ye do ill / but
call we all with one voice the mother of mercy. Than all togyders called and
reclamed ye blyssed vyrgyn Marye. And the said abbot the which had not ete in
two days and in two nyghtes but one apple / and the which was at low that he
ne might syghe / he sange with his monks this responce. Helix na^que. And ye
verse Ora pro populo And before yt they had ended their song and devotion /
there arrived a great light in the heyghte of the maste as a tapre the which
chased away all the derkenesses of the night and enlumyned the presence / and
all the tempest so ceased at the commandment of the queen of heaven and had
great transquylyte. And right anon after the day clear and fair shone / and
the ship applied it self unto the land where as they entented. And so had
they aid of the vyrgyn Marye. By this example and by many other a man should
know that all persons the which serve the vyrgyn marye and her ^equyre by
devotion and with good heart / they have aid and socours in all necessytees
that they find themself in / be it in earth or in the sea / be it at the death
or in the life. And by that yt the abbot said unto his compaygnons yt they
should call the aid of ye vyrgyn Marye more sooner than all the saints of
paradyse / he spoke it of good right. For she is more noble dygne / and holy of
the creatures that god create ever. Vnde scryptura dicit. Sicut sol luci dior
est quam luna: et luna quam syderibus: sic maria dignior e^ creaturis oi^bus.
She is more digne than the aungelles / for she is mother of the king of
aungelles. Vn^. a^. Ipsu^ rege^ angelorum sola virgo lactabat. And she led a
life au^gelyke and more then au^gelyke. Vnde hieronimus. In carne preter carne^
viuere no^ terrena vita e^: sed angelica Also she lived without any sin in
her body corruptyble. Vn^ ca^t. iiii. Tota pulcra es amica mea and macule non
est in te / She is more dynge than the prophets / for they prophetysed of her.
Vnde scriptura. Prophet predicaueru^t christu^ nasciturum de virgin maria.
Vnde ysaye. vii. Ecce virgo co^cipiet and pariet filiu^. She is more digne than
the appostles / for she is mother of the king of the appostles / ^ she is their
maystres the which taught them. Quomodo co^cepit de spu^ scto^ and peperit
sine dolor. Also she was more ferme in the faith at the passion than the
appostles. Vn^ scriptura. Beata q^ credidit qm^ perficientur ea q^ dicca era^t
ei a dn^o. She is more dygne than the martyrs. For she suffered in the soul at
the passion more of dolor than all the martyrs. Vnde luce. ^ Et tua^ ipsius
ai^am pertra^sibit gladius. Also she was more dygne than ye confessors for she
was sanctified in ye womb of her mother / and put in to the temple to serve god
in the age of three year yt the confessors has not done. Also she is more
dygne shan the women. vnde luce. i. ca. Bn^dicta tu i^ mulieribus. Et cant. ii.
Sicut liliu^ i^ter spinassic amica mea inter filias.

B Another example how salve regina vayleth much to deye well. Cxviii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye of the vyrgyn marye that as a
chanoyne regulyer labored unto ye death he dredde that the which is written
ecclesiastices none. Nescit homo vtru^ amore vel odio dignus sit. Albeit he
dyspeyred him not. And the vyrgin marye appeared unto him in form vysyble / and
in sweet words said unto hy^. Dread thou not thou shalt not be dampened. But
in likewise as thou have honored me oftymes with this antem. Salve regina. In
likewise shall thou be crowned by me in the realm of my sone. When he had
recompted this thing ioyously unto his bredern he deyed. etc.

C. Another example how ye vyrgy^ marye appesed the thondres and tempests of
ye time for to say salve regina. Cxviii.
IT is written in the book cesarii that a priest had of custom to say at al his
hours this ante^. Salve regina. And one time as he walked through ye feldes
and that he yode to vysyte a recluse ye which was by ye church great thondres
and horrible tempests sourded up yt he lost his force to walk. And in the end
by great labor he entered in to the church and fell prostrate before the
altar and required the vyrgyn Marye to appese ye said tempest And there
appeared unto him a woman with vysage of a vyrgyn replenysshed with great beauty
yt said unto him. For asmoche as thou say and syngest oftymes this antem.
Salve regina matter mi^e. the tempeste shall hurt nor fere ye no more. when she
had spoken these words she vanysshed away / and he understood yt it was the
vyrgyn marye. Another example of salve regina written in the promptuary of the
dyscyple. It happened one time yt in two towns the freres of the order of
prechers were by night so tormented with fantasyes and yllusyons dyabolyques yt
it neded yt one of them must watch and keep by night those that slepte and
rested. And they did put all their esperaunces in the aid of ye vyrgyn marye
/ and made solemnel professyon after complyn in singing Salve regyna / and
incontinent all was appesed / by these examples here it behooves to understand
that the said antem pleases unto our lady. Also marie is queen of heaven of the
aungelles / and saints of paradyse of whom we sing regina celi letare. Also
marye is the queen of all queen's. Also marye is queen of mercy in like wise as
notyfyeth this ante^ Salve regina. Also this queen is dygne / noble / holy /
blyssed / fair pure / clean / clear / gyuyng light / shynyng that she
surmounteth al creatures in bou^te / / dignyte / and clarte / and therefore is
she lift up and set by god her sone. Vn^. psalm. Astitit regina a dextris tuis
i^ vestitu deaurato circu^data varietate / It is good to love serve and honor
this vyrgyn the which is so great a lady / for that yt she requires is done
/ and that yt she refuses is not done Love we than the vyrgyn Marye / serve we
and honor we her / in keeping her feestes and well shall come unto us.

D. Another example how the vyrgin Marye restored the hand of Johan Damascene
yt made salve scta^ pare^s. Cxvii
THe dyscyple recites in his promptuarye yt at rome there was a valyau^t
doctor named Johan damascene The which had of enmyes yt accused hy^ falsely
that he had written with his proprehande of lettres again the empire and
romans. So it happened yt he was led before the emperor / ye which made his
hand to be cut of / which thing he bare patiently. And afterward he
considered yt our lady had none introyte propre as some other saints / and
that it was not an honest thing yt she yt was queen of heaven had not also well
a propre introite as the other. Then he made salve scta^ parens. and then when
he had made it he doubted lest he should forgete it / and incontinent called
his clerk for to give him his ynkorne / and remembered not yt he had his hand
cut so he reched forth the stompt for to take ye pe^ne / and incontinent he
was heled through the vyrgyn marye / and had his hand agay^ also fair and
fresshe as ever it had been. etc.

A. Another example of ye salutacyo^ angelyke how a religious made the chaplet
of the vyrgyn marye. Cxix
MEn find by writing that a relygyous demanded of his abbot how he might do
thing that might please unto ye vyrgyn marye. And he gave him to answer. Make
unto her every da^^ a chaplet of roses He demanded how / he answered. Say
every day fyfty aues a pater noster at every tenth. Than he did it. And a
great time after he was sent for a n^cessite unto another abbaye / and passed
through a wodde and was taken with thieves in saying his aue marye. And as the
capytayne of the said thieves beheld him he saw a white dove the which took
of roses out of his mouth. And demanded him what it was that he said / and
from whens proceeded the said roses. The said relygyous showed how ye said abbot
had instruct him to serve the vyrgyn Marye as it is said. And the said thieves
converted them / restored the others goods and were relygyous in the abbaye of
the said monk and defyned well their days. etc. Another example semblable. It
is written in the promptuarye of the dyscyple yt a relygyous had of custom to
make the chaplet unto the vyrgyn marye in saying a hondreth times aue maria.
etc. And as he yode by the country when he came unto a wodde a thief the
which would slay him saw that a fair child took the roses in his mouth and
made of them a chaplet. The said thief was ameruaylled to se that demanded of
ye said relygyous ye cause and what it was that he said. He said that he salued
the vyrgyn marye in saying aue maria. For to be short the thief corrected hy^
of his ^^rsed life. etc. By these examples here a man should understand yt aue
maria the which is the salutacyon angelyke p^easeth much unto the vyrgyn
marye / and for as much as it is often said and comune it behooves to declare
it in right ample wise.

B. First the angel said unto the vyrgyn marye. Aue. That is for to say god
the salueth. He gives us example yt we should salve the persons when we
arryue upon them in sayng. God ye salve. god save you / or bliss you. Maria.
God ye salve marie. This name marye is interpreted maris stella / sterre of the sea. Of this sterre spoke the prophet balaa^ that ^^aid Orietur stella ex
jacob. And also a sterre appeared to the kings on crystenmas day toward
oryent that conduyted them to Ihesus / and to the vyrgyn marye. And by this
the angel salued the vyrgyn marie in saying unto her aue maria. God salueth
the sterre of the sea / fair / clear / and shynyng^ / For also as the maryners
have a sterre in the fyrmament much clear and fair and verytable that
conduyteth them by night and redresseth them when they are wrong and ledeth
them unto good port. Semblably marye ye which is interpreted sterre of y see
/ is she that conduyteth all the errau^tes and strayers / and ledeth them unto
the port of salute. And for this says saint bernarde. Si i^^urgu^t ve^ti
te^ptationu^ etc respice stella^ voca maria^. In periculis: i^ angustiis: i^
rebus diebus: maria^ i^uoca: no^ recedat ab ore: non recedat a cord: vt
i^petres eius auxiliu^: ipsa^ seque^s no^ deuias: ipsa^ roga^s no^ desperas:
ipsa^ cogitans no^ erras: ipsa tene^te no^ corruis: ipsa protege^te ^o^ metuis:
ipsa duce no^ fatigaris: ipsa propitia peruen^es ad terra^viue^tiu^. After the
words of the said saint bernarde / in all ^ekenesses necessytees / and
aduersytees / and in all temptacyons and dangers what so ever they be that a
man fyndeth him in / him behooves to have his recours of heart and of mouth
unto this ster^e yt is marye / and a man shall have all that yt he requires
Example of a man yt as he fell in to the sea he called the vyrgyn marye the
which brought him safe unto land. And because that marye socoureth in such
wise the creatures in all necessytees call ye marye serve ye marye / honor ye
marye / keep ye the feestes of marye and well shall hap you. Gratia plena. The
angel said unto the vyrgyn marye. God the salve full of grace. Marye was
replenysshed with grace for she was fulfilled with the holy ghost / from the
womb of her mother as says the gospel. Spiritussa^to replebitur adhuc ex
vtero matris sue / and when she conceived. Vn^ luce. i. Spiritussctu^s
superueniet i^ te and virtus altissimi obu^brabit tibi. Also she was
replenysshed with the sone of god wha^ she bare him in her womb. Also she was
replenysshed with all humylyte as it apperethe by the answer yt she made unto ye
angel. Ecce ancilla dn^i: fiat michi secu^dum verbu tuu^. Also she was
replenysshed with charity / with beauty / bounte / holiness and beatytude / and
without co^myttyng any sin Vnde cant. iiii. Tota pulcra es maria and macula non
est i^ te. And for asmoche as she is replenissh^^ with so many of goodnesses /
love we marye / serve we marye / keep we the feestes of marye / and well shall
come unto us. Dn^s tecu^. The angel said unto the vyrgyn marye. God is with
ye. god is evermore with the vyrgyn marye. He was with her in the concepcyon.
He was in her in her womb.ix. months. He was in her in chyldynge and
nourysshyng / and bare him in to the temple / in to egypt and was obeyssaunt
unto Joseph and unto her as says the euangelyst. Erat subditis illis. Again
ye cursed children yt will have domynyon above faders and moders. etc. / Als^
the vyrgyn marye was with god in the time of his passion and assencion / and
sytteth by hy^. Vn^ psalm Astitit regi^a a dextris tuis in vestitu deaurato
circu^data varietate / They ben of one amyte / of one pryue cou^sayll and sytte
together of one Judgment and in paradyse. And yt that the vyrgyn wylleth and
requires for her servants it is done and accomplisshed. And therefore love we
marye / serve we marye / call we marye / keep we the feestes of marye and well
shall hap us. Bn^dicta tu i^ mu^ieribus. The angel said unto the vyrgyn
Marye / you art blyssed among all women and above all women. Thou art more
blyssed than the vyrgyns / than the women married / and than the wedowes. Vn^
ca^t. ii. Sicut li^iu^ inter spinas sic amica meai^ter filias. First thou art
more blyssed and fair than ye vyrgyns. For thou art the flower of vyrgynyte
and of maydenhede / of all purete / beauty and holiness / and the examplayre of
al chastyte and womanhede. And so thou vowed vyrgynyte and kept it in all
estates / wherefore thou art flower of vyrgynyte / unto this vyrgynyte is
appropryed these words. Elores mei fructus honoris and honestatis. yt is to
say. My flowers ben fruytes of honor and of honest as the flower delys the
rose / the violet / and the gelofre. The said flowers have in them four
things that is in the vyrgyn marye. Primo they have beauty to behold / odor
to smell / they decore them yt bear them / and auaylleth unto the medecynynge.
etc. Semblably the virgyn marye is the most fairest rose of all ye women as
said is. Sicut liliu^. Also her sone was the most fairest of all ye men / Vnde
psalm. Speciosus forma prefiliis hoi^m She was fair wtoute foulenes / she did
never mortal sin / nor venyell. Vn^. ca^t ii.i. Tota pulcra es amica mea and
macula no^ e^ in te. Et alibie. Pulcra facie: sed pulchrior fide. Secu^do she
had ye odor of good reno^mee. Vn^. Beata^ inedicent oe^s generationes: and
illud. Nardus mea dedit odore^ suauitatis. etc. Tertio she decoreth them that
serve her / and the place where is her remembrance. Quarto she is of valor
apprecyable for to help in all necessytees. etc. The vyrgyns the which keep
vyrgynyte ben of the household of the vyrgyn marye / and shall have retrybucyon
an hondreth double. And if they corrupt virgynyte they lose the said treasour /
and shall not be of the nombre of vyrgyns. Also the vy^gyn marye is more fair
than the wives. For she was married unto Joseph and conceived not of him / but
of ye holy ghost luce. i. Spiritus sctu^s superueniet i^ te and virtus
altissimi obu^brabit tibi. Also she bare the sone of god and gave hy^ souke /
and abode vyrgyn after chyldynge / in chyldynge / and before childynge. Virgo
ante pertu^: virgo i^ pertu^ et virgo post pertu^: virgo i^uiolata perma^^isti
She was the very mother of Ihe^us for three things. Prima because that ye body
of our lord took humanyte in ye womb of the vyrgyn marye most pure and clean
Secunda he had place and rest in her precious womb. Tertia he had nourysshyng
of her body / and by yt she is ye mother of the sone of god. Also she is mother
of the king of aungelles and saints of paradyse. She is mother of the king of
kings the which governs ye heaven and the earth. Rege^ qi celu^ terra^que
regit. She is mother of the lord of lords / of the ^uge of Iuges and master
of all. She is mother of grace and of mercy. Vn^. hymnus Maria matur gratie
matur mi^e. etc. She is mother of grace / for she increases them in goodness yt
are in ye estate of grace / and also unto sinners / for she has pite and
compassyon and prays for them. She ^ydeth again the enmye Tu nos ab host
protege. And also she he^peth at the death. Et hora mortis suscipe. Also she is
mother and nouryssher of orphelyns / beggars and wedowes / and her sone
nouryssheth all the world / and therefore a man may say that she is blyssed
among the women married / and above all those ye which has well kept
marriage. Bn^dictatu i^ mulieribus. Love we than marye / serve marye / honor we
her / keep we her feltes and all good shall come unto us. Also ye vyrgyn marye
is more blyssed than ye wedowes. She was wedowe.xiiii. year / and she governed
her chastely and purely so that never man ne sinned in her / neither by sight
nor otherwise / yet was she ye most fair woman of ye world as said is She
was so full of grace and of bounte yt the grace of her enlumyned those yt
beheld her so that they had no will to sin nor do ylle And therefore men may
say. Bn^dictatu i^ mulieribus.i. intur oes mulieres. Et b^nedictus fructus
ve^tris tui. The fruit of the womb of the vyrgyn marye is right blyssed / for
all goodness of it is proceeded. By the sone that she bare peace was made by ye
inobedyence of Adam and of eve. Also by the fruit the which is issued out of
the womb of the vyrgyn marye paradyse has be opened to all good and loyal
crystye^s And the yates of hell has be broken and the holy souls taken out
and put in to paradyse. Also by the great miracles and by the great things
that the sone of the vyrgin said and did saint marcelle said unto our lord.
illud luce. xi. Beatus ve^ter qui te portauit: et vbera q^ suxisti. The womb
and pappes of the vyrgyn marye were right blissed / when they had borne and
given souke so precious fruit as the sone of god / Ihesus is enterpreted
savior and redemptour of all the world / in like wise as it is said / ye
which bring v^ unto his bliss Amen.

A. Another example of him yt knew no good but aue maria. Cxx.
MEn find by writing that a man of arms renou^ced unto all ill / and made
him relygyous of the order of chartreux the which in his life ne might learn
no good thing but these two words aue maria / but he said them right devoutly
of heart and of mouth together / and of time he repeted them / and so used his
life. After his departing there ^prange from his grave a fair flourdelys
white. And on ye leaves of ye flower was written in lettres of gold aue maria.
The people meruayled of this thing. For to be short it was found yt the said
flouredelys proceeded from his mouth / and that it was for that that he had
honored the vyrgyn marye with those words aue maria.

B. Another example of him yt which kneled at the name of our lady. Cxx.
IT is written yt there was a relygyous yt loved so much the vyrgyn marye yt
when h^ herd her name spoken of he kneled down / and wrote it wi^h gold azure
or yelowe. At the last he was seek / and another relygyous yt lay nere unto
his bed herd on a night how the vyrgyn marye with great light and company of
aungelles came to fetch him and said unto hy^ for as much as thou have written
my name / and had it in so great reverence I shall make thyn to be written in
the book of life and so he deyed. etc.

C. Another example of the mother the whi^he taught unto her child to salve ye
vyrgyn marye. Cxx.
MEn find by writing yt a good mother taught well her child / and learned him
to salve the vyrgyn marye and to go every day on his knees to say aue maria
before her image that was in her chamber. The said child was so accustomed and
loved so much the vyrgyn marye that when he was beten he yode to complain him
to the said image / and also he bare often a party of his porcyon that he ete
and put it before ye child of ye vyrgyn marye. And it fortuned one day that
he fell in the water before his said mother / and was drowned / she ran to
fetch people to draw him out all dyscomforted. and when she came again /
she found him where he yode out of the water and played him with two apples.
He was demanded how he came out / he answered that ye vyrgyn marye yt he
saluted / had drawn him out and had given him ye two apples.

D. Another example how the vyrgyn marye aided a woman to child in ye see of
the mount of saint myghell. Cxx.
VIncent says in the myrrour hystoryall in the first party of the eight
book yt a woman with child the time comen for to child put herself on the
way to the mount of saint myghell in one of the solempnytees with diverse
persons. And when they were on ye sands the signs appeared that ye see came.
The people had fere and took them for to cry inferinge the death / and began
for to run toward the mount of saint myghell. The woman with child might
not flee / but abode in great fere and trauayll / and wist not what to do save
for to call the aid of the vyrgyn marye and saint myghell. And great multitude
of people lamented her on the ryuage of the see cryenge toward heaven for the
help of the vyrgyn marye. for to abredge the vyrgyn marye came to ye aid of
the said woman / covered he^ and was as in a sure place / and kept her from
the water in such manner yt never drop of water touched her / and also she
was delivered of a sone in the mids of the sea / without having fere / for
she was well kept. When yt the sea was withdrawn / the vyrgyn marye showed
her the way / And after the said woman came to the ryuage with her child /
and found the people to whom she recounted ye miracle. etc.

E. Another example of a ^ayn^er that the vyrgyn marye defended / and kept
from having ylle. Cxx
THe disciple recyteth in his promptuarye of the vyrgyn marye that there was a
paynter yt painted in a church the image of the devil ye most horryblest that
he might / and also painted the image of our lady the most fairest and with
the fairest colors yt he might find And ye devil him demanded why he made
yt / and he answerde because it was so as the payntynge showed. And then the
devil by envy made ye tymbre to fall yt he stood on because he should fall
down / and as he began to fall the image of our lady painted took him by the
hand so that he might not fall / and kept him from the malice of the d^uyll.
And the ^ynners wtdrewe them from ill doing in beholdy^g the said images / the
one horrible and ye other fair. and^.

F. Another example of the good and honor yt the vyrgyn marye did unto a
thief the which fasted the saterdayes in her honor and absteyned him from
ylle saying. Cxx.
IT is written in dyalogo cesarii As men say yt there was a thief in a forest
reno^med right ill for yt that he pylled slew and did many ylles with many
compaignons. And he found a monk precher in the way unto whom he said that
he should sle him if he yode not after him And in walking ye said monk
demanded him what he was / and what operacyo^ he did. He answerde I am a
thief so gretely reno^m^d ye which has so to name And the said monk said
unto him / thou wakest much dredest thou not the peril of thy soul. He
answered no / no more than a be. And the said monk asked him what had been
his life / he answered when I was a child I stryued with my felawes and after I
was a thief / and to be short I never did no good deed / but ever did ylle
and now am I the master of thieves / and the monk said unto him. Dredyst thou
the pains of hell the which ben made ready for ye for thy cursed deeds / he
answered. Of ye soul without doubt she is lost And the monk the which would
convert him said unto him. If I show unto the how thou shalt be saved will
you do it He said ye. And the monk counsayled hy^ that he should fast every
saterdaye in the honor of our lady / in doing none ylle yt day / and that
the vyrgyn marye should be the mean yt he should be saved. And ye said thief
thereto consented and vowed. He kept yt vow and let his fellows also to do
ylle And the people that his fellows took on that day he delivered them in ye
honor of the vyrgyn marye. Also on ye saturday he ne armed him ne bare staff
of defense. And on a saterdaye his enemies found him and his fellows dysarmed
for the saterdaye he was taken and never would defend him / albeit he had be
more strong Also he ne excused hy^. When he was led in to the cite and that he
was known he was Iuged to be hanged. How be it afterward the Iuges were moved
with pite as men believe by the vyrgyn marye and took their counsayll togyders /
and would yt he ne should deye. But he said that he would nothing so / and
that he loved better yt he should weep his sy^nes here than in hell And the
Iuges said to him will thou be byhedede. He answerde and said I care not what
ye pain be so that I deye. And they said unto him / wylt you have a priest He
answered ye ben al christian men. I confess unto you my sins I ne did never no
good deed. etc. but only yt I have fasted the saterdayes there needs no
priest Than he repented him right bytterly in confessing openly his sins.
And bare and endured the pain and dolor of the death wyllyngly for his sy^nes
ye which was unto him hard penance. To be short he was byheded without the
cite. And the night following the watch men watchynge in the cite saw in the
place where he was buried lights celestielles / and five fair matrones the
which unburied hy^ the which set his heed upon his body the which there took
again / and laid it honorably in a coffyn and bare it in to the cite unto
the church door / of the which matrones there were four the which bare the
said coffyn and had candelles in their hands / and the.v. was more fayrer
than ye other the which yode by with candelles / When the gardiens of the
church saw yt they dredde and wend it had been a fantasye unto whom one of
them said. Say unto your bishop that he burye honorably my servant in the
church in such place the which has be byheded without ye cite. And if he
were neclygent yt to do she menaceth him. More over she named the vyrgyn marye.
When the bishop herd the said thing and saw the head to be taken unto ye
body dredde and called ye clergy and buried him honorably / not as a thief but
as a martyr the which endured the death for his sins. After that the said
deed was known all the men of ye prouy^ce fasted the saterdaye in the honor of
ye vyrgyn marye.

G. Another example how a thief beheded ne might deye without confession for yt
that he had fasted the saterdayes in ye honor of ye glorious vyrgyn marye. Cxx.
IT is written in the promptuarye of the miracles of our lady that a thief the
which pylled a poor woman and he found that she fasted the saturday from her
enfance / and demanded her the cause / She answerde that those the which fast
the saterdayes in the honor of ye blyssed vyrgyn marye ne should deye wtoute
true penance. And ye said thief took this thing agreably and fasted them. In
the end he had the heed stryken of / the which cried confession confession /
those ye which present were meruaylled and got him a priest for to confess
him. After yt the heed had be put again unto ye body and that he had made true
confession he said. I had this gift of grace to confess me by the glorious
vyrgyn marye for ye which I fasted the saterdayes. The deuylles were about me
but they ne might nothing do unto me for the presence of the vyrgyn Marye and
ben fled for the holy confession. Wha^ he had spoken these words he deyed.
etc.

H. Another example how the vyrgyn marye aided unto a thief in his death
because he had fasted on ye saterdaye. cxx.
IT is written in the promptuary o^ the dyscyple yt there was a great thief yt
never had done good deed / but only that he had fast a saturday and made to
sing a mass to the end yt the vyrgyn marye should convert him before his
death And the said mass and fast were so much agreeable unto the vyrgyn m^rye
that she appeared unto the said thief unto whom she said. I have prayed my sone
Ihesu christ for the that thou sholdest convert the and also repent the of
thy sins. He has given unto the such grace that before thy death you shalt
speak five words that shall deliver thy sins. Afterward this thief was taken
and holden in bands / and on the third day was led to be hanged / and in
the way god gave unto him great contrycyon / and in that true contrycyo^ he
said ye.v. words following. Deus propitius esto michi peccatori. yt is to say.
God be merciful unto me sinner.

I. Another example how a thief hanged might not deye without receyuynge of his
ryghtes thrughe our lady. Cxx.
IT is written in the promptuary of the miracles of our lady / yt there was a
thef yt fasted only bread and water the vygylles of the feestes of our lady. /
And when he yode in theft he saluted her and prayed her yt he ne should deye in
mortal sin. And it befell that he was taken and hanged / but he ne might deye
by three days. He called those yt which passed by and prayed them that they
would bring a priest unto him / yt which came with the Judge and with the
people / he was vnhanged / unto whom he said yt the vyrgyn marye sustained him
on the gybet / and so was let go / and lived after holyly. etc.

K. Another example how a thief was bruised and might not deye without
confession / for he had fasted the vygyles of our lady. Cxx.
IT is written in the promptuary of the miracles of our lady yt three bredern
were dysheryted of a knight castyllan. And after that they watched the ways in
the next woddes and did many ylles. And that knight took two yt he made to
hang. The third dredde and confessed him unto a relygyous ye which warned
him to cease of doing ill. He answerde I ne may cease till that I have stryken
the knight with sword or arowe yt has slay^ my bredern. More over he said he
would fast bread and water the four euens of our lady / to the end he deyed not
without confession. The relygyous said yt it was well done to fast / but it
should not prouffyte if he ceased not his sy^ne. He yode forth and after was
taken of the knight yt broke al his members. And as he was full of wou^des he
said he should not deye till he were confessed and received his cre^tour. Than
when he had his ryghtes he deyed. etc.

A. Another example of a monk dyspenser the which was drunk unto whom ye
enemy appeared for to slay him / And the vyrgyn marye kept him. Cxxi.
IT is written in the promptuary in ye miracles of our lady yt in an abbaye
there was a dyspenser ye loved perfytely the vyrgyn marye. So it happened one
time that he was so drunk yt he reled in the cloystre and ne might find the
way to the church. Than the devil came unto him in lykenes of an horrible
bolle which would have stryken him with his horns / but a right fair
damoysell put her between them holdy^ge a rod in her hand / and rebuked him
and put him forth right strongly for that yt he would do ylle unto her
servant / and him commanded that he should go his way. Than he departed and
the vyrgyn. And the said monk put him self in the way again for to go unto
ye church. And the enmye appeared unto hy^ in semblaunce of a dog enraged yt
would lepe in his face. And the fair vyrgyn came yet again and put her
between them the which devil fled all confused / and ye monk entered in to
ye monastery: Than the enmye came in semblaunce of a lion enraged the which
would devour him / but ye blyssed vyrgyn forgate not her friend came before
that the enmye grieved hy^ and stroke him hard with her rod / and commanded
him to come no more again. And the enmye departed all confused / and the
vyrgyn took the monk by the hand and led him in to the dortour and laid
him in his bed / and put his pelowe under his heed / and made the token of
the cross upon him. And when ye monk awoke he was well. Our lady commanded
him yt he should confess him and acco^plysshe his penance And that afterward
he should keep him from falling again in to sin. And ye monk her demanded
what she was / she answerde I am the mother of Ihesu crist And when he herd
that he fell unto her fete and yielded unto her graces / and she mounted in to
heaven.

B. Another example how the vyrgyne Marye delivered from dampnacyon a clerk
lecherous. Cxxi.
THe dysciple recites in ye miracles of our lady yt there was a vicious clerk
yt had alonely this good deed that he said devoutly the matyns of our lady And
one day as he passed through a water for to accomplysshe his lecherye / he
began to say his matyns / and when he had said aue maria gratia plena / he
fell in to the water in sayng dn^s tecu^ / and was drowned / the deuylles took
his soul / but ye vyrgyn Marye came to defend it / and because ye deuylles
had dyuysyon with her for the said clerk they yode in Judgment before god. And
our lady said yt the clerk had ended his days in her service and spoke so yt
Ihesus commanded yt the soul should return unto the body. etc. Men find
another example semblable of a monk secretayne yt was drowned in serving the
vyrgin marie as he yode to accomplysshe his lecherye / and the vyrgyn marye
delivered ye soul in to ye body to amend hy^. etc.

C. Another example how the vyrgyn marye and saint peter delivered a monk from
dampnacyon. Cxxi.
IT is written in the promptuary of the miracles of our lady that there was a
relygyous in the monastery of saint peter the which lived ill / which took
one time a plaster medeynail for the health of body with some freres. And after
he deyed incontinent without confession and without the other sacraments. And
as the deuylles led his soul in to hell saint peter had pity of his monk /
and yode to pray our lord Ihesu christ for his soul And our lord said unto
him how may he be saved the which is deed in sin without doing Justice. When
saint Peter herd his words he yode unto the blyssed vyrgyn marye to the end yt
she should pray for yt soul. And when the vyrgyn marye was before her sone /
he said / Mother what ask ye. And wha^ she had required for the soul of the
said relygyous Ihesus answerde. Sith that it pleases you that he have pardon I
grant for your prayers that the soul return unto his body for to do
penance yt he may be saved. Than saint peter chased away the deuylles / and
commanded two au^gelles to bear the soul in to the body / the which lived
well after and recounted all the deed.

D. Another example of monks yt rose and brake their license. Cxxi
MEn find by writing yt there were of monks yt rose before day and yode in
sporting by a river side / speaking fables and vayn words. And forthwith they
herd a great tempest of ores / and the monks demanded what they were /
which answered we ben enemies of hell yt bear ye soul of ye provost to ye
king of france apostate / for he was in relygyon and left it. Than ye monks
had great fere and said Vyrgyn marye pray for us unto your sone Ihesus. And
the enemies answered ye have done as wise men to call the aid of the vyrgyn
marye. For that yt ye have broken your lycences and are out of your church at
an hour not dew we had put you unto death and borne you with this soul here
in to hell if ye had not called the aid of the vyrgyn marye. And incontynen^
ye monks returned unto their monastery And ye deuylles bare away ye said
soul. etc

E. Another example how he the which brake the arm of the image of ye vyrgyn
marye was strangled of the devil. cxxii
IT is written in the promptuary of the miracles of our lady yt a woman was
pursewed of thieves / and she hid her behind a pyller where the image was of
the blyssed vyrgyn marye. And one of the thieves wenynge to stone ye said woman
stroke with a stone the image of ye enfent of the vyrgin marie and brake it.
And incontinent great habou^daunce of blood yode ^ute. Of the which thing all
those that saw this thy^g were a meruayled in praysynge god. And he that
stroke that stroke was strangled of ye devil before al. Another example written
in the miracles of ye vyrgyn marye that a Jew cast an image of the vyrgyn
marye within ye draught And forthwith he was strangled. etc.

A. Another example that a woman ye which deyed in sin was borne again in to
her body for to do penance at the request of the vyrgyn marye for that that ye
said woman had served her. Cxxii
THe disciple recyteth in his promptuarye and says that a woman of honest
conuersacyon commit a sy^ne in you the / the which she ne durst never to
confess / yet was she axed many times / but she had of custom to go as every
day before the image of the vyrgyn marye and there weep her sin unto
herself. And in the end she deyed so / and before yt she was buried her spyryte
came again unto her body / by the merit of the blyssed vyrgyn Marye / and
after yt she had confessed her sin unto the priest she deyed and was saved.
etc.

B. Another example how a man should be dampened and sentencyed unto dampnacyon
he was delivered at the request of the vyrgyn marye and borne again in his
body. Cxxii.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye yt as a man should be damned / ye
vyrgyn marye unto whom he had done of service prayed for him unto god her sone
that he should yet give him life for to confeffe him. And he accorded unto her
/ but he sentencyed that he should be. xl years in purgatory for to make
satysfaccyon of his sloth / yt is for his penance.

C. Another example how the vyrgyne marye aided unto a friar yt which was
enflambed in hate again the procurour of the covent. Cxxii.
IT is written in the life of faders yt there was at Rome a friar of the order
of prechers the which right hardly treated the procuroure of the couente /
When the pryour had understand this thing he enjoined unto the said hater to
say every day seven pater nosters / ye which hater was more strongly
troubled and enfla^med again the said procuroure / And one day he was seek
and as deed / and he vnpuruayed of wit / began to curse unto his said brother
and unto his order. In the end he said as the freres were in orayson. Mother of
god / mother of god help me. It seemed unto him as he recompted that he was in
brennynge fire for his hate and his Ire / and said yt for the pains
intollerables he had dyspeyred and blasphemed / And at the prayers of the
freres and in calling the aid of the vyrgyn marye was restored unto the
first life / and in probacyon of truth he was all flayne.

D. Another example how the vyrgyn marye aided in Judgment a man yt was
merciful and voluptuous. Cxxii.
THe dysciple recites that it is written yt there was a man full of mercy he
was rauysshed and the Iugementes were showed unto him. In the which he saw
that many were presented unto the Judge. And one presented the almesdedes yt he
had done for the love of god. And another the oraysons yt he had done and said
for the love of god. Another presented the clothes wherewith he had clothed the
^oores. Another the works of mercy that he had done to the poores yt he had
lodged And the said man the which saw ye said things thought unto himself.
Thou haste done more of the works of mercy than those here. Now thou shall
have well before this Judge. So when it came unto his course the Judge ne
demaun^ed hy^ how many works of mercy have thou done / but he him demanded /
what delyces and what voluptuosytees have you wtdrawen from the for the love of
me. And he held his peace / for he had evermore lived in delyces. And the Judge
said unto him / have thou not seen yt I have said in the gospel math. vii.
Arcta e^ via q^ ducit ad vita^ / yt is to say strayte is the way yt ledeth
unto life / yt is unto the realm of heaven. and incontinent the said man turned
hy^ unto the vyrgy mary^ / and unto the saints yt he had served most special
/ and r^quyred them yt they would pray for him / and that in time to come he
should amend his life and purposed to weyke his body in f^stynges and
abstynences and to serve god in time coming. And it was so done. For at the
prayer of the vyrgyn marye and of saints he came to life again / and weyked
his body all the days of his life and lived in great abstynences / and was
more mercyful unto the poor than he ne had be and fined his days in good
consu^macyon. etc.

E. Another example of a relygyous yt which was in his death in Judgment
before god. and the vyrgyn marye and the say^tes of paradyse did aid him.
Cxxii.
THe disciple recyteth in his sermons that there was a young friar relygyous in
ye realm of england in ye coue^^ of bery right devout the which relygyous
was seek to the death / and in the presence of ye suppryour and of five of his
bredern he shytte his eyes with his hand and with full mouth began to laugh.
Unto whom the said suppryour said. Wherefore laugh ye / and he said. That our
king saint Edmonde martyris come / and here all ye house is replenysshed with
aungelles. And he laughed again more ententyfly and said / Our lady is come
salute we her. And after that that they had all said salve regina. etc. The
seek man said. O how agreably has ye vyrgyn marye taken this salutacyon and
in reioysyng made laughyng After that the said seek friar adressed his eyes
toward the door. And his color changed and said unto them. Now is Ihesu
christ comen to judge me. His members were as deed / and he trembled so yt he
swet out of mesure. And as he was constytute before the Judge in all dread he
said sometime ye / nay. And sometime he prayed ye vyrgyn marye yt she ne would
depart from him / sometime he reproved all his accusers / and among other he
began to say. / O Ihesus gy^e me this little. Unto who^ the suppryoure said.
What is yt dear brother / these little sins ben they compted among ye great.
And he said right grievously. Alas ye. And the said suppryour warned him yt he
should not dyspeyre for our lord is merciful. The said seek answered with a
Joyous face. It is a thing verytable yt he is full of mercy / and I yield
thanks unto ye blyssed vyrgyn marye ^ unto the saints the which assyst with
her and the which has made intercession faithfully for me unto Ihesu crist
And after a little of time he deyed and rested in peace. etc.

Innocenti^*
A. Examples of people Innocents and first example. Of a child innocente the
which kept the order of the myneurs relygyous and ne would touch no money /
and deyed well. Cxxiii
IT is written in ye book of honey bees that there was a child the which was
borne of honest parents / when he was five year old / and that he had seen
the order of the freres myneurs he required of his parents yt he might receive
ye habyte / and as they estymed yt his words were childysshe / they knew
after verytably yt the child took him to keep ye customs of the freres
myneurs / for he yode barefoted and gyrde with a hard cord and kept himself
in all manners to touch silver or gold. And in this thing there happened a
meruayllous case. For there came merchants to lodge in his faders house the
which meruayled them to se such a child in such habyte / and to know if he
touched no money one of them cast a penny in to the cup wherein they drank
secretly / and with a little wine gave the cup unto ye child to dry^ke /
which as he had drunk and saw the penny he began to cry horrybly / and cast
away the cup / and said with eyes eleuate. God all puyssau^t thou have known
yt I not known has violed mine order. Afterward he trembled and was pale as
tendynge to ye death. When his fader saw yt he ran for the priest yt
absoyled him / and shortly ye dolor passed / The said child on ye holy days
gadred children and taught them their paturnoster / and aue maria. And if he
saw in them yt they were proud or vycyous he repreued them / in bidding
them serve god. In the conuocacyons of this child the auncyentes ran with
the little child / and also delyted them right much in his prudence and in
his answers and documentes When he saw his fader yt swore or was drunk he had
compassyon and in weeping said unto him. Fader our priest says in the church
yt those ye which do those things ne shall possede paradyse. And in a
solempnyte he repreued his mother in weeping before her pewe felawes because she
was pompously arrayed / and said. My mother right dear fle ye precious clothynges
that thou deserve not the pains eternelles. And without taryeng by the words
of the child his mother had horror of such clothes / and would no more use
them / The manners and the gestes of yt child showed the perfeccyon of virtues
/ and the grace of god being in him. The child had not yet seven years
accomplysshed when he deyed. When death approached he confessed him and required
of the priest the sacrament of ye altar / but ye priest denied it him for his
youth. And ye child with great grace of orayson stratched out his hands
unto the heaven and said. My lord Ihesu christ thou have known that my
sovereign desire is to have ye. I have demanded the / and also I have done
that yt I should do. And I hope that I shall not be void of thy presence. These
things spoken the child cherid his parents weeping yt present were and them
provoked to live better. And among these words of exhortacyon / of orayson
and of lauding he yielded his spirit unto god impolluted And incontinent the
habyte of the order of the freres myneurs yt was cast upon him ne appeared more
/ yt is they were never more seen after. And after his death in his buryeng
some of ye freres myneurs were^ the which ne might never say this psalm
deprofu^dis / albeit they forced the^ and began again many times / the which
gave to understand yt that holy soul ne had indygence of orayson. After the
death of the child the fader and the mother prouffited so much in ye example
of their sone that they left al delyces of ye world And the fader was
relygyous in ye ^rdre of prechers and the mother in the order of women. And so
they entered in to relygyon and served debonayrly. etc. Unto the example of this
innocent we should live well to y end that we may deye well / he was innocent
yt is without sin / and without ill will / he taught to do the good and to
flethe ill. And so should we do to the end that we may escape dampnacyon. For
innocence and virtue keep a man from peril of dampnacyon eternell. Also god
says in ye gospel that if any man keep his commandment without co^myttynge
sin yt he ne shall be dampened. Vn^ john.viii. Si qis sermone^ meu^ seruauerit
morte^ no^ videbit i^eternu^. The said child kept the word of god. Than he
ne ran in to dampnacyon eternell. Also saint gregorye says. Nulla nocebit
aduersitas si nulla dominei^ iniquitas. That is to say none aduersytee shall
noye the as unto the soul if no sy^ne have domynyon in the / no sin ne had
domynyon in the said innocent: ergo. etc Also the holy ysydore says. Nec
plaga: nec mors te trebitur si been vixeris. That is to say / yt neither ye
plage / ne death shall fere the. If you have well lived. The said child lived
well without sin than the death ne noyed him and by the consequent he is
saved. And so shall be those the which lived in innocence without sin. etc.

B. Another example of a scoler innocent the which chased the devil from ^
maiden. Cxxiii.
THe disciple recyteth in his promptuarye yt certain relacyon was made of
those the which were present and the which had seen yt a maiden right much
daunced on a sunday with many young men. When she was weary she returned unto
the house / slepte and was posseded of the devil. She cried the household arose
and she was bound for her woodnes. In the morning she was borne into the
oratorye founded of the vyrgyn marye where many miracles were done. as the
little scolers apperceyued her they ran after where she was tormented. Of the
which children one of the aege of.xii. years ye which was m^re hardy and wise
than the other began to expelle the devil that h^ should issue out of the
maiden. It was showed yt the devil was beside the nau^l. The said child made
with his thombe the sign of the cross under / and so by little and little
thrughe the sign of the cross he chaced the ^euyll upward and made hy^ to
come in to her mouth / in ye which all saw it in the guyse of a grene orchyn
pylled and foul. A meruayllous thing / ye people cried yt he forced to
reentre in again And the child opposed in making the sign of the cross /
and constrained him to issue with great vyolence. When he was out as said is in
lykenes of an orchyn / he took it hardely in his right hand and keste it in ^
dytche where the rain dyscended The which departed before all ye people The
hand of the child was black with tou^hynge of the maiden / but by the
washing of holy water it was made clean / By this child innocent without
sy^ne that did this miracle is to understand that ye estate of innocencye is
much vtyle and agreeable to god / but they must have symplesse and wisdom as
the said child had. And by that yt the maid was a dau^ceresse and the
daughter of the devil for to take and deceive souls for her beauty and by her
manners / the said devil had puyssaunce to enter in to her and tormente her /
wherefore all daunceresses beware by her lest that the devil tormente you in
hell / withouten end. etc.

C. Another example that a little innocent impetred of Ihesu christ pardon for an
apostate. Cxxiii
THe disciple recyteth in his promptuarye and says yt a little monk innocent
spoke with Ihesu christ a little child in namynge him his little brother / and was
before the image of the vyrgyn marye that held her sone in her arms. And
Ihesu christ answered and spoke to him amyably as brother to brother. And an
ancient monk yt had be long in apostasye herd this thing / supplied the
little monk that he would pray his little brother yt he would forgive him his
sins / and yt he would receive him to mercy. And the little young Innocent
obtained of his little brother that request / and the auncyente was much
Joyous. etc.

D. Another example that the orayson of children innocents auaylleth much for
the quycke and the deed. Cxxiii.
THe disciple recites in his sermons that it is written in many passages that a
devout bishop saw in his sleep a child fysshynge in a well with a hoke of
gold and with a line of silver / and from the well drew a fair woman When he
was waked he saw yt child in the chircheyarde the which prayed on a tomb /
and he him demanded what he did there. He answerde I say pater noster / and
myserere for the soul of my mother And the holy man understand yt the soul of
that woman was delivered from purgatory by the prayers of that child
innocent / and that pater noster was ye hoke of gold / and miserere was ye
line of silver.

E. Another example of a child innocent ye touched a hot horse shoe. Cxxiiii
THe dysciple recites yt it is written in the book of honey bees that there was a
child in the monastery of ye order of saint benet Innocent and right simple in
his young aege. And one time his abbot led him with him for recreacyon / and
for cause to shoe his horses / the said abbot descended before the door of a
smyth / the which abbot meruaylled him of the simplesse of the said child y
took a hot shoe in his naked hand and lift it up without brennynge him. Then
the abbot and they yt were present were abashed and honored the innocence of
ye said child / and that thing they proved often. After yt the abbot and his
people were occupied in other things / and the said child entered within the
house. The wife of the smyth set him on her knees in meruayllynge her of ye
deed / and in playenge with him. And the wife intysed the child in expert of
malice / and demanded him if he would have such a wife as she was / and he
said ye. The which led hy^ hastily unto bed as not knowinge and instruct
him. He promised to do it / After the lyenge the child was dyspoylled of
innocence / came to the forge and took the hot shoe as he was accustomed but
he was grievously burnt / and ^^yed / of which thing the abbot was much
troubled and thought in his courage yt the soul ^as hurt within sith yt he
was hurt without and that innocence yt had kept him before was no more in him.
Then the abbot led him again in to the abbaye / and inquired him dylygently
for to tell the truth. He confessed the said deed symply. And after by great
teres trembled his do^mage and did repent him. etc.

F. Another example that the devil vnknewe ye sins of ^ synneres after true
confession / and said that she was a good woman. ^xxiii.
MEn find by writing yt god gave diverse goods unto a man and his wife beyng^
in ye cite of ^ome / yt which might have no children / and therefore they
prayed god that they might have some / and he gave them a sone / yt which was
so much beloved of the mother yt she held him often between her arms and
slepte / and the fader of the said sone had a vyage to go to Iherusalem / and
said unto his wife when he should depart yt she should do alms
haboundau^tly / and that she should keep well their sone. And she laid him with
her / and by the admonycyon of ye devil had his company and was with child. Then
she was much angrye and fered the sin and the dishonor of the world and of
her husband / and by the entysemente of the devil yt admonesteth to do ill:
qr peccatu^ peccatu^ atrahit / killed her child when he was borne / without
that any body knew it save only god. Then the devil would that ye sin were
manifest for to lose the wife came unto rome in guyse of a doctor dyuyne
astronomyer / ye which devil told many th^^ges to ye romans yt should
happen. And among the other things said that there was in rome a wife yt had
conceived of her sone her husband being out the which had slain her said
child / And that if the said sy^ne were not avenged yt god should make the
cite perysshe and all they. Then ye romans were much abashed and might not
believe yt the said woman had done the sin for her holly life that she led
and her alms / was made to come before the said deuyne or doctor / the which
accused her to have done the said sy^ne before al. The said woman yt had done
ye said day service to ye vyrgyn marye was suddenly provided of yt that she
should answer and said. Sir ye accuse me of a great thing. And for to give
answer I demand three days of term and I shall answer you. It was granted.
And the mean while she yode to confess her to the pope / the which gave her
in penance to serve the vyrgyn marye / And when it came unto ye term
establysshed the said woman was presented before the senators of Rome / and
before ye said devil in guyse of a doctor / ye which senators said unto the
devil in guyse of a great doctoure. Thou haste accused this woman unto us to
have conceived of her sone and to have slain her child / here she is what
say thou. And ye devil answered it is not this woman here. I never said ill of
^er / this here is a good woman ye which does many good deeds. And also she
has in her company marye ye mother of god ye which makes me to fere. And for
her it behooves me depart / for I am a devil ready to deceive folks.

Virtus.
A. Examples of people virtuous / and first example of vtues of.v. bredern.
cxxiiii
THe dysciple recyteth in his promptuarye and says yt a holy abbot demanded
of five of his brederne / which ben ye virtues yt pleases you before other
and how have ye lived sith that ye were relygyous. The first said I have in
such wise lived yt I remember every day my sins with dolor of heart / and
I am confessed of all yt which I have done to day The second said I have
devised all my time in two parties the one to be employed in devotion and
oraysons / ye other in labors and in seruyces of the freres. And I have
dystrybute faithfully where I have might unto little and great. The third said
I am all given unto the works of mercy and unto compassyon / in such wise
that I weep with those yt weep / and I am Joyful with them yt are Joyous.
The.iiii. said I have evermore gone and adjoined where I was dyspreysed. And I
have in such wise governed me to the end yt I may come to plain humylyte and
pacyence. The v. said I have lived in such manner that I never troubled no man
and I was never troubled of any. The said abbot required of god yt these
things here were unto hy^ reveled. And a voice came fro heaven that said unto
him. I give me. I suffer yt I be found. I sell me. I suffer yt I be stole^ I
suffer yt I be surmou^ted of man. And the abbot yet prayed god to know them
more euydently. Than he herd a voice yt said. I give me unto ye repentau^t. I
suffered me to be found in oraysons and labors I sell me unto him yt has
compassyon on his neighbors / and that enjoys them of their good and well. I
suffer yt I be stolen of ye humble and dyspreysed. And I suffer that I be
surmounted of man the which ne troubles none and holds him in peace. Than
the abbot required to know which was ye best among them. Than a voice came
fro heaven ye said. It is he yt troubles no man / and is not troubled. etc.
For to know what virtue is understand the scryptures of saint Austyn yt says.
quod virtus e^ queda^ equalitas vite: vndique consonans rationi. That is ye
virtue is an equalyte of life the which always sounds and conformeth unto
reason. Et crisos. dicit. quod virtus animi e^ recto de deo sentire et recte
i^ter homines agere. That is to say / the virtue of courage is felyng of god
ryghtfully / and do well right among ye men Et hieronimus dicit quod sola apud
deu^ libertas e^ non seruire peccatis: su^ma apud deu^ nobilitas est clarere
virtutibus. That is to say / only lyberte toward god is / serve not unto
sins / and sovereign noblesse toward god is resplendysshe by virtues / Et
legitur in quarto ethicoru^ quod virtuosus been vtitur qibu^cu^que. The
virtuous use well in all things. Et i^ nono ethicorum dr^ quod virtuosoru^
beatissimae^ vita. The life is right blyssed of the virtuous. Et legi. i^.ii.
ethicoru^. Virtus certior e^: et melior oi^ art. Virtue is more certain and
better than all art and craft. And one ought here to note that one should not
be to Just / nor to unjust for to fle the inconuenyentes yt thereafter may
follow / but one ought to take ye mean. For it is written in.ii. ethico. quod
oi^s virtus co^sistit i^ medio: in oi^bus medium est laudabile. etc.

B. Another example that four virtues were in four hermytes. cxxiiii.
IT is written in the life of faders ye four hermytes were in one house / the
which hermytes one time inquired each other of their virtues and for to show
the most special. One said yt he was so humble yt it seemed him yt none was
wors than he in all the world. The other said that he was pacyente. The third
said ^ he herd gladly speak of god. The fourth said yt he prayed gladly. And
with one assent prayed god to give them knowledge wh^che was most agreeable to hy^
/ and they herd a voice yt said to them. The first has take me / the second
holds me / ye third byndeth me / and the fourth bears me where he will. etc.

C. Another example of the excercyte of five sreres. Cxxiiii
THe dys^yple recyte^^ in his promptuarye and says yt an abbot had.v. freres /
which he commanded to tell their virtues. The first said I have made
general confession every day this ten year The second said I have studied to
have good entencyon in orayson every day by xx. years. The third said I have been meserycordyous asmoche as I might.xxx. years. The fourth said I have
troubled no person by.xl. years / and have sustained al things pacyently.
The.v. said I have sought dyspreysynge by.l. years and have found none
semblable to me in humylyte. Then the abbot prayed god yt he would show which
o^ them were the best. and a voice said to him. The first gives hy^ self to
our lord. The second fy^deth our lord. The.iii bears our lord. The.iiii.
byeth our lord. The.v. vaynquyssheth our lord. etc.

D. Another example how a man and his wife were in like in merit unto saint
pafuncius. Cxxiiii
IT is written in the life of faders yt a holy fader named pafuncius required of
god that he would show unto him upon the earth unto whom he should be
semblable. And a voice came unto hy^ the which said. Know thou yt thou art
like unto the first man of such a street next. When pafuncius herd these
words he yode to knock at ye door of his house. And the man ran before him
as he had of custom to receive his gestes / and washed his fete and set him
to dinner. And between ye metes pafuncius required his host what his deeds were
/ what he studied and unto what operacyons he excersysed him in. He answerde
him of things humbles. For he loved better yt his good deeds were hid than
publysshed. And the said pafuncius said unto him that it was reveled unto him
of god yt he was dygne to be in the company of monks / Than his thought was
yet more humble and said yt he ne was culpable of few good deeds / but sith yt
the word of god has be spoken unto ye from him a man may nothing hyde. I
shall tell than what I have done among many the which ben in vs^ge. Thyrty
years ben now accomplysshed yt I have had consentemente with my wife to keep
chastyte and contynence / and tha^ none of us has had ado with other I have
had three sons of her / and that has because wherefore I have known her to
have lygnee. I never cease to receive gestes / in refusing no body but
gyuynge them their necessytees. I have sytte in judgment. I have not accepted
the person of my sone again Justice. The fruytes of labors of other never
entered in to my house. In all noyses I have put peace / no persons took never
my servants in culpe / nor my beestes never hurt the fruytes of another. I
never defended to labor in my field those yt would saw therein / and also I
never took of the better for to harm the worste / nor never suffered the rich
to ouergo ye poor. I have studied all my life yt I ne should wrath no man. If
I have had Judgment to do yet have I not condampned person but I have studied
me to make peace. The instytucyon of my life has be in these things by the
grace and gift of god. When pafu^cius had herd these words here he kissed
his heed and blyssed him. Bn^dicat tibi du^s ex syon vt videas bona que fecisti
in iherusalem Thou haste well and conuenably done these things beforsayd / but
there faylleth one sovereign good deed / yt is that thou leave all / and that
thou follow the true sapyence of god / the which thou ne may come to if thou
abiecte not thyselfe and deny thyself as ye gospel tells. Nisi abneges temet
ipsu^ et tollas cruce^ tua^ and sequaris xprem. When the said man had herd
these words here without taryenge and without to order any of ye things of his
house followed the man of god and yode with him in to deserte. In the which he
gave unto him ye order of conuersacyon spyrytuel and taught him the excercytes
of the parfyte studyentes and he gave himself unto the science secret. etc.

E. Another example that a mynstrell was semblable in merit unto saint
pafuncius. Cxxiiii
IT is written in the life of faders ye one time saint pafuncius required of god
that he would show him unto whom he were semblable in the world. The answer
was given unto him yt he was semblable unto a mynstrel yt sought his living in
such a town. Than he was abashed of the answer and in dylygence yode unto
the town to seche the man And when he had found him he asked hy^ much what
holy things and relygyeuses he had done / and how he had led his life. / He
answerde yt he had be a man sinner and of cursed life. It is not long time
sith yt I was a thief / and have put me to mayntene this excercitude
myscheuous. and pafu^cyus asked him if among the theftes if he had any good
operacions. He answered I ne feel me culpable of no good deed but as I was
among the theuys there was taken a vyrgyn consecrate unto god that my felawes
would deflore / and I put me in the meddle and took her away fro them / and by
night led her in to the street of her house without having any atouchement
dyshonest. And in another time I found a woman of honest form strayed in
hermytage. I demanded her fro whens / or wherefore / or how she was come in to
that place. And she answerde ne demanded me not I unhappy wife and questyon me
not of those causes / but and it please the to have me for maid / led me
where thou wylt. I woman perverse and ill have had a good husband / the which
is oftentimes beten traylled and put in torments / and is kept in a dongeon
because of dettes yt he owes. We have had three sons together that are also
withdrawn for because of the said debt. And I right unhappy yt am sought for
to be put in se^blable pains / fle from place to place / and of pouerte and
myserye am all abyden / and yet have I ben three days without etyng When I
herd ye said woman I had pity / led her in to our den and gave her to ete
/ for she de^ed for hongre. I gave her also three hondreth shely^ges for to
deliver her out of pain and seruytude / her husband and her sons. When ye
said woman had the money she yode in to the cite and delyuerd them from pains.
Then pafu^cius said yt he never did such things. God has showed me of the
that thou have not less of merit toward him than I and therefore dysprayse
not thy soul that shall have such merit. When the mynstrell herd these
words of pafuncius he cast away his pypes and went with him into his
hermytage / and changed his song seculer in to spyrytuell / and excercysed
him in fastings / oraysons / afflyccyons / and to live straytly. And at the
end o^ three years he yielded up his spyryte unto god. etc.

F. Another example that a provost and his wife were se^blables to an hermyte.
cxxiiii
IT is written in the life of faders yt an hermyte was full of great abstinences
so yt he ete but rotes and pouertees / made request to god yt it pleased him
to show if there were any man in the world that were of strayter life than he.
Then god reveled him yt he should go se the life of the provost of such a
town. Th^rmyte yode. And when he approached the said town he found ye provost
on a fair horse clothe with fair clothes / and in his company many ryders and
notable folk / so he was much abashed (...) se so great pompes. Told to ye
provost how god commanded him to se his life. And the provost badde him go to
his wife which should show him their lives. Then he yode to her the which
showed him the state of the house And she made to preprayre unto dynere of
precious metes as she had accustomed And when they were set at dinner men
brought the first metes of good vyandes before them. And incontynente that they
had be set upon the table they were borne away again without any thing etyng
of chem After men brought the second metes / and the third / and every of
thyem better than other / and were borne away without any thing etynge. The
hermyte seeing so good mete taken away fro before hy^ demanded them / but it
was told him that he should live yt day after the life of them. And at the
last men brought of musty bread all knaw^n with myse. And the wife of the
provost ete a little / and she ne ete of other / but al was given and
dystrybuted unto the poor. After when yt even tide came to go to bed ye wife
of ye provost said unto the hermyte yt they should goo to bed together / the
hermyte would not / but the wife said unto him that he should / and that it
behooved yt he saw how they lived. Than when they were laid and warm the
hermyte was tempted of ye sin of the flesh to have so fair a woman by him
and would have delte with her. Than she said / up up rise we and do we as we
have accustomed my husband and I And when they were up they yode in to a tubbe
of cold water yt was by the beds side. And they were there so long yt they
trembled of cold. Afterward they yode to bed / and when they were hot
again the hermyte was tempted of lecherye / and would have had her company.
Than returned they again in to ye tubbe of col^^ water. All the night ne
cessed they to do so. And the hermyte seeing that said unto himself yt they
led a more straytter life than he far / and that it was reason that they
had more great merit than he And the provost that was so well clothed was also
a man of good Justice to punysshe the malefactors and to yield unto every man
that the which was his. etc.

G. Of fastings / and abstynences of saint Germayn. Cxxiiii.
IT is written ye saint germain was noble / for he was duke of Burgundye / and
after was bishop. He tormented his body by.xxx. year so that he ne ete of
bread of whete / ne yet drank of wine but two times in the year yt is to say
at crystenmas and Eester. And it was meddled so much with water yt it ne had
but a little taste of wine. Also in the.xxx. years he ne ete of pese ne of
benes / ne salt for to have savor in his mouth. For his refeccyo^ he ete
first of the ashes / and after of barley bread. In winter ne yet in somer he
had none other clothing but only the here his robe and his rochet yt is his
habit ye which he ne put of / but only when he gave it unto any poor / or
that he ne brake it. / His bed was of ashes and besen with here and with a
sack / he ne had never under his heed ne under his sholdres feder / but waylled
and bare the relyques of his saints about his neck. He ne vngyrded him but
seldom. That yt he bare of abstynence in this present life was above man. And
after he did so many of miracles yt if the merytes ne had proceeded men would
hane wend that it had be a fantasye. etc.

H. Of the great austeryte of two women. Cxxiiii.
IT is written in ye book of honey bees that there was a woman in ye parties of
barba^ce recluse in a little tabernacle yt ware next unto her flesh an
haubergon of mayle / and above the said haubergon she had an here made of
hogs brystilles ye which prycked her flesh through the maylles of the said
haubergon. She lay upon the earth naked and among the stones / and ete three
times alonely in the weke. And she put of ashes in her bread and ne ete but by
weight and mesure:

I. Another example. Cxxiiii.
THe disciple recites in his sermons that a vyrgyn was in her
hermytage.xxxviii. years the which dwelled in a dytche and served god
deuoutely. And she never ete in the said hermytage but herbs fruytes and rotes
/ and in all that time she ne saw no man. And afterward two hermytes passed
by her entered into ye dytche there they found her d^ed and put her in
sepulcre. etc. By these examples of this book a man may know by experyence
that it is ill taken unto sinners dysobeyssau^tes unto god / and that it is
well taken unto the obedyentes. And therefore thou the which art in this world
living myrre thy self in the example of thy neighbor and know thou yt it
shall take ye in like wise as it is done unto him if thou dysobey unto god.
When thou have seen thy neighbor fall in to an ylle passage and that it is
inconuenyente of body or of soul / or to fall in to hell by his folly thou
sholdest keep the for to do as he did / or thou sh^lte not be wise / but thou
sholdest learn ye manners and condycyons of those ye which has lived holyly
and virtuously in obeyeng unto the commandments of god to the end to go with
him in to the glory of paradyse unto the which we may go cu^ illo qui est
benedictus i^ secula seculoru^. amen.

Here ends the book intytuled the flower of the commandments of god with
many examples and auctorytes extr^cte as well of the holy scryptures as of other
doctors and good ancient faders the which is much prouffytable and vtyle
unto all people / lately translated out of Frensshe in to English in the
years of our lord. M.CCCCCix. Enprynted at London in Fleet street at the sign
of the son by Wynkynde Word. The second year of ye reygne of our most
naturell sovereign lord king Henry the eight of that name. Fynysshed the year
of our lord. M.CCCCC.x. the.xiiii. day of Septembre.

wynkyn de word

printer's device of Wynkyn de Word


