Tailors Feast: Containing Twentyseaven Dishes of meat, Without Bread, Drink,
Meat, Fruit, Flesh, Fish, Sauce, Sallats, or sweetmeats, only a good
stomach, etc.

Being full of variety and witty mirth.

By JOHN TAILOR.

LONDON: Printed by J. Oaks dwelling in little St. Bartholmews.

Anno. 1638.

The Names of the several Dishes served in at this Feast.
1. THE Invitation. 2. Bread and Salt. 3. Great and small Oysters. 4. Brawne
and Mustard. 5. Powderd Beef and Cabbadge. 6. A Chine of roast Beef. 7.
Strong Beer. 8. Venison. 9. Wine Clarret. 10. Puddings and sawsadges. 11. Two
Pigges, one raw, and the other roasted in a Cloak-bag. 12. A Goose. 13. A Cup
of Sack. 14. A couple of fat Ducks roasted. 15. A cup of small Beer. 16.
Twelve Woodcocks in a dish. 17. A Loyne of Veale. 18. A Custard. 19. A whole
Sturgeon like an old Colt. 20. A fresh Salmon. 21. Six six-penny Mutton pyes
to make up the Feast. 22. A Pudding-pye. 23. A Fool. 24. Cheese. 25. A Posset.
26. Music. 27. One hundred Faggots to warm the Guests, and dress the meat.
Tailors Feast, Containing Twenty seven Dishes, without Bread, Drink, Meat,
Fruit, Flesh, Fish, Sauce, Sallats, or Sweet-meates.
The Invitation.
FIrst I would have my Guests understand this point of Modesty, not to presume
to come unto my Feast without bidding, except they bring stools with them (as
unbidden Guests should do.

Secondly, I observe a Rule of the Italian (which is now of late in great use
in England) which is to invite a man most earnestly to Dinner or Supper, hoping
he or they that are so invited, will have more manners then to come: But if
they do come, then the Inviters do esteem the Guests unmannerly, and that
they want good and gentile breeding.

Thirdly, I would have none but such as have the gift of Abstinence and Fasting
to come to my Feast, for my House stands (as other Gentlemen's houses do) in a
very wholesome and hungry Air, that shall not take away any man's Appetite, but
allowing every man to depart with a good stomach to his meat, (when he has
it) which is an apparent and infallible sign of health.

Lastly, as many as please to come over my House any Morning, shall be very
welcome to break their Faces before they go: Or if the greatest enemy I have
do ride within a Mile or two of my Dwelling, let him or they make bold to stay
there a Month (if they please) and take such as they find and welcome, for I
will be but at ordinary or small charge in providing.

Now Gentlemen Readers, or all of what degree so ever, that do read this, I
pray you all to take notice that you are my Guests, for the entertainment and
Diet you are like to have, I pray takeit in good part, washing is costly, and
Soape is dear, therefore I will not have any Table-cloath, or Napkin fould,
for you shall have no occasion to wash your hands, lick your lips or fingers,
nor shall you need to make use of a Toothpicke, you shall have no cause to
draw Knives, neither shall here be any carving of either the wing of a Coney,
or the fore-legge of a Capon: here is no troublesome shifting of Trenchers or
Platters, nor exception for the highest place at the Board, for the Diet is a
like in all places of the Table, (and to avoyde Pride and emulation) I have
caused it to be made and framed, neither long or short, or middle size, square,
round, or ovall; and so you are all welcome unto my Tantalian Feast, which is
dressed without Kettle, Pot, or Spit, Drippingpan, Drying Pan, Ladle, Scummer,
Cook, Scullion, Jacke, or Turne-broach: So now at the first sight you may
perceive bread and salt, which is first placed upon every man's table, and so
likewise at my Feast, and so in good order you shall find the rest of the
Feast follow in their due course and order.

2. Bread and Salt.
BRead and Salt are the first Ushers to the Feast. The Anagram of Bread, is
Beard or Bared, and though Salt come in with the first, yet Salt Anagrammatiz'd
is Last; which signifies that Bread and Salt should be the first brought in to a
Table, and last Bared and carried away. But my Bread is not for every man's
tooth, it not being made of Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, Mescellin, Beans,
Pease, or any Grain, Pulse, or Root whatsoever. It is neither dough Baked,
Baked dough, or burnt in the Oven, neither leavened or unleavened, nor any
yeast, Barme, or Rising put into it, (for it might fill my Guests with wind in
stead of puffing them up with vain glory.) It has neither Crust or Crum, nor
is it chip'd or unchip'd; for the color and finenesse of it is neither White,
Wheaten, Raunged, or Brown: it is neither in the shape of Loaf, Roll, Cake,
bunne, Wig, Manchet, Ruske, Bannock, Jannock, Symnell, or bread-pye, nor is it
Cheat-bread, for it shall satisfy every man as much as he looks for: if it
be distasteful unto any, let him dippe it in the Salt, and it will be savoury
presently.

3. Great and small Oysters.
MY Bawdy Boy, having thus procured Faggots, yet he will not be idle, but for
your better content, the same Tide he will fit you with two Bushels of great
and small Oysters; for before he had rowed four miles, he overtooke a Katch
that was swiming up toward London laden with Oysters. Well overtaken
Katch-man says one, Gramercy Water-man said the other; will thou buy 100. of
Faggots, said Bawdy Boy? I know not what to do with them said the other; but
yet I care not if I give thee a Crown for them: Bawdy boy replied, I was glad
(quoth he) to take them for part of a desperate Debt, for where I had them, I
could get no money, and my house is little, so that I want room to lay them
in, which is the cause that makes me to sell them to thee at so cheap a rate.
The match being thus made, the Faggots were delivered into the Katch, and the
five shillings was paid to the Water-man, who presently demanded of the
Katchman if his Oysters were good? who answered, that his great ones were at
six shillings the Bushel, (water-measure) and his small ones at two shillings
the Bushel: Bawdy Boy said, thou have bestowed thy money with me for Faggots,
and I will leave it again with thee for Oysters; I will give thee a Crown for
a Bushel of the great, and two shillings for the small: all parties being
agreed, the Oysters were measured, and thrown into the Boat: I pray thee
Katch-man said Bawdy Boy, give me one great Oyster or two into the bargain,
which whilst the Katch-man was reaching, the other put off his Boat, and
rowed away: The one called ho Water-man, thou have not paid me for my Oysters,
the other said, you lie Katchman, you have Faggots for your Oysters; the other
replied, thou have money for thy Faggots, the other answered, thou have Faggots
for thy Oysters, and for thy money both, and thou art an ignorant fellow, that
know not how to reckon right: So away rowed he, and I pray Gentlemen fall to
your Oysters.

4. A Collar of Brawne.
WIll Baxted, a late well known fine Comedian, went in a Morning, on one of
the Twenlve days in Christmas time, upon occasion of business to speak with
an old rich miserable Housekeeper, and having done what he came for, he took
his leave, leaving the old man in his Chamber: but as he was going out of the
doors, he said to the Fellow that let him out, My Friend, is not this
Christmas time? Yes that it is said the other; then said Baxted, will not your
Master be angry if I do go away and not drink? the Fellow said, no sure, I
think he will not be offended at all for such a small fault: O but (quot
Baxted) it is good to be sure, and I am loath you should have any ill will for
my sake, therefore I pray you, ask your Master if he will not be angry with
you, if I do go away before I drink: Sir said the fellow, I will not ask
him such a question, but I will make you drink without his knowledge. So into
a Celler they went, and strong Beer was drawn in a Horne-cup, and as Baxted
was drinking, the Master of the house knocked, and called, and whistl'd for his
man as if he had been mad, so that the fellow was feign to leave Baxted in
the Celler, and run upstaires in haste to his Master, who angryly said,
(Sirrah) where have you been? and what is the reason that I have knocked, and
bounc'd so long for you? Sir (said the servant) I was giving a cup of Beer in
the Celler to the Player that was with you: How, said the Master, thou idle
wastfull knave, do I keep a Tap-house or Ordinary for every companion to
tipple in? I Will make thee know it is not my Disposition, nor is it for my
Reputation or profit: Truly Sir, said the Fellow, I could not choose but make
him drink for shame, he spoke such words that moved me so; and with that he
told his Master what Baxted said, and that he had left him in the Celler alone:
A Rope on him said the Old man, I will go to him, and bid him welcome, (though
but with an ill will) the mad knave will jeere me else. So he went to the
Celler, where finding Baxted, he said, you are welcome, and I thank my man
for having so much manners as to entertain you; for my head was full of
business, and so I drink to you good Mr. Baxted, and I pray you what say you
to a slice of a Collar of Brawne and Mustard this Morning? O sir, said he, I
would not say any thing at all to it, but I would do somewhat to it if I had
it; truly Mr. Baxted (said he) and you shall have it; so with an ill will he
sent his man for it, who brought into the Celler a goodly Collar of Brawne,
whole and uncut, Baxted knowing the Riches of the man, and the miserable
poverty of his mind, drew forth his knife, with a full resolution to take the
Collar lower, though the anger were raised the higher, so with a desperate
acute stomach he cut out a piece as big as a Penny-loafe on the top of the
Brawne, which he presently consumed, and more for roagery than hunger: in the
mean space the sight of the Brawnes demollishing vexed the Old man: But Baxted
persisting twixt Jest and Collar, gave it the second cut in the other side on
the top, so that it looked forked like the Sign of the Myter; at which the Old
man could no longer hold, or contain himself from speaking, saying, Master
Baxted, are you married sir? No sir quoth he, I am single, and I keep no
house; the other said, I thought so by your cutting of Brawne, for I do think
you do neither know the price of such a Collar, or what belongs (...) it.
Baxted answered him, Sir, indeed for the price I neither know, nor care for,
but yet I do know what belongs to it, which is a cup of Muskadell, if I could
get it. So the old Mizer was feign to send his man to the Tavern for half a
Pint of Muskadell, to wash down Baxteds Brawne, who was no sooner gone, but
the old man in a rage gave his man warning to provide him another Master, for
he would keep no such riotting knaves that would entertain such bold Guests.

5. Powderd Beef and Cabbage, and a mess of Mustard.
A Water-man (now living) named Gilford, dwelt on the Bank-side, and coming
home to his Dinner, which was Beef and Cabbage, of which he had made pottage,
he prayed his wife to make haste, and take it off the Fire, that he might
quickly dine, and be gone; and whilst the woman was reaching a Porrenger and
Platter, a Cur-dog came into the house, lifted up his leg, and pist in the
Porridgepot amongst the meare and Cabbage, which the man perceiving told his
Wife, and caught the dog, and almost beat him to death: but the woman
entreated her Husband to eat his Dinner, for it should be never the worse,
when she had strayned the Pottage through a clean cloth, but all her
persuasions could not make him eat.

Mustard.

THree Gentlemen of the ancient race of Redshanks, (now called Highland-men,
because they inhabit in the Mountaynous parts of the North of Scotland) these
three having occasions to come into England, being at their Inn, had to their
Dinner a piece of powdered Beef and Mustard: now neither of them had never
seen Mustard before, wherefore one of them demanded what Deele it was? the
Host answered, that it was good sauce for their meat; Sauce said the other? it
has an ill look, I pray let me see you eat some first; then the Host took a
bit of Beef, and dipped it in the Mustard, and did eat it: the Highland-man
presently took his meat and rolled it in the Mustard, and began to chaw, but
it was so strong, that it was no sooner in his mouth, but it set him a snuffing
and neesing, that he told his Friends, ( Ducan and Donald) that he was slain
with the gray Grewell in the wee-dish; he bid them draw their Whineards, and
stick the false Lowne, (their Host) he prayed them to remember his last love
to his wife and Barnes, and withal to have a care to beware of the gray
grewell, for the Deele was in it. But after the force of the Mustard was spent,
the Gentleman left neesing, all was pacified, mine Host was pardoned, and
Mustard was good sauce for powderd Beef.

6. A Chyne of Beef roasted.
AFaire Chyne of Beef was once given to Mr. John Fletcher, (the Poet) he
prayed his Hostess, (being an old woman near the Bank-side, where he lodged)
to salt it well seven or eight days, and he would invite some friends to the
eating of it: the day being come, and the Chine at the Fire, the Woman had not
played the Huswife so well in salting of it, but that it had taken Air, and
entertained more Tenants than were welcome: but after it had been three hours
at the fire, Master Fletcher had a mind to have a slice hot from the spit, and
for that purpose came down from his Chamber, drew his Knife, and cut; and as
he cut, he espied Maggots drop out, at which he was angry, but suffering the
Spit to go about, he cut on the other side, and found it worse: Whereupon
Fletcher being alone, (for the Woman was gone forth, and left the Jacke to
look to the Spit) was so enraged, that he took the spit up, and setting his
foot against the meat, footed it off, and threw it into a muddy ditch on the
other side of the way, and putting the Spit into the Jackerope again, went up
to his Chamber again in a chafe: the old woman suddenly coming in, and
seeing the meat gone, was amazed, and stepped into the street, and asked some
of her neighbors, if they saw any body go into her house? one made answer,
that Mr. Fletcher went over to the Ditch, and back again, but he saw no body
else; then the woman went to see, and she perceived the mudde was newly
enclosed over something that had been cast there in lately: so she fetched a
Rake, and raked the Beef out of the ditch, put it under a Pumpe, and with a
wispe, ashes, and sand, washed and scower'd it, so that all the Gentiles in it
were confounded, then to the Spit she put it again, winds up the Jacke, which
made a noise in his language whir, whir; which Mr. Fletcher hearing, mused what
was provided for Dinner for his Guests and himself; the old woman being gone
into her backside, Fletcher stole softly down the stayres, and peeping
toward the fire, saw the Chine a roasting the second time, at which amazement
he biest himself, saying, Art thou crawled thither again, thou shall never
be removed for me again: so it was roasted, and gave good content to the
Guests, but some of them said, it had taken wind.

Gentlemen, I doubt you have sat too long over your Beef, and therefore a cup
of Beer is not amiss, and then you shall be furnished with some other Viands.

7. Strong Beer.
TWo Soldiers of old acquaintance, having been long asunder, chanced to
meet, and after salutations they agreed to enter an Alehouse, where a
formal fashionable Tapster filled them as much nicke and froath with Petars of
Tobacco, as made them (in his estimation) to be reckoned at two shillings;
they fell to the discourse of their several Fortunes and Services, the one of
Russia and Poland, the other of Germany and Sweaden; they talked of hunger and
thirst, cold, and nakedness, sieges, and assaults, Artillery, Ammunition,
Guns, and Drums, wounds, scarres, death, and all the perils incident to men
of the Sword.

The Tapster over-hearing them, said, that they were the better welcome for
being Soldiers, and that he had been one of that Martial Train himself in
the Low Countries, where (he thanked God) he neither did harm, nor took
any; the best was, that he had learned so much wit that no man could cousen
him: the Soldiers answered him, that his labor was worth his travel, in
learning so much cunning, and so they paid their reckoning, and departed. They
had not gone far, but they met with another of their old acquaintance, (a
cunning shark) to whom they told the bragging confidence of the Tapster: How
said he, will he not be couzned? Tell me where he dwells, and go you two and
stay at a Tavern that is next him; and I will first be with him, and then come
quickly to you.

The place being told, and the Tavern appointed, the witty Soldier went to the
Tapster, and called for two Gunnes of Beer; Guns quoth the Tapster? Canns you
would say; the other replied, I do mean Cannes, but I have been so used to
Cunnes in the Wars, that I forget my self, and call every thing a Gunne: So
the Beer was filled in, and drank, and the Tapster filled his Gunnes or Cannes
by couples, which they drank between them; then the Soldier said that he
saw a Tapster win a Wager lately beyond belief; for he brought six Cannes
of Beer from the Tap all full, in one hand, and set them on the Table, not
spilling one drop; Sir, said the Tapster, I dare to lay a Crown that I can do
that, I will lay as much that you do it not said the other; so the Wager was
laid on the Board, but whilst the Tapster was filling the Cannes, the Soldier
ran away with the money, and straight perceived for all his wit and cunning,
yet was able to be couzned.

8. Venison and Wine.
A Gentleman dwelt two miles from a Market-towne, where (at a Tavern) he
caused some bottles of Wine to be filled to carry home, because he had invited
some friends to his house to eat a Venison Pasty with him the next day: but
his man and himself drank so hard, that they forgot their Liquor, (I mean
the Bottles.) The next day being come, and Dinner ready to be laid on the
Table, they remembered the Wine; so the Gentleman commanded his man to take a
Horse, (which was sadled in the Stable) and to ride for the Wine with all
speed. Well, to Dinner they went, and the Serving-man to the Stable, the Pafry
was opened, and to it they fell, and after an Hours time expecting the Wine,
now said the Gentleman, methinks my man is riding hither in post, I hear the
Horse dash; at which words the fellow entered: Hah well said, art thou come said
the Master? we have stayed long, and thou have made but slow speed; a pox on it
said the Fellow, if I should be hanged I cannot find the bridle.

10. Puddings and Sawsadges.
THe Pudding and the Sawsages will be cold Gentlemen, if you do not fall to,
and then they will not be worth a sir-reverence; and methinks it is an easy
piece of Logic, to prove a Pudding to be a perpetual motion, for it is
always moving.

And as an Arrow, flies from Butt to Butt,
So does a Pudding post, from gut to gut.
SImon Wadle, a Vintner, (that once kept the Tavern near the Temple-barre, at
the Sign of Saint Dunstane) with some other Vintners, had been to taste and
buy Wines at the Merchants, and having done their occasions, happened into the
three Tons at Garlike-^ithe, where all the meat they could have on the
sudden, was a pound of Sawsadges; Wadlo being hungry, had no great stomach
to have so many partners in so small a dish, and having an old rotten Tooth in
his pocket, (which a Barbar in Fleet-streete had drawn from him the day
before) he secretly conveyed, and thrust the said Tooth into one of the
Sawsages, which he himself first took into his hand; and after his associates
had each one tasted a little, and began to be quick and nimble, Wadlo snap'd
his old tooth in his chaps, and pulling it forth, showed it to the company;
upon the sight whereof they were all struck with fear and amazement, believing
by the Tooth, that the Sawsages had been made of Man's flesh: so they called
for Sack and Sallet-oyle, supposing they had been poisoned; but Wadlo fell to
with a good stomach, saying that he could be no worse poisoned with them than
he was: The man of the house vowed that the murderous Jade that made the
Sawsages, should be burnt. But after Wadlo had eaten up all, he sent for the
Barbar that drew the Tooth, and every man was presently cured, and the
Sawsagewoman escaped burning.

11. A Pigge.
A Collier, near Croyden, having laden his Cart with Coals for London, a
woman that dwelt near him that was Nurse to a Merchants child of the City,
desired the Collier to remember her humble service to her Master and
Mistress, and to tell them (God be thanked) their Child was well; and withal
she entreated the Collier to carry them a live Pigge, (which she had put in a
bag before the Colliers face:) the Collier took the bag and made it fast
upon the top of his Cart, and away came he. When he came into London where he
should deliver his Coals, he took the bag with the Pigge, and tied it
under the Cart to one of the spoakes of the Wheel, and when he had almost
unloaden, a couple of Porters stood and perceived something moove in the bag,
did suppose it was a Pigge or a Goose, or some such creature, which they had
borrowed upon some Common or high way, as they came by night: And whilst the
Colliers were busied, and absent in carriage, and empting their Sackes, the
Porters stole the Pigge out of the bag, and put in a little cur dog of
their own, making it fast as they found it, and away go they: The dog
impatient of his bondage, began to frig and fling, as he had bin mad, that the
Colliers said, the Devil was newly entered into the Pigge; or else the Pig did
presage that he was near his own death. Well, the Cart being empty, the
Collier takes the dog-pigge, and carried it to the Merchant, delivering his
Message (which was welcome) saying that he must carry the bag back again; so
he went to a side Table, and opened it, and putting in his hand for a Pigge,
the dog bit him by the fingers; a pox on ye dee bite, quoth he: what does he
bite: quoth the Merchant, it can not be, I will take him out my self, then the
Merchant put his hand into the bag, and the dog snapt him so currishly that
he fetched blood of his fingers, at which he was angry, and bid the Devil
take the Collier and the Pigge both. At which the Merchants wife laughed, and
called them both fools, and with that she took the bag by the bottom, and
shook out the dog: the dog being amazed, (not knowing where he was)
turned round twice or thrice, and leapt over a Hatch, and away ran he home to
pick the bones of the Pigge: the Collier hanged down his Head all ashamed to
look upon the Merchant. The Merchant (standing with his fingers bleeding) very
angerly asked the Collier that if he had no body but he to abuse, and play
the knave withal, to bring him a dog instead of a Pigge: to whom the Collier
replied, and also affirmed with an oath, that his intent was free from abusing
him or any man else, and that it was a Pig in the morning. The Merchant swore
it was a dog, the Collier swore it was a Pig; and so much good may it do you
with your Pig.

A Pig miraculously roasted.
BUt a raw Pig is no man's meat, and therefore now you shall have one roasted,
and strangely over-roasted. A Gentleman that dwelt about Enfield ten miles from
London, had a Buffe, tough suite in Law, that had lasted him ten years, and
every Term he sent his Counselor a Pig, scalded and ready dressed for the
Spit: It fell so that at the beginning of a Mid-summer Term: Richard the
Serving-man had the Pigge in a cloak-bag a Horseback behind him, and as he
was riding by Totnam-high-crosse, other Servingmen were there drinking at the
sign of the Swan, who espied Richard, they called him to make him drink.
Richard was glad to see his old acquaintance, and alighted, put his Horse in
the Stable, took off his cloak-bag, and laid it on the board, telling his
friends of the Pigge, and that it was the fortieth Pig that he had carried in
ten years from his master to a Lawyer. The company gave Richard the hearing,
and with all one of them cunningly stole the Pig out of the cloakbag, and
carried it into the Kitching, commanding it to be speedily roasted: in the
mean time they plied Richard with cup after cup, that they were al merry: the
Pig being roasted, they wrapped it close in the napkin again, that no heat should
come from it, and put it into the cloak-bag: so they took sudden leave of
Richard, who was quickly mounted with his piping hot pig behind him. So that he
being well lined with Sack, with the hot Pig at his backside, and the Sun in
his face, and exceeding hot, so that poor Richard did ride, as it were
between two fires, besides the Horse trotted terrible, which made the
cloak-bag skip, and the Pig was tossed as in a blanket: In these occurrences,
Richard was half stewed, so that the sweat distilled from his body, and
lyquored his boots. In this bloated case he came to London, and set up his
Horse, took off his cloak-bag, which carrying under his arm, it was so hot
that his side seemed to scald, and he thought he had gotten a Plewrisie, or a
burning Fever. Being come to the Councillors chamber, he remembered his
Masters and Mistresses loves to him, and that they had (acording to custom)
sent him a Pigge, and withal complained of the soultrinesse of the weather,
and the extreme heat he was in. Then he puts his hand into the Cloakbagge to
take out hte PIg, which was so hot, that he said there was fire in it; at last
he drew it out, and when he opened it, that it had gotten air, it reak'd and
smoked in such manner, that Richard said, there was one of the Wonders of the
World; for between the heat of the Sun, and the hard trotting of his Horse,
there was a Pigge roasted all to pieces in the Cloake-bagge.

A Gentleman loved the sole of a Goose more than any part else, but his Cook
having a Wench that longed for it, he adventred to give it her: when the Goose
was carved, and brought to the Table, the Gentleman mist the sole, and demanded
the Cook for it; the Cook made answer, Sir, this was no Goose, it was a
Gander, and and he lost his sole with treading his Sister. This Goose deserves
some sauce, but I can swim no more than a Goose, therefore I Will wade no
further: much good may it do you Gentlemen.

13. A cup of Sack.
NOw it is but folly to offer a little Sack to my Readers, for it is not a
little or small Sack that can hold them; yet for all that they may hold or
contain a little Sack, (when they have it.) A roaring Gallant having drank
so much Sack, that his head and belly were full, and empty of Ebriety and
Sobriety, and his purse and brain discharged of Wit and Money, was enforced to
cast up his Sack with more haste than he received it, which being done, and
his stomach somewhat eased, he threw the Pottle-pot down the stairs,
saying, Drawers, you Rogues, bring more Sack, for all this is gone.

A Spitch-cocke, or roasted Eele turned to a Bull.
THere was a great Dispute held amongst good fellows once, of what thing in the
world would live longest after exquisite and extreme Torments: the Judgment
was general, that it was an Eele, for first he would live after his head was
off; after he was flayed, after he had his entrails and heart taken out,
after he was cut in pieces, yet every piece would have life in it, after it was
laid on the Gridyron: Then one of the company said, I do approove of your
opinions; for an Eele does live longer after he is dead, than any other thing
that everliv'd on the earth.

14. A couple of fat Ducks roasted.
Near the City of Gaunt in Flanders, in a small Village there was lately a
Priest that preached, or rayled most bitterly against the Protestants, calling
them Reprobates, Cast-awayes, Hugonats, and Heretics, good for nothing but to
feed fire, flame, and faggots; for which constant way of invective talking the
Priest was mightily followed by abundance of ignorant people, (the most part
women) as the like troops do into many places haunt Schismatic
Seperatists, that willingly would dislocate the Conformity and Unity of the
Church. Amongst the rest of this Priests Auditorie, there was one man and his
wife that seldom failed to hear him; but it happened that the Woman was to give
her mayd-servant leave to go to a Wedding at Gaunt, (where she had a kinswoman
to be married) so that her Mistress was forced to stay at home that Sunday, and
dress Dinner for her Husband and family. The Sermon being done, the Goodman
came home, and told his Wife that their Priest had made an extraordinary piece
of work, that the like was never spoken, and that he thought all the
Protestants were knocked down with his words, and that he was grieved at the
heart she was not at Church to hear him.

At which report the woman was so full of grief, (for her being absent from so
rare a matter) that she could eat no meat to Dinner, but fed upon sorrow;
her Husband began to comfort her, and told her, that if she would be merry,
and eat her meat, he would procure the Priest to come to their house on the
Wednesday following, and there, (in their Parlour) he should repeat the same
Sermon to them privately. The woman was well contented with the motion, and
said, that she would bestow a couple of as good Ducks roafted on him as ever
he eat in his life. (Now you must understand, that the Woman was hard and
miserable, and did seldom use to feed her Husband, or any other with Ducks:
and the Priest on the other side, did love a Ducke so well, that he would run
over the Parish after them.) Well, the Wednesday was come, the Priest came, the
Ducks were on the Spit roasted, the Sermon was repeated, and Dinner was
expected: The Woman arising from her seat, made a low courtesy to the Priest,
saying, Sir, I will go into the Kitchen, and make haste with your meat, the
while I will leave you with my Husband to discourse. in the Parlour: So the
good wife went to her Maid, saying, In faith Wench our Priest has made a good
Declaration, but I would my Ducks were alive again, for it grieves me to
remember how the pretty fools would quacke, quacke, about the backsides; but
troubles my mind more, to think how, like Wolves, the Priest and thy Master
will devour them. The Maid answered her Dame, that if she pleased, that we two
here will eat up the Ducks in the Kitchen, the whilst the Priest and he are
prating in the Parlour. The woman replied, that she could find in her heart to
do it, but she could not answer the matter with credit. Then said the Maid,
Dame, let us eat the Ducks, and I will lay my Quarters wages against them,
that we will come off with fame and credit.

The match was agreed upon, the Ducks were taken from the Spit, and betwixt
them one was eaten, and the other dismembered, and spoiled: What must be done
now said the Dame? I pray you (quoth the Maid) to lay the cloth, with Bread,
and Salt, and Trenchers; which she did, (her Husband bidding her make haste
with Dinner) then she came to her Maid again, and asked what must further be
done? Then said the Maid, you see our Knives are foul and blunt, I pray you
whifper our Master in the ear, and tell him you will turn the grindstone
whilst he does sharpen them: Then the woman did as her Maid bid her, and as
her husband and she were grinding in the backside, the Maid went into the
Parlour to the Priest, and told him that he was in great and sudden danger,
for her Master and Dame were much defamed by reason of too much familiarity
which was suspected between her Dame and his good father-hood, and therefore
they had sent for him, with a trick to abuse him, to make him relate a Sermon,
(which they regard not:) and as for the Ducks which he expected, she swore
truly there was not a Ducke in the house: The maine plot was, that they did
purpose to gueld him, and therefore were sharpning their Knives; which if he
pleased but to look out at the Hall-window, he might plainly see. The Priest
was all amazed at this news, and looking, (as the Maid said) he spied the man
and his wise grinding and turning, at which sight he took his heels, and ran
away as if he had been two stone lighter than he was. Then the Maid went to
her Master, and said, that she thought the Priest was mad, or the Devil was
in him; for he came suddenly into the Kitchen, and was run away with both the
Ducks. Whereat the hungry man was angry, and in haste (with one of the naked
Knives in his hand) he ran after the Priest; so they both ran, the one for
fear, and the other for hunger: the man calling to the Priest, bad him for
shame not to carry them both away, but to let his wife have one of them: the
Priest made answer (as he ran) that thy wife and thee are a couple of Rogues,
and they should both be hanged before they had one of them, and that he would
keep them both whilst he had them. Thus the Sermon was said, the Priest was
afraid, his hunger unstay'd, the Jest well laid, the Wages paid, Gramercy Maid.

15. A cup of small Beer.
MY Reader perhaps may be thirsty or dry with relating this long Tale of the
Ducks, therefore it cannot be amiss to give him a Bowl of small Beer for a
cooler.

A Gentleman that dwelt ten miles from London, sent his Footman in all haste
to the City, to tell a Merchant welcome news of a rich Uncle of his lately
dead, that had left him somewhat to make him merry for his Death, with an
outside mourning in Black, and an inside laughing with Sack. The Footman
having his Message, with a Letter, made as much speed as he could, in hope of
Reward for his good tidings, so that he seemed by his pace to have wings on his
heels, and by the fogge or sweat he was in, you would have supposed him to
have been bloated or stewed body and bones.

Being come to the Merchant, he delivered the Letter, which after he had half
read, the Contents contented him so, that he called his Maid, commanding her
to fill a Bowl of Beer, and give it to the Footman, (who stood dropping with
sweat as if he had newly been duck'd) but he setting it to his mouth,
swallowed it with extreme eagerness, and finding by the taste that it was a
poor mortified Liquor, having no vivacity left in it, but merely cold,
comfortless, and at the best, a poor decayed single-soal'd drink, although
it were dead, and a deceased remnant of humidious Aquacity, nay though it had
not upou the death or departure from its Cinnicall or Diogenicall habitation
given so much as a good relish, a smacke, or a taste to the poor Footman,
that ever any Malt had been drowned, drenched, or imbrew'd into it, yet he
(as a man of a mild temper) amidst his heat, unwilling to speak ill of the
dead, did plainly tell the Merchant thus: Sir, I do think that your Beer
has ran as fast as I have ran, and faster. Why say thou so? (quoth the
Merchant) because said the other, it sweates more then I do: it cannot be said
the Merchant: the foote-man replied that if it did not sweat, he was much
deceived, for he was sure it was in a cold sweat, or all of a water.

Another piece of Beef, and then how the Beef was purchased, etc.
THough Beef be accounted a gross dish at most of our late Sardanapolitan
feasts and Banquests, yet I doubt not but many of my Guests (or Readers) will be
well pleased to eat Beef (when they have it) but I being reasonably well
stored, will tell them how I came by it, and then (as they like it) let them
fall too and welcome.

Now how the Beef was purchased.
A Brace or couple of monilesse Gallants, who had met with some believing or
credulous Mercer and Tailor, and sworn (and lied themselves into complete
suites of praeter-plu-perfect-plush, or well deserving beaten Uelvet: these two
had long time shared equal fortunes, and did purpose to live and dye in a
brotherly conjunction; and indeed it was pity to part them.

It befell that upon an Ash-wensday, they chanced to read a Proclamation for the
strict observing and keeping of Lent; at which they were both exceedingly
grieved, so that the one said to the other, I cannot live according as is here
commanded, for I will eat no fish, and therefore must have flesh: The other
then replied I I think neither of us have friends, money, or credit, to
purchase flesh or fish; but if thou can borrow a Porters habit, as a Frock,
Cap, Basket, Rope, or Halter; stockins, shoes, and the like, then I will
assure thee, I will load thy back with good Beef; my wit shall get it, and
thy back shall bear it, and our old Hostess where we lodge, will powder it,
and we all will be merry, and eat it.

To be short, the outside of a Porter was borrowed, and on the Thursday after
Ash Wednesday, to the Butchers went this Gentleman-porter, and his consort the
Kater. (Now there was an old Doctor of Physic, which for some Reasons shall
not be named: He dwelt in London, of good repute, and great estate, but so
lame of the Gout, that he seldom went out of his House, but sat in a Chair,
and gave his opinion of Urins and Diseases, and Directions, and Bills to
Patients and Apothecaries.) This Doctor was the stake or aim that the Master
Cheater did purpose to make the Buckler for his knavery: For coming to a
Butcher, he bargained with him at the best rate for so many Stone of the
chiefest Beef, with a leg and shoulder of Mutton, and loyne of Veale, which
came to fifty shillings and odd money; which being cut in pieces, and joynted,
and laid in the Basket, he asked the Butcher if he knew such a Doctor of
Physic? (as aforesaid) the Butcher said that he knew him well, that he was
an honest Gentleman, and that one of his men did buy meat often of him at his
shop; the Cheater replied, that he was also one of the Doctors men, and that
he that was wont to buy meat of him, was his Fellow, but he was gone into the
Country about some occasions, and that himself for his part had laid out all
his money in the City upon other things for his Master, therefore he
entreated the Butcher to let one of his servants to go home with him, and take
his due for his meat: The Butcher said it was a busy time, and had my
customers to serve, yet he commanded one of his men, (calling him Richard) to
go with the Gentleman, to bring 52. shillings and 10. pence, and to make haste
back again.

Away went the Butcher, the Porter, and the Gentleman, who asked the Butcher
his name, and of what Country he was? he said his name was Richard Snelling, of
such a Parish in Northamptonshire; the Cheater strait began to call Richard
Cousin, and told him, that himself was a Snelling by the Mothers side, and
that he would do more for him than he was aware of. When they came into a
Lane near London wall, (called PhilipLane) where the old Doctor dwelt, the
Cheater said Richard, I will go before, and have the gate or door open,
because the Porter is laden; so running apace to the gate, he knocked, which
strait a Maid opened, to whom he said, yonder comes a Butcher with a Porter,
I pray you let them rest here in the Hall whilst I do speak a word with your
Master in the Parlour: as he requested, it was done, and the Cheater went to
the Doctor, and told him that he was a Gentleman famous for Learning and
Experience, and that though he were lame in his legs, yet he was sound in
his Art and profession, which had moved him to bring to him a Patient, (his
Kinsman) who was of Gentle Birth, but in his wild youth ran from his Parents,
and bound himself Apprentise to a Butcher, and now within two days he was
half frantic, and talked of nothing but money, which he thought was some
distemperature in the Brain, through want of sleep, which surely Sir (said he
to the Doctor) I am persuaded that you can effect in one night, and you shall
have ten pound for the Cure: He is very mild and tractable, his fault is only
talking of Money, and he stays without in your Hal. I pray you call him in
said the Doctor, which the Cheater did, saying, Richard, go into the Parlour,
my Master will pay you: so in went the Butcher to the Physician, the whilst the
two Cheaters went away with the meat. Then Richard entered with his Cap off,
and made many scraping legs to the Doctor, who bade him put on his Cap, and
take a stool, and sit down by him; but Richard said, he had more manners
than so, desiring his Worship to help him to his money: Alas good fellow said
the Doctor, I would not have thee to set thy heart upon money, for they that do
love money, are bewitched with this World, and have little thought or hope of a
better; that money was like fire and water, very necessary for the use of Man,
(so long as they are servants, and kept under) but where they get the maistry,
they will do a man a world of mischief.

Richard replied, (Sir) I care not for money, but I must have money of you for
my Master Beef: to whom the Doctor said, Richard, thou art far gone, how
long have thou been in this case, to talk thus idly of Money? I pray thee
can thou say thy prayers, or Creed? Then strait the Butcher began to wax
hot, and said, that he was not far gone, nor would go without his Money; and
for the case he was in, it is the same he will be in, till he have his Money:
And as for prayers, he came not thither to pray; and therefore I pray Sir, to
leave jesting, and give me my Money, for my Master and Mistress are hasty
folks; and will be very angry with me for my long stay, and therefore give me
my money.

The Doctor perceiving that he could not put Richard out of talking of Money,
did suppose he was stark mad, and therefore he quickly called for his men, (
William and Thomas) and commanded them to take Richard, and put him into a
close Chamber, and to draw curtains, and shut up the windows, whereby he
might be kept dark, (for the better settling of his brains) saying that
Richard came of good friends, and that a worthy Gentleman (his Uncle) was with
him but now, and further, that he had a good hope to cure him in short time.

The Serving-men (as their Master bad them) took hold of Richard, who would
not go with them; then they began to pull, hale, and tugge him, so that
Richard in anger, asked if they would make him mad: Then they fell by the ears,
and cuffe, and buffetted till they were bloody-nos'd, and their Bands torn;
the Doctor still crying to his men, Away with him, I will tame him before I
have done, that he shall set his mind no more upon Money.

Richard (being weak) was dragged perforce to the Chamber, when presently the
Butcher ( Richards Master) came to the door, and knocked, demanding whether
he had not a servant in the House? one of the men said, there was a young
fellow in the House that was stark mad, and that they would hhe had been
hanged before they saw him, he had beaten and torn them so: what, is he mad,
(quoth the Butcher?) yes said the other, he talks of Money, and would have it
of my Master; but fear not (honest man) my Master will cure him.

What, is my man mad said the Butcher? yea quot the other, he would have
Money, I told you: Money, why should he not have Money said the Butcher? He
must, and shall have Money, and so will I: Are you as mad as your man said the
Serving-man? then we must be troubled to have another dark Chamber for you
too; and (growing to high words one with another) at last the Butchers wife
came, (flinging her Arms as if she had been swimming) using the volubility of
her Tongue to a shrill and lofty strain, (a principal virtue in too many
women) that the House rang with the clamor, (as if it had been a Cockpit)
asking her Husband why he staid there, and where the idle rogue her man was,
that he brought not away the Money.

The old lame Doctor, hearing such a noise, asked one of his servants what the
matter was: who told him that the Butcher and his wife both were come for
money: Hoy-day, said the Doctor, I think all the World is made for Money; go
and tell the Butcher and his Wife, that I have not dark rooms enough in my
House for them: so after a little conference together, the Doctors maid
affirmed that a Porter rested his meat in their Hall, whilst the other
Gentleman spoke with him in the Parlour, and that they both went away when the
Butchers man went in: thus the truth was cleared, the Cheaters were victual'd,
the Doctor was gulled, the Butcher was couzned, and Richard was released.

16. Twelve Woodcockes in a Dish.
ABout six or seven new molded Gallants, (whose outsides were silk and
slashes, and their insides jeeres and flashes) were invited to a worthy
Citizens House to dinner, where amongst a great deal of other good cheer,
there was brought to the Board a Jury of Woodcockes in one Dish, laid Head to
Head in the center of the platter, as fantastic Travailers and their Wives do
lie feet to feet in the great Bed of Ware, sometimes by dozens. These Guests
(being loath to conceal their small Tallents of wit) had an especial Art to
break ten good jeasts of other men's, before they were able to make one good
one of their own: they began to jybe at the Woodcockes, and said they were a
Jury Empanell'd; another said, it was hard to judge whether they were a petty,
or a Grand Jury: a third said, that he thought that those twelve were an
Emblem of the twelve Companies. The Citizen (being a Gentleman of place and
eminence) not thinking their eering worthy of his anger, would not set his
gravity against their foppery; yet thus mildly he answered them. You are
welcome Gentlemen, and I do wish that my entertainment were better for you: I
see there is one dish that distastes you, but it shall be taken away; for I do
assure you, that I never had so many Woodcockes at my Table at one time in all
my life; but I think the fault is not in my Cater, for here are at least half
a dozen more then he provided. So he commanded one that waited on, to take
away the roasted Woodcockes from the rest.

17. A Loyne of Veale.
ALthough the bodies of men are all (or the greatest number) of one form or a
like frame, all compacted and composed of the four Elements and Humors: yet
those Elementary Humors are so variously mixed in men, that it makes them
different in their Appetites, Affections, Inclinations, Constitutions and
Actions: For example, some will gape and make water at the sight of a hot
roasted pigge; some will run from an Eele; some dce hate Cheese so, that they
will not handle a knife that has cut it: some will sweat at the sight of a
mess of Musrard. Mr. Anthony Monday (sometimes a Writer to the City of London)
would run from the Table at the sight of a forequarter of Lamb roasted: And a
reverend grave Judge of this Kingdom, did abhor a Ducke as it had bin a
Devil. Another Gentleman did love Salt, but by no means could endure to see
it about the sides of a dish, but would swound at the sight of it. A
Schoolmasters in this City cannot endure to smell Apples. Amongst all these,
I my self did know one Thomas Vincent that was a Book-keeper or prompter at
the Globe playhouse near the Banck-end in Maid-lane: As also I did know John
Singer, who played the Clownes part at the Fortune-play-house in GoldingLane,
these two men had such strange and different humors, that Vincent could not
endure the sight or scent of a hot Loyne of Veale, and Singer did abhor the
smell of Aquavitae: But it happened that both these were invited to Dinner by a
Widow, (that did not well know their dyets) and as they sat at the Board, a
hot Loyne of Veale was set before Vincent, who presently began to change
color, and look pale, and in a trembling manner he dropped in a swowne under
the Table; the Widow (being in a great amazement) made haste for an Aquavitae
bottle to revive him, which was no sooner opened, but the very scent sent
Singer after Vincent in the like foolish trance. But when the Veale and Aqua
vitae were taken away, after a little time the men recovered: Vincent went into
another Room, and drank, and Singer called for the Veale, and dined well with
it.

18. A Custard.
A Prating fellow, that dwelt in a City that had in former times been govern
by Bayliffes, and was newly made a Majoralty, did brag that their first Majors
feast was most sumptuous, and in price and value beyond the Lord Majors of York
or London, for besides other Dishes and provision, there was sent in by the
Gentlemen of the Country, Fourteen brace of Bucks; I demanded of him at what
time of the Year their Major was chosen? He answered me, that about the
Twentieth of October he tokee his Oath, and kept his Feast: I replied, that I
thought he was mistaken, for the Season for Buckes does not hold or continue
till the Month of October; then he said, that if they were not Bucks, they
were Does: To which I seemed to grant; but withal I told him, that if they had
been Bucks, all had been too short of our London Feast; for we were able on
that day to drown such a town as theirs with sixteen Tun of Custard.

19. A Sturgeon like an old Colt.
THere is a Market Town (which I will not name in Print) in the road betwixt
London and York, which has a pretty River or Brook rnnnes by it, up which
Brook it did chance that a Sturgeon did swim or shoot, (somewhat near the
Town) the which a Gentleman that dwelt near, espied, and caused a small Rope
to be put through the gills of the Fish, and fastened it to a stumpe of a
Willow, intending to take it as a wafte or stray, that fell into the limits of
his own Bounds or Royalty: but as he was gone to make provision for the
carriage of it, and to call his servants for that purpose, the news of the
Sturgeon was brought to the Town, and the Recorder told the Major, that it was
taken in their Liberty, and that they were better to spend or give an Hundred
pound, than to lose or hazard the loss of so much ground as the Sturgeon was
within their Liberty and Lordship: and therefore it were their best course to
go speedily and fetch it away into the Town perforce.

This counsel was liked and approved, and so with one consent, the Major with
his Brethren, the Recorder, and Officers, with the whole Drove or Heard of the
Townsmen, went out to bring in the Sturgeon. And as they went, Master Major
said, that he had eaten part of such a Fish many times, but in all his life he
had never seen a whole Sturgeon, and therefore he did not know of what shape or
proportion it was: to whom one of the Aldermen said, Sir, in my youth I did use
to go to Sea, and then I did now and then see one, and I can compare or liken
him to nothing more than to an old ragged Colt; it is like enough to be so
(quoth the Major) and for any thing I know he may be like a Goose, a Cock, or
a Bull: Thus as they walked and talked many words to small purpose, they espied
a fellow leading a young Colt with aslip from the Brook thwart over the field,
which caused one of the Aldermen to say to the Major, Sir, yonder man (be like)
has had some warning of our coming, and you may see he is about to prevent
us, for he is leading away the Sturgeon from us; with that the Major called
aloud, saying, Hallow, thou fellow, I charge and command thee, that thou bring
hither our Sturgeon before me: The fellow (wondering) answered, what zay Zur?
Marry I say Sir, I charge thee bring hither our Sturgeon; What do you mean,
my Colt said he? Sirrah, sirrah, said the Major, do not you offer to put your
knavish Colts tricks upon me, for if you do, I Will lay you by the Heels: Do
thou think that I am such an Ass that I do not know a Colt from a Sturgeon?
In Faith quoth the fellow, you are a merry Gentleman, and with that he led the
Colt away. Then the Major commanded men to pursue him, and take away the
Sturgeon: Well, the fellow ran, the Townsmen ran, the Colt slipped his Halter,
and was encompast round, and hunting him into the Town, was met by men, women,
and children, as a rare and admirable sight, and had like to have been killed,
and cut out into Jolles and Rands, and made up into Keggs in pickle, but that a
knowing understanding Shoemaker most luckily prevented it.

In the mean time, the Gentleman that first found the Sturgeon, caused it to
be taken up out of the Brook, and carried Home unto his House and there it was
dressed as was fitting. The Major perceiving his error, let the man have his
Colt again, with a full determination that at the common charge with the
Townepurse to try an Action with the Gentleman for the Sturgeon.

20. A fresh Salmon.
THe good, old, and truly right Honorable Charles Earl of Nottingham, Lord
High Admiral of England, whose renowned memory shall never be forgotten
until his bounteous Houskeeping be generally imitated. He being at his House
at Chelsey, and looking upon certain Fishermen that were fishing in the Thames
with their SalmonNet, his Lordship called to them, and said, My friends, if you
take a Salmon, and bring him a shore living, that I may see it move, and live,
I will give you your price for it: The Fisherman answered, (My good Lord) I
hope we shall be able to present your Honor with such a Fish as you desire;
so they drew their Net to Land, and caught a very fair Salmon. (My Lord
standing on the Land looking on them) To whom the Fisherman said, my Lord, I
have him, and you shall have him strait: So the poor man took off his
leather-girdle, which had fastened to it a little Pouch, with ten pence in money
in it, and as he had put the girdle through the gill of the Salmon to hold it
the faster, the Fish being a strong lively fish, gave a sudden flirt or
spring out of the man's arms into the River again with the girdle in the gill,
and the Pouch with ten-pence; which Salmon did shoot up the River the same
Tide, from Chelsey to Hammersmith, and there it was taken by another Fisherman,
and the Girdle with the pouch with it, which was restored to the right owner,
and the Fisherman contentedly rewarded for the same by the bounteous Nobleman
aforementioned.

21. Six six penny Mutton-pyes to make up the Feast.
MEthinks a Feast is not well set forth if there be no Pies or baked meats,
and instead of Dear, I pray Gentlemen take in good part such Venison as
Smithpenns afford. There was a Chyrurgian, or corruptly a Surgeon, whose name
was well known to me, and many more by Land, but especially and truly by
Walter, and by shortning it an L, by Water, or briefly, Wat; (the help of a
Priest would declare the rest) This Walters stomach did water for a Six-penny
Mutton-pye, at a Cooks named T. S. at Westminster, almost over against the 3.
Tons Tavern, and having eaten one Pie, he liked the relish so well, that
he called for five pies more of the same price, and valiantly consumed them
both crust and meat, outsides and linings: Which being done, he heard
Westminster clock strike, and demanding of one of the Cooks servants what time
of day it was? who answered him, that the Clock struck Eleaven; Oh (quoth he)
I pray you bring me a reckoning quickly, or else I shall lose my Dinner at my
Lord Maynards.

22. A Pudding-pye.
AN old rich Tanner, with a beggarly mind, did use Hartfourd Market constantly
every Week, for the time of 28. Years, to buy and sell Hides; in all which
space he never changed his Inn or Hosresse, nor altered his price for diet or
expenses, either for his Horse or himself; whose Horse-meate was to be tied up
to an empty Rack, for which one penny paid for his standing, and another
penny the Tanner spent upon himself in a Pint of Beer, and a halfe-penny
loaf; so two pence in the Total was his constant expenses every Market Day
for so long a time: till at last as he passed along the Street, he espied a
Wench that sold hot Pudding-pies, and presently his chapps began to water, so
that his quick Eye and liquorish Tooth made him turn prodigal so far as to
waste a penny upon himself for a Pudding-pie, which he put in his
Handkerchiefe, and carried to his Inn, with a purpose to feast his carcass.
So being set alone in a Room, he called for a whole pot of Beer, which the
Maid drew, and was carrying it to him: but meeting her Dame or Mistress by the
way, she asked her to whom that Beer was filled? for the old Tanner said the
Maid, whereat the Mistress called her forgetful Baggage, that had forgotten
his usual Diet, to be but a pint of Beer, and a Halfe-pennie loaf: The
Maid replied, that he had bought a Pudding-pie, and would make that serve
instead of Bread, and therefore he would spend a whole penny in Drink. So it
was carried to the Tanner, who sat (repentingly) looking upon his Pie; the
whilst the Hostess went into another room, where there were some merry
fellows drinking, to whom she told how the Tanner had altered his custom and
diet, and that he was in such a Room alone with his Pot and his Puddingpie
before him: whereat one of the fellows start up, and swore, the old miserable
Hound should have small joy of it; so away went he to the Tanner, (who as yet
had neither touched Pie or Pot) to whom he said, by your leave Father, I am
bold to look into your Room, for my self with some friends are basely used
in this House, for they fill us such scurvy dead drink, as a man would be
ashamed to wash his Boots with it: Now you being an old Guest of the House, I
would taste if your Beer be better, and with that he took up the Pot, and
drank all off, set it on the Board again, saying, I thought (old man) that
you were in favor with mine Hostess, and I perceive it now by the goodness
of the Liquor: Oh but said the Tanner, you have drunk up all, then call for
more said the other; but who shall pay (quoth the Tanner?) he that is best able
quoth the fellow; Thou art a saucy fellow (said the Tanner) and little better
than a Cheater, to come into my room and drink up my drink thus basely, and
therefore tell me thy Name: The fellow told him, his Name was Gurley; Gurley
said the Tanner? there was a Rascal of thy Name that stole a Mare from me
three year ago, that I could have hanged him for it if I would: With that the
fellow clapped his hand on the board, and said, Old man, that Gurley was my
Cousin, and he was the most desperate Fellow that England bred, and did care
no more for stealing your Mare, than I do at this time for eating your
Pudding-pie, and with those words he suddenly snach'd up the Old Tanners Pie,
and greedily (knavishly) devoured it at two or three mouthfulls, leaving the
miserable Tanner in a mad, hungry, and thirsty anger, without either Beer or
Pudding-pie for his twopence. So Gentlemen, much good may it do you with your
Pudding-pie: Now there remains behind only some light meat for the closure
of the stomach, which I pray fall to, and welcome; and that is a Fool, being
made like a Custard, and when that is done, pray give ear to the Music.

23. A Fool.
TO furnish a Feast completely, there must be Tarts, Custards, Flawnes,
Flap-jackes, and by all means a Fool or two: and at a Feast it so happened, that
a Counselor at Law (or of Law) being at the table, amongst other dishes that
stood before him, he fell to feeding most heartily upon a Fool, and lovingly
likeing it so well, demanded of the Mistress of the House, what good name
that most excellent dish of meat had: she answered him, that the name of it
was a Fool. The Lawyer replied, hat he had often tasted the goodness of a
Term Fool, but for a Table Fool he never smatch'd one that pleased his
palate better, and therefore he desired her to let him have a note of the
ingredients that appertained to the making of such a composition, that his Wife
might put it in her book of Cookery. To which request of his, the Gentlewoman
condescended: so after Supper was ended, the Counselors man drew his pen and
ink, and as the Gentlewoman directed him, he wrote. Item, so much clouted
Cream, so much Sugar, so much Rose Water, so many Eggs, such and such Spices,
with other Simples that are pertinent to Foole-making, which I am not perfect
in: But after he had written all, he knew that his Mistress would insert it
into her Book, and therefore he thought it fit to give it a title or
directions above it, to distinguish it from other receites, wherefore thus he
entitled it: A receite to show my Mistress, how to make my Master a Fool.

A Tale of a Fool.
A Young Gentleman (being a rich Heir) came a woing to a proper Gentlewoman,
whose sharp wit quickly found him to be a Fool, by his playing the Coxcombe,
and by his outward gesture; and so she gave him frumps for his folly, and
flours for his foppery, parting as wisely as they met: which her mother
perceiving, began to chide her, saying that she was a squeamish proud
Baggage to give no more contentfull respect to a Gentleman of his worth and
rich hopes, and that she had best to be more tractable to him hereafter, for,
(quoth she) your Father and I, and his parents are minded and agreed that he
shall be your Husband. Now, God bless me, said the maid, for I cannot love him:
why can thou not love him? (quoth the mother,) I know he is very rich: rich,
said the maid? I know he is rich, (But, --.) But quoth the mother, what But:
you idle slut, you would say he is But a Fool: you say true mother, said she,
it is for that only that I cannot affect him: the mother replied, that for his
being a Fool, it was her wisest part to take him; for it was better for her to
be married to one that is a Fool already made to her Hand, then after marriage
to take the pains to make him one: saying further, who loves theirwives better
then Fools? who lets them Eat, Drink, wear, say, or do what they please,
but Fools? I tell thee that I was four years married to thy Father, and he
he curbed me, and restrained me of my will so much, that he almost broake my
Heart, till at the last (with a great deal of cost and counsel from my good
neighbors and Cossips,) and abundance of care and pains taking, I made him a
Fool, (and so he happily continues:) since which time, I have lived a Ladies
life, full of content and pleasure: and therefore Huswife, no more a do, but
take my counsel, and marry a Fool, if you mean to live a merry and pleasant
life.

24. Cheese.
ONe bragged and boasted that when he was married, that he had at the least two
hundred Cooks to dress his Wedding Dinner: Another answered him that he
believed him not, because he knew that he had not so much as a House to put his
Head in, but lodged in a Garret, and therefore he could not have use or room
for so many Cooks: He replied, that as he with his friends came from Church,
they went to a dry Hedge, and set it on fire, (every man having a piece of
Cheese in his pocket,) and dividing themselves, the one half half of them on
one side of the Hedge, and the other half on the other, and so toasting their
Cheese, being two hundred in number, they were all Cooks, and dressed the
Wedding dinner.

25. A Posset.
THe King's Head Tavern in Fleet-streete, at Chancerylane end, has a long time
bin a contenting well-custom'd House, and if the Travailes of some of the
Drawers up and down the stairs could be measured, it may be reckoned a daily
journey of Forty miles a day in a Terme-time.

About 30. Years since there was a man that kept the said Tavern, whose Name
was Gent, who was an honest fat man, (as most fat men be) who being in bed,
about midnight the Drawers and the Maids were up merry in the Kitchen, to have
a little recreation after their long days toil: for which purpose the Maids
had made a great and a good Posset, which exceeding hot, and well sacked,
sugared, and spic'd, was put into a broadbrim'd pewter Basin: Mr. Gent being
suddenly taken with an occasion to rise, (for the keeping of his bed clean)
put on his slippers, and as he was coming down the stairs, his servants
hearing him, were in doubt they were discovered by their Master, whom to
prevent, they put out the light, and one of them took the Basin with the hot
Posset, and (to hide it) laid it upon the seat in the House of office, Master
Gent suspecting no harm, went thither in the dark, and set himself in the
Posset, which he found so scalding, that he cried out Help, help, the
devil's in the Privy: thus was the Servants deceived, the Good Man scared and
scalded, and the Posset most unluckily spoiled and defiled.

26. Music.
THree or four Gentlemen being merry with drink and discourse in a Tavern, a
Musician proffered them Music, which was denied; within a little time after
another asked the same question, Gentlemen, will you have any Muficke? The
Gentlemen began to be angry, saying, they were Music to themselves, and of
themselves, and bad the Fiddler get him gone; but it was not long before the
third Fiddler opened their door, and peeped into the Room, with the old note,
Gentlemen, will you have any Music, a new Song, or a fine Lesson? The
Gentlemen perceiving that no denial would satisfy their intruding
importunacy, said, do thou hear fellow, how many are you? We are four
said the Musician; Can you dance said the Gentlemen? Yes sir said the other;
tha^'s well quoth the Gentlemen: so without any more bidding, the Musicians
entered, and two of them played, and the other two danced four or five Dances;
in conclusion the Gentlemen called for a Reckoning, and paid it; but as they
were going away, one of the Fiddlers said, Gentlemen, I pray you to remember the
Music, you have given us nothing yet; to whom one of the Gentlemen answered,
nor will we give you any thing, for we never knew any Reason to the contrary,
But always those that dance must pay the Music.

27. One hundred of Faggots.
GEntlemen, the air is raw and cold, therefore it is not amiss to have some
Faggots, as well to warm you, as to dress your meat; and first how the
Faggots were gotten.

There dwelt a Water-man at Greenewitch, who for his meritorious and notorious
Virtues, had justly purchased the Nickename of Bawdy-boy, by which name he was
generally known, and called, and will thereby be many years to come, had in
remembrance. It happened that this Fellow (working with Oars) had a Gentleman
at London in his Boat, whom he carried to Gravesend; it being in a
Winter-night, and Eleaven of the Clock at the time of their landing, the Moon
shining in her full brightness, and so calm and still was the wind, that it
would not move the smoke of a Chimney, or flame of a Candle. When Bawdy-boy
had landed the Gentleman, and took his fare, (which was six shillings) he
told his fellow what he had received, and withal the Tide being an hour
flood, and no passengers left, he thought it best to swim up emptie-boated
with the stream from Gravesend to Greenewich, rather than to stay there, and
spend their money; and that he doubted not, but to make some profitable
purchase on the river before he gat home: In which resolve they put off their
Boat, and after one hours Rowing, between Greene-hithe and Purfleete they
overtooke an Hoy, or great Boat, laden with as good Kentish faggots as
Christendom could yield: the Hoyman driving and whistling up in the calm
stream, and the light Moone-shine, to whom Bawdyboy called, and asked him if
he would sell him one Hundred of Faggots? The Hoy-man answered, saying, they
are not mine to sell, I am but hired to bring them to London for a Woodmonger
that dwells there. My Friend (quoth Bawdy-boy) what though they are none of
thine to sell, yet thou may let me have one Hundred of them, and make thy
Master believe they were mis-told to thee; or else thou may mis-tell one
Hundred in the delivery of them; it is twenty to one they will never be mist
amongst so many.

This gentle and grave counsel began to work upon the tender conscience of
the Faggot-man, insomuch that the bargain was struck, that for Five Shillings
Bawdy-boy should have one Hundred of Faggots. In brief, the Faggots were taken
into the Wherrie, and the Faggot-seller expected Five shillings; to whom
Bawdy-boy said, (Friend) I do see a Faggot with a crooked stick in it, which
stick will be to me of more worth than three Faggots, for a use that I would
put it to: I pray thee let me have it, and I will give thee one of my faggots
back again for it; the other replied, that he would do him that kindness,
though it were troublesome to him to remove a dozen or twenty Faggots that lay
about it: So whilst the fellow was busy to get the crooked-stickefaggot,
Bawdy-boy thrust himself off with his Boat and one Hundred of Faggots: At the
last the Hoy-man came to the Hoyes side, and perceiving his Merchant to be
gone, he called to him, saying, Hoe friend, com^ hither, here is the Faggot
with the crooked stick: To whom Bawdy-boy replied, saying, it is no matter, I
have better bethought my self, I will make a shift without it: the other
called again, and said, thou have nor paid me for my Faggots, I know it well
quoth the other, nor will I pay thee any thing; thou art a Thief, and a
notable Rogue, and I will pay thy Master, who is an honest Gentleman, and he
shall know what a Rogue you are, and so I leave you.

Courteous Reader, I would entreat you to read this pleasant discourse of One
hundred of Faggots, before that of Great and small Oysters, for so it should be
placed.

Thus Gentlemen, you have seen your Cheer, and you know you are welcome; I am
persuaded that you could not have had so good diet (as is before related) at
any six-penny Ordinary, though it were in the North, where Victuals are
cheapest: Here has been variety without Ebriety, I promised you at first,
that I would not take your stomachs from you, and that you should go away as
sober as you came, wherein I hope I have kept my word, and so you are welcome
Gentlemen: Only here is a Bill of Fare to satisfy your minds, or to be a
President fo you, when you have occasion to make a Feast, and how to provide
for every man's Palate.

A Bill of Fare, invented by the choicest Pallats of our time, both for Worth
and Wit, wherein are appointed such Rare and Admirable Dishes, as are not to
be had every where; and may be expected daily at the Five pound Ordinary: as
it came to my hands I give it you freely (Gentlemen) with some Addition of
Dishes of mine own.

Four Phantasmaes, two boiled and two roasted. One Dish of Cadulsets. A stewed
Torpedo. One Dish of Andovians. One Phoenix in white Broth. One fore-legge of
a Green Dragon baked. Four Pelican Chickens. Two Dottrells broyl'd. A Dish
of Elephants Pettitoes. A Rhinorsceros boyld in Allecant. A Calves Head roast
with a Pudding in the belly. A sowst Owl. A Dish of Irish Hearts Horn boiled
into Jelly, with a golden Horse-shooe dissolved in it. One Lobster fried in
steaks. Nine Soales of a Goose. Three Else of a Jackanapes tail. Two
Cockatrices. Two dried Sallamanders. One boild Ele-pie. A Dish of
Quishquillions. A Dish of Modicums boild with Bonum. A Dish of Bounties with
Sorrellsoppes. A Gull pickled. A Tantablin with an Onion. A Sallet of
Goose-grease and Chickweed-fruite. A West India Cheese. One Hundred of
CoakerNuts. Fifty Pine-apples. Twelve Palmitaes.
FINIS.

