A Sermon teaching discretion in matters of religion, and touching certain
abuses now in the Church: Preached at Paul's Cross the 21. of November by
Robert Temple Bachelor in Divinity sometimes of Magdalene College in Oxforde.

Bern. Cant: sermon. 49. Quo zelus feruidior, ac vehementior spiritus
profusiorque charitas, eo vigilantiori opus est scientia quae zelum supprimat,
spiritum temperet, ordinet charitatem.

Imprinted at London by R. B. for Edward Aggas. 1592.

To the right Reverend father in god John by Gods permission, Bishop of
London, my special good Lord, all humble duty acknowledged.
ACcording to your Lo. pleasure (right reverend Father) I have copied out
this Sermon, and let it go to the press, removing (at length though with much
a do) a common reason that diswades very many, and did for a time discourage
my self: I mean the perverse cauillatio^ of such, as call into question other
men's labors, a great deal busier to find a fault, then do any good, as in
deed it is easier to reprehende then judge arighte, and mislike then do the
like. I am so far (I protest) from self love or lyking, that I am still
affrayde least some thing of other be committed which being set out
abroad, can not be called in again Many may flatter themselves in a fond
conceit of there own doings, and delight in the favorable judgment of their
friends, but they shall find it far otherwise, when there works come once
to a vulgar protractation. I most humbly beseech your Lo. to defend with your
accustomed favor my unworthy labor, and earnestlye pray my Brethren in the
Ministry, to lay aside all former conceived opinion against the matter, and
heartily desire every good reader besides to construe every thing with a
conscience, as I for his sake in every point have spoken my conscience. At your
L. Manor house at Fulham: April 22. 1592.

Your L. in all humble duty Robert Temple.

Text 1 Cor. 14. verse. 1. Follow after love and covet spiritual gifts, and
rather that ye may prophecy.


THE Apostle having handled before at large the manifold gifts of the
spirit, and treating theruppon of love, the excellent way of all gifts,
purposing to handle prophecy the worthyest gift of all, he seems to make
his entrance by conclusion of all he spoke of before: and bids the
Corinthians a Gods name to covet spiritual gifts but with all to follow love,
and rather that they may prophecy. D^uision.
Before I come to speak of two principal points herein considered, first love
the moderation of all gifts, secondly prophecy the excellent gift of all:
We are generally to observe the only matter and work of all gifts.

^l. 68.18. ^os 4.8.
Christ ascending up on high led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto me^,
and the same unto every one of us by grace according to the measure of the gift
of christ, and to this end the repayring of the Saints, the work of the
ministry and the edificatio^ of the body of Christ. that gifts ^e.
By gifts are meant operations, and faculties bestowed diversely, and peculiarlye
to profit the church withal. Why called ^irituall ^fies. Author of all ^fies.
They be called spiritual gifts: First for authority, secondly for office.

The Author of all gifts is the spirit of God. For there are diversities of
gifts, but the same spirit, and there are diversities of administrations, but
the same Lord, ^. Cor. 12.4.
and there are diversities of operations, but God is the same that works all
in all. 4.5.6.8.
So that all kind of gifts and callings (as prophesies, teaching, exhortation,
the word of wisdom, the word of knowledge, faith, Romans 12.6.
healing, great works, discerning of spirits, diversities of tongues,
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers) one and the self same
spirit works, distributing to every man severally as he will. Ambrose
says: Vnum flumen, Ambros. spi sanct. Gratian. lib 1. cap. 2^
sed multi donorum spiritualium meatus, hoc flumen exit de font vitae: Many
rivers but one flood from which they do all issue, Math. 28.1.
this comes out of the fountain of life. For which cause the holy spiryt
(albeit properly the third person in trinitye, and Effector of all gifts) is
taken for the gift of God, Act. 19.20.
as appears in the question of St. Paul to certain disciples at Ephesus,
have ye received the holy ghost since ye believed? Meaning whither the graces
of the spirit were given to Christ's disciples. Austen says somewhat
confusedly, Aug. Lau. Enchirid. Cap. 37.
as it may seem, yet truly Et vtique spiritus sanctus dei donum est, quod
quidem et ipsum est equale donanti. And verelie the holy ghost is the gift of
God, the which in very deed is equal to the giver discerning the spirits by a
double notion as the author of all gifts spiritual and so it is not the gift
of God, but God himself essentially equal to the father and the son and
again for the very gifts themselves, as either they were bestowed upon the
Apostles in the day of Pentecost, or as the faithful have the holy Spirit
promised.

Collos. 3.1. Act. 3.24.
Christ then is come and gone, he sittes at his Fathers right hand, the
Heavens conteynes him until the restitution of all things, Heb. 7.25.
he is our Advocate with the father and lives for ever, making intercession
for us, without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness which is: ^.
Tim. 3.16.
God is manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up in glory.
But now the master, and Commissarie of the faculties in his absence is his
spirit: For as he deserved grace for us by his death, triumphed over death by
his resurrection, sits at his fathers right hand by his ascension: So he has
left the spirit obtaining and bestowing all requisite, and necessary graces
for his Church. The spirit is Christ's vicegerent and President of his church,
the church being like unto a School wherein the holy ghost teaches the
faithful all godliness. Romans 10.4.
Christ is the end of the law, for righteousness sake unto every one that
believes, and now through the spirit we wait for the hope of righteousness
through faith. Galat. 5.5.
Math. 5.17
He is the fulfiller of the Law and the Prophets, for he came not to destroy
them, Chrisostom. adorand. spi^ Galat. 3.2^ Esaias. 54.13 Ioh. 6.45. Ioh. 14.26.
but to fulfill them. And so is the spirit the fullfilling of the gospel. The
law was our scholemayster to bring us to Christ, that we might be made
righteous through faith, now we are all taught of God, as the holy ghost
sent by the father in Christ's name teaches us all things, and bringes all
things into our remembrance, Ioh. 1.12.
as he has told us. As many as received him, to them he gave a prerogative
to be the sons of god, Galat 4.6.
and now has god sent forth the spirit of his son, which cries Abba
father, Romans 8.16
and the same spirit witnesses with our spirit, that we are the Children of
God.

Likewise they be called gifts spiritual for the office, ^ffice of these
^iftes.
either in respect of the matter, for it is the wisdom of God in a mystery,
^. Cor. 2.6. ^phe. 3.8.
even the hid wisdom which God determined before the world unto our glory, a
grace given to preach the unsearchable riches of Christ, ^. Pet. 1.12.
a gospel sent down by the holy Ghost from Heaven, the which the Angels
desire to behold, or of the success and fruit, ^. Cor. 4.20. These. 1.5. ^.
These. 2.15.
for the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power, neither is the gospel
in word only, but in power of the holy ghost, to be received not as the word
of men, but as it is in deed the word of God which works in them that
believe. Paul may plant, ^. Cor. 3.7.
Apollos water, but God must give the increase, whosoever is any thing he
must say with St. Paul, by the grace of God I am that I am, 1. Cor. 15.10.
and therefore a work impossible for man to perform without worthy graces of
the holy ghost. If we do consider the mutual edification of the Church, the
matter is indifferent without any respect at all, Gal. 3.26.
28
for we are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus, all one in him,
Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise, a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, 1. Pet. 2.9.
an holy nation, a people set at liberty to show forth the virtue of him
that has called us out of darkness into a wonderful light, Reave. 1.5.
in him that loved us and washed us from our sins in his blood, we are made
Kings and Priests unto God even the Father. But if we do mark the
ordinarye government of the Church there is very great ods. Act. 20.28.
For the holy ghost choseth out some from amongst the rest to the Bishopric
of the flock, and superintendence of the Church: Heb. 13.17 1. These. 5.13
To be obeyed as overseers because they watch and must give accoumpt for
souls, to be had in love for the works sake laboring among the people, and
being over them in the Lord. And as there are gifts of the spirit common to
the faithful love, joy, peace, Galat. 5.22.
long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekenes, temperancy, against which
there is no law: So these gifts whereof the Apostle speaks we have named
them a little before in the beginning. Prophecy, Teaching, Romans 12.6.
Exhortation, and the like, are gifts of a several and peculiar function. 1.
Cor. 12.8.28.
But as with this community of gifts unto all the faithful, there is a
discretion and order in the Church for ornament: So gifts are always joined
with these offices, for edifica-of the Church, and both for increase of faith,
and knoweledge by unity in Christ. The spirit of grace, which always from
the beginning discerns the elect from the numerositie of the rest refused,
and disanulled, evermore furnishes such as be called to this order of office
in the Church with dignity, and sufficiency of gifts. When Christ called
forth his Apostles to preach, he sent them with gifts, saying, the kingdom
of GOD is at hand heal the Sick, cleanse the Leapers, raise up the dead you
have freely received, Math. 10.6.8.20.
give freely, it is not you that speak, but the spirit of your father which
speaks in you, Act. 2.4.
and in the day of Pentecost, they were all filled with the holy ghost, and
began to speak with other tongues as the spirit gave them vtteraunce. And the
seven men whom the Apostles did choose to the office of the Deaconship, were
full of the holy ghost, Act. 6.3.5.8
and of wisdom and faith, and so known before they laid their hands on
them, and Steven full of faith and power above the rest, and of many miracles
among the people, so that a number of them of the Synagogues disputing with
him, were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit where with he spoke.
Tertullia^ says, Tertul: exbo. ad castit.
aleadging the reason of the Apostles words, 1. Cor. 7.40.
and I think also I have the spirit of God, idcirco hoc dixit vt sibi
Apostoli fastigium redderet. Therefore he said so to show the authority of
an Apostle. Spiritum quidem Dei etiam fideles habent, sed non omnes fideles
sunt Apostoli, proprie enim Apostoli spiritum sanctum habent qui plene habent
in operibus Prophetiae efficatiam virtutis atque documentorum linguam, non
quasi ex part quod ceteri. Truly the faithful have also the spirit of God,
but all that be faithful be not Apostles, for the Apostles have the holy
ghost properly, insomuch as they have in their Prophecy an effectual working
of power, and vtteraunce of doctrine, and that aboundantlye, not as it were in
part like other: Not then the vocation to the several office, but measure of
gifts necessary to their offices, not the worthynesse of such as be called.

The first part Love the rule of all gifts.
Now the Corinthians replenished very graciously with all these gifts, yet
converting them (not as they ought to the glory of God, and edifying one of an
other, but to oste^tation, and contention among themselves:) St. Paul aloweth
their aemulation of gifts, but withal settes down a moderation by love, for
love disposes every work unto a perfection. The principal end of all
actions is the glory of God, for whatsoever we do, 1. Cor. 10.31.
we must do all to the glory of God, but the way to bring us to this end is
love, all things divine, and aim at love, for the end of the commandment
is love out of a pure heart, and a good conscience and of faith unfeigned. 1.
Tim. 1.5.
This the Apostle proves very largely, naming it a more excellent way of the
best gifts, that although a man do speak with the tongues of men, and Angels,
and have not love, 1. Cor. 12.31 1. Cor. 13.12.
he is like a sounding brass and a tinckling Cymball: And although he had
the gift of Prophecy, and knew all secrets, and all knowledge, yea if he had
all faith, so that he could remove mountains, and had no love, he were
nothing: And though he fed the poor withal his goods, and though he gave
his body to be burned, and have no love it profits nothing. So again to the
same purpose, he wills the Ephesians to follow the truth in love, Ephesians.
4.13.16
and in all things to grow up unto him, which is the head, which is Christ,
by whom all the body being coupled and knit together by every joint for the
furniture thereof according to the effectual power, which is in the measure of
every, part receaueth the increase of the body unto the edefieng of it self
in love. A man may be endued with many other gifts, ^. Cor. 8.3.
and yet be ungodly, but if any man love God, ^. Cor. 12.7.
the same is known of God. The end of all gifts is unity, for the
manifestation of the spirit, Ephesians. 4.3.
is given to every one to profit withal. Now love endeavors to keep the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, and gives no offense, neither to
the Jews, nor to the Grecians, ^. Cor. 10.31.
nor to the Church of god, but follows those things which concern peace,
and wherewith one may edefie one an other. Whatsoever either precept or
counsel is specially set down in scripture has relation to love, as we love
God for himself, and one an other for Gods sake. Christianity is where the
spirit is, and where the spirit is, there is love. 1. Ioh. 4.16.
For God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in god, and god in
him: The love wherewith god loves us shed abroad in our hearts by the holy
ghost which is given unto us, Romans 5.5.
is only theirs which fulfill the royal law, Iam. 2.8.
thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, love discerns the merit of the
work in piety, from the semblaunce in unity, Aug. Ioh. ^pist. tract. 7
as Gods tradition of his son from Judas prodition. The one was of love, the
other of covetousness. Luke 7.38 4
Mary's entertaynment from Symons hospitallitye, many sins were forgiven her,
for she loved much, Phil. 1.1^.
some men's preaching of conscience, and somes under a pretense, the one of
goodwill, the other thoroughe envy and strife, Agust. ciuit. dei lib. 9. ca
21. Agust. Ioh. ^pist. tract. 7.
godly knowledge from the Devils, as great as their knowledge is they have no
love. Alms deeds in compassion, from liberalitye in vain glory. Love does
does seek the praise of God in alms, but vain glory the praise of man. 1.
Ioh. 4.18 Agust. Iho. 3. tract. 13.
Godly fear from slavish fear, for fear has paynefulnes, but perfect love
casts out fear, love indeed is the invisible vnctio^ of the spiririt. All
sacraments whatsoever, are but the form, love is the root, faith is like unto
the sense, Aug. hom. 1^
but love unto the health of the body. Austen says that a man may have
Baptism and yet be wicked, Prophecy (eue^ that notable gift that Paul here
prefers) and yet be wicked, take the sacrament of the body and blood of the
Lord, and yet be wicked, be named a Christian, and yet be wicked, habere
sacramenta ista omnia, et malus esse potest. Habere autem charitatem, et malus
esse non potest, hoc est ergo proprium donum. He may have all these
sacraments, and yet be wicked, but he cannot be wicked if he have love, this
is therefore a proper gift.

If this were well learned of a number in these days, who take themselves to
be notable fellows, eue^ incomparable censors of all other, it would contain,
and keep in many mischiefs which daily break out to the dangerous hurt of
the Church, as Pride, Envy, Indiscretion, Innouatio^. Pride through knowledge,
Envy through aemulation, Indiscretio^ through zeal, Innovation through
schism.

Pride tho^ugh knowe^dge.
For commonly Pride is where knowledge is, this same, Sermo scientiae, word of
knowledge, 1. Cor. 12.8 Romans 12.^.
very hardly admits sapere ad sobrietate^, understanding with sobriety, for
knowledge puffs up, 1. Cor. 8.1.
and makes a man very singularly proud, as if he were the only man, and
none like him in the world. A perilous matter (I tell you) is inflammation
through knowledge, Iren. lib. cap. 1.31.
that marde Tacianus after his master Justinius martyrdom, and made him a^
heriticke, Bern. cant. sermon. 65.
Bern. notes it to be the only prancke of all such: Captare gloria^ de
singularitate scientiae, to get glory by singularity of learning. Bern.
resur. domin. ser. 3.
And I pray you (as Ber. says again) quaemaior superbia, quam vt vnus homo
totae congregationi iudicium sum prae ferat, tanqua^ ipse solus habeat spiritum
dei. Can there be any greater Pride then for one man to set his own
judgment before the whole Congregation, as though he and none else has the
spirit of God. Now where love is there can be no presumption, and maystership
of doctrine, Love does aedefie, and does not boast it self, neither is puffed
up, Austen says, Aug. secundu^ ^oh. sermon. 53.
Amate scientiam, sed anteponite charitate^, scientia si sola sit, inflat,
charitas vero edificat, et non per mittit scientiam inflari. Love knowledge,
but prefer love, knoweledge if it be alone puffs up, but love edefieth,
and does not suffer knoweledge to be puffed up.

Envy tho^ough emulalation. Aug. secundu^ Ioh. sermon. 53.
With pride commonly envy is joined, for pride is nothing else then a love of
excellency, which breeds a perverse imitation against the Apostles rule. 1.
Cor. 12.31
Desire you the best gifts, and yet I will show you a more excellent way,
(meaning love) and again forasmuch as ye covet spiritual gifts, 1. Cor. 14.12
seek that ye may excel to the edefieng of the Church. And so brings forth
that carnal emulation spoken of by the Apostle amongst the works of the
flesh. Galat. 5.20.
Now love is in this a remedy, 1. Cor. 13.4.
for love enuieth not. If there be any comfort in love, if any fellowship of
the spirit, nothing is done through contention, Philip. 2.2.
or vain glory, but in meekenes of mind, every one esteems an other better
then himself. Aug. hom. 15.
Austen says. Congaude illi, cui deus aliquam gratiam dedit, et potes in illo,
quod in te non potes. Be glade in his behalf to whom God has given any
grace, and thou may do that in him, which thou can not do in thy self.
Peradventure (says Austen) he has virginity, love him, and it is thine.
Again thou have more patience then he, let him love thee, and it is his. He can
watch a night at his study, if thou do not envy him, his study is thine.
Perchance thou can fast a great deal more, if he love thee, thy fasting is
his, hoc ideo, quia in illo tu es, per proprietatem non es tu, per charitatem
tu es. This is the reason, because thou art in him, by property thou art not,
by charity thou art. Bern. altitud. cord. sermon. 1.
Bernard reports that on a time one told him that he saw a lay Moncke in
whom he did reckon 30. virtues, whereof says he, I find not one in my self,
and perhaps says Bernard, he had not so great a virtue amongst the rest as
this was, religiosae emulationis humilitas: Humble emulation in matters of
religion. And in deed there is no gift greater. Math. 3.15.
When John earnestly put Christ back, saying. I have need to be baptized of
thee, and come thou unto me? He made him this answer. Let be now, for
thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousenes, teaching us that perfect
righteousness has always godly humbleness. 1. Co. 13.2.3.
When the Apostle shows the corruption of many gifts, if charity be away,
he says, all secreats, all knowledge, all faith, all goods, to signify that
all is nothing where is envy and emulatio^, two very contraries unto love.

Teale without discretion.
An other mischife we spoke of, is zeal without discretion, for where the
spirit enableth a man with notable gifts, zeal for the most part co^sumeth
and eats him up, Psalm. 69.9.
that very seldom is that rule of the Apostle performed spiritu feruentes,
fervent in spirit. But rather that wherewith the Apostle finds fault, Romans
10.21
zelum dei habe^t, sed non ex scientia, they have the zeal of god, but not
according to knowledge. If zeal be not governed, it inclines very
quickelie to vices. Berna. epist. 89
Barnard writing to a friend of his (and allowing his zeal) wills him to
have a zeal, but according to knowledge, vt cautus sis maiora minoribus non
impedire, that says he thou do beware thou hinder not greater matters for
less. For in matters of vehement, and hot emulation, we mar all if we
order not love with discretion, and zeal with love. Berna. cant. sermon. 20.
Zelum tuu^ inflammet charitas, informet scientia, firmet constantia. Let love
kindle thy zeal, knowledge instruct it, stedfastnes settle it, says Bernard:
We may very well compare zeal to a fierce horse, if he have not a bridle: a
voice that is harsh, if a man contend, and strain it to hie: an unhappy
child if he have not a rod: and a flame of fire if it be not quenched: for
so is zeal without love, and even so is the zeal of many for lack of love,
fierce, contentions childishe, the very firebrand of the Church. It is a godly
thing to be zealous, yet a right zeal is according to knowledge, ^m. 10.2.
and it is better howsoever, to have a zeal (although without knoweledge)
then to have no zeal at all, ^ig. re^. 13.
and yet better to have neither zeal, nor knowledge, then have no love.

^novation ^ough ^hisme.
The last of all is innovation, the very handmaide of the other, which
brings in the corruption and abuse of Gods good gifts by Schism, a fault in
the Corinthians, (as the Apostle tells them) that in all things being made
rich in Christ in all kind of speeches, Cor 15.7.10.12.
and all knowledge, so that they were not destitute of any kind of gift, yet
they had contention among them, every one of them saying, I am Paul's, I am
Apollos, I am Cephas, and I am Christ's, as though Christ was divided or Paul
crucified, for the^. Such a fault is now a days among us, where many
unlearned in this, that things indifferent are tolerable, and that pollution
comes not by communion of sacraments, but by consent of sin do thereupon
sequester themselves from the public Congregation of Christians, to a private
segregation of Schismatickes, and so by discention bring into the Church, as it
were, an infernal dissipation of the body, and a very hellishe perturbation
of the members of Christ, as though Judah, Greg. nazia orat. 1. pac^
and Israel did not belong to one principallytie, nor Jerusalem, and Samaria,
to one heavenly Jerusalem, And Paul, and Appollos, and Cephas for whom and
against whom all this same swelling is, and Christ himself and all Christians
are not all one. Psalm. 26.^
Austen says, conferring the place of David, I wash my hands in innocence oh
Lord, and again Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, Psalm. 27.4.
and the place where thine honor dwells, with the saying of saint Paul. 2.
Tim. 2.20
In a good house are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood
and of earth, and some for honor, and some for dishonor. Aug. parm. Epist.
lib. 3. cap. 4.
Ideo quippe tollerabat nocentes, non desereret innocents, cu^ quibus lauabat
manus, quia diligebat speciem domus Domini, quae species in vasis honoralibus
fuit, nec propter vasa que erant in contumeliam se a magna domo seperabat, sed
eos in vnitate vnius domus tolerabat a quibus se non imitando seruabat. David
did therefore (says he) let the wicked alone, least he should go from the
godly, with whom he did wash his hands, for he loved the beawtye of Gods
house which beawtie was in vessels of honor, neither went he asunder from the
great habitation because of the vessels of reproach, but kept himself well
enough from them, not doing as they did whom he suffered in one and the self
same house. These fellows should learn of Austen to love the bewtye of Gods
Church, which is the honorable society of the godly howesoeuer mixed with
the shameful corruption of the wicked, and not forsake the ornament of the
one, for the dishonor of the other, seeking a fellowshipe of perfection in
every point which cannot be found. Number. 11.^
Moses did wish that all the Lords people could Prophecy, and that the Lord
would put his spirit upon them. St. Paul did wish that all men were like
himself in (purity) and that all did speak strange languages, but rather
that they prophesied. 1. Cor. 7. 1. Cor. 14
Aug. secu. Ioh. sermon. ^
St. Augustine wishes that all would remember love, and brings this reason.
Sola est enim quae et vincit omnia, et sine qua nihil valent omnia, et
vbicunque fuerit trahit ad se omnia. For only love both overcomes all things,
and without love all things are nothing worth, and wheresoever love is, it
draws al things unto it. Greg. Na^ an. part o^ 3.
If any of us (Christians) be asked the question (says Gregory Nazianzen)
what we worship, Promptum est respondere, quod charitatem, veneremur: The
answer is ready, we worship charity. We had need cry out and writ no
longer against false Catholics (sola fides) Faith only, but against false
Protestants (sola Charitas) love only, faction abounds, love abateth, let
faith only justify, but love only rectify.

But let us come nere the sore, and touch the very wound of the church, and I
pray you with patience, because I will utter nothing but that every ones
conscience shall by experience acknowledge true Gregory Naziazen lamenting the
desperate state of the church in his time through the intolerable fury, ^reg.
Nazia^. ^ist. Nect. ^iscop. ^ctant.
and miserable affliction of the same, reckneth up many heretics. First those
of Arrius or Eudoxius, an insolent sect, assembling themselves in private
Churches, as it were by lawefull permission: Again Macedonians whose factious
contention grew to that temeritie and madness, that they took unto
themselves the titles and places of Bishopes, boasting of Eleusius the author
of their election. But (says he) there is one Eunomius and his sect the
inward plague and mischeife of the Church, who thinks it a great deal out
of his way if he draw not all with himself into destruction and danger,
and yet these things are tolerable: But of all church trobles, the
Apolinarists liberty is most licentious, I am to certefie your reverence (he
means Nectarius) that a little book is come to my hands of Apollinaris,
wherein such things are written as exceedes all perverse heretics that ever
were. Conueticles of Schismatickes dangerous.
I will have you consider, that if these have common liberty of private metings,
it is nothing else but to esteem their doctrine truer then ours, and you know
that in every thing nature suffers not two contrary doctrines of one and the
same point to be true. Any that will, may very well consider the same to be
the present calamity and ieopardy of our Church, and as Gregory to Nectarius,
so I appeal to our magistrates for redress. First and for most we have among
us Paul's Jesuits, Chem. Exa^ prefat. par. ^
a murren sect of heretics that infect the pureness of the Gospel, and a
cruel sort of bloody ones that abjure a lawefull allegiaunce to their Prince,
^^s. Hum. ^m. Cur. ^ax.
and natural love to their Country, and by foreign conspiracy abroad put
in practice at home the death of the one and destruction of the other: ^suites.
These think they do God good service to slaye his anointed, ^sebius. lib. ^
cap. 40.
and murder his saints, endeavoring as did the Imposters in Alexandria in the
days of Decius to inflame the peoples desire with a customed superstition of
the Country, and make them believe that the worshipping of Idols, and
murdering of Protestants is piety: August. exclaimes against such a zeal,
^gust. Iho. ^. tract. 93.
o error horrendus, o execrabilis cecitas, Zelum Dei habent sed non secundum
scientiam, obsequium se putant praestare deo interficiendo famulos Dei. Oh
horrible error, oh execrable blindness, they have a zeal, but not according
to knoweledge, they think they do GOD good service in killinge the Servants
of GOD. But I will not make many words about them, only this I say, as
they be our country men by Nation, pity their lives, as they be Papists in
weakness, labor to convert them, but as they be heretics in popeperie, and
Traitors to their Country, let the Law punish them, and I pray God either
turn their hearts from whetting any more swords to shed the blood of the
Lords anointed, or return the sharpest swords from the point with a cutting
edge on both sides in up to the very hiltes in their own hearts blood. Oh
Lord let ELIZABETH florishe with a Crown of glory upon her head, and a
Scepter of Tryumphe in her hand, and still wash her feet in the blood of
her enemies. Psalm. 58.9.


We have again among us Libanius, Martinistes, I use that name: Socrat. eccl.
hist. lib. 3. cap. 19.
Because as Libanius the Sophister in a ridiculous libell against religion
flattered Julian, that hipocrite in profession, until he came to the empire,
but afterward a Tyrant in persecution: ^artinistes.
So Martin publishes many his frivolous Pamphlets, bewraying in this, a
spirit rather of scorn and slander, then learning and love, because he
handles divinity with scurrillitie, and scripture with laughter, more
pleasant to a sight of gospel Libertines, and Churchrobbers, then meddling at
all with the matter in hand, much less. deciding the controversies by moment
and wayght of argument, and therefore better answered already by some merry
mates like himself, then to be vouchsafed so much as a silable by learned
replye: These irregular fellows derrogate from Bishops both title and place in
Church, and common wealth. A very sore plague to the good estate and
constitution of the Church, and a great deal the sorer, because domestical
and inward, and yet shall I say my conscience, and speak indifferentlye? Fie
for shame both Martin and Antemartin, Paciscamur (says Augustine to Petilia^)
si placet vt nec tu malos nobis obijcias, quos putas nostros, Aug. petilia^
lib. 2. cap. 3.
nec ego vestros vobis. Agreed (says August. to Petilian) If you please, that
neither you vpbrayde us with those on our part whom you think to be bad: Nor
we cast you in teeth with such on your side, as we judge very ill of. So do
ye both, and go to the matter: Ciprian. lib. ^ Epist. 9. Brownistes.
But we have as mischievous as any the other: Puppianus Brownistes, for they
rightly follow his steps, who as Ciprian writes would be perfect alone,
unspotted, holy, pure, and not join himself with the rest, but alone as it
were in Paradise, and in the kingdom of heaven, swelling with such a pride,
and puffed up with such arrogancy of mind, that he would reduce all bishops,
and clergy men to his own knowledge to be purged before him, and to be
absolved by his sentence: so that for the space of 6. years, neither had the
fraternity any Bishop, nor the people an ouerseer, nor the flock a Pastor,
nor the Church a governor, nor Christ a Prelate, nor God any Priest. These
set forth their books beyond all impudency of all Schismatickes, Magistrates
^egligence ^he cause of ^ectes.
and if they be let alone, as either impunitie, or security of magistrates (I
will not say perciallytie) must needs further their faction, what may the
silie people think, whom they seduce daily, and draw into error, but that
their doctrine is truer then ours and, as they fasly object our Church of
Englandes ministry, preaching, ^ocrates lib. ^. cap. 33.
prayer, sacraments, discipline, is of no warrant from God. Eustathius sometime
Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, after his abdicatio^ by a general counsel, set
a broch many wicked opinions, among other, he did persuade the people
(detesting other churches) to have their common meetings in private houses,
drawing away servant from their masters by simulation of religion,
Brownistes Conuenticles.
the like are among us, condemning all other asse^blies in accustomed churches,
and gathering themselves together in household conuenticles, alienating
prentices by coulor of religion from all duty of obedience, and dwelling with
their masters. I wish this saying of Ciprian were well learned of such.
Ciprian ibid
Scire debes Episcopu^ in ecclesia esse, et ecclesia^ in Episcopo, et si qui in
Episcopo no^ sunt, in ecclesia non esse, et frustra sibi blandiri eos qui pacem
cum sacerdotibus Dei non habentes, obrepunt et latenter apud quosdam
communicare se credunt cum ecclesia quae catholica et vna est, scissa non sit
neque deuisa, sed vbique connecta et cohere^tium sibi inuicem sacerdotum
glutino copulata. You ought to know that the Bishop is in the church, and the
church in the Bishop, and they are not in the church whosoever they be that
are not in the Bishop, and they do vainelie flatter themselves which having no
peace with Gods Priests commit themselves in close manner to be pertakers
with some certain persons whereas Gods Church being Catholic is not rent nor
divided, but knit and coupled together by fast consent of Ministers of the
Church agreeing one with another. Aug. Ioh. 7. ^ract. 33.
I will say unto them as sometime Augustine said. Habemus spiritum sanctum si
amamus Ecclesiam, amamus autem si in eius compage et charitate constitimus. We
have the holy spirit if we love the Church, and we love it if we persist in
unity and love of it.

But now all this while if there be any that in singleness of heart and
godliness of zeal desires somthinges amended, I speak not against them, for as
I am not with them that utterly blaspheme and affirm we have nothing aright,
As anon you shall hear toward the end.
so I am not against them that discretly blame and accuse some things amiss
in the church: Therefore this is my meaning Good things loose the grace of
their goodness, if they be not well handled. Concertation for reformation more
eager and bitter a great deal, the^ is behoofefull or needful, is like unto
madness, a very seditiouse vexation of the common wealth does often follow the
turbulent affection of the Church. Sozom. lib. 8 cap. 25.
The Emperor Constantine does his part, whose care is both to lead the people
along in uniformity of religion, Eusebius. vita. Constan. lib. 2. cap. 63.
and heal the grievous sickness of the body of the whole common wealth, and I
hope the like be endeavored by the Clergy of the land that was signified by
the Bishops of the East to them of the west Church in their letters from their
Synods, Theod. lib. 5. cap. 9.
concerning the necessary great case to recover the Church: Now I would have
the people do as they of Antioch did, who for 30. Theod. lib. 2. cap. 31.
years space endured the Arrians schism with patience, still hoping for a
better day, until indeed their blasphemy against the Apostles doctrine, and
conspiracy against christians was intolerable. Then how much more ought we
with longer patience among our selves tarry for reformation of some things
amiss upon a better time, Hope and pray for reformation.
since we have more then 30. years now enjoyed the free doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles, and still have as much as ever we can do to prevail against the
seditious and bloody enemies of the gospel.

The second ^art. Prophe^ie.
We come now to prophecy, the second thing to be handled, the most excellent
gift of all, the Apostle means not that peculiar prophecy, foretelling the
coming of christ, and forethreating the punishment of sin, beginning at
Samuel, Act. 3.24. Math. 11.3.
the number whereof were frequent, before Christ's coming, but now very rare,
but in the se^ce as he speaks else where. Let us prophecy according to the
proportion of faith: Romans 12.6.
And again he that prophecieth, 1. Cor. 14.3.
speaks unto men unto aedifieng, and to exhortation, and to comfort,
preferring it before all other gifts: For the ample use and principal
benefit, for as all other gifts do respect the profit and aedification of the
Church, Ephesians. 4.11. 1. Cor. 12.7.
so prophecy especially: For salvation cammeth by faith, Romans 10.14.
faith by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. It is the very same we
call preaching, set down in the scripture by the Apostle in variable phrase of
speech, as these, apt to teach, 1. Tim. 3.2. 2. Tim. 2.15 2. Tim. 4.2
dividing the word of truth aright, preach the word, be instant in season and
out of season, improve, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrines,
holding fast that faithful word according, able to exhort by wholesome
doctrine, Tit. 1.9. Tit. 2.1.
and convince them that say contrary: Speak the thing which becomes
wholesome doctrine. Therefore the whole scripture is called a most sure word
of prophecy, 2. Pet. 1.19 20
being of no private interpretation, because prophecy came not in old time by
the will of man, but holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the holy
ghost. As the use of all scriptures is very manifold, for the whole scripture
is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable, to teach, 2. Tim. 3.10
to convince, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God
may be absolut, being made perfect unto all good works, and whatsoever things
are written aforetime, are written for our learning, Romans 15.4.
that we through patience, and consolation of the Scriptures might have hope:
Right so he that is furnished according to the qualities before mentioned, and
can aplie the scriptures to the same end as shall be requisite, may be called in
this sense of the Apostle, a prophet of the gospel. Augustine says speaking
of Christ: Agust. tho. 6. tract. 24.
Erat autem dominus prophetarum, impletor prophetarum, sanctificator
prophetarum, sed et propheta, propheta dominus, et verbu^ dei dominus, et
nullus propheta sine verbo dei prophetat. Cum prophetis verbum dei, et
prophetae verbum dei. Meruerunt priora tempora prophetas afflatos, et impletos
verbo dei, mernimus nos prophetam. ipsum verbum dei. But it was he that set
forth the prophets, fulfilled all things the prophets told should happen,
sanctified the prophets, the Lord was that prophet, and the Lord was that word
of God, and no prophet does prophecy without gods word. In old time they had
the benefit of prophets inspired, and filled with the word of God, but we have
this pleasure, the very word of God to be our prophet.

This is the gift which the Apostle acountes most excellent above the rest,
and therefore not common, but rare, not easy but difficulte, as be all
things, which are excellent, for he says, he that speaks strange
languages edifieth himself, but he that prophecieth, 1. Co. 14.4.12 13.
edifieth the Church: Again forasmuch as you covet spiritual gifts, seek
that you may excel, to the edifying of the Church, 18.19.
and let him that speaks in a strange language pray that he may interpret.
Again he thanketh God, he spoke languages more the^ all the rest, yet he had
rather in the Church speak five words with his understanding, that he might
instruct others, then ten thousand words in a strange tongue. This ought to
strike into the hearts of all christians a deeper consideration of a more
godly duty, and first of the ministry then of the multitude.

Touching our selves to shu^ne some faults very common among us:
Insufficienci^ of ministers.
As first Insufficiency. For it is not for every one to protrude, and thrust
forth himself unto the calling with a profane mind, only for the subsidy
and help of liui^g, and not the benefit of the church, having nothing above the
capacity, and knowledge of the vulgar sort, as though we were miraculouslie to
believe that Saul is among the Prophets: 1. Sam. 19.24. Greg. nazian Apol. 1.
Item (...) lend. Atha.
Or that to become a mediator between god and man, to have the very se^ce and
meaning of christ, and of his spirit, to be (as it were in the place of Angels
and Archangels, to be even a god, and bring others to god, to handle that great
body of Christ (the society of the church) were a matter both of facillity and
security, 1. Cor. 2.16.
whereas indeed who is sufficient for these things? Moses among the priests
vneloquent, Exodus 4.12.
of a slow mouth and tongue, till god was in his mouth, and taught him what he
should say. Esaias. 66.
Esaias among the prophets a man forlorn, and of unclean lips, until one of the
Seraphins having an hot cole in his hand taken from the altar, laid it upon
his mouth and touched his lips, Galat. 1.15. 1. Cor. 15.8.
and so he was sent of the Lords message. St. Paul among the Apostles, as one
borne out of due time, unmeet to be called an apostle, but that God did
separate him from his mothers womb, and called him by grace to reveal his
son, Ambros. in 1. Tim. 4.14.
and preach him among the gentiles. Amb. says, expounding the apostles words
Prophetia est, qua eligitur quasi doctor futurus idoneus, manus vero
impositiones verba sunt mistica quibus confirmatur ad hoc opus electus,
accipiens test conscie^tia sna vt audeat vice domini sacrificiu^ deo offerre.
This is prophecy when one is chosen, as a meet man afterward to teach the
people, and the hands laid on by the company of eldership, are words in a
mystery, by which the party thus chosen, is withal settled to this work, and
receaueth power, his own conscience bearing him witness, that he may boldly
offer sacrifice to god in the lords steed. When Vale^tinia^ the Emperor after
the death Theod. lib. 4. cap. 6.
of Auxentius the Arria^ had made this speech to the synod of bishops for the
election of a bishop, saying unto them you cannot be ignorant being learned
Divines unto what manner of men it is convenient to commit the pontifical
dignity, even such a one as ought to instruct the people, not only with
doctrine, but also with manners and life so proposing himself an example of
perfect honesty, that the godlynes of his life may say for a witness his
doctrine is good, and therefore place him at this time in the Bishopric, to
whom also even our selves the rulers of the Empire may sincerely submit our
heads: And because we are me^ and must needs offend, may willingly admit
their reprehensions as a cure by physic. And thereuppon the Synod willed the
Emperor himself by his voice to make choice of one very wise and godly man,
he replied thus: Mayor, quam vt a me praestari possit, res est, multoque
fuerit melius vos discernere diulna gratia dignatos et participes spendoris
illius. It is a greater matter then I can perform, and it shall be much better
for your self to discern whom gods grace has vouchsaued worthy pertakers of
his glory.

This Christian Emperor may very well instruct us, that the imposition of the
hands of the Eldership in making a Minister should follow first a dignity of
gifts by discretion of grace. Greg. Nazia^. Apolog. 1.
Gregory Nazianzen commending the dignity of the Ministry, says thus:
What a gods name is he that as if he fashion an Image out of clay in a short
days space makes a Minister (who is a defender of the truth) him (I say) that
must be in the order and degree of Angels, celebrate the praise of God with
Archangels, transmit the sacrifices of the highest altar, execute the
Priesthood with Christ. I will say more, he that shall become as it were a God,
and make others gods. This sentence should be well observed both of Bishops
(such I mean not all) as suddenly impose their hands on men unmeet for the
calling, and so become pertakers of their sins, ^. Tim. 5.20.
and likewise of them that unworthily intrude themselves into the function,
dee^ing it as ordinary a matter to be made a minister, as for the potter to
form a shape out of clay or the register to writ forth the orders, and the
Officials to clap to the Bishops seal.

Negligence in ^he ministry.
An other fault is negligence. For many having very notable gifts of god, and
withal the gift of prophecy, do clean forget the Apostles rule, and council
to Timothy. 1. Tim. 4.14.
Despise not the gift that is in thee given by prophecy, and again, that
worthy thing that was committed unto thee, 2. Tim. 1.6.14.
keep through the holy ghost, which dwells in us. Likewise stir up the gift
of God which is in thee, by putting on of my hands. Ambition of the world more
then spiritual gifts, and love of pleasures, more then of Prophecy carry
many such away. The Apostle can tell them that preaching in a Minister is a
work of necessity laid upon him, and his case is woeful, if he preach not
the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9.16.17.
whether willinglye, or grudginlye, because the dispensation is committed unto
him. I think there was never age before us so excellent for many flourishing
wits both in all kind of learning, and in Deuinitie. The Spirit of Moses
distributed very commonly and universally unto the Elders, Number. 11.16.25.
and Officers in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, 2. Reg. 2.5.
and the Spirit of Elias dubled upon Elizeus. The word of the Lord is not
rare, as in the days of Samuel, 1. Sam. 3.1. Esaias. 2.2.
but all the multitude of the people may ascend to the hill of the lord, to
the house of god, and he teaches them his ways that they may walk in his
paths. Many for all that neglect their gifts, and become voluptuous wantons
of the world, seldom or never exercised in Preaching to the people. That order
in the church spoken of before, brings with it a necessary care of duty. Aug.
sermon. temp. 165.
August. says Habemus duo quaeda^ plane distinguenda, vnum quod christiani
sumus, alterum quod prepositi sumus: Christiani propter nos, prepositi propter
vos: excepto quod christiani sumus vnde rationem reddimus deo de vita nostra,
sumus etiam prepositi vnde rationem reddimus deo de dispe^satione nostra. We
(of the Clergy) have two things plainly to be distinguished (from you of
the Laity) The one is that we are Christians, the other, that we are placed
over you: We are Christians for our own selves, but set over you for your
sakes. Besides this that we are Christians, and thereby render account to God
for our own life, we are rulers over you, and by that means give account of
the dispensatio^ co^mited unto us. I spare the reverend Bishops of the land,
and other ancient fathers, such as have labored in doctrine diligently, when
they were young, but are unable to sustain, and unapt to execute the like for
defect of nature, and feeblenes of age, I wish them yet to do as Gregory
Nazianzen writes to to his father. Greg. Nazian. Apolog. post. ex fuga red.
iter. pasci^ orat. 1.
Duplicem pro simplici dat seipsum senectutis que subsidium, spiritus subsidium
facit. He gives you too for one, and makes a supply of the spirit, an aid
of his age. For being consumed himself with years, he did associate his
son, who was a double steed and aid unto him (to wit) of his ancient
years and gifts of the spirit, upholding his father broken with weakness, and
bearing with him the spiritual cares of the church. So should aged Prelates
do, procure and alure young men of worthy gifts to be coadiutors in their
infirmities, and accordinglye reward them the better to maintain them in
study, and the more to encourage them in preaching. Now if there be any such
as Gregory writes of besides, cui vel altissima senectus canam doctrinam attu,
lerit, eamque vim habentem vt nouae in pietate animae vtilitate atque adiumento
esse queat. Whom extreme old age has brought unto an ancient kind of
preaching, and the same so effectual, that he can with a godly mind do good,
and help to labor (in the Church) as much as he did before. That as Moses
was fourscore years old when he spoke to Pharao, Exodus 7.7.
so any one or other of like years decrees with himself that he will begin
again his former travel in preaching the gospel, I esteem such a one not
only reverend among men, but also greatly blessed of God. Sozomen writes of
one Theonas very learned in the doctrine of Aegiptians, Sozom. lib. 6. ^ap. 28.
Grecians and Latins, who for thirty years space lived in silence. If there
be any such among us of the Ministry sufficientlye seen in variety, and
diversity of learning, that have used silence now this four and thirty
years space in so religious and blessed a p^^agation of the Gospel, how they
will answer for many a soul perishing in ignorance long of their
negligence, I leave it to god, and their own conscience

We may add a third fault to both the former, which is simonie: Symonie in
ministers.
For we covet not spiritual gifts, but spiritual promotions, not the
calling, but the living, not the benefit, but the benefices of the church. I
say as Barnard sometime to Eugenius: Bern. consi. Eug. lib. 4.
Vides omnem ecclesiasticum zelum feruere sola pro dignitate tuenda, honori
totum datur, sanctitati nihil aut parum? Perceive you the zeal of our Church;
men how earnest they are only to maintain their dignetie? All is for
estimation, nothing a do for holiness, or very little. I would handle this
matter more largly, if I thought I did speak to such a people who, as ye do
justly find fault with the ministry, so ye would discreetly take heed ye
apply it not to the froward offense of your own faith, and shamfull reproach
of our caling: but rather be first religious to amend your selves, and the^
officious to reprehende us. Considering what Augstustin says, Par causa et
docentem et audientem constringit vt vtriusque cofessio factorum testificatione
signetur, Aug. math. sermon. 3.
iungantur factis, qui seperantur officijs, copulentur opere, qui diuersi sunt
nomine, et quos vocabula ab inuicem seperant, eos obseruantia praeceptorum
fideliter et deuote coniungat. The like reason constraines both the preacher
and the hearer, that their works bearing witness may betoken both their
confessions: let them be joined in deeds, that are set apart in offices:
coupled in works that are diverse in names, and let the reverence of Gods
commandments join them faithfully, and devoutly together whom titles
separate one from an other. Greg. Nazia^. Orat. ad Gregor. Nissen.
Gregory Nazianzen writing to Gregory Nissen: I would says he very gladly
speak somewhat boulder, but I am moved with the reverence of the day to say
nothing sharply or vnluckely. Perhaps he would not displease the ears, or
greiue the consciences, or offend the faith of seelye christians, by telling
them of the unclean sacrifices of the heathcn: even so I desire to speak more
boldlye of some things, but moved with the reverence of the calling, I will
say nothing vngentlye, or vnluckely, partly because of Libertins that will by
and by snatch occasion to blaspheme the holiness of the calling, and partly for
hypocrites that ca^ epsy the motes of simonie in us, but not see the beams of
sacrilege in themselves. Math. 27.4.
I will not say (no in deed will I not) that with Judas, we sell Christ,
betraying the second time the blood of the innocent. Neither can I say with
Simon, Act. 8 19.
we buy the gifts of the holy ghost. Simon in deed of experience would have
bought them, but he could not, Basil. epist. 76. Math. 10.8.
yet this I will say that with Judas we love the bag and having it freely
given, Ioh. 12.6.
we do not bestow it as freely: and that with the Romans we worship Mercury
too much that god with a purse in his right hand. Euag. lib. 3. cap. 12.
One John Presbiter after the death of Timothy Bishop of Alexandria by jury
and simonie gat the bishoricke, but when Zeno the Emperor understood it, he
put him out and placed Peter in his stead writing an epistle (te^ding to
concord) called (henoticon) that Peter should subscribe to the same epistle.
Euag. lib. 5. cap. 5.
But Anastasius bishop of Antioch, when Justinius the Emperor (after he was
bishop) asked him a sum of money and thrust him out because he denied (as the
Historian reports from an other) like a very godly bishop, did willingly
suffer depriuatio^. John Chrysostom the Archbishop of Constantinople in his
visitation in Asia understanding that many by gifts, ^ozom. lib. 8. cap. 6.
and favor did buy and sell benefices, came to Ephesus, and for simonie de
priued 13. bishops at once, some of Li sia, some of Phrigia, some of Asia. Now
if there be any among us (I say if there be any, for I protest perticularlie
I mean not any, much les maliciously accuse any) who rather like John
Presbiter will get a bishopric, or ecclesiastical promotion by perjury and
simonie, the^ like Anastasius suffer eiection, rather then co^mmit simonie. I
do wish that our Zeno would remove John, and surrogate Peter, Elizabeth.
but with this condition, Io. Archbis^ Cant. and York. Anglia.
that he observe the epistle of concord, and that John Patriarch would make his
visitatio^ in Asia and spy out as in my clergy me^ as come in by simonie, some
in one dioces, and some in an other, and put them out, if there be 13. bishops
at a clap. Ambros. epis^ lib. 50. orat. ^ Auxent.
Shall Ambrose sentence be heard. Quid sunt cathedrae nisi honores, quid sunt
columbae nisi mentes simplices, vel animae fidem ca^didam and puram sequentes,
ergo iubetur exire qui dignitates vendit et honores, iubetur exire qui vendere
vult simplices mentes fideliu^. What are the seats but places of honor, what
are the doves, but the seely minds and souls of such as follow the clear
and pure faith, then he is commanded to go forth of the church that sells
dignities and honors, he is commanded to go out of the church that will sell
the seely consciences of the faithful. Basil does call it transitum ad
Gehe^nan, Hellferrie, and so I fear me it is in deed both for the priest and
the people. Barnard tells a tale of Martin a Cardinaall prelate who returning
in his Legacy from Dacia was so poor (his money and horses failing him) that
he could scarce come to Florence. The Bishop of Florence gave him a horse
which brought him to Pise, where Barnard reports he was at the same time: the
next day after the Bishop of Florence came to Pise, and requiring for the
dispatch of some cause he had in law the testimony of his freindes,
presuming of the Cardinal among the rest, for his late good turn, came to
him for his voice, then said Martin you have deceived me sir, I little knew
ye had such business in hand, and the very same hour resigned his horse.
Barnard bringes this in to vpbrayde both the insolency and simonie of the
Court of Rome in Pope Eugenius time, because Martin passing through a Country
of gold and silver took no knowledge of it, and moreover would not be so much
as suspected to take any gift at all. As little as I like Martin Marprelate,
surely this was Martin good-prelate, Martin good prelat.
and I would to God that every one both Bishop and other minister were such a
Martin.

Now concerning your selves of the Auditory. Contempt in the common people.
Many faults likewise are common in you: Contempt of Prophecy is one and the
first. For whereas the end of this notable gift of Prophecy is edification (as
ye heard before) the people in these days are grown to a hateful contempt,
and rebellious disobeidience of the word preached, as the Prophet said in his
time. Ierm. 5.13.
The warning of the Prophets is but wind, the word of God is not in them.
They say prophecy not, Mich. 2.6.11.
ye shall not prophecy unto us, no ye shall not. Every paynfull minister may
find Bernards words to be true. Berna. cant. sermon. 42.
Coarctore duobus, et quid eligam nescio: placere ne mihi in eo quod locutus
sum, quoniam quod debui feci, an penitentiam agere super verbo meo, quia quod
volui, non recepi. Besides a threefold peril of the labor and work in respect
of our selves, conscience, intelligence, vtteraunce, Conscience to be rightly
called by inward testimony. Intelligence to perceive the divine sense of the
scripture, vtteraunce to teach the people, (of which three, the first is
requisite, the second hard, the third in manner harder then the second) ye do
ad a threefold harder difficulty then all, and that is to procure your
teachablenes in hearing, faythfulnes in believing, holiness in obeying. For
oh! Lord who has given credence to our preaching, Esaias. 53.1. Romans 10.^6.
Esaias. 65.2. Romans 10.21.
or who has believed our report. All the day long do we stretch forth our
hands to a disobedient and gaynsaying people, but err not I pray you and be
not deceived. Greater far authority, is the prophecy in the gospel, then of
old: and far more fearful to despise the one, then conte^ne the other. John
Baptist, Math. 11.6
more then a prophet, none greater among me^ begotten of women, and yet the
least in the kingdom of heaven greater then he. The Apostle commaundes us not
to despise prophesying, for no doubt he that despises, 1. These. 5.19 1. These.
4.8. 1. Sam. 8.7.
despises not man but god, who has given you his holy spirit: The Lord said
to Samuel the prophet. They have not cast thee away, but cast me away, and so
said Christ to his disciples, Luke 10.16.
He that hears you, hears me, and he that dispiseth you, dispiseth me, and
he that dispiseth me, despises him that sent me. And in deed all former
prophets in their visions did level with their eyes, and look strait on
Christ the only prophet of all. To him al gave witness that through his name all that believe in him should receive remission of sins. Ambrose says: Act.
10.43. Amb. Luc. 9. lib. 7.
Et hodie Moses docet, et hodie Elias loquitur, et hodie in maiori gloria Mosen
videre possimus. Eue^ now a days Moses teaches and now a days Elias
speaks, and now a days we may see Moses in a great deal more glory. Nay
Barnard seems to require the grace of prophecy in as many of your selves as
are devout and godly. For says he, Vbi angelica in hoc corpore conuersatio,
in cord prophetica expectatio in vtroque apostolica perfectio inuenitur,
gratus iste cumulus gratiarum. Where we have in this (our) body a conversation
like unto the Angels in the heart: an hope as the prophets had in both: the
Apostles perfection, how great an abundance is it of Gods graces?

Arogancie in ^he people.
Arrogancy is an other fault in our people: For many have a dedignatio^ to be
taught, surmising themselves more sufficiently to have the sense of the spirit,
and sincerlie the knowledge of the truth, the^ any learned preacher of them all.
As though it were a protrit and base matter that St. Paul speaks of, ^. Cor.
2.10.
to search the deep things of God. And whereas the Apostle would have the
spirits even of the Prophets subject ^. Cor. 14.32.
to the Prophets, 2. Pet. 1.20 2. Tim. 3.1^ 1 Cor. 12.2^
these will admit no censure of any else, but only their own private
interpretation, yet being no Prophets, as though Prophecy were of private
interpretation, Greg. nazia^ Theol. orat. 1
all were Apostles, all Prophets, all Teachers.

Gregory Nazianzen writes of Eunomius, who as though he were rapt into
heaven after Elias, 2. Reg. 2.11
made worthy to talk with God, Exodus 19.9.
and behold him in a cloud after Moses, taken up into Paradise, and hearing
impossible things to be uttered, 2. Cor. 12.^
after Paul, does (says he) in one days space make many mo Saints, and
creat deuines (as it were) inspiring learning into them, and causing many
conuenticles of unlearned praters, and of such an immediate vpstart spirit
above the sober and modest proportion of lawful knowledge, separate from the
rest of the ministry, and people of God, altogether in the heavens, in
clouds, Greg. Nazia^ mother. dispu^ habend.
in the paradise with God himself are those I speak of. A days dispatch for
deuinitie is enough with the^. They come out of the school of Concision. He
or she that has rashly learned two or three words of scripture, Genesis 11.4.
straight ways falls a building of Babell that their name may be scattered
abroad upon the whole earth. Number. 16.2.
And by and by must Corah and his company furiously stir up an insurrection
against Moses making in deed (which is miserable) a scattered confusion abroad
of the Church, and a like holiness of office in the ministers, and every one of
the congregatio^s. I would to god withal my heart, Number. 11.29.
that all the lords people could prophecy, and that the lord would put his
spirit upon them, ^oh. 5.39.
and I will all christians to search the scriptures, for in them is eternity of
life, and testimony of christ, ^ct. 17.11.
even to be exquisit examiners of doctrine, as were those nobler men then those
of Thessolonica, Ioh. 4.1.
and not to believe every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of god
so many false prophets are abroad in the world. I am not of the judgment that
old Apelles was who thought that every man ought to hold ^us lib. 5. eccl
^ist. cap. 12.
opinion as he believed, Socrat. lib. 3. Eccl. histor. cap. 14.
and is not at all to examine any doctrine. But rather of an other mind
teaching the utility and necessity of scripture, that the scriptures inspired
by god, do cast seeds of wonderful precepts of doctrine teaching matters in
deed very divine, notable godliness, and a right rule of life, into the hearts
of the auditorie, and do propose a very holy religion to such as study them.
But they do not deliver the art of Logique, whereby to resist them that oppugn
the truth. Forasmuch as we do then most easily conquer the adversary, when
we use our own weapons against them. And therefore I do wish that every
christian congregation were like to Samosata, Theod. lib. 4 ^Eccl. histor. ap.
11.
who when their bishop gave up the sea, and Lucius a wolf and traitor came in
his room, being spoiled of their Pastor, tamen officia pastoris exe quebantur,
nam apostolica^ doctrina^ seruaba^t incorruptam. For all that did execute their
pastors offices themselves, and kept the incorrupt doctrine of the apostles.
But my desire is that great deal more sobriety be in man's professors, and
that an order be kept in the execution of gifts, that some teach, and some
learn, some to be like the tongue, and some the ear, and the flock arrogate
the pastors office, nor the soldier guide the Army which belonges to the
Captain. As it is expedient for a provident Merchant, whose calling is to
travel the ieoperdouse seas for commodity, sometimes to be in tranquillity
and quiet on the land: So in controversy and scruple of matter in religion,
sometimes discipline with soberness more beseems a godly people then
disputations with frowardnes. Bern. cant. ser. ^6. in 1. Cor. 8.2.
Barnard says upon these words of the Apostle. Now if any man think that he
knows any thing, he knows nothing as he ought to know: Vides quoniam non
probat multa scientem, si scientiae modum nescierit, for you see that he likes
not a man, that understands much, and is ignorant of the manner of
understanding, noting afterward the manner of knowledge to consist in these
points: Ordine, Studio, Fine. Ordine id prius quod maturius ad salute^. Studio
id arde^tius quod vemehe^tius ad amore^. Fine vt no^ inane^ gloria^ aut
curiositatem, aut aliquid simile, sed tantum ad aedificationem tuam et proximi.
In the order, endeavor, purpose. Touching the order (to know) that foremost,
which is speediest to saluatyo^. concerning his endeavor that more zelouslie,
which is more vehement to love. As for the end that if it be not for vain
glory, or curiosity, or any like matter, This part fo^lowing was cut of: for
time was p^^ and ouerspe^t it the other (...) parts before. Sacrilege in the
La^tie.
but only to aedifie thy self, and thy neighbor.

An other fault and exceeding both the other is your sacrilege, that holy
covetousness and both honorable and worshipful Idol of Protestants: but alas
the spoil of the church, and hinderaunce of prophecy. For what an impiety is
this? We must have the gifts of holy spirit, 1. Cor. 9.7.
and ye the gifts of holy Church, we prophecy and preach the gospel, and
ye live of the gospel: like mercenary soldiers ye send us to war, and be at
no charges your selves. Nay you put our money, and paime^t in your own purses,
ye will have us plant the vineyard, and not taste of the fruit, but your selves
will be dru^cke with the grapes thereof. You say it is our calling to feed the
flock, and will not let us eat of the milk. Job. 21.24.
But your own breasts are full of milk, and your bones ru^n full of marrow:
you will have us never out of the tempel, and yet you will take away the
offerings, and the gold of the tempell. It is true that I tell you, your
sacrilege is the very cause of our simony: for if we had a law sure enough to
cut of your sacrilege, we could find a liberty soon enough to commit no
simonie, and without doubt we are not so deep in the judgments of god for
simony, but ye are the former and the farther in for sacrilege. And as we
shall answer for our own selves, so shall ye answer both for your selves and
us also. I find not so great a cause of such a number of poor in this la^d as
this your sacrilege. Your robbery of the church is the robbery of the poor.
Amb. says: Amb. lib. 5. Epist. 31. Esaias. 3.14.
Possessio ecclesiae su^ptus est egenoru^. The church livings, are the
maintenanece of the poor. The Lord must needs have a controversy, and
judgment, with the ancient of the people, they wast his vineyard, the spoil
of the poor is in their houses. Deuteronomy. 14.26.
Call ye me this a protestaunt, when a man has money, oxen, sheep, or strong
drink, or whatsoever his heart desires, and eats it before the lord his god,
and rejoices both he and his family, but never brings forth any tithes of
his increase for the Leuit within his gate, that has no inheritance with him,
and forgets the stranger and fatherles, and widow, which should likewise
eat and be filled, that God might bless him the more in all the works of his
hands, Romans 2.22. Ephesians. 5.5.
as the Apostle says to the Jew. Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou
sacrilege? So I to such a protestaunt: Thou that abhorrest popery, August.
Ioh. tract. 50.
commitest thou idolatry I mean sacrilege? August. says of Judas that he
was, fur sacrilegus, no^ qualiscunque fur, fur loculorum, sed dominicoru^
loculoru^, sed sacroru^, fur sacreligus qui ausus fuerit vndecunque tollere,
hoc est de ecclesia tollere. Qui aliquid de ecclesia furatur, Iudae perdito
comparatur. A sacrilegious theife, not a common theife, that stole out of the
lords coffers. A sacrilegious theife that durst steal whersoeuer it was to be
had, even out of the church. Who so steals ought from the church, is like
Judas that child of perdition. Greg. Nazia^. ^ul. arat. 2.
Gregory Nazianzen names sacrilege to be impietatem auaritia cumulata^.
Eusebius. vita Constant. lib. cap. 36.
A hughe heap of ungodly covetousness. In the days of Constantine, when any
martyrs or confessors died, or banished persons having no kindred suruiuing to
posses their inheritance it came to the church of that place, and if any of
the^ before named, had given any of their possessions to the church, it was to
remain sure for ever to the church. There be many that can find fault with our
covetousness, but not with that covetousness in themselves, a huge heap of all
impiety. They can spy out Magus for simonie among us, but not Judas for
sacrilege amongst themselves: they think the Church goods which they posses
to be their rightful patrimony and inheritance, Psalm 83.12 Bern. Epistol. 42.
which I see not how it may be unless they will say, let us take the sanctuary
of god for our possessions, for in very deed the church goods are poor men's
possessions, not an inheritance for noble men and gentelmen. But I fear me it
will at lenth be the decaie of both our flourishing Universities, where very
many of rare gifts, either betake themselves to an other calling abroad, or
abide close at their study in the university, their gifts being hid from the
world, because they see the reward of their labor taken away, so that they
cannot procure a living without corruption of conscience, so insatiable in a
number of you is your covetous sacrilege. You will say unto me, we do not see,
but your selves of the clergy are as faulty as we of the laity, for we could
not sell if ye did not buie, naie many will offer and that very roundly and
larglie out of their living, to have the dignity and title, I cannot tell
whether any do so. And I tiowe you speak not against lawful titles, but
ambition of them: For otherwise I see not but they are lawful in reverend
bishops, so it be as Barnard says cant. sermon. 33. Pro huiusmodi volunt esse,
and sunt ecclesiaru^ Praepositi, Deca^i, Archidiaconi, Episcopi, Archiepiscopi.
For these like things (speaking before of the voluptuouse pride in the
Clergy) both they are, and covet to be ecclesiastical Prelates, Deanes,
Archdeacons, Bishops, Archbishops. Nazianzen says against the indignity,
Greg. Nazia^. ^n Maxius.
and ambition of such as Maximus, who of a Cinicke philosopher so quickly
became a christian, and sought by simony to translate the chair to himself.
Vtinam nulla esset throni praerogatiua, nec praelatio et violenta authoritas ac
praeemine^tia, vt ex sola virtute cognosceremur. I would god there were noe
prerogative of throne, nor praeferme^t and violent authority and
praeheminence, that we might be known by virtue alone. Howbeit the same
ancient father approves a superiority and preferment of bishops, so it come
by degrees, and deserts, as he speaks of Basil, Greg. Nazia^ in laudem
Basilij.
who was first a reader of deuinitie, then an elder, and afterward placed in
the bishops chair deservedly. And again says that Basil, Ibidem.
had a principal care and endeavor antistitem obseruare (meaning Eusebius) and
did possess the government of the Church, though he were second in honor of
the Chair to Eusebius. I told you before I take no particular knowledge of any
such, but if there be any such I am suer Ambrose durst not for his life
deliver the goods of the church. For says he, they were given me to keep
them, but not to pass them away. The same father says of Auxentius the
Arria^, Ambro. lib. 5. Epist. orat. in Auxent.
who took upon him an other name to be called Mercurius. Vnum portentum est
duo nomina, mutauit vocabulum, sed perfideam non mutauit, exuit Lupum, et
induit Lupum. One monster, but two names, he changed his title, but not his
treachery, he put a woolfe off, and one very cunningly. And so I say of
every such a one. Call him Mercurius, but he is still Auxentius the Atria^.
One monster though he have diverse names he has changed his title, but not
left his naughtines, he can put a wolfes skine of and on very well. Whither in
the end the feircenes of sacrilege in you, and simonie in us will run, god
alone knows, and we may fear. The inrode is made already into the church,
the incursio^ will follow next upon Co^mnons, afterward the invasion will be to
the scepter and seat of the Highest. And then will these ouerrune the land,
confusion for estate of order in the common wealth, barbarousnes for civility
of conversation amongst the people, rebellion for obedience of laws in
subjects, ignorance for arts of learning in the universities. Atheism for
religion of God among christians. But o Lord in mercy turn away so fearful
punishments from the land. My conclusion is As god bestows diverse gifts of
the spirit to the edefieng of his Church, so we beseech him by grace of the
same spirit to make us more painful, your selves more thankful, and all of
us more fruitful, that following the truth in love every member doing his part
to build up the body, we may grow up together in him the head of the same
body Jesus Christ our Savior: To whom with the father and the holy spirit, be
all praise honor and glory evermore Amen.

Many things are amiss in the print, for ortographie, poynting, quoting, of
places, sense, and true Laten: Good Reader peruse it with ^ight judgment.


