THE KINGS BATH. AFFORDING MANY SWEET AND COMfortable observations from the
Baptism of Christ. Gathered by THOMAS TAILOR, Preacher of the Word of God at
Redding in Barkshire.

AUGUST. Christus baptizatus non sibi, sed nobis. AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix
Kyngston, for Thomas Man, and John Bartlet, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Talbot in Paternoster Row. 1620.

THE KINGS BATH.
MATH. 3. 13. to the end. Then came Jesus from Galile to Jordan unto John, to
be baptized of him.

14. But John put him back, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and
come thou to me?

15. But Jesus answering, said to him, Let be now, for thus it becomes us to
fulfill all righteousness: So he suffered him.

16. And Jesus, when he was baptized, came straight out of the water, and lo,
the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like
a Dove, and lighting upon him.

17. And lo, a voice came from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased.


IN this Chapter the holy Evangelist has preached Christ in John's ministry
and baptism: now he begins to preach him from his own facts and ministry,
and in the words are two things: Parts to be handled.
1. The baptism of Christ. 2. His solemn inauguration into his office.

Then. 2. The place, Christ came from Galile to Jordan. 3. The end of his
coming, he came to John to be baptized of him. 4. The dialogue between
Christ and John, verse 14. 15. 2. The baptism it self: Then he suffered him.

2. In his solemn inauguratio^ opening of the heavens. 2. A visible appearance
of the holy Ghost, in the shape of a Dove. 3. His Fathers voice and testimony
of him.

FIrst, of the time, Sect. 1. Of Christ's offering himself to John's Baptism.
1. The time when.
then: Mark says, chap. 1. 9. in those days, inferring it (as Matthew) upon
John's ministry: when John had enflamed the people with earnest affection and
desire to see Christ, whom he had so highly preferred above himself; when the
minds of men were so impatient of delay in this expectation of the Messiah, as
they would have given this honor to John himself, then came Jesus. 2. Then
when John had prepared the people with the baptism of repentance, had smoothed
the way to Christ, had cast down high mountains of pride, and had humbled
men, then most fitly comes Christ: so Luke 3. 21. when as all the people were
baptized, then Christ was baptized. 3. Then when Jesus began to be about thirty
years of age, (says Luke 3. 23.) at which age the Leuiticall Priests were
admitted to public ministry, and not before: for John began in the fifteenth
of Tiberius, and all consent that he was borne in the fifteenth of Augustus. 1.
Note hence the truth of Scripture, Consent of Scripture.
and consent with it self; this circumstance lets us see the accomplishment
of two prophesies, the former in Malach. 4. 5. that John Baptist must go
before Christ in the spirit of Elias, that preaching that salvation which
Christ now brought after him, men might better both take notice, and give
better entertainment to him, whom now all expected: the latter in Malach. 3.
2. that after this Messenger is sent, the Lord must speedily come to his
temple: this Mark expresses plainly, chap. 1. 19. that when John was
committed to prison, then came Christ into Galile preaching; and Math. 4. 12.
when Jesus heard, that John was delivered up, he returned into Galile: see Act.
1. 21, 22.

Whence learn, that the wise providence of God guides not only al actions,
Gods providence guides all circumstances as well as actions.
but all the circumstances of them also. Eccles. 3. 1. To every thing there is
an appointed time; whatsoever is done, suffered, enjoyed, whether natural,
voluntary, or inuoluntary, it has a set time wherein it is beautiful and
comely. But especially every vision and word of God is for an appointed time,
Habak. 2. 3. and though long, yet at length every promise, every threat, every
prediction shall come to his just period and performance. There was a due and
appointed time, when Christ was to be incarnate, that is, the fullness of time,
Gal. 4. 4. and then God sent his Son made of a woman: There was an appointed
time to undertake his ministry, when way was made for him by John's ministry:
There was an appointed time to finish his work in, an hour for the power of
darkness to work in, before which time, though they could take up stones
against him, they could not throw them at him, but, when his hour was come, he
went out to meet them. There was an appointed time, in which he was to be laid
in the house of death, after which three days he could not be held. And as it
was with him, so is it with the children of God by adoption, no thing befalls
them but in Gods time, which they must wait and expect, not prescribe. Want
thou any good thing? wait Gods leisure as Abraham did: Art thou in misery
under any evil present, or in fear of evil to come? patiently expect the
Lords set time; sow prayers, sow tears, thou shall reap in due time if thou
faint not; only make not haste. Lazarus must not be raised till the fourth day,
nor Christ himself til the third. Times and seasons are in his hands, for the
Father has put them in his own power.

Again, let us be wise in observing and entertaining his seasons; he has
appointed us a time of mercy, a day of visitation, a time when he is near and
may be found, a time when with the wise virgins we may enter, a time when the
blessing may be obtained: and there is another time when if we seek with
tears we shall not obtain it, as Esau. This present day is our day; now know
God, enter fellowship with him, believe his word, obey his voice, and in this
thy day follow the things of thy peace.

2. Christ fitly follows John.
Note that then Christ is fitly preached, when John has made way for him: the
law must prepare men, and lead them to Christ as a Schoolmaster; the
ceremonial law points at him and shadows him, Medicus primo erodit, and
ab^adit putrida in vulnere, postea ligat, and pharmacum subdit: ita sidelis
mysterioru^ dei dispensator, etc.
but the moral forces unto him by showing sin and damnation without remedy,
so as we must despair in our selves, and fly forth of our selves unto
Christ. He is a good scholar in Christ's school that has heard John's voice
humbling him, and being driven out of himself, has heard the voice of Christ,
saying, Believe in me, turn unto God, and bring forth the fruits of new
obedience.

Secondly, the place: He came from Galile to Jordan.^ The place.
Christ dwelt in Nazaret, a town of Galile, where all the while before he
lived privately, and by his labor in his calling sustained himself and his
mother: for, that he was called the Carpenter, and Carpenters son, proves
that he exercised that trade, Mark. 6. 3. and John 7. 15. the Jews wondered at
his doctrine, seeing he was not brought up in learning. Thus he lived in
obedience to his parents, and was counted a Nazarite.

Christ having thus in his own person sanctified the private callings Christ
in his own person sanctified both private and public callings.
of private men, now he comes forth in public, and enters upon the
gathering of his Church, by being himself gathered into it: now he leaves his
parents, friends, and all, that he may do the work for which he is sent.

Here arises one question by the way, Quest.
Whether a man may change his calling, and turn himself out of one into
another as Christ here did?

The general rule of a Christian, Answ.
is, 1. Cor. 7. 24.
to abide in the vocation wherein he is called, and one of the necessary
conditions is constancy: But yet sometimes there may be a change of one calling
into another, as in these cases: 1. For private necessity; as when a man is
disabled from his calling, as suppose, not suffered to execute it; or else
hindered by sickness, age, or any incurable disease; or when one calling is not
sufficient for his honest maintenance; or when a calling is out of request; or
the work of it is hindered: now a man may lawfully change his calling, good
advice and prayer going before. 2. For the public good, as when a private man
is called to be a Magistrate in a society; and thus Christ changed his calling,
and of a private man is called by his Father to be a public person, even the
Mediator between God and man.

But why is the Evangelist so Quest.
diligent in the accurate describing of the places where these things were done?

For these reasons. Answ.
1. For the John were by Gods providence brought up in several places so
distant, as one knew not the other, till Christ came to his baptism. This was
so by Gods appointment, lest the Pharisees should slander them, as if there were
a collusion or plot between them: and therefore, Ioh. 1. 32. John professed he
knew him not, otherwise than by the sign which God gave him, On whomsoever
thou shall see the Spirit descend and abide, that is he, ver. 33. it had not
been fit for John to have spoke so much as he did of a familiar and known
friend: Besides, Christ sent Disciples to John, to show him what was done: The
blind see, the deaf hear, and the poor receive the Gospel, etc. 3.
Nazareth Luke says, that when all the people were baptized, Christ was
baptized; he would not creep into his office, but would be solemnly and
openly inaugurated, that men and Angels might take notice of him. 4. The Lord
must come to his Malachi prophesied, Malac. 3. 1.
and to his own, Ioh. 1. 11. Now the place where John preached, was in Judea:
for Palestina was divided into three parts, Galile, Samaria, and Judea; now
Judea was the place, wherein Christ was especially to converse, and therefore
it was meet he should be there called and set out: that was the place fittest
for John to perform his ministry toward him, whom he must make known to
Israel, and point at as the Lamb of God, Ioh. 1. 31. Naaman was cleansed from
his leprosy, 2. Kings 5. 14. and which river those famous Prophets Eliah and
Elisha had divided with their cloak, Congrue Iordane: quia sicut per illud
flumen silij Israel transierunt ad terram promissam, sic per baptismum fideles
transeunt ad terram viuentium.
2. King. 2. 8, 13. For special reason, 1. for whereas the Israelites about
1500. years before passed over on dry land, under the conduct of Joshua, unto
the land of Canaan: about the very same place did the true Joshua, our Jesus,
fulfill that type: for at Bethabara (signifying the house of passage over, in
memory of that famous passage:) did John baptize Christ; secondly, there were
the waters divided again; that way might be made for our passage into our
hea^^^ly Canaan, our Country (...) above, Heb. 10. 20. Thirdly, there the Ark of God stood in Jordan, Josh. 3. 17. Now our Propitiatory descends into Jordan.
Fourthly, there God magnified Joshua that day before all Israel: here God
magnifies our Jesus to all the Israel of God, giving such testimony unto him as
never was given to any creature. Fifthly, Jordan was but simple, pure and common
water, fittest for baptism, not mixed or distilled: and Christ will be baptized
with no better, to show that the words of Institution leave no inherent
holiness in the water after the use; Jordan after this was a common flood and
used to common uses, and so any thing may be done with the water after a child
is baptized. Neither find we to this Iordan-water, added either oil, or salt,
or cream, or spittle, or any such other device.

But why does Christ come to John? Quest.
the Lord to the servant? Dommus ad seruum, lux ad lucernam, sol ad Luciferum.
why rather did not John go to him? or Christ might have sent for him, and
commanded him to come to him; but he takes a wearisome journey unto him: for
from Nazaret to Bethabara was about 14. miles.

Thus carnal reason judges, Answ.
that it had been fittest for John to have gone into Galile, and there have
preached and baptized, if it had bin only for Christ's cause and ease; but
Christ in great wisdom would have it otherwise. 1. Why Christ comes to
John, not John to Christ.
In respect of John: for it was prophesied before of him, that he must be the
voice of a crier in the wilderness of Judea, and he must keep his place
assigned. 2. That which the first Adam lost from us by pride, the second Adam
would restore to us by humility; and in every thing debaseth himself, and
stoopeth to help us up being fallen: and therefore he that was borne in so
mean a condition, and brought up in a poor village, out of which it was a
marvel that any good could come, he sorts himself among the common people,
comes to John his servant like a common man; as before he was circumcised
with the same knife with others, so now he will be washed with the same waters,
in a common river with others; he would not be singular, but, being clothed
with ye same flesh, would be like other men, except in sin, laying aside his
glory for the time of dispensation. 3. He would hereby honor the ministry of
man, in yt he submits himself unto it, and seeks to it with much pains and
labor. Whence learn 1. Phil. 2. 5.
To put on the same mind with our Lord, who for our good refused the glory of
heaven, and laying dignity aside, would live a temporal life among sinners,
eat, wash, suffer and dye, and lie in the grave with and for sinners: Thus for
our own and others true good, we should lay aside our reputation, Heb. 11. 24
as Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, to suffer with
Gods people: a strange choice, yet when he was of age, stayednesse and
discretion, he made it.

2. As he was baptized, not by an Angel or Prince, but by an homely man that
lived like an Eremite in an austere manner of life for diet and clothing, so
must not we account baser of the sacraments for the meannesse of the man, if a
lawful minister, seeing Christ refused not the sacrament at John's hand;
neither must we from the meanest minister, seeing the least in the Kingdom of
God is greater then John: nay, not the meannesse only, but even the wickedness
of a minister does not pollute the sacrament to a worthy receiver; why? 1. A
good minister does not make it the better to a bad man: therefore not a bad
minister the worse to a good man. 2. The efficacy of a sacrament depends on
Gods ordination, on the truth and power of Christ, not on man's goodness or
badnesse. A message may be as truly delivered by a bad man, as a good: and
good wax will receive an impression as well by a brazen seal as a golden one.
But of this point (God willing) we are to deal more fully elsewhere.

3. Christ was content to wash in a common water, in the flood Jordan; he
feared no infection from it, though Naaman the leper were washed there; though
the Pharisees and hypocrites washed there, yet he takes no exception, Obesse
mali bonis non debent, sed magis mali a bonis adiuuari, Cyprian. Epist. synod.
54.
contracts no uncleanness: so the wickedness of another Communicant does not
prejudice him that is rightly prepared; though he communicate with him in the
Sacrament, yet not in his sin.

It makes indeed for our comfort, when we do receive with such as of whose
godly life and conversation we are persuaded, because in it we profess our
selves members and fellow Christians with them, and desire to be confirmed in
that communion: Besides, our love and zeal may be better stirred up by the
prayers and example of such, rather then by wicked ones: But notwithstanding,
1. no man's sin can defile another, or make Gods promise in vain, nor the seal
of it, to him that is no way accessory to it; neither has power to hinder him
from the Sacrament. Eze. 18. 20. The same soul that sins, shall dye: and
Gal. 6. 5. Every man shall bear his own burden. 2. Christ not only
communicated here in the service of God with common men, but elsewhere with
those assemblies in which were many notoriously wicked, Nec propter zizania
segetem Christi, nec propter paleas aream Christi, nec propter vasa inhonorata
domum magnam Christi, nec propter pisces malos retia Christi derelinquunt, Aug.
cont. Crescon. lib. 3. cap. 5.
as at Mary's purification, Luke 2. 22. and when he went up yearly with his
parents to Jerusalem, Verse. 14. Besides, the Apostles were continually in the
temple, notwithstanding all gross corruptions in it, Luke 24. 53. Act. 21. 26.
And lastly, we should otherwise be bound not to examine our selves only, but
al others with whom we communicate: but the Apostle says, Let a man therefore
examine himself, and so let him eat and drink; and, He that eats and
drinks vnvvorthily, Non dicit, alijs. sed sibi, Calu.
eats and drinks his own damnation, 1. Cor. 11. 28, 29.

4. Seeing Christ so honored the ministry of man, who dare disdain the holy
ministry, and society of the Church, which the Son of God sought unto? Where
be they that think it too base for them to go to Church, to seek the
Sacrament? Oh it is more state to have Baptism come to them into their houses.
Nay, but the Church is now our Jordan; hither come, or else thou art more
stately than Christ. How dare great men so despise our ministry, which Christ
in his own person has graced, that it is not worthy their presence?

The third point is, the end of John, namely, The end of Christ's coming to
John.
that he might be baptized of him.

Why would Christ be baptized? Quest.
what need had he of it?

Christ needed not for himself: Answ.
for 1. he needed not the regeneration of the holy Ghost, being sanctified in
the womb, and conceived of him. 2. Baptizari vis domine Jesus? nunquid sano
opus est medicina, aut inundatione mundo? Quam maculam habere potest agnus sine
macula? Bernard. sermon. 1. de Epiphan.
Baptism is a Sacrament of clensing sin, with which he was never polluted.
3. What should it seal and signify to him, which he wanted? But for sundry
other reasons it was fit he should: for (to omit that given here by himself,
till we come to it, So it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness:) 1, as the
high Priest when he was inaugurated, had of Christian society, 1. Cor. 12. 13.
for, as by it the faithful are set into his body, so would he by it be set
into the body of the Saints, and take on him the common mark and privilege of
his members: even as we see Kings and Princes, by whom all hold their freedom,
will sometimes be made free, and so receive a public testimony of association
from their people: and lo here our Prince in the colors of a common soldier.
2. As Baptism is a symbol of affliction, so he would undertake it: so Mar.
10. 38. Christ calls his cross and death by the name of Baptism. 3. Christ
would be baptized, Vnus mersit, sed lauit omnes: Theoph.
not to put off sin as we, but to put on our sin, that so our sin in him
might be washed away, that he might sanctify this Sacrament to us, Baptizatus
Christus vt homo, sed idem peccata soluit vt Deus: non quod aquis lustralibus
ipse egeret, sed vt aquas sanctificarit: Nazianz. orat. 4. de filio.
and all waters the element of it, and in his own person he might commend and
confirm it unto his Church: also to put an end to legal worship, and to
testify that we must be spiritually washed, whereto he sets seal first in his
own person. 4. That in nothing he might be unlike us, sin only

But John baptized the baptism Object.
of repentance, which Christ needed not.

Being sent in the similitude Answ.
of sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3. he would not disdain the mark and badge of
sinners; he was as sick among the sick, that he might be a most familiar and
acceptable Physician, Is. 53. We counted him as plagued and smitten of God, and
he was numbered among the wicked, yea rejected behind Barrabas.

But how could he, no sinner, Object.
take upon him the Sacrament, which is a symbol of remission of sins, of
purification, of putting off the old man, and putting on the new?

1. He was content to be as like sinners as might be, Answ. Christ no sinner,
took on him the symbol of remission of sins
and not be a sinner, and therefore he that took the curse of sin upon him in
his execrable death, abhorred not to take a badge of sin upon him in his holy
baptism. Admire the Lords humility who knew no sin, yet stands among
sinners to be baptized.

2. Of the covenant of grace, whereof Baptism is a seal, be two parts: 1. On
Gods part, the promises of grace and remission of sins to believers, with
renouation of nature, etc. and thus Christ received it not for himself. 2. On
man's, that is, by accepting of his seal or badge; the obligation of our selves
to resign up our selves wholly to him, and his service, and become his: and
thus it was meet that Christ should accept the seal of the Covenant, that he
might be bound in our name as our head to fulfill that, which we had promised,
and God required at our hands by virtue of the Covenant, I will be thy God, and
thou shall be my people.

And hence all the significatiue actions of Baptism, The significatiue action
in Christ's baptism what they betokened
applied to Christ, imply nothing else, but how he was resigned up wholly to
his Father for us and in our stead: as for example: 1. When Christ descended
into the water, was signified his descending from heaven, and humbling of
himself, to take flesh, suffer, and dye in it, choosing rather to lose his
life, than his Father should lose the obedience of his Law.

2. The dipping, sprinkling, or his abode under the water, signified his death
and burial, by whose power and virtue our old man is dead and buried, that is,
our corruption of nature is slaughtered and consumed.

3. His ascending out from the water, betokens his resurrection for our
justification, by the power of which we are regenerated and rise to life
eternal: So as it appears, that what we were bound to, Christ has first in
himself performed; and enableth us also in some measure here below, but at
last by his grace shall perfectly perform it in our full holiness above with
himself.

But seeing Christ had been circumcised, Object.
his baptism seemed needless.

Indeed if he had been a private man, Answ.
and his baptism only personal, this objection might seem the stronger,
(although the Jews, converted by Peter's sermon, and already circumcised, were
baptized:) But Christ as a public person, Why Christ was both circumcised and
baptized.
and head of the Church, in other respects was to undertake both Sacraments: 1.
To show himself the 3. To sanctify both Sacraments

This is for our consolation: Use 1.
here we have Christ manifesting himself our flesh, our brother, our surety:
here is the Word made flesh, God with us, Immanuel; God, not come down in the
likeness of man, (as they of Lystra thought of Paul and Barnabas:) Act. 14. 11.
but clothed with the very nature of man, who in his perfect age, having
grown out the several ages of infancy, childhood, and youth, to show
himself true man, now of thirty years of age, becomes as man, our brother in
the covenant, and in the seal of it: yea our surety as God and man our
absolute Mediator: he would, by undertaking both Sacraments, show himself not
only a member of both peoples, but also the Savior, head, and chief
cornerstone, knitting both into one body, and spiritual house, which is his
Church: And all this is for us, that we might have sweet comfort; Christ is
among men, among sinners, that we might be among the sons and Saints of God;
he is washed as a sinner, Christ washed, to cleanse, not to be cleansed.
not to be cleansed, but to cleanse us: he stands in Jordan, that the waters of
Gods wrath being stayed on both sides, Josh. 3. 17.
both peoples might pass over to the heavenly Canaan: In a word, that he might
every way help us, he will be every way like us: and to this purpose is this
tabernacle of God amongst men, that we might have way made to the tabernacle of
God amongst Angels. Therefore if Satan or the infidelity of our own hearts
set upon us, we see whom we have believed, our salvation is surer than the
gates of hell shall ever be able to overthrow.

Again, this is for our instruction, to note the excellency and dignity of
this Sacrament, and what esteem we ought to have it in: the Lord comes to the
servant a tedious journey to seek it; yet many of us, when it is brought to
us, turn our backs upon it. What price set they upon it, who fly forth of
the Church, when this Sacrament is to be administered? Shall Christ that needed
it not, come to it, and shall we that need it, run from it? Shall he seek
only the baptism of water? and shall we so undervalue the baptism of water
and the Holy Ghost? Shall he (no sinner) not Nemo refugiat lauacrum gratiae,
cum Christus no^ refugit lauacrum poenitentiae, Ambros. in Luc.
refuse the sign of repentance for sin? and shall we despise the broad
Seal of remission of sin? Shall Christ himself seek to John's baptism, and
dare thou run from Christ?

This I will add to what I have elsewhere largely delivered, that whosoever
do not present themselves with due reverence and meditations, but run out
carelessly and profanely when Baptism is administered, they be far from
Christ's example, and little comfort can they have of their baptism, but may
well fear, lest those mysteries and benefits, offered and sealed to a member of
the Congregation, belong not to them: for if they did, they would own them,
and not run contemptuously from them: as good never baptized, as never
meditate on it. But, were thy self to take no good by the Sacrament, in
calling to mind thine own covenant made in baptism, with the fruit in thy
self, yet good order requires thy presence: 1. Because the ordinance belongs
not only to the infants, parents, and sureties, but to the whole Congregation,
as the entering of a freeman into a Corporatio^ is by the whole. 2. God looks
it should be graced, and not scorned by turning thy back upon it. Were it not a
most irreuerent contempt, to run out from the Word? and is it not also, to
run from the Seal? especially the blessed Trinity being met to such a
purpose, to seal such benefits to a member of that Congregation? 3. Thy
presence is requisite to help the infant by prayer, to join with the
Congregation in prayer, and in praise for the ingrafting of a member into
Christ's body.

Verse. 14. Verse. 14.
But John put him back, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and
come thou to me?
Sect. 2.
THis is a part of the dialogue between Christ and John: John's Repulse of
Christ.
For John seeing Christ come to him, and his Baptism, would have hindered him
in his purpose, (...), verbis vrgendo obnixe prohibebat; forbad him, that is,
instantly urged him to forbear, and refused to admit him, and that with some
contention.

Why did he so? Quest.


First, in respect of Christ. Answ.
2. He considered the purity of Christ, who had no need of the Baptism of
repentance; he not only had no sin to be washed away, but also was the Lamb
that took away the sins of the world: where there is no sin (thought John)
there is no need of repentance, nor remission, nor the sacrament of it.

I am not worthy to loose his shoe. 2. His own uncleanness, and that he was
a sinner, and needed to be baptized of him; and thought it unmeet, that a
sinner should wash him that was no sinner, and more fit, that himself should
be washed by him.

one of the multitude, needing the Baptism of repentance, especially seeing
before the people were baptized, they came confessing their sins: for this
(in John's conceit) might both wrong Christ, and the people, and weaken the
testimony that himself had given of him.

Whether did John err in Quest.
prohibiting Christ, or no?

He did: Answ.
for 1. well might he know, that Christ would not have offered, or attempted,
or made so tedious a journey for any thing, either unlawful or inconvenient,
but what was most holy, most necessary, both in respect of his own calling, as
also others salvation. 2. Our Savior in his answer implies, that John knew
not all that belonged to his own vocation. 3. In suffering Christ, he revoked
his error.

Whence we see, Doct.
that men of great virtues and excellency may err, and be good men for all
that. John was an excellent Baptist, of admirable holiness; of whom Christ
gave testimony, that he was not a reed shaken, but more than a Prophet; than
whom a greater was not borne of women; and yet he erred in that, which was
nearly joined with his calling. This we see in Moses, the servant and friend of
God, Exodus 4. 13. who being called by God, at first (in humility) disabled
himself; and not that only, but after God had given him satisfaction to all
his doubts, upon his four refusals: 1. His own insufficiency, and the
greatness of the business, chap. 3. 11. 2. Because they might enquire after
Gods name, ver. 14. 3. The incredulity of the people, who would not believe
him. 4. His own imperfection of speech: yet after all this he refused, and
showed so much infirmity, as God was very angry, even so angry as a father
could with a child. How did the Apostles at the Ascension of Christ still
dream of an earthly kingdom, Act. 1. 6. When will thou restore the kingdom
to Israel? And Peter, Act. 10. 14. being bid to rise and eat of things
ceremonial forbidden, said, Not so, Lord; for no unclean thing has entered
into my lips.

1. Because God reueales not all at first to his children, Reason 1
who must of weak ones grow stronger; we know but in part till that perfect
come; God will have his strength known in weakness.

2. That being still in combat, they might watch so much the more, awake out of
drowsinesse, shake off security, not triumph before victory, nor suffer their
weapons to rust, as fearelesse of the enemy, but still be in subduing natural
corruption. Paul himself needed a prick in the flesh. This is the reason why
all the Canaanites were not presently subdued, Deuteronomy. 7. 22.



should be puffed up with their own great gifts, nor that others should
entertain too great an opinion of the best, as being above the nature of man:
nor yet be discouraged too much by indwelling corruption, seeing the best are
in the same conflict against it as we are: nor lastly to fear the prevailing
of it, or our final falling away by it, seeing the best have been preserved by
the power of God to salvation, notwithstanding their own weakness.

5. That it might make for

But seeing the best and dearest Quest.
Saints have erred, how may we trust their writings? and, does not this call
the truth of the Scripture into question?

No: Answ.
for the Penmen of Scripture, while they were in their work, were directed by
infallible assistance of the Spirit both in speaking and writing. 2. Pet. 1.
21. The holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: though
the same men as men, and out of that work, did fail in judgment and practice.
Jonas in his prophecy could not err, but as a man was impote^t in anger,
when he savv Niniue was not destroyed. Nathan, 2. Sam. 7. as a private man
was deceived, in giving David advice touching the building of the Temple.
Peter erred as a man, and went not with a right foot, and was worthy to be
blamed, Gal. 2. 11.

First then, Use 1.
seeing in the best, who were mirrors in the world, we have a mirror of our
frailty, let us deny our own strength as being privy to our own weakness,
and acknowledge that as far as we be exempted in any thing from error, it is
by the grace of God, by which we stand: and hence will follow, that we must
apply God by prayer, that he would not lead us into tentation.

Secondly, Use 2.
beware of abusing this doctrine, which wicked men pervert to their own
destruction: Oh (say they) the best man alive may err: Prou. 24. 16.
The just man sins seven times a day. And so they make light account of
foul sins: but 1. the place in the Proverbs is abused: The just falls seven
times a day, namely, into affliction, as the other part of the opposition
shows. 2. The godly indeed do fall into sin, but keep not a course in it,
they go not on as profane ones do. 3. We must look both at their falls and
rising, as they do not: John continued not in this error.

Thirdly, Use 3.
we see that there is no just cause to refuse the word, because man shows
weakness in any thing; for then Christ might have refused the Baptism of
John, and we the Scriptures, because of our Ministers frailties: but we must
consider, that many good Ministers know not all points, and none have all
perfections: what John saw not at first, he saw afterward; and so may they.

I have need to be baptized of thee.] John knew Christ, whom he had never
seen before.
Some have thought, that John did not know Christ to be the Son of God, and
the Messiah; but only by his speech, gate, and habit, took him to be some
worthy and excellent man. But 1. it is improbable, he knew him to be more, and
greater than a mere man, even the Son of God, the King and Savior of his
people, who only washes them with the holy Ghost, and gives them life
eternal, I have need to be baptized of thee.

How is it then, Object.
that John says, chap. 1. 31, 33. that he knew him not, but by that sign
given him by him that sent him, Upon who^ thou shall see the Spirit rest, that
is he: the which sign was not yet accomplished, until after the Baptism of
Christ?

John was filled with the holy Ghost, Answ.
and by the same Spirit which caused him to acknowledge him in the womb,
before he had seen his face, was admonished that this was he whom he
preached. But in that he said, he knew him not but by that sign, he must be
thus understood: 1. He knew him not by face before; for he had never seen
him, for the reason before alleged. 2. Though he had in some sort known him
when he came to Baptism, yet he knew him not so fully and clearly as he did
afterward by that sign: yea, that former knowledge compared with the latter,
is scarce worthy the name of knowledge, but of ignorance: for as it was with
the fathers and believers of the old Testament, so is it here; Christ was
after a sort known to that ancient people, but yet so obscurely, as compared to
that knowledge in his appearing, it still carries the name of ignorance,
Ephesians. 3. 9. Paul speaking of Christ's manifestation in the flesh, says, that
now that mystery was brought to light, which was hid from the beginning of the
world. The former was a dark knowledge, as in a glass or picture, this is
face to face, at lest a knowledge by present. 3. Though John knew him before
the sign by a special revelation, whereby he was after a sort manifested unto
himself, yet was he not so inwardly confirmed, as that he durst preach him to
be the man, though he had preached much of such a one; and therefore, Ioh. 1.
34. As soon as he had seen the Spirit rest on him, he says, I saw and bare
record, that this is the Son of God, and ver. 36. pointed at him with his
finger the next day, saying, Behold the Lamb of God: for now he was openly
manifested by this sign and others at his baptism, not to John only, but to
all Israel.

Out of this knowledge of Christ and himself, he gives this worthy testimony
of him, I have need to be baptized of thee: I came of Adam, and contracted
pollution: thou did not, but wast sanctified of the holy Ghost to be a
sanctifier of all; Thou art Spirit, I am flesh: can flesh wash the Spirit? I am
a sinful creature, thou who have power to create, have also the power of
sanctifying; Why do thou that art Lord of all, rich over all, seek wealth
at my hands a poor and needful creature, who should rather beg it of thee?
has a sound man any need of a Physician, or a clean man of cleansing? what
spot is there in the immaculate and spotless Lamb of God?

I have need to be baptized of thee:] in which worthy profession, 1. Obser. 1.
Note his humility; he acknowledges his need and wants, yet a man risen to
great perfection, then whom a greater was not borne of woman, so holy in his
life, and so powerful in doctrine, that all men held John for a great Prophet;
yet he confesses his need of Christ, and of his baptism.

The greater gifts and graces a man has, The more grace, the more is the sense
of want of grace.
the more he sees his wants, and will be humbled for them. John was
privileged above all men, to be not only a witness to Christ, but also one,
to whom Christ himself seeks for baptism: now the more he is exalted, the
more does he abase himself, and in the presence of Christ thus honoring him,
he makes himself of no reputation. Genesis 18. 27. Abraham coming near to God
to intercede for Sodom, and having prevailed with God in sundry suites, was so
far from swelling in conceit of his familiarity with God, as that most
modestly in sense of Gods presence and his own baseness, he says, I have
begun to speak, and am but dust and ashes: and the nearer the Saints come to
God, and are more graced by him, the more is their sense of their own wants.
Job having heard of God by the hearing of the ear in the ministry, now more
familiarly and fully, even by the sight of the eye, in the signs of his
special presence, breaks out into these words, I abhor my self, and
repent in dust and ashes, chap. 42. 5, 6.

Luke 5. 8. When Peter saw the dignity and divinity of Christ in that
miraculous draught of fishes, he said, Depart from me, Lord, for I am a
sinful man. Why would Peter cast off his Master, or be cast off? No, (for he
fell at his knees:) but the majesty of Christ forced him to descend into
himself, and to see himself utterly unworthy of the company or fellowship of
Christ: Besides, the sight of his sin made him fear, lest, if he should be
so near Christ, he might revenge his sin.

Reasons.
As a man, the more he looks upon the body of the Sun, the more shall he
discern the weakness of his own sight: so the bright beams of Gods grace
and glory lets a man see his own impotency and nothing.

in this plant of grace in the ground of man's heart by Gods finger, the root
of grace, which is true humility, grows with every other grace.

First then, Use 1.
he that would see himself in the truest glass, must draw near to God and
Christ, and he that would be something in himself, let him stand near God a
little, and he shall see his error. Isa. 40. 15. All nations are before him as
the drop of a bucket, and as the dust of a balance; all nations are before him
as nothing, and counted to him less then nothing, and vanity: Yea, the Angels
themselves are comparatively powerless and impure in his sight; Job 4. 18.
how much more those that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the
dust?

Secondly, Use 2.
examine thy self; if thy grace be sound, it lets thee see thy wants and
weakness, and keeps thee under, and leads thee into the practice of
humility, thou will see some pricks in thy flesh humbling thee. Christ
himself who was anointed above all his fellows, what a lowly and humble
course of life lived he in? Paul before his conversion, Romans 7. 9.
was a jolly fellow, alive and able to stand alone: but, when grace took
footing, then could he confess himself the chief of sinners. 1. Tim. 1. 15
The prodigal son in his prodigality thought none so good as he, Luke 15. 21.
he had no company fit for him in his fathers house: but, when he came to
himself, and returned home, oh then he was scarce worthy the place of a
servant. Let this curb the pride and fullness of spirit, in such as seem to
themselves to be advanced in grace above others. Much ambition is in the best;
and the Disciples in Christ's school, at his elbow, Math. 20. 20.
and in his presence, will be contending who should be greatest, one cannot
yield to another: what trifling follies drive even Professors, who should have
first denied themselves, into comparisons, into contentions with violence, and
all to obscure one another? one will have the praise of understanding, another
of speech, another of memory, another of judgment; and one must rise by
another fall. Now would I like him of all Professors, who will strive for the
praise of humility: and this man is (by Christ's determination) the greatest of
all, who is in regard of himself the least of all, and in respect of others
servant to all. I know, great corruptions will thrust in upon beautiful
graces, but yet know thy grace to be much blemished by such courses, and if
this corruption grow and reign, thou may suspect the soundness and truth of
it.

2. Obser.
Observe, John acknowledges his need to be baptized.

Object.
did not he seal the grace of the Covenant to believers by baptism? what need
then had he of it?

He means here that baptism, Answ.
of which formerly he had spoken, by the holy Ghost and by fire: well he knew,
that he could never apply to himself that grace, which was offered in the
Word and Sacrament, unless he were baptized with the holy Ghost, which was
proper unto Christ to do.

But what needed John the baptism Quest.
of the Spirit? he was sanctified from the womb, and had received the spirit
of regeneration and holiness already, and was a most gracious man.

True it is, Answ.
that John had received grace, and possessed the benefits of the new Testament,
and merit of Christ by faith, but yet 1. because he had them only in part, he
sees his need to have them increased and perfected: grace was rooted, but
without the Spirit of Christ it could not grow. 2. Although he had received
grace, yet he knew it must needs lie idle, unless Christ did by his Spirit
continually quicken and move it: therefore he needs still the baptism of the
Spirit, to inspire him with new life, and set him on work in spiritual
duties. 3. He knew, that though he had received grace and beginnings of
salvation, yet he could not persevere in grace, and retain those graces,
unless Christ did still by his Spirit work powerfully in him, and finish the
good work he had begun: for it is not in the nature of grace, that the Saints
persevere in it, or that it cannot be lost, 1. Pet. 1. 5.
but by the power and promise of God, who preserves his to salvation.

The Saints of God in Scripture Doct. The saints ascribe all their good unto
grace from first to last.
ascribe the whole matter of their salvation from first to last unto God,
acknowledging that it is God, who works the will and the deed, that he is the
author and finisher of their faith and salvation. 1. Pet. 5. 10. The God of all
grace; namely, both of that first and eternal grace of election, and also of
all secondary and consequent graces, whereby such as are elected, are in due
time called, justified, sanctified, and led unto glory and salvation. Isa. 45.
24, 25. In the Lord I have righteousness and strength: the whole seed of Israel
shall be justified, and shall glory in the Lord.

1. Reasons.
The true knowledge of God brings in knowledge of a

2. They know, that to come by blessing, they must cast away their own rags,
and then put on the garment of their elder brother, which being a long white
robe, it needs neither eeking nor patching; a garment of Gods making, as John
here acknowledges Christ, and every way fit.



We must therefore in the whole matter of salvation, Use 1.
acknowledge with Paul, By the grace of God I am that I am; and, I labored
more than all, yet not I, but the grace of God that is in me: faith is the gift
of God, and so is continuance in faith; for he that is the Author, is the
finisher of it, Heb. 12. 2. Every new act and motion of faith is Gods: In him
we live, move, and have our being, Act. 17. 28. Oh say with that holy Martyr,
John Lambert.
live and dye with it in thy mouth, Only Christ, Only Christ.

Secondly, abhor all Popish religion, Use 2.
which joins the doctrine of free will, merits, and humane satisfactions with
Christ's merit. John saw nothing in himself, being a man justified, but still
needs Christ's baptism; he gives testimony to Christ, that it is he alone
that washes from sin, gives the holy Ghost, and life eternal; and all
contrary doctrine heereto, abolisheth the death and merit of Christ. For this
conjunction and hotch-potch of theirs, we must for ever disioine our selves
from them, unless we will be disioyned from Christ as they are, Gal. 5. 2, 4,
11. Oh but the difference is not so great. Yes that it is, we differ not in
circumstances only, but in substance and foundation; and if the Apostle may
judge it, one of us must needs be fallen from Christ, and have no part in him.
As good join with Turks as with Papists.

Thirdly, Use 3.
the best had need be baptized of Christ, and therefore let us never content
our selves, till we find in us the power of Christ's baptism, which where it
is, there is the presence of the Spirit, who is as water to cleanse us, and
fire to purge us.

And come thou to me?

It was a good Antecedent, that he needed Christ's baptism, but it was an ill
consequent, that therefore Christ should not come to him. Our corrupt nature is
ready to infer upon good grounds false consequents; upon free justification
by faith, a neglect of good works; upon the doctrine of predestination, a
carelessness and leave to do what we list; upon the doctrine of Gods mercy,
a boldness and licentiousness in sin; upon the doctrine of care for our
family, a covetous earthlinesse.

Verse. 15. Verse. 15.
Suffer now: for so it behooves us to fulfill all righteousness: so he
suffered him.
Sect. 3.
SVffer now; Let it be so now for the time of my abasement, Christ's persuasion
of John.
and for the time of my office and ministry, and for the days of my flesh,
wherein I have voluntarily laid aside my greatness; I aim now at another thing;
there is a righteousness, which I must perform, for which I have descended from
heaven, and must descend, and be further abased the^ thus yet upon earth:
therefore suffer now.

By righteousness here is meant, not any special virtue, but generally
perfection of all virtues, namely, whatsoever the Law of God requires; for
that is the rule of all righteousness. The fulfilling of all righteousness is
perfect and absolute obedience unto all Gods holy constitutions and ordinances,
according to those many precepts in Scripture, as Deuteronomy. 11. 32. Take heed that
ye do all the commandments and laws that I have set before you this day:
and 6. 1, 2, and 4. 6, etc. This fulfilling of righteousness the Law looking
for at our hands in our own persons, but being now impossible because of the
flesh, Romans 8. 3 God sent his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh,
that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, not by way of
inherency, but of imputation, not by doing, but by believing. And this
fulfilling of righteousness our Savior here speaks of, whereby as a most
obedient servant of God, and our surety, he was voluntarily subjected to all
Gods ordinances. Thus to satisfy the law, he must be circumcised; for that
Moses his law required: he would be presented in the temple, Luke 2. 21, 22.
As it is written, etc. At 12. years he came up to Jerusalem after the custom
of the feast, verse. 42. He was after this subject to his parents, verse. 51. for
so the Law required: and he that hitherto had fulfilled all legal rights and
obseruances, now at this time must undertake another, which was yet wanting.

But what law or ordinance was there for baptism, Quest.
to which Christ must be subjected?

It was decreed by the whole Answ.
Trinity, 1. That Christ should be initiated by this ceremony; wherein also
he must manifest himself the author of all purity and cleanenesse. 2. John
had preached it, and showed the necessity of it by divine authority. 3. He
would not only subject himself to his Fathers ordination, but also for our
sakes, the virtue of whose baptism depends upon his, as also give us help by
his example, and therefore would himself do that which he commanded others
to do. 4. Christ as Mediator and in our stead, was to be made our righteousness,
1. Cor. 1. 30. three vvayes: 1. In being made an offering for us, by which he
was to abolish our sin and curse, and by his most perfect obedience satisfy
the whole Law for us. 2. By applying that righteousness purchased by his
blood, which else we could never have had benefit by. 3. By appointing and
sanctifying means and instruments for that application, called the ministry
of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 3.
whereof one branch is the lauer of water in the Word. And thus as in our
stead, he stood in the general, bound by the will and ordinance of God, in
himself to sanctify baptism for us.

But why does Christ say, Quest.
It behooves us to fulfill, and not, me, seeing never any but he fulfilled all
righteousness?

In the righteousness, Answ.
wherewith we stand righteous before God, are two things: 1. The merit of it,
and whole performance; and thus by his satisfaction and obedience, he alone
procures perfect righteousness to his people: he trod the winepresse alone,
Isa. 63. 3. He looked for an helper, and there was none. 2. The application of
it in the means: and thus he takes in helpers, that is, the ministry of the
Word and Sacraments, whose labor he uses in the work of reconciliation: and
in this second consideration he takes John in with himself, who he also puts
in mind of his duty, and so speaks in the plural number.

Our Savior sees John in an error, Doct. 1.
because of his ignorance and want of consideration, he suffers him not to lie
in it, neither does he imperiously check and reproach him, nor stand upon his
will, Sic volo, sic iubeo, -- but vouchsafes him a meek and modest answer,
whereby 1. he labors to root out his error. 2. To lead him into his duty.
3. To lead us into our duty in dealing with weak offenders.

1. He answers him, to root Peter, The right manner of helping our brethren
out of their errors.
Ioh. 13. 37. I will lay down my life for thy sake. Nay verily (says Christ) I
say unto thee, before the cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. The like with
Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. when he spoke most grossly and carnally of the high point
of Regeneration: so Matthew. 20. 21. to the two sons of Zebede, who would sit
at his right and left hand, and be above all the rest, It is not mine (says
he) to give: and when the other ten heard this and disdained, verse. 26. how
does he call them and teach them, not to make this use of the others
weakness, but learn to be humble in themselves, and become each others
servant? In whose steps we must tread, and bring our brethren our of their
errors, by exhorting one another, and restoring one another by the spirit of
meekness, Gal. 6. 1. for 1. hereby we testify our hatred of the evil, which
we seek to suppress. 2. It is a token of true Christian love to help our
brethren out of sin, whereas to let them run on in error, not seeking to
reclaim them, or restrain them, is a part of hatred and cruelty. Leuit. 19.
17. Thou shall not hate thy brother, nor suffer sin upon him: as we would
not suffer our neighbor to run into bodily harms. 3. It is the right use
and dispensing of our gifts, when we lay them out to the profit of our brethren.

2. Christ leads John into his Peter's error, Ioh. 13. 8. he would not in
modesty have Christ wash his feet, till Christ told him that then he must
have no part in him. Oh then (said Peter) not my feet only, but my head and
hands and all. God had called Abraham to kill his son: he must not now
pretend nature or pity, or the promise, etc. to hinder him; Gods will and
calling must be Moses failed, Exodus 3. 11. saying, Who am I, that I should go
to Pharaoh, etc? his calling should have bin in his eye, not Pharaohs
greatness. Paul to reveal his Son among the Gentiles, immediately he
communicated not with flesh and blood: So in our ministry we may not common
with flesh and blood, but go resolutely to work, and say as Nathan did to
David, Thou art the man; nor forecast issues and successes, but do our duty,
and leave all unto God. 3. In our

3. Our Savior in the manner John leads us into our duty, namely, Meekness
necessary in informing and reforming
when we are to deal with persons offending of ignorance, to use all
moderation and meekness, in informing and reforming them: wherein,

1. We frame our selves to the commandment, Reasons.
Gal. 6. 1. Restore such as are fallen, by the spirit of mecknesse: and 2. Tim.
2. 25. Instructing with meekness the contrary-minded, waiting if at any time
they may be plucked out of the snare of the devil.

2. We tread in the steps of our Savior Christ, of whom it was prophesied,
that he should not cry, nor cause his voice to be heard in the streets; a
bruised reed he should not break, Isai. 42. 2. and 53. 7. When he was
oppressed and afflicted, he opened not his mouth. How meekely answered he him,
that smote him unjustly, John 18. 23. If I have evil spoken, bear witness of
the evil? and how meekly did he call Judas friend, coming to apprehend and
betray him?

3. We manifest a notable fruit of the spirit, called the Spirit of meekness,
and has in it the pith of love, which when it acco^panieth a reproof, it is
that oil, even the precious oil which breaks not the head, Psalm. 141. 5.

4. We take the course to do good by reproof; whereas to reprove with rancor
and malice, seeking rather to disgrace, than to reform the party, has no
promise, no good effect, Pro. 15. 1. A soft answer puts away wrath, but
grievous words stir up anger: and 25. 15. A soft tongue breaks the bones:
and Romans 12. 20. A meek and gentle behavior heaps coals on the enemies head.
See the example of Gideon appeasing the men of Ephraim, Judge. 8. 1, 2, 3. and
Abigail David, 1. Sam. 25. But if John had sinned of obstinacy or wilfulness,
Christ would have been plainer and rougher with him, as Matthew. 23. he
denounced many woes against the Scribes and Pharisees. For this is a rule of
all reproves, They must be so tempered, as that the party reproved may be
brought to a true sight of his sin, and to be pricked in heart, if it be
possible: God himself does so reprove, as he sets men's sins in order before
them, Psalm. 50. 21. If a man will still wink and shut his eyes, or go on in
contempt of God and his ordinances, he must be dealt plainly withal: a cold
and perfunctory reproof, such as Eli used, will do no good; yet in this
plain reproof there must be such carriage, as the party may see himself
rather reproved by God, than by us: See 2. Cor. 13. 2.

Again, in that Christ affirms, Doct. 2.
that he was to fulfill all righteousness, learn, that whatsoever the Law of
Moses required to perfect righteousness, Mat. 5. 17.
that Christ fufilled in most absolute perfection, I came not to destroy the
Law, but to fulfill it. Romans 10. 4. Christ is the end of the Law, for
righteousness to every believer.

How did Christ fulfill ye Law? Quest.


He fulfilled, Answ.
1. the ceremonial Law by his one oblation of himself upon the Cross: for
then all of it had his end; then the vale was rent. 2. The moral, two ways:
First, in his own person; partly by his doctrine, in delivering the perfect
doctrine of the Law, and clearing it from corruption: partly by his obedience;
both active, performing the whole, and every duty concerning the love of God,
or our neighbor; and also passive, satisfying the curse due to transgression;
and partly by the conformity of his nature with the Law, which only he (since
the fall) has, or can have. Secondly, in the persons of others he fulfilleth
the moral Law:

godly, 1. by imputation, Romans 5. 19. By the obedience of one, many are made
just: and this is by giving faith to the Elect. 2. By inchoation, and
renouation of their nature by the Spirit, writing the Law in their hearts, Ier.
31. 33. and making them to walk in his ways, Ezech. 36. 27. But this
fulfilling is weak, and only begun in this life, wherein the best (in their
minds) serve the Law of God, but in their flesh, the Law of sin, Romans 7. 22.

2. Of the wicked, by executing

But by what bond was Christ tied to fulfill the righteousness Quest.
of the Law?

Galath. 4. Answ.
4. When the fullness of time was come, God sent his Son made of a woman, and
made under the Law: made of a woman: that is, not begotten; and made under the
Law, not borne under the Law. For Christ was, and is, the Lord of the Law, as
the Son of man is the Lord of the Sabbath, and by his nature (as Lord of the
Law) is not subjected unto it, but by mere and voluntary condition of will,
abased himself, and subjected himself unto it; and not as a private person,
but as a pledge and surety, and that in our stead representing the persons of
all the Elect: Thus says the Apostle, Phil. 2. 7.
he made himself of no reputation, and was made sin for us, and a curse, etc.
All which shows, that it was a voluntary subjection, and a free will offering
of himself; for else could it not have been acceptable.

Neither may any man stumble at that common objection, whereby they would make
Christ merit for himself, and all this fulfilling of righteousness to be
necessary for himself; because his flesh and manhood was a creature, and
ought homage to God as Creator. I answer, The manhood of Christ is considered
two ways: 1. as severed from the Deity, and in it self; and thus it owes all
obedience to God: but 2. as from the very first conception, it was received
into the unity of the second person, and became a part thereof; and thus it
has an eternal righteousness from the first moment, and is exempted from the
common condition and obligation of all other men, and freed from the common
bond of obedience. Thus our comfort is every way enlarged, in that Christ did
all for us; not by any such necessity of nature as we, but by free choice and
election of will, by which his whole obedience was a free will offering.

Hereby Christ is concluded to be perfect God: Use 1.
for he cannot be a naked man, that can perfectly fulfill all righteousness;
and yt not for himself directly, but for all the Elect: he is not only just,
but a iustifier, Isa. 53. 11. by his knowledge. Who could observe all the
precepts of the Law? Who could undertake upon himself, and foil and overcome
all the curses of the Law, due to the sins of the Elect? Who could merit all
the promises of the Law, that they should be yea and Amen to believers; but
this second Adam, our Emmanuel, God with us, and in our nature, as well as in
our stead? Ier. 23. 6. The name whereby they shall call him, is, The Lord our
righteousness: and 35. 16. He that shall call her, is The Lord our
righteousness. And he that can thus justify believers, is God; because he
can both merit, and impute a perfect righteousness, and by renewing their
nature, and donation of the Spirit, begin, and accomplish the same in
themselves.

Secondly, observe the goodness, perfection, Use 2.
perpetuity, and strength of the Law, seeing Christ must come from heaven to
fulfill it; not a jot of the Law shall pass away, when heaven and earth pass
away. How little do men think hereof, that let pass the precepts, promises,
and threats, as if they were things not at all concerning them? Whereas, if a
man could overthrow heaven and earth, he could not diminish one tittle of the
Law. The wickedest wretch that lives, and sets his face against heaven, and
glories in his defiance of the Law, shall fulfill it in the curse and plagues
of it; as he that will transgress the Laws of the King by felony, shall
fulfill the law in the penalty of death.

Thirdly, Use 3.
if Christ have fulfilled all righteousness, and satisfied Gods justice, then
have we found comfort: 1. Our whole debt is paid, he has paid the uttermost
farthing for every believer: here is a stay to him that sees his insufficiency
and banquerupt estate. 2. If Satan set upon the believer, and come upon him for
the breach of the law, which God will stand so strict for, here is a full
answer, Christ has fulfilled all righteousness.

Fourthly, Use 4.
here is a Cannon and battry: 1. Against all Popish merit, and humane
righteousness and satisfaction; it must be Christ's righteousness that must be
meritorious and satisfactorie; his, who can fulfill all righteousness, which
we cannot do, neither need to do after him. 2. Against all works of
hypocrites and unregenerate ones, who being without faith in Christ, all they
do is sin, no fulfilling of righteousness. 3. Against loose Christians,
who, because Christ has fulfilled all, will do nothing: for, to whom Christ
fulfilleth all righteousness for justification, he renueth their hearts, and
gives them his Spirit, that they shall endeavor to fulfill the Law; not to
satisfy for, or to justify themselves, but to testify their thankfulness
for such a free and undeserved grace.

Further, Doct. 3. Christians must aim at universal obedience.
as Christ our Lord had respect to fulfill every duty that God had commanded
him in his place and calling: so must every Christian Householder endeavor to do
all the things that God has enjoined him by virtue of his calling, general or
particular. Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Oh that there were such an heart in them, to fear me,
and keep all my commandments! and ver. 32, 33. You shall not turn aside to the
right hand, or to the left: you shall walk in all the ways, which the Lord
your God has commanded you. Phi. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are honest, just,
true, of good report, think on these things, and do them.

Reasons.
the Law, whereof every jot must be fulfilled, and the fragments of it gathered
up, curses every one that continues not in all things; and the Gospel
teaches to observe all things, Math. 28. 20.

to one good thing as well as to another: the sound grace of Regeneration
changes the whole man, and renews the whole nature with all the powers
thereof. And indeed here lies a maine difference between a sound heart and
an hypocrite: one will seem to do many things with Saul, but Agag shall be
spared; yea, and can do many things with Herod, but will hold his Herodias;
the other has respect to all the Commandments, Psa. 119. 6. and 128.
and hates all the ways of falsehood. Give thy self liberty in some things,
and in the end thou will take liberty in all.

3. The eye of the Lord is upon presence of any true grace, to encourage it: so
takes he notice of that which is wanting, partly to reprove the want, and
partly to provoke us to the purchase of it. Thus he testifies of many of the
Kings of Judah, who were highly commended in some things, but failed in others;
either the high places were not taken away wholly, or some league was made with
Gods enemies, or some forgetfulness ouertook them: So the Spirit in the new
Testament, writing to the Churches, Reu. 2. and 3. Chap.
speaks plainly, I know thy works, etc. but this I have against thee, This
thou have, and this thou have not.

rich might a man be in good works? what an Harvest might he make account of?
what a crown of righteousness might he expect, that were careful in this
endeavor to look to do one duty as well as another?

Zachary and Elizabeth walked in all the ordinances of God without reproof;
first, they framed their lives to all Gods commandments, and then they are
said to keep them, or to walk in them. 1. Because Christ's keeping of them was
imputed to them. 2. Because themselves were renewed by the Spirit to keep all,
not legally in the perfect act, but euangelically in the endeavor to keep
them, and grief in failing. Thus Paul encourages and commends the Romans,
chap. 15. 4. that they were full of goodness; and Dorcas, Act. 9. 36. that she
was full of good works.

We must therefore account the whole word of God our rule of life, Use 1.
as well as the ten Commandments, and so respect greater duties in the first
place, as we neglect not the least: for, is not every word of God a binder of
conscience to obedience or to punishment? No man can be an imitator of Christ
herein, that is not diligent to know the whole will of God in the Scripture,
and conscionable to subject himself as well to one precept as to another: the
Word bids thee, Thou shall not kill, steal, commit adultery; the same word
binds thee to all particular duties of mercy, of justice, of sobriety; the
same Word binds thy eyes from unlawful looks, thy tongue from guilefull or
corrupt speech; yea thy thoughts are not free, but ought to be kept in full
conformity with the will of God.

Secondly, Use 2.
this serves to reprove lame and cripple Christians, having at most, but one
leg to walk upon, and that very impotent. Some content themselves with opinion
of religion, and hope they walk with God, in public and private duties, which
care they are to be set forward in; but in dealing with men justly, discreetly,
and conscionably, here they fail: they separate those things which God has
joined. Others, so they walk ciuilly and honestly, so as man cannot reprove
them, are safe enough; the care of Religion is wholly cast off, as if the
duties of religion and ciuility were at wars, and could not both lodge in one
house, or heart. But this lesson binds on thee a care of all duties, both as a
man, and as a Christian. The Magistrate must be both a good Magistrate, and a
good man: if he administer justice, and neglect religion, he may be a
tolerable Magistrate, but a vile man: if he shall think that he is only a
patron of equity, and not set out as a pattern of piety, and a foreman in all
good exercises, he has not yet learned to tread in the steps of godly
Magistrates, whose chief care was to lead others the way to the Temple: If he
shall think, that the building of the Church, the discountenancing of sin,
the encouragement of the godly, belongs only to the Minister, and he will have
no hand in this business; we may with the Scripture conclude him to be neither
a good Magistrate, nor a good man. The Minister must not only be a good
Preacher and diligent, but a good man, merciful, sober, watchful,
heauenly-minded, humble: for, he that teaches another, should not he teach
himself? And as his gifts are above ordinary men's, so his care must be in
them all, to testify himself both a good Minister, and a good man. Private
men, who profess the teaching of grace, Tit. 2. 12.
must learn to live soberly, justly, and godly in this present world.

It were infinite to show the particular duties in their several ranks, all
which must have place in Christian life: only consider, that there is no man,
which is not bound, 1. to all duties of religion and godly life. 2. To all
duties concerning outward righteousness, which all men claim. 3. To all
special duties charged upon him by virtue of that society, whereof he is a
member, whether Church, Commonwealth, or family. And for the better
performance of them all, observe these rules:

1. Make conscience of this duty, as knowing that omission of duties, and
failing in them, shall receive sentence against them, as well as commissions:
Depart from me, Mat 25. 42
for ye have not done these and these things.

2. Look what thou art called unto; and in thy calling, what is most needful
and necessary, and that do; wisely preferring the general calling, before the
special, and heavenly things before earthly: as for other men's matters, meddle
not uncalled; and for things lawful, if not so necessary, be not so
conversant in them.

3. Keep thy self in a readiness to every good work, both in respect of thy
self, and others: Know that thou have always one iron in the fire, a soul to
save, 2. Pet. 1. 10.
an Election to make sure, which requires all diligence: and now is thy day,
thy tide, thy tearme-time; thou may not slack thy opportunity: And for thy
brethren, if thou can do them good to day in soul or body, delay not till
to morrow. Say not unto thy neighbor, Go, and come again, and to morrow I
will give, when thou have it by thee, Prou. 3. 28. This may be the last day of
doing thy self, or others good, and therefore accept it.

4. He that would fulfill all, must not only take occasions offered, but even
seek them, and watch them, as being glad to obtain them. So did the
Patriarchs, they watched at their gates, to who^ they might show mercy, and ran
a far off to force them to accept it: so should the sons of Abraham seek
out to relieve Christ in his members, those that are truly poor indeed: here
is a note of a cheerful Christian, when love and mercy flow from him, and are
not forced.

5. So contriue thy course and business, that neither duties of piety hinder
the duty of thy calling, nor these stand in the others way. God is a God of
order, and has not appointed one duty to destroy and eat up another, but to
feed and strengthen one another. Eccl. 8. 5. The heart of the wise knows time
and judgment; knows how to subordinate duties, and not make them opposite:
the heart of the wise will forecast for the Sabbath aforehand, and so order
the weeks business, as the Lords Sabbath be not encroched upon. The heart of
the wise will so husband opportunities, and manage the affairs of his calling,
that the private service of God in the family shall not be interrupted: as
prayer, reading, etc. which is often omitted through want of providence, which
would have allotted time for it, which some domestical distraction has
devoured. The heart of the wise will order times and seasons, as there shall
be place for every good work in the week day, and especially for the best
works; as if there be a public exercise of religion, it were hard if a good
heart could not gain one hour in the weeke-day to watch with Christ; if it
were any thing else, which went with the stream of corruption, as to any
gaming, sporting, or some unwonted occasion, twice as much time would either
be redeemed, or insensibly lost. Doc as you do in your trades, in this trade
of godliness: many several businesses belong to every trade, yet a wise man
so casts them, as one crosses not, but helps forward another.

6. See that no time pass thee, of which thou can not make a good account:
have thou so many things to do, and let precious time slip and do none of
them? 1. Pet. 1. 17. Pass the whole time of your dwelling here in fear, and,
Redeem the time, because the days are evil. There is no time, wherein God
and thy neighbor, or thy self, the Church or Commonwealth, or thy family, or
the Saints abroad call not for some duty from thee; and can thou stand idle
in the vineyard, having so much work before thee? Have thou all righteousness
to fulfill in endeavor? and can thou find an idle time to intend no whit at
all? Oh lay up these rules, and they will be excellent helps to set thee
forward after Christ, till in the way that himself has appointed, thou
come unto him to receive the fruit of righteousness.

Then he suffered him.
Sect. 4.
John hearing Christ give such a sound reason for his fact, John's permission of
Christ.
he disputes no longer, nor resists, but cheerfully admits him to his
baptism: for 1. Now he knows that whom he believed firmly to be the Son
of God and Savior of the world, all his commandments and preceptsmust needs
be just, wise, and only good. 2. His spirit could not but rejoice, that he
would vouchsafe him to be the minister in his fulfilling this part of
righteousness. 3. He is now in expectation of that promise to be accomplished,
Ioh. 1. 33. and to see the Spirit visibly descend upon him, which was as
glorious a sight, as any mortal eye could ever behold, and therefore
undoubtedly he now most willingly permitted him.

Whence note the singular modesty of this holy man, Obser. A godly heart easily
yeldeth up an error.
he yields up his error at the first; so soon as Christ lets him see it,
and teaches us, that it is a point of Christian modesty to be willing both to
see our error, and to forsake it upon the sight of it. Job was so desirous to
see his error, that he would learn it of his servant and maid, Cha. 31. 13.
And seeing his error, chap. 39. 38. He professed thus of himself: Once have I
spoken, but I will answer no more, yea twice, but I will proceed no further.
The like we see in David, when Abigail met him and persuaded him from his
purpose, 1. Sam. 25. 32. Blessed be the Lord that sent thee, and blessed be
thy counsel, and blessed be thou that have kept me from blood. Thus did the
Israelites at at the counsel of Obed the Prophet, concerning the spoils and
captives, 2. Chron. 28. 13, 14.

1. Reason 1
This is a sign of humility, to be ready to acknowledge humanity and
weakness: pride will not give over a conceit.





Pro. 26. 16.
to be wise in his own eyes, and that there is more hope of a fool then of
him that will lean to his own counsel.

First then, Use 1.
in hearing the Word, bring teachable hearts, which is the way to profit in
Gods wisdom: for, he teaches the humble in his way, Psalm. 25. 9. and the
wise in heart will receive commandments, Prou. 10. 8. and he that hears
counsel, is wise. Consider how dangerously Moses replied upon God again and
again, till the Lord was very angry: and so did Peter once and again, Ioh.
13. 6, 8. till Christ told him in earnest, that if he washed him not, he should
have no part in him. Therefore let all flesh stoop to the wisdom of GOD in
his Word.

Secondly, Use 2.
this conuinceth the obstinacy of men, who hold it a point of wit and
learning, to defend every novel opinion they take up, and not yield an inch to
any man what ever be brought to the contrary. And indeed if a man be resolved
to hold and maintain an error, he will be hardly overcome: for the devil and
his own wicked heart will suggest words and color; as for substance and
soundness they care not, the contention is for victory, not for truth: but all
this is the way of one wise in his own eyes: a proud folly, an ignorant
learning, leading into strength of delusion. This folly is now set on
horseback, as the numbers of strange questions (not in ceremony or
circumstance) but in the substance of religion, daily forged out of conceited
brains, do witness: and it is the unhappiness of many a man; that he cannot
rise into request, but by the fall or foyling of some truth or other.

Thirdly, Use 3.
private persons especially must take heed of stiffness in opinion; a spice of
pride, and the mother of schism: not to be reeds shaken with the wind in
fundamental and more necessary points grounded in Scripture, but in things
controuerted and of less consequence to beware of ungrounded conceits, to
suspect their judgments and be of the yielding hand to better reason: and for
this let John be an example. But alas! many are so stiff and wedded t^
^^^nions, as neither private (...) ^ublike persons can stir (...) out of them.

Verse. 16. Verse. 16.
And Jesus, when he was baptized, came straight out of the water, and lo, the
heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a
Dove, and lighting upon him.
Sect. 5.
NOw follows the solemn inuesting of Christ into his office by three
wonderful and admirable effects: first, Christ's prayer being come out of the
water.
the opening of the heavens: secondly, the desce^ding of the holy Ghost in a
visible shape upon him: thirdly, his Fathers voice concerning him.

But first it is said, that Christ, so soon as he was baptized, came straight
out of the water, and this not without just reason: for 1. whereas John in his
baptism of others preached unto them, and admonished them to look to their
faith and repentance, and before they came out of the water, instructed the^ in
the doctrine of Baptism, and exhorted to bring forth fruits worthy
repentance, verse. 8. so as they were stayed awhile (as it seems) after their
baptism, Christ presently ascended; where John's wisdom is commended in
putting difference between the person of Christ and others: he knew, that
though Christ must be baptized with his baptism, yet he needed not his
instruction: and teaches Ministers wisely to see into the estate of their
people, that they perform duties to them according to their several
necessities.

2. It shows the willingness of Christ to undertake his office; he stayed no
longer than he must needs: and indeed all his obedience was most voluntary,
teaching us also to make haste, and not delay in doing the work which God has
committed to us. Psalm. 119. 60. and ver. 32. I will run the way of thy
commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart: we love quick servants, and so
does God.

3. Christ stayed not in the water, but hasted to receive the Spirit promised
in his baptism, and teaches us not to stay in outward washings, but hasten our
selves to the Spirit, without which, all external washings avail nothing: it
is meet to use the outward means as Christ did, but not to stay in them: for,
further than the Spirit accompanies them, they are but dead and powerless.

4. This speedy coming out of the water, was a type of his rising from under
our sin, which his baptism washed away, and of ours in him. Again, the
Evangelist Luke has another circumstance, chap. 3. 21. That Christ as he was
baptized, did pray. It is undoubted, Why Christ prayed at his baptism.
that Christ both before, and in the time of baptism, did lift up his heart in
requests unto his Father; but now the Evangelist records, that so soon as
he was baptized, he composeth himself upon the bank of Jordan, to solemn
and humble prayer, both in respect of that which he had done, and that he was
further to do.

For the first, he was now baptized, first cleansed and sanctified, and then
pray: men must lift pure hands with pure hearts in every place, God will not
hear sinners; hands full of blood, and an heart full of hypocrisy, make
prayer abominable: therefore wash you and make you clean, and then come, and
we will reason together, says the Lord, Isa. 1. 16. 2. In receiving the
Sacrament, a holy heart knows that he has to do with God, and lifts it
self above sensible elements; it labors to approve it self to God, and
looks not at men, but at God and his covenant, and renewes it self with
faith, repentance, and invocation. 3. In that Christ goes to God for a
blessing upon the Sacrament received, we learn that all the grace, holiness,
and efficacy of any Sacrament is to be obtained, continued and increased by
the means of prayer.

For the second, Christ prayed

1. He was now to be declared that great Prophet of his Church, Deuteronomy. 18. 18.
And the whole ministry of the new testament was now to be delivered and
consecrated in him, and therefore undertaking this great work, he goes to his
Father for blessing and success in it.

2. He was now in a solemn manner by sundry testimonies from heaven, to be set
apart for the work of Redemption, and the salvation of man being lost, a
ministry which men and Angels were all too weak for: and no marvel if he
pray to his Father for sufficient strength and grace to undergo the same.

3. He knew that the heavens were to be opened, and therefore he will be in
prayer, to show the power of prayer, that it pierces the heavens, and enters
the presence of God, and prevails for blessing.

4. The Spirit was to descend upon him, and therefore he would be in prayer,
to teach us, that the prayers of Gods children are of that force, that they
bring down the holy Ghost with all graces upon earth; as elsewhere it is
said, Luke 11. 1^.
If you that are evil, can give your children good things, how much more will
your heavenly. Father give the holy Ghost to them that ask him?

5. God the Father was to testify of him as he never did of any: Christ would
be apart at prayer, not only that the people should not mistake the person, on
whom the Spirit descended, and the voice was uttered, but also that we might
note, that faithful prayer does cause God to give some evident testimony or
other upon those, with whom he is well-pleased: for prayer from time to time
has procured Gods loving favor to his children, and the fruits of it in all
necessary blessings, spiritual and temporal.

Now, in that Christ here undertakes his office, and the Sacrament with
prayer, we learn, that

Whatsoever we take in hand, Doct.
we must reverently and religiously undertake it with prayer, but especially
two things above other: 1. The parts of Gods holy worship. 2. The duties of our
callings: in both which our Lord goes here before us in example. Shall Christ
do this, and have not we more need?

First, the parts of Gods worship. Parts of Gods worship to be entered with
prayer.
We are to come into the glorious presence of God, who is of pure eyes, and
cannot behold wickedness, Habak. 1. 13. but requires holiness and purity in the
worshippers of him: for, what have thou to do with my law and ordinances, who
hate to be reformed? he will glorify himself in all that come near him;
and therefore we ought not to come without leave, reverence, preparation, and
to get grace by prayer, that we may be pleasing in his sight.

Secondly, So are the several duties of our special callings.
the duties of our callings. Col. 3. 17. Whatsoever ye shall do in word or
deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God: a general
rule for all the actions of thy calling, yea, of thy life, and for all the
words of thy mouth, is this: Begin with Christ, and end with him, that it may
be to his glory. This prayer has two parts: 1. Petition before, whereby
especially in the beginning of the day, and the work of it, a Christian craves
Gods assistance, blessing, and acceptance. 2. Thanksgiving at the end of the
day, and of his labor, for his calling, for the free use of it, and Gods
blessing in the success: Both are necessary;

1. Because every creature of God, Reasons.
and every ordinance, is sanctified by the word and prayer, 1. Tim. 4. 4. the
word shows the lawfulness of the duty to be done, and directs us in the
right manner, means, and ends in performance: Prayer serves to obtain
blessing and success; for nothing can further be blessed unto us, then we
receive the blessing thereof from GOD; and we can look for no blessing which
we pray not for. Consider well, and you shall see all Gods promises run with
this condition: Whatsoever we would have God to do unto us, our Savior tells
us we must ask it in his name; Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, it shall
be done unto you: Whatsoever we would have God to give us, we must not expect
it out of the same condition, Math. 7. 7.
Ask and it shall be given you. Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me: there is the
commandment: and I will hear thee: there is the promise.

2. Such is our weakness, as when we do any thing the best we can, we had
need to pray to do it better, and for pardon that we have done it no better:
which if it be true in external things and duties, wherein we are better
acquainted, much more in spiritual, wherein our ability is much less.

3. We never receive so much favor from God, but we still stand in need to
crave more, nor never so little, but that we have much to be thankful for.

This doctrine serves to reprove Use 1.
such as content themselves with the work of Gods worship, that come to the
word and Sacraments, but beg not a blessing of God beforehand, whereas Christ
himself contented not himself with the outward means, but prayed for a
blessing: And this is the very cause why men find so little taste, strength, and
power in these ordinances, because Gods blessing goes not with the means; and
therefore it is sundred from his own ordinances, because it is not asked. Is it
any marvel, that when me^ come carelessly, carnally, and profanely, without
reverence and religion to the exercises of religion, that they go away as
brutishly as they come, and the longer they thus profane Gods holy things, the
more senseless and incurable they grow by them, more hardened and hopeless?
What good has many a man gotten by customable coming to the Word and
Sacraments many years together? for their knowledge, babes may pose them in
principles; for their conscience, we may as soon prevail with children of
three years old, to sit reverently and attentively, as some of three or four
score, who in the morning are so sleepy, as it were fitter they were at home in
their beds, or take order to bring their beds with them; and for their
profitablenesse in their places, or reformation of any thing in public, or in
their private families or their own persons, God nor man can see no such
thing. Now would I ask these men as old as they be, how often they can
remember they have humbled themselves before God, that he would bless the Word
unto them, and them to understand it, and make conscience of it, to reform
their ways, to comfort their consciences. Alas dead men! this is a strange
motion to them, and now we conclude, No blessing asked, none obtained, but a
curse accompanied them further to harden them: whereas humble and feeling
prayer would have opened the heavens, and fetched down the Spirit to have
accompanied the ordinance; and so some testimony would have bin seen, that God
had been better pleased with them and their work.

They may likewise see their error and reform it, Use 2.
that attempt the ordinary duties of their calling, without calling upon God
for a blessing; whereas it is prayer whereby all needful things are obtained,
both public and private, for our selves and for others, belonging to this
life, and the life to come; and the neglect hereof is the cause why many men
thrive not, but rise early, go late to bed, and eat the bread of
carfulness, either in vain, or else get money and put it in a broken bag:
and all is, because they humble not themselves morning and evening with their
family, for a blessing on their labors, and never pray but coldly, and for
custom, and that in the Church only. If some man's conscience now tell him,
that although he has never used this course of prayer with his family, and
yet he thriues, and prospers, and his work goes well enough forward: to him,
I say, 1. That he holds nothing that he has, by any special favor of God,
but by the general providence whereby he feeds the bruit creatures; and all
this while God has no more respect of him than of them. 2. He holds nothing by
virtue of any promise, not being in Christ: for whatsoever God has promised,
he applies it in this means of prayer, and not otherwise. 3. Wealth and
prosperity being not had, or held by virtue of any promise of God, nor yet in
the means of God, is so far from being a blessing unto him, that the curse
of God abides him and it; he by it corrupts himself, hardens his heart,
withdrawes it from God, drownes it in the things of this life, and is to be
drawn to a reckoning for his unjust usurpation.

Thirdly, let this example of Christ, Use 3.
undertaking all his actions with prayer, sometime publicly, sometime
privately; yea his whole Passion, as in the garden often and fervently, move
us to accustom our selves to this duty: for,

1. Herein lies a difference between the child of God, Motives to fervent
prayer.
and a worldling, between a sound Christian, and an hollow hypocrite: the one
walks with God, lifting up his heart to God in holy meditations and prayers
continually, as just occasion is offered; and therefore by this title the
Scripture describes true Christians, Act. 2. 41. And Paul saluteth all the
faithful that call upon the name of the Lord, 1. Cor. 1. 2. The other are
noted, Psalm. 14. 4. by this mark, They call not upon God. Prayer is as the
breath, whereby we know whether a man live the spiritual life or no: a child
that cries not, is dead and still-borne, as we say; no prayer, no breath of the
Spirit, and no breath, no life.

2. Our own benefit calls for this duty; all good comes unto us by reason of
the great power of prayer, which avails to set heaven open, to bring down the
Spirit, to pacific God, and appease him being offended. We see what great and
extraordinary things the Saints have obtained by prayer; Moses, Elias, etc. And
lest we should think that these examples appertain not to us weak and silly
men, the Apostle James urges this as an argument to force us to prayer, by the
practice of Eliah, who prayed that it might not rain, Iam. 5. 17.
and it rained not in three years, etc. Not that we should pray so, that it
may not rain for so many years together; but, if the power of prayer be so
prevailing with God, that therefore we should be much and often in this duty:
and surely he that can pray well, can want no good thing, needs fear none
evil.

3. It is a notable fence against sin: for, as the more sin preuailes, the
less can a man pray; so, the more he prays, the less is he overtaken with
sin. When the true man is assaulted, if he cry for help, the thief runs
away; and so does sin, (a thief which ever doggeth and besetteth us to rob
us, and steal away grace) if we can cry mightily to God.

4. Acquaint thy self with God; for the times come when nothing will stand by
thee but his help; and therefore use prayer, to be familiarly acquainted with
him: know him now in the time of thy prayer, that he may know thee in the day
of thy distress.

And lo, the heavens were opened unto him.
Sect. 6.
NOw it follows, that we speak of those three admirable events, which
followed the Prayer The opening of the heavens upon him in his prayer.
of Christ: 1. The sensible opening of the heavens. 2. The visible descending
of the holy Ghost. 3. The audible voice of God the Father, witnessing to many,
both eye and eare-witnesses, the solemn instalment and induction of Christ
into his office and work of mediation and ministry: Wherein we must know,
that as there never was in all the world so high and excellent an office as
Christ's was: (for, the greatest of Kings, and the high Priest, who yet were
with great state and observation anointed and deputed to their offices, were
but shadows of this:) even so God would have Christ entered into it with such
magnificence and glory as never man was, nor creature is capable of. As the
Coronation of a Prince, with what glory, pomp, and sumptuousness, even to
admiration, is he brought forth with his Nobles and subjects? But all this is
but earthly glory, from earthly men, to an earthly King: But now at the
Coronation of the Prince of peace, God sets himself from heaven to honor it;
and for this purpose he does more familiarly, and yet more gloriously reveal
himself unto all mankind, then he had ever before done from the creation of
the world; and never was any ceremony in all the world so honored, as this
Baptism of Christ was. The ancient sacrifices of Gods institution were
honored by manifest signs of his gracious presence, as by the fire which came
from heaven continually to consume them: the Arc was honored with special
signs of his glorious presence, sitting between the Cherubims, answering by
Oracle and voice, unto cases propounded: the Temple it self at Jerusalem, at
Salomons prayer and dedication, was filled with the glory of God, manifested in
that cloud that filled the House of the Lord, 1. Kin. 8. 10. and this cloud
still watched over the Tabernacle, Exodus 40. 34. But these were all but
shadows to this, wherein the Lord did not cloud and veil his presence, or
reveal his presence in some sign, but the Divine Majesty manifested it self
distinctly, as we may say, in person, yea in the distinction of all the three
Persons, the Father testifying his delight in his dear Son, the Son
standing in Jordan, and receiving his Fathers testimony; and the holy Ghost
descending in the visible shape of a Dove.

From whence is notably grounded the doctrine of the blessed Trinity of
persons, Obser.
in the Unity of divine essence, because they be so really distinguished,
although they cannot be separated.

But the word Trinity, Object.
is not to be found in the Scriptures.

Yet the doctrine is, Answ.
if not according to the letter, yet according to the sense. Mat. 17. 5. In the
transfiguration of Christ, the Son stands, the Father by his voice
witnesses, and the holy Ghost ouershadowes him in a cloud, as here by a Dove.
So Matthew. 28. 19. Baptize them in the name (not names, to note the unity) of
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. And 2. Cor. 13. 14. The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost be with
you all. Besides, there is expressly the word three, from whence Trinity comes,
1. Ioh. 5. 7. There be three that bear witness in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. So also Gal. 4. 6. God sent
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts.

Which is worthy to be by the way observed, Use.
as against sundry other damnable Heretics, so especially against the Jews at
this day, who hold an indistinct essence in the Deity, without distinction of
persons: and secondly, against the wicked Arrians, who deny the Son of God to
be begotten of the essence of the Father, and to be coeternall and coequall
with him; they hold him to be mere man, only borne without sin, and receiving
the Spirit beyond measure; and in all those places, where he is called God,
they understand it God by office, not by nature, as the Magistrate is called
God; and by this equivocation they can deceive the Magistrate, and profess
(namely in this their sense) that they verily believe him to be God, and yet
mere man. But this place, and many other assume him into equal dignity with
the Father and holy Ghost, as we shall further see in the Fathers testimony
of him.

In the opening of the heavens consider 1. how they were opened: 2. why they
were opened. For the former; not the whole heavens, but a part, and that part
over the earth where Christ prayed in the bank of Jordan, and not to all the
people of the earth, but to those only that were present with Christ, were the
heavens opened: and therefore it is said, The heaven was opened unto him, not
(as some say) to John, but to Christ: for so the phrase is used, Act. 2. 3.
(...), visae eis linguae, i. supra eos. The difficulty is in the manner.

Some think it was but an apparition in the air, How the heavens were opened.
because the densitie of the heavens (as Philosophy teaches) cannot admit of
any division in the same. But this is unlikely: for in apparitions the eye is
easily deceived by thinness or thickness, neerenes or remotenes, light or
darkness of the parts of the heavens and clouds: now God would not have so
notable a confirmation of Christ's calling stand upon the credit of a thing so
liable to deceit as apparitions be. Again, this was a miracle, by which
Christ's office was exalted, and therefore goes beyond nature, and it is absurd
to limit so transcendent a power within the rules and hedge of nature.

Others of the Fathers, whom some Schoolmen follow, think that there was no
alteration in the heavens to the bodily eye, but it was a mere vision, which
none but Christ saw, and that not with the eyes of his body, but of his mind,
such a vision as Ezekiel and Steven saw. But this is not so: for first, to the
eyes of Christ's mind heaven was never shut. Secondly, Mark. 1. 10. he saw the
heavens (...) cloven, a word used in things really done, and used of the rent
garment, Luke 5. 36. and of the veil of the Temple, which was rent in twain.
Thirdly, the other signs were really and sensibly done, the Spirits descending
visible, and the Fathers voice audible and sensible, which are things of
greater difficulty to conceive as we shall see: and, visible and sensible
were they not so much for Christ's, as for John's and the peoples confirmation
that stood there.

It seems therefore to be true, that the heaven was sensibly divided and
rent in twain, even as the earth was when Korah and his company were swallowed
up. This is not unreasonable to conceive, if we consider that the Lord might
well do as much for his Son, as he had formerly done for his servants.
Henoch, in his body as well as in his soul, was taken up into heaven: here
either the heavens must divide themselves, or one body must pearce and
penetrate another, which even glorified bodies cannot do. Eliah, when Elisha
prayed him that his spirit might be doubled on him, answered thus, Thou ask
an hard thing, yet if thou see me when I am taken from thee, thou shall have it
so, 2. King. 2. 11, 12. and Elisha saw him when he was taken up into heaven by
a whirlewinde, and consequently saw the heavens divided to receive his body now
glorified in the act of translation.

When Christ had accomplished his whole ministry, Act. 1. 9. while his
Disciples beheld, he was taken up into heaven; they did see the heavens opening
themselves to receive his glorious body: and shall we think it absurd, that
according to the letter of the Scripture, his Father should enter him into that
ministry by a sensible opening of the heavens? As easy it must be for God to
do this, as to make the Sun stand still, the Sea run back, yea the Sea to
divide it self and stand like a wall for the defense of his people. And, that
he thus did, it is plain, because this serves for the greater confirmation,
and glory of the business in hand, which above all other the Lord set
himself to advance and commend to the world.

Now in the second place, Why were the heavens opened.
the reasons why the heavens were opened, were sundry.

1. To manifest the truth and certainty of the other signs which followed,
that seeing the heavens opened, they might not conceive, that either the Dove
or the voice came from any other place.

2. To show that howsoever Christ stood there as a weak man, and in similitude
of sinful flesh, yet he was the Lord from heaven heavenly, of whom was
verified, Ioh. 3. 31. He that is come from heaven, is above all.

3. That as his person, so likewise his doctrine was divine and heavenly, ver.
34. He whom God has sent, speaks the words of God: and this was the special
work of his doctorall office, to reveal the will of his Father. And Io. 1.
18. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, has declared him. The power also and grace, whereby he
wrought miracles, was not from Beel-zebub, but from heaven.

4. To show that his office, into which he was now entered, was and is to open
heaven again for us, who by sin had shut it against our selves; he has made
our way unto ye throne of grace. And thus this second Adam stands in
opposition with the first; he shut us out of Paradise: a token that we were
shut out of heaven: but this lets us into the Paradise of God again.

The heavens are opened by Object.
his passion, not by his baptism, Heb. 10. 19.

They are opened by his death Answ.
as by a common cause, which must be specially and singularly applied, and that
is by baptism: therefore it is said, Romans 6. 3, 4. We are baptized into his
death; that is, to have benefit by his death.

1. Note hence, that Christ by fulfilling all righteousness, has set heaven
open unto us, and consequently, the justification of a sinner, is not only by
the obedience of his passion, but also by his active obedience in fulfilling
the Law: for, 1. the whole sum of the Law, is, to love God with all the
heart, etc. which if we perform not in our selves, or in Christ, then the
whole Law is abolished, whereof every jot must be accomplished, Math. 5. and
Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. 2. The sanction of the
Law (Cursed is every one that abides not in all things) cannot be avoided, if
all those things be not done in our selves or our surety. 3. There are two
parts of justification: 1. Remission of sin, which is by the blood of Christ,
which takes away all sin. 2. Imputation of Christ's righteousness: neither can
the one stand without the other, as 1. Cor. 5. 21. He has made Him sin that
knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in Him. And
this meets with their maine objection, that when sin is taken away, Christ
has fulfilled active righteousness for us as well as passive.
the Law is fulfilled, and the sinner acquitted and justified: for that is not
true; for a sinner is not justified when sin is abolished, unless justice be
added. Sin must be covered indeed, but that is but fulfilling of half
righteousness, unless righteousness be imputed, Romans 4. 25. He was delivered
for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification: where
justification is far more then remission of sins. 4. The words of Scripture
are plain, Romans 5. 18. By the obedience of Christ many are made righteous: and
10. 4. Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness; and not only to remove
unrighteousness. As for all those places, wherein it is said, that Christ has
purged all sin with his blood, etc. they are to be meant exclusiuely, in
respect of the blood of beasts or any meritorious works of men out of Christ,
but not to exclude the meritorious active obedience of the Son of God. 5. He
that is circumcised, is bound to keep the whole Law.

Object. That was to make him a fit Savior.

Answ. No, but that he might redeem them that were subject to the Law, and
that they might receive the adoption of sons, verse. 5. He speaks plainly
of Christ's active obedience. We will conclude with Bernard, Totus mihi datus,
totus in meos vsus expensus est. When I can have too much of Christ, I will
renounce his active obedience; but if by fulfilling all righteousness, he has
opened heaven, I will lay fast hold upon all his righteousness to bring me
thither.

Secondly, hence we note what we are to think of the doctrine of Christ, who
came from heaven, and spoke from heaven. Heb. 1. 1. In these last days God
has spoken to us by his Son, and therefore our means of salvation are great
and glorious; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of his Father,
has revealed the Fathers will unto us. Natural light has manifested much of
God to many men; supernatural light has made him more manifest, both by the
delivery of the Law, and the promises of the Gospel concerning Christ to come,
whereby the Jews saw God after a sort through the veil of types and shadows,
but did not see him clearly and perspicuously, till Christ was manifested in
the flesh, who was in his person the brightness of his Fathers image, and in his
office the chief Doctor and Teacher of his Church.

Whence it follows, Heb. 12. 25. That if they escaped not, who refused him
which spoke on earth, much less shall we, if we turn from him that speaks
from heaven: and 2. 2. If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, etc. how
shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which was first begun to be
preached by the Lord, and is confirmed to us by them that heard him?

Object. Oh, if we should hear Heaven opened it self, to confirm our
doctrine to be from heaven.
Christ speak from heaven, we would obey.

Answ. The doctrine that we bring, is from heaven, heaven opened it self to
give confirmation to it, the same it is which Christ taught, which the Apostles
received from him, and we from them; and of us, holding our selves to the
Apostles doctrine, our Savior says, He that hears you, hears me. With
how great danger therefore do men refuse and turn away from our doctrine? how
shall they escape, that refuse doctrine from heaven? A just thing it is, that
they be given over to Satanicall and hellish delusions, who refuse doctrine
from heaven.

3. This opening of heaven being a sign of that which Christ had done,
affoordeth special comfort to all the members of Christ, in that heaven being
shut against us by our sin (for into it shall no unclean thing enter:) Christ
has set the gate of it open unto us again; he has made a way, and as it
were a thorow-fare between heaven and earth.

By him (says the Apostle) all things in heaven and earth are gathered into
one, Ephesians. 1. 10. and Col. 1. 20. He has reconciled to himself through him
all things, which are in earth and in heaven; that is, all elect and believing
men on earth, and the blessed Saints and Angels in heaven: and this follows,
that in the former verse, where Christ is called the head of all things; being
the head of his body, he has made a passage both for himself and his members.

How does Christ open heaven Quest.
for us? oh that we could see such a sight!

Christ opens heaven: 1. by Answ.
the merit of his obedience unto the death; so says S Paul, Col. 1. 20. By the
blood of his cross he has set at peace all things. Christ opens heaven for
us 3. ways.
Meditate on his death. 2. By the donation of his Spirit, who works faith in
the heart of Gods child; which is as an hand whereby Christ with all his
benefits is received, and a mouth whereby he is eaten; so is it an eye cleared
to see through the clouds God sitting in his glory, upon the Propitiatory and
Mercy-seate, and sometimes upon the throne of his justice. Heb. 11. 27. By
faith Moses departed Egypt, and feared not the fierceness of the King, but
endured as one that saw him that was invisible. By faith Henoch walked with
God, he had him ever in his eye, heaven was ever open and vndrawne unto him.
Iose^h saw on the throne of his justice, and said, Can I sin and do this
great wickedness against God? Thus the godly in this life have heaven after a
sort opened, so as they have God ever present with them. Steven being full of
the holy Ghost, saw heaven open; get faith, and thou shall see it open too. 3.
By the benefit of his intercession, Ioh. 17. Father, I will, that where I am,
they also be to behold my glory. Now he was heard in all that he prayed for, so
as by virtue of the merit of his intercession, all the elect shall be gathered
in soul and body into heaven after this life. This same key opens heaven to
our prayers, and persons.

Here is the comfort of the godly, that whereas the first Adam has shut
heaven on them, and set hell wide open, and armed all the creatures against
them: this second Adam has opened heaven again and reconciled all things;
there is now passage from man to God, from earth to heaven, by the prayer of
faith: and between God and man, while he hears prayer and bestows heavenly
blessings: a passage for the Spirit, and for Gods helping hand in trouble;
there is a beaten way between heaven and earth, in which Gods Angels are
continually moving as dilligent ministers to the heirs of salvation. Here ye
may see Jacobs ladder, which reaches from earth to heaven, on which the Angels
are continually ascending Genesis 28. 1.
and descending: this ladder is Christ himself, who by his humanity touches
earth, Ioh. 1. 51.
and by his divinity reaches up to the heavens, and so has made heaven and
earth meet together.

And as this comfort us through our whole life, so especially in the hour
of our death it is of exceeding use; then happy is he that can see the heavens
opened by Christ for him, as Steven did; he shall lay himself down in rest
and assurance, that though his body shall be enclosed in the earth for a time,
yet his soul shall ascend to God, and both soul and body in the Judgment day
shall partake of the glory, unto which Christ the Head is already ascended; and
the same power, which made the heavens themselves now at his baptism set
themselves open to strengthen and increase the grace of his Saints, shall then
set them wide open to confirm them for ever in glory.

And John saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him.
Sect. 7.
THis is the second divine The Spirit descending upon Christ like a Dove.
testimony, whereby God the Father would make evident to all the world, that
Christ the Son was the Messiah, anointed with the gifts of the holy Ghost for
this purpose: Where, for the meaning of the words, must be known; 1. What is
here meant by the Spirit of God. 2. How the Spirit could descend, or be seen
so to do. 3. The manner of his descending, like a Dove. 4. Why he lighted
upon Christ. 5. Why it is said, John saw all this.

1. By the Spirit of God is meant sometimes the whole essence of the Godhead,
as it is common to all the three Persons: as Ioh. 4. 24. God is a Spirit.
Sometimes the gifts and graces of the Spirit, as Luke 1. 15. John was filled
with the Spirit; that is, spiritual gifts, by a Metonymie of the cause for the
effect. And Act. 6. 5. Steven, a man full of faith and the holy Ghost. Sometimes
the third Person in Trinity, as 1. Ioh. 5. 6. and that Spirit is truth: and
thus is the word here used; not the gifts and graces of the spirit, nor taken
essentially or commonly for the whole Trinity; but personally, for the third
Person in Trinity, who is distinct from the Father and the Son, equal unto
the Father and the Son, and the same God in Nature and Essence with the
Father and the Son, though not the same person. And the third person is
called a Spirit, because he is that essential virtue, proceeding and as it
were spired or breathed from the Father and the Son; or from his effect, who
blows where he lists, and inspireth holy motions and graces into the hearts
of the elect.

2. How can the holy Ghost How the holy Ghost can be said to descend, seeing
he fills heaven and earth.
`who is God omnipresent, and filling heaven and earth? Psalm. 139. 7. Whither
shall I go from thy Spirit?

Answer. True it is, that this descending of the Spirit, was a local motion
from heaven, where it was opened, unto earth to the very head of Christ, and
yet we may not conceive any local motion in God or any of the persons: but in
one word, The sign or siymbol wherein the holy Ghost pleased to testify a
special presence or efficacy, does take the name of the thing signifiyed; the
Dove, a sign of the Spirit is called by the thing signified, the Spirit it
self; not that the blessed Spirit was changed into a Dove or any similitude,
(whose nature were it not immutable, he could not be God:) but because it
pleased him, retaining his own unchangeable nature, to appear under this
form and likeness: and thus John also, seeing this shape and appearance descend
from heaven, is said to see the Spirit which is invisible; the Dove signifying,
called ye Spirit, signified by a figurative kind of speech, common in the
Scriptures. The Ark was called The Glory of God, because it was a special
sign of it. Genesis 18. 3.
Three Angels came to Abraham; one of them, seeming to be more glorious then
the other, is called by the name Iehoua; a name proper to God, and not
agreeable to any Angel, further then he represents the Son of God as that
did.

The right interpretation and understanding of such phrases, would cut off
infinite quarrels about the real presence, which is only held up, because by
this same figure the bread signifying is called the body signified; which if it
necessarily imply a change of the bread into the very Body of Christ, then
because the Spirit of God is called a Dove, he must necessarily be turned
into a Dove, and of a creating God become a creature; which is high blasphemy.

3. The manner or form of the Spirits descending, was in the shape of a Dove.

Quest. Whether was this a true material Dove, or an appearance of a Dove only?

Answ. It is enough to conceive the presence of the holy Ghost under the form
of a Dove, and it is no article of faith whether it was or no: But yet I think
it was a true real body and corporal Dove; 1. Because Luke adds (in a bodily
shape) implying that there was a body. 2. Because none of the other signs were
imaginary or appearances, but real things: whence some of the Fathers
conclude, that it was as true a Dove, as the Spirit was a true Spirit.

Object. But if it were so, how came it into heaven?

Answ. He that created of nothing all things, created it at this time, not for
common use, but for this use and purpose; which when it was accomplished, he
could bring it to nothing, or resolve it into the first matter whereof it was
made, as it was with those bodies in which the Angels appeared.

Object. But the text is, (...), like a Dove; therefore it was but a
similitude, and appearance, not a true body.

Answ. The word (...) is not to be referred to the Dove, but to the Spirit, who
manifested his presence in this likeness. 2. The phrase does not always note
likeness and similitude only, but verity and identity, as Ioh. 1. 14. We saw
his glory, as the glory of the only Son of God; and Phil. 2. 7. Christ was in
the shape of man, and like man: shall we thence conclude, that he was not a true
man, but one in appearance only?

Why did the holy Ghost appear Quest.
in this shape? For sometimes he appeared in mighty winds, as to the Apostles;
sometimes in burning fire, wherein he seems to be contrary to himself.

These diverse symbols and testimonies Answ.
of the presence of the Spirit, argue diverse, but not contrary effects; all of
them his wisdom made choice of, according to the occasion and present use.
There was great difference between the ministry of Christ, and Moses;
between the Law, and the Gospel, and accordingly the Spirit manifests
himself. The Law was confirmed with terror and fear; but to ratify the
Gospel, the Spirit appears in the shape of a Dove. Act. 2. 2. He is noted to
come like a mighty rushing wind, to show the mighty power of the Gospel in
the ministry of the Apostles, who were now to be sent out: so in the shape of
tongues, to show the utterance given by the Spirit to the Apostles: in the
shape of cloven tongues, to note the variety of tongues and languages,
wherewith they were endued: in the shape of fiery tongues, to show the fruit
and efficacy of their ministry and doctrine, which should be as fire to
sever between dross and pure metal. So here the Spirit would appear in the
shape of a Dove, Why the Spirit appeared in the likeness of a Dove.
to note, 1. what kind of Spirit Christ's was: 2. what kind of gifts they were,
which were collated and bestowed upon him: and 3. what was the fruit of those
gifts.

For the first, in the Dove observe two things: 1. Of all fowls it is the most
mild, without gall. 2. It is most innocent and harmless, not ravening and
hurtful. Which signifies, that Christ should be endued with a mild, meek,
and gentle spirit: so it was prophesied of him, Isa. 42. 2. That he should not
cry nor lift up his voice in the streets, a bruised reed he should not break;
and how it was accomplished, the whole story of the Gospel witnesses, Math.
12. 19. So also, that he should be most innocent, blameless, of a most pure
spirit: In him was no guile, no deceit in his lips. Who could accuse him of
sin, being the spotless Lamb of God?

2. As the Dove has many excellent properties; patience, simplicity,
sincerity, tenderness to her young, faithfulness to her mate, etc. Even so God
the Father has fitted Christ with all profitable and necessary gifts; humility
and patience, holiness and integrity, love and tenderness, constancy and
diligence in working out the good of his members.

3. The fruit of these gifts is the appeasing of his Fathers displeasure,
conceived against the sin of man: for look as the Dove which Noah sent forth
out of the Arc, returning with an Olive branch, which argued the ceasing of
the deluge, brought news that Gods wrath was now assuaged and decreased with
the waters: so the Spirit of the Lord is upon Christ in the form of a Dove,
sending him out to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, and good tidings of
liberty to captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound,
forgiveness of sin, and conferring of grace, and life, etc. Isa. 61. 1. Now
this being the end of the Spirits appearing in this shape, separating and
sending Christ to his ministry, and that only for this time, and not reserved
out of this time and use, it is not now lawful for any man to represent the
holy Ghost by this shape, or make an image thereof: for this is to make an
Idol, as the Papists do, not only in this, but in painting God the Father
like an old man, because he is called the Ancient of days, Dan. 7. 22. Both of
them flat Idolatry. God is above his Law, if he make shapes, Cherubs, or
bodies, it is just because he does it: but we are borne under the Law, which
expressly forbids the making or having of any Image of God in any use, or any at
all in religious use, and enioynes us to worship God in spirit and truth, only
in the Image of his Son.

And it will strongly follow, that if we may not reserve the shapes which God
himself has used to manifest his presence, much less upon any color, any
Images or Idols devised and beautified by Idolaters, abused in times past, and
in present, and for time to come, subject to be abused to the maintenance of
Idolatry. Here come all Popish pictures to be defaced, whose Idolatry is as
gross as ever the Heathens was: a lamentable thing, yt any Christian can feed
and please his senses in the co^uicted instruments of Gods dishonor in so high
a kind.

A chaste heart will make a Why the Spirit lighted upon the head of Christ.


The 4. point is the Spirits descending upon Christ, for these reasons: 1. To
show that The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, he has anointed me to preach.

Object. But Christ was filled with the holy Ghost from his infancy.

Answer. He was endued with such a measure of the Spirit, as was fit for his
private estate; yet now entering upon a public office, and a work after a
sort infinite, he needs more grace, and receives according as his calling
required.

Object. But then Christ had imperfection in him, if he wanted some grace.

Answ. It implies a degree, but not imperfection: he was perfectly graced so
far, as his youth and private estate required, yea, as much as that was
capable of; it being with him as with the Saints in heaven, among whom are
degrees of glory, but not want nor imperfection. And 3. to show that the Spirit
abode upon him. This was prophesied, Isa. 11. 2. The Spirit of the Lord shall
rest upon him, the Spirit of counsel and understanding, of wisdom and
strength, the Spirit of knowledge, and the fear of the Lord.

Object. But the Spirit of God dwells in the Elect, therefore this was no
privilege.

An. Never did or can the spirit rest with Saint or Angel, as he did with
Christ. 1. In respect of his humanity, the Spirit is ever with that, working in
yt nature all divine virtues, graces, and glory, both in number and degree
perfect, as fitting the Head; whereas the members have some, not all, and in
some small degree, not in all perfection of degrees, as he was, being anointed
with ye oil of gladness above al his fellows. 2. In respect of his Deity, the
spirit, the third person, is perpetually present with the Son, as joined unto
him in the admirable unity of one and the same nature; yea, so joined, as he
proceeds from the Son as from the Father, and has his subsistence from the
Son, as from the Father, by the unspeakable communication of one and the
selfsame nature. In which respects, the Spirit never lighted, nor did rest
with any but with Jesus Christ alone. 4. Some add a fourth reason of the
Spirits lighting on Christ: not only to design Christ, but to distinguish him
by an apparent sign from John, lest any should think that the voice
following, This is my well-beloued Son, was uttered of John, and not of
Christ himself.

The fifth point is, Why it is John saw all this: this was, 1. that the Word of
the Lord might be accomplished, who had promised John, that he should
certainly know Christ by this sign, Ioh. 1. 33. 2. That John might bear
record of the truth hereof, not only in his age, but to all succeeding ages:
so it is said, Ioh. 1. 32. John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit, etc.
Hence was it, that it did so openly appear, because it was not only for
Christ, who as he was man, and had taken upon him our infirmities, had need of
assistance, but for John also, and the people of God: see John 12. 30.

1. Note, that the Spirit of God is no quality or created motion in the mind
of man: for then he should not exist without the minds of men, (for the
accident cannot be without the subject, to which it cleaves:) and much less
could the Spirit appear in a visible and distinct form, as he did here, and
in the feast of Pentecost. 2. He is here a distinct person from the Father and
the Son, and yet joined with the Father and the Son. 3. He is called God.
Act. 5. 3, 4. To lie to the holy Ghost, is to lie unto God: and 1. Cor. 12. 11.
He gives gifts to every one according to his will, as here he anointeth
Christ the head, and consequently, is the Author of all good gifts with the
Father of lights, and not the gifts themselves.

2. Note, as Christ was set apart both by the ministry of man, and by the
Spirit, by the visible appearance of which, God would manifest, that he was
fitted thereunto: so in all those that are set apart by man to the ministry,
must be an apparent descending of the Spirit, though not in visible shape, yet
in evident gifts and graces. The reason is sound: if Christ himself must not
take this honor upon himself, but the spirit of the Lord must be upon him to
preach, much more must it be so with those that come in his name. Add hereunto
these arguments:

1. If God, when he had set down the frame and parcels of the material
Tabernacle, did set apart a Bezaleel, and fill him with the Spirit of God, in
wisdom and understanding, in knowledge and all curious workmanship, and
joined an Aholiah unto him, into whom he put wisdom, to make al after his
draught, Exodus 31. 3, 6. And, if when Solomon is to build the material Temple,
he must have his Hiram sent for, a man full of wisdom, understanding, and
knowledge to work all manner of work in brass, 1. King. 7. 14. much more the
true Solomon, in building his spiritual Temple, makes choice of men filled with
the spirit, etc.

2. If the Prophets and Apostles performed every thing by virtue of their
extraordinary calling by God, then must Pastors and Teachers also, by virtue of
their ordinary calling by God: They spoke and wrote, as they were moved by the
holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1. vlt. they revealed and foretold things by the Spirit,
1. Pet. 1. 10, 11. The Spirit of Christ in the Prophets, searched and signified
the time, and passion, and glory of Christ: the Spirit was promised to teach
the Apostles what to speak, and to lead them in all truth, Ioh. 14. Yea, the
Spirit shall teach you in that hour, Luke 12. so must we be furnished by the
Spirit to our duties. 1. Cor. 17. 7. The manifestation of the Spirit is given
to every one to profit withal, to one a word of wisdom, to another a word of
knowledge. Whence the Spirit is said to send Pastors, Act. 20. 28. Pastors at
Ephesus were made ouer-seers by the holy Ghost; because he fitteth them to the
Church, and commends them by gracing them to the use of it.

3. This sitting of the Spirit, gives a man's self much comfort: 1. That he
is lawfully called of God, who sends not his message by the hand of a fool,
(for this is as he that cutteth off the feet:) but he sends a learned tongue,
an Ezra, an Apollos, mighty in the Scriptures. This was signified by the
consecration of Aaron and his sons, who must be, 1. washed, purged from
whatsoever might blemish their calling. 2. Arrayed with new garments,
signifying their furnishing, and instructing with graces, of wisdom,
knowledge, etc. 3. Perfumed with a sweet smell of the holy oil, noting the
sweetness, the sweet savor by holy doctrine and life, which they were to
diffuse into the Church. This when it was done, then were they set apart by the
Lord, and not before, Leu. 8. 3. 2. That God, who has graced him, will protect
him, and carry him through the troubles of his calling, which Satan and the
wicked of the world (whom he is to encounter with) will raise against him:
which promise of special protection, while the sons of Sceua wanted, Satan
(who easily spied their want of commission) mightily prevailed against them,
Act. 19.

3. That God will bless his labor, and the works of his calling, and make it
powerful and fruitful, because it is his own work; whereas such as have not
their commission sealed from the Lord, find not their sacrifices burnt by God,
but often labor all day and night, and catch nothing.

A caveat not to run upon Use 1.
man's calling without Gods, as the false apostles did, against whom the
Apostles opposed themselves: see that the chief Bishop of souls send thee,
that he has laid his hands upon thee, that he has bid thee receive the holy
Ghost; as for the order and ordination of the Church, it is only a
manifestation and declaration of him, whom God has fitted. Let every Minister
be able to say as Christ himself did, Isa. 48. 16. The Lord God himself, and
his spirit has sent me, namely, to declare what Cyrus in his time was to
perform to the Church.

And here he that would have good and assured comfort of his commission, must
examine what kind of gifts they be which he has received of the Spirit: for
they be of two sorts: 1. Common to good and bad, as those of knowledge,
tongues, interpretation, eloquence, to which if working of miracles (if a man
have no more) were added, while he might much benefit others, himself might
remain a reprobate. For, Saul and Judas had the Spirit of God.

2. Proper and peculiar to the elect, as justifying faith, true love,
invocation, repentance, unspeakable groans, and mourning of the Dove,
innocence, meekness, sincerity, and such like testimonies, that God has
sent the Spirit of his Son into the heart, purifying it, making it cry Abba
Father. These are gifts worth having, making all the former not only
profitable to others, but truly comfortable to himself, and acceptable to God.
Now shall a man speak powerfully, feelingly, and conscionably, and resemble
those holy men of God, who wrote the Scriptures, in interpreting the^; they
shall speak and do as they are moved by the holy Ghost; men shall perceive,
and after a sort see a fiery tongue upon their heads; such shall be the
efficacy and power of their ministry in separating the precious from the
vile.

3. Note, wheresoever the Spirit descends on any Christian, it descends
like a Dove, that is, makes a Christian resemble the Dove. Whence it is, that
the holy Church or company of believers is called by Christ, his Dove, Cant. 2.
14. 1. Because the same sweet ointment (as that of Aaron) runs down from the
head to all the members: the same graces, which this Spirit in the shape of a
Dove did fill Christ withal above measure, he does also bestow in measure
upon Christians: Thus are we said to receive of his fullness. A fountain sends
the same water into the streams that it self has. 2. The Spirit of God is
euery-where like to himself, both in the head and members, as the same juice is
in the root and branches, in the tree and fruits: look what were the fruits
of the Spirit in Christ, the same also are in the members, Gal. 5. 23.

To examine whether we have Use.
received this Spirit or no, by the properties of a Dove. Four properties of
ye Doves of Christ.
1. Meekness is an essential mark of one of Christ's Doves, and on whom the
Spirit of Christ is descended, as himself witnesses, Learn of me, for I am
lowly and meek: 1. He in heart never conceived fierce or reuengefull thought.
2. In word, being reviled, he reviled not again. 3. In action, he was led as
a sheep to the slaughter, and was dumb before the shearer, 1. Pet. 2. 23.
Moses was the meekest man on earth, but not like him. If any be a rough Esau,
of a froward and perverse disposition, the Spirit of Christ has not sat and
lighted upon him: for, in the kingdom of Christ, the lion and the lamb shall
feed together. Let us therefore put on, and deck our selves with meekness,
Col. 3. 12. A most beautiful grace, much set by of God. How glorious a sight
was it, and how delightful to God his Father (as the voice witnesses) when
the Dove sat upon Christ? and even so the Apostle commends this grace to
women, as a most precious garment to set them out to God, and make him set by
them, as their most costly garments do set them out to men: neither is it a
garment proper to the women, as distinguishing the sex (which the clothing of
our bodies do or ought to do:) but the condition between a natural and
spiritual man, an old and new creature: for this makes difference before God,
when none is between male and female. And though we take little notice of a
meeke-hearted Christian, yet God does so account of it, as he does denominate
the righteous by it, and makes it a special title of the just, Zeph. 2. 3.
Seek the Lord, ye meek of the earth: as though none were fit to seek him,
and he would be found of none else.

innocent as Doves; enforcing it plainly to be a quality of those who are
baptized with the Spirit of Christ: To which purpose he knitteth these two
together, Cant. 5. 12. and 6. 8. My Dove, my undefiled. Elsewhere he calls the
Church fair as the Sun, pure as the Moon, the Lords holy ones, undefiled in
their ways, Saints, pure; not only in regard of their justification by the
blood of Christ clensing them from all sin, but also of their endeavor in
sanctification.

These Doves of the Lords Culuer-house are clean fowls, not of the unclean
birds, Vultures, Crows, and Hawks that can smell a carrion a far off, to
fly to it, and feed upon it: the Spirit never took such a shape. Let us be
careful of our ways, not to foul our selves with sin, which is the most
filthy uncleanness: but rather when the Spirit sat upon Christ's head, make
known that it sat like a Dove on our head, by purging our selves, even as he
is pure, 1. Ioh. 3. 3. as it is a mark of our adoption in that place. He is
not capable of any grace, that endeavors not in this: will the Spirit of God
dwell in a stye? or will he power his gracious liquors into fustie and filthy
vessels? What may we think the hire of those that moyle themselves in all
filthy lusts, and tumble like swine in their sins, and in the mean time
scorn at those who desire to be more free and innocent from the riots of the
world; seeing GOD is good to none but the pure of heart, hears none pray but
such as lift up pure hands, accepts no service but a clean offering and from
a clean offerer, admits none to the blessed vision of God, but the pure of
heart, and much less to stand in his Holy place, but he that is of innocent
hands, and a pure heart? Psalm 24. 3.

What other spirit has lighted upon them, then the spirit that bears rule in
the world? The spirit of lying, railing, swearing, slandering, has light upon
their tongues: the spirit of revenge, wrong, and wickedness upon their heads:
the spirit of fornication, uncleanness, wantonness upon all their parts and
members: and the spirit of error, delusion, and desperate impenitency has
settled upon their hearts: all this, because they have grieved this holy
Spirit, and made this Dove betake himself to his wings, and left them to be
haunted with an evil spirit, as Saul was, when God had forsaken him.

A third quality of such on and singleness in heart and life, in body and
soul: the Dove is a most chaste bird, truly keeping her to her mate; and this
is required in all the members of the Church, Cant. 4. 1. Thine eyes are like
the Doves, that is, single, chaste, beautiful. This eye of faith beholds Christ
and him alone, acknowledging all perfection of beauty and sufficiency in him:
it keeps the heart into him alone in the purity of his worship; it keeps the
affections unto him as the chief of ten thousand: it watches against all
unchaste lusts, and abandoneth all unlawful, strange, and stolen pleasures,
called in 1. Cor. 7. 34. The holiness of body and spirit. Of spirit, when it is
not tempted to uncleanness; or being tempted, yields not; or having yielded,
renews it self to repentance. Of body, when, as a fit instrument to a chaste
soul, it never exciteth, nor being excited, executes uncleanness. Whence it
follows, that those that go a whoring from God, as all Idolaters that seek
to many lovers; or are bawds to their own lusts and sinful pleasures of any
kind, or prostitute their bodies to any uncleanness; or their members as
servants of unrighteousness, are not possessed with the Spirit of Christ.
Idolatrous eyes, adulterous eyes, covetous eyes, evil or envious eyes, blind
eyes, or wanton eyes, are not the eyes of Doves.

A fourth quality in Isa. 60. 8. fly like the Doves to the windows? A
prophecy of the Gentiles converted, that shall in such flocks come into the
Church, as if a whole flight of Doves driven by some Hawke or tempest, should
scour to the columbary, and rush into the windows. The Church is compared to
Gods culuer-house; thither the Doves fly together, feed together, roost
together: which signifies the Communion of Saints, who are of one heart and
soul, and which worship God purely with one shoulder: It is no receptacle of
Eagles and ravenous birds, which devour one another: and the reason is,
because the Spirit lighting upon Christians, ties them together with fast bands
of peace, called The bond of the Spirit. And hence it follows, that whosoever
neglects the ministry, which is the chariot of the Spirit, the Spirit lights
not upon him: whosoever joins not in this society of Saints, and carries not
himself as one living with other the children of God, under the same roof of
one Father, he has not the Spirit of God, and consequently is none of his.
What may we think of him that is an enemy to the Church, that malignes the
members of it, that opposes the pure worship and worshippers, that flies from
the culuer-house, but to be an unclean bird, no Dove?

This is one special note of the presence of the Spirit, which I would not
omit, because many may come to see themselves better by it.

Verse. 17. And lo, Verse. 17.
a voice came from heaven, saying, This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased.
Sect. 8.
HEre is the third sensible testimony of Christ's most solemn The voice from
heaven testifying unto Christ.
setting into his office, and that from heaven also, as the other were, and
that by an audible voice: wherein are two things;

1. The circumstances, three: 1. Whose voice it was, The Fathers. 2. The place
whence it came, From heaven. 3. The manner, It was a sensible and audible voice.

II. The substance, in which are three particulars: 1. That Christ is the Son
of God: to note the relation between God and Christ. 2. That he is his beloved
Son; to note the neernesse of that relation. 3. The fruit of it, in whom I am
well pleased.

1. The Person whose voice it was, is God the Father: for he says, Thou art my
beloved Son. Every testimony receives validity and authority from the
Testator, therefore this must needs be sound and good. God had given testimony
to Christ by many famous men, even all the Prophets, and now lately by John
Baptist, who was greater than a Prophet, that Christ was greater than he; yea
more, had given testimony of him by a multitude of heavenly Angels, Luke 1. 30.
and 13. But not content with all this, he gives from heaven his own testimony
of him.

1. To strike us with reverence Why God the Father gives testimony to his Son
4. Reasons.
in receiving this testimony, which has this privilege above other parts of
Scriptures, that it was uttered by Gods own mouth, not by men or Angels.

2. To confirm us in the truth of the testimony, proceeding from him who is
prima veritas, Truth it self (not only true) in his Essence, and much more in
his words and works, who cannot be deceived, nor deceive us.

3. To show the necessity of believing this testimony, being the first and
only principle in Christian Religion, without which foundation laid, can be
no religion, nor salvation, as we see in the Jews and Turks: That we might
more firmly believe in the Son of God for life, Gods own mouth testifies so
honorably of him. 4. That such a glorious commendation of this testimony might
stir up our best attention and affections in the unfolding of it, we have
here the word of a King, which was never stained, and that not uttered by any
Herald, or a Lord Chancellor, but from his own mouth, which carries more
weight with it: if God speak, woe to him that hears not.

2. The place whence, from Why the testimony concerning Christ was from heaven.
4. Reasons.
heaven: for these reasons:

1. For more authority to the Person of Christ, whom God from heaven does
honor: and if God thus honor him, how ought we to honor him? 2. Pet. 1. 17.
He received of God the Father honor and glory; when there came such a voice
to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son: which was verified
not only in the time of his transfiguration, but here also.

2. Because the testimony contains the sum of the whole Gospel, to declare
that the doctrine of the Gospel, which Christ delivered to the world, was from
heaven, because God from heaven so testifies it to be: wherein it differs
from the doctrine of the Law, which although God renewed from heaven in the
Tables of stone, yet was it written in the heart of man by nature; so was not
the Gospel: but as after ye fall it was immediately deliuerd by God to Adam in
the promise: so here, by the same voice from heaven confirmed to be divine and
heavenly.

3. In respect of us, that we should more carefully attend to the testimony it
self, proceeding from the excellent glory, and that from the mouth of the God
of glory, sitting in his chair of Estate, seeing the word of a King in that
place is more regarded. The contempt of the Law, given upon Mount Sinai, in the
hand of Angels, was required at their hands: how shall they then escape, that
despise him that speaks from heaven? Hebr. 2. 2, 3. The Law being
transgressed, the Gospel from heaven moderateth and pardons a man: but the
Gospel from heaven being despised, what can plead for him?

4. To show the extent of the Gospel, that it is to be preached, and binds to
the faith of it all the people under heaven: and herein it was not to be
inferior to the Law, which God would have acknowledged his own by uttering it
from heaven, and that not before he had sent Moses down, lest it should have
been thought to be his, although it was so loud and piersing, as it could not
possible be but divine, not humane.

3. The manner of the testimony, by an audible and sensible voice: How the
Father uttered this voice, is needless to enquire, seeing we know, that he who
made the tongue, can either speak without a tongue, or by secret inspiration
and revelation, as to Isaiah, 2. King. 20. 4. or frame a tongue and organs of
voice at his pleasure, to utter and make known his will and good pleasure to
his creatures: or speak by creatures, as Angels in humane shape, or other
creatures, sensible as Baalams Ass; or insensible, as the bush of fire. It is
much more material to enquire into the end and use of it, which was, to make
the Son of God known unto the world, that the faith of men might be fixed on
him for salvation.

Hence note, in that the Lord Obser. 1.
from heaven teaches by voice, his wonderful care, that will not suffer us to
want any means to help us in the knowledge of the means of salvation: he had
taught them and us before, by the sense of sight, seeing the heavens opened,
and the Spirit visibly descending; and now he teaches the ear by a voice:
for, he knows our dullness, security, slownesse of heart to believe, and
applies himself every way to help us: he sets out his glory by his works
and creatures, he adds his Word confirmed by many powerful miracles; to his
audible word he has annexed his visible word the Sacraments; he has set up a
constant ministry in his Church, and every way fitted it to the edification of
his people, so as he may now say, What could I do more for thee, O Israel?

Is God thus careful of our profiting every way? Use 1.
then how damnable and excuslesse shall the carelesnes of the most be in the
matter of their salvation? in which regard it had been good for many a man,
that God had never made his will known to him, that he never had heard the
word, or received the Sacraments: for, all tends but to his deeper
condemnation, because of his neglect and formal use. When our Savior said of
Judas, It had bin good for him he had never bin borne: did not he in effect
say the same, It had bin good for him he had never bin a Disciple of Christ,
never had heard Christ, or preached Christ, because the more excellent means
he had, the greater was his sin and judgment?

Again, Use 2.
hereby God clears his righteous Judgment, in the just damnation of the
wicked and unbelievers: O Israel, thy destruction is of thy self: say not,
What can I remedy it if God will not save me? nay, what can God do more then he
has done? He has given thee strong and excellent means, and preached the
Gospel from heaven by his own mouth, and sent it to all nations under heaven
in their own language, in an audible and intelligible voice: if thou will now
wilfully refuse the means, thy blood be upon thy own head, that which will
dye, let it dye; thou art in the sea of thy sins, ready to be drowned, good
help is offered, but thou refusest it and must dye in thy sin: thy case is that
of Jerusalem, How often would I have gathred thee, and thou would not?

2 Note, Obser. 2. Theodoret, out of the like ground, gathers the same
doctrine, and notably urges it against Images, on Deuteronomy. quest. 1.
that it is Gods pleasure that we should be taught the matter of salvation by
voice, and attend to that: Here was a visible openning of the heavens, a
glorious presence of the Spirit in the shape of a Dove resting on Christ: but
when the Lord will have Christ published and proclaimed the Messiah, this must
be done by voice. Deuteronomy. 4. 12, 14. Thou heardest a voice, but saw no image,
therefore take heed to thy self, and corrupt not thy self by any image.

1. Reasons.
Herein his mercy has appointed a familiar and fit instruction,

2. Herein he aduanceth our

3. Herein he magnifyes his

4. Hereby he tryes our obedience,

This makes against the Papists Use.
position, that images are Laymens books: Melius docet interdu^ pictura, quam
Scriptura, Bellarm. de Imag. Cap. 10.
for 1. The people of Israel were as rude and elementary as any, yet God
permitted them no such books, but straightly forbade it. 2. Images are dumb,
and how can they teach? they have mouths, and speak not: If they teach, it
must be by an interpreter, and an interpreter can teach better without them. 3.
Let them be Laymens books, what do they teach? Hab. 2. 18. They are teachers
of lies, and Zach. 10. 2. The Idols speak vanity. If a man would learn lies,
let him gaze upon these books.

And 1. whereas Bellarmine says, that the Image of God and the holy Trinity is
a teacher of truth: I answer, The Scripture says it is a teacher of lies, and
so I will prove it.

1. E^ce a te cogitationem minime decentem Magnitudinem Dei: ne paruum reddas
eum qui magnus est, etc. Basil. in Hexam. Homil. decima.
God is a Spirit and invisible: now how can this be painted or carved? he that
says he can do it, must needs lie.

2. God is infinite and incircumscriptible, wants beginning and ending: he that
says he can paynt such a thing, is a loud liar: his image or idol is made by
man, and moth-eaten, and consumed by worms and rotten.

3. God is a working act, never idle: but the Image never stirs vnstirr'd:
therefore it is a lie.

4. God has being of himself, and all things are sustained in him: the image
has being from the hands of man, and is not able to uphold it self no more
then Dagon was, if it be not strongly vndershored: therefore it is a lie to
say it resembles God.

5. It is a lie and idolatry, to conceive or fix the name of God upon a
picture, that has nothing but what man will give it: and does not the Lord
accuse the Israelites by common sense, in the example of one that goes into the
Wood and hewes a tree, then makes a fire of one end to warm him, and a God of
the other to worship? Are there not as good blocks and stones, lying upon the
floor and pauement, as they be that are set up for idols?

II. As for the picture of the Trinity, which is most horrible idolatry,
painting God either a man with three heads (making him a monster:) or But here
your own Aquinas leaves you. Ipsi Deo, cu^ sit incorporeus, nulla imago
corporalis poterat poni: quia, vt Damascenus dicit, insipientiae summae est,
and impietatis, figurare quod est diuinu^, Part 3. quaest. 25. art. 3. So does
Durandus, speaking of the images of the Trinity, Fatuum est imagines facere,
vel eas venerari: ^n 3. sent. d^st. 5. quaest. 2. (...). 15. So also does your
own Roman Catechism, Diuinum numen violari, si quis conetur diuinitatis
formam aliquo artisicio effingere: Part. 3. cap. 2. quaest. 11.
the Father like an old man with a child at his knee, and a Dove between
them. Bellarmine himself faints, when he says, it is not certain, but an
opinion of the Church, whether any pictures of the Trinity be to be made: And
further, that those images must not be multiplied, because they give occasion
of blaspheming. Besides, these pictures are as senseless as wicked: 1. To
picture the Father, as a man with the whole world in his hand, to note his
creation and providence (which the Rhemists, in Act. 17. 5. commend so highly,
as whence the people may take much good:) is a teacher of lies, because it
restraines creation and government to the Father. 2. To picture the Father as
an old man, and the Son (who is as old as he) like a child, is a lie, and not
footed, in the 7. of Daniel, where the ancient of days is the whole Deity. 3.
To add to these two the image of a Dove for the holy Ghost, is (as it is said,
Romans 1. 23. 25.) to turn the whole glory of God into a lie, and to transform
most heathenishly the glory of the immortal God, into the similitude of a
mortal man, or feathered foul. 4. If the Divinity can be pictured, then may
the three Persons: but he that will say he can conceive either the Trinity, or
express the Divinity, he is a liar; much less carue or paint any thing like
them.



1. Christ's Divinity cannot be expressed in an image, and it is dangerous in a
picture to separate them which God never disioyned: to divide his natures,
sauoureth of the Nestorian heresy; to offer to paint the Godhead of Christ, as
they have, who to express it, have made a Rainebow, etc. This is to fall into
the heresy of Eutyches, confounding the natures, and circumscribing the
Godhead; both ways it must be a lying image, no way speaking truth.

2. Make an image of Christ, as man, it is but of his bodily shape; and as (D.
Fulke says) an image of his bodily shape, is no more his shape then another
man's: make such an image, and what difference between his and the thiefes that
was crucified with him?

3. The Scriptures, which speak so much of his doctrine, works, and all other
circumstances, speak not a word of any lineament and portrayture of his body,
wherein Gods wisdom prevented the true painting of his body, which if any go
about to do, it must be a lying image.

4. He need not be painted on a Table, being so lively described in the Word
and Sacraments, Gal. 3 1.
and crucified before our eyes; We hold the image of Christ more dangerous then
any other, because of the excellency of his person, Pet. Mart. loc. com. class.
2. cap. 5. sect. 26.
there is the length of the Lord, there is the Crucifix; and in every Christian
thou have an image of Christ: look upon him and love him, for the image he
bears of Christ.

5. Such a picture or image cannot safely be made, in respect of the dignity of
the Person, whose very humanity in composito, as united unto the Deity, is to
be adored and worshipped above all men and Angels: for it is a true position,
Totus Christus adorandus. And I marvel the more, that P. Martyr, In 1. King. 7
so judicious a Divine, and learned, should permit the painting of Christ's
humanity, and yet afterward confess how prone the men of our age are unto
idolatry, that they adore stocks, stones, relics of Saints, reuersions of
the Sacrament, etc. Omnino errare meruerunt, qui Christum et Apostolos eius non
in sanctis codicibus, sed in pictis parietibus quaesierunt, August. de consensu
Evangelist. lib. 1. ca. 10.
bow down before them, light Candels, burn Incense, invoke and call for
that at their hands, which better creatures cannot give: surely these things
stand not well with the former. For images of Saints, it is a lie to pray to
them in earth, that are in heaven, a lie to give them mouths, and they cannot
speak, eyes and they cannot see.

But though we have not images of God, Object.
or Christ, or the Saints in religious use, may we not have them in civil
use, suppose for an ornament or history?

Whatsoever image has bin devised or beautified by Idolaters, Answ.
which has served, or may hereafter serve in idolatrous use, the same we must
either destroy; or if we reserve them for private use, we must so deface
them, as their honor and good opinion be utterly laid in the dust. The reasons
hereof are these:

utterly overthrow and break in pieces their images: and 34. 13. Thou shall
overthrow their Altars, break their images, and cut down their Groves. Deuteronomy.
7. 5, 6. and 25. 26. The images ye shall burn: Covet not the gold and silver,
lest ye be ensnared therewith. Ezekiel. 20. 7. Let every man cast away the
abominations of his eyes, and defile not your selves with the Idols of Egypt.
If the Leprosy had once taken a garment, or vessel, the garment or vessel
must be burnt with fire, Leuit. 23. 51. Which what did it signify other, then
that all instruments of idolatry (which is a far more hateful leprosy then
that of the body) ought to be destroyed, and that we should have nothing to
do with them; but rather then they should remain to be prouocations to
idolatry, to burn them with fire?





2. In respect of what images are, men's devices, not named by any Prophet or
Apostle, but in despite and detestation of them, abominations, Ezekiel. 14. 6.
teachers of lies, dung to God, and so called, such things as ought not to be
named among Christians. Now if an idol be as dung to God, ought it not to be
so to us? If God have polluted them, shall we count them clean? and do we
account them dung, when we garnish our best rooms with them?

Again, they be Idolothytes, things sacrificed to devils; and no Corinthian,
no Christian may eat an Idolothyte, for any civil use or commodity: Say not
then, The creature is good, and beautiful, and utterly changed in the use:
this plea will not preserve it by the Papists doctrine it self: for thus the
Rhemists (in Reu. 2. Sect. 8.) describe an Idolothyte; Though the creature be
good by creation, it does become an Idolothyte, and is made execrable by the
profane blessings of heretics and idolaters. Shall not we yield as much?
nay, the image is no creature of God (though the matter be) nor good, and
therefore by Popish doctrine it self, we may not reserve it: for Aquinas
himself says, In rebus infructuosis we may not communicate with Gentiles,
though in fructuosis we may.

Qui non prohibet cum potest, facit, yea iubet; and he partakes in idolatry,
that roots not out, where he may, all relics and monuments of it. Nay,
suppose a superstitious person come into thy house so swept and garnished for
him, and fall down, or uncover his head, or make secret prayers (as they must
by the principles of their doctrine) to the images thou have set up, art not
thou now an accessory, nay a principal? did not thou lay this snare and
stumbling block before thy brother? wast not thou the bawd to his spiritual
fornication? Thou ought to have removed this stumbling block, and gotten
the harlot punished: for the image tempts to spiritual fornication, as the
scandalous presence of a woman does a light mind to bodily. The Law
pronounces a curse on him that lays a stumbling block before the blind.
Finally, such a one is far from seeking to propagate the purity of Gods
worship to posterity.

3. In respect of thy self, to show thy self zealous for Gods pure worship,
and bewray thy utter detestation of idolatry: thou must destroy every such
Agagite, which God has pronounced sentence of death upon: shall thy eyes
spare, nay, thy eyes feed themselves upon such brokers of idolatry? shall thy
hands advance, and thy care beautify such abetters of superstition? how do
thou destroy their memory? David would not once mention their names, Psalm. 16.
4. And how dare thou? Those things, which by our doctrine of Homilies and
Statute-lawes of the land, are swept out as dung out of our Churches, how is
thy house a little church, if thou there take them up, and nourish them?

I esteem them but as an ornament. Object.


An ornament is an indifferent thing, Answ.
and must be ruled by the squares of Gods glory, edification of men, thy own
sober and faithful use, by virtue of a word: this ornament fights with all
these.

I honor it not, Object.
it is but a picture in civil use.

Hezekiah honored not the brazen serpent, Answ.
which was of an other manner of institution, nor himself was in danger so to
do: but because there was danger of abuse in others, he brake it in pieces.
Again, to express the dalliance of adultery upon a stage, is utterly
unlawful, by Ephesians. 5. 4. It will not serve a Player for excuse, to say, I
have no purpose to commit the act of adultery; therefore he may bring
adulterous dalliances upon the stage: so this is one of the things which must
not be named, though thou do not mean to use it as a Popish picture.

I may use the gold of it in some Object.
other civil use, why not in this?

I know not whether a man Answ.
can account it a civil use of an image, though the gross corruption be taken
away, or rather a secret kind of worship, at least too much reverence and
respect, to set them up, to cloth or cover them with precious things, to
praise the curious workmanship of them, and commend them to others so to be.
Secondly, whatsoever a man may do with the gold in other uses, sure I am, the
gold of an image is abominable, even in private use, when the idol is
countenanced and not disfigured. Deuteronomy. 27. 15. Cursed is he that shall make an
image, the work of the hands of the craftsman, and set it in a secret place:
and all the people shall say, Amen. Thirdly, the Jews might not use them in
private use, but burn them, Deuteronomy. 7. 25. But yet we, defacing and dismembring
the images, may use the gold, etc. For as Augustine, P. Martyr, and Calvin
think, that Law is Judicial, though the ground of it be moral, and the use
of it to back the moral.

Lastly, look upon the examples of holy men, after Gods example taking away
the names of Baalim; Jacobs zeal, not only burning the bodies of Idols, but
abolishing their eare-rings, which were costly; Elias abhorring Baals altar as
well as himself; Iehu destroying not only Baal himself, but his Temple also,
Vestry, and all his trinkets; Daniel detesting Bells meat, as well as Bell
himself; Joshua razing all the monuments of idolatry of the Canaanites that
he could find, chap. 23. 7.

If any say (which is the last shift) that those were heathenish idols, and
worse than these: I answer, that Popish idolatry is as base as ever the
Heathens was, and as odious to God, more pernicious to us. For the original of
it, Bucer says, Insiciari non potest vsum idolorum a gentibus in ecclesiam
irrepsisse, It cannot be denied but that the use of idols crept into the
Church from the Heathens: And that Romish idolatry is as base and foul as
theirs, I prove by these arguments:

I. To give divine worship to base, dead, and rotten creatures, is as base
idolatry as any the Heathens could commit: But the Papists give divine worship
to such creatures: therefore, etc. For the assumption, the scope of D. Reynolds
his second book, De idololat. Romans eccles. is to prove that they give divine
worship to five such things, as 1. Saints, dead men. 2. Relikes, rotten bones.
3. Images, painted blocks. 4. Consecrate things, oil, salt, spittle, wax,
cream. 5. Breaden hosts. And in the same book he affirms, that to worship a
wooden cross and a piece of bread, is as gross idolatry as ever was.

Object. The Papists do not think their idols to be gods.

Answ. Few or none of the Heathens did so, as it is well proved by Master White
in his book called, The way to the Church, page 398.

II. Pezelius, answering the Jesuits Catechism, in sundry places, proves at
large, that there is no difference between Popish and Heathenish idolatry,
nominibus mutatis, only the names changed. Page 225. Eadem est ratio
idololatriae apud Papistas, quae olim apud Gentiles fuit, sieve ipsa simulachra,
sieve vsum and cultum consideres: and proves it by reason, and the testimony of
Augustine and Athanasius: And after, Prorsus eadem idololatria, and, Imo
grauius peccant Papistae quam Ethnici, page 230. page 152. 153. etc. Inter
idololatriam gentium, and cultum sanctorum apud Pontisicios, nihil interest:
and he concludes, Nec ouum ouo, neque lac lacti similius, quam cultus
sanctorum apud Pontisicios, and idolorum apud Ethnicos. And Master White in his
book forenamed, sect. 5. parag. 7. 8. proves, that the Papists worship
stocks and stones as the Gentiles did.

III. Master Perkins, in a book of his own setting forth, not in few places,
has the very words, Refor. Cath. 9. point: Papists under new terms maintain
the idolatry of the Heathen. Popish idolatry is a gross as ever any was
among the Heathen. In the practice of a reformed Catholic, Popish idolatry
exceeds the idolatry of the Heathen, In his Advertisement to Roman
Catholics. And, the Popish Host is as abominable an idol as ever was. To whom
Bucer in Psalm. 115. accords, saying thus of the Popish Church in worshipping
of the Virgin Mary and the Saints, En omnia facit, quae olim idolis suis insana
gentilitas.

IV. Add one thing out of the Scriptures: If Rome be called Egypt, Sodom, and
Babylon, then the idolatry of all these Heathenish places runs into it: But the
first is true, therefore also the second. Again, If it be a cage of unclean
birds, and an habitation of devils, if any worse can be said of any Heathens,
Romish idolatry shall not be the worst.

3. Note, Obser. 3.
that God the Father, uttering so audible a voice concerning his Son, he will
be known of us, not so much in his own substance, as in his Son; nor by
curious prying into the excellency of his Majesty, as by sober attending to
his voice and Word. And the many manners of Gods speaking unto men, all
confirm the same: sometimes he is said to speak out of fire that none dare
approach; sometimes out of a dark cloud (a cloud, because out of man's reach;
and dark, because if it were not so, none might satisfy their curiosity in
seeing any thing:) sometimes out of a whirlewinde, a fierce creature which men
are afraid of; and sometimes out of the light, but such as is inaccessible. And
good reason, that such high and divine knowledge should be thus delivered,
because, being matters of faith, they must be insensible, and he that comes
to God, must believe, not see; neither is the eye of the body of such capacity
and piercing brightness, as to behold things of infinite and invisible nature.
God, in giving the Law, made a law against pryers and gazers, and severely
punished those that pryed into the Arc.

Those that despise the still voice of God in the ministry, Use 1.
shall never see God in Christ; see him and feel him they shall in his power
and justice, never in his favor and love, who refuse the tender of his love
and gracious calling.

Again, Use 2.
no marvel if ignorance and Egyptiacall darkness reign in Popish countries,
where the voice and Word of God must not be heard, read, or known: Satan and
his lims know where their strength lies, and that the strength of his kingdom
of darkness stands in ignorance and darkness.

This is that my Son.
Sect. 9.
THe first thing in the substance of the Fathers testimony, Christ that beloved
Son.
is, that relation which the Father acknowledges between himself and his
Son. And first, whereas there seems to be some difference in the
Evangelists, (for Mark and Luke, chap. 3. 22. read it in the second person,
Thou art my Son:) to omit other answers, for reconciliation it is most
probable, that this voice was twice uttered: first, for Christ's confirmation to
his office, in the second person, which Mark and Luke record; and after for
the confirmation of John, and the faith of believers, in the third person, This
is he, Take notice of him. And this answer not only satisfies the Text, but
the prophesies formerly wherein this voice was foretold, which run in both
persons. Psalm. 2. 7. Thou art my Son: and Isa. 42. 1. He is my Elect, in
whom my soul delights. By the Son of God is meant, 1. Sons by Creation,
framed and made after Gods Image, in perfect holiness and righteousness. Thus
Adam was the son of God, Luke 3. vlt. and the Angels, Job 1. and Psalm. 89. 6.
2. Sons by Profession only, who outwardly worship ye true God, but not in
truth: as Genesis 6. 1. The sons of God saw the daughters of me^, etc. 3. Sons by
Adoption, who being the children of wrath by nature, are by grace and favor
taken in to be the sons of God: thus every true believer, led by the spirit, is
the Son of God. To. 8. 14. As many as believe, to them he gave power to be ye
sons of God. Christ is none of these ways the son of God: for although Christ,
as the fountain and head of our adoption, is called the chief among many
brethren, yet is he not adopted as we be. But he is the Son of God two ways:

1. By nature, as God, begotten from all eternity of the substance of God, by
an unspeakable generation, (for who can tell his generation? Isa. 53. 8.)
whereby God the Father communicated his whole Essence unto him: and thus he
alone is the Son of God, the only begotten Son, Ioh. 1. 14. We may adore this
Sonship, we cannot search it out.

2. By grace of personal Union: and thus the manhood of Christ, or Christ as
man, is after a special manner the Son of God, because his manhood was
inseparably united to the Person of the Son of God. Luke 1. 32. That holy
thing which is borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Neither had
Christ (as man) any man to his Father; but the humane nature being framed of
the holy Ghost, subsifted in the Deity, and so makes but one Person. And thus
Christ both in respect of both his natures, and the Union of them, is the Son
of God.

How is he begotten of the Father? Quest.


After an unspeakable manner, Answ.
much differing from humane generation, we may conceive no humane thing in it:
1. It was without any alteration of the Father, or passion in the Son. 2.
Without any propagatio^ of any part of the Godhead, but by communication of
the whole Godhead of the Father to the Son. No natural father communicates
his whole Essence. 3. The Father begets the Son in himself, not forth of
himself, as earthly Parents do. 4. Natural fathers are before their children
in time; but the Father so begets the Son, as he is not before in time, but
in order, both being eternal.

Object. Psalm. 2. 7. This day begot I thee; therefore in time.

Answ. In the Sons begetting are two things to be considered: 1. The
generation it self, which is eternal. 2. The manifestation of it, and this is
in time, at his Incarnation and Resurrection. Of this the place is to be
understood, not of the former.

But Christ is (...), Object.
God of himself, and therefore not by generation.

Consider him in respect of his Godhead, Answ.
and he is God of himself as the Father and holy Ghost: but consider him in
his Person, and so he is the Son begotten of the Father, and not of
himself: for the Father is a beginning to the rest of the Persons. And whereas
the Athanasian Creed confesses him God of very God; and the Nicen, Light of
light, and very God of very God: the word ( God) in both places must be taken
not essentially, but personally, namely, the Son of God begotten of the
Father.

But the Godhead of the Son is from the Father, Object.
because the Son is God?

The Godhead of the Son Answ.
is not begotten of the Father, but the Person of the Son is begotten: for
the Godhead of the Son is without beginning as the Father is; but the Person
of the Son is of the Father.

But the Son having the same Essence with the Father, Object.
then the Father begetting the Son, the Son begets himself also.

Person begets Person, Answ.
not divine Essence begets divine Essence: the Person of the Father begets the
Person of the Son, but not the Godhead of the Son.

If the Father and Son be one in Essence, Object.
then the Son being incarnate, so is the Father also.

It is a weak argument, Answ.
because Incarnation belongs not properly to the Essence, but to the person; or
the divine Essence of the Person of the Son became incarnate and took flesh,
or if to the Essence, yet not absolute, but limited.

The whole divine Essence is Object.
the Father: the Son is the whole divine Essence; therefore the Son is the
Father, not distinct or begotten.

There is an Homonymie in Answ.
the word ( whole divine Essence) which is taken either essentially and
absolutely, as in the Proposition; or personally, limited to the second Person,
as in the assumption: and therefore the reason is faulty, because of four
terms in it.

But if the Father beget the Object.
Son, then he communicates either a part of his Essence, or the whole: but
he can do neither; not a part, because it is indivisible; not whole, for then
he leaves none for himself.

The Father begetting, Answ.
communicates his whole Essence, and yet retains it wholly; as a candle giving
light to another, retains it wholly to it self.

If the Father begot the Son, Object.
then either when the Son subsisted, or when he did not: if he did subsist, how
could he beget him? if he did not subsist, then he had a beginning.

The Father begot the Son Answ.
subsisting: for generation and subsisting are in time together, or rather both
from eternity; and in the Trinity there is nihil prius, or posterius in time.
And thus also that objection is stopped, that the Father begetting, must be
before the Son begotten: for the Father is not in time before the Son, but
in order.

But Christ is the first begotten, Object.
and the first borne of many brethren, Romans 8. 29. and Col. 1. 15. therefore he
is not the only Son of God.

1. Answ.
The word ( Primogenitura) is sometimes a word of dignity, and not of order.

2. Christ is called* The first borne of every creature, because he was
begotten eternally before any creature.

3. He is called First borne, by a Metaphor and resemblance, being shadowed by
the first borne in the old Testament, who were Heirs and Priests in the
family, and had double portions, etc. All which types were verified in Christ,
who was first borne not of a few brethren in one family as they, but of many
brethren in all Tribes and Families.

Christ was the Son of the Object.
holy Ghost, because he was conceived by him.

No, because he was conceived, Answ.
not of the substance, but power of the holy Ghost. Again, consider him either
according to the flesh, so he was of the substance of the Virgin Mary, not of
the holy Ghost: or according to his Deity, and so he was of the substance of
his Father, not of the holy Ghost. But the Article (he is that my Son) is not
to be omitted, namely, that promised seed and Messiah, on whom all the fathers
eyes have been fixed, whose day Abraham desired to see, on whom all the
Patriarchs cast their hopes, whom all the Prophets with one mouth have declared
and poynted at, as with one finger: This is that my Son, whom ye have already
seen borne of a Virgin, Isa. 7. 14. Come out of Bethleem. Mic. 5. 2. Called
out of Egypt. Hos. 11. 1. Out of Egypt have I called my Son. This is he
before whom Eliah has prepared the way, Mal. 3. 1. that is, John Baptist in
the Spirit of Eliah. And as ye have seen these things already, so expect the
accomplishment of all other predictions concerning him, till he has finished
his course, and the whole work of man's Redemption.

Is Christ thus peculiarly the Son of God? Use 1.
then note the wonderful love of God and of Christ: God the Father setting his
only Son separated from sinners, and higher then the heavens, among sinners,
to receive among them not only the badge of sin, but the curse of sin, wherein
he was cast lower then earth, and hell it self; that we might by him become
the adopted sons of God: for this was the Fathers end, that we might be united
to his natural Son, and so to himself by him, and receive our title of
Sonship. And what father that loved his son, would so debase him, that he
might take in some stranger, yea an enemy to be heir with him? And yet the
love of God has done thus for us.

Again, the love of Christ is surpassing, and appears in his voluntary and
extreme abasement, that he would be pleased from the height of his Glory, being
Gods natural Son, to become not only like, but lower then all other men in
his life and death.

No man living ever was or can be so abased: for he that is lowest of all, can
fall but from one degree in earth to another: but Christ falls from the highest
degree of the glory of heaven, to the very bottom of hell. What does this
infinite love call for at our hands, but return of love for love? Shall we
think any of his Commandments grievous? shall we think much of any condition
which God sees fit for us, and Christ has sanctified, be it never so base?
shall we refuse the lowest abasement for his sake, seeing we cannot be brought
so low for him, as he for us? Who art thou that professest love to Christ, and
wilt not endure a word, a frown of a superior, a check and rebuke for his
sake and good conscience? Was Christ's love such to thee? or, if it had, where
had thy hopes and salvation been? Had he disdayned the frowns of his Father
for thee, the rebukes and shame of the world, the cursed death to which he
voluntarily subjected himself, thou had bin laid for ever under the frowns
of God the Father, and the curse of thy sin: and though thou see that all the
good of his abasement came to thee, thou will endure nothing for him: Ah,
conform henceforth thy love to his.

Secondly, Use 2.
here is an excellent ground of comfort, that we have a most perfect and
all-sufficient Savior, not only the son of man, but the Son of God almighty.
Ioh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever should believe in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
All other saviors were mere sons of men, Joshua, the Judges, Iephte,
Samson, etc. And their deliverances but temporal from the sons of men: but
here is an eternal Son of God, an heavenly Savior, and Salvation from all
spiritual enmities, worthy the Son of God.

Hereupon, namely, the excellency and dignity of his Person, arises the
excellency, price, and merit of his obedience, both active in fulfilling the
law, and passive, in satisfying the breach. For, being the natural Son of
God, he cannot but be very God, of the same substance and Godhead with the
Father; unto which Divine nature the humane being united, it receives an
excellency and dignity above all created natures of men and Angels: for, to
which of the Angels did he at any time say, Thou art my Son, Heb. 1. 5? And
hence all his obedience must needs be of infinite merit, the Person being so
infinite: else could he not have sustained the infinite burden of man's sin, nor
appeased the wrath of his Father infinitely offended, nor in so short time have
made so full and perfect satisfaction, which must be of infinite worth and
desert, nor have vanquished so infinite enemies as sin, death, hell, and the
devil, nor have purchased for us that infinite and eternal Crown of
righteousness, unless he had been Immanuel, God with us, and for us, blessed
for ever.

Thirdly, Use 3.
If Christ be that true Son of God so declared by the Prophets, then we are
instructed,

1. To believe in him: for this is the Commandment of GOD, 1. Ioh. 3. 13. and
Ioh. 14. 1.
that we do believe in the Name of his Son. Ye believe in God, believe also
in me. And the reason is, because the Father and the Son are one. Besides, no
creature can be the object of faith, which fixes it self upon God, as Mar.
11. 22. Have faith in God: which word (God) in the Creed is but once named, to
note the unity of essence, yet in understanding is to be referred to all the
three persons, in whom we believe, and in nothing else. And because we must
believe in him, we must pray not only by him as a Mediator, but unto him as
God equal with the Father, into whose name we are baptized. Thus the Apostles
prayed to him, Lord, increase our faith: and a Leper came and worshipped him,
saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean, Math. 8. 2. And often it
is made a mark or note whereby all Christians are described, that they are
such as call upon the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 9. 14. 1. Cor. 1. 2.
In one word, whatsoever divine worship is due to the Father, is due to this
Son of God: Romans 15. 12. In him the Gentiles shall trust, every knee shall
bow unto him: and Ioh. 5. 23. That all men might honor the Son, as they
honor the Father.

2. We must esteem and affect him as the Son of God, accounting him the
chief of 10000. as the Church does, to love and reverence him above all other,
Psalm. 45. 2.
saying, Thou art fayrer then the sons of men: If any man love not the Lord
Jesus, let him be accursed, 1. Cor. 16. 22. Yea, account all things as loss
and dung in comparison of him, hate father and mother, if need so require, in
respect of him, and be so far from being ashamed of him and his profession,
as to acknowledge it the greatest honor to suffer in his cause, 1. Pet. 4. 13.

3. If Christ be the only natural Son, then kiss the Son of God, Psalm. 2.
12. 1. In token of subjection, as a kiss is if it be of an inferior to a
superior: so Pharaoh said to Joseph, All my people shall kiss thee, Genesis 41.
namely, in token of subjection: so Idolaters are said to kiss their Idols,
that is, to be subject and devoted unto them, 1. King. 19. 18. 2. In token of
love and good will, if from a superior or equal: thus the Saints must kiss
one another with an holy kiss. And thus must every Christian kiss the Son
of God, both in token of their homage and subjection, as also as a sure pledge
of their love and faithful affection toward him; especially we must take his
yoke upon us, stoop under his Scepter, and observe whatsoever he has
commanded us. Do as the people promised Joshua, chap. 1. 16. All that thou
command us, we will do; whither thou sendest us, we will go; whosoever
rebel and will not obey thy words, let him die the death: and as Mary his
mother said to the servants, Whatsoever he shall bid you do, that do.

Beloved Son.]

The English is too short for the Greek, where we find two articles, and it
sounds thus: This is that my Son, that my beloved, and such a beloved one,
as on whom all a man's love is cast: for the word (...), is commonly used of
that which is but one, as of Isaac, Take now thy (...) (not (...)) thy only
Son, thy beloved Son.

Christ is the proper object Doct.
of Gods love, on whom all his love is cast, figured not only in Isaac, but in
Solomon, 2. Sam. 12. 25. The Lord also loved him, and called his name Iedidiah,
that is, the beloved of the Lord: Christ is the true Iedidiah, prophesied of
Isa. 42. 1. Behold my Elect, in whom my soul delights. The Apostles express
this love in sundry phrases: Ioh. 1. 18. The only begotten Son which is in
the bosom of the Father, has declared him; that is, who is entirely and
inwardly loved with such affection, as is due only to her who is to be laid in
the bosom, who is thy best-beloued, thy heart, thy self. And he is called
Gods dear Son, Col. 1. 13.

1. Reasons.
God loves him as himself, as being one with him: The

coexisted and laid in the bosom of his Father, whereas all creatures are not
capable of this knowledge.



Of consolation, Use 1.
1. In respect of Gods affection. 2. Of Christ's intercession. 3. Of our own
acceptance. The first, if God thus dearly love Christ the Head, he must
needs dearly love the members: whence Christ prays thus, Ioh. 17. 23. That
the world may know, that thou love them, as thou have loved me, namely, with
a fatherly and free love. What then if the child of God be in want, distress,
danger, death it self? God looking on him in Christ, cannot but pity him: the
wife and children cannot so pity and help us, when they can weep about us.
Psalm. 103. 13. Secondly, Christ's intercession for us, must needs be powerful
and prevailing, because he therefore ever lives to make requests for us: and
being also ever loved, it must needs be fruitful for us: he was heard in all
things in the days of his flesh, and much more now in his glory. We see what
great suits a Kings favorite can carry away, as Ahashuerosh, because Hester
found grace in his sight, would not deny her to the half of his Kingdom, and
she easily got her suit for her self, and all her people: But Christ shall
not be denied the whole Kingdom, if he ask it for his Elect. Thirdly, hence
comes in our boldness to come to God, in the name, and for the sake of Christ,
in whom our persons and prayers find acceptance: we in our selves being
enemies to God, strangers from God and his covenant, having forfaited all, are
by his mediation received into such favor, as, Ioh. 16 23, 24, 26.
Ask what we will in his name, in faith and understanding, and we shall be
speeders.

Of instruction, Verse. 2.
in two things: 1. If God thought not his dear Son too dear for us, We must
think nothing too dear for God, who thought not his Son too dear for us.
but, although his whole love was cast on him, would not spare him, shall we
think any thing too dear for him? If benefits will bind, search heaven and
earth, you shall not find such a love, which is left with an admiration, Ioh.
3. 16. God so loved the world, etc. And ought not thou to give up thy soul,
body, and life it self as a reasonable sacrifice for him? Oh the ingratitude
of men, that are so far from this, as that they will not part with a grain of
their wealth, with a dram of their credit, nor with their base lusts! The proud
will not depart from his pride, nor the drunkard with his drunkenness, nor the
froward with his malice and revenge, for Christ, and much less from liberty,
life, etc. And what is the reason? Men love their lives, their lusts, etc. and
did not God love his Son more than thou can love these? he set his whole
love, even an infinite love upon him, and yet he gave him to death for thee;
and will thou do nothing, suffer nothing for him? Will thou love hateful
things better than God, who loved not his dearest Son too well for thee?

2. If God so dearly loved Christ his Son, Motives to stir up our love to
Christ.
so must we; we want no reasons or motives thereunto: for first, he loved us
first not existing, yea resisting. Secondly, he has declared his love by
innumerable gifts of body and soul, yea by that inualuable gift of his own
body and soul. Thirdly, he has more to declare to us hereafter in greater
things, which eye has not seen, ear has not heard: for he will not be in
heaven without us. Fourthly, God cannot love us, if we love not his beloved
Son. Can a father, who has cast his whole affection on his child, and
worthily, endure that he should be contemptuously entreated and despised? The
sentence is passed, If any love not the Lord Jesus, let him be accursed.
Fifthly, the greatest reason of all, is the strait union and band between
Christ and the Christian; he the foundation, we the building coupled; he the
root, we the branches ingrafted; he the Head, we the body united; he the
Husband, we the wife married: and hence is the communication between us in
natures, goods, estates: he puts on our nature, to cloth us with his divine
nature; he put us in state of all his goods, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and Redemption, yea gives us right to heaven, to earth, and the
creatures; he takes on him our low estate, to advance us to his glory; yea our
troubles are his; in our wrongs he is wronged, and whatsoever is done to us of
well or woe, he takes it as done to himself, either to recompense or revenge
it. Now what an unseemly and confused sight were it to behold the building
falling off of the foundation, the branches seuering from the root, the
members cutting themselves from the head, and the wife suing for a divorce, or
at daggers with her husband?

Notes of our love to Christ are these: 5. Notes of the love of Christ.


1. Often to think of him, and these thoughts be deep, large, frequent,
which argues abundant affection in the soul: Often out of that abundance to
speak of him, and never but to his glory: for, where we heartily love, we can
willingly praise. Thus the love of God in David's heart filled his mouth and pen
with often praises, Psalm. 119. 164. Seven times a day do I praise thee. Thus
the Spouse in the Canticles loved much, and praised much; My beloved is white,
and ruddy, the fairest of ten thousand, chap. 5. 10. Yea, by this means bring
others to be in love with him, as we do with our dear friends. Psalm. 31. 23.
O love the Lord; all ye his Saints. Cant. 5. 16. His mouth is as sweet things,
he is wholly delectable: this is my well-beloved, and this is my lover, O
daughters of Jerusalem.

2. To be careful to please and content him in all things: the man I love I
will do any thing whereby I may please him, I will abstain from yt which will
offend and incense him. 2. Cor. 5. 9. We covet both at home and from home to be
acceptable unto him. I will not forget his desire, his word, I will think the
time short and well spent to do his requests. I will not imprison his love in
my heart or mouth, but express it in my whole course and calling, as Peter was
thrice enjoined to express his love to Christ in feeding his sheep and
lambs, Ioh. 21. 16.

3. Love is bountiful: I will spare nothing for my friend; all I have, is his
to command and use, because my self am: sincere love is communicatiue, and
will be at cost for Christ: those that love Christ, first give themselves to
Christ, and then their gifts, their graces, their goods to the use of Christ
and of his members: sincere love is diligent, and will refuse no pains to
please or pleasure the party loved: what infinite pains will men (that love
the world) take for an handful of it? and such as love Christ, will refuse no
pains to enjoy, to glorify him, as the Apostles and Martyrs, in whom we see
how love overcomes all things, and the hardest pains is pleasure to it.

4. This Christian and holy love is ready to defend Christ: no man can endure
to hear or see his friend abused; love carries a sympathy with it, that is, a
fellow-feeling, causing joy or grief, to see his glory, Word, or Kingdom
advanced or hindered: it carries a godly zeal to Gods house, which consumed
David, Psalm. 69. 9. Paul and Barnabas, when GOD was dishonored, were moved,
and rent their clothes; and love to Christ makes a man take to heart things
against his name and honor: nay, it makes the Christian ready to suffer with
Christ and for Christ, and accept of never so hard a condition with him. Much
water cannot quench love, nor the floods drown it, Cant. 8. 6. Yea if all the
world should forsake Christ, and sincere profession of him, sincere love would
love the more, and die with him rather than deny him.

5. Now in his absence to love him in his image, in his servants, because they
love him; in his Word and Sacraments, which are his letters and pledges; in his
gifts and graces, which are his loue-tokens, and long to obtain his presence:
for the Spirit says, Come: and the Bride says, Come, yea even to be sick of
love after him, Cantic. 5. 8. Thus may we try our love of Christ, and shame
our selves for want of it, and stir up our selves to grow up in the image of
God, who has set his whole love upon him, and long after the day when we also
shall set our whole love upon him as he upon. us.

In whom I am well pleased.
Sect. 10.
HEre is the fruit of this near relation, The Fathers delight in that his
Son.
declaring to us, that God is not only pleased with Christ, his person, his
actions and perfections: (for he says not, with whom:) but that in him
whatsoever is presented is accepted, and he is pleased with that also.

Never is God appeased with any man, Doct.
but in and through his Christ, whom he so loves, as that all his wrath is
appeased with all that are in him. Ephesians. 1. 6. We are accepted in his
Well-beloved. Col. 1. 20. In him are all things reconciled, and set at peace
through the blood of his cross, both in earth and in heaven; that is, the
whole body of the Church, which is partly in earth, and partly in heaven, by
Christ united to God. Luke 2. At his birth the Angels sang, Glory to God, peace
on earth, and good will to me^; teaching us, that now by Christ, Gods good will
was turned toward men. Add hereto, that all the favors we receive from God,
are ascribed unto him. Ephesians. 1. We are elected in him, adopted in him, called
with an holy calling, justified, but all in him: and verse. 3. He has blessed
us with all spiritual and heavenly blessings in Christ.

For 1. If God look on us in our selves, Reasons.
and in the common mass, Christ, we receive the dye and tincture of his blood
and obedience, and so are justified and accounted innocent and pure. And thus,
as it is said of the Church, Ezekiel. 16. 14. we recover our former beauty, which
is made perfect through his beauty.

Noah came out of the Arc, he offered burnt-offerings to the Lord, and the
Lord smelled a savor of rest, and said, I will no more curse the earth, etc. A
notable type of Christ, the Mediator and maker of atonement between God and
man, from whose meritorious sacrifice God only smells a savor of rest. So
likewise in Aaron the high Priest, Exodus 28. 38. Aaron must bear the iniquity
of the offerings of the children of Israel, and [Holinesse to the Lord] shall
be always upon his forehead, to make them acceptable to the Lord: here (says
Calvin) must all our senses be fixed upon the forehead of the only high
Priest, from whom all holiness flows forth to his Church: neither could the
Priest make the people acceptable in his own person, but as he stood a type
of Christ.

Lo-ammi, Lo-ruhamah. 2. Consider him as Head of the Church and Mediator, his
obedience was so voluntary, and satisfactory, so full and meritorious, as must
needs appease his fathers wrath; in him the Father has his Law wholly
fulfilled, even all righteousness; in him he has the curse borne and carried
away; in him he has a new righteousness of faith restored to believers, and a
new image repaired upon them: so as now beholding them, not in the first Adam,
but in the second; not in the old root, but in the new plantation; he loves
the members, because he loves the Head, and accepts them as sons through his
beloved Son.

To note the miserable condition Use 1.
of all them that are without Christ, because they are as the Gentiles, without
God in the world, without hope: for nothing else in the world can put back the
wrath of God, there is no name else under heaven in which a man can be saved.
How fearfully is the wrath of God come upon the Jews to the uttermost, who
reject this Corner stone, and yet expect a Messiah of their own making?
Neither the clear testimonies of the Prophets, nor of John, nor Hear this
voice of the Father, nor his own mighty works, have moved them, because
hardness is come upon them till this day, and the veil is upon their hearts,
which we must pray that God would in his time remove. Those mighty kingdoms
of Turks and Heathens, who refuse the Son of God, and will not acknowledge
him more than a man, lie under Gods wrath, and in the power of the devil, and
reject the only means whereby they should come into favor with God: which
when we consider, as we are to pity and pray for them, so with praise and
gladness we are to acknowledge Gods goodness, whose providence watched over
us to be borne in the places and times wherein Christ rides most gloriously in
the chariot of his Gospel, that unless we will wilfully shut our eyes, and
make our condemnation heauyer than theirs that never heard of him, we must
needs see the light shining so brightly.

The like may be said of all those damnable heretics, who have denied Christ
either in his natures or offices: and here we must for ever renounce the
damnable heresy of the Church of Rome, who, though in word they hold the
doctrine of faith, yet in deed and by express consequent deny both the natures
and all the offices of Christ, and so profess a false christ, in whom they
cannot meet with salvation. The case of worldly and carnal gospellers is no
better, who profess Christ their Jesus, not their Lord, denying him their
hearts and lives, and yet with their mouths say, Lord, Lord.

Again, Use 2.
seeing God has professed, that Christ is that his Beloved in whom he is only
well pleased, away with other mediators, other intercessors, none can be (...)
but he, He only was found worthy to open the book, Revel. 5. 5. God never
professed himself well pleased in any but he, though with many he has been.
Away with those fond devices of merits, and works of supererogation; away with
Popes pardons, unless we can bring such a voice from heaven for any other
man: away with foreseen faith and foreseen works, with which some men say
God was pleased, and so moved to elect his people. No, no, only Christ is the
delight of God, he is delighted in nothing but him, and that which he sees
through him: give him the honor of a sufficient Savior, able to appease and
please his Father, able to tread the Wine Press alone; or else give Gods
testimony the lie, as all they do, that dote upon any other means of
pleasing and appeasing God than Christ alone.

Lastly, Verse. 3.
seeing our selves out of him can find no acceptance, let us labor to be
found in him, and to know that we are in him, which must be our only comfort
both in life and death; then let the law curse, the devil accuse, sin stand up
against us, hellgates set themselves wide open for us; if we can say Christ is
ours, we shall be vpheld, while other Iusticiaries fall.

But how shall we know that we are in Christ? Quest.


By these rules: 1. Answ.
If we be led by his Spirit, Romans 8. 9. 2. If we crucify the affections and
lusts, Gal. 5. 24. 3. If we be new creatures, 2. Cor. 5. 17. 4. If we persevere
in the obedience of faith, Heb. 3. 14. Obser. 1. Filius pronu^ciat quae Deus
pater dictat, Job. 8. 26. et spiritus sanctus obsignat, Ioh. 16. 26.


The general use of this whole testimony, is set down, Math. 17. 5. Hear
him: for by this voice Christ is now appointed both, 1. The Doctor and chief
Prophet of the Church, more excellent then Moses; for He is faithful as the
Son in all the house of God. 2. The high Priest of our profession, whose lips
must preserve knowledge, infinitely above Aaron, a most merciful high Priest,
able to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he lives for ever to make
intercession for us. 3. The only King of his Church, a greater than Solomon, of
whom all the Kings of Israel were but shadows; who only makes Laws for his
Church, and of such power as they bind conscience, which no King nor Laws can
do.

1. Reasons.
He is the Angel of the therefore only to be heard. What? is not the Church
to be heard? the Preachers of the Word to be heard? yea, the one as the Spouse
of Christ, the other as Ministers of Christ: only Christ himself as receiving
this dignity, Mat. 23. 8.
to be the only Master of his Church; they had streams, but he the fountain
of wisdom, he had treasures of wisdom hid in him.



all prophecies, ceremonies, revelations, and dreams, and these many,
extraordinary means whereby he taught his Church of old: and now God has
spoken unto us by his Son, to whom all they made way, Heb. 1. 1. He is that
Messiah of whom the Samaritan woman said, Ioh. 4. 25. I know that the Messiah
will come, and when he shall come, he will declare all things. They that lived
before him, made account to hear him, because he was expected from the bosom
of the Father, to reveal all the will of God, and all necessary truth
concerning salvation; how much more should we, who have heard all things, all
his doctrine, and seen his miracles, as the Samaritans did, Ioh. 4. 42. We
have heard him speak our selves?

4. If we consider our own

Now if it be asked how we must hear Christ, the answer is this:

1. He must now be heard in the voice of his Ministers, to whom he gave gifts
at his ascension, and of whom he said, He that hears you, hears me: so
far as they can prove that which they teach, to be his voice, they must be
heard, and further we must not hear Fathers, Doctors, Councels, nor the Pope
of Rome: for himself is still the chief Doctor, and chief Interpreter of the
Scriptures, and Judge of all controversies in Religion.

2. To hear him, is not only to lend him our ears in the ministry, (for many
Jews, Pharisees, wicked Romans, etc. heard his own gracious words, and yet
heard him not:) but, to hear him, is, 1. to repent and believe the Gospel:
for this was the beginning and sum of Christ's preaching, Math. 4. 17. and
Ioh. 12. 36. Believe in the Light, that ye may be the sons of the Light. 2.
To love one another. This is the new Commandment, That we love one another,
Ioh. 15. 12. and is most express, 1. Ioh. 3. 23. This is the commanment, That
we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another. 3. To
obey him in whatsoever he commands: Ioh. 10. 27.
His sheep hear his voice, and follow him: and, Math. 28. 20. Teach them to
observe, and to do all things that I have commanded you.

Hereby many sorts of men Use
are reproved, that hear not the voice of Christ: Papists hear the voice of
the Church, and of traditions, revelations, false miracles, yea the voice of
Antichrist: the Atheist hears the voice of reason, Laws of men, and
persuasions of fleshly wisdom; but the Apostles thought it fitter to obey God
then man, Act. 5. 29. The natural man hears the voice of the serpent, as Adam
did, though Christ's voice be never so loud against the touching of the
forbidden fruit: Yea, men that profess better things, may hear the voice of
wives, children, parents, yea, the voice of profit and unlawful pleasure,
before and above Christ's voice; Solomon himself heard the voice of his
idolatrous wives, till GOD rent the Kingdom from him: so as the best of us had
need be stirred up by this voice from heaven, Hear him.

FINIS.
The Errata.
Page 24. margent, for inundatione, read, mundatione. p. 26. marg. r.
sanctificaret. p. 87. liu. penult. put out householder.

If any other faults have escaped, I desire thee (Courteous Reader) to pass by
them.


