THE PRACTICE OF REPENTANCE, Laid down in sundry directions, together with the
Helps, Lets, Signs and Motives. In an easy Method, according to the Table
prefixed.

As it was preached in Aldermanbury by THOMAS TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed for I. Bartlet at the gilt Cup in Cheapeside, 1628.

A Table of the chief things contained in the several Chapters of the
TREATISE.
Cap. 1. THe ground and occasion of the Treatise. p. 1 The occasion and meaning
of the words. p. 5 We may not judge of men's persons by their outward condition.
p. 9 In all our conferences, we must take occasion to edify one another. p. 13
Every man must make use to himself of Gods judgments on others. p. 14 The
only way to prevent perdition, is Repentance. p. 15
Cap. 2. What Repentance is. p. 17 The only efficient cause of it is the
Spirit of God, it is beyond the power of nature. p. 18 Why we have commands
from God to repent, though it ^ee not i^ our power. p. 21 How the Spirit works
repentance. p. 22
Cap. 3. The subject of Repentance is the believer. p. 25 Faith goes before
Repentance, not Repentance before faith. p. 26 C^^tio^s to be taken with this
truth. p. 30 Th^se places answered where Repentance is set before faith in
Scripture. p. 31 What the act or form^ of Repentance is. p. 32
Cap. 4. The ^earmes from whence, and whither a man must turn: first, from all
sin: secondly, to God, with forcible reasons of both. p. 34 It is not enough to
cease to do evil, unless we learn to do well. p. 38 True Repentance has
God still in its eye. p. 39
Cap. 5. What Repentance is not. p. 41 It is not Ciuility, which a great part
of the world mistakes for it. p. 41 It is not every sorrow for sin, though
deep. p. 42 Signs of that sorrow, that is a part of true Repentance. It is
not every leaving of sin, that is Repentance, unless there be a change and
reformation. p. 45 Outward abstinence from sin, no reformation. p. 46 Cutting
off of some sins, without a rooting of them up, is no Repentance. p. 47
Conquering of sin, not always reformation. p. 48 Every reformation is not
Repentance, unless the whole man be changed. p. 48 Every change of the whole
man is not Repentance, unless it be from all sin. p. 50 Turning from all
sin is not Repentance, unless there be a turning to God. p. 51.
Cap. 6. Rules concerning the persons that must Repent. p. 52 Every man must
repent for sundry reasons. p. 53 Natural and unregenerate men though never so
civil. p. 56 Godly and regenerate men, even the best. p. 59 Young men, for
sundry reasons. p. 61 Old men, for diverse reasons. p. 63 Women must repent as
well as men. p. 64
Cap. 7. Rules concerning sins to be repented of. p. 66. All sins must be
repented of. p. 67 Sins both known and unknown p. 69 How unknown sins may be
repented of. p. 69 The smallest sins must be repented of for sundry reasons. p.
71 Sins of knowledge and presumption, must be repented of* p. 73 Sins also of
aggravating and scandalous circumstance, as p. 75 Customable sins. p. 75 Sweet
and pleasing sins. p. 76 Sins after conversion, especially. p. 77 Sins against
means. p. 78 Sins of open profaneness against holy times, places, exercises,
persons. p. 79
Cap. 8. Rules concerning the manner of entrance into the duty of repentance.
p. 81 It must be entered upon with preparation. ibid. Means to help forward
the preparation, required, viz. p. 82. etc. 1 A serious consideration of the
blissful estate lost by sin. p. 82 2 Of the miserable estate we are now in,
and shall continue in, till we repent. p. 83. etc. 3 Serious thoughts of the
God with whom we have to deal in this business, chiefly of his Majesty,
Justice, anger at sin, and of his rich mercy in Christ. p. 25.86. 3 A
consideration of the necessity and benefit of Repentance. p. 87
Cap. 9. Rules concerning the wise proceeding in the duty of Repentance. p. 88
1 The work of Repentance must be begun within, with the cleansing of the
heart. p. 89 2 Outwardly, begin with some master sin, to root out that. p. 90 3
Cease not till it be quite rooted up, and cast out. p. 93 4 Rest not in the
rooting out of sin, till there is rooting and growth in the contrary grace. p.
95 Trust not Repentance as sound, till then. p. 97
Cap. 10. Rules concerning the time of Repentance. p. 99 The time wherein alone
it is possible a man can repent, is the whole time of his life, and only that
time. p. 99. etc. The time of necessity, wherein men ought to Repent, is all
the time of their life. p. 102 1 A Christians life should be begun with
repentance, for sundry weighty reasons. p. 102 2 Continued in the exercise of
repentance. p. 109 3 Ended with repentance. p. 111
Cap. 12. Of the Lets of repentance from the world. p. 130 1 Fear of contempt,
and reproach from the world. p 133 A preservative against it. p. 135 2 Fear of
the loss of friends, if we repent. p 141 This rub removed. p. 142
Cap. 13. 3 Of another Let from the world, viz. the paucity and small number of
Penitents in the world. p. 146 The antidote against it. p. 147
Cap. 15. Of the Lets of repentance from Satan. p. 166 1 He labors to
persuade us of the goodness of our present natural estate by sundry
arguments. p. 167. etc. Answers to such Arguments. p. 168. etc.
Cap. 16. 2 Of a second rub, Satan casts in our way to hinder repentance, viz.
If he cannot bring men to please themselves with their natural estates, he
labors to work men to so great a dislike of their conditions, as to drown
them in the gul^e of despair. p. 176 1 Satan labors to work men to a
despair of Gods mercy, by diverse arguments. p. 177. Helps against them. p.
177. etc.
Cap. 17. 2 Satan labors to hinder repentance by bringing men to a despair
of themselves, and their own conditions by diverse reasons. p. 185 Answers to
such temptations* p. 186. etc.
Cap. 18. 3 Satan labors to bring men to despair of their repentance. 1 He
would persuade men it is impossible, by diverse arguments. p. 195 His arguments
answered. p. 196. etc.
Cap. 19. 2. The Devil labours^to keep men off from repentance by perswadi^g
them, it is unprofitable p. 207 Such temptations answered ibid.
Cap. 20. 3. The Devil labors to hinder men's repentance by obiecting their
relapses and fallings after repentance. p. 211 Comfortable answers to such
temptations ibid.
Cap 21. 3. Of the third rub the Devil lays in men's way to hinder their
repentance, viz. Presumption. When he cannot drive them to despair, neither of
Gods mercy, nor their own estate, nor their repentance, he assaies to make
them presume of mercy without Repentance, p. 215 1. He persuades a sinner his
sins are not great p. 216 Answer to this Temptation ibid. etc.
Cap. 22. 2. The Devil labors to persuade men Christ dyed for all p. 220 That
objection answered ibid. etc.
Cap. 23. 3. The Devil persuades men that God is merciful, and therefore they
need not so trouble themselves with repentance p. 230 Answer to this
temptation p. 231, etc.
Cap. 24. Of the lets of Repentance from our selves, which we cast in our own
way p. 239 1. A conceit we have, that repentance is harsh and unpleasing to
nature ibid. Helps against this let 240
Cap. 25 2. Of the second let, we hinder our repentance withal, viz. the
certainty of Gods decree of election and reprobation p. 243.244 If we are
elected, say men, we shall be saved without this repentance, if reprobated,
all our repentance will not save us. This dangerous subtlety met withal p.
245. etc.
Cap. 26. 3. Of the third rub men c^st in their own way to h^ld themselves from
Repentance, viz. the comfortable lives and deaths of many impenitents, and the
uncomfortable lives and ends of godly persons, and such as have been most
penitent p. 252 Answer t^ this objection p. 253
Cap. 27. 4. Of the fourth let to repentance from our selves. Men conceive
Repentance very easy. p 258 This conceit met withal. ibid. etc.
Cap. 28. 5. Of the last let we hinder our repentance withal Men object the
unseasonableness of Repentance p. 263 Some think it too soon to repent ibid.
These have their answer. ibid. etc. Some think it too late to repent p. 269
These comforted and encouraged p. 270.
Cap. 29. Of the means of Repentance in respect of sin Serious humiliation
necessary to Repentance, proud persons incapable of it p. 273 Means to attain
Repentance 1. To get a clear sight of sin, and our misery by it p. 274 2.
True sorrow for it p. 275 3. A holy despair in our selves of deliverance by
any means of our own p. 276 A direction to get acquaintance with the moral
Law, very useful to work our hearts to a sight of sin, etc. 277. etc.
Cap. 30. Of the means of Repentance in respect of God 1. His word a notable
means to work Repentance p. 281 The Law: see how p. 283 The Gospel: see how
ibid. etc. What men must do, that the Word may further their repentance p.
284. 2. Thoughts of Gods eye always upon us, in all our ways p. 285 3. A
consideration of Gods hand both of mercy and justice, a forcible means to
work repentance Of mercy p. 286 Of justice, both on our selves, and others p.
288. etc. 4. A serious consideration of our relation to God, a means to work
Repentance p. 291
Cap. 31. Of the means of Repentance in respect of Christ, viz. 1. Serious
thoughts of the greatness of his person, and nearness to his Father p. 295 2.
Of the heavy things he suffered for sin p. 296 3. Of the baseness of the
persons for whom he suffered such things ibid. etc.
Cap. 32. Of the means of repentance in regard of our selves* 1, It Is a
profitable means to further our repentance, to consider our desires and
affections, both what they are, and what they ought to be p. 300 2. To recount
our lives and actions what they are, and ought to be p. 301 3. To consider
seriously the checks of our consciences. p. 302 4. To remember our latter end
p. 304
Cap. 33. Of the means of repentance, in respect of others. How we may further
our repentance by good men. p. 305 How repentance may be furthered by bad men,
and enemies to grace. p. 306
Cap. 34. Of the marks of repentance in respect of sin. 1 A true penitent
remembers his sin, though remitted, with shame and sorrow. p. 309 2 He will
aggrauate his sin when he beholds it. p. 311 3 He hates all sin every where. p.
314 4 He resists and holds fight against all sin. 316 5 He relinquisheth his
sin in true endeauours, and never turns to it any more. 318 6 In his strife
and resistance of sin, he differenceth himself from the hypocrites, in that he
sets himself against sin universally and sincerely. p. 320. etc.
Cap. 35. Of the marks of repentance in respect of God. 1 True repentance
shows it self by a sincere love of God. p. 327 2. By a childish fear and awe
of God p. 331. 3. By strong cries for grace against corruption p. 332
Cap. 36. Of marks of repentance in respect of others. 1* A man truly humbled
by repentance, will esteem of others better than himself p. 335 How a man
ought to esteem another better than himself, though he see in him gross
faults p. 337. etc. 2. He is soft and gentle unto others p. 339 3. The faults
he espieth in others he will condemn in himself, if not in the act and habit,
yet in the seed and inclination. p. 340. 4. He will do his best to draw
others out of sin p. 341
Cap. 37. Of the signs of Repentance in respect of ones self 1. A true
penitent judges himself, proceeds against himself iudicially and impartially.
p 344 The fruit and use of judging. p. 345 The manner of a penitents judging
and proceeding against himself. p. 345. etc. 2 He renews himself daily. p.
350 Wherein a true penitent renews and changes himself. p. 350. etc. 3 He
strengthens himself against lusts and the assaults of sin for time to come. p.
354 How he arms himself, see. ibid. etc. 4 He prepares himself by daily
exercise of repentance, for Christ's appearing. p. 357. etc.
Cap. 38. Of the motives to repentance from the necessity of it. It is most
necessary a man should repent. p. 360 1 If we look at the nature of sin. ibid.
etc. 2 At the inseparable companions and effects of it. p. 362. etc.
Cap. 39. Of motives to repentance in regard of God. 1 Our own unfitness to
have any fellowship with God, without repentance. p. 365 2 That strict justice
that is in God. p. 366 3 His rich mercy. p. 367 4 The unprofitableness of all
Gods ordinances without repentance. p. 371 5 An impossibility of enjoying God
in glory without it. p. 373
Cap. 40. Of motives to repentance in respect of Christ. 1 His surpassing love.
p. 375 2 His bitter passion, with the end of it. ibid. etc. 3 Consider our
relation to him. p. 378
Cap. 41. Of motives to repentance from ones self. 1 Both the whole, and parts
of man, call for repentance. p. 379 2 His sins show it is high time to practice
repentance. p. 380

FINIS.
A TREATISE, Wherein is handled the PRACTICE of REPENTANCE.
LVK. 13.3. Except ye Repent, etc.


CAP. 1. The ground of the Treatise.
FIrst, the occasion of choosing this Text and argument.

Upon occasion of Peter's repentance, which I have opened unto you, I entered
into a more serious consideration of the duty, and conceived,

1 That Precepts and Examples must go together, and therefore I would give
directions, as well as incitations, how to imitate so worthy a pattern.

2 As at all times, so at this time especially, the urging of the doctrine of
repentance, is not only not unseasonable, but very necessary: For,

1 A great Judgment, never to be forgotten, was lately upon us; we then
promised, and vowed repentance and amendment, if God would be pleased to
remember his own name of Grace and Mercy, and our prayers. But we have
forgotten all, and dealt* unfaithfully with the Lord: for where is the
reformation of any one thing in public or private; in Court or City; in
Churches, in Houses, in persons or behauiours? Are not former sins as rife,
as unrepented, unreformed, as ever before? pride, profaneness, drunkenness,
swearing, riot, excess, unmercifulness, while your bills bring you in some
starued in your streets? Nay, are not things grown far worse than before,
since we dissembled with our tongues? Had it not been a lesser plague for
numbers to have been buried of the Plague, than to survive, to heap up so
many sins against God, against their own vows, and promises?

2 As it is a fearful present Judgment to forget that Judgment so lately
past; so, many are the signs, as the just causes are many of Judgments to
come, which lie in ambush against us, and not far remote from us. We had need
generally to be called to repent, if we will not all perish: As Pharaohs
counselors, so may we say; What, will thou see all Egypt destroyed, before
thou obey Gods commandment in letting them go? shall we still stand it out,
till inevitable destruction overtake us?

3 The true desire of every godly Minister, and man of God, must be to prevent
Judgments from a people: for which purpose we must lead them in the exercise
of Repentance, which our Text will teach us to be the only means to avoid
perdition. And we want not examples of the best Evangelical Preachers that
ever were, to press hard this point; especially in a secure age, as ours is.
John Baptist here began, Mark. 6.12. Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at
hand. Peter to them that were pricked in their hearts, here began, Acts 2. Be
Baptized and repent* Nay, Christ himself did it, Repent, for the kingdom of
God, etc. Many condemn pressing of Repentance, as too Legal, who seem
ignorant, that the Law knows no repentance.

Now the occasion of the words, and scope of our Savior in them: Some come
unto Christ, and tell him of heavy news, that Herod had taken the Galileans*
and slain them, mingling their blood with their sacrifices. Like enough they
came to entangle him; for if Christ shall patronage the persons, they have an
accusation, that he were a friend of Rebels and seditious persons: If he shall
speak against Pilates cruelty, they will accuse him to Pilate as an enemy of
authority: If he shall approve of Pilats fact, and tyranny, then will they
accuse him to the people as one that abetteth the cruelty of the Roman
President, against the liberty of the Jews. Thus can wicked men, and do, lay
snares and traynes every where against the members of Christ; even from Gods
judgments, whereof they should make better use, they can feed and excite their
own malice against the Saints: As the Heathens against Christians, as the
causes of all plagues, famine, drought, etc.

But our Lord, being the wisdom of his father, bewraieth,

1 his divine wisdom, who seeing that he cannot answer without danger,
either to the persons or the fact, either to approve, or reprove it; he passes
that, and brings them to a judgment at home in Jerusalem, by the fall of the
Tower of Siloam; yea, and leads them into themselves, to consider not so much
what sinners others be, as themselves, who if they repent not, shall perish as
other sinners do.

2 His love, and desire to do them good, who intend evil against him. For,
perceiving they make a wrong use of this judgment, supposing, and concluding
the Galilaeans were greater sinners than others or our selves: he labors to
reform the Judgment, and earnestly inuiteth them to repent, repeating the
same words, both in the third and fifth verses. Thus must his ministers and
servants do, meekly instruct the contrary minded, urging, and waiting when God
will give Repentance.

In the words are three parts.

1 An implication of his Authority: I tell you. 2 A correction of their wrong
censure, Nay. 3 A direction to prevent judgments from themselves, Unless ye
Repent.
1 Gods own Authority: I tell you.

I, who am truth it self, and cannot misleade you.

I, who am the doctor of the Church, and speak by my own Authority, as never
did Prophet, Apostle, nor any Angel of heaven.

I, who being true God, and omniscient, know and search all hearts, and see and
discern all sins, never so secret, in all the degrees and circumstances of
them.

I, who am the Judge of the world, and cannot pass a wrong sentence, I tell
you: Vae qui non audit.

All this must quicken our attention, and settle our faith in the truth of
things here uttered, and to be opened in this Text. If the greatness of the
person move, here is the mighty God speaks: If the wisdom of the speaker, a
greater than Solomon is here: If an Angel from heaven spoke, we would believe;
but here is the Lord of the holy Angels: Will we hear and believe a servant,
and not the master, not the Lord himself? But says Dives in hell, If one were
sent from the dead, they would believe: here is one sent from the dead, raised
by his own power.

2 The correction of their wrong censure upon this judgment of others, Nay:
You ask if they were greater sinners, because of the judgment which befell
them, I tell you nay; as if he had said: I say not that they were not sinners,
nor not great sinners, nor do I deny but they might be greatest sinners, but
not therefore greater sinners, because they were thus smitten by Pilate.

Where our Savior teaches us:

1 Not to judge of men's persons by their outward condition; for, first, all
things fall alike unto all of outward things: as the one dies, so dies the
other, in outward appearance, by sword, plague, casualty: and no man knows
love or hatred, by any thing that is before him, Eccles. 9.1. and 1. Pet. 4.17.
Judgment must begin at Gods house.

2 This is an uncertain rule to judge by; Moses and Aaron, both were shut out
of Canaan, as well as the searchers: Ahab destroys religion, Josiah restores
it, both shot with an arrow: Zedekiah a wicked man, had his eyes put out, so
had Sampson the valiant Judge of Israel, a type of Christ; If we should judge
of their persons by their condition, we must needs err.

3 We must frame our judgments of men's persons, as God does, who judges not
of men by any outward and perishing thing, but by lasting and spiritual things:
he looks not on Dives as rich, nor on Lazarus as poor, but according to the
presence, or absence of grace and spiritual riches: He judges not by
accidents, but substances.

Use. Mis-iudge not thy self or others, as loved of GOD, because rich, and
outwardly prosperous: commonly the lighter scale is higher; and a rich man, if
wicked, an enemy to goodness, ought to have no more favor and respect among
men, than he has with GOD, and that is little enough: though as high as Nero,
Pharaoh, always holding offices of relation in divine and civil societies:
but else greatness, severed from goodness, is in great detestation with God, as
his sin is greater.

2 Nor judge thy self hated, for poverty, sickness, temptations: GOD neither
chooses nor refuses for this.

3 Nor have the faith of God in respect of persons, to embrace rich
Professors, and despise the poor; God does not so: Grace in the poorest man
is as acceptable to him, as in the richest.

3 The direction to prevent judgment from themselves: Except ye repent, ye
shall likewise perish: that is, as miserably and cruelly. The word [Perhaps]
points not out the same kind of death, but a destruction not less severe,
and a perdition as miserable of body and soul. And some there be who conceit
the very manner of perdition to be not much unlike, and that the Lord had
respect unto the general perdition of the Jews, by the Romans, forty years
after. For as Pilat mingled the blood of the Galilaeans with their sacrifices,
so did the Romans mingle the blood of the Jews with their sacrifices, at the
feast of the Passover; for then they destroyed them: and as the eighteen men
were slain with the fall of the tower of Siloah, when they were building it,
as was likely; so the Jews, if they repented not, were to be oppressed, and
suddenly slain in the ruins of the City and Temple, as after it came to pass.

Note 1. Note 1.
In all our conferences, and telling news and relations one to another, let us
learn to take occasion to edify one another, and excite to faith and
repentance, after the example of Christ, who on this occasion exhorts them to
repent. So the Apostle would have all our speech sauorie, and tend to
edification: especially, seeing the judgments of God breaking out in the
Church, and in the World, let us not speak of them as News, to fill up
discourse, but to help forward our Repentance and Amendment.

Note 2. Note 2.
Every man must make use to himself of Gods judgments on others. These men
began to condemn them on whom the judgment fell: and our Lord leads them
home, to judge, and condemn themselves.

Reason.
1. Gods end of his judgment on others, is not their condemnation by us, but
our emendation by them.

2. Why else does the Lord strike others, and spare us, but that we might be
wiser by other men's harmest? hat whilst he expects our amendment, his
bountifulness and patience should lead us to repentance.

3. It is just with God, that those that will not take example, should make
examples: that if they will not be bettered by other men's harms, others may
be bettered by theirs.

Use. 1.
Use. In all spectacles of Gods justice, every man enter into himself, and
search his own heart, and he shall find that evil of sin, which might justly
bring that, or a greater evil of punishment upon himself, as our Savior here
implies. Thus for a man to begin with his own sins, and lay them in the right
scale, will keep him from insulting over them, who have perished, and cause
him to deiect himself in true repentance, lest he likewise perish. We can see
the original of affliction in others, and exaggerate the sin, but in our own
we do not.

Note 3. Note 3.
The only way to prevent deserved perdition, is Repentance; sin brings
judgment, and only Repentance preuenteth it. Ier. 3.12. Return O thou
disobedient Israel, and I will not let my wrath fall, for I am merciful.
Nineueh was threatened, the time of destruction set, yet Repentance prevented it.

Use.
Use. To provoke us to repent, that we may partake of the riches of Gods mercy
in the Gospel, to quit us from the condemnation of the Law. Hear the sweet
voice, and warning of the Lord to his people: Turn ye, turn ye, Oh why will
you dye? Except ye turn, ye must dye.

2. Persuade thy heart of the necessity of repentance; thy sin has kindled the
fire of Gods wrath: he must be just, and only repentance is as water to quench
this fire.

3. Take timely pity on thy self: why will thou treasure wrath still? Romans 2.
If thou carest little for thy self, pity the Church and Kingdom, Revel. 2.
the Church is threatened, Repent, or I will come against thee. Beware it be
never said of thee as of Thiatyra; I gave her space to repent, and she
repented not: lest it follow, And I cast her into a bed of sorrow.

CAP. 2. What Repentance is.
IN Repentance consider, 1. The Treatise and doctrine. 2. The Practice and
application.


The treatise being set down to our hand by sundry worthy Writers of our own
Age and Country, I will not further prosecute it, than by delivering and
opening a short description of Repentance, that we may know what we are
exhorted and incited unto.

Repentance is a grace of God, wheroby a Believer turns from all sin, unto
God. Where is

1. The efficient: 2. the subject: 3. the act or form of it: 4. the terms
whence and whither it turns from all sin to God.

1. The efficient: A grace of God; both for beginning, progress, and
consummation: for

1. It is not in nature neither entire; for Adam in innocence knew it not:
besides, the voice of the Gospel (the m^ans of Repentance) was not known to
man in entire nature; but the first motion of it is supernatural.

And much less is it in corrupt nature, without the revelation of grace: for

1. Neither have we it in our selves, being dead in sins, and sold under sin;
as naturally drinking in sin, as the fish does water.

2. Neither can get it by any labor or industry of our own, who cannot so
much as think one good thought, 2. Cor. 5. much less reach so high a work as
Repentance. How can earth reach heaven? How can a man melt a stone or Adamant,
such as his heart is? How can he change a flint into flesh? How can a wandering
sheep return back to the fold of it self; such as we are? Psalm. 119.10.

But it is a grace of the Spirit of God; not a legal grace: for the Law
knows neither repentance for sin, nor remission of sin. But an Evangelical
grace, wrought not by the Law, but by the Gospel.

That it is a supernatural grace of the Spirit, is proved Zach. 12.10. it is a
pouring out of the spirit of grace and supplication; Acts 11.28. then has God
given the Gentiles repentance unto life; 2. Tim. 2.25. waiting if at any time
God will give repentance.

2. The Church goes to God for it. Ierem. 31.18. Convert thou me, O Lord, and
I shall be converted. Lament. 5.21. Turn us, O Lord, unto thee, and we shall
be turned.

3. Such are the strong resistances and enemies of grace within us, and without
us, that it must be only the Spirit of power and fortitude that must conquer
them. The strong man has taken the hold: the devil works effectually in
blinding the eyes, and taking captive the wills of wicked men, to rule them at
his pleasure, 2. Tim. 2.26. and only a stronger man can cast him out.

Such is the strength of lusts, and the numberless excuses of sin and sinners,
as only the Spirit can convince of sin. Such is the frowardness and
perverseness of spirit in evil men, yea the deadness and senselessness of
heart, obfirmed by wicked habits, and customs of himself, and the world
without, that all the power of the means shall be frustrate, and be
ineffectuall to turn the sinner, if the Spirit of God quicken them not with
life, and power to this purpose.

Whence it will follow,

1. That we cannot repent when we will, as the Atheist thinks: Repentance
is no flower that grows in our own garden. If the Lord by his Spirit draw us
not, we never run after him.

Object. But why have we so many commandments to repent, if it be not in our
power? they seem to be very idle.

Answ. 1. Deus jubet quae non possumus, vt nouerimus quid ab eo petere
debeamus, says Augustine.

2. Exhortations are instruments, in which the Spirit puts forth his power,
and comes into our hearts.

2. We must beware of resisting the Spirit in this work, or in the means
whereby he works repentance in us.

Quest. Tell us how the Spirit brings us to Repentance.

Answ. 1. Docendo: He must teach outwardly. The teaching of the Spirit is
necessary to lead us into the knowledge of our selves, and of God. The former
he does by the Law, letting us see our misery: 1. by sin, 2. the punishment
of sin. The latter, by the Gospel; showing us what God is in his Son, and unto
us, ready to receive us to grace and mercy.

Every one must therefore hear the voice of the Spirit in the Ministry,
seeing the Spirit, not without the Word, but by the Word, as an ordinary
instrument, works Repentance.

Hear the Word Persuading and inuiting to Repentance, Promising grace and
mercy to the p^nitent, Threatening the impenitent.
Isay 55.7.

By this means the Jews were pricked and converted, Acts 2.37. By the Lydia's
heart was opened, Acts 16. and such as refuse and resist the Word, are never
drawn to Repentance. Pro. 1. Because ye would not hear my voice, I will not
hear you.

2. Ducendo: by inward moving and persuading. The Spirit must be Doctor, and
Ducton. This inward motion is,

1. In changing the mind, to see both sin, and the reward of sin; what and how
great both of them are.

2. In framing the will, and making it of evil good; and bowing it from it
self, to the willing of grace.

3. In kindling the affections with a desire of good, and hatred of evil.

Now therefore if thou would truly repent, thou must also give thy self to
be led by the Spirit; cherish his motions, affect his graces: for he must not
only show us repentance, but lead us into it.

3. If the Spirit be the efficient, and author of repentance, then never
despair of great sinners: He can presently make of Saul a persecutor, Paul a
Preacher: he can easily raise a dead man from the grave of sin, let him be
never so rotten. Here is a work of power, and a powerful worker.

Neither be out of heart in the sense of strongest corruption, and resistance
against grace. When thou see armies of lusts rise up in thee, and whole hosts
of rebels up in arms against the work of grace; hold on the combat, and this
Spirit of power shall chase them before thee: Go forth in his strength, and
fear not assured victory; greater is the spirit in thee, than in the world.

CAP. 3. Of the subject of Repentance.
2. THe subject of Repentance is the believer; the general subject of
Repentance is a sinner for Christ came to call sinners. But because every
sinner repents not; I say only the believer turns.

Where I plainly conclude that question, wherein is more scruple, than staid
wisdom; That Faith goes before Repentance, and not Repentance before Faith.

Here are 1. Reasons, 2. Cautions.


Reason.
1. The fountain must be before the stream, the root before the fruit, the
cause before the effect: but Faith, leaning upon Gods mercy, manifested in the
promise, is the isntrumental cause of Repentance. Hos. 6.1. Come, let us turn
unto the Lord: for he has smitten, and he will heal. The hope of Gods
healing, that is, of forgiveness of sins, is the ground of Repentance. Psalm.
130.4. Mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared. Which shows, that no
man can lay hold upon God, to fear, and reverence him, but he that is
persuaded of his favor.

Two cannot walk together unless they be friends, and man never meets God
in Repentance, while he conceiueth God an enemy; but runs away from him, as
a strict Judge. Slavish fear brings not a man to God; but love, which is a
fruit of Faith, for Faith works by love: therefore Faith is before Repentance.

2. True Repentance is a saving grace, and every saving grace is from Christ.
John 15.4. No branch can bear fruit of it self, unless it abide in the Vine:
Every penitent must therefore receive Christ, before the gift of Repentance;
and no receiving of Christ, but by the hand of Faith, John 11.12. therefore
Faith must necessarily go before Repentance.

3. Repentance works directly upon the heart, to soften it, to cleanse and
purify it. Now in Repentance, it is only the blood of Christ, that can soften
the hard heart, as only Goats blood softeneth the hard Adamant: It is only
the blood of Christ that can purge the heart and conscience from defilements,
Heb. 9 14. Now would I know how we can have his blood, before, himself; or
himself, before Faith. Nay, therefore the Scripture applies the work of
purging the heart to Faith, Acts 15.9. because it is the instrument to lay hold
on the blood of Christ for our purging; therefore Faith must be before
Repentance.

4. Repentance is the most acceptable of all good works. A contrite heart is
above all Sacrifices; therefore Faith must be before it: for

1. Whatsoever is before Faith, is the issue only of corrupt nature, and
corrupt conscience, and cannot please God.

2. Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb 11.6. for nothing is
acceptable, but in and for Christ; and nothing in and for Christ, but by Faith
in Christ, apprehending him.

Object. This shows, that Faith must go with Repentance, but not that
Repentance is therefore before it.

Answ. The Apostle expresses the same thing in another phrase, which puts
Faith before it. Romans 14.10. Whatsoever is not (...), ex fide, is sin: If it
flow not from Faith, as the stream from the fountain, which in order of
nature must be before.

5. Before any thing can please God in a man, the man himself, the person must
please him first. Genesis 4. God accepted Abel and his sacrifice. The new motion
pleases God, because it is from a new creature; but first the person must be
in Christ, and then a new creature, 2. Cor. 5.17. And first he must be a
believer, before he be in Christ: God respects not opus externum, but
spiritum internum; He looks on no work further than it is the work of his
spirit: but the spirit is no where, but in the sons of God, Gal. 4.6. and no
sons but by Faith in Christ, Gal. 3.26. If therefore Repentance must be a work
and fruit of the spirit of God, and that spirit be in none but sons, and none
of them sons but by Faith in Christ; therefore must Faith go before
Repentance, yea before the Sonship it self.

1. Both of them are wrought at one moment of time; Secondly the Cautions.
and in time are neither first nor last: but in order of nature, Faith, as the
cause, is first, and then Repentance.

2. Faith is before complete Repentance; for some beginnings or preparations to
Repentance, go in time before Faith: namely, legal fit^, and terrors of
heart for sin; and these are sometimes called by the name of Repentance, as a
part by the name of the whole. Math. 21.32. Ye were not moved with Repentance,
that ye might believe. The ignorance of the meaning of the word Repentance in
this place, has occasioned this idle scruple: But the distinction of Legal
and Evangelical Repentance will fully satisfy it: Legal, which is a sorrow
and terror excited by the law, and only initiall, and preparatory, is before
faith: But Evangelical, which is saving and complete, must have faith before
it, for the former reasons.

Object. But that which most troubles, is the setting of Repentance before
faith, as Mark. 1.15. Repent and believe the Gospel. Act. 20.21. Testifying to
Jews and Greeks, (...).

Answ. But they forget that the cause is set sometimes after the effect, as 1.
Tim. 1.5. Faith is set after a pure heart, and yet it is Faith that purifieth
the heart: But it is as if he should have said, If you would get a pure heart,
get Faith; so in these places: Repent, and that ye may do so, ye must first
believe; and so this transposition plainly overthrows the conceit they build
upon it.

3 The form of Repentance is in turning, or returning: for by the sin of our
nature, and practice, we have turned our selves away from God, and cannot see
his face, and favor toward us. Now Repentance turns us back again the way
that we are gone from him. And in this return

1 The whole man must turn: for the whole man is turned away, and naturally and
wholly evil. Genesis 6. The imaginations of his heart are evil continually: yea
whole evil is in every man: even the whole root of sin, and further than the
restraint of special or common grace, would produce all bitter and poysonfull
fruits.

2 He still turns: Repentance is a continued act of turning; a Repentance
never to be repented of, a turning never to turn again to folly: For,

1 He has ever something with him to turn from: a flesh still resisting the
spirit, many temptations of Satan, many wicked fashions of the world.

2 He can never get near enough to God in this life, nor ever turn so near
him, as once he was, and therefore he must proceed on till he do attain.

Cap. 4. The terms of Repentance: 1 Whence, 2 Whither.

4 THE terms from whence, and whither a man must turn, are, first, from all
sin: secondly, unto God.

1 The Scripture notes Repentance to be a turning from wickedness. Act. 8.22.
Repent if so be the wickedness of thy heart may be forgiven; and from dead
works, Heb. 6.2. It is called a ceasing to do evil, Isa. 1.

The object of Repentance, is all sin; not one, or many, but all sins. The
reasons are these:

1 God calls for repentance of all sins. Colos. 3.8. Put away all these
things.

2 He has showed his readiness to forgive all sins, except that against the
holy Ghost, but upon this condition.

3 We desire God to forgive all iniquity, and not leave one vnforgiuen, and
therefore we must leave none vnforsaken.

4 One sin separateth from God, as well as many; one poison kills as well
as many; one hole sinketh the ship.

5 Christ suffered for all sins, as well as one; he is the lamb of God that
takes away all the sins of the world: if he pay not the uttermost farthing,
we never get out of prison.

6 Mortification kills all sin, and the virtue of Christ's death in us,
sets us against all sin, as well as any sin: and sanctification reduces
every faculty to the first image, one as well as another; in which the whole
man must be blameless, for whatsoever is old must be renewed.

7 A day comes when every sin shall be set in the open light, and if any
one be unrepented of, that shall be found with us, and laid upon us eternally.

Whence it must follow that every true penitent,

1 Sets himself against great sins, sins as red as scarlet, of a deep
dye, which every one thinks to repent of.

2 Small sins, defects, and omissions, common frailties, secret evils: David's
cutting Saul's garment; John Hus his playing at Chesse for loss of his time,
and provocation unto anger.

3 Sweet and friendly sins. This stream of repentance is as the flood that
drowned Noah's near friends and servants; so it drowneth our nearest and most
friendly sins.

And hereby thou have a good note of sincerity, Psalm. 119.3. the upright in the
way do no iniquity; sincerity hates all ways of falsehood: An hypocrite will
strain at coming into the common hall upon the Preparation day, but not at
shedding the blood of Christ.

2 Ever true Repentance carries a tender conscience, which is as a tender eye,
that will water, and find the trouble of the least moate; as a strait shoe
cannot endure the least stone within it, but will make him shrink.

The second term, [to God:] for this we have sundry

1 Commandments. Joel 2.12. Turn to the Lord, Ier. 3.12. turn to me, O
disobedient Children, Ier. 4.1. if thou return, then return to me, says the
Lord.

2 Examples, David; Against thee, against thee, etc. Ps. 51. The Prodigal will
return to his Father.

3 Reasons, first, because we have sinned against him, and turned not only
from him, but against him, Hos. 6.1. Sin is a turning away from the chief
good; Repentance is a returning to the chief good.

2 He will only pardon sin on this condition: sin is a running from God,
and into the hatred of God, only Repentance is a returning into favor, and
friendship with him.

3 He is our first husband, therefore let us return unto him our first
husband; for at that time it was better than now, Hos. 2.7. It is the
advancement of our estate, and a returning to our first innocence.

From hence it follows,

1 That it is not enough to cease to do evil, unless we learn to do well.
Esa. the first. It is not enough to put off the old man, unless we put on the
new man, Ephesians. 4.22.

Not only we must turn from the power of Satan, but to God, not only return
from our wandering, but to the Shepherd of our souls, 1. Pet. 2.10. True
Repentance is not only a ceasing from unrighteousness, but an exercise of
righteousness. He that does righteousness, is righteous: both are required
fugere prohibita, and praecepta face^e.

2 That true repentance carries God all along in his eye; and it is the
consecrating of a man's self wholly to God: so the Apostle describes it, 1.
These. 19. A turning from Idols, to serve the living God.

1 The scope and aim of it is not the saving of himself, but the service of
God; it brings not only from the ignorance of God, but to the knowledge of
God; not only from the hatred of God, but to the love of God; not only from
contempt of God, but to the fear of God: not only from love of sin, but to
hatred of sin; not only from practice of sin, but to the practice of
piety: And there is no man but may try his estate by this mark.

2 He will still conceive that he has always to deal with God. If he sin,
he will seek chiefly to clear himself to God: He will accuse himself to
God, he will not lie from God, till he have made up his peace, and gotten a
discharge.

3 His affections will be after GOD; his soul pants after God: his soul
thirsts for God, even the loving God, Psalm. 42.1 2. because he has tasted of
God.

4 His dependence is upon God for counsel and direction: he will know, and
inquire of Gods word, and servants, what to do to be saved, Acts 2. and Acts
16.

CAP. 5. What Repentance is not.
A Right rule is the measure of it self, and a crooked: and this description
shows as well, what Repentance is not, as what it is* Many things are like
Repentance, but are not it; and this definition will find out much counterfeit
Repentance, which goes commonly for current; and seldom is the deceit found,
till it be too late.

1 Many mistake Ciuility, for Repentance sufficient, but it is not; for first,
It is not saving grace of the spirit, but common.

2 No proper fruit of the gospel, but grows amongst heathens.

3 A man may have it without Christ, without Faith; yea, have it, and go to
hell. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall not enter, etc.

4 Ciuility is no change, nor turning; it may cover sin, it cannot cure it:
it wrappeth a clout on the wound, but lays no plaster: it may loppe some
branches of sin, but it strikes not the root: it lays a false finger on
some sin or other.

5 It looks all at men, men's laws, men's approbation, men's pleasing, more
than God: and desires rather to seem good, than be good; in all which it
falls short of Repentance. A Christian must have that in his Repentance,
which no hypocrite has.

2 Every sorrow for sin is not Repentance, no, nor every deep sorrow for
sin. Cain had deep sorrow in respect of punishment: Pharaoh howled, but it
was for the thunders and hail, when it was over, so was his Repentance: Esau
wept for the loss of the blessing, seeing some inconvenience to himself, more
than the sin against God. Saul deeply sorrowed, but it was because he had
heard the Lord say, he had cast him off from being King, 1. Sam. 15.24. Ahab
was much humbled, but it was after he had heard evil denounced (against him)
to cut off his posterity: All this is no Repentance.

Quest. How may I know my sorrow to be a part of true Repentance?

Answ. 1. When it is godly sorrow, or repentance toward God, Acts 20.21. or
sorrow according to God; when the sorrow is more for the offense of God, than
any shame, punishment, fear, or hell it self: for it looks more on the
offense of the great majesty of God offended, than upon the desert of his
offenses.

Reason.
For true sorrow is from love of God, and the love of God must be more than of
my self, or my own salvation. Here is the just cause of grief that Christ is
wounded. Zach. 12.10. They shall look on him whom they have pierced. The
waters of Repentance issue, when the rock of the heart is smitten, not with
the rod of the Law, but the staff of the Gospel. Acts 2. When they heard
this, they were pricked.

2. When it drives unto God. Ier 4.1. If thou will return, return unto me.
If thy sorrow for sin drives thee from God, it is not godly sorrow; as if it
hinder Faith, Hearing, Reading, Prayer. The Prodigals sorrow drives him to his
Father. True Repentance is not the having of a wound, but the obtaining of a
cure. There is not only the feeling of a burden, but the getting it off the
back, which is by obeying the call of Christ, Come unto me, etc.

3. When it is continual, and constant: as good never washed with these
waters, as become filthy after washing. The sorrow of Repentance is not a fit,
or qualme of sickness, but a sound cure: whereas the hypocrite forgeth that he
was purged.

Try now thy sorrow, whether thou have taken a Purge, or a Preparatiue. What
ease have thou after thy pain? Whether thou suffer the smarting plaster to
lie on to the full cure, or like a froward patient, have plucked it off, when it
was but new laid.

3. Every leaving of sin is not Repentance, unless there be a turning, a
change, and reformation. For Repentance is such a turning and change, as makes
a man clean contrary unto himself. Whence it follows, That

1. Abstinence from sins outwardly, is not reformation; for a man sometimes
abstaineth from sin, because he cannot commit it: and now his sin turns
from him, not he from it. Sometimes fear, or shame, or other sinister
respects, may cause a man to forbear, and yet not be contrary to himself: his
heart and mind may be as foul and filthy as before. A pil^erer in the Cage
cannot steal, because he is restrained; but he has his pilfering mind
still: Here is a change in the condition, but Repentance is a change of the
person. Judas, no question, thus far left his sin; He was sorry, he would do
so no more, and perhaps, would feign have undone that which he had done against
Christ.

Now wherein art thou beyond him? not a whit if thou retainest thy disposition
to sin, thy affection, and love to evil. If thou could do it safely from
man's eye, and securely without the hazzarding of thy self on the wrath of God,
would thou do it again? All is deceit and the spirit of bondage, and
worldly sorrow, a repentance to be repented of. But if thou hate sin, because
God hates it, and resoluest not to do it, for his sake, as Joseph, all is
well.

2. It will follow, that the lopping and cutting off of some sins, is not
Repentance, unless the roots be stocked and grubbed up; for this is not a
change, but a restraining of washboughs, that will come again.

Thou abstainest from swearing, but do thou fear an oath? Thou actest not
sin, but do thou hate it, and put it away?

3. That conquering of sin is not always reformation, and turning from sin:
for one sin may conquer another; Satan may be cast out by Beelzebub. Ambition
may conquer covetousness, hypocrisy may ouer-master many sins, but this is
far from Repentance: For by the fear of the Lord a good man departs from
evil. I set the Lord ever in my sight, that I should not sin against him. When
grace and Gods fear thus conquereth sin, it is a good sign.

4. Every change and reformation is not Repentance, unless the whole man be
changed. The whole man must turn, both inward and outward, in both, all
faculties and parts: But with this caution, that this change in every part, is
but in part, and imperfect, as the Air in the dawning, is light in every part,
but in part; and as lukewarm water, heat is in every part, with cold.

Reason 1. The Scripture calls for a through change and sanctification in the
soul, body, and spirit, 1. These. 5.25. The whole man must turn from the power
of Satan unto God. The whole man must be made of an old, a new man, Ephesians.
4.23.

2. Else the remedy will be short of the disease; for the whole man is turned
from God by sin, and Repentance must turn back the whole man.

Deceive not your selves in this great and weighty point; some find a change
in their mind, and have some illumination, and rest in that as Repentance. But
howeuer it is true, that the first thing in Repentance, is the change of the
mind from darkness to light, yet Repentance is not the turning of the
understanding unto truth, unless the will also be turned to God.

It is no repentance for a Papist to be never so devout, humble, charitable,
penitent, if he turn not his mind to the truth.

It is no repentance in a Protestant to embrace the truth in judgment, and
profession, and live unreformed, and unanswerable unto it; for his will must be
changed, as well as his mind.

5. Every change of the whole man is not Repentance, unless it be from whole
sin; for Repentance turns from all sin, and continues not any.

Object. No Repentance can get away all sin in this life.

Answ. Not that it be not, but that it rage not. The Iebusite will dwell
within our borders, but see he be subdued and commanded.

1. That Repentance is not true, which is not general.

2. To look back upon any sin, is to turn the back upon God; and to turn
from one sin to another, is not Repentance. Herod's reformation was far from
Repentance; for howsoever he did many things, he would not part with his
Herodias. Keep no bosom sin.

6. Turning from all sin is not Repentance, unless thou turnest to God. Deuteronomy. 5
Ceasing from evil is not Repentance, unless thou learn to do good; nor
casting off the old man, unless thou put on the new.

Now to turn to God, is to get a sincere purpose, desire, and endeavor to
walk according to all Gods commandments.

Try thy Repentance: Has thy sorrow bin deep and godly? Have thou got beyond
civility? Imbracest thou the grace thou did trample before, as a Swine,
under feet? Have thou changed thy soul, thy whole man, from whole sin to God?

CAP. 6. Rules concerning persons that must repent.
NOw in prosecuting the practice of Repentance, I will confine my self within
these bounds.

1. Propound the rules and directions to guide us in the duty.

2. The lots or chief impediments which hinder Repentance.

3. The means and helps for the happy performance of it.

4. The signs and marks of a man truly repenting.

5. The motives or inducements to provoke us to Repentance.

1. The rules or directions to guide us in this duty, concern

1. The persons that must repent; 2. the sins to be repented of; 3. the
manner; 4. the time.

The general rule concerning the persons, is, That all, and every man must
repent. The word in the Text is indefinite. Except ye repent; that is, all of
you. Acts 17 30. But now admonishes every man, every where to repent. The
doctrine of Repentance is preached to all.

1. All have sinned, and turned away from God; Reas. 1.
all are deprived of the glory of God: there is none that does good, no not
one. 1. Ioh. 1.8. If any man say he has not sin, he deceives himself, and
the truth is not in him. Iam. 3.2 In many things we sin all: therefore all have
need to repent.

All men are under sin, Romans 3.9. that is, all men in respect of natural
corruption, and actual pollution, are equally under the guilt and punishment
of sin, the sentence of the Law, the curse of God. A matter of such danger, as
a man had better be under the weight of all the mountains in the world, than
under the weight of sin upon his soul: therefore every man must repent.

2. Every man will say, he would have his sins remitted; therefore every man
must repent: for Repentance and Remission of sins go hand in hand. Mark 1.9.
John preached the baptism of Repentance for Remission of sins; and the state
of impenitency, is a state of perdition: Except ye repent, ye shall perish, for
you are yet in your sins.

3. Every one will say, he would be saved, and come to heaven at last, but
without Repentance, can be no salvation; neither is there place in heaven, for
an impenitent person; flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God:
Without shall be dogs, and swine not washed from their filthiness.

Consider the commandment. Ier. 4.14. Wash thy heart from filthiness, that
thou may be saved.

2. The threatening; If Christ wash thee not, then thou have no part in him.

3 The appropriated only to those that have part in the first resurrection,
the second death shall have no power over them.

4 The folly of a man that aymeth at a high and excellent end, and never
thinks of the way and means to attain that end: so it is to think of
heaven, and not of Repentance, the way and means to it. Hence will follow,

1 If all men, then natural and unregenerate men, be they never so civil,
must hasten their Repentance. For,

1 They are as clouds without water, trees dead, without fruit, condemned
persons without a pardon; the law has read an after sentence of death upon
them: And a madness were it for a Fellon to look to be quit by that law that
condemns him* that stare is nothing but death* only Faith and Repentance of
the Gospel, makes thee capable of mercy and pardon.

2 Why is Repentance Preached to natural men, but that of old men, they should
be come new? of Wolves, they should become Sheep of Christ's fold? of
Ethiopians and strangers, they shoud become of the household and family of God?
Such were they to whom Peter Preached, Act. 2. when so many thousands were
converted: and in all ages we have commission to instruct the contrary minded
with meekness, waiting when God will give them Repentance, 2. Tim. 2.15.

3 Civil men have most need be called to Repentance, because they think of
all other, they least need repentance, and seem to themselves not to be so
far from the Kingdom of God, as indeed they be: For having no sense of their
misery, they rest in pure naturals, civil honesty, external virtues, as in a
good estate. And indeed, this conceit of their goodness, leaves them in a
damnable condition; that what our Lord says of a rich man. I may say of a
civil man; it is hard for him to come to heaven, and often extreme flagitious
sinners are sooner converted. Publicans and Harlots that cannot have that
conceit of themselves, go often into heaven before them.

Let all such well consider, what is all civil, upright honest carriage before
God, without Faith and Repentance.

Surely nothing but a shining sin, and beautiful abomination: And therefore
the Apostle Paul, though before his conuer^sion he was beyond all civil men
in respect of gifts, virtues, and righteousness of the Law, yet he must undo
all this, and cast out all as dung in comparison of grace, and begin all again.

What better was the Pharisee for thanking God he was not as other; unjust,
extortioner, nor as the despised Publican, when he could not thank God, that
he was a Penitent, or believer? What better art thou to say, I thank God I
come to Church, hear the Word, receive the Sacraments, pay men their due, give
alms to the poor? when with a form of Ciuility or Religion, thou only
couerest thy corruption from thine own eyes, as a man in the dark; but art an
enemy to the power of godliness, to the powerful Preaching of the Word, to
godly Preachers; a resister of Faith, Repentance, Mortification, and holiness
in thy self, and others, without which thou shall never see God: Thank God as
much as thou will, thou shall never get thank from God for all this.

2 If all men, then godly and regenerate men, who have already repented, they
must hold on their repentance: For,

1 Even the best men after grace received, have sin dwelling in them. Romans
7.14. The law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin. Paul was then
long converted, and even then did that he hated, and hated what he did, verse
15. And no man in earth so just that sins not, Eccl. 7.22. witness Noah,
Lot, Abraham, David, Pet^r, the Virgin Mary (...) they are, outstraying, Psalm.
119.10.

2 God will have the best men trained in Repentance by the daily sight of their
sins, in many burdens, temptations, corruptions, sicknesses, casualties, and
death it self: for even they by many afflictions, must enter into heaven: All
fruits of sin, must be goades to Repentance.

3 The best must daily repent, because even the best duties performed by the
strength of grace, are in themselves sinful and defective: the righteousness
of the Christian is as a filthy clout. How much cause have they daily to
bewail their sins, that must repent for their best duties?

4 Our Lord has taught his Disciples, and the most regenerate, to pray daily
for forgiveness of sin, which is an act of Repentance. Never can a man be
free from Repentance, till he be free from sin; which (...) use the best can
never (...), he must never lay (...) Repentance. When thou have attained a
perfect image of God, then farewell Repentance; but that image which was lost
in a moment, cannot be repaired throughout the whole life, for the repayring of
which, they must still retain and renew Repentance.

3 If all men, then young men must repent. Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creator
in the days of thy youth: For,

1 How is it for us to take the corruption of nature in hand betimes? for sin
fasteneth by continuance; a sore the longer uncured, the more incurable it is;
so in this corruption which is morbus naturae, and habits grow into another
nature, which will not be repelled easily.

2 The Grace of Repentance, is a gift of God, not in our own power, and must
be taken while it is offered; If God offer it now to thee a young man, or maid,
refuse not this gracious offer, but even this day hear his voice; and as young
Samuel, say, Speak Lord, thy servant hears.

3 What a commendation and advantage is it for youth to be early graced, and
truly converted, even in the morning of their life? Many sins are prevented
in such a one, whereby also much sorrow and accusation is cut off, which does
often perplexe good men: as David prays often against the sins of his
youth. Besides, such a one has many opportunities of well doing, and abounds
in good duties, to their abundant comfort, both here, and in their reckoning.

4 Young persons may dye, they have no lease of their lives; youth is as fickle
as age, time and tide stays not: perhaps the Gospel will not stay with thee,
perhaps thou art not to stay in the world: Know thy day, and time of visitation.

4 If all men, then old men must hasten their Repentance, while yet their
glass runs.

1 If young men must not defer their Repentance, because they may dye; old
men must much more, because they must dye.

2 Thou art an old man, whose time in the likely course of nature, cannot be
long; have thou deferred thy repentance till the 11. or 12. hour, and yet is
it too soon to repent? Was not Iesabel in state fearful enough before God by
her fornication and filthiness, but that God gave her space to repent, and the
repented not? This is the very height of sin, and heapeth up a terrible
damnation. Is it not damnation enough to be a sinner before God, but an old
sinner, an old drunkard, swearer, fornicator, liar, cousner, an old fox, and
an old barking dog against all goodness?

3 Consider how the lees and dregs of profaneness be most sour and stinking
in old men: what a filthy sent leaves an old sinner, when he is gone? he was
an old graceless man, enemy of God to death; only his sin was strong, and
youthful in him to the last.

5 If all, then women must repent too, if they will not perish.

1 Gods School is as well open for women, as for men; and the Scriptures and
the Ministry belong as well to women as to men, and these are commanded to
learn the doctrine of Faith and Repentance, as men, and to profess the fear
of God, 1 Timothy 2.15.

2 Women were made to the image of GOD as well as men. Genesis 1.27 and were first
in transgression, and need Repentance as well as men.

3 Women are heirs of the same grace of life, and promises, and are to be
saved by the same way and means as men. They shall be saved if they continue
in Faith, Love, Holiness, and Modesty. 1. Tim. 1.10. In Christ, neither male
nor female, etc.

4 The examples of many gracious women are propounded in Scripture, for
imitation of all women: The virtuous woman has the law of grace set in her
lips. Many godly women followed Christ to hear his Sermons; The poor woman
that washed Christ his feet with tears, and wiped them with her hayres: a
notable eye-marke to all women of Repentance. Mary was commended by Christ, for
choosing the better party; and the blessed Virgin Mary, for laying the word in
her heart.

5 The Lord loves Godliness, Religion, Repentance, being his own grace, as
well in women, as in men; and the times of sickness and death come on women
as on men, and then nothing but true grace can bestead them.

CAP. 7. Rules concerning sins to be repented of.
2 THe second rule for directing our Repentance, concerns sins to be
repented of.

The general rule is unquestionable, That all sins must be repented of:
because

1. Because the Law of God condemns all sins, and the Gospel pardons all,
and Faith and Repentance only obtain that pardon. We have not learned, that
any sin is venial in it self; but none not venial by Repentance.

2. One sin unrepented of, condemns the sinner as certainly as a thousand;
as one stab at the heart kills him as dead as a thousand.

3. Although the least sin committed be damnable, that is, deserves
damnation; yet not the commission of the greatest sins brings damnation, but
the continuance in them. The only damning sin is Impenitencie, in respect of
the act, though not in respect of the desert.

4. The Scripture, Eccles. 11.9. would have us know this, That God will bring
every thing into Judgment, and, Chapt. 12. Verse. 14. God will bring every
work unto Judgment, with every secret thing done in the flesh, whether it be
good or evil: therefore every sin must be repented of. For look what sin
thou iudgest not in thy self, thou leauest to God to judge. If any sin lie
shut up in the book of thy conscience, vnblotted by Repentance, the day
comes, in which that book shall be opened, and it shall be found. Hence
the Apostle, Acts 17.31. inciteth the Athenians to repent, because God had
appointed a day to judge the world.

From this general, follows these conclusions.

1. We must then repent of sins both known and unknown. For known sins every
one will assent; if they be private, they must be privately repented of, if
open, they call for declaration of Repentance openly. Known sins are not
pardoned, but upon special Repentance.

But besides these, are a number of secret, unknown, and hidden sins, even in
the regenerate themselves. Psa. 19. For who knows how often he offends? Let
the best search his heart with lights, and do it most diligently, and
impartially, yet it is vngageable. He can never get to the bottom to find out
all his sins: Numbers are committed, which he knows not to be sins. Numbers
are committed, which in process of time are forgotten: A number of sins lie
close to our best duties, and we discern them not. Now if they be sins, they
must be repented of.

Quest. How can unknown sins be repented of?

Answ. As known sins must be repented with particular Repentance, so unknown
by a general Repentance, which God in mercy accepts for these, or else no
flesh could be saved.

The Patriarchs most of them lived in Poligamie, which was ever a sin: nor
could they be saved, without repentance of this sin; and yet we read not that
any of them specially repented of it, because of the corruption of the times,
they knew it not to be sin, only God in mercy accepted a general Repentance
for the same. Yet they repented specially of known sins; as David of his
murder and adultery: yet we read not that he specially repented of this.

By this we see, that had we not known sins, we have an infinite number of
unknown evils, whereof we stand guilty, and whereof we must repent daily, and
pray with David, Lord, forgive give me my secret and unknown sins.

If all sins, Conclus.
then we must repent not only of great, but the smallest sins: for

1. No sin is so little as not to need repentance; for the least sin is an
infinite offense against an infinite God, an infinite Law, meriting an infinite
damnation.

2. The smallest of sins, negligences, omissions, ouer-sights, hastiness of
speech, passion, must be repented of, and resisted, else they grow more common,
and more strong, or at least, as little thieves, they open the doors and
windows to greater, and stronger: He can never overcome the greater, that
does not smaller.

3. Here is more assurance and trial of sound grace, than in that repentance
of great sins: for

1. True grace lesseneth no sin, but aggrauateth it.

2. General, common, and restraining grace, may shun and grieve for great
and open sins; as the Heathens themselves. But it must be sound grace that
grows to the hatred of smallest, and most secret evils.

3. Sound grace desires to clear the book of God, and wipe out the score, as
well pence and farthings, as pounds and talents.

4. The nature of sin stands not in the material part, which often is in a
little thing; but in the form or anomy, which is the transgression of the Law:
and this may be in an apple, as well as a talent of gold. Yea the most
poysonfull sin of all was in an apple; a small thing, to show the sin in
smallest things not to be small.

If all sins must be repented of, Conclus. 3
then sins of knowledge and presumption: which are of two sorts.

1. When we attempt any thing above our own strength, not sensible of our
own weakness; which is, for the most part, punished with fearful falls, as
Peter. Never any Disciple fell so dangerously as he: for never any of them was
so presumptuous as he.

2. When we dare attempt a^ie thing against the truth and justice of God;
knowing his will, but run against it. Sometimes

1. Dreaming that God is made all of mercy; not so just as the Law says.

2. Because he holds his peace, we think him like our selves, and conceive
he will never punish.

3. Sometimes supposing we can repent when we will.

4. That howeuer he deal with others, yet he will not grow into such
displeasure with us: Hence we grow secure in sin.

These sins must be repented of, because they mightily prevail, Psalm. 1 9.

1. Sins against conscience waste the conscience, make great gashes, destroy
graces, grieve the spirit, sets a man's own best friend against him, that
is, his own conscience, which becomes a servant, a judge, a witness, and
executioner.

2. A mark of a wicked man, is to make league with hell, and death, and go on
in sin; and though the sword pass through the land, to cry Peace, Peace.

3. Great is the difference between the sins of godly and wicked: One sins
of weakness, the other of wickedness; one is drawn to sin violently, the
other runs willingly: the one sins against his purpose, the other
purposes sin; the one slippeth into sin, the other lies down, and walloweth
in it: the one slumbers, the other is in a dead sleep.

4. We must hasten out of presumptuous sins, because the sin against the holy
Ghost is of this kind of sins; though not every sin of presumption, and against
knowledge, and conscience, but such a presumption as renounceth the whole
Gospel, and that of set purpose and malice against the majesty of God, and of
Christ, Heb. 10.29.

If all sins, then sins of aggravating, Conclus. 4
or scandalous circumstances: as

1. Old and customable sins, which are grown strong and habitual, and need a
long and earnest Repentance to cut and break them off; and here especially our
oldest and strongest sin of all, the mother and nurse of all the rest, our
original corruption, had need be bewailed, being as a great wheel in a
clock, that sets all wheels a moving, while it seems to move slowest.

Yet not one of a hundredth takes this of all other in hand, as not seeing the
danger of it. But never did any truly repent, that begun not here, and first
conquered this master* esteeming it the most foul^, and hateful of all, as
David, Psalm 51. and Paul cries out of it, as most secret, deceitful,
powerful evil, Romans 7.

2. Sweet, pleasing, and profitable sins* the more pleasure thou have taken in
sin, the more shall thy sorrow be sooner or later, and shall know one day (but
the sooner, the better) that thy sweetest sin is a poison, or rats-bane, sweet
in going down: but forget the danger, and please thy palate a while, it shall
work in thy bowels, and bring death sure enough. If sin be not as a dagger at
the heart before, it shall after the commission. The profit of sin, is like
Achans wedge, it cost his life. Unhappy is that profit of the world, gotten by
the loss of the soul.

3. Sins of the godly after conversion, are greater than common men's.

1. They are committed against more grace, more means, more knowledge.

2. It is more noted, being in a greater light. David caused the enemies to
blaspheme, and the godly be ashamed because of sin.

3. There is great profession of love to God* and this cannot but work great
sorrow for offending him. Luke 7. The woman that had much forgiven her, loved
much; and so in Peter, he sorrowed bitterly, as his love was great.

4. The Lord takes sin more hainously at their hands, than any others; as a
father, abuse and dishonor from his son. Christ complains it was thou my
friend and familiar, (...).

4. Sins against mean^, against warning, admonition, vows, promises,
correction, much provoke the Lord to wrath. So Christ aggrauateth Judas his
sin, he has the greater sin. John 19. he not only knew my doctrine, saw my
miracles, but was warned. Peter after warning on Christ's part, and
protestations on his own, so fowly denying: Oh how the sin pricketh him, and
gives him no rest till he had met the Lord by Repentance!

Most sins of men in these days of light, are not for want of knowledge, but
against knowledge, admonition, and conscience; the sins of men are taught,
among whom the Gospel is still preached, and men follow with daily
instructions. All of them are against the vow and promise of Baptism, many of
them against special motions of spirit, against special promises, and vows
to God, either in time of affliction, or terror of conscience, or bodily
sickness, or coming to salvation, when men have resolved and promised a
change of life: All these are fearful sins, and have a loud voice, to call
either thee to repent, or God to revenge.

5 Sins of open profaneness. As,

1 Against holy times; swearing, whoring, drinking, gaming on the Sabbath day:
a time holy, wherein ordinary lawful actions are prohibited; as Iourneyes,
Markets, bying, selling, and every piece of ordinary calling.

2 Against holy places; profane thought^, speeches, actions in the Church and
house of God. The holier the place, the fouler the sin.

3 Against holy exercises, disgracing, reproching, and scorning the exercises
of Religion, Preaching, Hearing, Prayer, Singing in the family, and other godly
duties.

4 Against godly persons, and such as excel in virtue; reuiling godly men
under titles of Puritans, Hypocrites, factious, and troublers of the state.
Little know men the height of profaneness they are grown to in these sins,
nor what, nor whom they blaspheme, nor what a fierce plague of GOD hangs over
them, which nothing but timely Repentance can turn away. Let such therefore
try their Repentance, if the wickedness and profaneness of their hearts may
be forgiven them.

CAP. 8. Concerning the manner of entrance into Repentance.
THe third rule for the direction of our Repentance, concerns the manner of
it, and this both of 1 Entrance, 2 Proceeding.


1. For the right entrance into this duty, we must know that there can be no
true Repentance, without due preparation. Amos 4.12. Prepare to meet thy God, O
Israel. And in all divine duties, the rule is, Eccles. 5^6. Be not hasty with
thy feet, nor rash in thy mouth, but consider how thou must do a good thing
well.

In this preparation, remember,

1 Thy self, and thy own estate: For a man must return into himself, before
he can return to God. The prodigal Son, as he departed from his father, so
he departed from himself; and therefore before he returned to his Father, he
is said to be in se reuersus, he returned into himself. Esa. 46.8. Return
into your minds, O transgressors: implying, that sinners are as mad men, out
of their right minds, and must come into themselves again, before they be
well.

Now, in considering thy self, first, remember from what an happy estate thou
art fallen. Revel. 2.5. Remember whence thou art fallen, and repent: So the
Prodigal remembered from what an happy condition in his fathers house, he was
fallen.

2 Remember thy ways, and works see, and say how foolishly thou have done: so
David, I considered my ways, and turned my feet, Psalm. 119.59. proclaim
thine own folly, as David, I have done very foolishly: Ex lege agnitio
paccati, weigh thy sins in the Balance, not of crooked judgment, reason, or
affections, but of the law of GOD, which makes them exceed all the mountains
of the world in weight; for now must they needs press thee down to hell,
pouring on thy head all the curses written in that Book.

See them in the glass of the Gospel, committed against the blood of the
covenant, thou having done what thou can to make that of none effect. See in
them thy vile and abject condition, that durst commit such sins against God, to
abhor thy self with Job in dust and ashes.

3 Consider thy forlorn and cursed condition, till thou do repent: thou art
without GOD; he that sins, has neither seen God, nor knows him, John.
3.6.

Thou lie in a state wherein thou art not capable of Gods mercy, for God will
not be mencifull to that man, Deuteronomy. 29.120. Nay, he cannot, unless he can be
unjust in bestowing grace upon the contemners of grace. Say not God is
merciful* for his bounty would lead thee to Repentance; but the heart that
cannot repent, treasureth up wrath against the day, Romans 2. Yea, thou lie in
a state in which the Angel of the Lords wrath is ready to meet thee, as
Balaam, with death at every corner. Revel. 16.2. The Angel that powered out the
V^o^s of Gods wrath on the earth: the reason is given, because they repented
not of their works: and except ye repent, ye must perish everlastingly.

2 In this Preparation, remember with whom thou have to deal: Repentance is a
drawing near unto God, Iam. 4. Men draw near unto GOD many ways; by outward
profession, by inward faith and apprehension, by prayer and invocation, but
especially by Repentance and Conversion: therefore says James, Draw near to
God, cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and wash your hearts ye wavering minded:
for sin estrangeth, separateth, withdraws from God; but Repentance is a
returning to him, and striking a new league.

In this approach to God, it will notably set forward Repentance. If

1 Thou set him before thee, a God clothed with Majesty and honor: with
justice, and wrath against sin: this strikes the soul with an awful fear,
and dread of God, to make it stoop before him.

See we how the idolatrous person will cast himself on his face before his
idol: he will go barefoot, creep along as a worm from one end of the Church
to another, to get a kiss of it: and shall we approach the true God with so
little reverence, when they show so much to Idols? It is the fear of God that
diminishes the power of sin.

2 If thou set him before thee in the riches of his mercy, in providing so
excellent a remedy against sin, as is the precious blood of his dear Son,
when nothing in the world else would serve, 1. Pet. 1.10.

3 And now to set thy face toward God, as Daniel did, Da^. 9.2.

1 Implying a drawing of the mind from all other distractions and occasions,
as now having only to do with God, who in this duty requires the whole
heart, and the pouring out of the soul before him.

2 To testify that we are turned quite out of our selves, in whom is no help,
and depend only upon him for all supplies and mercy.

3 In this preparation, consider the necessity, benefit, and use of Repentance.

1 That nothing else can free us from the snare of the death in which we are
captives, 2. Tim. 2.9

2 Nothing else reconcileth us unto God, and restores us to his favor.

3 Nothing else corrects the corruption of nature, and returns into
innocence.

4 Nothing else renews our life and course, and makes us capable of
holiness, or happiness.

All this preparation is requisite; not only because of

2 If Daniel be not fit till he be prepared, much less we who have so many
distractions, so much earth, so dull spirits.

3 There is no comfort in doing the duty, but in the well and acceptable doing
of it: and never is it well performed, but when we are well prepared.

CAP. 9. Concerning the wise proceeding in Repentance.
2 THe wise proceeding in Repentance, stands in these things.

1 To begin the work within, with cleansing the heart. Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away
your transgressions, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit. For,

1 The heart is the fountain of actions; as that is, so are they: Out of the
abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks, the hand acts: If the heart be a
fusty vessel, the Lord will power none of his gracious liquor into it: As that
is, so is the whole man; If the root be naught, so are the branches, so are
the fruits.

2 This is the most compendious way: Wash the inside first, says Christ, and
all shall be clean. A vain and lost labor it is to offer to stop the
current of a stream, if you go not to the fountain: a vain thing in a
Gardener to cut off the tops of weeds, and leave the root, which fasteneth
it self so much the deeper: And therefore the Prophet David praying for the
grace of Repentance, Psalm. 51. Wash me, purge me; he tells the Lord where he
would have him begin, Create in me a new heart, and renew a right spirit.

2 Coming outwardly, begin with those master sins that are most rooted, and
have most foiled us: for as in an army, if the Generals and Captains be cut
off, the common soldiers are easily routed: so if our chiefest sins, which
have been Commanders, and borne most sway and rule in us, be mortified and
killed, the lesser sins will be more easily subdued and chased* 1. Sam. 17.51.
When the Philistim^ saw their Champion Goliath was dead, they fled. Blast and
pluck up the root, the branches and succors withers of themselves: Cut off
the right hand, right eye. Herod had bin in a fair way of Repentance, if he
could have begun with Herodias.

2. It is obseruable in the Scripture of most true penitents, that they begun
with the strongest sins. David begins with his Bathsabeh, and testifies a
notable Repentance, Psalm. 51. Saul once mastering his fury and rage in
persecuting, he shall quickly become a zealous Preacher. If we could see some
men lay aside their malice and hatred of good men (which is a strong snare of
the devil) we would hope to see them forward and loving, and join themselves
with such as walk in the ways of God.

Zacheus once mastering his pilling, and polling, and covetous catching after
the world, becomes a notable example of a true penitent. So could we see a
worldling, an usurer, an oppressor, once give up his covetousness, we should
expect any good thing from them. We should hope to see them diligent in Gods
house, which now, in the week day, they think a loss of time. We should see
them restoring as fast as they fetched in; we should see them as liberal to
Gods worship, and good uses, as they have been basely griple. We should see
them as merciful, and charitable, as they have been cruel, and unmerciful.
We should see with Covetousness, the root of all evil, all the boughs and
branches fall.

Till this be done, never say thou have repented of any sin: for he never
repented of any sin, whose master-sin is alone, is spared, and unrepented.

3. In wise proceeding, when thou have begun with any sin, go through stitch
with it; not only to the shaking of the root, but to the vnrooting, and casting
it out of the ground: for

1. In all true Repentance, there is a clearing of ones self, 1. Cor. 7.11. in
our rotten frame and building, it will not leave a stone upon a stone.

2. To find mercy there must be confessing and forsaking, Pro 28.

3. The profession of every true penitent must be that of Paul, I was a
blasphemer, I was an oppressor, but now God has showed mercy. I am no such
man now.

Now all this will not be done, but by earnest endeavor: slighting and
slubbring of this business, leaves men in the suddes they were in before: as

Some dally with their sins, and semble a repentance as men that join, do a
fight. Perhaps they will this time of year come to confession, and seem very
penitent; and having confessed, think themselves eased: but it is as a
drunkard, by vomiting, that he may drink more: so these to go fresh to drink
in sin again.

Some will swear and curse, and say, God forgive me, you make me swear; and
swear as fast by and by again. But these roots of sin remain.

Some pressed by Gods hand, force a Repentance, and make many confessions and
promises; but after return, are as fresh to sin, as a dog to vomit, or the
horse to the smell of his dung. Here is no parting with sin: Well may he
say, I was a swearer, drunkard, a tippler, an hater of God, and so am I still
for all my dissembling Repentance. I was never other, nor like to be.

4. In this wise proceeding, rest not in the rooting out of sin, till thou
see the rooting, and growth of the contrary grace: for in all true
Repentance, is a change in the judgment from error to truth, in the will from
evil to good, in the whole man from darkness to light. Thou can show no
Repentance, if thou can not show this change.

True Repentance makes a man clean contrary unto himself, and changes him
into a clean other man. His whole nature is changed from a corrupt and
carnal, into a spiritual nature. In nature an Ethiopian cannot change his
color, but grace changes nature: of a bramble, he becomes a vine, of a
thorn, a fig tree, of a wild, a natural olive, of a lion, a lamb, of a
dog under board, a son sitting at table, of a Saul, a Paul. He is changed in
all his parts and members; they were, as swords and spears, weapons of
unrighteousness and fierceness against God, and good men, now are turned into
sythes and mattocks, weapons of grace, and instruments of common good in time
of peace.

His whole course is changed; of a lover of sin, he is be come a loather of
sin, and lover of grace: of a receiver and deceiuer, it makes Zacheus a
restorer, and charitable destributer. Of one thirsting after the blood of
Saints, it makes Saul thirst now after their salvation. Of a waster of the
Lords talent, it makes him increase it.

Let not thy soul deceive thee in thy Repentance, except it have brought thee
thus far to express the contrary grace. Solomon could not satisfy himself
with his Repentance of those foul sins of lust, till he had written his book
of Repentance: nor Augustine, till he had written his book of Retractations:
nor Cranmer, till he had burned his unworthy right hand.

Trust not thy Repentance for wantonness and uncleanness, unless as the
woman, Luke 7. who had abused her eyes, her hair and lips to folly, she
gave her lips to kiss his feet, her eyes to wash them, and her hair to dry
them. Thou must express Humility, Modesty, and Repentance, in members most
abused. David polluting his bed, washes it with tears.

Trust not thy Repentance for covetousness, usury, briberie, without
restitution, as Zacheus, without expression of charity, mercifulness to the
poor, and without free, and liberal dispensing to pious and godly uses.

Has thine house been a profane house, a gaming house, an house of swearing,
riot, and disorder? thou have not repented, though these things be left, if
thou have not reformed it unto a house of prayer. Have thou bin an enemy, or
no friend to Gods servants, and service? thou have not repented in putting off
thy malice, unless thou have put on loving affections, and expressest love
above the former hatred.

Have thou sinned in disgracing and reuiling the servants of God, and
professors of the Gospel, casting on them the com^mon terms of hypocrites,
puritans? thou have never repented, if thou do not justify, and defend them,
and right them in their names, and godly practices: and so in all others sins.
True Repentance will not only undo what is ill done, but will set up with both
hands what it has plucked down; it will now see God have his glory, and men
their right. I conclude with 1. John 3.7. Let none deceive you, let none
deceive himself, he that does righteousness, is righteous, as he is
righteous.

CAP. 10. Concerning the time of Repentance, both of 1. Possibility, 2.
Necessity.
THe fourth rule of direction concerning the time of repentance, for the time,
is either of 1. Possibility, 2. Necessity.


The time of Possibility is, the whole time of this life, and only the time
of this life. Except ye repent, while ye live here, ye shall perish eternally.

God gives every man a space Reas. ^.
to repent in, as ^^zabel, Reu. 2.21. that is, the space of this life; and any
time of this life the Lord may give repentance. 2. Tim. 2.25. waiting at any
time. Mat. 5.25. Agree in the way.

2. After this life can be no Repentance, for these reasons.

1. Because there is no faith that cease. The tree cut down, no fruit can
grow any more: Repentance is a fruit of Faith.

2 Because the acts and parts of repentance are only for this life. These are:
1. Mortification, godly sorrow, Christian combat^. 2. Renouation, growth in
grace, strife to perfection.

All these are by death abolished: no more tears, fight, no more imperfection,
no more molestation of sin; but victory and perfection attained.

3. After death is nothing but judgment. Heb, 9.27. there is a resting from
labor of repentance, no more working, no more washing, no Purgatory, no more
oil may be gotten after the door is shut, no more place for Repentance is to
be found being at the ways end; Repentance is the way of life.

This consideration calls us to the speedy undertaking of Repentance, even
while this frail and uncertain life lasts; for who has a lease of his
life, but for so few years as Hezekiah? Thou may dream of many years, as
the glutton did, when that night his soul was taken, and he called a fool,
and so proved.

Nature teaches to take the time allotted for all other things; the husba^dma^
to sow while seedtime lasts, to make Hay while the sun shines; the
Merchant to buy and trade, while the Fair lasts; the Sea man to take time
and wind, which stays for no man: the Smith to strike while the iron is hot;
the Soldier to fight while the battle continues: yea, the very Storke, and
Crane, and Swallow, to know their appointed time, Ierem. 8.7. and should not
grace teach men to repent while they live?

Object. Yes, God forbid but we should; but when dying day comes, etc.

Answ. Would thou repent on thy dying day? why then not every day of thy
life, seeing every day may be thy dying day? and why does thy folly not esteem
it so? 1. Pet. 1.17.

2 The time of necessity is the whole time of our life; the whole life being
but one day of Repentance, and ought to be begun, continued, and concluded
with Repentance. This General we will take asunder into these propositions.

1 The first thing a Christian must do, is to Repent.

1 Look at God; his commandment, is, First seek the Kingdom of God; To day,
hear his voice, Psalm. 95.7. Exhort one another while it is called to day, Heb.
3.13. Eccles. 12.1.

2 His spirit will be more grieved to morrow, and stand further from our help
and comfort, and the more he is grieved, the hardlier will he be entreated.

3 His patience is more abused by refusing the means of our Repentance this
day: by slighting his voice, calling us, his stretching out his hand this day
offering grace, and by not listening to the knockes and raps at the door of
our hearts.

4 His wrath will be more increased by the increase of our sin this day before
to morrow; and being provoked, may justly give up the sinner to a heart that
cannot repent. Were it not just, that seeing he calls, and they will not
hear, that either he should be dumb, and never call hereafter, or God deaf,
never to hear thee call? If thou that wilt not repent at Gods call and
command, should not find Repentance to be at thy call and command; live
forgetful of God, and dye forgetful of thy self.

2 Look at our selves, and see if Repentance had not need be thy first task.
For,

1 Before Repentance, a man is an evil tree, and an evil tree can bring no
good fruit; thou can not pray, nor be heard in prayer; thou can not hear,
nor receive Sacraments, but to damnation, nor perform any duty of piety or
charity acceptably, till thou have repented: If thou have any thing to do with
God, or any expectation from him, thou must first wash and cleanse thy self,
and then come and reason with him, Isa. 1.

2 If thou be not apt, or willing to repent to day, thou will be less apt
to morrow: for the heart will be more hardened, the conscience more seared, the
will more crooked, the conversion more difficult, corruption more rooted by
continuance, the nail ha^der driven in, the soul more deadly stung, thy self
furre weaker, to get out of silme, in all which regards, thou can not
undertake Repentance too soon.

3 Look upon sin, and whether we had not need deal with it at first: for sin
is like fire set into our house to burn us up; who but a mad man would not
bestir himself with all speed to quench it in the first spark, or breaking
out, before it be increased to a great slame? should we not be as careful for
our souls as for out houses?

It is morbus natura, we are wise to take our bodily diseases in hand betime,
because the medicine is prepared too late, when the disease has prevailed by
continuance. It is the plague of the soul, for which the Physicians prescribe.

2 Sin by continuance grows more in number, and more in strength; it is still
ingendring, and grows more fruitful: one sin is a link to another, drawing
that, and one sin must maintain another. Ahab must maintain his covetousness
by murder, Gehesi^ one by another; David his adultery by murder: Solomon from
carnal whoredom, to spiritual: Herod maintaining incest, must cut off John's
head: Sin grows stronger after the birth, and as a plant of the devils
planting. Take it when it is new set, it may be plucked up easily, but let it
grow to a tree, no struggling can pluck it up, nor many blows strike it down.

Sin is strong in the cogitation, stronger in affection, most in action and
heart.

4 Look upon Repentance, and there is a twofold Repentance, that is seldom
true.

1 Late Repentance: for then commonly sin leaves us, not we sin; and when
Repentance lives not with us, commonly it dies with us: and what thank is it
to leave the world, when the world leaves him, and casts him off? When
weakness hinders him to sin, we must thank his weakness, not him,
says Basil.

2 Forced Repentance, when men in distress of body, or mind, or fear of
death, pretend a Repentance; will promise, pray, vow, or do any thing: but the
fear is scarce over, but so is their Repentance* then returns the unclean
spirits with seven worse than himself; and now running from God, God is gone
further off, than before; and a thousand to one never returns again.

O therefore is the delay so dangerous? is neither the day of thy life, nor the
day of grace certain? is the present day late enough? may the next day be too
late? how dare thou cast thy Repentance into thy last accounts, which ought
to be the first work of every Christian? how dare thou defer it beyond
this day, and hazard to lose that in one moment, which can never be hoped or
gained afterward?

Let every eye behold Christ mourning over him, as over Jerusalem: Oh that thou
had in this day known the things of thy peace! but these things are hid
from thine eyes: A wise man may slip, or fall into a pit, but he is a mad man
that will not rise out again.

2 As Repentance must be the first, so it must be the constant and daily
exercise of every Christian, who must esteem his whole life, a continual
Repentance.

We sweep our houses every day, Reason 1
but the houses of our hearts have more need, because of the soil and dust of
our daily infirmities: Our hands have daily need of washing, our hearts much
more.

2 As the blood runs through all the veins, and is necessary to carry life
and spirit through all the parts: so Repentance must run through all the
occasions of the day: all which call us to repent. For

1 We are bound to the daily sacrifice and service of God; which cannot be
performed without Repentance. Come before God without Repentance, all is one as
if thou cut off a dogs head, or offer swines flesh.

2 Our daily failing calls us to daily repentance; we go over daily frailties,
many yielding to temptations, many rouing thoughts, idle speeches, many sinful
actions of bad and scandalous examples, many secret sins not easily found out,
many sinful defects cleaving to our best duties; every one of these call us to
a constant practice of Repentance in examination, confession, watchfulness,
mortification, etc.

3 Many are the daily troubles of our callings, many afflictions meet us; many
crosses befall us in our family, in our estate, in our friends; many
afflictions upon the Church and land we hear of: every of these have a loud
voice to summon us to daily Repentance: for man suffers for his sin; and
remove the cause, the effect will cease.

4 We stand in need of daily blessings and new favors, and these call on us to
renew our Repentance daily, for else our sins will hinder good things from us:
either we must remove them, or they will remove Gods mercies from us; and
instead of blessings, cast us into perils and dangers every moment.

For time, Repentance is also the last duty of a Christan which he must
principally intend. Rule 3.
For.

1 All natural motion is swifter to the Center, and so supernatural: every
sound grace is most stirring at last, and this especially, because Satan is
most stirring in temptation, and so in his last act is most troublesome; and
therefore Repentance must be most busy in thrusting down the last powers
raised against it.

2 In sickness, sorrow, and approach of death, is great cause of sight, sense,
and godly sorrow for sin, the mother of them. Now is a time of humiliation,
mortification, so that now the worst can dissemble a Repentance, and therefore
now true Repentance cannot but above all times show it self.

3 The less time that grace sees it has to work in, the more stirring and
working it will be; only grieved that it has not more, and cannot more
glorify God: and as friends parting* when they take their last farewell, they
desire to take their fill one of another; so the Saint^ being to bid farewell
to godly sorrow, are willing to take their fill of it.

4 What is it else thou would have thy Master find thee doing at his
coming, but so doing? and what else has the promise of blessedness? and what
servant else, but he whom the Master finds so doing?

Now the way to do it well at last, is to exercise it well before hand, else
it will hardly and ^unglingly come off: but what a man does customably, and
habitually, is done easily, cunningly, and comfortably. Nothing but the
dispatch of this business makes life sweet and desirable. Nothing else
affords peace with God, part in Christ, quietness of conscience; but the
comsort of sound Repentance, without any of which, life is no better than death.

Nothing but this can allay the fears and bitterness of death: How can the
evil servant but fear to be called to accounts, that has never made them
ready? How can the condemned Pellon but fear the assizes, who never looked
after pardon?

But why should the soul fear to go forth to God, when it knows it is
reconciled to him? what need he fear sudden death, who is ever prepared? When
a malefactor has sued out his pardon, let the assizes come when they will, the
sooner the better: Never will that soul fear to go to Christ, that is in
Christ; nay, it will desire it, because it is best of all.

CAP. 11. Let^s of Repentance in respect of sin.
THe second thing propounded

The more excellent any duty or grace is, the more difficulty there is in
attaining it; and Repentance being of all graces the first and leader, we must
not think it easy to come by. God seeing it in our nature, lightly to set by
things we easily come by, has set a price upon his best blessings, that we
might prize them: and is not so prodigal of them, as to cast them upon
sleepers, and sloathfull persons, that think them worth no pains nor labor.

And Satan hangs such weight on our corruption, and by his policy and power,
so cloggeth and blocketh up the way to this grace, as very few are able and
willing to encounter with so many Glants, and Hydraes, and to undertake so many
Herculean labors and difficulties, as he must go through, that means to
go through stitch with sound Repentance.

Though therefore men unacquainted with repentance, think it the easiest thing
in the world; an hours work, or dispatched with three words, Lord have mercy:
yet never any true Penitent found it so easy, but the hardest task in all the
world: and he that comes in earnest to it, must cast his costs, and consider
whether he be able to drink of this cup, or no.

We shall find it no small labor to reckon, and discover these hindrances;
and much less is he to find it so, that is to grapple with them, and conquer
them.

These lets being so many, may be prosecuted under four heads, being cast in
our ways, either by sin, or the world, or satan, or our selves.

1 In respect of sin we have sundry lets, 1. love of sin, 2. seeming profit,
3. appearance of pleasure, 4. a kind of credit in sin.


1. The love of sin rises from the nearness, long acquaintance, and
familiarity with us, it being bred and born with us, at board and bed with us,
as near and dear as our eyes and hands unto us. And this disordered love of
sin, makes us hate and loath all means, which might work us to dislike and
forsake it. So our Savior tells us, John 3.19. Men love darkness because
their deeds are evil. This love of darkness, of sin, makes men loath the
grace of Repentance.

Now to remove this let, consider:

1. To love sin is to hate the Lord. Psalm. 97.10. All ye that love the Lord
hate all that is evil: therefore love of evil will not stand with love of God.
Every grace is active against the contrary.

2 To love sin is to love death. Genesis 2.17. In the day thou sinnest thou shall
dye: And to hate his own soul. Pro. 8.35. He that sins against me, hates
his own soul: And all that hate me love death, Pro. 11.19.

3 A child of God cannot but hate his own sin; he hates the evil he does,
and is far from allowing himself in it, Romans 7.

Yea, abhors himself in dust and ashes for his sin, Job. 42.6.

4 Yea, we shall find all the affections of the godly set against sin.

1 His sorrow is chiefly for his sin. We read not that Peter ever wept so
bitterly for any suffering, as he did for his sin: nothing is so contrary to
godly sorrow, as sinful joy.

2 His fear watches against sin, and flies sin as a serpent, yea the
occasion and appearance
of it.

3 His shame is most for his sin. The Publican is ashamed to look toward
heaven; and the Prodigal ashamed to look to his fathers house.

5. Grace wheresoever it is, resolves against all sin, voweth against all; he
will work no iniquity, Psalm. 119.2. he will with full purpose of heart cleave
unto the Lord; he renueth a daily purpose of not sinning, of banishing sin, and
conquering it.

2 In sin is a seeming profit, which the sinner is loath to let go.

The Usurer will not part from his gainful and unlawful trade: the Buyer and
Seller will not lay aside their oaths and lies, their sleights and deceits, by
false wares, weights, lights, and an hundred devices to deceive.

The Non-resident will not part with his gainefull sin, though it be the
price of a thousand of souls.

The Lawyer, the concealing and hiding of truth, which he ought to open. They
cannot live if they should.

To conquer this Let, consider,

1 That no man can establish himself by iniquity, Pro. 12.3. What stabilitie
is in that house, which is founded in water, and underpropped with kindled
firebrarnds? Could Saul stablish his house, by founding it in disobedience, and
underpropping it with persecuting David? No, it falls on his own head, and
crusheth and hides all his posterity in the ruins of it.

Could Jeroboam stablish his house, or confirm the kingdom to it, by devising
the trick of the two Calves at Dan and Bethel?

Can a sick man gain his health by drinking a strong poison? Such is the
gain of him, that will assure his state by sin.

2 All is not gain that is gotten by sin; no man can reckon it for clear
gain: for there is no gain, but the loss is far greater: for

1 In sinful gain is a loss of grace; faith and dependence upon God is gone.
Thou leanest on a reed, make a wedge of gold thy hope. Better had it bin to
have begd thy bread, than lost thy faith.

There is a loss of good conscience: And better had it been to have cast
ouer-board all that ill-gotten goods, than made shipwreck of a good
conscience. And what comfort to have thy house full of goods, when thy
conscience tells thee, they have a bad master?

2 What gained Balaam, Judas, Ananias and Saphira, when by seeking unlawful
gain, by cursing, betraying, lying, they lost their lives for their labors?

3 What gain, or profit is it for a man, to win the whole world, and lose
his own soul? Or what recompense shall he give? Here is not only a certain,
but an irrecouerable loss.

4 What gain, or profit shall he find, when the curse of God blows upon
the state so ill gotten? which makes it as a fire to consume the rest, if any
be better gotten than other. As Ahab when for Naboths Vineyard he lost his
whole kingdom: or sometimes the curse of God raises an unthrifty heir, who
shall lavish it, and as wickedly waste it, as ever it was wickedly gotten.

And how can it be, but the curse must accompany that wealth, for which men
fall down to the Devil and worship him, on which condition only he enricheth
them?

3 The only true gain is to gain Christ, in comparison of whom all things are
dross and dung, Phil. 3. the gain of godliness, 1. Tim. 6. The gain of true
wisdom is better than that of gold, prove. 3.13. a better and more enduring
substance, Heb. 10.34. A treasure in heaven worth selling all, as Christ to the
young man: An undeceivable wealth, not consumed with use, but increased; not
left on earth, but carried to heaven: a wealth for which the Saints willingly
endured the spoiling of their goods, because they knew they had a better
substance.

3 In sin is an appearance of pleasure, and every sinner is loath to change
the sweetness of sin, with the sower and tart seed of Repentance and
mortification; loath is the sinner to let the sweet morsel go from under his
tongue, Job 23.12. whence it is that we see so few drunkards, fornicators,
worldlings, wantons, gamsters, playhaunters are so seldom reclaymed, and won
to Repentance.

To remove this let, consider

1 That sin the more delightful, the more dangerous it is; as Sampson in
Dalilahs lap, the more pleasing the more pernicious: for as the eues they set
upon men, and rob, and wound their souls; and usually ease slays the sinner,
as in the Proverbs. Which was the Apostles argument, 1. Pet. 2.11. Abstain
from fleshly lusts, for they fight against the soul, though they seem never so
familiar and friendly. First, they chase away fear of evil to come. Amos 6.1.
They that are at ease in Sion, put far off the evil day. Matthew. 14.39. The
old world, set upon pleasure, knew nothing till the flood came.

Secondly, they thrust out pleasures of the world to come; they make a man
delight more in the Devils books, Cards and Dice, than in Gods; in gathering
money than in gathering grace, make their Hawks and Dogs more chargeable than
Gods poor members.

Thirdly, they bind a man a willing slave, and like the harlot, their hands
are as bands to hold them fast in the snare; as Herod can make shift against
many sins, but his Herodias.

2 The sweetness of sin is as the sweetness of poison, only sweet in the
mouth, poison in the belly. Prove* 5.4. Stolen bread is sweet, but the dead are
there; sweet only in committing, bitter in the account and reckoning: and this
last dish will spoil the feast. Let wisdom set thine eye upon the future
misery, which is as the sour sauce to the sweetness; and were the sweetness
of sin a true pleasure, what folly were it to buy a broken and momentany
pleasure, with endless pain; to prefer an empty joy above fullness of joy;
the pleasures of Gods left hand, above the pleasures of his right hand; a drop
of pleasure, above a river of mercy and glory?

3 Nothing can be more contrary to the state of Grace, than a life led in
pleasures: The Widow living in pleasure, is dead while she lives: noted for a
course of the vngenerate, Tit. 3.3. serving diverse lusts and pleasures, and it
is a brand of a foolish course. Eccles. 7.6. The heart of the fool is in the
house of mirth.

Let us account it therefore an high wisdom: first,

To discover other matters of pleasures, such as are the souls delight. The
way of wisdom is the way of pleasure, Prou. 17. Oh that we knew what
pleasures are in peace of conscience, joy of holy Ghost, what a solace it is to
be a son of God, an inhabitant of heaven, to live by faith!

2 To exchange these broken, worme-eaten, and poysonfull pleasures of sin for
a season, with the pleasures of Gods house, of Gods spirit, and of Gods right
hand for evermore.

In sin is a kind of credit and glory which the sinner is loath to let go:
The fourth Let.
as the Gallant^ and Great ones that must not put off any of their proud
fashions or tyres; nor must not be behind any of their fantastical disguises
of the times. And our Roisters, Swearers, Swashbucklers, cannot be thought men
of great spirit or place, if they should not despise the baseness, and
pusill^nimity of Repentance, and humble carriage of Christianity.

Against this Let, consider:

1 To glory in sin, is to glory in a man's own shame; as if a man should glory
to wallow as a swine in his own dung, or as if a thief should pride himself
in his fetters which hold him fast to his execution. Phil. 3.19. The Apostle
spoke of such as gloried in their shame; that is, whereof they might, and ought
to have been ashamed, and whereof they should be afterward ashamed* What will
be the end of that glory, that fights against the glory of God? 2. Sam. 2.30.

2 Sin unrepented of, makes a man the basest slave and drudge of all men; it
makes him a slave to the devil, a drudge in the basest services of flesh and
lusts: with more reason might the basest slave in the Turkish Galleyes, glory
of his freedom, and honor: Will thou be great in sin? thou shall be great
in plagues, great in sorrow, in torment.

3 Sin can draw no credit but from persons of no worth or reckoning. What
credit for a Rebel or Traitor to get applause among his accomplices, and be well
thought of among such condemned Rebels as himself, while they are all going to
an infamous and cruel death, hated of the King, and despised of all good
subjects, and the whole state in which they lived?

4 As godliness is the truest gain, so it is the truest greatness and honor:
for is it not the truest greatness, to be great in Gods favor and love?

To be godly, is to be great, great in the Court of heaven, great in blood and
alliance, (...) in present estate, greater in ex^spectation, great in place and
privileges* If therefore thou seek great things for thy self, seek grace,
seek precious faith, holiness, hope; especially, seek true humility: for he
that will be greatest, must be least, least in himself; and he that is so,
will be least in sin: And suppose piety and grace carry reproach and contempt
in the world: yet faith sees it recompensed with everlasting honor and glory
in the life to come.

CAP. 12. Lets of Repentance from the world.
THe second sort of Lets of Repentance, are from the world, which is a
perilous sea, wherein some Christians escape drowning, but none danger; some
escape shipwreck, but none hazard. And the greater and more dangerous is this
enemy, because, she betrayeth us as Judas with a kiss; not coming in hostile
manner, being always an enemy, but sometimes as a friend: sometimes hyring us
to sin with great wages, as Balaam was carried with wages of unrighteousness,
to curse the people of God: sometimes inticeth us to sin, holding before our
eye, an apple fair to the eye, as Eve: or a wedge of gold, as Achan.

2 Our selves without great watch, yea with it, are easily carried away,
because of the league that is between the world, and our corrupt nature; all
our affections and thoughts, and courses, naturally tending world-ward: further
than they are weighed up with much strength of grace.

3 Yea, we see men of much grace cast back by the world, and the very
Disciples themselves shall stand sometimes striving for superiority, and to be
somewhat in the world, when they should have minded other business: And why
does the world cast such a number of lets to hinder Repentance, and reach at
those that are at the side of Christ, but because in every one that repents,
she loses a limb or member?

Now the Lord seeing our danger by this masked enemy, has charged us, that
whatsoever love the world makes to us, we must not bestow our love upon it:
for then the love of the Father cannot be in us, 1. Ioh. 2.11. but arm our
selves against it, as an arch-enemy to us in the way of grace, and stand out
against it unto victory, and that in the strength of our head, who has bidden
us be of good comfort, because he has overcome the world, both for himself,
and all us his members.

There be four great impediments cast in our way by the world to hinder
Repentance, and the exercise of godliness.

First, fear of contempt and reproach from the world: secondly, a forsaking of
friends; thirdly, fewness of sound godly men; fourthly, multitude of contrary
examples.

1 The great rub of all from the world, is that general contempt powered upon
Professors and practices of piety, which is a general Let: insomuch as our
Savior pronounced that man blessed, that is not offended in him; and once
asked his Disciples, if they would also go away with others.

2 This was a strong Let and stumbling block; which laid in the way, hindered
many Rulers from following Christ, and from professing that, whereof their
conscience was convinced, Ioh. 12.43. Because they feared contempt from their
consorts, and loved the praise of men, more than the praise of GOD. What else
hindered and deferred the Repentance of Nichodemus, and cast his coming to
Christ into the night?

3 It strikes at that which nature is very tender over: for who would
willingly cast himself into so contemptible a condition, as that of men
forward in Religion? who would be pointed at for singularity? who would not
shun the nicknames cast upon godliness? or who but would be loath to be
thought of the Preciser sort? who would be at such a pass, to have his
Religion judged hypocrisy; his christian prudence, censured as crafty policy;
his godly simplicity, esteemed silliness and folly: his zeal, madness; his
frugality, couetousness; his bounty, wastfulnesse; his resolute obedience to
Gods law, no better than rebellion to the Princes; his contempt of the world* a
silly carelessness; his godly sorrow, melancholy? how hard is it to be so
misconstrued in every thing?

Now for removing of this Let,

1 Look to Christ, and thou shall find Christ and his Cross inseparable.

2 It were strange if the world that hates Christ himself, should not hate
his Disciples. Ioh. 15.18. If the world hated you, it hated me before you.

3 Cannot the wisdom, innocence, and holiness of Christ, fence him from the
scorns and mockes of the world, and can thine fence thee* Did they deal thus
with the green tree, and will they not with the dry? Durst they call the
master Be^lzebub, and will the servant look to be better than his master?

4 How base and vile was he content to be for thee?

2 Look to the world, and consider that it were strange if the world should
not hate those that are called out of the world: Is it a strange thing that
they speak evil of them, that will not into the same excess of riot with
them?

3 Look at thy self, and consider

Whether if thy person and ways please God, the world will not be displeased
with both.

2* What fence have thou above other of the Lords holy ones? were not the
Prophets reputed Rebels, to States and Princes? was not the happy tidings of
salvation in the Apostles mouths* counted seditious doctrine and novelties?
was not John Baptists abstinence and sober manner of living, esteemed
melancholic; yea, devilish austerity? was not Mary's love and bounty to
Christ, counted wastfulnesse? nay, our Lords gentleness and meekness with
sinners, was it not called boon companionship, and himself for it a glutton,
a companion of sinners?

3 Look at thine own secret worth, that art an humble Christian, and comfort
thy self in it for the time. A Prince in a strange Country unknown, is
content with homely usage: for he knows his own worth, so do not they: And
a secret rich man is well pleased with his wealth, and willingly concealeth it
from others: So the godly and humble soul may be well contented, that he is
rich in God, and rich in Grace, and in an honorable and happy estate, though
all men take no notice of it.

Though the world judge according to the outward appearance, because it knows
not the Father, nor yet the love of God: Neither is this the time when they
must appear what they are: yet mis-iudge not thine own happiness for the
present, though it appear not; for did the honor of the Saints appear, all
the sheaues would bow to theirs; and all the Nobility, and glory of the earth,
were but vanishing shadows, and as Jonas his withering Gourd before them: Yea,
I suppose, the glory of the least Believer, when it shall appear, shall darken
the glory of the Sun.

4 What an happy service is it if thy dishonor can bring any honor to God and
his truth. As Luther of Moses body, so I say of thy name, Let it dye and be
buried, stink, and rot, and let no man know where it lies, so as the name of
Christ may be magnified by thy life or death.

Be content then if the sons of men turn thy glory into shame: if it be vile
to be humble before and for the Lord, be yet more vile.

5 Consider whether the work of grace get strength in thee, whereby thou art
crucified to the world and the world to thee. whether can thou co^temn the
contempt of the world, and despise the glory of it, esteeming it in comparison
of Christ dung and dross? A man that is dead, or crucified, is in such an
estate as he cares not for all the pomp and glory of the world, neither does
he fear that the world can judge him lower than he is: so a man crucified
with Christ is dead to the world, and the world cannot cast him lower than he
has cast himself.

4 Consider that the scorn and reproach for Christ, which is causeless, is
indeed the present crown of glory, set upon the head of a Christian. And
though the world knows not Christ if he come not with a crown of gold, yet
faith spieth more honor in the crown of thorns, both on his own, and on the
heads of his members; and reioiceth more in the cross of Christ, than in all
the world besides. Christ crucified is a Christians only glory, Gal. 6.19.

5 Seeing there is no man but must be contemned, let us choose rather the
contempt for well-doing, than the contempt for sin. A man must either be
contemned here of the world, or hereafter of God. Now whether is more eligible,
to be rejected of evil men, or of the Son of God? Surely nothing can cast such
dung in the face of a man as his sin unrepented, unpardoned. This makes him
contemptible to God, to good Angels, good men even here; and there abides an
eternal contempt for sin and sinners hereafter, as it is Dan. 12.

Whereas if godliness draw on the hatred of wicked men, this is abundantly
recompensed with the love of God and of the Saints; which is not temporary, as
is their hatred, but everlasting and endless. And what need a wise man to care
for the hatred of abject scullions, and base gally-slaues, if he can retain
the favor of the Prince, the Nobles and best men in the land?

A second great let of Repentance Luke 9.61. who would feign follow Christ, but
he must first bid them farewell that are at his house; and this is so long a
doing, that we hear no more of him: So every natural man has many friends in
the world, many welwillers, and sundry to whom he is engaged and much
beholding, and he is loath to part companies, and bid them farewell. Now if he
begin to repent, he must bid a number of these friends adieu, and farewell much
of that which formerly he called good fellowship and merry company* these will
not go in his way, and he must not go in theirs.

Ans. To this let, first, If the business of Repentance break off that
fellowship, which wicked men make works of darkness, and pleasures of sin,
such as is drunkenness, swearing, revelling, stage plays, masking, may-games,
carding, dicing, frothy or foul communication and the like; what can be a
higher praise of godliness, than to cut off such ungodly fellowship, of which
sin is the only knot and band?

But as for Christian fellowship in lawful and joyful meetings in the fear
of God; as the ancient Christians believed, conuersed, eat, and drank, and
rejoiced together, Acts 2. Godliness and piety establishes such, so it
rectifieth and sweetneth society, and makes it truly fruitful and profitable.
It only forbids that merriment which is not in the Lord, and the mirth which
Solomon calls madness, when men are never so merry as when God is farthest
off, as mad men sing when their bands increase.

2 To walk in the way of repentance, is not to lose friends; for let a man's
ways please the Lord, he makes his very enemies become his friends, Pro.
16.7. This is the way to get and keep sound friends, and friendship: It is he
alone that can contemper iron and clay to a mixture; he can make the wolf and
the lamb, the Bear and the Calfe, the Lion and the Ox feed peaceably
together; Esa 11. For as he that is confederate with a King, is at peace with
all his subjects, so he that confederateth and enters league with God, shall
so far forth find men frie^dly as may stand 1. with Gods wisdom, 2. with
exception of the cross, 3. with promotion of his own salvation.

And what wise man would choose to live out of Gods favor for man's, yea for
wicked men's? As Elkanah said to Hannah, Am I not better than ten sons? so may
the Lord, Am not I better than ten thousand friends?

3 To walk humbly before God, is not to lose friends, but to exchange those
that are covert enemies under the habit of friends, for true friends indeed:
and to break from such friends is to get God thy friend and father, Christ thy
friend and brother, the Angels thy friends and guardians, the godly thy friends
and fellow members, thine own conscience thy friend, yea as a thousand friends
and witnesses for thee: And these are friends worth having. As for other
friends, who draw thee aside from obedience to God, say to them as Christ to
Peter, dissuading him from suffering, Get thee behind me Satan: and as David,
Away ye wicked, for I will keep the commandments of my God, Psalm. 119.115.

4 Grace teaches a godly man to have the same friends and enemies that God
has, because of the covenant and league now stricken between them. Psalm.
139.31. But

1 See the hatred be carried against vices not persons, lest we sin against
the precept of loving our neighbor.

2 See to the purity of our affections, that they be not private, but set
upon Gods glory; nor as they be our enemies, but Gods.

3 Let no relation between any man and us, neither in high nor low place,
cause us to betray Gods cause and truth; but let it be dearer to us than our
own peace, profit, yea our lives themselves.

CAP. 13. Lets of Repentance from the paucity of true penitents in the world.
THe third let of Repentance cast in our way by the world is the fewness and
paucitie of sound godly men. In the world we see Repentance and sound
godliness practiced but by a few, and every unregenerate man has an
unwillingness to row against the stream of time, the age and customs of men;
so that most will do as the most do, that the fewest may scorn them; and the
most common reproach cast upon Religion, is, They be but a few sorry fellows
that profess it.

Ans. To remove this let,

1 We must know that the number of faithful Christians, that stick close unto
Christ, are but a small number, and as small in worldly reputation, for four
reasons:

1 The true Church of God is a little park or pickle of God, empaled from the
rest of the world; a garden enclosed, Cant. 4.12. a paradise of God, not the
waste of the world; a fold, not a field: It is the floor of Christ, in which
are a little wheat in an huge heap of chafe, a little gold in a whole
mountain of clay or dross, a gleaning after a harvest, a few berries after
the vintage: so the members of the Church are but few, compared with the heap
of wicked men. Gods company was always a little flock, Luke 12.32. The number
of Gods company are said to be one of a City, and two of a Tribe, Ier. 3.14.
As if in a great inundatio^ of water, which carries away whole towns or
countries, some one or two houses or persons should escape: or as if in a raging
and universal fire devouring a whole City, one or two houses should be left
standing.

2 Consider how few are chosen. Matthew. 20.17. few are to be saved: If Israel
were as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant only should be saved, Romans 9.^9. As
a Tradesman having cut off the whole piece of cloth, a small remnant is
remaining: so the true professors of Christ are a very small remnant of the
whole piece and people of the world. Revel. 12.10. It is called the remnant of
the woman's seed; that is, as a little seed corn is reserved out of a great
heap for store, which is nothing to the whole croppe; so is the small number
of true believers reserved by grace to the whole field, and crop of the world:
In the Arc a few, even eight persons were saved, 1. Pet. 3.

3 Consider the truth of that of our Savior, Math 7.14. strait is the gate,
and narrow the way, that leads to life, and few find it. Which must not be
understood simply in themselves, for many shall come from East and West, and
sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob Math. 8.11. And John saw a
multitude, which none could number, of all Nations, Kindreds, and Tribes, and
Tongues, standing before the Lamb, in white robes, Revel. 7.9. But
comparatively, in respect of Unbelievers, Infidels, Hypocrites, and Reprobates;
they be an handful, to an house full; a spark to a flame; a drop to a
stream. And the reason is twofold,

1 The worth of grace and salvation, and excellency of eternal life, allows
it not to be common, but is a precious commodity in the hands of a few; as
Pearls and Jewels are so much more advanced in price, as they be harder to
come by.

2 Because there be so few that will endure the persecution, sharpenes, the
self denial, the mortification, the many losses and crosses which the
straight way is strewed with; every man naturally desiring to walk in the
easy and broad way, where is elbow-roome, profit, pleasures, applause of
others, and pleasing a man's self.

2 This should be so far from offending any, as that every one should strive
to be of the little flock, and remnant, and walk in the way of good men; and
though thy company be small, it shall be good: Nay, thou must praise God that
ever he vouchsafed thee mercy to join thee to this small number of them that
fear the Lord; Considering

1 That the world yields his harvest to the God of this world, and the earth
affoordeth much clay for Pottes, but little oar for gold: pebbles are many,
pearls but a few.

2 Yea, in the particular Churches, there are but a few names that defile not
their garments, Revel. 3.4. All are not Israel, that go for Israel; neither
all that go for Virgins, are admitted into the Bride-groomes Chamber.

3 Consider the day coming, wherein thou that shunnest this small number,
shall wish thy self of it, and shall be most unhappy in the fellowship which
thou have chosen, when all the dross and chafe shall be swept together, and
cast into the fire.

And on the contrary, thou that have sorted thy self with these few, shall
praise God for a far higher mercy to thee, than it was in the great deluge,
to save one Noah; and in the dreadful burning of Sodom, to save one Lot.

CAP. 14. Lets of Repentance from multitude of contrary examples in the world.
THe fourth Let from the world, Let 4.
is the multitude of contrary examples. The world has a great many crooked
patterns, many perswaders, and pul-backes, as backe-byasses to Repentance and
godly life: whole bands of bad company, and wicked society, which are strong
impediments; and so much the more dangerous, As,

1 Our nature is sociall, as well as the bruits: we readily thrust into
company, as naturally enemies to solitariness: we easily follow one that
offers to lead us; but if many, or multitudes, or great ones go before us,
then we can run as sheep, and for have never stay to reason the case, neither
in what way we are, nor upon what errand.

2 Our nature is corrupt, and attractiue of evil: as the Adamant will draw
iron to it. We are suddenly corrupted by, first, filthy communication, and
evil words which corrupt good manners: secondly, by counsels and persuasions
to evil, by which they are justly carried that will not be guided by the voice
of wisdom. Thirdly, by the wicked example, especially of great, or wise, or
learned men, who thrive well enough, and are lifted up in the world without all
this niceness, and ado.

3 Add hereunto that evil is diffusiue of it self, and such acquaintance is
between it and us, as the plague cannot so easily and soon infect our bodies,
as sin does poison, and suddenly infect our souls.

Now against this Let, consider, (to break thorough this Let;)

1 The straight injunctions and charges of Scripture. Exodus 23.2. Thou shall
not follow a multitude to do evil: the word (...) signifies as well mighty,
and potent men, as many, or multitudes; so as we must not follow others to
evil, be they never so many, never so mighty, by doing that we either know to
be evil, or know not to be good. Pro. 4.14. Enter not the way of wicked men,
(...) them* partake not with them: have no fellowship with unfruitful works.
Ephesians. 5.7. Numb. 16.26. Separate from the^* come out from among them. Pro.
9.6. Forsake the foolish and live.

When we speak thus from God, as Lot to his cousens; Have you, get you out,
stay not in Sodom; think not as they did, that we speak in jest, lest ye
feel the fire of God in earnest.

2 Oppose to this Let, the danger of following multitudes, and corrupt
examples. For,

1 Multitudes can make nothing good that is evil, but must needs make that
which is evil worse and more heinous: If all the earth be corrupted, the cry
is great; many hands rid much work, many sinners fill the measure full.

2 Multitudes cannot keep off the revenge of evil; they may help thee into
sin, but cannot help thee out of punishment: thou can not partake in their
sins, and not in their punishment. Reu. 18.9. Pro. 13.20. Companions of
fools must be destroyed, and therefore let hand join in hand, they shall not
escape unpunished. A world of sinners in earth, a million of Angels in heaven,
cannot shift off revenge, if they sin together against God.

3 It is almost impossible for a good man to retain his goodness among evil
men; it is a rare example to be a Lot in Sodom: See David in the Court of
Achish, once basely counterfaiting madness, another time dissembling himself
a friend of Philistims, and an enemy of Gods people: and Peter in the company
of denyers, and enemies, denying, and forswearing his master: And hereof are
two reasons,

1 The disposition of wicked men, like men sick of the plague, care not how
much they can infect, that so the fewer may shun them.

2 Our own disposition, and aptness to receive infection from them, as sound
sheep, sound Apples are easily infected with the rotten: whereas therefore
some pretend to run with wicked men to win them, they delude themselves; for
as there is no great hope to do them good, so there is certain peril of
thine own hurt. A man that runs down a hill, if he has hold on him that
is going up, shall easily pull him back with him, because the descent is
easier: And dead carkases tied to living bodies, are not revived, but by
miracle; but the living bodies, tied to them, are poisoned and putrified by
them. Is there so little hope of doing them good, so great peril of thine own
bane and poison? get out from among them. Pro. 22.14. ^e with whom the Lord is
angry, shall fall by them.

3 Fence thy self against the objections that might carry thee away.

Object. The most do so, most are in the fashion, most swear, game.

Answ. Walk with the most, and perish with most: do as most, suffer with the
most, live as most, dye with most: Argumentum pessimum turba est, says Seneca.
No excuse to say, thus do my neighbors. Commit a felony, and say others did
so.

Object. My forefathers did thus, and believed thus, and they were wise.

Answ. A part of our Redemption, is to be delivered from vain conversation,
received by tradition of our fathers, 1. Pet. 1.2 The Spouse of Christ must
forget her fathers house and kindred, Psalm. 45.

Object. But some Ministers, good Scholars, great Preachers, play, and swear,
and drink, and swagger, may we not follow our guides?

Answ. 1 It is a fearful thing for Aaron to lead Israel to dance about the
calfe.

2 The Scribes and Pharisees were great Scholars, but they said, and did not;
they must not be followed further then they sit in Moses chair. Judas went
far beyond all Preachers in gifts, yet he led a band to apprehend Christ. And
many such there be, of whom Christ says, He that breaks the least
commandment, and teaches men so, by word or example, shall be least in the
kingdom of heaven: Christ speaks of blind guides: no wise man must shut his
own eyes to follow them, le^t blind lead blind, and both fall into hell
ditch.

Object. But I know good men do thus and thus, may not I follow them?

Ans. 1. The fairest earth has his Moles, the best men faults, and falls, and
must not be followed in all things, as in Noah, Lot, David, Peter. But if we
will follow example,

1 Follow the best, not the most, walk in the way of good men. 3. Ioh. 11.
Follow not that which is evil, but that which is good.

2 Follow the light side of the cloud, not the dark side, as Praraoh.

3 Follow one man that has his sight and light to guide him, rather than ten
thousand blind men that walk in the dark.

4 Christ is the only unerring pattern, follow him as the wise man by his
star, and follow all other as far as they follow him, be they even Apostles
themselves, 1. Cor. 11.1.

Object. But the Church is a multitude of Believers, and a Catholic company to
which we must join our selves: here is a multitude* which we must follow.

Answ. No, I must not follow a Church because it is a multitude, for that
simply makes not a Church; for then a legion of Turks or Devils were a Church,
but the Church is multitudo orthodoxa, a multitude teaching, and embracing the
truth of Christ: I must live, and walk by my own faith, as I see with no man's
eyes but my own.

Object. But I shall be counted singular, and more eyes see better than one.

Answ. It is better to walk the right way alone, than to wander with company;
It is better to go to heaven alone, or with a few, than with multitudes to
hell.

2 It was Lots happiness that he was singular in Sodom, and that he went
alone; and for Noah, that he alone, and his family, entered into the Arc; and
happy is he that is alone, if only sanctity be counted singularity.

3 One eye having sight is better than a thousand blind eyes: one poor
crucified thief had a clearer eye, than all the Jews rulers and people, that
condemned and crucified Jesus Christ.

4 Resolve upon the rules of wisdom to fence thee from this sin.

1 Choose thy way, not because it is broad, but because it is straight; and
suspect that way wherein thou see multitudes, multitude being a stream we
must row hard against. Most scorn the word, hate the fear of God, live after
the fashions of the world: shun this broad way.

2 Regard not what is done, but what ought to be done; for that only will stand
in the account.

3 In all matter of practice, walk by rule, not by example; look at truth,
not at numbers. We have a surer word of Prophets and Apostles, a sure
foundation, 1. Cor. 3.11. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace
shall be upon them, Gal. 6. Christ said he was truth, not custom: and let
customs be never so old if not enlightened with truth, they are the worse for
their age.

4 The wisdom of the wise, is to choose and direct his way, Pro. 14.8. He
takes it not on men's words, or walks on adventures: wisdom will to heaven
alone, if it cannot get company.

The wisdom of the wise will look better to the soul, than to damme it for
company: No man but loves his body better, but if he see never so many leap
into the sea, or cast themselves into the fire, or off a rock, he will be
loath to kill himself for company: and will thou, foolish man, break the neck
of thy soul for company?

5 Thou must hinder and stop the sins of the multitude, rather than imitate
them. So Lot persuaded the multitude of Sodomites; strive, resisting sin even
unto blood; keep the praise of grace even in oppositions. Tully commended one
for being continent in Asia: So hold on the light in the midst of a froward
generation.

And what thou can not hinder, thou must mourn for the sins of the
multitude, as Lot, whose righteous soul was grieved daily to see and hear the
unchaste conversation of Sodomits: And Jeremy said, My soul shall weep for you
in secret: And David, I saw the Transgressors and was sore grieved, and mine
eyes gushed with rivers of tears. This is true zeal against a man's own sins,
which kindles a fire against other men's sins, and the more universal they be,
the more will zeal be kindled.

CAP. 15. Lets from Satan lulling us in security.
3. FRom the World we come to the encombrances and rubbes cast in the way of
our repentance, by Satan the god of this world.

And he has reason to bestirre himself, especially against our repentance,
because he knows that only this grace fetches us out of his power, 2. Tim.
2.25.

To this purpose he suggesteth three ^orts of Temptations,

1 To lull us asleep in the security of our present natural estate.

2 If our natural estate content us not, he urges to despair.

3 If he cannot do that, he will enforce the other extreme of presumption of
Gods mercy, though we slack or slip our repentance.

1 To hold us in our present security, he will persuade us of the love of God
toward us in our estate of nature. For, has he not made us men, not beasts,
or serpents? has he not preserved us, and prospered us in our estate, and
lifted us up in earthly mercies? yea, are we not members of the Church, enjoy
the Word and Sacraments? and seeing God has been so free in his love and
care, what need we trouble our selves with such penslue preciseness, and spend
our time in fears and cares, which requires rather comfort and cheerfulness
in our condition?

Against this Temptation, consider*

1 How dangerous, and deceivable a thing it is, for a man to bless himself in
cursed estate. As the wicked man, who couenanteth with death, and makes an
agreement with hell; whose wilful ignorance hides all the danger near him;
who, as the silly Bird, feeds securely on the bayte, while it is within the
compass of the net. Oh what a delusion is it for a natural man to assure
himself of Gods love? Can justice love wickedness? Can the Lord do any other
than hate a rebel against him? Is a child of wrath the object of our fathers
love? Can a vessel of wrath look to be filled with any thing but wrath?

2 Look what deceit and fallacy lies in all his arguments of love:

1 God created him a man, not a beast: Why, did not GOD create the Angels that
sinned too? and yet are not they shut up in chains of black darkness for
ever? Little comfort that God loves thee as a creature, unless as a Father in
Jesus Christ: better it were, thou had been a beast.

2 God has outwardly blessed and prospered him in the world, and therefore
loves him.

Answ. No man knows love or hatred by any thing before him, Eccles^ 9.1.
Temporal blessings are common to good and bad, and the worst men enjoy common
mercies, more than other, Job 21.13. He speaks of wicked men flourishing in
all wealth and prosperity: who say to the Almighty, Depart from us; who is the
almighty? And it is said of Antiochus Epiphanes, that mad and furious horn
against the Church, who cast down some of the host of heaven, and the
stars, and extolled himself against the Prince of the host, and took away
the daily sacrifice, and cast down the place of the Sanctuary; the text adds,
Thus he shall do and prosper, Dan. 8.13. Who was more outwardly prosperous,
Caine or Abel; Esau or Jacob, who durst not look his Lord Esau in the face,
nor come near him till he had bowed seven times?

3 They are seized with a kind of spiritual prosperity: they live in the
bosom of the Church, and enjoy Word and Sacraments, therefore are loved of God.

Answ. But many are in the Church, that are not of the Church; yea, the
wickedest of men, enjoy the outward ordinances of Word and Sacraments, as well
as other; as Esau, Saul, Judas, Simon Magus, and are so much the mote hated, as
their sin was against the glorious means: what love can a malefactor gather,
when the sentence of death is read against him, as in the Word?

What love when the Lords Table is made snares to him; and his sin casts
poison into the Lords cup? When his Baptism is but a broken vow, and all his
profession a vizzard of hypocrisy?

4 Would thou find true evidences of Gods love, which come from God, not as
God, but as from a father bestowed on sons, but not on bond children? find it
in other gifts.

1 Has he given thee Christ* God so loved the world, Ioh. 3.16. has he given
thee a sonne-ship? Ioh. 1.3. and 1. Behold what great love the Father has
given us, to be called the Sons of God: Has he given thee faith? oh there is
a precious gift of love: have thou love? God loves not thee, unless thou love
him: what obedience have thou? Keeping his commandments, is a sign of his
love, Ioh. 14.23.24.

The Scripture which knows the best assurances of Gods love, pulls our eyes
from gazing on earthly dignities and prerogatives, which we are ever poring
upon, as with Hawks eyes, and would have us behold Gods love in other things,
than these, namely, in the inward notes and marks of Gods children. See thou
what faith, what hope, what repentance, what holiness, what fruits of faith
and holiness thou have attained: this argues our justification, and so
assures us of our election; and consequently, of his eternal and unchangeable
love: this is the inheritance which is given to sons of promise, while the
bond children are sent away with mou^ables.

2 To hold us in the security of our natural estate, he persuades us we
cannot be Saints here, and why should we not do as others, rather than tire
our selves in vain by pursuing impossibilities?

To answer this temptation, consider; none are Saints in heaven; but saints in
earth.

1 True it is in their sense, none can be saints here, that is, absolutely
perfect; but must we be therefore wholly flesh, because we cannot be wholly
spirit? Because we cannot get quite out of the law of flesh, must we not serve
the law of God in our spirits? Because we cannot do all the good we would,
must not we do all the good we can? Because we cannot attain the harvest of
holiness, must we not have the first fruits?

2 Sense of imperfection has sundry other more fruitful uses, than to settle
us in our security. For,

1 It ought to humble us, and drive us to Repentance, and not pull us from it.

2 To strive against imperfection, and not to rest contented in it.

3 To awaken us, and drive us out of our selves to get perfection in Jesus
Christ: for our sense of weakness in our selves, must force us to get our
strength in him.

3 We are not now under the law, which requires perfect and personal
righteousness and holiness, yet we are under the Gospel, which requires
Evangelical perfection, which stands in true and sincere endeavors, in
mortification and spiritual combat, and binds us to the daily subduing of
that, which we cannot at once vanquish; and though we cannot but sin daily,
yet we must not please our selves in our sins, but daily bewail them, as our
Savior taught us to pray for daily forgiveness of sins.

4 Thou can not expect to attain any thing of thy self but expect strength
from Christ: Thou have, or may have a good helper: I can do all things by
Christ, strengthening me; his grace shall be sufficient.

2 If thou feel never so small a measure, if true, the Lord cherishes that
least degree of goodness.

3 No Saint, not Paul himself can do as he would, nor can conquer all
corruptions: but yet, first, is not carried away to gross sin, though not so
pure as an Angel: secondly, he gives not up all, but strives hard to the
mark and high prize.

3 Is not contented with, but complaining and combating with it, he gets ground.

CAP. 16. Lets of Satan by temptations to despair of Gods mercy.
2 IF our natural estate content us not, Satan windeth about to bring us to
such a degree of discontent, as to drown us utterly in the gulf of despair.
And this looks three ways;

1 If we look to God, he would have us despair of his mercy.

2 If to our selves, to despair of our own estates.

3 If to Repentance, to despair of that as utterly Impossible, Unprofitable.


1 To bring us to despair of mercy, he will set before the sinner, the
greatness, foulness, and heinousness of his sins, which as before they
were done, he made seem as a mote, now he makes them swell to the magnitude
of a mountain.

See thou not how numberless thy sins are, and of deep dye? has not God
given thee over so long, to commit such outrageous sinne^, so scandalous
against such means, often against thy knowledge, and since thou supposedst thy
self called? and is it not now in vain to repent of them? Seek Repentance
and Grace with tears, as Esau, thou shall not find it, God being justice it
self.

To help our selves against this great injury, thus frame our answer:

1 If I look all on Gods justice, or my own injustice, I were indeed
altogether hopeless; or if I look only on the law of God, the rule of all
justice, that knows no mercy, no Repentance: But God in great mercy has set
a mean between his justice and my injustice, and that is the Gospel of his
Son, which Preaches Repentance, and proclaims a pardon; so as now if the
law cast and condemn me by my own demerits, the Gospel offers me free
salvation by the all-sufficient merit of Christ: and now as I behold the curse
of the law, due to my sins to humble me; so also I lay hold upon Christ, on
whom that curse was laid, to justify me: For he was made a curse, not for
himself, but for us, that the blessing of Abraham might come upon us.

2 I grant all thy premises: My sins are as great, as heinous, as numberless,
as thou speak, and against great means; but shall I conclude with thee,
that either I must not turn to God, or that God will not return to me? God
forbid: Nay, first, the greater my sins are, the more need have I to repent;
the more deadly my disease is, the more need have I of the Physician: the more
my sins be in number, I have more need to lessen them by Repentance, rather
than by impenitency to make them both greater and heavier: the longer I have
continued in them, the more need have I to hasten out of them.

The more dangerous and festered my wound is, the more have I must make to the
Surgeon. If a bone were broken in my body, I would not believe him that should
tell me it were too late to get it set again.

The greatness of my sin therefore shall never hinder, but further my
Repentance: and were I not so great a sinner, I should not see so much need of
Gods mercy, or Christ's merits; but now being so heavy laden, I have more need
to come to Christ to be eased. He came to call sinners to Repentance: and this
Physician is not so weak or unskillful, but he can cure deadly diseases, as
well as infirmities: he cured him that was 38 years diseased, Io^. 8.2. Or
shall think* the Lord has forgotten to be merciful, and will not return, as
thou suggestest? For,

1 Can he forget his nature and cease to be God, merciful, gracious,
abundant in mercy and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin, Exodus 34.6.7. Who is a God like unto him,
passing by the transgression of his people, and not retaining wrath for ever?
for mercy pledeth him. Micah 7.18. Or can he forget his promise, and deny
himself? Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and return, and he will
have mercy, for he is ready to forgive; and Math. 18.21. has he commanded us
to forgive our brethren offending seventy seven times, and will not he forgive
us our offenses? the scope of that parable. Is not he rich in mercy to forgive
ten thousand talents, yea the uttermost farthing?

I will therefore, hearing that the King of Israel is a merciful King, submit
my self as B^nhadad, 1, King. 20. It may be Ahab will spare thy life;
assuredly the God of Israel will spare thy humbled soul, who cannot forget his
own glory, whose mercy and grace is more magnified, as the sinner is greater
that lays hold upon it. I will resolve as Hester* to go in to the King* If I
perish, I perish. My sins are so great, I dare not add a greater of
despair; Plus pe^cauit Judas desperando, quam prodendo Christum.

3 I never read that the greatest sins could make true Repentance vain: I
find sins red as scarlet and crimson, made white as snow, Isay. 1.18. I see
Harlots, Idolaters, Persecutors, Witches, Thieves, by Repentance, acquitted and
accepted to highest grace. I see murderers of the Son of God, who shed his
blood, drink his blood by faith; and upon their Faith and Repentance were
converted and saved, Acts 2.

Can there be greater sin than to blaspheme and persecute the Church of God?
yet Paul obtained mercy for this, that he might be an example to others to
come, that should believe unto everlasting life, 1. Tim. 1.16. Could there be a
greater sin than Peter's, after so many warnings and vows, to deny and
forswear his Master, and curse himself; and this again and again? and yet
our Lord mercifully looked back upon him, and gave him both Repentance and
mercy.

4 I have learned not to cast both mine eyes upon my sin, but reserve one to
behold the remedy.

Do I see, (as David, Psalm. 51.) a multitude of sins, yet with the other, I
behold a multude of mercies; I see sin abounding in me, but grace abounding
more. I see a sea of rebellions ready to drown me, but withal, a bottomless
sea of compassions to drown all them, Micah 7.19. I behold, mourning, a number
of wounds and soars on my soul; but withal, a balm to cure all my wounds. I
have a million of debts, and not a farthing to pay: but I have a good surbey, a
good Samaritane undertaking to pay all; a merciful Creditor saying to me, Have
not forgiven thee all? I have deserved a million of deaths by my bloody sins,
but I see an infinite virtue and merit in the blood of Christ, that cleanses
all sins; this was shed not only for small sins, and is never dry. I hear
many menaces, and threats for many sins, but I read of as many promises of
mercy, and all they indefinite, excluding none, whose impenitency and
infidelity excludes not themselves. I see the nature and measure of my sins
utterly separating me from God: but I see that the Lord measures not the
sins of his according to their nature and measure, but according to the
affection of the sinner; and therefore the foulest sins, being heartily
bewailed, carefully resisted, by godly sorrow cast out, that sinner shall get
his suite of pardon, at the throne of grace. I see every sin deserving
damnation; but I see also that no sin shall condemn, but the lying and
continuing in it: and therefore I must repent. I see the misery and
loathsomenesse of my disease; but because I see the Physician is not so much
offended with the loathsomeness of the disease, as the contempt of his physic
in the Patient, I will not reject the physic, because I expect cure.

CAP. 17. Lets from Satan by temptations to despair of our selves, and of our
own estate.
2. IF Satan cannot prevail to make us despair in regard of Gods mercy, he
will assay to bring us to despair of our selves, and our own estates: that
although the Lord have mercy in the full sea and ocean of it, yet thou art
unworthy of the least drop of it. Mercy is for vessels of mercy; but thou art
a vessel of wrath, a grievous sinner, and every day adds to thy sin; and
Gods justice treasureth wrath as fast against the soul. It is in vain for
thee to repent: God will be found of his own children, not of such as thou art.

Ans. He that would deceive, will hide himself in generals: So Satan here
lays load upon the fearful soul, to hold it from Repentance. But resolve
this Temptation into the particular branches, and see the strength and
consequence of it.

Here are wrapped up four several reasons to drive the sinner from
repentance: 1. because he is unworthy of mercy: 2. because he has incurred
the justice of God: 3. he is a grievous sinner, and is no child of God: 4. he
daily adds to his sin and provocation; which Gods child does not.

1. I am unworthy of mercy or love; and therefore must not seek it.

Ans. 1. God never loved any man for his own worthiness, or any thing in any
man causing his love: and all the worthiness in the most, and best worthy, is
but an effect of Gods love, but no cause at all. For, what worthiness was in
us before we were, that moved him to elect us to salvation? what worthiness
in us being yet sinners and enemies, that he should with so dear a price
redeem us? nay, Romans 5.8. herein God set out his love, in that, while we were
enemies, he reconciled us by the death of his Son. Say as the Centurion,
Luke 7.6.

2 The best and dearest unto God, durst never appear in their own
worthiness. Paul, himself, regenerate, would not be found having his own
righteousness, but that which was by faith in Christ, Phil. 3. Jacob must come
to his father for a blessing, in the garment of his elder brother: We must
cast off our own rags, before we can put on the wedding garment.

Never any of the Saints were capable of mercy, but by an holy despair of
themselves and of their own worthiness: and therefore did seek, and find a
worthiness elsewhere; because they could find none in themselves. Let
whosoever will, with Papists ascribe any thing to their own merits; they
detract so much from Christ, and his free grace; they cast themselves off from
Christ, and are fallen from grace.

3 The tenure of our salvation, is not by a Covenant of Works, but by a
Covenant of Grace, which is a most full, a most free, and every way grace,
founded not in our worthiness, but in the grace and good pleasure of God. And
this is suitable to God, whose honor is to be first in goodness: He loved us
first, 1 John 4.19.

4 By this reason, no flesh should be saved, all being alike dead in sin; not
sick only: all the children of wrath by nature, and I am as worthy as any
child of wrath can be: and if any as unworthy as my self come to salvation,
why not I by the same way of repenting, and bewayling my own unworthiness,
and slying out of my self to Christ, who alone is worthy?

5 Why should I despair now, seeing God has made me worthy in Christ, and
has loved me while I was an enemy, and has out of his love called me, in
some measure purged me from corruption, and not only quickened me with his
spirit, but endued me with some measure of grace; but that he will continue
his love, and work in me to the end? John 13.1.

2 Because God is a just and a severe revenger of sin: therefore I must not
repent and seek mercy.

Ans. But the conclusion and argument of Scripture is clean contrary. Is God
just, and a righteous judge? we must therefore judge our selves, if we would
not be judged of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11. Has he appointed a day to judge the
world by the man Christ? therefore let all men be admonished every where to
repent, Acts 17.31. Will God bring every secret into judgment? therefore let
us fear God and keep his commandments. There is no straighter tie to
Repentance, and Obedience, than consideration of Gods justice.

2 God is just: and therefore when he has made me of unjust just, and
righteous in Christ, he will for ever repute me so. Nay even his justice
cannot but bestow mercy and grace on me a believer, because in Christ I have
fully satisfied his justice, and in Christ deserved his love.

3 God is just; and this is a strong motive to repent, and believe in Christ,
for his justice will not suffer him to punish one sin twice; nor to demand a
debt once paid, the second time. Nay, his justice assures me of mercy. 1.
John, 1.9. If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive our
sins: his justice assures repentance of mercy.

3 Because I am a grievous sinner, I am no child of God; and so all my
Repentance is in vain.

Ans. 1. Why, are not all grievous sinners before they repent? what was Adam,
David, Peter, Paul? or what be grievous sins, if poligamie, adultery, murder,
lying, denying and forswearing Christ, blasphemy, persecution, breathing
slaughter, and threatening against the Church, be not?

Do not all, even the regenerate, pray daily, Forgive us our trespasses?

2 Am I a grievous sinner? I must therefore so much more carefully and
earnestly repent. I want not encouragement, I see that woman who was called a
great sinner, a notorious adultresse, Luke 7. and 37. seeeking mercy from
Christ, receive that comfortable answer, Thy sins are forgiven thee. 48. Thy
faith has saved thee, Go in peace. 50. I see that poor Canaanite whom Christ
calls a dog, yet earnestly seeking mercy; gathered some crummes that fell
from the Table. Gods mercy shall be more manifested in restoring great
sinners: his power more magnified in raising dead and rotten sinners: my love
more footed; as that woman* Luke 7.47. Many sins were forgiven her, for she
loved much.

4 Because I sin daily against God, I am none of his, and in vain seek for
favor.

Ans. 1. Our Savior teaches us to say, Our father, and yet to pray daily,
Forgive us our trespasses: Therefore he that sins daily, may call God father.

2 Paul was a child of God, being regenerate; yet had a body of death, and a
law of sin about him daily, Romans 7.24.

3 I sin daily, but I repent daily. The wicked rejoice in it. I sin, and
yet resist sin, and strive against it daily: I do hateful things, but I hate
that I do: I break the law, but yet I love the law as holy, just, good: flesh
is in me, but I am not in the flesh.

Now tell me Satan, can thou gather such sigs of thistles, or grapes of
thorns? who ever heard a child of hell repent?

Ob. No? did not Esau, Judas?

Ans. To repent, is not only to know and confess what is bad and naught, as
they, and as the Gentiles, Romans 2.19. but a change of the heart, seen in an
earnest affection and strife to loathe the bad, and embrace the good. And this
had not, did not they.

Howsoever therefore I confess my natural disease discovers it self in
daily issues and symptoms: yet this sickness is not unto death, but that God
may be glorified in raising me up by his mighty power. I am not (...) so low,
not so long in the grave of sin, but his mighty word can, and will call me
forth to life.

CAP. 18. Lets from Satan by Temptations to despair of our Repentance from
Impossibility, Difficulty.

3. IF Satan cannot prevail to make us despair, neither of Gods mercy, nor
our own estates, then he assayeth to bring us to despair of our repentance.

And this in three respects, 1. of impossibility, 2. unprofitableness, 3. of
relapses, or relinquishing Repentance.


1. What an impossible thing do thou attempt? do thou ever think to master
thy sins, which are so inbred, so near, so necessary, so profitable as eyes,
hands, yea, as air, fire, or water? will thou strive against the stream,
where it is so impossible to overcome, and forsake them?

How often have thou purposed, promised, vowed, and resolved to enter the way
of Repentance, but could never attain to go through against any one sin?

2. Thou shall find another manner of task in Repentance, than thou dreamest
off: it calls for more pains, sorrow, mortification, difficulty, prickings
of heart, than ever thou look for, or art able to endure: and therefore
never go about it, unless thou had more hope to attain it.

Answ. Thus the devil, like churlish Laban, never persecuted Jacob so much, as
when he was departing from him: and our own sloathfull corruption says, A
Lion is in the way, Prou. 20. and the sluggard says, It is too cold, he dares
not go forth to plow, Pro. 29.

But to the first, concerning the multitude, masterfulnesse, and necessarinesse
of thy sins, answer thus:

1 I discern indeed an huge army of sins, and sweet lusts to encounter: and
these sons of Zeruiah are too strong for me, and it is impossible for me to
overcome them, if I look at my self or my own strength; but as David against
Goliath; I come against these Giants, in the name and strength of the Lord, by
whom I shall behead them: It is he that teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight: It is his battle, and he will give the victory, and close
my enemies in my hand.

2 I discern many enemies against me, and I cannot stand before them, but the
Lord has opened mine eyes with Elish^'s servant, 2. King. 6. that I see more
now with me, ready to fight on my side, than they that are against me thou
would deceive me, in carrying both mine eyes in things against me, but I
behold the Lord near me with grace sufficient. I see what spiritual help
and succor he is ready to supply me with, while I constantly cleave to his
help.

3 Though I be to deal with many and mighty sins, yet they are already
conquered enemies; spoiled of their power by the victory of Jesus Christ my
Lord; so as I have nothing to do, but follow the chase and spoil of
vanquished forces.

4 Though they were never so dear, and beloved sins, yet must I hear the
voice of God, saying as to Abraham; Take thy son Isaac, whom thou love, and
offer to me in sacrifice: though indeed what ever they pretend, such is their
love, as if I kill not them, they will kill me; and therefore though I have
sometimes vowed, resolved, and purposed Repentance in vain; now by the grace
of God I will make a new onset to better purpose.

A Soldier though he have once turned his back, will fight again, and
wounded the second time, will seek cure again.

A Merchant brought behind hand, will trade again more cautelously: a Mariner
that has suffered shipwreck, will to sea again, and traffic again: and I
will never be such a slave, as though I be prevented again and again, yet I
will seek my liberty still.

2 But whereas thou obiectest the difficulty, sorrow, pain, and unconquerable
labor of Repentance: I answer,

1 Were the work of Repentance so painful as thou say, first, what pain
would a man sustain to avoid sickness of body, loss of goods, poverty,
shame? and shall not I be at pains to avoid eternal shame, loss of soul, and
salvation?

2 What infinite pains and sorrows endured Christ for my salvation? and what
was his aim in all that, but to make rough ways smooth? Esa. 42. and shall
not I be at some pains for my self? and what pains have the Saints been at
in taking of the Kingdom by violence, and apprehending life eternal through
fire and water, and infinite deaths and torments? Is it not worth so much to
me, as them?

3 Is there no pains in going to hell, in the devils commandments, in the
service of sin? is there not more pains in committing, than forsaking any
sin? See it in one sin of uncleanness, is there not more pains in
contriuing his sin, wasting his body, consuming his goods, exposing himself
to the shame of men, to the punishment of the Magistrate, to the justice and
curse of God in body and soul, than in forsaking his sin? and so in the rest.

4 Is there no sorrow, nor burden in the consequents of sin? is it no pains
to have a selfe-secret accusation, a biting conscience, a gnawing and vndying
worm, a sound of terror ever in the ears, fear and flight when none pursue?
is there no baseness in sin to be a servant, and slave ^o ^usts? and is
there any slave to the sinner, that is ruled and hurried by the will of the
devil? No Galley slave but would break from his chains* vijs and modis.

5 Were the pains of Repentance so difficult as thou say, and intolerable,
yet the privileges and recompenses of that pain, are as great: what sick man
would not displease his taste with a bitter potion, to recover health, and
retain his life? the sufferings of this present life are not worthy the glory
that shall be revealed; the moment any af^^^^tions of this life, cause a weight
of eternal glory.

Resolve therefore of this pains, and do it betimes: for if it be hard and
difficult now, will it be easier by delaying, by despairing, when thy sin is
stronger, and thy self weaker? An ague, the more fits, the more incurable; a
Beast, the elder, the more untameable* and sin is a leaven, the elder, the
sow^er and stronger. Make not thy self more labor by sufferance of sin: make
an onset with courage, as the hearty, spies, Caleb* Numb. 13.31. and Ioshu^,
Numb. 14.19. they are but bred for us.

2 But indeed the work of Repentance is not so painful and sorrowful as
thou pretendest; for, is it not Christ's yoke? and is not Christ's yoke easy and
sweet? and there be other things that make it sweet and easy, being an
Evangelical commandment.

1 The presence of grace, which conquereth difficulties* foyleth temptations,
1. Ioh. 5. He that is borne of God, overcomes the world, for he has a grace
sufficient for him. I must not fix mine eyes only upon mine own resistance,
but on Gods assistance, by whom I shall be able to leap over all walls, and
impediments. Psalm. 119. I will run the way of thy commandments when thou have
enlarged my heart.

2 The promise and donation of the spirit, that we may walk in the way of Gods
Commandments. Ezekiel. 11.19*20. And I will put a new spirit in their bowels, and
take the stony heart away, and give them an heart of flesh, that they may walk
in my statutes, and keep my judgments, etc. 1. Cor. 3. Where the spirit of
GOD is, there is liberty.

3 Love of grace, and love of God makes every thing sweet. 1. Ioh. 5* and 8.
This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and his commandments
are not grievous: Da ama^tem and sentit quid dico. Aug. Love of gain makes
the Merchant refuse no adventures of sea.

Love of God makes Abraham offer his only Isaac; a difficult commandment:
Jacob loved Rachel, and the seven hard years of labor, seemed to him a few
daye^. The mother loves the child, and swalloweth all pains, watchings, and
difficulties, vnweariably.

Gods love for us, made him undertake many worse torments, and sorrows; love
of Christ made the Martyrs pass fire and flames, and most exquisite torments*
with sweetness and pleasure, as if they had been in beds of roses: Love of God
is unconquerable, much water cannot drown it.

Now is Satan fully answered; get Gods grace near thee, the presence of the
spirit, and love of grace, and down shall all the bars and impediments; and
the most difficult commandments shall be made easy.

CAP. 19. Lets from Satan's temptations from the unprofitableness of our
Repentance.
2 TO bring us to despair of our Repentance, to the impossibility or
difficulty, he will urge the unprofitableness of it: What can thy Repentance
do, being so slight, so sinful, so unworthy? thou can not look to be
perfect, and how can God accept that which is so unworthy and imperfect?
Besides, do not thou see many wicked men, as Saul, Esau, Judas, gone far
beyond thee in bitter sorrow, and shed far more signs of Repentance, than
thou, and yet all in vain, for they were rejected and damned?

Answ. This is a dangorous dart, and must be wisely repelled.

1 I grant my Repentance to be weak and unworthy, but I am taught in Gods Book

1 That it is neither my Repentance, nor worthiness of it self, that washes
away my sin, or can satisfy Gods justice; for then it were indeed as thou
say: but it is the blood of Jesus Christ that washes away all sin, 1.
Ioh. 1.7* and that reconciliation with God, depends not upon the quantity or
merit of my Repentance, but upon the merit and virtue of Jesus Christ, whom I,
a repentant sinner, lay hold on for salvation. My Repentance, were it never so
perfect, can neither satisfy God, nor justify me before God, but only
testify that I am a believer prepared to receive Christ, and thankefully to
accept him with his merits, by ceasing to sin against him.

2 I find in the Scripture, that as no man is accepted for his perfect
Repentance, so none is rejected for the imperfection of his Repentance, if it
be sound and unfeigned: for then it is a certain fruit of a lively faith, and so
of the presence of Christ, and of the life of God; even as the least bud or
blossom appearing, is a certain demonstration of life in the root. God
cares not how great, but how true and sound our Repentance is; not how much,
but how good; he accepts not for quantity, but for quality: yet where grace
is found, and right in quality, it will ever strive to increase, and abound
still.

3 Notwithstanding my Repentance be weak, yet being an Evangelical grace, a
mite is accepted: a grain has his due weight: a desire to repent; a will for
the deed; a ready mind for performance; a sorrow because I cannot sorrow:
these go for godly sorrow, and my faith gets Christ to supply the rest.
Thus the Christian is to be fortified against the weakness of his Repentance.

2 Thou say, many wicked men have gone far in desperate sorrows. I care
not how far they go beyond me therein: but that is far from godly sorrow,
both in the nature of it, and in the acceptance of it. My sorrow is for God
offended, for God loved for himself; my sorrow is from God, and goes to God
again: theirs was not a seeking of God, but of themselves: my tears of
sorrow, have a washing and cleansing virtue, so not theirs: my sorrow is as a
soaking rain, which has wet the very roots of my heart, so not theirs. And
for acceptance, they have no promise to be accepted in their desperate sorrow:
but I have a promise, that my humiliation, joined with faith and reformation,
shall be accepted in Christ, in whom my person is accepted.

CAP. 20. Lets from Satan's temptation from our relapses.
3 But see thou not that for all thy Repentance, thou fallest again into the
same sins, which had thou truly repented* thou should never have done?
what good does thy washing, who forgettest that thou wast washed? True
repentance is a Repentance never to be repented of; as thine is.

Ans. To turn to sin as a dog to the vomit, and as a swine to the wallowing
after washing, is a dangerous case, but not hopeless and desperate.

And howsoever it is not ordinary for the child of God to fall diverse times
into the same grievous sins; yet notwithstanding, some comfort here belongs to
troubled consciences: But let no presumptuous sinners meddle with it.

1. Godly men are the same men after sin and repentance, that they were
before; beset with the same infirmities, and no more privileged from error
than before.

2. Experience shows, not only subject to the same infirmities daily; but
often taken in the same snares: as, wandering thoughts, idle speeches,
distractions in prayer, negligence, and too much unprofitableness in hearing,
rash anger, with many daily omissions; whereof, who can clear himself, so
long as he carries the causes of daily failing about him? as

1. Ignorance. Many know not many sins to be sins: as the Patriarchs knew not
Poligamy to be sin.

2. Weakness of grace. A child of God for weakness may get many falls to
day, and rise again, and as many to morrow, and rise again: yea, and if he
hurt himself, and cannot rise himself, his father will help him up.

3. Inconsiderateness, and not attending his way and watch. A man in haste may
take diverse falls, and many slips; so as if often falling into the same sin did
exclude from Grace, or barred us of pardon, we were all hopeless.

3. Relapse does not always argue former Repentance to be unsound: because 1.
Repentance is an effectual instrument to seal up forgiveness of former
transgressions; but not a fence from all force of sin for time to come: 2.
soundest Repentance of all does not wholly abolish and take away sin; but
abateth, weakeneth, and lesseneth it.

4. The article of remission of sins excepteth not relapses, because the
promise of remission does not except them; neither is the virtue of Christ's
merit to be restrained to sins once committed, but to all sins truly
repented.

5. Many examples of Saints in Scripture raised from relapses, give comfort in
this Temptation. Lot was twice overcome with wine: Marie the Virgin twice
checked of Christ for curiosity: John twice worshipped the Angel.

6. True it is, that relapse into a disease is more dangerous than the first
assault; yet proper physic seasonably applied may cure the relapse as well as
the first disease.

Repentance is Christ's Physic, and so sovereign, as cannot be foiled by
relapses into the same disease. Whence we are commanded to renew our
Repentance daily, as we renew our sins: and the Physician is as able to cure
the same disease as he was before. And yet we hold the rule of Isidore, Non
poenitens est, qui adhuc agit, quod poenitet; id est, if he do it both actu
and proposito: but if he sincerely purpose against all sin, and keep alive
his zeal and hatred against that he does, this preiudiceth not his former
Repentance. But as he did truly run that now sits down; so did he truly
repent that sins again against his purpose, and sincere intention of his
heart.

CAP. 21. From Satan's Temptation to presumption that our sins are not many
nor great.
3. IF Satan cannot drive men off Repentance by engines of despair, he
assayeth if he can make them presumptuous of mercy, without serious
Repentance. He knows the truth of that of Augustine, Tam sperando, quam
desperando, pereunt homines: and that despair has slain his thousands, but
presumption his ten thousands. And every deceitful heart, is like a deceiving
Prophet, that cries Peace, peace, when sword and danger is the nearest.

For this purpose he uses three maine arguments:

1. Persuades the sinner his sins are not many, nor great.

2. But if they be, Christ has dyed for the sins of the world.

3. God is so merciful as he will not condemn them for them.

1. It is a wonder, that a man looking upon his sins should presume; but that
such must be given up to strong delusions, to believe lies, that will not
receive the truth in the love of it; and lie under that heavy stroke of Gods
justice, to be given up to the ways of his own heart; which is, to wander in
the paths of death.

But against this Temptation, know, that there is not a more certain property
of a wicked man, to know himself by, than by allowing himself in the
lessening and mincing of his sin: for it is an issue of the love of sin, that
will not be warned of the deceitfulness; neither of sin nor of his own heart.

1. Here is a man woefully deluded by the Devil, who has turned the wrong end
of the prospectiue to his eye: wherein things as huge as mountains and castles,
seem as small as molehils. And is it not just, seeing he will not believe God
who tells him that the least sin separateth, and is a partition wall between
God and him? makes him the child of wrath, shuts heaven, opens hell,
kills soul and body? What persuasion could make this man believe that a
stab at heart would not kill him? because a small prick.

2 A man is befooled by himself, who neither knows Gods ways, nor desires
to know them; but entertaineth wilful objections against the means of
knowledge, and covers himself with questions, whether his sins be sins.
You have not yet proved (says he) my usury to be sin, nor fashions of
apparel to be sin, nor drinking healths to excess and inflammation to be
sin, nor to do this and that on the Sabbath in civility to be sin: all
this while the sin is kept close and warm, and is none of the greatest,
because they are not resolved. But are not these of the number of those, of
whom Peter speaks, they are willingly ignorant, yea wilfully ignorant? as
those that will not be ruled and guided by their teachers, afraid to be
resolved. As the beggars that will not have their soars cured, because they
are a cover for their ease and idleness, and now and then get many a penny by
them; and are afraid of none so much as the Surgeon. Thus he sends among
Salomons simples, that are friends of sin, but enemies to their own souls.

3. Here is a man branded with an high wickedness by the spirit of God. Psalm.
36.1. and 2. Wickedness says to the wicked man, there is no fear of God
before his eyes, for he blesses and flattereth himself in his sin, even
while his own heart finds his wickedness. There is no grace.

Love would not displease a friend in the least discourtesie: So the love of
God. A chaste wife will rule her self, not to show the least look, or
behavior to offend her husband. Holiness would abhor all sin; repentance
would fear all, even the least.

CAP. 22. Lets of presumption in that Christ dyed for all men.
THe second Objection to bring men to presumption urged by Satan, is this: But
Christ dyed for all men: and if thy sins be forgiven in him, what needs all
this ado? as if thou would satisfy again for that which Christ has once
satisfied. If Christ have redeemed all, then thou art safe: if he have redeemed
but some, be as careful as thou can, thou can never be assured that thou
art of that number; and therefore howsoever, thou may enjoy thy sin.

Ans Christ's precious blood, the price of redemption, was for the virtue and
value of it, for the sins of the whole world and every person: but neither in
the purpose of God, nor in the will and intention of our blessed Savior, nor
in the spiritual application of it by lively faith, is it effectual to all
and every one, neither are all universally redeemed by it.

1. The Scripture means by all, not every particular, but many. Matthew. 26.
This is the blood shed for many for remission of sins. Matthew. 20 28. The son
of man came to give his life a ransom for many. Isay 52.11. My righteous
servant shall justify many. Luke 2.34. He is for the rising and fall of many
in Israel.

2. All, is taken for all kinds, not persons. And this ground answers a
number of places alleged to the contrary. Titus 2.11. The grace of God
appeared, bringing salvation to all men; that is, all kinds, ranks, and
conditions of men; even servants as well as masters, unto whom, and for whose
comfort he directed his spirit.

Heb. 2.9. Christ tasted death for all men* that is, for all kinds of men, not
all particulars. Romans 11.32. that he might have mercy on all, that is, as God
shut up all under unbelief, as well Jews as Gentiles; so he will have mercy
on all, as well Jews as Gentiles, that neither Jew nor Gentile should be saved
but by mercy. The word all cannot be taken collectiue, but distributive, Vt
quosdam ax illis omnibus saluaret. Dionysius Carthus. So 1. Tim. 2.6.

2. There is an all, or universality of the elect. Esaias 53.6. The Lord has
laid on him the iniquity of us all, that is, believers in the Mesiah the
Prophet, including himself in their number. And as there is a world of
reprobates for whom Christ prays not, John 17.9. so there is Mundu^ e mundo
electus, says Augustine, for whom Christ is the propitiation. 1 John 2.2. He
is the propitiation for our sins.

Ob. Yea, and of the whole word?

Ans. 1. Of the whole world of believers: 2. of the whole world in general in
respect of sufficiency, price, and virtue of his death; but not in respect of
efficacy, which is hindered by the infidelity of the wicked. Thus the
universal particle includes not unbelievers, impenitent, contemners, and
enemies of Christ. For howsoever 1. Christ dyed for all in respect of the
sufficiency of the price, the virtue of his death being infinite in himself,
and sufficient for all that by faith can apprehend it; and the preaching and
publishing of it appertains to all: yet in respect of the fruit, and
application, it belongs only to the faithful; because this remedy is
propounded unto all upon condition of faith, which condition only the believer
performs. Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that whoseuer believes in him,
etc. Whosoever fail: in this condition, never taste any benefit by the death of
Christ: and what were I better* if I had a plaster never so sufficient for my
wound* if I apply it not to the ^ure? as no unbeliever does.

2 The Scripture speaks of some, whom Christ never knew, Math. 7. therefore
there are some whom he dyed not for; for he will know them, whom he will dye
for: there are some whom he will not pray for, will he dye for those whom he
will not pray for?

3 The Scripture plainly distinguishes the persons: for whom Christ dyed,
from such as never shall have benefit by his death.

1 He gave his life for the Church, Ephesians. 5.25. that is, that part of the
world that is washed and sanctified through the word: he dyed for those that
part from their sins, not those that will hold on a course in them: he dyed
for his people: his name is JESUS; for he shall save his people from their
sins: implying, there is a people that are not his, for whom he dies not; a
people that are strangers and aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, I must
therefore be one of those. I must dwell in Sion, the true Church: of those that
dwell there, is said, their sins shall be forgiven.

2 He dyed only for his sheep, Ioh. 10.15. not for the goats: who be they?
those that hear his vo^ce, that follow him in obedience, that hear not the
voice of a stranger, nor the voice of the tempting seducer, to draw him aside
from following the true shepherd.

3 He dyed only for his friends, Ioh. 15.13. not for the wicked, for enemies,
that say we will not have this man to reign over us.

Object. He dyed also for his enemies, Romans 5.10.

Answ. Those for whom Christ dyed, were enemies in their nature and corrupt
constitution, but now are friends by grace, reco^ciliatio^


Object. But Christ dyed for Reprobates, for they were sanctified by the blood
of Christ, Heb. 10.29.

Answ. Sanctification by the blood of Christ, is either external, or
internal: the former is only in outward profession of Faith and participation
of Word and Sacraments; and so these Apostates were sanctified; ^d est, severed
from the Jews and Pagans in profession. But they were never inwardly
sanctified, nor the blood of Christ never purified their hearts.

2 The Apostle speaks of these Apostates, as they were in the judgment of
charity, reputed of men, who holds all them sanctified, that consent to the
doctrine of faith* but not that they were so in the judgment of certainty
before God: for they were never of the Church, while they were in it. 1. Ioh
2.19. They went out from us, because they were not of us.

Am I then a friend of Christ, that I may be sure Christ dyed for me?

1 If I be a friend, I am a believer. Abraham believed God, and was called the
friend of God. James 2.23. He dyed for no unbeliever. I must be a believer, or
he dyed not for me. Romans 3.25. God set forth his Son to be a reconciliation
through faith in his blood.

2 Am I a friend^ (...) must do whatsoever Christ commands me. Ioh. ^1.14.
Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you: A seeming friend, as
Herod, may do many things; but a sound friend will do all things, even
difficult and costly commandments. If he bid me repent and return, I must
obey.

3 A friend must be glad of an^ opportunity (...) show his friendship and
love* so must I. Prou. 3.28. Say not to thy friend, I will answer thee to
morrow, if now it be in thy power. If Christ thy friend, call thee to
Repentance this day, defer him not till to morrow; for then it may be out of
thy power to show thy friendship*

4 He dyed only for those that manifest the fruit of his death, 1. in the
daily conquest and abolition of sin: he dyed for my sin* that (...) might
dye unto sin, and sin dye in me. Romans 6.2. How can they that are dead to
sin, yet live in it? If sin never dye in thee, Christ never dyed for thee:
thou art still under the curse of sin, that art under the power of it: if
thou be not redeemed from vain conversation, thou art not from condemnation
of sin.

2 I must daily find the work of Satan destroyed in me, for by death he
destroyed him that had the power of death, which is the devil, Heb. ^.14. If
Satan rule thee still at his will, and hold thee under the dominion of sin,
thou have no benefit by Christ's deaths.

3 If Christ be dead for me. I must manifest the obedience of faith, another
fruit of his death. Heb. 5.9. He is the Author of salvation to all that obey
him, not to any that continue in sin.

4 I must henceforth live to him, that dyed for me, 2. Cor. 5.15. and he dyed
for those, who whether they sleep or wake, live or dye, live in him, and for
him, 1. These 5.10. that is, are partakers of his life, and live to his glory.

CAP. 23. Presumption of Gods mercy hindering Repentance.
Object. 3 But is not God merciful, who will not the death of a sinner? and
therefore what need thou so continually afflict and macerate thy self by
Repentance?

Answ. Yes, Gods mercy is a boundless Ocean, which can never be drawn dry,
and he is merciful to all, even the worst, and vessels of wrath.

But first, distinguish of Gods mercy; it is either general, whereby he saves
man and beast, and maintains the creature in a temporal being: thus he
feeds the Sparrowes, and cloatheth the Lillies: thus he is the Savior of all
men, especially of them which believe, 1. Tim 4.10. For that place is meant of
his general providence: Or, secondly, there is a special saving mercy, which
tends to eternal life, whereby he tendereth men as a father. Now herein he
is merciful to the worst in offering this mercy by Christ, and proclaiming it
in the Preaching of the Gospel. But they are content with the other without
this. This special mercy is not cast as a musse unto all.

2 Let not Satan delude thee by offering an unlimited mercy where God has
bounded it. For that mercy which in God knows no bounds, in respect of
persons, is bounded and limited according to the covenant of grace, and mercy,
as appears in two conclusions.

Conclus. 1.
1 There be sundry sorts of impenitent sinners to whom the Lord couenanteth no
mercy, but wrath. As,

1 Ignorant persons, who care not for the knowledge of God, Isa 27.11. This
people has no understanding, and therefore he that made them, will not be
merciful unto them* and 2. These. 1 8. Rendering vengeance in flaming fire to
all that know not God.

2 Hard hearted persons, that will not repent. Romans 9.18. He will have mercy
on whom he will, and whom he will, he hardens; implying, that hardened
persons are shut from mercy. Romans 2. Thou that by the hardness of thy heart,
treasurest wrath.

3 Wilful and stubborn persons against the Ministry, and counsels of the
word. Ier. 16.5. Mourn not for this people, for I have taken my peace from it,
even my mercy and my compassion: why? verse 1^. For every one walks in the
stubbornenesse of his heart, and will not hear me: and therefore I will show
you no grade.

4 Presumptuous sinners, who say I shall have peace, though I walk on in
sin. God will not be merciful to that man, Deuteronomy. 29.30. but the wrath of the
Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses in
the book of God shall overtake him.

Only vessels of mercy are Conclus. 2.
filled with mercy; for salvation or saving mercy is not so prodigally
bestowed, being childrens bread, but on such a^ are qualified and pointed out
in the Scripture by sundry marks.

1 All that must share in this mercy, must be true members of the Church. Isay.
63.7. I will remember the great mercies of the Lord, and goodness toward the
house of Israel, which he has given them of his tender love. Am I a true
Israelite, a son of Abraham, according to the faith? Do I lay about me for
the blessing, as Israel did? Do I wrestle it out with God by prayer, and do I
prevail for mercy and grace? Am I circumcised in the heart, and daily part
from sins and lusts?

2 All that must share in mercy, must be repentant sinners: God would have all
saved, but so as they must first come to the knowledge of the truth, 1. Tim.
2.4. But this they cannot do without Repentance. 2. Tim. 2.25. If at any time
God will give Repentance, that they may come to acknowledgement of the truth.
Ezekiel. 33.11. God will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he repent and
live.

3 Mercy is intailed only to such as love God, and keep his commandments:
second Command. Exodus 20.6. He shows mercy to thousands of them that love him
and keep his Commandments: for God is in covenant with no other, and vessels
of wrath cannot look to be filled with mercy: yet this shows not the cause
of Gods mercy, for there is none in us, and it is a free grace; but only
shows the persons that may claim it. Do I love God? All external obedience
without inward love, is hypocrisy: Love is the fountain of obedience. And do
I keep the Commandments? I cannot fulfill them: but do I keep them in my
understanding, meditation, affection, in true purpose and endeavor in my whole
conversation? then mercy is mine.

4 Mercy belongs to such only as fear to offend God, and live in any sin.
Psalm. 130 Mercy is with thee that thou may be feared. Psalm. 1.03. As a
father pittieth his son, so the Lord him that fears him. He that
apprehends mercy, will not bolster himself in sin, nor lay presumptuous
sins upon Gods back, but the sense of Gods mercy will lead him to
Repentance. Romans 2. He knows that though mercy rejoices against justice, yet
it destroys not Gods justice: All the ways of God are mercy and truth: these
are the two feet of God, by which he walks in all his ways: Let us humbly
fall down, and kiss both these his feet. Bernard.

5 Mercy belongs to the merciful, to those that are charitable and kind to
their brethren. Math 5. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall find mercy;
but judgment merciless shall be to them that show no mercy. Can we expect and
receive a full stream, and not let fall a drop of mercy upon others? Has the
Ma^^er for iuen thee 10000. talents, and wilt not thou forgive pence and
farthings? Math 18.27. In spiritual things, will not we bear with the
infirmities of the weak? are not we subject to the same infirmities? do not
we consider our selves? Gal 6.1. Did not Christ become in all things like to
us, to be a merciful high Priest? Have we never had any sores, which we would
have had others handle gently? Do old men forget they were children? what
lusts of youth and temptations they have passed? In temporal things, we call
for mercy on this, and that occasion, general and special: God in his members
call for mercy: Some men pass by as the Priest and Leuite, without all bowels,
dry as flint, without hearts, hands, bowels; no charity, no humanity: first,
look they for no more? secondly, may it be their case? thirdly, is it not a
great misery on themselves, on their ill-gotten wealth, on their injustice to
God his Ministers and others?

CAP. 29. Lets of Repentance from our selves, as first, that it is unpleasing
to nature.
3 NOw we come to the lets and hindrances of Repentance, cast in our way by
our selves: for nothing can be a greater, or stronger Let to Repentance, than
the natural and idle ungrounded conceits of the unregenerate heart, which has
devised many wanderings and turnings to shift off the business of Repentance.

1 A conceit, that it is unpleasing to nature: and indeed sloathfull nature
cannot endure the hardness of Repentance: and no marvel that case slays the
fool, when it wounds even the godly themselves. Cant. 5.3. The Church will
not foul her dainty feet, nor get off her bed to let in Christ, after many
knooks and persuasions.

Ans. But what a distemper is in that judgment, and how crazie is that
understanding of a sick man, that fears ^he remedy more than the disease?
yet so foolish are we in our own wisdom, as to fear the remedy of
repentance more than the sin to be repented. We hold that extremity of way
wardnes* and near to phrenzie, when a patient will rather choose to dye of his
disease, than to endure the taste of physic, because it is bitter and
unpleasant* Even so although godly sorrow be bitter and unpleasant to corrupt
nature; yet wisdom will conclude many things to be wholesome, which are not
so toothsome.

2. Compare and weigh in an even balance, whether the pains of well-doing be
matchable with the pains of sin; whether the momentany pains of Repentance
here, be comparable to the eternal pains of impenitency hereafter: consider
whether the crop of sin, or harvest of repentance be better. The wages of
sin is death: and is not death painful? but the harvest of repentance is
eternal life. 2. Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow brings Repentance to salvation. Say
now whether is easier, to sow in tears, and reap in joy; or to sow in carnal
iollitie, and reap in eternal sorrow: whether is easier, to sow to the flesh,
and reap corruption; or to sow to the spirit, and reap eternal salvation.

3. Be it that Repentance be unpleasing to nature: yet a Christian has more
than nature; he has a spirit of grace changing nature, and making the
Commandment easy. Whence it is, that those that have entered this way, and by
the spirit have mastred the flesh in part, find nothing more sweet, than the
tartest sorrow of sound Repentance: and this Repentance they never repent of.

Be it as Basil. Laboriosa virtutis via; yet render thy self as captive to the
commandment. Be at some pains in subduing thy heart: thou shall no sooner
begin, but ^ase and joy will come, which shall abundantly recompense all former
grief and labor.

Object. Alas, then I never repented: for I feel no inward power or motion,
whence I can draw comfort from my repentance* (...).

Ans. It may be so: for perhaps* 1. thou have performed that duty in a cold*
and formal manner: or 2. for sinister ends, not for conscience: and 3. by fits
and starts inconstantly. And how can a man that goes backward and forward,
make riddance of his way?

But go about it heartily, join the inward service of the heart in seeking
God, with the outward, tie thy self to a settled course in performance, favor
not the flesh^, nor care to fulfill it in the lusts of it; and be assured to
find more joy and sweet inward motion, at least, much less pain in the
exercise of repentance, than in the exercise of sin.

CAP. 25. Objections against repentance from a man's election.
2. But why should I thus abridge my self with needless sorrow, and to very
little purpose? For, if I look to God, I am either elected or not: If I be, I
shall be saved without all this ado: If I be not, all the Repentance in the
world will not avail.

Again, look to men: they be either such as repent not, but enjoy the world,
and their pleasures, and their sins too; and yet these live and dye honestly
and peaceably, and as well as any other.

Or they be such as do repent, and betake themselves to this strickt course:
and these many of them in their lives are as deceitful, unjust, covetous,
proud, hypocritical, as any men in the world: and many of them in their death
as unquiet, uncomfortable, and unhappy, as those that never undertook such
business.

Ans. To meet this dangerous subtlety. 1. To those that conceive Repentance a
vain thing, because of the certainty of Gods decree concerning their salvation
or damnation.

1. The wise God in all his decrees, to his maine ends, has also decreed the
means, serving and leading to those ends.

The ends of his election are either next, which is the glorification of the
elect, or the remote and highest, his own glory in the Saints.

The means decreed to these ends, are Christ; Regeneration by the spirit,
required in all that must be saved, even the smallest infant; and in men of
years, Knowledge of the Word, Faith, Repentance, Obedience. And as those ends
are steadfastly and unchangeably; so are the means as certainly decreed as
those ends. And unto these the elect are as certainly predestined, as to the
ends themselves. Ephesians. 1 4 He has chosen us in him, that we should be holy,
and without blame before him in love.

2. Gods wisdom teaches every Christian to imitate God, in tying his means
and ends together: because as they cannot attain those ends without the
means; so they cannot digress from the means, but miss of their ends. Gods
decree stablisheth the means, not remove them. God had given Paul the life of
all in the ship, Acts 27.31 but when the shipmen would have forsaken the ship,
Paul says, Except these men abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved: because God
will save them by means.

3. See the fallacy of this general delusion, a been coniunctis, ad male
diuisa. And indeed Satan woefully ouerreacheth us, who in outward things would
have men wholly to distrust God, and rely wholly on the means: but in these
spiritual things makes us lay all on Gods purpose and decree, and utterly
despise the means. What a false conclusion is it, If I be elected, do what I
will, I shall be saved? For, as it is impossible that the elect should not be
saved; so impossible is it, he should do what he list; and as impossible to
be saved without Repentance.

And though it be true, that Election and Salvation be coupled together
inseparably: yet the means run between them; and Gods order as stable as his
decree. So as he that is chosen to salvation, is chosen to faith, holiness,
love, perseverance, that by these steps he may walk in the way of salvation.
Quae Deus coniunxit, nemo separet.

4. Observe the absurdity of this allegation against Repentance; and in all
temporal things we can scorn the conclusion. If God have appointed thee to
salvation, why come thou to Church? what need thou hear? what need of
the Sacraments? why prayest thou? all this cannot alter his decree; why turnest
not thou then Atheist? See here the battry of all godliness, piety, and all
worship. So in temporal things, why do thou not refuse meat in thy health,
and medicine in thy sickness? and say, If GOD have decreed my life, I shall
live, and never eat nor use means.

So, cast off thy calling and trade, and say, If God have appointed me to be
rich I shall be rich though I do nothing: and if not, all my trading will not
avail me.

5. Another delusion hides it self in this allegation, whereby the deceitful
heart would lay the cause of his impenitencie upon Gods decree, whereas thy
impenitencie is not an effect of Gods decree, but a consequent. The cause being
in thy self, a darkness and wilful blindness in thy mind, an obstinate
contumacie of thine own will, resisting grace offered; yea, a depraved delight
and desire in thy affection, who willingly deliuerest thy self to be bound in
the chains of unrighteousness: So as thy destruction is of thy self; and no
sinner is condemned, till himself have worthily deserved it.

6. The guilefull heart willingly deceives it self with Ifs, and Ands; If I
be elected, and if I be rejected: and that in things secret which belong to
God, letting pass things that are revealed: where as every Christian ought to
know himself elected, and to believe it Gods order revealed to bring us to
glory.

Christ would have us rejoice that our names are written in the Book of life.
And this is not by any extraordinary ladder to climb to heaven, but by an
ordinary way here in earth. For if we can find sound faith or holiness in our
selves or others, we may conclude certainly, our own or others election.

How did the Apostle know, and pronounce the Thessalonians to be the elect of
God, 1. These. 1.4. but by their holiness, faith, love, and patient hope? verse.
3. whence he concludes their election. So may we know our selves, and ought to
know our selves elected, by being called out of the world. If my father have
given me an estate, and assurance in Land or Goods, now I know it was his
purpose within himself before to give it me. If I see a manchilde borne, I now
know that a manchilde was conceived in the womb the number of months before.
If by faith and holiness I can discern my self or others, born into the
Church of God, I am now as sure that this party was before all worlds conceived
in the womb of GODS eternal election. So as, clean contrary to this
objection, nothing can more urge, and fasten the practice of Repentance on the
soul, than the consideration of the decree of Gods election. Thus I have
insisted longer on this Objection* because of the generality of it, and the
subtlety couched in it: and I find it no where so thoroughly sifted.

CAP. 26. Objections against Repentance of some that seem not to repent, yet
live and dye honestly; and others that do dye as fearfully.
2. NOw to the instances of men. 1. Some repent not, and yet live and die,
honestly and peaceably.

Ans. 1. All things fall alike to all for outward thing, Eccles. 9.2. As is the
good, so is the sinner in death. And the judgment of a man is not to be
fetched from his outward death: but from his life, and faith, and fruits.

2. A wicked man may be quiet and peaceable in death, because,

1. Their blind presumption of a good estate in death, as in their life,
assuring themselves of heaven and (...) though they never (...)

2 Satan's (...) knowing then to be his (...) not only to hold (...) in the
snare, but their companion that outliue them: left they see^^g the terror and
perplexities of their death, should be moved to change their lives.

3 Gods justice on them, who leaves them to dye, as they lived; not allotting
them understanding, sense, memory to remember themselves, who have all their
lives forgotten sin. But this justice of God on them, should make us rather
hasten our Repentance betimes, while our season lasts, and our understanding,
health, and senses, than longer to defer it.

1 Others made show of Repentance, and strict walking, but very unjust,
deceitful; in a word, the worst of men in their dealing.

Answ. This is for the most part an ungrounded clamor against holiness, and is
a parcel of that poisoned sloud cast out of the Dragon, Reu. 12.

2 But sometimes has grounds in the neglected lives of Professors. Oh remember
the woe pronounced on them by whom offenses come: Why take thou the Law into
thy mouth, and hate to be reformed? how dare thou call on the name of the
Lord, and not depart from iniquity?

3 But how unhappy art thou that stumblest on this rock, to cast thy self
headlong from thine own salvation? thou should bring thy self to the Rule,
and see thy work be straight, and not scandalize thy self by cro^ked and
faulty examples.

4 In temporal things, thou would not wrong thy self on these silly
grounds. Who ever refused to go in a right way, because some in that way have
fallen and miscarried? But the right way to heaven is Repentance.

Would a man refuse wholesome physic because some dye that take physic? The
proper physic of a diseased soul is Repentance. Would we think that man in
his wits that would disclayme and wilfully refuse good and wholesome meat,
because some surfeit and cast up all again? Where shall we find a Trader, or
dealer in the world, that will refuse to meddle with all money and gold,
because there is some clipped and counterfeit? or will therefore cast off all
trading, because some of the same trade break and deceive? and much less the
most gainefull trade of godliness.

3 Some others that have very busily followed the work of Repentance, have
found as little peace and comfort in their death as any. Some of them have dyed
despairing, some blaspheming; perhaps some on their own hand.

Answ. The way of dying well, is the way of Repentance, and in this way, none
can dye ill: But precious in the eyes of the Lord is the death of all such,
whatsoever it seem, Psalm. 116.

2 Gods children may want sense of comfort, but this argues not, but he might
have formerly the presence of sound comfort, and the true ground of it present
still. A tree in winter lives, but seems dead: present pain and sickness
of body, argue not it had never health.

3 Gods child may want sense of faith, and in death seem to be in the gulf of
despair, and yet pass to heaven by the gates of hell, as Christ did.

4 Gods child may have rauings, blasphemies, fierce actions against themselves
and others, which are the effects of diseases; melancholy, frenzy, burning
agues, pestilence; from which they are not freed; but howsoever diseases may
deprive the child of GOD of health, sense, comfort, and life it self, it
cannot deprive him of salvation. Romans 8. I am persuaded that neither life nor
death, etc.

5 Christian wisdom judges not of a man by the strangeness of his death,
but by the goodness of his life; and no kind of death is evil to him, that is
in Christ, for he is freed from the curse of the law.

CAP. 27. Objections from the conceit of the easiness of Repentance.
Object. OThers conceive Repentance so easy a thing, and soon done, as
needs no such care or time. A Lord have mercy at death: and what need a man
martyr himself all his life?

Answ. 1. These men that so slight the remedy, never saw the danger of the
disease. Is the disease but a little languishing of nature, as the Papists
would make us believe? or rising out of a few slight venial sins, cured by
a a Creed, or Aue, or a knock on the breast? They deal with their Proselites,
as the mother with an infant; if it hurt the finger, the mother blows it; and
these babies believe presently, the blowing has soundly healed it.

But he that measures either the disease by the remedy, or the remedy by the
disease, shall find it mortal enough, being the foulest and most contagious
and incurable disease that appertains to man, compared in the law to the
leprosy, which was not cured so easily, but required an infinite toil to go
through the cure according to the law, and often proved invincible and
incurable. Naaman cured by miracle, must yet wash seven times, to know the
difficulty of the cure.

2 The whole power of nature cannot do it, and yet a natural man thinks it
easy: Is it easy for an Ethiopian to be washed white, or a Leopard to part
with his spots? So easy is it for him to do good, that is accustomed to
evil, Ier. 13.23. Is it easy for an old man to become young again? and so
easy is it in nature for an old sinner to be renewed by Repentance.

Is it easy for a dead man to be raised to life? it cost Christ himself
tears and groans to raise Lazarus, not because it was hard to him, but to
show the impossibility in Lazarus: and is it easy for a dead man to raise
himself? and so easy is it for a man dead in sins and trespasses, to raise
himself to Repentance, Ephesians. 2.1.

3 Is it so easy, which the whole power of grace cannot conquer, while we are
here below? All the grace in the world cannot clean fetch out the soil of
sin while we are here. Is it easy to wash out a scarlet or crimson, to
become white, which was dyed both in wool and cloth? nay, the cloth will be
torn to pieces first: and so easy is it even to get out by Repentance, the
deep dye of our scarlet sins of our nature and practice.

4 Did thou ever try how easy it was to turn away from some outward act of
sin, to which thou wast addicted? and yet a hypocrite by some restraining
grace can do it; he can for some reasons forbear some acts of adultery,
swearing. But this is another thing, it is the killing and mortifying of inward
affections and lusts, as dear as members. Col. 3.5. Mortify your earthly
members: this is not the cutting off a washbow of sin, but the stocking up
the roots, which is another manner of task. A natural man would offer any
thing to God, but his beloved sin: he would rather come before the Lord with
rivers of oil, and offer the fruits of his body, than any one lust: and
therefore it is not so easy, as many conceit.

5 Is it so easy? what makes wicked men take on so at godly Preachers when
they call them to Repentance; dealing with them as some distempered patient, who
feeling the smart of a drawing plaster, and corasiue, drives away the Surgeon
with railing speeches, and casting bedstaues at him when he comes to touch,
and to cure his wound. Can thou not abide a drawing plaster to drive away
corrupt blood and humors? much less will thou find ease in cutting off
joints and members, and putting out eyes, which Repentance must do. Think on
these things, and then tell me what an easy thing Repentance is.

CAP. 28. Objections from the unseasonableness of Repentance, that it is yet
too soon, or else it is now too late.
4 OThers object against themselves the unseasonableness of their Repentance.
And this has two branches: some conceive it is yet too soon, others that it
is too late.

1 It is yet too soon, I may enjoy my sweet sin a while; for sin is like
his father, is loath to be tormented before his time.

Answ. 1. No man will reason so senselesly for his body. I have a wound or
gash, but it is not yet time to look to it; I will let it rot, and gangrene,
and then I will look to it; but then it is too late and incurable. Or I have a
thorn in my foot, it is not yet time to pull it out. We know all delays in
bodily diseases dangerous, much more in the soul: neither will a man be so
void of common reason for his goods. My house is on fire, but it is not yet
time to quench it; why should this be admitted for a good reason, where the
loss is incomparable?

2 If this day be so soon, to morrow may be too late; the Commandment is to
seek the Lord while he may be found: implying, that he who may be found to
day, will not perhaps to morrow: Fear therefore the just revenge of GOD, who
if thou deny him to day, may justly deny thee to morrow. See we not many that
would not Repent young, that cannot repent old? Gods justice being now deaf at
those, who were deaf at his mercy: he knocked, and they would not hear, and
they shall cry and knock, and he will not hear, Prou. 1. Esau rejects the
blessing while he may have it, and after would have it, and cannot get it,
though he howl after it.

Object. But did not the penitent thief repent at last, and why not I?

Answ. 1. Thou bring an example without a promise of God; bring me a promise
that thou shall repent at last, or thou promisest thy self that which God
promises not. If he promise mercy, if thou repent at last, he promises not
the mercy to repent at last.

2 Thou bring an instance which was a work of wonder, and every way
extraordinary and miraculous, wherein Christ pleased to honor the ignominy of
the Cross, and to manifest his glory, and power in his lowest abasement; and
therefore is set among those wonderful works of God; raising the dead,
earthquake, darkning of the Sun, etc. And therefore thou may as well exspect
a second crucifying of Christ, and the darkning of the Sun, and raising of dead
bodies out of their graves, as such a conversion.

3 Thou bring but one instance without a second; and of one particular,
would make a general; and from an extraordinary, draw an ordinary direction:
whereas thou have infinite millions of instances, that have dyed as wickedly as
they lived. Sometimes a Prince pardons a malefactor on the Gallows; but
shall every malefactor trust to that? Our Lord Jesus now entering into his
Kingdom, pardons a great offender, as Princes in their coronation: should
any therefore imbolden himself to the like offense? as if any should go and
commit a robbery, in hope there may be a Coronation between the fact and his
execution.

4 Thou bring an instance which will not hold in thy case.

1 The thief he did not desperately and wittingly defer his Repentance; nor
thrust off the remedy till the last moment; for then in likelihood it had never
been offered; but thou do.

2 He was saved without all means; he had never heard of Christ nor Religion
before; and therefore did not refuse them: for if he had, says Augustine, it
is like he had not been last among the Apostles in number, who was before them
all in the Kingdom. But thou reiecte^^ the means, despisest the voice, and
wilt not come in to Christ: his conversion was upon the first opportunity, and
can thou wrest it to slip all opportunities?

3 He was not saved at the instant, without expression of saving faith, sound
love of God, of men; care of his own soul, confession of his sins, and a
rare confession of Christ in that instant, when all the world forsook him;
yea, even all the Disciples fled from him. But thou look at the end,
ouer-leaping all the means; and thou not for the love of God, but fear of
hell; nor for hatred of sin, but avoiding punishment; meanest at last to
dissemble a Repentance. Was this the case of the happy thief?

Object. ^ut was not he that was hired at the eleventh hour, as well allowed,
and rewarded with the same penny, as he that came into the work at the third?

Ans. 1. Thou that meanest to repent at the eleventh hour; how know thou,
thou shall come to the eleventh hour? what if thou be cut off at the
fourth, sixth, or eighth?

2. The Scope of the Parable only teaches, that men that are later called, and
have the means later than others, may be saved as well as others; and is not
to be stretched beyond: So as an old man that has long wanted the means, may
now in the means comfortably lay hold of salvation.

3. Yet the Parable fully answers the Objection, seeing those that were hired
at the eleventh hour came in so soon as any came to hire them: and will not
justify their presumption, that being called in the third hour, will not come
in till the eleventh.

Others think it too late to repent. I have lost my time and tide, and have
put off my Repentance so long, that my sins are risen to an infinite
multitude, and an unconquerable strength, I may now strive and never the nearer.

Ans. 1. To stay long makes Repentance more difficult; but not desperate. As
to go far out of a man's way, makes him more labor in returning; but proves
it not impossible.

2. The time of Repentance for hope and possibility, is the whole time of thy
life, that is the day wherein thou must work, John 9. As Mannah for
possibility was to be gathered any of the six days, that was a type of
Christ; and they found it, that went out to seek it in the sixth day as in the
first.

3. The more time thou have lost, the more have thou need to bestir thee in
redeeming the residue, and in sparing at the bottom. And the stronger thy
sin is grown by continuance, the more have thou need to take it in hand to
weaken it; unless thou think it will weaken with age, and grow feeble of it
self. But the body of sin, is unlike the body of the sinner; this grows
old and weak with age, but that by age grows stronger: as leaven, the older,
the stronger and sowrer.

4. If thou come against the huge army of thy sins in thine own strength*
thou art too weak for the least: but come in the strength of God. He can
easily make an Ethiopian white, and him that is accustomed to evil: he can
soften the hardest hearts, and shake the rocks: he can add strength to the
feeble, and make thee daily so much the stronger, as thou find the washing
and weakening of thy sin.

CAP. 29. Of the means of Repentance: and first in respect of sin.
Having spent much time and labor in setting down

1. The rules to direct us in the practice of Repentance; and

2. The lets and hindrances of it, which we have removed: now

3. We are to proceed in the third General propounded, namely, To point out
the principal means which every one must carefully make use of, who mean to
go through the comfortable dispatch of this so weighty and urgent a duty.

The chief means may be ranked under five heads.

1. In respect of sin, 2. of God, 3. of Christ, 4. of our selves, 5. of others.
Wisdom to all great ends advises of means.

1. In respect of sin there must be a serious humiliation, which the Apostle
calls godly sorrow, which brings Repentance never to be repented of: For

1. A proud person puffed up as a bladder with self conceit, or windy
presumption, is not capable of Repentance, till he be pricked with the sharp
needle of the Law, pricking his heart: Never till then did the Conuerts say,
Men and brethen, what shall we do? Acts 2.37.

2. God gives no grace but to the humble, Iam. 4.6. but especially the grace
of faith (without which is no true Repentance:) excludes all boasting in our
selves, that we may be all we are in Christ, in whom we believe for
righteousness and reconciliation.

3. Christ, and his saving Grace is received into the heart, as seed is into
the ground, Luke 8.12. And therefore the heart being like stony and fallow
ground, must first be broken up, and made full of furrows by the help of
legal humiliation, Ier. 4.5.

4. Repentance is a walking with God, as being made friends. Now no proud man
can walk with God: for he dwells only with an humble and contrite spirit,
Isay 57.15* and Micah 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good, to do
justly, to love mercy, to humble thy self, and walk with thy God.

The means therefore to attain true Repentaince, is,

1. To get a clear sight of our sins, and misery by them, and by the curse
due to them temporal and eternal: for how can a man be humbled for those
sins or judgments, which he never saw, nor knew off? Hence are we called to
a through search and trial of our ways, to find out distinctly in what
particulars we have gone astray, Lam. 3.40. and then turn to the Lord. And
Ier. 31.19. the Church says, After I was converted, I repented. But to show
that conversion nor repentance, is or can be before this search; he adds,
After I was instructed, or as the Hebrew word signifies, After I was made
known to my self, that is, After in the glass of the Law I discerned mine
own sinful and woeful estate, then I repented: for who can otherwise see his
need of mercy, but in the sense of his misery? Tremelius. Post quam ostensum
fuerit mihi.

2. True sense and sorrow for sin: as pangs and throws before the birth, with
shame of face, grief of heart, and horror of soul in the apprehension of our
guiltiness by sin, the curse of the law, and Gods infinite anger; and all this
represented in the law, in a most terrible manner. As holy Paul by the dart of
the Law professed himself killed, and slain, and made so wretched in the
sense of his own guiltiness and uncleanness, that he desired to be
dissolved, to be rid of it.

This is the true touch of sin wrought by the spirit, when we most grieve and
afflict our hearts with that which hurts us most.

It is not loss of money, goods, estate, liberty, or life it self, that
hurts us so much as the loss of Christ, of grace, of salvation.

3. To get to an holy despair in our selves, as being out of all hope of
deliverance, by any power, policy, or goodness of our own, or of any
creature: that the case be with us as with Paul and his fellows, distressed on
the sea, who are said to be past all hope of being saved from drowning, Acts
27*20. And as the woman with the bloody issue, having spent all her strength
and means in physic without cure, was out of hope to be recovered by any
secundarie means, Mark 5.26.

All this makes us to seek for a remedy; and feeling the need, and extreme
want of whatsoever the Gospel offreth, yea, and pinched with hunger, thirst,
poverty and beggarie, do long after, seek, and beg earnestly for help and
pardon.

Let this admonish every man that would proceed in Repentance, which is a
continued act, to be conversant still in the Law of God, and especially to be
well acquainted with the Moral Law, by which, is the knowledge of sin, Romans
7.7. that thereby seeing their own sins daily and the misery due to them,
they may be kept humble, and low in their own eyes. What mean men to cast
off the whole use of the Law under the Gospel, and they must hear of nothing
but Gospel?

For 1. Is not the Convert liable to sin? and how can he know what is sin, or
what is not sin, but by the Law? how can he discern the nature of sin, to be
an irrectitude and crookedness, but by the straightness of the Law? how can
he discover the danger of his sin, to awaken him out of it, but by the Law?
The office of which is as of Paul's kinsman, to detect the treason of the Jews:
and Paul's danger, that he might avoid it, Acts 23.16.

3 Though the regenerate man be free from the reigning act and power of sin,
yet he is not from the root of evil; which every one can find fruitful, and
ever shuting as in a perpetual May: How necessary is it then, always to have
by us, this sharp axe of the law which strikes at the root of sin? which
else would grow (...) and insolent; that as a servant, it may be kept under,
with blows and fear: wherein the spirit works, it being his office as well
still to convict, as to convert, Ioh. 16.8.

3 Though the maine armies of sin be defeated in the godly, and those
masterfull commanders be suppressed, and subdued by grace, yet there be
straggling troops of smaller evils and infirmities, which daily assail, and
should war against the law of the mind: now by what other glass shall a man
see these spots in his face, than by the law? for as we see the little motes
discovered by the light of the Sun, so it is the light of Gods law that
detecteth the smallest evils against God or men: without which, we should never
come to a distinct notice or Repentance of them; and so consequently, could
never prize the grace or offers of the Gospel. That we may magnify the
Gospel, let us prize the law as a perpetual scourge to drive us out of our
selves to Jesus Christ.

So long as we have any thing found with us, which must be either forgiven by
mercy, or repented, or reformed by grace; let us faithfully hear, and read
the law to this purpose: That we may daily conquer the pride of our hearts, and
walk humbly before God, let us take with us the use of the law.

I cannot marvel at the intolerable pride of these Antinomists, and
Perfectists, because they never came to see their sins aright; and this they
do not, because they reject the law, the proper glass of sins discovery.

CAP. 30. Means of Repentance in respect of God.
2 IN regard of God, we may many ways help forward our Repentance, if we
consider, first, his word; secondly, his eye; thirdly, his hand; fourthly, his
relation unto us.

1 Gods word in the reverend use, is a notable means of Repentance: for,
first, the very knowledge of the word is a means in which GOD gives
Repentance. 2. Tim. 2.25. Instructing them, and waiting if God will give
Repentance: and ignorance of the Scripture is made by Christ, a chief cause of
error, both in opinion and life, Math. 22*29. We must therefore labor by
diligent hearing, and reading of the Scripture, to come to know the Word. The
Word reuealeth Gods will concerning our Repentance; who now admonishes every
one to come to Repentance, Acts 17. It shows Repentance to be above our own
power, and reach; and it is God that must give Repentance. It directs us to
the means to attain this gift, namely, prayer: we must go to God to heal
our nature, to change our disposition, to perfect his own work. Ier. 31.18.
Convert me, O Lord, and I shall be converted.

2 The several parts of the Word in their several offices, excellently
conduce to this work: first, the law is an hammer to beat an hard heart to
pieces: the very reading of it privately, made Iosiah's heart to melt, 2. King.
22.10. and much more when it is publicly preached and applied by Gods
Ministers. This was the Ministry that pricked their hearts to conversion, Acts
2. this is that whereby the heart is awakened, as Peter's was by the Cock
crowing. The reading of the law, and threats of it, wrought a general
reformation and separation of Israel, from all that were mixed among them, Neh.
13.5.

2 The Gospel propounds Christ a good shepherd, laying down his life for
his sheep: and entreats the sinner in the name of Jesus Christ, to return,
and repent, and live; with many promises of mercy and grace upon their return:
that if any cords of love can draw us, we want them not.

To the furtherance of our Repentance therefore, we must do two things
concerning the Word:

1 Mingle the whole Word with faith, else it will be unprofitable; believe it,
credit it, without cauils, or questions to avoid it; subscribe to the holiness
and goodness of it, as a good heart does, though it speak unpleasing things
to it. Ah^b will now say the word of God is not good: Michaiah never
prophesies good. But Hezekiah will say the word of God is good, in the most
sharp threatenings of it: as a good natured child will bow at an angry word of
his father.

2 Keep the Word fast to us, that it may keep us. David hid the Word in his
heart, that he might not sin. This is the sword of the spirit, of daily use
in this warfare against sin; and we must buckle it unto us.

2 Consider Gods eye is ever upon thee, and all things are naked unto him, with
whom we deal, Heb. 4.13. Would a fellon cut a purse, if he thought the Judge
saw him? Moses knowing that an Egyptian saw him slay an Egyptian, feared, and
fled, Exodus 2.14. Should not we fear, and flee those sins, which we know
God knows, and has to lay to our charge? A thief never so stout, if taken
in the manner, will run away afraid: But we are bold offenders, who though we
cannot sin, but be taken in the manner, yet will stand it out. What a folly
is it not to shame at our sins, which Gods eye is upon; while we should shame
to commit them if a child of five years old stood by? Were not that an
ungracious child, that durst commit folly, and fornication, not only in her
fathers house, but before his face: so is our sin

3 Consider Gods hand; first, of mercy; secondly, of justice, and both are
powerful means to lead into Repentance.

1 Observe his hand of mercy, 1 In spiritual motions, 2 In temporal
excitements.


1 When the Spirit rappeth by any of his motions, open unto him: Quench not
this Spirit, grieve him not, send him not away in displeasure. Now is an
heavenly help offered of thy good, work now with GOD; cherish any good
motion, let not the world, or corruption, or delay, dead it; but thankefully
apprehend the opportunity: if that be slipped, thou art not sure of another.

2 For temporal excitements, look upon, first, Gods patience, how long he
has suffered thee, giving thee space of Repentance, waiting for thy return:
this should hasten Repentance, Romans 2.5.

Set God before thee as a loving father dealing with an ungracious child,
often admonishing, sometimes correcting, often conniuing, never dealing
extremely, loath to loose him, and cast him off.

2 Consider Gods bountifulness unto thee: he never cease to supply thy
wants, but has bountifully provided, and heaped up fatherly kindness on thy
head, and all to draw thee, were it possible. The Apostle joins both these
motives together, Romans 2.5. Despisest thou the bountifulness of God, his
patience and long suffering, not knowing that they should lead thee to
Repentance?

The bounty of Joseph's Master, kept Joseph from sinning against him; and the
Prodigal returning, mourned that he had run from a kind father. Is there
not mercy with the Lord, that he may be feared?

Object. God forbeareth me, says the sinner, and therefore I may, and will
sin.

Answ. Gods forbearance, argues his goodness, not man's innocence: it is the
exercise of his mercy, not the abolishing of his justice: and it is made the
note of a wicked man, Not to Repent, when mercy is showed to him, Isay. 26.

2 Consider his hand of justice; mark and lay up the strokes of Gods hand,
sensible and insensible, in soul and body, on thy self and on others: Amend
by them, and fear him the more.

1 Make use of corrections on thy self: hear the rod. The not regarding of
warnings, causes God to give over such a party, as the Physician does a
desperate Patient. Isay. 1.5. Why should I smite you any more, seeing ye fall
back more and more?

2 Slight not the corrections inflicted on others, whether nearer or more
remote. When God comes near thee in thy friend, family, say God warns thee
to Repent: the sin of Belshazer, Dan. 5.22. was when he knew all those
things, that came on his father Nabuchadnezar, yet he humbled not his heart. A
fearful thing it is, not to profit by example. He that will not take
example, shall make an example.

3 Consider the judgments recorded in Scripture, past, present, and to come.

1 Those that are past in former ages; the Angels that sinned, the old world,
these on whom the Tower of Siloam fell; and all the Writs of execution recorded
in the Scripture; and say of them, as 1. Cor. 10.11. All these are examples to
us, all our Monitors, all of them so many Sumners, so many Sermons to persuade
us to Repentance.

2 Consider the examples of Gods justice in our own age; so many, and
remarkable, as never more; upon Blasphemers, Drunkards, Adulterers, and
enemies of grace. A man might make as large a volume, as that in the fifth of
Zachary, written within and without, with examples of such, as into whose
houses and hearts the curse is come. Let the fight of the Angel with a drawn
sword, (which made Balaams Ass to fear) make us fear and tremble.

3 Consider the dreadful judgment to come, the day of which shall be as an
Oven, and all impenitent persons as stubble before this terrible burning. Acts
17.30. He admonishes all men to Repent, because he has appointed a day
wherein to judge the world. When heathenish Felix heard of the judgment to
come, he trembled: happy were it for Christians, who repeat it as an Article of
faith, that they did so. We will end this point with that exhortation, 2. Pet.
3.14. Considering these terrors of the Lord, what manner of men ought we to
be? etc.

4 Consider in God our relation, which will be a means to further our
Repentance.

1 Look upon him, as our Lord, and our selves as servants: as a Lord he has
hired us into his service, and has freed us from the service of all other
creatures, that we should only serve himself: But alas, who can serve him
according to his holiness and greatness? and when we have done all that we
can, how unprofitable servants are we? We have wasted our Masters goods, and
cannot show our talents again: and therefore we have need to humble our selves
in Repentance, and pray with David, Psalm. 119.124. Deal with thy servant
according to thy mercy, and enter not into judgment with thy servants, O Lord.
A sorry servant is he that can neither do what is agreeable to his Masters
will, nor yet be grieved for failing in the evil he does, or leaving undone
the good he should do.

2 Look upon him as our shepherd, and ourselves as sheep, but wandered from
the fold. Oh the misery of a lost sheep! It is without the flock, and fold,
without a certain pasture, and food, without a keeper, or shepherd, without
God and Christ, without protection and safety, subject to all annoyances, and
becomes a prey to all ravening beasts, never able of it self to return. And
this is the state of every man, and no man can reckon up the errors and
wanderings of his life. All this should help us to return to the shepherd of
our souls, 1. Pet. 2.10. to seek to him betimes, and pray him to seek us, as
David Psalm. 119.10.

3 Look upon him as our father, and our selves as his sons and children. A
Father that has given his dear Son to death for us; the dearest thing and
price, that was in heaven or earth. A Father that has reserved for us an
inheritance immortal and undefiled among the Saints in light.

Is not this a strong inducement to loath and leave sin? will not the love of
a father, make thee hate sin the more? can any stripes work so powerfully upon
an ingenuous nature, as to see his loving father offended? A poor man's son,
who cannot be much hurt, or helped by his father, will be grieved that he has
justly offended his father* Awaken thy self to Repentance, and say to thy
soul, as Moses to Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.2. Do you so reward the Lord, O foolish
people? Is not he thy father that bought thee, that made thee, and
proportioned thee? What else gave hope to the Prodigal to return, but the
sight of love lurking in his father? and therefore resolved, I will return to
my father.

CAP. 31. Means of Repentance, in respect of Jesus Christ.
3 A Third sort of means to help forward our Repentance, is to look upon
Jesus Christ. Zach. 12.10. They shall look on him whom they have pierced, and
mourn. The effect of beholding Christ, whom by their sins they have
crucified, is great sorrow for sin: and indeed among them all, there is no
means so available to the working of the heart, to due and deep sorrow for
sin, as the serious consideration of Christ's death and passion. If we
consider the person who suffered; the eternal Son of God; the beloved Son
in the bosom of the Father; the most innocent lamb of God.

The things he suffered: that this person was so abased, and plagued, with the
curse of the Law, the wrath of his father, shame, sorrows, of first and second
death; such hard and heavy things as would have crushed all men and angels.

And for whom he suffered all this, even for our sins in special, while we
were yet ungodly, sinners, enemies, the just suffered for the unjust: he was
cursed, that we might be blessed, wounded, that we might be healed, he
endured torments of hell, that we might partake of heavenly joys. Oh then,
shall this chief of ten thousand, the worthiest of men and Angels, be
murdered, not by the treachery of others, but by thy hands, thy sins, for
which else thou had been everlastingly damned? and does not this wound thy
heart? shall the earth tremble at this; and shall not our hearts fear? shall
the Sun be darkened, and the Heavens covered with mourning; and shall not we
mourn, and be ashamed to show our heads? shall the stones rend asunder, and
earth tremble, and all senseless creatures suffer at the suffering of the Lord
of glory, at the death of the Lord of life; and shall not our stony hearts be
rent with sorrow, who were the occasion of so execrable a passion, to so
honorable a person?

Surely, if there be a drop of spiritual life and grace in us, we must needs
loathe those sins of ours, that brought such woeful misery on the Son of God:
And it will make our hearts bleed, as a man would do at the sight of a knife or
instrument, whereby (unawares) he had slain his child, wife, or dearest
friend in the world.

Thus the Gospel shows the heinousness of sin above all the curses of the
Law. Would thou see the execration of sin? see it not in the dreadful curse
of the Law, but in the blood of the Gospel.

The most ougly visage of sin, is not in the death of the world of sinners: but
in the death of the Son of God, no sinner. the most dreadful spectacle of Gods
wrath that ever was.

And although the menaces of the Law prepare the sinner to Repentance, yet it
is the sight of sin in the Gospel, both in the transcendence of the remedy,
and infiniteness of Christ's sufferings, that shows the true face of sin, and
indeed works Repentance. The Faith of the Gospel, is that internal means
that turns a man round about, and causes him to s^t his face upon God, and
Jesus Christ, and leave his sins, Acts 15.9. This puts a difference between
us and others, who are yet in their sins.

CAP. 32. Means of Repentance in regard of ones self.
3. IN thy self, for the helping forward of Repentance, keep a continual
audit, and take account of thy self and estate. A special way and means to
bring the Prodigal back to Repentance, was, that he returned and came into
himself: And David, Psalm. 119.59. I considered my ways, and turned my feet.

To which purpose for further direction, consider in thy self four things:

1. Take notice of thy heart, and disposition of it, in the desires and
affections of it; both in what they have been, and what they ought to be.

1. Consider how thou have loved thy sins, what a deal of poison, and hatred
thou have had of grace; how thou have been wedded to the lusts of the flesh,
how hand-fasted to the world, how earnest thou have bin in prosecuting the
profits of this life, with utter neglect of better things; and then how
necessary it is to clear out this self love, and love of sin, to make room for
better.

2. Consider which will be the principal desire of a repentant heart: as
namely,

1. To be rid of sin. Romans 7. O miserable man, etc. never was a prisoner so
weary of his bolts, nor a sickeman of his pain, as the penitent of his sin.

2. To please God in all the ways of his Commandments. Psalm. 119.5. Oh that
my ways were directed, etc.

3. To be in nearest fellowship with God in Christ. Cant. 1.3. Draw me, and we
will run. Oh when shall I come into thy sight?

And these desires will be insatiable, till the soul get a presence, sight,
and comfortable hold of God: for never can a good heart be delighted but in
seeking most excellent things, with most excellent affections.

2. To further thy Repentance, recount thy life, actions, and course, what it
is, what it ought to be. Never man considered his ways aright; but found
something to be redressed. As

1. If he behold the infinite evils of his whole life committed against God,
and his Law, and light of his grace.

2. The innumerable good duties omitted, for which he has had calling and
opportunity.

3. The good thing done, but failed in all, both in the Manner, End.


Oh what a measure of sorrow, will this set to a careful heart, to see it
self so far from answering his horrible sins, that he cannot answer one of a
thousand of his best actions through his life. All this shows the need of
mercy answerable to so woeful misery.

3. Consider seriously the checks of thy own conscience. Thou may contemn
the checks of men: but never reject the checks of thy conscience. For
conscience keeps Court in the soul at all times, there is a continual
Term: it has a power to examine, witness, and sentence at any time. And
this sentence admits no delay, no delusion, no appeal. If thou feel the
privy nips of conscience, listen to so near and wholesome a rebuker, lest it
grow to a seared conscience, and God in justice discharge it of the office it
holds in the soul under him, when he sees it unregarded.

But do thus: 1. when thy conscience checketh thee, bless God for a waking
conscience: which will only check great ones, whom none else may; and for
things which none else can.

2. When conscience accuses thee, and, as the Clarke of the Lords Crown
office, reads a bill of indictment against thee, take his office on thy
self, plead guilty, accuse thy self too. The way not to be judged of the
Lord, is to judge our selves before the Lord.

3. If conscience go on to prick thy heart, and fetch blood of thy soul, now
feel the smart, apply the blood of Christ to stay the smart, and bleeding of
it. This is the chief labor of Repentance.

4. To further thy Repentance, remember thy latter end, the shortness of thy
life, the approach of thy death, and the terror of the day of judgment. This
numbering of our days is a means to apply our hearts to wisdom, Psalm. 90 12.
But therefore is men's iniquity in their skirts, because they remember not their
latter end, Lam. 1.9.

CAP. 33. Means of Repentance concerning others.
4. Means of Repentance in respect of others.

1. If a good man be cast amongst good men, he will quicken himself to
repentance and reformation.

1. By humble submission of mind he yields to all godly admonitions, of
good men; and blesses God with David for their rebukes.

An impenitent person bears such affection to his sins, that he disaffecteth
him that reproves him: But this man, contrary, is a stone in the Lords Temple,
and is willing to be hewed and polished; and, as a man knowing himself out of
the way, is willing to be set in again by any, even the meanest that knows
it better than he.

2. By imitating their godly example, which is a great incitation to goodness.
Whence Christians are called lights, shining in the darkness of the world,
holding forth the word of life; whose light must shine, that others seeing it
may glorify God.

And God puts good examples to good use in the world, not only to convince
the adversary, but sometimes to win the disobedient, and to gain a testimony
in their consciences to the truth; yea, and to provoke others to an holy
emulation, to get share in the same grace.

2 If good men be cast among enemies of God, and grace, yet they will be
furthering themselves, in their way of Repentance: they will take knowledge of
the reproaches of their enemies, by whom they may hear their sin sooner, and
plainer told them, than by friends; although neither in a good manner, nor to a
good end.

1 But this will help to humble a good man: Let Shemei alone (says David) I
have deserved it, 2. Sam. 16.

And no sooner shall a wicked man accuse a Saint, but he with an heavy heart
will accuse himself before the Lord. Nothing is more ordinary, than for wicked
men to scandalize godly ones: They are hypocrites, proud, covetous, and what
not? and when they hear this, they can go to the Lord, and complain of
themselves, that they are so indeed, and can rifle themselves, and be more vile
in themselves, than the others terms can make them.

They can inroll themselves, as Paul, before the Lord, the chief of all
sinners. But all this while when they intend to wound them, they help to heal
their wound, and make them humbly seek to the Physician.

Augustine hearing the Donatists reuiling him for the former wickedness of his
youth, made this answer: The more you blame my disease, I will so much the more
admire my Physician. And Beza to one obiecting against him the wantonness of
his youth, and wit in his Poems: answered, Iste homo inuidet mihi gratiam
Christi.

CAP. 34. Marks and signs of Repentance, and first in respect of sin to be
repented.
4* NOw follows the fourth general, concerning the signs and marks of a
man truly penitent: for this grace will show it self, what way soever a man
turn himself; whether he look upon, first, his sin repented: or, secondly,
God offended: or, thirdly, himself: or, fourthly, upon others: it will be
working every way.

1 In respect of sin, a man truly penitent, will discover himself by those
properties and practices.

1 He remembers his sins, though they be remitted, and that with shame and
sorrow. Ezekiel 16.60. I will establish my covenant with thee: then shall thou
remember thy sins, and be ashamed of thy ways; nor never open thy mouth any
more, namely, in justification of thy self, when I am pacified toward thee for
all thou have done; verse. 62.63. So as when God is pacified, yet the humble
heart is ashamed.

This is one clause of the new covenant. Ezekiel. 36.26. Reason.
A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit I will put into you. verse. 31.
Then shall you remember your own wickedness, and your deeds, which were not
good, and judge your selves worthy to be destroyed for your sins: therefore
shall the house of Israel be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, verse.
31.

2 This remembrance of former sins, though pardoned, preserves and blows
up the embers, and keeps alive godly sorrow in the soul. Zach. 12.10. The
looking on him whom we have pierced, exciteth all that have received the
spirit of grace and compassion, to mourn for him, as their first borne. Peter
remembering what himself had done, and his master had said, went out, and wept
bitterly. Hereby our Repentance is renewed daily, and the wound made bleed
afresh.

3 As it is our happiness that God once pardoning our sins, forgets them,
and never remembers them more: so it is a sign, and way of our happiness,
that our selves forget them not, but hold them before the eye of our minds, to
contain us in constant humiliation for them.

2 He will aggrauate his sin, when he beholds it: he will excuse none,
extenuate none; he will not mince, nor hide any, as Adam: nor cast it off
himself upon others shoulders, as Saul* The people did it: But he weighs his
sins in a true balance, which has showed none of them to be light: he will
put in so many weights, as to bring him to a just humiliation. If his sins be
of a bloody dye, his heart shall bleed with godly sorrow. If they have been
sins of knowledge, and after illumination, or after admonition, or with
vehemence, or repetition, or in hateful manner, with cursing and swearing, as
Peter's was: Oh this will bring back bitter sorrow, brinish tears; here is
cause to weep bitterly. If his sins have been old sins, as old sores, and
festers, long continued in, and lived in till the eleventh or twelfth hour;
the longer and more painful will be the cure: the more willing will he be to
open them, and content to have them handled. If they have been committed in
foul circumstances; as to have been drunk, or disordered on the Sabbath
day: to be rude, or irreligiously disposed in the Church, under the eye of God:
to run riot against good counsel, against the directions of the Word, and
motions of the spirit: the fouler the sin, the deeper will be the sorrow. But
if they have been after Repentance, vows, promises, after fasting, prayer,
now the weight increases marueilously upon the soul. A good heart will hardly
think any Repentance enough for such sin.

Far from true Repentance, is that false heart that is more ashamed to
confess sin, than to commit it: and in confession, does it in the gross and
lump, with excuses and extenuations; and in making show of sorrow, is as a
cloud without rain, soon blown over: he has never a tear of godly sorrow
for foulest sins, or if any, too soon dried away.

He that can plead for his sin, and defend bad actions, with fair pretenses,
as Saul saves the fat against the commandment, for sacrifice: that can rob
God and his Ministers of their right, pretending a reach of wisdom, or
public care beyond all others: that can plead for their usury, a practice of
charity; as doing as they would be done to: their injustice and false arts in
trading, because they do as others do, and else they cannot live: or their
non-residency, because of their charge, or a way to preferment: all these, and
all others that hold up bucklers for their sins, never yet knew what Repentance
meant. In a word, he that can please himself in the remembrance of his sin,
that can glory how he has ouer-reached his brother, which is ordinary in
trading: that can rejoice in the pleasure or profit gotten by sin, is far
from Repentance. A good heart, the more pleasing or profitable any sin has
been, will lament so much the more.

3 He hates and shunneth all sin every where. This indignation and bitter
hatred against sin, is made a fruit and note of true repentance, 2. Cor.
7.11. Can. 5.4. See how the Church rated her self for her folly, and
unkindness against Christ: and no marvel. For,

1 If we look at God, he hates all sin with a deadly hatred; and all that love
the Lord, must hate all that is evil: And the more a man conceiueth God his
friend, the less friendly can he be to his sin: and the more favor a man
expects from God, the less can he favor any sin.

2. If he look at his sin, he sees it a serpent, and hates it, though the
sting be gone, by a spiritual and gracious Antipathy. And now the league being
broken, he will never be friends any more with it: but in anger, as Ephraim to
his Idols, say, Get thee hence, what baue I more to do with you?

3. If he look on sin in the evils it has formerly wrapped him in, he
cannot but shun, fear, and fly it. A burnt child dreadeth the fire. A man
once stung with an Adder, will fly from all Serpents: A man that has felt the
pains of broken bones by his false, will fear to fall, and look better to his
feet.

An impenitent person may forbear to swear: but a true convert fears an
oath, Eccles. 9 So he fears to break the Sabbath, is afraid of covetousness,
worldliness, drunkenness, profaneness, and other sins: and this not in
respect of his own skin only; but in respect of God, now reconciled unto him.
Even as a dear Wife fears to offend her loving Husband, to whom she was
lately married.

4. He resists and holds fight against all sin; even those that he cannot
conquer, he combateth against. As Jacob said of the people of the ^and after
the slaughter of the Sich^mites, Now will they hate us, and therefore will raise
their powers against us to destroy us: even so a godly heart hating sin, will
raise all his power against it, to destroy the whole body of sin, and will
revenge upon it as his capital enemy.

A Subject that has taken up arms against his Prince and Country, and gone
out in rebellion with rebels and traitors, if once he come to see his offense
on the one side, and the Princes clemency on the other, pardoning his offense,
and saving his life, cannot choose but hold himself extraordinarily bound to
resist all such rebels, even while he lives. This is the case of every
Christian, who having run with his rebellious lusts, fighting against the crown
and dignity of Jesus Christ; but now graciously pardoned, cannot but stand
stoutly against them.

And this cannot be other; but where flesh is, and spirit, the spirit will be
lusting against the flesh. Wheresoever these twins are conceived, this Jacob
and Esau will struggle in the womb, and Rebecca shall feel the striving
within her: whereas the barren and fruitless womb, which never received the
seed of God, feels no such struggling.

5. He relinquisheth his sin in true endeavor, and never returns

2. In every true Repentance is a clearing ones self, 2. Cor. 7. And with all
true humiliation goes reformation: for repentance is not a vow, and purpose
for hereafter only; but a present act and endeavor.

3. In every one that must find mercy, there must go with confession forsaking
of sin. Neither can a penitent man say, I was a liar, swearer, drunkard, and so
am still: for though sin be still in him, he is not in sin: and though flesh
be in him, he is not in the flesh. So as howsoever he that has confessed his
sin once, and again, but continues in it, may think himself well eased; yet
is it no otherwise than when a drunkard has eased himself by casting, that he
may drink more. You shall hear a swearer take himself in his sin, and say,
God forgive me, now I swear: and yet swear as fast still as his tongue can
turn out oaths. Others forced to a kind of Repentance, pass many promises,
and vows, and confessions are made: but after return as a swine to the
wallowing, and an horse to the smell of his dung. Here was no Repentance, but a
forced hypocrisy.

6. In all this work of Repentance he differenceth himself from the hypocrite
in his strife and resistance of sin.

1. In that he sets himself against sin universally: 2. sincerely.

1. He is set by grace against all sin, because all is contrary to grace, as
1. his own sins. As Paul, Romans 7. I hate that which I do: as a man fears and
slieth most the danger that is nearest him.

And of these, 1. his smallest sins. David the cutting off Saul's lap: he
thinks none of them gnats, or mites, which GODS Law takes order against; for
which either Christ must dye or himself eternally.

The wicked man can startle at great and outrageous evils, murder, adultery,
drunkenness: but the godly repent of those which the world count no sins, as,
unprofitableness under the ministry of the Word, profanation of the Sabbath,
petty oaths, rash anger. And whereas the wicked man thinks is thoughts free:
the weakest Christian repenting, repeateth the wanderings, and disorder of his
very thoughts.

2. His own most secret sins: knowing that none are secret in respect of God,
with whom he has to deal; and that the more familiar any sin is, it is so
much the more dangerous.

3. His fat, profitable, delightful, and most necessary sins: he spares no
Agag, no f^tlings, (...) cutteth off hands, plucketh (...) eyes, that is,
lusts, which (...) as near and necessary. Zacheus casts away his most
gainefull sins presently.

2. Because true hatred is of kinds, and true zeal is as fire which will
fasten on any fuel that comes in the way of it: therefore a true penitent
hates and resists other men's sins. If he can he will hinder them, if he
cannot do that, he can and will grieve and mourn for them. So David's eyes gusht
out with rivers of tears, because men kept not the Word. Jeremy wished his
head a fountain of tears: And Lots righteous soul was vexed, to hear and
see the unclean conversation of the Sodomites. But wicked men are so far from
repenting for other men's sins, that they cannot repent their own.

2. He deals against all sin sincerely; as Hypocrites cannot: which appears
thus.

1. A godly man renews his Repentance often. But when, daily? In the time of
his peace, when all things go well with with him, when the world laugheth on
him, and at him for it. The Hypocrite never or seldom thinks on Repentance,
but when Gods hand is upon him: when he is bound on his bed, and can intend no
other business, then call for the Minister, whom in all his health and life he
wronged and scorned. Thus the Hypocrites howl on their beds (says Hosea) but
were his grace true, he would have done it in prosperity.

2. Godly men going seriously about the work, repent of particular sins. David
cries out of blood: Peter of his denial: Paul says, I was, etc. But
Hypocrites repent in the gross and lump, and would feign deceive GOD and
themselves, by hiding themselves in generals: God be merciful unto us, we are
all sinners, and cannot be saints. I have bin deceived as others have been: yet
I am not the greatest sinner. And thus slubbereth over the business.

3. True Repentance will easily pass by an offense against himself: but not
easily pass over a sin against God. Moses in his own cause the meekest of
men, in Gods cause the most fiery and zealous.

But an Hypocrite can earnestly hate, and revenge an injury to him: but, in
injury and wrong to God, can be calm enough: because Gods name and glory is
nothing so dear to him as his own.

4. The sincerity of godly Repentance will ever appear in the healing of that
error, Dan 4.24. and undoing what is ill done. It will never be without
restitution of that which is wickedly gotten, or wrongfully held from the right
owner. Sound Repentance will go through stitch with restitution. Have thou
gotten so many hundreths by swearing, lying, breaking the Sabbath? have thou
gotten so many thousands by cruelty, and usury? have thou gotten so many pounds
by robbing God and his Minister, by unjust and malicious detaining Gods part?
will thou, or dare thou go on, and not think of Repentance? or do thou
think of Repentance, and not of Restitution? Here is no healing of the error;
the wound in thy soul bleedeth fresh, and, without timely Repentance, will do
so unto death.

5 The sincerity of true Repentance appears in the godly, in the speedy and
seasonable apprehension of the offers of grace in the means. Psalm. 119. I made
have and delaied not. Worldly men are for fastening on the world: there are
their affections, desires, endeavors: the world has engrossed their thoughts,
time; and the more water goes through one pipe, the less goes into another:
but, as ready to break, they deal in heavenly things; put off, and are taking
order for three, or six months, and then prove as insufficient and insoluent
as before. Ambrose says, If I would offer thee gold to day, thou would not
say, I will come to morrow: but God offers grace; thou can find no time to
take it.

CAP. 35. Marks of Repentance, in respect God.
2 THe soul truly penitent, looking toward God, will bewray it self in the
constant expression of three most gracious affections, mixed and wreathed
together: all which wait inseparably on sound Repentance, as light and heat on
fire; both which necessarily argue the presence of fire.

The first is love of God; the second, fear of God; the third, desire or
prayer.

The first is a vehement and fervent love of God, unto which he finds
himself bound in many strong obligations: as, when he considers how many
sins are forgiven him, he cannot choose but love much: and that his
reconciliation is made by the death of Jesus Christ, the Son of Gods love;
through whom, as a Conduit pipe, all grace flows into him: here is the
strongest attractiue, and lodestone of love, that ever was. If great benefits
and gifts, be great binders, what is the greatest gift of all, the giving of
his Son to be a surety, and satisfaction for sin?

2 When he considers that the Lord should choose him, so vile a creature, to
such grace of life, not only removing infinite evils, but in conferring so
many mercies, as are beyond all his thoughts: not only redeeming him by his
Son, but governing him by his spirit, teaching him by his word, and lading
him with blessings daily: and this he should do to him, passing by so many
millions of men yet in their sins, every one as good in their nature as he:
That he should make his habitation in Goshen light, when all Egypt sits in
darkness: That his fleece alone, as Gideons, should be watered with the dew
of blessing, and so many earthly men round about him dry and destitute of
grace; Oh what a vehement love will all this raise in the heart of a converted
man?

3 When he considers how the Lord has heard his prayer in his tribulation,
and answered him both in giving, and forgiving, and turned his sorrowful seed
time, into a full harvest of joy: delivered his eyes from tears, his soul
from death, his feet from falling; filled his soul with consolations of God,
peace of heart, and joy of the holy Ghost, unspeakable and glorious: oh how
will this, as bellows, blow up a bright flame of holy and fervent love unto
God for his goodness? Psalm. 116.1. This heart will not suffer such blessings
to rain as upon the sands which are unfruitful, but will be devising how to
return love for love: and in this return, nothing shall be thought too good
for God. As he has received Gods best blessings, so he will return of the
best: as he has received liberally from God, he will return liberally unto
God, 2. Sam. 24. David will not offer to the Lord, of that which cost him
nothing. Israel delivered from sea, will offer their ear rings and Jewels to
the Tabernacle, Exodus 30.

The worldling, as a beast, drinks of the brook, thinks not of the spring;
but the convert, drinking of these sweet waters of consolations, rises up to
the wel-spring and head of them with love, and praises.

The second holy affection toward God, is a child-like fear and awe of God. I
say childe-like, because it is twisted with love, and issues from it. He
sees,

1 How contrary he has been to the pure and holy nature of God: how contrary
to his image and grace: how contrary in his will to the righteous will and
pleasure of God. Fire and water, light and darkness, were not more contrary:
nay, he finds still a restance in himself, a rebellion, a law of members
relucting against the law of his mind, and has great reason to fear his own
impotency, and inclination to be led aside by the slyenesse and deceitfulness
of sin.

2 He sees more need of Gods favor, than life it self; and how hardly, but
happily, he has attained it: and now no marvel if his chief care be to
retain it. He fears now to forfeit or cloud the beams of this happy sun.
Psalm. 89. He resolves against whatsoever may offend God, might he gain a
world by it. Joseph might have gained favor, pleasure, wealth, by yielding to
his Mistress; But can I, says he, do this and sin against God?

The third affection toward God, is desire, and breathing out continual and
strong cries for grace against corruption; for the Lord gives not only grace
asked, but grace to ask. A man truly converted, retains still godly sorrow,
and continual prickings of heart; as holy Paul was ever complaining of
himself after his calling, for former sins, and present corruptions; and
hereby discerns that the greatest happiness, stands in pardon of sin;
and that in this world it can never get far enough into this happiness; it
can never get sense and assurance enough of the pardon of sin, and therefore
cries importunately after the sense of the joy of his salvation, Psalm. 51.

2 He sees the deep dye of his sins, and how hardly he parts with his
spots, and so grows instant, almost endless, in his petitions and
repetitions, that God would still wash him, cleanse him, purge him with Isope,
and make him whiter than snow: he knows none in heaven or earth, is able to
purge him, but God alone. This fountain is neither Arbanah, nor Pharphar,
rivers of Damascus, nor Jordan, nor out of any other Cisterne, than the
fountain of living water: for as Creation belongs only to God, so does
redemption, justification, and remission of sins, and sanctification by the
blood of Christ, and spirit of God.

3 He sees the strong sinews of sin yet in himself, and what an heart of
Oak it has within him: how little he profits by his stri^e against it: how
sin repented, returns, and recoyleth upon him, as the unclean spirit cast
out, returns again. And hence is he earnest in daily prayer, for daily
strength, for that spirit of grace, and strength to take his part, that he may
find the power of sin shaken and weakened in him, and he carry victory
against them: thus in sense of smart, steynes, strength of sin, never did a
starued beggar more importunately desire relief, nor a condemned man, a
pardon, than he does further sense of mercy, grace, and strength, and is
restless till he have gotten them in good measure.

CAP. 36. Signs of Repentance, in respect of others.
3 THe signs of true Repentance in respect of others.

1 A man truly humbled will esteem of others, better than of himself, Phil.
2.3. For, 1. his mind is cleared to see his own evils greater than all men's
else: so Paul esteems himself the chief of all sinners.

2 His heart is smitten and humbled, and so dejected in himself, as that he
thinks himself too mean for any rank, or place with GOD, or good men. The
returned Prodigal coming to himself, confessed he is not worthy to be set
amongst the meanest servants in his fathers house: whereas a proud man, that
never saw himself, is so far from casting down himself, that he thinks
every place too mean for him; that every man's sheafe must bow to his: he
thanketh God, as the Pharisee, he is not as others, nor so bad as the Publican.

Object. But sound grace is not blind; it is able to spy a difference
between himself, and a graceless man. It knows that a small measure of
grace is of much worth before GOD: whereas a graceless man is little worth.

Answ. As by light we see light; so by grace, the light of grace; which
shows us, that grace is not given us, to lift up our selves above others, but
to humble us in the sense of our imperfections, in the sight of our own grace.
True grace causes us to glorify God by them, and for them, but by no means
to glory in them.

Object. But I know many great evils in others, which I praise God, I find not
in my self: I know others far inferior in knowledge, wisdom,
watchfulness unto my self: may I for humility, prejudice the truth? may I
give false testimony, or judge unrighteously to prefer a wicked person before
my self?

Answ. 1. Charity rejoices in the truth: therefore the Apostle commanding to
judge better of every man than our selves, must be understood with limitation:
first, he writes of men converted, called before, Saints and Brethren. A man
called, may with praise to God judge his own estate better before God, than
him that he knows is not yet called: but of Brethren and Conuerts, thou may
not prefer thy state before GOD, above any of them.

Object. But I see many evils, and faults in him.

Answ. 1. See thou none in thy self?

2 Thou see his outside, not what he is within toward God: but thou see
thine own inside, and that none called, can be worse or so bad as thy self,
if all were known.

3 Grace will teach thee to see evils in thy brother, to cover them, to cure
them if thou can, and humble thy self for them.

2 The Apostle speaks not of gifts, or qualities bestowed on men, but of men's
persons; not before men, but before God. A man may in true judgment esteem
his own gifts, being so, better tha^ an others. The Apostle said not, ^et
every man esteem another gifts better, but another man's person. And a man may
esteem his person, better than another man's place among men, but not before
God. he may esteem his own person better.

3 A man may in some particular action, hold himself more just, and innocent
than another, before God and man, as David was more innocent than Saul in that
particular: but if David had esteemed Saul a better man before God, than
himself, I suppose he had not sinned, but walked according to charity, which
hops all, and construeth all the best.

Object. He had been deceived.

Answ. Falli quidem posse, peccari non posse; He does what he is commanded, and
sins not, where he goes not against certain kinds.

2 He is soft and gentle unto others: this grace puts off fierceness and
fury, makes the Lion and Lamb dwell together, Isay. 11.6. He seeks to
restore him that is fallen, by the spirit of meekness, considering himself,
Gal. 6.

He considers, first, how himself was once carnal, and sold under sin:
secondly, how long it was, and with what ado he was drawn out of sin:
thirdly, what a while he was a babe in Christ, weak, foolish, childish:
fourthly, how often he has fallen since in temptation: fifthly, how subject he
is to fall, how hardly he stands, what weakness still breaks out; this
makes him meek, and soft to other weaklings and offenders. Thus the grace of
Christ affects the Christian, as Christ himself, who had experience of
temptation, to have a fellow-feeling of infirmity, in such as are tempted.

3 The faults he espyeth in others, he will condemn in himself; if not in the
act and habit, which grace preserves him from, yet in the seeds and
inclination: or he will fall upon some worse thing in himself, which in his
own sense shall cast him far below them. Master Bradford seldom saw any man
fall into sin, or misery, but used to say, Lord be merciful. A good heart
has so much to do at home, as it is not at leisure, or list so much to judge,
or condemn others, as himself.

4 He will do his best to draw others out of sin. Hos. 6.1. Come, let us
return unto the Lord. Acts 26.29. Would God not thou only, but all that hear
me this day, were altogether as I am, excepting my bands. The thief on the
Cross in that straight time, bewrayed the soundness of Repentance, by
admonishing his fellow, railing on Christ, to win him, Fear not thou, etc.

1 The Commandment is Reason.
general. Ezekiel. 18.4. Return, and cause others to return.

2 Grace is as fire, spreading and catching. Mal. 3.16. Then spoke every one
that feared God to his neighbor, by admonition counsel.


3 The spirit of grace, and compassion will pull men out of the fire, Jude 22.
and draw them out of the danger.

4 Well he knows how by his sins, and bad example, he has drawn others
from God: and now will manifest Repentance, by drawing others with himself
unto God.

Use.
Do thou seek by exhortation, advice, admonition, persuasion, by the spirit
of meekness to turn them right that are gone astray? Here is an argument,
thou have been humbled for thy own sin, and misery: thou declarest thy
Repentance by thy care of other men's souls. But a careless disposition
toward others; thou troublest not thy self with sins of others, as not
concerning thee, argues a careless disposition within thy self. Especially

1. The Magistrate must reclaim or restrain evil doers; prevent and hinder
the sins of others, else lie under the guilt of others sins.

2. The Minister must set himself to win souls, to save others with himself.
Peter converted, must strengthen the Brethren. The Servant must resemble
Christ, who not only mourned over Jerusalem, but warned Jerusalem that their
habitation should be desolate.

3. The Master of a family must have care to bring all the family to the
knowledge of God, to reform his house. Job 12.23. He that puts sin away in
himself, puts iniquity from his Tabernacle; and will not abide to dwell,
where sin dwells unreformed.

CAP. 37. Signs of Repentance in respect of ones self.
4. THe converted person will discover the truth of his Repentance in sundry
practices concerning himself.

1. He judges himself, and will set up a throne of judgment in his soul,
and proceed iudicially and impartially against himself, as in ordinary form
of trial of Malefactors.

1. The practice we have in the Church, Ezekiel. 36.31. when the Lord has
renewed his covenant with his people, and bestowed new hearts upon them, and
put his spirit within them, and delivered them from their filthiness; then
shall they remember their wicked ways, and judge themselves worthy to be
destroyed for their iniquities.

2. The fruit and use of this self judging, is, 1. To avoid the Lords judging
of us. 1. Cor. 11.31. If we would judge our selves, etc. 2. To clear the Lord
in judging us, whatsoever he bring upon us for our sins. Psalm. 51.4. That thou
may be clear when thou iudgest. And we conclude with the poor Thief, We
are righteously here.

3. The manner of process in judging himself, is in these things:

1. He will, as a Judge, arraign himself before Gods judgment seat, and
summon himself before the great Judge, and, with Noah, is struck with a
reverent fear and trembling in sense of the judgment, and yet this is by
Faith.

2. He will indite and accuse himself, he will cast the first stone at
himself, he will, as a Judge on the bench, sift out and narrowly examine his
sins in the most odious circumstances of them. This is the searching and
fanning of our selves, and finding out what we have done. Zeph. 2.1. Search
your selves: Search, oh Nation not worthy to be beloved. But who must do it?
Verse 3. Seek the Lord in this manner all the meek of the earth, which have
wrought his judgment.

Even such as have repented must thus search and fan themselves. and the
Church, Lam. 3.40. Let us try our ways, that is, lay our lives to GODS law,
sift the secret corners of our hearts; as the Mariners in the tempest would
find out by lot, for whose sake the storm was. The Church converted has not
done with the Law: but makes use of it for further conviction and humiliation.

Now where is the man that does thus narrowly and impartially sift himself, as
the Kings Attorney sifteth out and aggrauateth every circumstance of the
crime, and fact of the Traitor at the Bar, to make it as odious and hateful as
may be? We may complain as Jeremy, No man smites upon his thigh, no man
says, What have I done? Many a man, like a desperate Bankrupt, is afraid to
look on his reckonings, and goes on till he be clapped up in prison.

3. He will confess against himself, and plead guilty. This is the Covenant,
He that confesses and forsakes his sin, shall find mercy, Pro. 28.13. The
hardened heart, Ier. 2.35. says, Because I am guiltless, surely his wrath
shall turn from me: but the answer is, Behold, I will enter into judgment
with thee, because thou say, I have not sinned.

This is a special end why God makes his own sick in smiting them, yea,
makes their flesh to fail, and their bones to clatter in the skin, and draw
them near to the grave, and their life to the Buryers, and then looks on a
man, and if he say, I have sinned, and perverted right, and it did not profit
me; then will he deliver his soul from the pit, and his life shall see the
light, Job 32.27.

Nay, not only a Rebel yet unconverted, shall be brought to this: but David
himself, by his broken bones, and drying up his moisture, shall roar all day
long under the heavy hand of God, so long as he will keep close his sin. He
must resolve ^o confess, and the Lord will r^mit the iniquity of his sin. 2.
Sam. 12.13.

Now this confession is of special sins: it summeth not up all in a word, nor
is in the mouth only, but in the heart; nor without faith apprehending mercy,
nor without affection, but proceeds out of hatred of sin, not without purpose
of change and reformation.

4. He will read the sentence of death and condemnation against himself, and
abhor himself in dust and ashes, as Job 42. He is now a dead man in Law,
condemned by the sentence of the Law; as a dead man the world has cast him
off, he is no longer of the world.

5. He pleads now for pardon, and seeks for mercy, as a condemned person
would sue for life: even as Benhadads servants came with ropes about their
necks, and most submissiuely sued for their lives.

2. He renews himself daily, and is changed into another man.

1. His person is changed: of a child of hell and darkness, he is become a son
of God, a son of the light; of a sty and habitation of foul lusts and spirits,
he is become the habitation of the living God, 2. Cor. 6.16.

2. His powers and parts are changed. For,

1. He is renewed in the spirit of his mind, that now in the inner man he
serves the Law of God, and holds strife against the Law of the members.

Time was when he regarded wickedness in his heart, his will was set upon evil
works: but now he knows, if he should do so, God would not hear him, Psalm.
66.18. In all the faculties of his soul there is an embracing of
righteousness.

2. His outward members are now weapons of righteousness, ready servants for
grace. As his heart and will are bended toward God: so his tongue and hand are
quick instruments to express the grace that is within.

3. His motions and actions are happily changed: He reuerseth all that hitherto
he has done: he condemns for naught all that is done before grace: he
pulls down all old ruins, and sets up a new frame upon a new foundation,
and leaves not a stone upon a stone that was before. And indeed there can be
no less in true Repentance, than a departure from evil, and an access unto
good. Saul converted, will build up as fast as ever he plucked down; and
preach as zealously as ever he persecuted.

4. A great and remarkable change is in his whole estate and condition. The
change of all other in nature most sensible, is, the change from life to death:
the same is here from the life of sin, to the death of sin. And is not this
sensible?

2. What an happy and miraculous change is that, from death to life? as in the
raising of Lazarus; and of our bodies at the last.

Such is this happy change of the first Resurrection. My son was dead, says
the Father of the Prodigal, but is alive. Ephesians. 2. Ye that were dead in sins
has he quickened. Blessed and happy are they that have part in the first
Resurrection, Revel. 20.5. that is, of souls, not of bodies, unto grace, not
unto glory.

3. What a remarkable and blessed change is that after the resurrection, to
ascend into heaven, and fit with Jesus Christ? But such a change is here: for
the Believer is not only risen with Christ, but ascended already, and sits
now in heavenly places with him. We go up now after the Lord in cogitation,
and conversation; and by faith and hope, actually sit in our head in heavenly
places: for look what is the happy state of the head, is also the condition of
the members; and faith makes things absent, to be present.

Oh then, never be at rest till thou find this happy change in thee; which
is as evident as the shine of the sun, to all eyes being awakened, so full of
miracles, making the blind to see, the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, yea
the dead to rise, to ascend and sit with Christ.

3 He strengthens himself against the assaults of sins, and lusts for time
to come. 1. Ioh. 5.18. He that is born of God, keeps himself. 1. Ioh. 3.3.
He that has this hope, etc.

1 With watchfulness against sin; and here, first, he casts a most
vigilant eye upon those sins to which he has been most inclinable, and which
have bred him most smart. And

2 Knowing that nemo diu tutus periculo proximus, he watches against
occasions, means, and first motions to sin, to avoid them: Sure he is that an
assaulted City cannot long hold out, but by most careful custody of their
Watch: and therefore though sometimes he may nod, and sleep, yet his heart
waketh, Cant. 5.3.

2 He strengthens himself with a diligent care to prosper in grace, and grow
daily to perfection. Phil. 3.12. He has not yet attained, but strives. To
which end,

1 He listeneth heedfully to the silent and secret motions of the spirit, to
cherish and foster them.

2 He waits upon the means and ministry, as Mary sits down at the feet
of Christ, with humility and constancy, as that gesture implies, and seeks
and apprehends all occasions of good.

3 He observes, and carefully undertakes good duties, to which he is
directed, and indeauoureth to perform them in an holy manner, with
cheerfulness and wisdom, and to a good end, sincerely aiming at Gods glory,
and the salvation of himself and others. And as he must needs thrive, who in
a gainefull trade is diligent to apprehend all good opportunities: so in this
gainful trade of godliness, it is the diligent hand that makes rich, and in
every labor is abundance: whereas the idle person, quickly wastes his stock,
and comes to nothing.

3 He strengthens himself with spiritual armor, and weapons of Gods making
against temptations, assaults, persecutions, storms, and all kind of
resistances: he knows the enemies are many, their malice restless, and
inappeasable; and therefore he has need to stand as the Jews in building the
wall of Jerusalem, with the trowell in the one hand, and the sword of the
spirit in the other. And

2 Having had experience of the safety and strength in this armor of proof,
he is careful to put it on, and keep it on, being well assured that he cannot
be hurt but only in the want or careless use of it.

4 He prepares himself by daily exercise of Repentance, for Christ's
appearing. Acts 17.31. God admonishes every man to repent, because he has
appointed a day. And this exercise is in these things.

1 He looks for his head, and in the mean time comfort himself as a
member, which must be of the same nature and qualities: if the head be a
living, spiritual, holy, gracious head, so must the member. Our head admits
no rotten gangrenous, and incurable member.

2 He fears God, because of the great day of his wrath, which comes, Revel.
14.7. Being stricken with a reverend fear, he shunneth every sin, yea, every
idle word whereof he must give account.

3 He clears himself from sin daily; because as the day of death leaves
him, so that day of judgment finds him: he prepares himself, by doing that
daily, which he would be found doing on his dying day: his care is not only to
be found blameless, but well-doing. Blessed is that servant whom his Master
^indeth so doing.

4 He gets and keeps a good conscience before God, and all men: thus he
prepares an Arc for himself to sit safe in. Well he knows that the
sentence of the great Judge at that day, shall concur with the sentence of
this little inward Judge.

5 Because the sentence of that day shall be passed according to the soundness
of faith, and fruits, his daily care is to get oil into his lamp, and light
of shining and saving graces, and holy duties, which only admit him into the
Bridegroom chamber. Thus he prepares his reckoning daily, and fitteth his
account, that he may give it up with joy.

6 He longs, and sigheth, and waits to put off all corruption of sin and
misery, and put on fullness of grace, joy, and glory, Romans 8.23. we sigh in our
selves, 2. Cor 5.4. We sigh and are burdened to be clothed upon: and love to
remove out of the body, and to dwell with the Lord, chap. 8.2. The Spirit says
come, and the Bride says come, Revel. 22.17. These are the true characters of
sound Repentance, which every Believer shall find in himself in some
comfortable measure.

CAP. 38. Motives to Repentance, first, from the necessity of it.
THe fifth and last general is, the motives to excite us to this so necessary
a duty of Repentance.

The first of these motives shall be out of the Text, which inforceth the
necessity of Repentance: Except ye Repent, ye shall perish.

This will appear, if we look on sin unrepented.

1 In the nature of every one, being, first, a work of the flesh, which to do
is to dye: The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. If ye live after the flesh, ye
shall dye, Romans 8.13. And the end of these things is death, Romans 6.21. And when
we were in the flesh, the motions of sin, which were by the law, had force in
our members to bring forth fruit unto death, Romans 7.5.

2 Every sin separateth from God, the fountain of life, and so slays us,
and holds all good things from us, Isay. 59.2.

3 Every sin unrepented, fights against the soul. 1. Pet. 2.11. Lusts
war against the soul, and wound it with many deadly gashes. Paul tells
Timothy, that they drown the soul in perdition* 1. Tim. 6.9.

4 Every sin puts us under the power of the devil, and so in state of
perdition. 1. Ioh. 3.8. He that commits sin is of the devil, and makes
us resemble the devil: and the impenitent person is said to be in the snare of
the devil, taken at his will, 2. Tim. 2.10.

5 Every sin unrepented, shuts heaven. Gal. 3.^2. They that do shoh
things, shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven, and God has sworn, that
never an impenitent sinner shall enter into his rest.

2 Look on sin in the inseparable companions and effects of it.

1 The wrath of God as a fire kindled, burning to the bottom of hell: Psalm.
7.12. God is angry with the wicked every day, and raineth down on the head of
the sinner, storms and hail, and shoots all the arrows of revenge out of
his quiver. How did he lay about him, and cast out his curses as thick as
ha^le upon the first sin committed, against the serpent, the woman, the man,
the earth, and all about him?

2 This wrath has linked, as with an iron chain, sin and punishment
together, which go inseparably, as the cause and the effect, as the body and
the shadow; as the work and the wages, as the parent and the child one
begetting another: heavy and smart is the rod that is prepared for the fools
back: and thou can not go on in sin, but unto punishment.

3d. Effect: Gods justice requires, that as a man sows, so he must reap.
Gal. 6.7. Sin is the seed of wrath, and the harvest of the sinner is
proportioned to his seed time. Job 4.8. I have seen that they that plow
iniquity, and sow wickedness reap the same. If thou sowest iniquity, thou
must reap affliction. Pro. 22.8. He that sows to the flesh, must reap
corruption. Look not to reap wheat, if thou sowest tares: every seed brings
up his own kind; sow the wind, and reap the whirlewinde, Hos. 8.7.

4 There is no way in the world to avoid this wrath and justice, but
Repentance: for, first, to remove the cross, we must remove sin; remove the
cause, the effect will cease: a folly it is to think that fire will dye of it
self, while it lurketh in matter combustible; no more can the fire of Gods
wrath kindled in such severity: secondly, no Repentance, no remission; no
forsaking of sin, no forgiveness of sin. God can power none of his mercy
into thee, till thou by conversion become a vessel of mercy: and therefore let
me persuade, ^s Ezekiel. 18.30. Return, and cause others to return from all
iniquities, if you would not have iniquity to be your destruction. No waters
but of Repentance can quench the fire of wrath kindled; no other fountain is
opened to Jerusalem for sin, Zach. 12.1.

CAP. 39. Motives to Repentance in regard of God.
THe second Motive: If we look toward GOD, we want no incitements to
Repentance: as,

1 Without Repentance, we have nothing to do with God: no fellowship, no
society: two cannot walk together, unless they be friends: without
Repentance, we are without God, as rebels, gone out in rebellion against their
Prince and country. 1. Ioh. 3.6. Whosoever sins, has not seen God, nor
knows him, Ephesians. 2.12. Of all natural men it is said, that they are aliens
and strangers, without Christ, without hope, without God in the world. Only by
Repentance we are gathered into God again. An impenitent person is in no other
request with GOD, than an Heathen or Atheist.

2 In God we may behold a strict justice, and unavoidable. Let a world of
sinners combine against God, it shall be washed away with waters of wrath,
that would not wash themselves in the tears and waters of Repentance: Let a
world of Angels sin against God, those mighty and glorious creatures cannot
make their party good against this justice, but shall be cast into perpetual
chains of black darkness. Let Jonah, a godly man, sin against God, and
run another way, neither shall the ship, nor the Mariners skill, nor toil,
save him from the tempest.

Oh then shall I go on in sin, to dare this justice? shall I by an heart
hardened, not knowing Repentance, heap up wrath against the day of wrath? Did
not I observe the Angel pouring out vials of wrath on them that repented not
of their works? Revel. 16.11. Has not this justice appointed a day wherein he
will judge the world by Jesus Christ? and should not this admonish me to hasten
my Repentance? Acts 17.30.

3 In God we behold an ocean of mercies, which mercies of God should lead us
to Repentance, Romans 2, 4. and shall we let them lie by us as things we make no
use of? whereas every mercy should be a Sermon of Repentance. But let us see
how this mercy inuiteth us.

1 He has proclaimed himself merciful, gracious, one that repents him of
our evil, that we should repent of our own; ready to forgive, nay, coming
out to meet us upon our return, as the Father of the Prodigal: one that
woo^th, and seeks, and calls us, Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dye?

2. His mercy has made many merciful promises: but only to the repenting
sinner are they made, and made good. And indeed God neither can nor will be
merciful to any, but penitent sinners. While thy rebellions increase, how can
I be merciful unto thee? how can I spare thee for these things? Ier. 5.7. And
for his will, Deuteronomy. 29.20. God will not be merciful to such a man. Would
thou feed sauourly upon the promises of this life or a better? thou must season
them all with the sharp sauce of Repentance and godly sorrow, to which they
are all inteyled.

Only on condition thou turn to the Almighty, thou shall be built up, and lay
up gold as dust, Job 22.23. If thou cease to do evil and learn to do well,
thou shall have thy sins washed, and eat the good things of the land, Esaias 1.

3. This mercy repelleth no penitent sinner: but receives the greatest sinners
upon return. Esaias. 1.18. Wash you, cleanse you: then if your sins were red as
scarlet, they shall be white as snow. No sins can foil this mercy.

The poor penitent Thief was not despised: nor the poor Woman called a great
sinner, when she powered tears upon Christ: he condemned not the poor Woman
deprehended in the act of adultery, standing penitently before him: nor
rejected the Disciple that denied and rejected him: nor the Persecutor of the
Disciples, the Oppres^or of the Church; but receiu^d him to mercy, 1. Tim.
1.13. (...) will he shut the door to thee repenting, that opened it to these?

4. Sins against mercy, cast the sinner into severity of justice: sins
against the remedy bring miseries remediless. Oh that we were wise, to say,
Shall I sin against such mercy? has the Lord done me all this good in my
soul, body, in my self and mine, in outward mercies and inward, for this life
and a better, that I should repay him evil for good, load him with daily
sins, for lading me with blessings daily?

Why have not we the understanding of men in us, to conceive that our mercy to
our sins, preuenteth Gods mercy to our souls? shall a servant the kinder the
Master is, be so much the more careless to provoke him? Did Joseph reason so?
Would we brook it at our servants hand? Will God at ours?

A graciou^ heart will conclude, as Psalm. 130.4. Mercy is with thee that thou
may be feared. Let me by these mercies of God beseech you to give up your
selves unto him.

4. Look upon God in all his ordinances, wherein are offers of greatest
mercy, and sanctified, as blessed means of attaining the whole grace revealed
by the Gospel; without Repentance they are not only unprofitable, but most
hurtful, yea, and damnable. The Word which I speak, says Christ, shall judge
you at the last day, speaking to the impenitent Jews. The sweet tidings of the
Gospel are a savor of death to this man: The word will take hold on the
impenitent person one time or other, Zach. 1.4.

The Sacraments do him no good, but mischief, that by impenitencie casts
poison into the Lords cup. 1. Cor. 11.26. He eats and drinks his own
damnation: even the Lords table is a snare to a wicked man. The guest that came
into the Supper without the wedding garment, heard the doleful sentence, Take
him, bind him hand and foot, etc.

His prayers are abominable so long as he turns his ear from hearing the
Law, Prove. 18. Psalm 66. If I regard wickedness in my heart, God will not hear
my prayer. Isay 1.15. When you stretch your hands I will hide mine eyes from
you, and though you make many prayers I will not hear, for your hands are full
of blood: Never say Lord, Lord, if thou do not his Commandment.

His whole profession is hateful. Psalm. 50. What have thou to do to take my
word in thy mouth, and hate to be reformed?

5. Look upon God in the throne of his glory: who would not enjoy the glory of
God in heaven? who professes not that he will to heaven with the foremost? but
no repentance, no heaven: no other gate of heaven, nor passage, but by
Repentance. Men are well pleased so long as we speak of heaven, happiness,
salvation, eternal life: but when we speak of repentance, it is an hard
saying, an unpleasing doctrine, a duty which will not down. If they could get
to heaven by any thing else than by leaving their sins, were it thousands of
Rams, or ten thousand Rivers of oil: if by giving their first borne, or fruits
of body for the sin of their souls, these they would exchange; but to mortify
lusts, that the hypocrite cannot yield. But

1. Thou must come to heaven by no means, but GODS own.

2. There is but one way, and that a narrow and straight way of Repentance: and
to dream of heaven without Repentance, is to dream to pass over a deep and
broad River without bridge or barge. Thou may poast and wander up and down,
and tire thy self in coasting every way to avoid the stoninesse, roughness
and straightness of the way: but if thou meanest to come to thy iournies end,
thou must pass this narrow lane, and there is no way in the world to shift it.

CAP. 40. Motives to Repentance in respect of Christ.
THe third Motive: in respect of Christ; in whom we see

1. Surpassing love above the love of women: he loved us better than himself,
than his life, when we were no better than rebels and enemies. Shall I love my
sin better than him, who loved my soul better than his own life? Oh let this
coard of love draw us to Repentance; He came to call sinners to Repentance.

2. Look upon his bitter passion, and therein see the merit and desert of the
least sin: for which God must shed his blood, and pay the greatest price that
heaven or earth contained.

Consider the end of his suffering. He dyed that sin might dye in me: and
shall I put life in it again, and frustrate the death of Christ? The fountain
was opened in his side, and streams of blood issued out, that my soul should
be cleansed from the filthiness of sin: and shall I wallow in the puddle still?

Consider that Christ was crucified for none in whom sin is not crucified: None
have part in his death, but such as are dead to sin: none have the benefit of
his death, but such as feel the virtue of it in themselves. Isay 59.20. He is
a Redeemer of none, but such as turn from transgression in Jacob.

Consider in whomsoever there is sound application of Christ's death, there is a
similitude of his death. As he dyed for sin, so here is a dying unto sin. Romans
6.5. We are grafted with him to the similitude of his death. As Christ's body
was nailed to the Cross: so must we nail our sins to his Cross.

As his body and strength was infeebled and weakened upon the Cross, till he
dyed: so must our body of sin be daily weakened and subdued, till it be wholly
dead in us.

As Christ spared no part of himself, but gave himself wholly in all parts
and members to death for us: so must we not spare any sin or lust, but put them
all to pain, mortifying one as well as another.

And as Christ after death was raised to life, and dyed no more: so we, having
dyed to sin by mortification, must rise again by daily renewing our
Repentance, never to return under the power of sin and death any more. This is
the similitude of CHRIST'S death.

3. Look upon Christ as our head, and there is no member of that head, but the
true penitent: he admits no rotten or stinking member. 2. Cor. 5.17. If any man
be in Christ, he is a new creature. Truth of Christianity is discerned by
truth of Repentance. Without faith unfeigned is no union with Christ: and all
that faith is fained and false, which works not in Repentance. This grace
discerns us from hypocrites and wicked men.

CAP. 41. Motives to Repentance from ones self.
THe fourth Motive to Repentance may be drawn from thy self. And here look
on thy person, and thy self; both whole, and parts, will call on thy self to
hasten thy Repentance.

1. Thy soul: Was it redeemed with gold, silver, or any corruptible thing? or
rather, with the precious blood of Jesus Christ? and will thou basely sell it
again for gold, or silver, or corruptible things, or any sinful pleasure? will
the winning of the whole world recompense the loss of thy soul?

2. Thy body is, or should be a Temple of the holy Ghost, else art thou none
of Christ's: and will thou profane thy body with filthy sins and lusts, to vex
the spirit, and make him weary of his lodging? Is it nothing to profane a
Temple? to turn it into a Tap-house by drunkenness, into a stews by
uncleanness? Is it nothing to make thy fathers house a den of thieves, by
injustice and falsehood?

3 Thy self was a slave and vassal of Satan and sin, and set free by Jesus
Christ: will thou run into bondage again? Art thou now a Christian? then
thou art in union with Christ, the Spouse of Christ; and will thou behave thy
self as a strumpet, and be led away with every alluring harlot, to the
dishonor and high displeasure of so loving a husband?

2 Cast thine eyes upon thy sins, and see it high time by Repentance to
renounce them. As,

1 How hateful every sin is to God, as for which he abhors his most
excellent creatures, Angels and men: nay, so perfectly hated by God, as he
could not choose but punish it in his dear Son, while he sustained our
persons, and bare our sins.

2 What an extreme folly sin is! who but a fool, having light, sight, and
reason, would walk upon rocks and quicksands, and bolt on into pits and
ponds, being warned of the danger? for all these cannot threaten such danger to
the body, as sin does to the soul.

Who but a fool being warned that thieves and murderers lie in such a way,
and such and such they have robbed and slain, and that they lie in wait for
himself, and if he go on, he cannot avoid present death, yet will be bold
and foole-hardy to go on after such warning? But thy sins are so many
thieves and robbers that lie in wait to destroy thee, and if thou go on in
that way, thou can not avoid everlasting perdition.

Who but a mad man would stir up the wrath of the King against him, and run
daily into the lurch of the Law? as the sinner does, who makes God his enemy,
stirs up a Lion against himself, makes the Law of God but a cobweb, as if
no execution waited the transgressor.

What a folly is it to offend, and not seek to satisfy? nay, a frenzy far
beyond that, for a traitor going to execution, and having a pardon brought him
for accepting, scorneth the pardon, breaks the seals, tramples the writing,
reuiles the Prince, the messenger, and justifies his treasonable practices
still. The sinner commits high treason against the crown and dignity of the
God of heaven, and is daily drawing nearer his execution; a pardon is offered
freely in the Gospel, grace and mercy are offered; but he by impenitency,
thrusts away the word of life, scorneth the messengers, justifies and
defends his sin: here is a spiritual madness and frenzy.

What a folly is it, whereas a man will do nothing to make his finger ache, he
would not be hired to hold his finger in the flame of a candle a moment, for
any money or gold: he will scarce taste a bitter potion for recovery of health?
yet this man makes no bones of that which will bring endless torment in hell
fire: he sticks not to drink up a cup of poison, the nature of which is, the
further it goes, the more incurable it is* he nourishes a serpent in his
bosom, which has teeth and sting, and poison enough: he carries every day a
faggot to burn himself. Oh now will not all this bring the sinner back with
David to say, Oh I have done very foolishly? The stung Israelites looked to the
brazen serpent, and lived; they needed not be bidden: but we have need to be
urged to lo^ke upon Christ lifted up upon the pole of the Cross, and yet will
not do so little for our selves and cure. What a folly is it for a man to fall
and not offer to rise? no man in his sense would lie still. Oh then remember
whence thou art fallen, and do thy first works, and repent.

3 All sin remains in full power, and condemning force upon the soul
without Repentance, Ioh. 9.41. Now you say you see, your sin remains, in
the guilt, in the stain, in the domination and reign, in the damnation of it.
Thou wast a swearer, an adulterer, a hater of God, and an enemy to grace, a
persecutor of Christ; and thou art so still if thou have not repented. Sin
hangs like a burre on the impenitent person, it parts not in life, nor in
death, but lies down in the dust with him, and rises with him; it goes to
judgment with him, and is sent to hell with him; the wrath of God abides on
him, because his sin abides with him.

4 Of all sins, impenitency is the greatest and nearest to judgment. Revel.
2.20. Iezabel had time to repent given her, but repented not, and therefore was
cast into a bed of sorrow. This was noted in Saul, 1. Chron. 10 13. Saul dyed
for his transgression, but what was his transgression? First, he disobeyed the
commandment: secondly, he sought to a Witch: thirdly, he sought not to the
Lord, and therefore the Lord slew him. True it is that every sin is damnable,
but no sin actually condemns, but impenitency, and therefore the greatest
of sins, is not to repent of sin. Let it not be said of thee, as of Herod;
yet he added this above all, that thou being so great a sinner, have not yet
repented.

3 Look upon thy self in respect of thy good duties.

1 None can be good in thee, till thou have repented; first, the tree must be
good, and then the fruit: first, Abels person was accepted, and then his
sacrifice; but to Caine, and his sacrifice, he had no respect.

2 Nay, in the best, even the best duties must be begun and fin^shed with
Repentance, without which the best service is unprofitable, and sinfully
defective. Nehemiah in building up the wall, in commanding the Sabbath to be
kept, desires to be remembered in goodness, and pardoned. Neh. 13.12. Repent
and pray; repent and be baptized; repent and receive the Sacraments, else sin
will hinder.

4 Look on thy self in thy estate and condition, both in respect of sin,
and of change, and Repentance.

1 Look upon thy estate of corruption for time Past, Present, To come.


1 What has thy whole life past, been before grace? Col 1.21. Paul wishes
them to consider, that in times past they were strangers and enemies, having
their minds set on evil works; and 1. Pet. 4.3. It is sufficient that we have
spent our time past in the lusts of the Gentiles, in wantonness, lusts,
gluttony, drunkenness. So do thou see thy sins for number, and weight as
the sands already: and for the manner of committing them against such light and
means, so out of measure sinful; and do thou not say, It is sufficient?

2 What, is thy whole present course without grace?

1 To go on in sin, is wilfully to perish and murder our own souls: the
case being worse with us, than that man's that fell among thieves; we lie not
half, but wholly dead. God sends his Son the good Samaritane, to bind up
our wounds, to temper a remedy of his own heart blood, when no herb or simple
was left in heaven or earth for our cure: Now we in stead of thankful
acceptance, and application of this remedy by going on in sin, we tread under
foot this precious blood: nay, we make our wounds larger and bigger every day
than other.

2 Every man is every day nearer his end, his death and judgment: we are going
before Gods tribunal, and to the bar of his judgment: and shall we be so
mad, as even in the way, to multiply our misdemeanors? A malefactor going to
the bar, or to execution, if he should cut a purse by the way, would not
every one think hanging too good for him? This is the case of every impenitent
person living in the practice of sin, even in the way to his execution.

3 What will be thy case in time to come, going on in sin?

1 In the approach of death, Satan will as^ayle with all his strength, that in
the last combat, he may break the neck of thy soul: and he having the
strength of a man's own sins unsubdued and vnmastered, he easily attaineth
his purpose: then sets he every small sin before the eye, in the
magnitude of a huge mountain, and the curse due unto it, to the breaking of
the heart of a sinner. Now is the guilty conscience in a woeful case, stricken
through with terror and torment. Now he sees that whereas he thought to have
got out of sin at the furthest at his death, how weak and sick his Repentance
is; how strong, unconquerable, and gyant-like his sin is, and all concludes
with satan against him: he sees where the strong man has long dwelt, he is
not easily cast out, but as he has lived, so he is likely to dye; for as the
tree leans, so commonly it falls; and as it falls, so it lies.

2 If all this will not move thee, consider what follows after death: the
time hasteneth wherein thou shall be naked before the Lord, the Judge of all,
in the sight of Angels, Men, and Devils.


Before thee a terrible Judge to condemn thee, and with him, the Saints shall
judge the world, and give witness against thy sin. On the one hand, Satan who
tempts thee, shall now accuse thee: On the other, the Angels, ministering
spirits, shall be ready, as a faggot to bind thee, and cast thee into hell:
within thee, an accusing conscience, as a thousand witnesses against thee,
shall bring to mind all sins, and circumstances long since forgotten:
Beneath thee, hell ready to devour thee: none shall be admitted to speak for
thee, and thy self shall be speechless, and can not speak for thy self,
so as sentence must needs pass against thee, and thou delivered to the
Devil, whose will thou did diligently execute here, that he may now have
his will and delight in thy endless torment. Oh therefore use means to
prevent this ruful condition: come out of thy sin betime; hye thee apace out of
Sodom; lay aside thine own folly; now take Gods warning; hear the raps of
Christ now knocking at the door of thy heart, by the hammer of his Word,
Spirit, Mercies, Judgments. Now follow the Motion: let not Satan or sin
beguile thee any longer, to hold thee off from Repentance.

2. See thy happy change and blessed estate, by this grace of Repentance.

1. Of all gifts a broken heart is the rarest and happiest: the humble heart in
stead of lodging foul sins and lusts, becomes a lodge for the highest God,
who pleases to dwell with a broken and contrite heart. What an happy change of
a stony heart into flesh!

2. The very first act of Repentance brings pardon of sin. Psalm. 32. I said I
will confess, and thou forgauest. 2. Sam. 12.13. David no sooner said, I have
sinned, but Nathan said, The Lord has put away thy sin: And the continuance of
it, brings and continues a sweet sense and assurance of remission in the
heart. It is not with God, as in men's Courts, Confess, and judgment runs
against; but in Gods, Confess, and the Law is satisfied. In men's Courts,
Confession and Condemnation go together; in Gods, Confession and
Justification. Judge thy self, and prevent the judgment of God.

3. What an happy and welcome change were it of age into youth? Nature cannot
work it, grace can: The old man is put off, the new man put on: Of old men we
become young, and smug again, renewing our strength as the Eagle, Psalm. 103.

And this change by grace forerunneth that great change by glory, and is the
beginning of it: When these base earthly bodies shall become spiritual bodies;
and this very piece of clay shall shine as the Sun: when corruption shall put
on incorruption; and these ignorant sinful souls shall put on a perfect image
of God^; and the whole man become like the Angels themselves. Whom these
considerations cannot move, I suppose nothing can.

Thus I have somewhat largely entreated out of this Text, of the Practice of
Repentance, in the Rules, Lets, Helps, Marks and Motives; I will conclude the
Treatise with that of our Savior, If ye hear these things, blessed are ye if
ye do them; and end as I began with the words of the Text, If ye repent not,
ye shall all perish. There is no greater misery, than to be without misery,
no greater sorrow, than to be without the sorrow of sound Repentance.

FINIS.

