Two Treatises: THE PEARL OF the GOSPEL, AND THE PILGRIMS PROFESSION: To
which is added A Glass for Gentlewomen to dress themselves by.

By Thomas Tailor Preacher of Gods Word to the Town of Reding.

a woman in front of a looking glass or mirror

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for John Bartlet at the gilt Cup in Cheape-side. 1625.

THE PEARL of the Gospel, OR Jewel Evangelical: 1. Diligently sought 2.
Joyfully found 3. Dearly bought
by the wise Merchant.

Infolded in Christ's Parable, AND Unfolded by the Application OF THOMAS TAILOR,
Preacher of Gods Word to the Town of REDING.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for John Bartlet at the gilt Cup in Cheape-side. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Mris. Elizabeth Backus, Wife to Mr. Samuel Backus
Esquire, and Justice of Peace: And to her three virtuous and religious
daughters, Mris. Mary Standen, wife to Mr. Standen Esquire, and Justice of the
Peace; Mris. Flower Backus wife of Mr. John Backus Esquire and Mris. Elizabeth
Bellingham, wife to Mr. Richard Bellingham Esquire; Grace and Peace from the
Fountains.
Right Worshipful,
Pearls are small in quantity, but great in their hidden quality, and
smaller often in the weight than in their worth: such an one is this which I
have presented unto you as a token of my due respect and unfeigned love to your
self, and the Church in your family. Pearls from earth fit not common
persons; but this from heaven belongs to all who mean to partake in the
common salvation. As this Pearl is yours in the common right of Saints, so
this offer of its is yours by a second and more peculiar right, as who first
helped it out of the dark into this light. Your earnest and often desires of
some of the written notes of this Treatise, drew from me a promise, the thought
of the payment whereof, was my first thought of this publication. And now this
Pearl being yours, wear it as your chief ornament, the price of which
raises your own price and reckoning in the eyes of God and good men, Pro.
30.10.
above the Carbuncles and Rubies. Other ornaments severed from this, are but
beautiful vanities. The largest revenues, the richest estates, the most ample
treasures, the costliest cabinets, filled with pearls and precious stones,
sets the person wanting this pearl, in no higher reckoning than common flints,
or other contemptible stones, Isa. 40.15.
with him to whom the Nations are but as the drop of a bucket, or as the dust
of a balance. So of all natural endowments, we may compare them (as Solomon
does beauty) to a ring of Gold, which outwardly commends the wearer; But the
jewel of this ring is this pearl of the Gospel, or the life of the Gospel,
in the life of the Gospeller. Let this Jewel be lost once, or missing, the
ring may be gilded, and glistering without, but the touchstone and trial will
find that it was never gold. 3 Ioh. 4.
And because I know that you have no greater joy than to see your children
walk in the truth, I am assured, you will gladly afford them an equal share
with you in this so precious a commodity, and therefore have I taken them into
this dedication. Psalm. 127.5.
Blessed are you that have your quiver full of such lovely arrows. Of the
virtuous woman is said, Her children praise her. Prou. 31.28.
Were this a verbal praise of the mouth, children might seem testes e sinu,
and the spreaders of the partial praises of their mother; but this is an
actual and solid commendation, and unsuspected, when the shining virtues of
the fear of God, sobriety, and modest conversation of children, proclaim the
grace, piety, and care of the mothers education. Among that rich store of
earthly comforts, with which God has beset you, you have none comparably
graceful to this, if you except your sweet society with your grave and
religious husband.

And now to you three daughters, worthy of such a Mother: When I call to
remembrance the unfeigned faith, which dwelt, and yet dwells in your
Grandmother, (whose reverend old age is crowned with an ancient and honorable
profession and practice of holy religion above any I know in these parts) and
in your dear mother; and am assured it dwells in you also, I could not but
put you in remembrance, to stir up the gift of God that is in you: And exhort
you, as you have happily begun, to hold on in the way of grace, and see that
your works be more at last than at first. God has advanced you into the
fellowship of religious and complete Gentlemen your husbands, to fair estates
and portions in this world, but especially to a sure expectation hereafter, by
means of your inseparable conjunction to your Head and Husband Jesus Christ.
You must now advance him who has thus advanced you, and love him for himself,
who has loved you in his Son: and hold every new sense of mercy, a new
spur and provocation unto duty. In the way and pace in which you go, I must
acknowledge I pass and slip an opportunity, by passing over in silence so
many commendable parts in you all, Prou. 31.30.
which make you worthy to be praised among women fearing God. But my praises
can lift you no higher than your own virtues do, whose diligent pains in
gaining knowledge of holy things, conscionable practice of sound religion,
charitable refreshing of the poor members of Christ, and whose humble, sober,
wise, modest, and lovely carriage, (especially in these loose days) are as so
many tongues, and mouths, and pens (without mine) to publish your due praises:
and knowing that you will be better pleased, that I turn my praises into
prayers, for your progress and prosperity in the good way, I shall endeavor
to supply that want this way, heartily commending you to the power of his
grace, who only can further enrich you with the pearl of the Gospel; who also
give you with the new year, new supplies of all holy graces, till the new man
be complete in Jesus Christ, in whom I rest

Your Worships to be used for your furtherance in the faith, THO. TAILOR.

THE PEARL OF the Gospel.
MATTHEW. 13.45. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant man that seeks
good pearls.

Who having sound a pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and
bought it.


Our Lord Jesus coming from the bosom of the Father, to reveal the mystery
hid from the beginning of the world, spent the whole time of his ministry in
discovering to the Church, the excellency, the utility, and the necessity of
that blessed and saving truth, the daughter of eternity, without which the
whole world had lien in perpetual death and darkness.

This parable among many, The scope of this Parable.
and above many, manifests, that how base soever and vile the things of God
seem to natural men, yet there is such worth, virtue, price and beauty in
them, as the godly man who only can discern them, will exchange all he has
with them, yea and part with all the world before he will part with them.

In which Parable consider four things. Four parts of the Text.


1. What is this kingdom of heaven. 2. What is this pearl, and the goodness
of it. 3. Who is this Merchant man. 4. What are his actions, namely three.
1. He seeks good pearls. 2. He finds a pearl of great price. 3. He
sold all to buy it.


By the kingdom of heaven, What the kingdom of heaven is not.
is not meant the blessed estate of the Church triumphant in heaven: as in
Matthew. 5.10. Yours is the kingdom of heaven.

Nor the Church militant and visible: as in Matthew. 13.47. which is like a net
cast into the Sea.

Nor the time of grace under Christ exhibited to preach in his own person:
Mat. 3.3. For the kingdom of God is at hand.

Nor the estate of grace, wherein the elect be justified by faith, and are lead
forward by grace, toward the kingdom of heaven: as Matthew. 13.51. The kingdom
of heaven is like a grain of mustard seed.

Nor the kingdom of power, by which God in heaven as a King governs all the
world, and every particular creature in it. What it is.


But by it is meant the preaching and publishing of the Gospel, called here,
1. A Kingdom. 2. A Kingdom of Heaven.


A Kingdom, 1. Why a kingdom, 3. Reasons.
for three reasons.

the Gospel of the kingdom, Matt. 4.23.

out of the kingdom of darkness, and translate us to the kingdom of his
dear Son, Coloss. 1.13. and the Apostle calls it the power of God to
salvation, Romans 1.16.

righteousness, peace of conscience, the joy of the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.
but also to lead us through to the participation of that kingdom of glory
reserved in heaven for us.

Secondly, of heaven. Why of heaven.


1. Because of distinction from earthly kingdoms: it preaches Christ a King;
but withal, that his kingdom is not of this world: he rules not after a
temporal manner, but sits as King in the spirits of his subjects, and
rules the conscience, and holds up this scepter of his kingdom in the
hearts of men, so as this kingdom is heavenly and spiritual.

2. For exaltation and advancement, lifting it up above all that earthly
kingdoms can afford, for worth and excellency: and so to stir up our
affections, and pull our eyes toward it; the very name of it should ravish us,
and commend the privileges of the Gospel unto us.

admonition and caution, that the subjects of this kingdom should receive
their laws from heaven, and contemning earth and earthly things, should
aspire, meditate and frame themselves to heavenly conversation: this very title
of the Gospel should be of power to lift us above the earth.

What is meant by the Pearl.
By the pearl is meant, 1. The happy estate of grace here. 2. The happy estate
of glory hereafter.


Of which latter, see Revel. 21.21. the foundations of the new Jerusalem were
garnished with all manner of precious stones; Jasper, Saphir, Chalcedon, and
the twelve gates were twelve pearls, etc.

But here it signifies the happy estate of grace, in which we are still
seeking, and purchasing the pearl, and the good things of the Gospel, as
namely, the glad tidings of it; the offer of Christ with his merits; the gift
of faith, justification, sanctification; Good things of the Gospel resemble a
Pearl in five things.
sanctification; and these are called a pearl for sundry reasons.

1. For the value and worth of them, 1. In value and worth.
which pass all other treasures in excellency and estimation. As silver is
beyond brass, and gold beyond silver, so pearls are beyond gold, and the good
things of the Gospel beyond the most precious pearls: so says Solomon, Pro.
3.14, 15. The merchandise of wisdom is better than the merchandise of silver;
the revenue of it is better than that of gold: it is more pretiou than pearls,
and all thou can desire are not comparable to it. What a world of wealth both
spiritual and heavenly, is manifested by the Gospel, which exhibiteth Christ,
in whom are al treasures of grace and glory? What a rich storehouse is Christ
himself? the least drop of whose blood was more precious than all the world?
How precious are all his merits, and plentiful for redemption? What a good
thing, and precious grace is faith, which storeth a man with all the good
things of heaven? How precious is the doctrine of salvation, which must not be
cast to swine; as Matt. 7.6? Well does our Savior therefore call this a pearl
of great price for the most precious pearls in regard o^ these good things o^
the Gospel, are but dust and clay.

2. 2. In rareness.
For the rareness. Pearls are not so common as pibles, nor in the hands of
common and ordinary men; but fit for Princes and great personages; common men
know them not, nor the price, nor the use of them: Even so the good things of
the Gospel are not known or obuious to every one, but hidden mysteries,
unknown to the most part of the world, and a wisdom revealed to Babes. And as
Pearls are easily contemned of unskillful persons, who are ignorant of their
price and use: so the mysteries of the Gospel; offer them to the Gentiles,
they esteem them foolishness: 1 Cor. 1.23.
to the Jews they are as a scandal: Christ crucified is the very scorn of the
world; only a few believers advanced to be Kings and Priests to God, Reu. 1.5.
know the price of this commodity, and lay out for it.

3. 3. For hidden virtue.
In regard of the hidden virtue and secret excellency of them. The body and
quantity of a Pearl is small, but the virtue and power of it great: so the
Gospel seems small, and contemptible, Romans 1.16.
but it is the power of God to salvation: and faith in the Gospel draws
virtue from Christ to open blind eyes; to cure all spiritual diseases, to
raise from death in sin; to drive away devils, and break the force of
temptation: all the Pearls betwixt heaven and earth have not such power; only
faith as small as a grain of mustard seed, draws virtue from Christ: and
grace though it be never so little (if sound) it is of power to open blind
eyes, and to carry the Saints along unto their salvation.

4. In regard of their excellent qualities, Four qualities of a rich Pearl.
as purity, and cleerenesse: 1. Brightness. 2. Famnesse. 3. Greatness. 4.
Roundnesse
and orient brightness: so the law of the Lord is pure, Psalm. 19. The doctrine
of grace, for the brightness and perspicuitie of it, is as a resplendent gem,
which draws all eyes to it. Secondly, in Pearls is firmness and strength;
so hard and firm are some of them, as fire consumes them not, nor much
strength can break them: even so firm and sure are the promises of the
Gospel; all of them are Yea and amen: 2 Cor. 1.20.
fire nor water, prosperity nor adversity can conquer them: so firm is
saving grace, which can never be shaken out of the heart. Thirdly, 2 Timothy 3.
last.
their magnitude and greatness; so great is the mystery of godliness;
amongst all Gods secrets, there is none so great, as this of man's redemption:
In the beholding of which, the Angels cannot yet satisfy themselves, 1 Pet.
1.12. Fourthly, equality and roundnesse much commend pearls. The Gospel is
offered to all alike, to believers and unbelievers; to masters and servants,
rich and poor: it is no fault of the Gospel, if thou be not saved by it.

5. 5. For the effects, which are three. 1. To enrich.
In regard of their effects. Pearls supply our needs at al seasons; and
therefore Nonius a Senator of Rome, persecuted by M. Antonius, provided only
for himself an Union of inestimable price, to carry with him in his flight, by
which alone be was rich enough: So the Gospel supplieth all our wants; Christ
in the Gospel supplieth us all things, provides for us bread of life, and
water of life, and garments of his own righteousness; he pays all our
debts, inricheth us with inestimable treasures, and naked Christ is wealth
enough.

Secondly, 2. To adorn.
Pearls serve for ornament, and honor, and show a man to be in dignity: some
hang them in their ears; some hang them in golden chains upon their breasts;
some set them in gold, and wear them on their singers: So the Gospel is the
honor and ornament of a Christian, and makes up all his indignities and
wrongs: while he hangs it on his ear, by diligent and careful hearing:
while he fastneth this Union, and Pearl, and makes it shine by faith in his
heart: and while he wears it as a ring on his finger, by conscionable
practice of the commandments of the Gospel; which is, to believe in the Son
of God, and love one another; this man is honored of God and all his Saints.
Thirdly, to cure and comfort.


Thirdly, many Pearls are of great use, and effect, to prevent poison, to
preserve natural strength, and recover it decayed: many of them great
Cordials, and others great comforters of the principal vital parts of man.

So the Gospel and good of it preserve the soul from the poison of sin,
preserves supernatural strength, restores and renews strength of grace
decayed; is the only heavenly Cordial to comfort the heart in gripes of
temptation, and accusation: it is the comforter in all afflictions; that a
Christian may say of it as David of the Law, Psalm. 119.92.
Had not my comfort been in thy law; I had perished long ago in my trouble.



Our Savior would have us see how carnal we are, while such supernatural
treasures are so slightly accounted, and at so little and low a rate with us.
How carnal is it to prefer other Pearls which are from earth, or sea,
before this Pearl which only is from heaven? How unwise are we, so highly to
value the Pearls whose matter is dust and slime, and whose beauty is by the
Sun beams included: and contemn the Pearl, the matter of which is the
eternal love of God by Jesus Christ: and the beauty the light and grace of
Christ the Sun of righteousness, which for the orient brightness excels
the Sun shining in his strength.

Beside, never shall this Pearl be purchased before it be prized; nor ever be
of use to us until we have purchased it: as a Pearl keeps it shine,
beauty, and virtue, wrapped up in the darkness and bowels of the earth; but
no whit enricheth him that finds it not.

Place our riches in this Pearl.
which is so far above Pearls as the substance is above the shadow: Pearls
here do but shadow forth the worth of grace, but there is no proportion
between them in shining, use, or beauty.

First, because opinion sets the price of the one; 1. The excellency of
this Pearl above all other in five things.
but worth on the other: the true worth of the grace of the Gospel,
heighteneth it to him that can truly esteem it.

Secondly, no Pearl can buy a grain of grace; but grace may bring riches and
Pearls; having the promise of this life as well as of that which is to come.

Thirdly, no Pearl can avail in the day of wrath: only grace opposed to Gods
displeasure stinteth it, Prou. 11.4.

Fourthly, Pearls and treasures can no way further a man's salvation; many
ways do and may binder it: many for gaping after the world lose their own
souls: but the wealth of the Gospel only saves souls, and there is no other
means besides it.

Fifthly, Pearls may make a man rich in this world, and adorn the outward man;
but not the inward: neither will they go with us hence to do us any good;
here we find them, and here we leave them. But the rich Pearl of the Gospel
is indeed ours; and makes us richest in heaven: content thy self therefore
with it as the blessed Disciple Peter saying, Ioh. 6.68.
Master, thou have the words of eternal life, and whither shall we go? How
have the Saints esteemed and made grace their only jewel and treasure? Ps.
119.111. David made the testimony of God his heritage, yea the joy of his
heart. Ephesians. 1.7. The Apostle calls it a rich grace, and Chap. 2.7. the
exceeding riches of his grace: and Col. 1.17. which riches is Christ in you.



rich knowledge, 1 Cor. 1.27. they have faith a rich commodity, more precious
than gold that perishes, 1 Pet. 1.7. they have Christ living in them, and
dwelling in them; they have prayer a rich storehouse; they naue title, and are
indeed heirs of the Kingdom of heaven. And suppose they be afflicted,
rejected, and scorned amongst men; yet can they with Moses, account the rebukes
of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.46. On what a
world of sweet content lodges in the heart with Christ? in want of all things
he has all things. It one ask a Christian, What is thy Country? he may
answer, Christ and his Country. What is thy kindred? Ans. Christ is my kindred.
Matthew. 12.50. Behold my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters. What is thy
wealth and honor? Answer, Gods Kingdom is mine, yea God himself: he is all
things to me, here and hereafter.

Men cast up their heads, and look aloft, if they be Lords of some small
Manor, or possession: but to be a King or Prince of a piece of earth, lifts
them in their conceits above the tops of the clouds: But a poor Christian is
better contented with poor and naked Christ, than with all such high and
stately vanity.

Do for the Gospel as men do for Pearls.
take pains to purchase and obtain it.

1. 1. Painfulnes to procure it.
What a deal of pains and travel do men take to Faires and Markets, in hope
of a little profit, of which yet they may be disappointed: but refuse all cost,
and travel for the Gospel? Oh that men would hear the call of the Gospel,
and seek for faith above silver, and for grace above fine gold; happy is the
man that finds the merchandise of grace, and the commodity of faith, which
is above all commodities: alas that such precious wares should lie neglected,
and never asked after, nay refused and thrust off, when God makes offer to
thrust the same upon us; while for every trifle we want, for every
shooestring, we can inquire, ask, and pray for: but content our selves with
goods wanting goodness, and with a full chest of silver, or gold; and a heart
empty of God and his grace: woe to so rich a beggar; and unhappy is that man
that has only not purchased what was only worth purchasing.

2. 2. Carefully lock it up in thy surest thest.
Lock up the doctrine and promises of the Gospel in faith full hearts and
memories. A man that has a Jewel of inestimable price, will be sure to lock
it up in the surest chest he has; How careful then should we be of safe
keeping the instructions of Gods word? which we can lightly reject; and will
be more careful to keep the least piece of silver that ever we saw coined,
than the most inualuable treasures of Gods word that ever we heard preached?
But Mary pondred Christ's words, and laid them up in the closet of her heart.

Comfort to poor Christians.
this tends to comfort poor Christians. Thou art poor and despised in the
world; but God has honored thee with a Pearl, worth all the Kings ransomes
in the world. Thou art a loser in the world, the profits of it fly from thee,
into other men's hands; But 2 Cor. 6.10. as poor, and yet making many rich; as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things. Thou losest thy name, goods, and
liberty; but this Pearl remains with thee in all estates; thou art never so
poor as thou seem, nor such a loser as the world takes thee for: David
found the word his comfort in trouble, and that kept him from perishing: yea
the statutes were his songs in the time of his pilgrimage, Psalm. 119.50.54.

This of the second thing.

Who the Merchant is.
Answ. Every Christian man and woman, who are in the way to heaven; and in
respect of their trade of Christianity are compared to the Merchant. Prou.
3.14. for the merchandise of wisdom is better than the merchandise of silver,
and the gain thereof is better than gold. Luke 19.13. And he called his ten
servants, and delivered them ten pecces of money, and said unto them, Occupy
this till I come. Christianity is a spiritual merchandising: I say
spiritual, to distinguish it from civil; neither is it altogether so like,
but that there is much difference and dissimilitude between them: Seven
differences between civil and spiritual merchandising.
and the difference is in seven things.

1. In respect of persons: 1. Persons.
in civil society, all must not be Merchants. The Politicians call Merchants,
Pedes corpor is politici, that is, the feet of the body politic; both to
carry out needless commodities into foreign parts, and by exchange to bring
in more and other necessaries for them: Now all the body must not be a foot;
nor all the members of a natural body have the same function. But in this
mystical body it is far otherwise: For here every Christian ought to be a
Merchant, Luke 19.13. seeing every Christian man has received some talents of
his Lord to traffic with; and charge also to trade, and occupy with them
till he come: And whereas in civil dealings Ministers are excepted, and
prohibited, that they must neither make merchandise of the word, nor entangle
themselves with the affairs of this life: 2 Timothy 2.4. No man that warreth
intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, because he should please
him that has chosen him to be a soldier; These are in this supernatural
trading the chief Merchants, of whom men must expect, and inquire of these
chief and heavenly commodities.

Secondly, 2. Commodities.
in respect of the commodities; Civil Merchants do only deal in profits from
earth, and for earth: in earth are they gotten, and in the earth are they left;
but these spiritual Merchants deal in commodities farther fetched, namely from
heaven, and for heaven; not left by us, nor leaving us, till we get into
heaven; the Apostle calls them heavenly things in Christ.

Thirdly, in regard of the manner of obtaining them, they do much differ:
these are often gotten by indirect means; as by false weights, measures,
counterfeit money, lies, and oaths; and this civil merchandising is one of the
Arts or Trades, that may be well or ill used: But in spiritual and
supernatural trading, the Merchant aduanceth his estate by true and just
means only: every thing is weighed out, and taken in by the weights of the
Sanctuary, sealed by God himself for true and just; they are people of a pure
language; casting deceit out of their mouths: here they are not crafty
Merchants to deceive their brethren, John 1.
but true Nathaniels in whom there is no guile.

Fourthly, Fourthly, effects.
in regard of the effects; Civil trading often times calls men from the
worship of God, and hinders it: Luke 14.18.19. we may read of three sorts
that refused to come to the supper, two of them were Merchants; the one had
bought a farm, and the other five yoke of oxen, and these must be excused:
But this ever furthereth it; for no man can attain to the means of salvation
(which is this supernatural merchandising) but by such parts of Gods worship,
and man's duty, as the Lord has appointed in his word.

Fifthly, Fifthly, means
in respect of necessary means to uphold and drive the trade withal: In
civil trading money is necessarium subsidium; for when men needed not the
commodities exchangeable, money was invented to preserve contracts; without
which the Merchant cannot compass his commodities. But in supernatural
traffic, the Merchant buyeth without money or money worth. Esa. 55.1. Hoe,
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that have no silver,
come buy and eat: come (I say) and buy wine and milk without silver and
without money: Not the least of these commodities are to be valued by money,
gold, pearls, and the desirable things of this life, Prou. 3.14.15. for the
merchandise thereof is better than silver, or whatsoever men can devise or
desire besides it.

Sixthly, 6. Circumstances. 1. Of time.
in regard of circumstances of time and place.

For the time: Civil merchandising is to be exercised on the six days, not on
the Sabbath day. 13. Neh. 19, 20. And when the gates of Jerusalem began to be
dark, before the Sabbath I commanded to shut the gates, and charged, that they
should not be opened till after the Sabbath: and some of my servants set I at
the gates, that there should be no burden brought in on the Sabbath day: So the
chapmen and Merchants of all merchandise remained once or twice without
Jerusalem.

But for supernatural and spiritual trading, as all the six days are fit; so
the seventh especially is the Lords mart or market, to furnish all his people
with provision for the whole week following.

And for the place: All places are not fit for civil marts and Merchants; but
the principal prohibited place is the Church the house of God: Matthew. 21.12.
Jesus went into the Temple of God, and cast out all them that bought and sold
in the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the seats of
them that sold Doves: Christ would not endure his Fathers house of prayer to be
made a house of merchandise. But in spiritual trading, for heaven, all places
are fit for Christian Merchants, who should go no where but still be trading
for grace: and continually either be doing of good, or taking of good: But
especially the house of God is the most proper place appointed, for the
enriching of the heart, and increasing of the stock of faith and knowledge,
and of all graces.

So much for the dissimilitude between them: The similitude and resemblance
between earthly and heavenly trading stands in five things.
Now the similitude and reason of this resemblance stands in five things.

1. A Merchant man is a man that deals in great and precious commodities; The
Greek word is (...), not (...), the Merchant is no peddler, nor chapman of
small wares, nor taken up in selling pins, or points, and toys for babes: but
tradeth for great things, for great bulks, and quantities, 1. In greatness of
the commodities.
for great sums, and deals in most rich commodities.

So the Christian Merchant careful for heaven, aims not at the base profits
of this life; as silver, gold, and such corruptible things: for these things
are but small in his eye and contemptible, in respect of the business of
justification, of holiness, grace, and glory. These are that one thing
needful, Luke 10.42.
and that better part that takes up his thoughts and desires: such a rich
Merchant was David, Psalm. 4.7. Thou have given me more joy of heart than they
have had when their wheat and their oil did abound. Let other men peddle and
barter for corn, wine, and oil, the Christian Merchant has a commodity
beyond all this, in his eye: Psalm. 4.6.
Lord lift upon me the light of thy countenance; Such a Merchant was Zacheus,
Luke 18.8.
when salvation was come to his house; he cast away these pedling profits,
faster than he gat them; half he gave to the poor, and the rest he reserved
to restore fourefold.

Such a one was Paul, Phil. 3.8.
who counted all things loss and dung in comparison of Christ; and to know the
virtue of his death and resurrection. Such rich Merchants were the Martyrs; who
having heaven in their eye, esteemed their goods, liberty, yea life it self
not worth having in comparison thereof. For as a man if he were as high as the
Moon, would see the earth but as a prick: so he whose thoughts are in
heaven, and his eye on things that are above, within the veil, esteems the
earth but small, and despicable. For even as the great light drowneth the
lesser; so the bright shining of the Sun of righteousness, drowneth all the
lesser candles and comforts of this present world.

Secondly, 2. In the skill of the commodity.
there is likeness in the skill of the commodity he deals in: For as a
Merchant greatly aduanceth his estate, if he have skill, and insight, what
commodities are like to be of the quickest return: if he know and lay out for
the best conditioned commodities of every kind: So the Christian Merchant
laboring for Skill, knowledge, and sound judgment in the matter of Religion,
whereby he may be able to judge aright of Doctrines delivered, shall grow rich
in knowledge, and to a great measure of faith, and full of Christian wisdom;
whence the Apostle ( Phil. 1.10.) prays, that they may abound in all
knowledge and judgment to discern things that differ: and thus they shall be
rich, and filled with fruits of righteousness, verse. 11.

And contrariwise, for want of this skill, a Merchant dealing for great bulkes,
soon falls into great losses: but especially the Ieweller or Lapidarie by
ignorance may soon overthrow his whole estate, in respect of many cheaters and
couseners, who can notably counterfeit Pearls, and make them seem very orient
by false arts, and so put away at a great price a piece of a fish bone or
shell, or some piece of painted glass for rich Pearls and precious stones.

Even so, many spiritual Merchants decay, and break for want of this skill,
by means of many imposters and deceivers, heretics, false teachers,
Apostates, Libertine Preachers, and the Popish guides, furnished with all arts
to deceive, as with wit and speech, and other insinuatiue faculties, that make
offer of pibles for Pearls, and thrust upon men for the true Pearl of Gods
word, the glassie, and brickle conceits of man's brains: which because they
have made to glister, and have set a good color on them, they hold at as high
a rate, as any Pearl can be valued; and now many inconsiderate persons are
taken with the beauty, profit, or some seeming pleasure, and so robbed and
gulled of their soundness, for the present; and of their expectations and
hopes hereafter. Now that we may not be thus abused, let us listen to those
Apostolical precepts: Ephesians. 4.14. Not to be children, wavering and carried
about with every wind of Doctrine, by the deceit of men, and craftiness
whereby they lie in wait to deceive: and in 1 Ioh. 4.1. Believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: and 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Try
all things, and keep that which is good

Thirdly, 3. In conferring of their commodities.
the similitude is in their conuersing and conferring one with another: Every
Merchant will be speaking of his commodities; he will make offer of his
pearls, and wares of price, that he may put them off into other men's hands for
his own advantage. So the Christian Merchant will be talking and conferring
of this Pearl of the Gospel; as in Cant. 5.6. The Spouse spends her days
in breathing out the praises of Christ. A faithful Christian cannot hide grace
in a napkin, nor hold it so close to himself, but he must communicate it and
make offers of it to others: Such good Merchants were the two Disciples going
to Emmaus, conferring of Christ, whom Christ joined himself with, Luke 24.19.
Such a one was Paul offering the Pearl to Agrippa, and wishing all the people
were such as he was, except his bonds, Act. 26.29. And the reason is,
whatsoever he can communicate to another, is his own clear gain: For this
is the difference between the secular riches and spiritual: A worldly rich man
is rich for himself only, and the more he imparteth to others, the less is
lest for himself; But he that is rich in God, is not only rich in and for
himself; but these riches do more enrich him by enriching others, than
holding them to himself: and the more he communicates, the more remains; as
the oil in the cruse and the meal in the barrel, were not wasted with
spending, but rather increased.

Fourthly, 4. The earnest desire of increasing their estate of both.
in the earnest desire, and endeavor of increasing wealth, they may be fitly
compared. The Merchant refuses no pains or peril, no labor or danger, no
cost or charge, no hazard by Sea or Land to purchase such commodities, as may
yield him return of profit and advantage: But especially Lapidaries and
Merchants for Pearls, toil themselves by many weary iournies, and voyages,
into all lands and countries; and have their factors lying abroad every where
to meet with Pearls and precious stones which are of greatest gain and
advantage.

So the Christian Merchant has an insatiable thirst and hunger after the good
things of the Gospel; and with unweariable study and desire he trauelleth to
every Mart, where this Pearl may be met withal: he apprehends all
opportunities, frequenteth every Sermon, waits at the gates of Wisdom: Pro.
8.34.
he swalloweth easily matter of labor and charge, to become owner of the
Pearl, and he is instant in this painful endeavor: for here it is not as in
civil trading, wherein many Merchants having gotten money enough, give up
their trade, and take their ease in the Country: but so long as there is any
good coming in, he will be ready for it: and as the labor of the body
brings thirst, so the labor of the soul increases thirst after grace.
Besides that, grace is so sweet to a godly heart, as a Christian Merchant can
never be satisfied, nor ever give up as having enough; and as he knows the
stream from whence he sucketh, can never be drawn dry: so himself is ever
in want of some good things, or at the least of some measure of it; and is ever
seeking the supply of the same.

Fifthly, 5. They agree in care to preserve their estate.
they agree in the care of preserving, and safe keeping the Pearls, and wealth
gotten: the Merchant does know he is in continual danger of thieves and
robbers; and that the more precious the commodities be, the more eagerly they
are assaulted: and himself for them often set upon; sometimes with hazard,
sometimes with loss of goods, and life it self: now he is so much the more
careful and watchful to bar, and lock up in the surest and strongest
places his richest commodities.

So the Christian Merchants are in continual chase and pursuit by Satan,
seducers, heretics, false teachers, tyrants, and all profane ones in the
world; Besides their own inbred rebellion and lufts, which fight against their
own souls.

Now then all these lie in wait so much more diligently, as the wealth is more
precious than any other, to rob these Merchants, not of silver or gold, but of
faith and hope, and all their graces, the least of which is much more precious
than gold, or the most precious Pearls that ever lay hid in the bowels of the
earth: Yea themselves are so furiously assaulted, as hardly they may escape
with goods or life, as we may see in Christ himself, and in the Martyrs, who
for his sake were bereaved, and stripped of all outward comforts of life, and
life it self.

Hence the wise Christian Merchant carefully fenceth himself with Gods fear:
Secondly, stands on his ground and guard of faith: Thirdly, locketh up his
graces and the word in his heart: Fourthly, keeps watches with God morning
and evening in holy prayer and praises: Fifthly, with Christian fortitude and
armor, he maintains the measure of grace received: By all which means he
not only disappointeth the enemy of his prey, but also shows his own
valor and virtue which is no less in keeping and retaining the good things of
the Gospel, Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri.
than in getting and attaining them.

Merchants and Monks very different.
not a cloistred people who live alone; and not to any other. Civil Merchants
must trade and converse together for the good one of another; and Christian
Merchants much more: I would these bellies had ears, and that these drones
would consider; First, how unnatural this course of life is, condemned by the
heathens themselves. Aristotle could say that Homo est natura animal gregabile,
Polity. 1.
a man is naturally sociable: and Cicero, that no man is borne for himself,
Offic. 1. Non nobis nati sumus, sid partem patria, partem parents, etc.
but his Country, kindred and his neighbors, yea every man has a part in
every man secondly (...) other more essential efference is there, between the
life of man and brute beasts; but the beasts life is a kind of fingle life for
it self: but man's life is a life communicatiue? Thirdly, these droues of idle
cattle are the unprofitable burdens of the earth; for, what gift soever they
have, all is lost; what profit is there in a hidden treasure? Paulum sepultae
distat incrtiae Celata virtus.
so wisdom and gifts denied to the Church and Commonwealth, to what are they
profitable? God has not given all gifts to one; but variety of gifts to
diverse; Vt ego tuis, tu meis indigeres: God will have men taught, edified,
governed, by men, not by Angels: How then can he set up the duties of piety,
promote the good of his neighbor, or edify the Church by precept or example,
which flies society, and imprisoneth himself in wilful fetters; unnaturally
putting off manhood, and blessing himself in a fearful curse, as any
te^porall almost can be?

Imitate wise Merchants in three things.


1. A wise Merchant will know what stock he puts into trade: so must we
take notice what talent or talents we have received of the Lord to traffic
withal; what portion or proportion of gifts we have in our hands: and esteem
our selves worth so much, as we have received of grace, and no more.

Secondly, the Merchant will not lay out his money but for a hopeful bargain.
Esaias 55.2. Wherefore do you lay out silver and not for bread, and your labor
without being satisfied? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which is
good, and let your soul delight in fatness; taxing the folly of such as
labor and dearly buy external food, and provision: with neglect of the
wholesome bread and water of life.

So a wise Christian Merchant will spend his time and labor on that, which
when he has gotten, will satisfy him; which if he bestow in outward things,
(suppose he does gain them) they cannot satisfy him. Eccles. 5.9.
He that loves silver shall not be satisfied, and he that loves riches
shall be without the fruit there of: And of all earthly things may be said that
of Solomon. The eye is never satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing:
only Godliness brings with it contentment.

Thirdly, the Merchant will often cast his estate, his books, his shops, and
his reckonings to see whether his stock increases or decays: If he find
himself a gainer, then he is glad; if the contrary, he is heartles and
sorrowful.

So the Christian Merchant is much and often in trying his estate and standing
in grace; and is most glad when he finds in himself increase of grace,
knowledge, humility, faith, love, etc. but it is a death to him to go
backward, and to see his estate of grace rather to decrease than increase: he
has no comfort in his present unfruitfulness; much less in Apostasy, and
backe-slicing: but his comfort and account to the Lord is only when he can
say, Luke 19.13. Lord, thy talent has increased ten talents.

The poorest Christian is a very rich Merchant.
thou that art a poor Christian, in a low estate in the world, labor busily
for grace: and thou may be as rich a Merchant, have as rich a stock, and
deal in as great and rich commodities (if poor in spirit) as the richest.
Thou that have no money, and but little credit in the world, may here make
as good a bargain and as gainful return for thy self, as he that has
thousands of money beyond thee. The poor receive the Gospel, says our
Savior, that is, few but the poor in estate, none but the poor in spirit;
for this trading is without money, like the poor woman's curing, who spent all
her money on the Physicians, and yet was not cured; but Christ comes and
cures her freely. Again, art thou a poor man, have thou a great charge of
children, and no means to put them forth to trades? here is a rich trade: make
Merchants of them, teach them and bind them to this trade of godliness: this
is the way to make them prosperous in earth, and bring them happily toward
heaven, Prou. 14.26. The fear of the Lord is an assured strength, and his
children shall have hope.

Part not from the Pearl once gotten.
thou do not fell it again. Pro. 23.23. Buy the truth, but sell it not:
likewise wisdom and instruction, and understanding, for what we sell, we
esteem it less worth than that we sell it for: but we must value this Pearl
above riches, glory, liberty, Pearls, and life it self: by no means part
from wisdom, neither by our forgetfulness, security or ouer-sight any way:
Besides, we can sell it for nothing which is not uncertain gain, but this is
most certain and most lasting; and therefore not to be exchanged with any
other.

This of the third general.

The Merchant man's actions are three: Three maine actions of a wise Merchant.


1. He seeks a good Pearl. 2. Finds an excellent one. 3. Sells all he
has to buy it.
Every man naturally will be seeking some thing to make him happy: the natural
man has some natural Pearl or other, on which he sets his affection, and
in which be takes greatest delight. Some Merchants esteem pleasure their
best Pearl, some honor, some riches, and the most of the world seeking some
Pearl, light upon some counterfeit or other; wherein they content themselves,
and blind both themselves and others: which made an ancient Father cry out:
Foelix negotiator qui nouit qua rerenon necina vt ambitiosi, nen inuti^a vt
curiosi, sed salubria vt sancti.
Happy is that Merchant that knows to seek not hurtful things as the
ambitious do, nor unprofitable things as the curious do; but the most
wholesome things as do the Saints: but this a supernatural both seeker and
seeking and things sought: The thing sought is the grace of the Gospel: a good
Pearl indeed as before the seeker was, the wise Merchant.

Psalm. 14. and Romans 3. no man seeks after God?

Answ. No man by nature can seek after grace, nor of himself once ask after
it because he is destitute of the spirit of God, no more than the lost groat
can ask after her that lost it, or a wandering sheep after the Shepherd, or a
dead man after life: So as those places are meant of men before conversion and
calling: for the elect seek not God till God first seek them, and finds
them. But this is to be understood of men called, converted, already found of
God, and moved by the Spirit of God: who moved by God can now move
themselves, and sought by him now can seek him. Which both sets out our
infinite misery, who of our selves never mind the means of happiness; and
also magnifieth Gods mercy which is infinite: who offering unto us a free
grace, does truly say, I was found of them that sought me not; and gives him
also the honor of goodness, and of our seeking of him.

Only the godly and all they are seekers of the good Pearl: Doct.
they seek after God in Christ, and the grace of the Gospel; Only the godly
and all they are seekers of the Pearl.
every where the godly are called seekers of God, and seekers of wisdom, Prou.
2. and seekers of the kingdom, Matt. 6.33. and wicked men are described to be
such as seek not after God, Psalm. 14.4. And why?

see their own want and beggerie, which is implied in seeking. No man seeks
that he wants not, or that first finds not in himself a want of grace.
Psalm 143.6.
David desired grace as the thirsty ground, and grace is not promised, nor
given to any but the thirsty. Isa. 55.1. Every one that thirsts, come ye to
the waters. Psalm. 14.2. First they must understand (namely their estate) and
then seek after God.

as well as the need of this Pearl, and God has let them see, in some
measure, the worth of it. Why are men so earnestly carried to seek Pearls,
far and near swallowing insensibly all toiles, dangers, and charges, but
because they know their worth and price, and that if they can light on them
they shall be well paid for all their labor.

Even so, such as to whom God has made known in some measure, the worth of
this inestimable lewell, are quickened daily to the unweariable inquisition
after it. Paul knew that one grain of grace would weigh down all the world;
and therefore would procure it through all perils and dangers, through good
reports or evil, through wants and losses, even of the dearest things, and
most desirous in all the world; whereas Ignoti nulla cupido, none will seek
that he knows not, or not any goodness in it.



Besides, that this is the condition upon which the Lord bestows his best
blessings: Pro. 2.4.
if we dig for wisdom as for treasures; which words implie, that it is not
easy to come by; he knows our nature, that we lightly set by what we
lightly come by: and if Pearls were as common as pibbles, we should as
lightly set by them as we do by the other.

any thing else be satisfied: for so seeking, implies a discontent in the want
of the thing sought for. Common men, if they find health, wealth, friends,
pleasures, and the like outward things, are well contented; corn, wine, and
oil, to cheer their hearts: But these wise Merchants seeking grace, no other
thing contenteth them but grace; one glimpse of Gods countenance through Jesus
Christ, is sweet above all. And as he that seeks a Jewel, does look still
after it, (a thousand things come in his way and eye, but he passes slightly
over them, and sees them not, nor seeks he them) even so does the Christian
Merchant; and as the civil Merchant attaining Pearls, does rest joyful in
them as in such commodities as will help his happiness in the world: So the
godly Merchant finding this one Pearl of the Gospel, which is the grace of
life, goes away rejoicing, and rests well appaid for all his labors and
sufferings. He was before he light upon this Pearl, the most unhappy man in
the world; but now he cannot hide his joy: but as the poor widow, which
called in her neighbors to rejoice with her, because she had found the lost
groat, Luke 15.9. so can he neither wholly hide, nor yet express half the joy
he conceiueth in his new commodity and purchase.

that with reares, that fail of grace, as Esan, and many shall strive to enter
(says Christ) and shall not be able: and Romans 9.31, 32. Israel sought right
nusnesse, but obtained it not.

Answ. Many seek, but amiss, Five conditions of right seeking the Pearl.
and therefore fail: so Israel sought, but not by faith. Now the true
condition of seeking as the wise Merchant, and as the word directs, stands
in five things.

1. 1. Affectionately.
With an earnest and true love, desire, and estimation of the thing sought;
this will make a man seek diligently, and as a thirsty person, not coldly,
carelessly, remisly, slightly, or negligently; for such seeking shall never
find: for why did the Church seek Christ so laboriously, till she found him,
but because it was he whom her soul loved? Cant. 3.3. The watchmen that went
about the City, found me, to whom I said, Have ye seen him whom my soul
loves? And why did Mary seek Christ, having lost him three days? Because she
loved him and rejoiced in his person and presence; which made her heart so
heavy in his absence, Luke 2.42. Behold, thy father and I have sought thee
with heavy hearts. The Merchant, because he loves and esteems of silver,
does seek it carefully and earnestly, Pro. 2.4. and the heavenly Merchant
shall find grace undoubtedly, if he seek it as the other does silver. Love is
laborious; he that loves Christ and his grace, will never cease to seek him,
nor fail to find him. See the promise in Ier. 29.12, 13. Then shall you cry
unto me, and you shall go and pray unto me, and I will hear you: and you
shall seek me and find me, because you shall seek me with all your heart:
Whosoever then ever means to find God and his saving grace, must unfeignedly
and heartily seek after him. 2. Wisely in the likely place of finding.


Secondly, it must be sought in the likely place and means of finding: the
ordinary place where this Pearl is to be found, is, the assemblies of the
Saints: there God holds forth his scepter, and makes offer of the grace of
life. Cant 1.7.
Where was the Church to find Christ with his graces at noone, in her thirst,
but in the steps of the shepherds? And these assemblies are the Suburbs of
heaven, called therefore the Kingdom of grace: and he that refuses the good
offers of grace, in the word, sacraments, prayer, hearing, reading, conferring,
and the like, shall never find it. No wise Merchant will slack any good
opportunity of advancing his estate; now the likely means in wise seeking are
diligently to be used, as

1. To search the evidence of the Pearl, and this evidence is contained in the
Scriptures. John 5. Search the Scriptures, for they witness of me.

Secondly, the grant of it is from heaven by prayer. Let us therefore go
boldly to the Throne of grace that we may find mercy and grace to help in time
of need, Heb. 4.16.

Thirdly, the covenant is by the application of these means signed, and
delivered, yea and witnessed by the blessed Spirit of GOD, by a blessed change
in the believing heart; by mortification, and subduing the corruption of
nature; by heavenly motions, heavenly mindednes, and gracious conversation,
standing not in a shell, a form or show, but in the kernil, power, and
substance of sound godliness.

Thirdly, 3. Principally.
it must be sought first and principally, yea only sought and that for it
self: it must be sought first in time: As Psalm 63.3. Early in the morning
will I seek thee. The Israelites must seek Manna, the first thing they do in
the morning. Esau seeks, but too late; the foolish Virgins do knock, but
the door is shut. 2. It must be sought in the first place. Matthew. 6.33. Seek
ye first the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof: Seek neither
other things before it, as worldlings, nor other things with it, as profane
Epicures, who would graspe heaven and earth together; nor yet seek it for
other things, as Hypocrites, who profess the Gospel for favor, credit,
profit, or some other (in respect of that) base things. But seek it alone for
it self, and in sincerity; for only such seeking finds it: Never will Christ
be sought for loaves, nor can the same eye look to heaven and earth together.

Fourthly, Fourthly, humbly.
it must be sought humbly, that is, first out of thy self: a man that wants
water, will go to the fountain; the waters of grace must flow from the
fountain, and wellhead Christ Jesus: seek it therefore in him and from him.
The eye of faith spieth it in him, and the hand of faith does take it up from
him.

Secondly, it must be sought with godly forrow and repentance for sin. Isay
1.16. Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your works, from before
mine eyes; cease to do evil.

Thirdly, with reformation of heart and life. Psalm. 14.4. The workers of
iniquity are unfit and unworthy seekers of grace.

Fifthly, 5. Constantly.
it must be sought constantly: Mary and Joseph never gave over seeking Christ
until they found him, nor the Church till she found him: neither must we give
over seeking, having found grace, for it is not in this seeking, as in other
things, where having found, we rest contented, and seek no more: but here
having found the thing we sought, we must seek still: for a Christian is ever
wanting of grace, if not in whole, yet in part, if not in substance, yet in
some degree and measure of it: and therefore this work (as the husband man's)
is never at an end.

of silver: but for grace we will hardly step out of doors or bestow the least
pains, to frequent the places of Gods exchange. In seeking silver, every man
will seek a good pennyworth; he is careful that none ouer-reach him: he
parts with his money as warily as may be: and will be ready to lay hold on a
good bargain, when it is offered. In the matter of grace, how fearfully do
many thrust it away with both hands, wilfully forsaking their own mercy? Iona.
2.8. They that wait upon lying vanities, forsake their own mercy: that is,
refuse the bargain of eternal life offered, almost forced upon them and
others, that seemed to have received a good sum of grace, foolishly depart with
it, and fall away either quite or wholly, or else from their measure and their
first love; these men are far from seeking grace, and farther from finding it.

express our selves wise Merchants seized on the Pearl, which that we may
earnestly seek after, let us consider these five motives.

1. 5. Motives to provoke us earnestly to seek after grace.
Christ seeks us, and desires us to seek him; and shall Christ seek thee
for thy good, and not thou seek him for thine own good? But Christ seeks
us, as a Hen that gathers her chickins under her wings, Matthew. 23.37. and woe
unto us if we remain ungathered. The father of the prodigal, goes out to
meet his son returning home, to encourage us to go out of our solues to
seek him.

Secondly, the fearful revenge against such as seek not, nor inquire after
GOD, should move us to seek him: as Zeph. 1.6. in the fourth Verse, I will cut
off the remnant of Baal; and in the sixth, And them that turn back from the
Lord, and those that have not sought the Lord nor inquired for him. And if they
under the Law were so revenged, how much more shall we living under the
Gospel, Heb. 2.3.
if we neglect so great salvation? If the Gospel be now hid, it is hid to them
that perish, 2 Corin. 4.3. Oh what a fearful case is it, that the Gospel
should serve for the conviction of men, and not for their conversion? Oh thrice
unhappy man that shall pervert this so abundant grace to his own destruction:
and yet the plenty of Gods grace in the Gospel shall condemn thousands that
never required or sought after it.

3. Thou should seek grace from God, but he seeks to pin his grace on thy
sleeue: God brings home the Gospel to thy house and doors; he sends
forth his servants, he continues to seek thee by continuing the means and
the season of grace: he seeks thee daily by his word, his Ministers, his
blessings, his corrections, by the motions of the spirit, by the checks of
thine own conscience, and will thou not seek being so sought unto? dare
thou receive such grace still in vain? 2 Cor. 6.5. or turn it to wantonness?
Iud. 3.

Fourthly, of this salvation the Prophets search diligently, 1 Pet. 1.10. and
shall we to whom it more specially belongs, not so much as ask or inquire
after it? or shall we thrust it away as the Jews did, Acts 13.46. but not
without the most fearful revenge that ever happened to any nation under the
heavens, under which they lie at this day?

Fifthly, for a man to abide destitute of desire and endeavor after grace,
shows that Satan the God of the world works mightily in such a one, and
has him in his power to hood-winke him, and hide from him the grace of the
Gospel, that the brightness of this Pearl should never shine to him, least
he should convert and be saved: See 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. This of the first action:
Who having found a Pearl of great price.

The second action of the wise Merchant is; he finds an excellent Pearl; Of
the Pearl, and of the excellency we have spoken: Now are we in this part
only to speak something of the finding of it. And by the Pearl being meant
the grace of the Gospel, as we have heard, we learn this Doctrine: Seekers
of grace shall find it.
That seekers of grace shall find it: and only they. Psalm 118.5. I called
upon the Lord in trouble, and the Lord heard me, and set me at large: and
Psalm. 138.3. When I called then thou heardest me, and have increased strength
in my soul: Solomon seeks wisdom and finds it. Luke 15.9. Matthew. 7.8. The
woman that sought the lost groat, found it: Whosoever asks, receives, and he
that seeks, finds. Why?

he has promised, and is able to perform, above all we are able to ask or
think: His power is sufficient to supply all our wants: and Isay 65.1. I was
found of them that sought me not: and verse 24. Yea before they call I will
answer, and while they speak, I will hear.

If earthly fathers that are evil, Matthew. 7.11.
(both in comparison of God, and in their own inclination) can give good
things to their children that ask, much more our heavenly Father can and will.
How glad is an earthly father, when his children can seek after that which is
good for them? and our heavenly Father much more: Besides, God who has
promised cannot lie, Titus 1.2. now he should deceive his people, if they
should not find the grace they duly seek: but he has said, Matthew. 5, 6. that
the hungring and thirsting soul shall be satisfied and supplied.

so far discourage his servants, and dishearten them, as never to let them
find that, they bestow so much true pains in seeking: but he vpholdeth them
in seeking, by supplying, some way or other, some time or other, that they
seek: his wisdom not only feeds his children with hopes of an harvest to
come; but affords them present food and finding, even in this life, so far as
will stand with hunger and thirst: by which he incourageth them in their
prayers, tears, labors, and sufferings, and without which finding for the
present, in part, the smoking wicke should be quickly quenched, and all the
beginning of grace easily lost: oil is not more necessary to feed a lamp,
than the supply of grace is to feed grace. Psalm. 116.1. I love the Lord,
because he has heard my voice and prayers: and Psalm. 65.2. Because thou
hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.

Psalm. 22.26. They that seek after the Lord shall praise him: namely, in
acknowledging him true in his promises and plentiful in his mercies.



Answ. 1. Gods grace is free in respect of merits, not of means: if God should
not give us saving grace before we ask it, we should never have it; and no man
can seek grace but by grace; yet God gives not grace to idle or sleepy
persons, but to the vigilant and watchful: he is not so prodigal of so
excellent a Pearl, as to bestow it for nothing: or upon those, who having
tasted the sweetness of it, will not bestirre themselves for more, that they may
grow in grace.

2. Though God does bestow on us free salvation which costeth us nothing, yet
we must accept it in the means: which do excite and exercise our graces, and
suffer us to be neither idle, nor unfruitful in the work of the Lord.

But if we seek, our seeking is a cause of finding, and so Gods grace shall
not be free.

Ans. 1. Our seeking is no cause of finding but a means or way in which we
find.

2. In seeking we do our duty, but merit nothing by it; for when we have done
all we can, we are unprofitable servants.

seeking, but to the seeker, being in Christ: who finds for Christ's sake, not
for his own.



Ans. There is a 2. fold seeking, 1. 6. Sorts of seekers amiss.
a seeking amiss, and then no marvel if thou find not; Esan sought with
tears, and finds not: many shall seek and strine to enter, and shall not
be able; and of these are six sorts, 1. wicked men being destitute of the
spirit of GOD, want their eyes cleared: and a blind man shall sooner find a
Pearl lost, than they this.

2. Some seek without light, as fond Familists and Anabaptists, who seek
grace in the dark corners of Enthusiasmes, and revelations, scorning the light
of the Scriptures and Ministry: in which the spirit only and ordinarily
offreth himself to be found.

3. Some seek without the promise and so without faith: Israel sought it by
merits, Romans 9.31.

4. Some seek without repentance. Isay 1.16. wash you, make you clean, and
then come and reason together.

5. Some seek it vnseasonablie the door being shut, so did Esau when the
blessing was bestowed.

6. Some seek withon out sincerity. Hypocrites seek a while but give over, as
weary of so much pains; now the promise is made to none of these: the goal is
not given but to such as strive lawfully.

A second Kind of seeking that is which fails not, and that is in the true
and lawful conditions of seeking, as by the supernatural eye of faith, by the
light of Gods Word, in the right vein of finding, and in the places where the
Pearl lies, and in season of seeking, whilst the day lasts and the light is
with us: have thou thus sought, and art yet held off? I say God must be true
Quaerentibus recta and recte, he that seeks, quae oportet and quomodo
oportet, shall certainly find; and therefore I say to thee that seek good
things well: 1. Thou have found grace sufficient, 2 Cor. 12.7.
as Paul did when he seemed to be denied of the grace desired: thou have found
grace in some measure, at least in such measure as may cause thee to hunger for
more.

2. God may delay to give thee a greater measure, and yet not deny thee; it may
be that which thou seek, is worth more labor than yet thou have bestowed:
distinguish now betwixt Gods delays and denialls: hold on thy seeking, thou
shall find in good time.

Thirdly, The best seekers find but in small measure in this life, and why.
the best and holiest seekers of al find but for the estate of this life; that
is, in small measure, a taste, a first fruits, here is but a sowing in grace.
God leaves his children in many wants for the present, for diverse ends. 1. For
their humiliation, as Paul had a prick in the flesh left.

2. To maintain hunger and thirst after more.

3. To long after the time of perfection, and full saciety, when they shall be
fully conformed to the Image of God.

Fourthly, thou have found a promise of God to be fully satisfied at length,
Matthew. 5.6. in the mean time esteem thy seeking as a seed time, thy labor
is sown in heaven, thy seed is cast into the bosom of God: and if it
presently return not so much comfort, joy, and increase as thou desire: it
is laid up and will bring thee good store, and a happy crop for hereafter: Gal.
6.9.
therefore be not weary of well doing, for in due time thou shall reap, if thou
faint not.

If no man seeks this Pearl aright but finds, see a difference between
this commodity, and all other. Seek any other thing in the world, with thy
best endeavor, and thou may fail, Eccle. 5.9.
and not find. He that seeks silver, shall not be satisfied: Seek wealth,
pearls, honor, pleasures, thou shall often fail of them: but seek the best
thing, and always speed. In all other things, many seek one thing, but find
another: go to the Physicians to seek health, thou may meet with death; to
the Lawyer, to seek law and justice, thou may find injustice and oppression:
at some friends hands thou may feeke favor and friendship, but find hatred
and enmity, as Joseph sought at his brethrens, but finds them foes and
enemies.

But in matters of grace, thou shall find the same things thou look for:
seek thou the Pearl, thou find the Pearl, as the Merchant did: nay,
find an excellent one, far better than thou lookedst for; the worth of
which is not to be valued in this vale of dacknesse.

Here is also a difference between seeking things at Gods hands, and at man's:
all that ask at man's hands speed not: though thou may ask never so justly,
as in the example of the unjust Judge. A poor man asks at man's hands mercy,
and misseth of it: knock at man's door, it is not always open: But the gate of
grace is never shut; Gods ear is always open, and as a favorite sits in the
ear of the King, and speedeth in any suite, so does the godly seeker speed
with God.

Psalm. 9.9.10. The Lord also will be a refuge for the poor, a refuge in due
time, even in affliction. Want thou strength against temptations? Seek by
prayer the grace of Christian fortitude: be strong in the cry of prayer; and as
a thief will run away when the true man makes a noise and outcry, so will
Satan upon this noise of fervent prayer cease his assault. Want thou peace
of conscience, chearfulnes in doing, or suffering? would thou see a sweet
look from God? or needst thou any other blessing for life or godliness? Seek
it with instance, do as the woman of Canaan, who sought grace at the hands of
Christ, and would not be repulsed, Math. 15.22. And the poor woman by her
importunity prevailed in her suit with the unjust Judge, Luke 18.5. And how
much more shall faithful importunity prevail with the most righteous and
faithful God?

my finding.

Jacobs seeking the, blessing? yet his weak and faulty seeking found it.



strive, and find and prevail.

Secondly, seek against sense and feeling, even out of the belly of the whale
of desperation it self, lay hold on the free grace of God, and thou shall find
an issue, and his sweet love dropping comfort, sweeter than honey combs to thy
soul.

Grace not found because not sought.
even because he that has not attained grace never sought it aright; the want
is not in God, nor in the means, but in thy self and manner of seeking: Non
deficit da^tis misericordia.
Non medicorum insufficientia, sed quaerentium negligentia culpanda; Blame thy
self for not finding, who have failed in the manner of thy seeking; for
perhaps,

Thou art full and feel not the need of grace, as the Church of Laodicea,
Reu. 3.17. and then how can thou seek? A beggar will not stir abroad so long
as he has any thing at home.

Or art profane and scornest the blessing, as Esau.

Or art a hater of it, and the seekers of it; turnest their glory into shame,
and art of the generation of them that hate them that seek the Lord.

Or art idle and seek slightly, or formally; and can God attend that prayer,
or request, which thou carelessly and formally castest out, and thy self
attendest not? And here numbers of men lie under just reproof; as

1. Such as never spent so much labor in seeking grace, as Saul did in seeking
his Fathers Asses, 1 Samuel 9.4,

2. They that never spent so much time to find it, as they could for a handful
of silver, and yet hope they have it, or shall have it. When did thou break
thy sleep, disease thy self, put thy self into all weathers by night and by
day, for the Word, as thou have for wealth? When wast thou so good and thriftie
an husband for thy soul as for thy body? Never look for grace before thou
prizest it: and be sure thou have it not, who so vnder-valuest it.



1. He has found by seeking who still seeks to find, 5. Notes of one that by
seeking has found the Pearl.
for it is not here as in seeking other things: here the finder gives not
over seeking: but the more be finds the more he seeks; here is an
insatiable covetousness, and a covetousness warrantable.

Secondly, much joy and large affections to express the sense of so great a
commodity: the testimony of Gods Spirit witnesses our adoption; once receive
it, and it refreshes the soul with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Peter 4.5.
and this joy will not be hid, as in the woman finding the lost groat.

Thirdly, the Pearl once found, there follows a contempt of the world, a
killing of the cares of this life, a fencing from the love of earthly things:
there is no true content in any thing else, he that has found this Pearl
esteems all other things, even the best of that the world so admireth, dung
in comparison of Christ.

Fourthly, being so rich a commodity, it enableth to good works and (as no
other Pearl can) it works the will also to be abundant in good works,
abundant in the fruits of the spirit, in the fruits of Sanctity, and holiness
of life.

Fifthly, it is of so precious virtue, as it is in every one that finds it, an
antidote against all the poison of sin, the grace of repentance presently
expels it: the grace of patience is a salve for every sore: the grace of
faith is a most sovereign Cordial; it is of virtue to renouate the whole man,
and all the parts of the man: it clears his sight daily, it makes him quick
of hearing, it sharpneth all his senses in divine things; it preserves his
stomach, and appetite to Gods word: it purges out his corruptions, renews
his strength, as the Eagle: All these and a thousand more virtues has this
Hearbe-Grace wrought in thee in some measure if thou have found it, and so
abundantly recompenseth all thy labor.

He went and sold all that he had and bought it.] The third action of the
Merchant.
Our Savior continues the allegory of the wise Merchant, who 1. has sought,
2. found the Pearl, and then sits not down: 1. Vadit ad forum spiritualium
per effectum.
but (thirdly) makes purchase. In the words are three things. 2. Vendit omnia
per affectum and contimptum terrenorum.


1. He goes away, to the Mart and means where it is to be had. 3. Emit per
conatum and desiderium aternorum.


2. He sells all in affection to it, and contempt of earthlythings.

3. He buyeth it by a careful desire and endeavor after heavenly things.

For the meaning, 1. he goes away.] Selfedenial is the first lesson in Christ's
school, Whosoever will save his life, Mat. 16.25.
shall loose it, and whosoever shall loose his life for my sake, shall find it;
he that forsakes not his own will, reason, affections, and evil habits, and
does not cross his own desires, shall never prize or purchase this Pearl.

2. And sells all] That is, in comparison he contemns all earthly things,
and sets them at a low rate and value in respect of the Pearl, and does not
care much who have them, so he may enjoy the Pearl: let others get the wealth
of the world, he will be rich in grace; let others get corn, wine, and oil;
if he can get naked Christ, he has enough.

Matthew. 19.22. Jesus said unto him, if thou will be perfect, go and sell all
that thou have, and give it to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
heaven, and come and follow me.

Ans. The Papists build a state of perfection upon voluntary poverty: and hold
it a counsel only fit for perfect Christians, and far more meritorious than
the keeping of the whole Law.

But 1. to answer them, and then the question.

1. It is a frivolous conceit to think, that any man may come to an higher
estate of happiness, by some other means than by keeping the Law.

Secondly, it is absurd to think that any work can be acceptably done toward
salvation, which is without the walk and compass of the law, which is so
perfect, that cursed is he that does dare to add to it, or detract any thing
from it.

3. Christ desired no more of the young man, than he did of his Disciples, who
said verse 27. we have left all to follow thee, and yet Peter had an house
still, and John, to which he took the Virgin Mary.

And therefore Christ would have the young man to part with all, which he
could not hold with his love and affection to Christ himself, and the Gospel.

Fourthly, that which Christ required of this Iustitiarie, is not any devised
Evangelical counsel above the law; but a duty contained in the law: the sum
of which is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart: and whereas
he had boasted, that he had kept all the law; Christ does send him back
again to the law, to let him see his want of love, both to God and his
neighbor; to God, if the love of his friends hinder him from following him,
whom he confesses a teacher from God: And want of love to man, if at Christ's
word he will not part with his money, especially if not at Christ his
especial commandment.

So as this is not a counsel to some perfect recluses or orders of wilful
men; but a commandment to all Christians, that must strive to perfection. 1.
Cor. 2.6. And we speak wisdom amongst them that are perfect: who must not only
leave goods and lands, and houses for Christ, and the Gospel; but must hate
father, mother, wife, and children, brethren, sisters, and their own life, if
they cannot hold them with Christ.

So much to answer the Papists:

Now to the question.

1. Who can deny wealth to be the gift of God, if it be held without
covetousness, confidence, pride, and subordinate to heaven and heavenly things?
Or who can deny but riches may become helps to heavenly Tabernacles? who can
denic but good men may both have them, and use them? Abraham was a man of great
possessions, and Job and David men of most great wealth: and yet godly men, and
poor of spirit; goods therefore in themselves are not to be cast away: but
first in comparison, Wealth in four cases to be renounced.
rather than we will not attain, and retain the Pearl of the Gospel, we must
abandon all we have.

Secondly, when they prove an impediment to our calling, and holy profession,
we must renounce them, Heb. 11.25.
as Moses in this case refused to be the son of Pharaohs daughter, and to
suffer with Gods people: a traveler may carry a staff to help him in his
journey, but not to ouer-load himself: and he may bear some money in his
purse for his charges, but not burden himself with it.

Thirdly, in affection always we must renounce them, and hold them retiredly
and weignedly, using the world as not using it: 1 Cor. 7.3.
Let them be in our hands, not in our hearts; to lay down, or lay out; not to
lay up, or lay up our hearts with them.

Fourthly, actually, but not uncalled, we must leave them, not of our own
accord, but called by God, no^ sponte sed vocati: let us always see we have a
good ground, as if tyrants, or persecutors, keep us from inioying either
Christ, or our own estate; then in this choice, we must prefer a poor estate
in Christ, before a rich estate in the world.

And buyeth it.] Our savior uses this word buying, not to signify, that we
can make any recompense, payment, or merit, to purchase eternal life: for,
first, that is infinite, we finite, and between these is no proportion.
Secondly, it is a free gift of God, Romans 6.23. Thirdly, it is a buying, Esaias
55.1.
but without money, and money worth. And the poor are called to buy it, who
have no money to lay out for it. Fourthly, this Pearl is such a commodity, as
neither men nor Angels can give any due price for. Fifthly, we can give God
nothing but his own.

But Christ here speaks figuratively, namely, that this wise Merchant deals
as a buyer; The Christian man resembles a buyer in 4. things.
first, he sees the want of Gods grace and Christ's merits; the thirsty are
called to buy, Esaias 55.1.

Secondly, as a buyer, he priseth, valueth, and casts the worth; esteems
Christ at the hiest rate, and all things else in comparison of him, loss, and
dung, Phil. 3.13.

Thirdly, as a buyer he makes an exchange; not of money, nor money worth, but
uses all good endeavor, and labor, by prayer, and diligence, and the use of
all good means, to obtain the grace of the Gospel. Which price God does set
upon grace, and on which condition, an (...) is made. The (...) puts over
his sins to Christ, and receives righteousness from Christ. 2 Cor. 5.21. For
he has made him to be sin for us that knew no sin, that we should be made
the righteousness of God in him.

Fourthly, the bargain, made, is earnested; so the believer, able to give
nothing to God, takes from God the earnest of his Spirit, in some saving
graces; by which the whole bargain of eternal life is assured unto him.

A wise Christian will part with all before he part with Christ.
and buying the Pearl, learn, That a wise Christian must, and will part with
all he has before he will part with Christ. Prou. 4.7. Above all thy
possessions get wisdom and understanding. The godly follow Christ out of
Jerusalem, and out of the camp, Heb. 13.13. they sold their lives, and loved
them not to the death for Christ.

Paul's possessions and his life was not dear, Acts 20.
so he might finish his course with joy. And why?

Laodicea will never buy gold and white raiment, so long as her judgment is
blinded, till she anoint her eyes with eye-salue to see; and seeing once the
worth, she is content to be at any pains for it. The text implies, that no
less pains be made for wisdom than that of most industrious Merchants, who
take long and dangerous iournies, and voyages by sea and land for Pearls, and
swallow all pains and perils in hope of attaining them.

Secondly, the Christian knows that he shall be no loser by the bargain;
other Mercha^ts buying great commodities know not whether they shall be gainers
or no: and many seek Pearls with infinite losses and find them not: But here
is a certain and an undoubted gain, for whosoever forsakes house, wife,
lands, liberty, children, and life for Christ's sake, and the Gospel, shall
receive an hundredfold in this life with tribulation, and in the world to come
life everlasting: here is usury enough, not ten in the hundred, but an hundred
for ten: have this Pearl and want nothing; want this Pearl, and have
nothing.

Thirdly, this puts a difference between soundness and hypocrisy; the
hypocrite can sell much for Gods favor. Mic. 6.6. they will give thousands of
rams, and ten thousand of rivers of oil: and their first borne, but will not
part with their sins. Ananias and Sapphira can part with three parts of their
portion: but soundness esteems the Pearl better than the whole, were it the
whole world.

Fourthly, because it sees Christ forsaking all, liberty, life, wealth,
heaven, and happiness for it; in the way of thankfulness, grace in the heart
does hold it self bound to forsake all for Christ.

than Christ, and his Sermons: Profane Esau despised the blessing in respect
of pottage; There are other scornful Merchants, who scoff at such
simplicity, as to forgo profits, and delights, for vain conceits, as to strip
ones self of the pleasures of life, to run many miles to Sermons, where is
none at home: Others would buy the Pearl, if by it they might gain ease,
reputation, and wealth, like the Swallows that will take their Summer with us,
but in Winter take their leave of us: these measure religion by their gettings,
and say with the old Jews, What profit is there in serving God? Mal. 3.14.


Many who think they have the Pearl deceived.
We may see it is not so easy a matter to have part in the Gospel, as most men
think: that utterly deceive themselves in this commodity; and this is the
cause why so few respect it, 1. Some men think they have it because they have
heard of it, but there is as much difference between finding and buying, as
between calling and answering. 2. Some hear, and like, and wish, and praise
it: but as in a fair they see many rich commodities; but they pass by them
and bargain for none: so many approve of Doctrines in general, but lay out
nothing, nor lay aside any lust: they can commend a good Sermon, but will be
sure it shall do them no good.

Thirdly, there are others that come nearer, cheapen, love, and bid somewhat;
but as hard chapmen nothing near the matter: rich men can cast some of their
superfluity sometimes to good uses; but not as the widow that had but two mites
and cast in all: this were too hard a bargain.

Fourthly, some would exchange some of their sins, but not all: others will
do some duties, as come to Church, hear, pray, sometimes read at home, and
reprocue sin: but come to chargeable or dangerous duties, to show love to
Christ in time of danger or disgrace, they are backward, and draw in the tender
horn for fear they be losers by him.

religion, while they give all they have to the Church and pious uses. Notes of
a man that has purchased the Pearl.




Paul, who lays his birth, kindred, righteousness, civil virtues and good
works, and holiness in the scoale: but all is too light, and found loss
weighed with Christ. So bring Wealth, liberty, friends, life it self, into
the sight of a sound bele ever: and if he must leave these, or Christ and his
Gospel, farewell they; he soon makes his choice: As in the danger of life,
Act. 27.18, the Mariners cast out their wares with their own hands, and the
tacklings out of the ship: so we must cast away all in comparison of Christ,
our Lord and our life. Where note, that the Papist that cannot disclaim his
own merits, shall miss of Christ's.

2. He goes away rejoicing, all his affections are on it; his chief joy is,
Luke 10.20.
that his Name is written in heaven, no affliction can remove this joy.

3. He desires nothing in comparison, beyond, or besides it; Simeon was
content with Christ in his arms; Jacob had enough, that Joseph lived: so the
believer has enough, that Christ lives in heaven, and in his own heart.

4. He retains his confidence to it; every thing else chalenging his
confidence, is but a staff of reed.

5. He will never sell his purchase at any rate. Pro. 23.23. Buy the truth, but
sell it not: Great merchants, what they buy for great prizes, they will sell
for greater: but nothing is sufficient to buy the grace of the Gospel out of
our hands: what we sell we value under the price; but we must deem it above
much fine gold, Psalm. 119. yea, above all that in the world is counted precious.

Not many rich, 1 Cor. 1.26.
not many noble, not many wise attain to have their share in it.

I have now according to the measure of the gift given me, set forth the
choicest and chiefest commodity in all the world, which no Fair, or Mart can
match, if into one Fair all the treasures of the earth were brought to sale:
say not now as the buier uses to do, These Sermons were preached on several
Fair days.
It is naught, it is naught.

I have set an easy price upon it, a little pains, a few good affections, an
upright endeavor, which is so low a price as your selves can wish. You need not
disburse silver, or gold, but may carry away this commodity in your hearts,
and your money in your purses too: as Joseph's brethren carried from their
brother, every man his sack of corn, and his money in his sack too: he that
now sees on the one hand, his own want, and on the other the worth of the
Pearl, will come and cheapen, and buy, and purchase it at any rate, and will
not leave it behind him. But he that still esteems the Pearl, but as a
common pibble, will go home without it, or tread it under his feet. Of this
man says Solomon, Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool, Prou.
17.16.
and he wants heart? And to this man I say, the day comes, in which thou
shall say, thou once refusedst a good bargain which was offered thee, and that
was thine unhappiness: but now attended with a greater, that it shall never be
offered thee any more; Be wise betime, 1 Cor. 12.31.
and covet after the most excellent gifts.

FINIS.
THE PILGRIMS PROFESSION, OR A SERMON PREAched at the Funeral of Mis MARY
GVNTER by Mr Thomas Tailor. To which (by his consent) also is added, A short
Relation of the life and death of the said Gentlewoman, as a per petuall
Monument of her graces and virtues.

Omnis peregrina regio patria est little,
Et omnis patria little est peregrina.
Justin Martyr. epist. ad Diognetum. LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Io: Bartlet,
and are to be sold at his Shop in Cheap Side, at the gilt Cup in the Goldsmiths
Row. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Lady LETTICE, Countess of Leicester, All increase
of Honor and Happiness.
MADAM;
HAving importuned and prevailed with that Reverend Preacher, who performed
that last office for your LADYSHIPS late Servant, to afford me a perfect
Coppie of his Sermon, (which for the fitnes and worthiness of the matter, I
thought much pity to be buried with her:) and purposing to add a short
Relation of the happy Life and Death or my dear Wife, both which I thought
were very exemplary; I emboldned my self, to present the same to your HONOR,
not only as a thankful testification, of my humble duty and service, for all
those gracious endowments, which I so happily enjoyed in her, (of all which,
under God, your (HONOR was a chief instrument) but also because I know that
your HONOR, who gladly apprehended all the means of her comfort through her
life, would as gladly receive the true Narration of her assured Comforts and
Conquest in her so Christian death and dissolution.

Neither is the Sermon unfit for your HONORS perusal, whom God has honored
with so many days, and years, and taught not to fear either the end of your
Pilgrimage out of this strange Country, or the near approach to your own home.

Thus humbly praying your HONORS acceptance of that which is most properly
yours. I pray the Father of mercies, to add to all your noble Virtues, the
continuance of your true prosperity.

Your HONORS in all humble service, H. G.

THE PILGRIMS PROFESSION.
PSALM. 39.12. I am a stranger with thee, and a soiourner as all my Fathers.


THIS holy Prophet being by great distress of mind, and disease of body,
brought very low, (as appears in the whole Psalm) and so low as he was
ready to break patience, and to offend with his tongue; wait upon God with
holy silence: and lifts him up to God in fervent and earnest Prayers (which
are the breath of Faith) both for pardon of sin, plague, the effect of it.
And because the sense of misery was deep; Iacoh) and not let him go till he
have blessed him; and therefore first he desires the Lord to hear his Prayer.
But because the Prayers of the Saints are often faint and feeble, and without
any strong motion; he desires the Lord to hearken to his cry; the sense of his
need urged strong cries, feruency, and importunity. And further because every
strong cry is not heard, unless it proceed from a broken and contrite spirit:
He prays the LORD not to keep silence at his tears; well he knew that
prayers of faith, watered with tears of godly sorrow, are eloquent perswaders,
to draw a comfortable answer from God; they cannot suffer him to sit silent
long; who has prepared both a bottle to reserve them in, and an hand-kerchiefe
to wipe them away from the eyes of his children. Try it after holy David who
will, or can; make every day a spring to sow thy prayers in heaven; and water
them sometimes with an April shower of mournful reares for thy sin, and
misery; and thou have prevailed against Gods silence; thou shall bear a sweet
and comfortable answer in due season.

Now the words read are a reason of bis earnest request, drawn from the
acknowledgement of the frailty, vanity, and breuity of his life, laid down by
a comparison taken from strangers, or Pilgrims, of which number he professes
himself to be; and may well be called, The Pilgrims profession.

In tying which words with the former, it may be asked, first, what force can
there be in this reason, to move or incline God to mercy, because he was a
stranger with him; it might rather imply, that God should the more estrange
himself from him, and stand further from his help.

I answer. 1. The Hebrew phrase, Quis dubitat quod bic psaltes posuit gnimea
tecum, idem esse quod Liphneca, id est, coram ie. Bucer.
I am a stranger with thee, signifies as much as to say, I am a stranger
before thee, or in thy sight. And not that he was a stranger in affection, or
conversation from God, as the wicked, who are said to be strange children, and
strangers from the womb. Psalm. 58.3.
For how could David be such a stranger, who set the Lord ever before him, and
at his right hand, Psalm. 16.8.
that he might not sin against him?

2. As it is a confession and testimony of bis own humility and sense of his
misery, it is a motive to mercy; as if he had said, I am a stranger and need
help, because as a stranger, I lie open to many injuries and inconveniences:
but thou art the God of the abject; and thy property is as to cast down the
proud, so to raise up such dejected souls as I am, and therefore hear my
prayers, cries, and tears.

3. As it ascribes unto the Lord the honor of mercy, it is a motive to mercy;
for holy David puts the LORD in mind of his own gracious inclination and
affection to strangers; Exo. 22.^1. Re^. 19.23 Do^. 10.19
for he has commanded us to be kind to strangers; and has in special
manner undertaken the protection of strangers. Psalm 146.9. The Lord keeps
the strangers: and therefore his faith binding God after a fort to his own law
and promise, assures himself of Gods mercy, because he is a stranger.

4. As it is an acknowledgement of his own impotency, and the misery of his
life, it pleads strongly for mercy, as if he had said; Thou know Lord,
that I am a stranger here, and so long as I am so, I cannot but carry a burden
of flesh, and a body of sin, and daily thereby deserve thy most heavy
displeasure: and therefore I beseech thee, be not so extreme against me, as
in justice thou may; but considering my frailty, mingle thy corrections with
mercy. And whereas I discern also by my bodily weakness and infirmity, that
I am a stranger here, and of short continuance, I pray thee remove thy hand,
and let not all my life be miserable, but that I may recover my strength,
before I go hence, and be no more. And upon the same ground, Job makes the
same request, Job 10.21.
Let him cease and leave off from me, that I may take a little comfort, before
I go and shall not return, etc.

Secondly, it may be asked, How can David use this as a reason for his
recovery, which he used before, verse 4. for the hastening of his death; for
because his life was short and miserable, therefoer he desires he might die
in all haste.

To which I answer. That great difference there is between David foiled by
flesh, and David supported by the Spirit; for we have in him lying under the
temptation, an instance of our own strong-hearted corruption; which out of a
good proposition, can draw most dangerous and wicked conclusions; for, out of
the consideration of the shortness of his life, he could draw conclusions of
murmuring, impatience, and almost of desperation. But now David is another man,
and the Spirit of grace has conquered those assaults, and now he can out of
the same premises, draw the clean contrary conclusions, to support his faith,
patience, and dependence upon God. For such is the wisdom of the Spirit, that
he can draw holy, sweet, and comfortable conclusions from those principles and
grounds, from which flesh and corruption uses to suck sin and poison; and
teaches the Saints so to do.

In the profession it self, Meaning.
consider for the meaning four things; 1. 1. What is this stranger.
What a stranger is. 2. Who is this stranger. 3. Where he is a stranger. 4. The
community of this condition; as all my Fathers were.


1. A stranger is he, that being absent from his own Country is traveling
homewardes unto it. For these two conditions are proper to a stranger. First,
that he is absent from his native soil, absent from his natural friends,
absent from his Fathers house, and absent from his own home and inheritance;
thus was Abraham a stranger in Canaan Secondly, that he is traveling home as a
Pilgrim to his own Country; Thus was Jacob a stranger, whose whole life was
a travail in foreign Countries, out of any certain and settled dwelling, as
himself professes, Genesis 47.9. The whole time of mypilgrimage is an hundred
and thirty years.

2. Who is this stranger? David says, I am a stranger, which may seem
strange, if we consider that David was a King, and that in his own Country,
and that the Country of Judea; in comparison of whose inhabitants all the
world besides were strangers, as Matthew. 27.7. For David was not now in flight
before Saul, 2 Samuel 21.23.
as when he played the fool in the Philistims Country before Acbish to save
his life; nor in likelihood, in chase before Absalom, as when being driven from
home, he went up to the mount of Olives and wept. Neither undertook he any
meritorious journey in a Pilgrims weed. For besides that, he was King of
Jerusalem, and needed not make any tedious Pilgrimage thither, Popish Pilgrims
were not borne some thousands of years after his Age. Peregrinatio ad Imagines
nalla fuit ante 600. annos a Christo nato. Perk. Probl.
There was now no Sepulcher of our Lord to visit; nor no Image of our Lady, and
yet he professes himself a stranger.

3. But where was David a stranger? Himself says, Before thee, that is,
wheresoever he is before God, there he is a stranger; not in another man's
kingdom or Country, as of Moabites or Philistims: but in his own Country,
in Canaan he is a stranger; yea, at Bethlem in the City of David; and in Sion
the Fort of David he is a stranger. This he expresses, Psalm 119.19. I am a
stranger upon earth, that is, in every part of the earth, even in mine own
house, in mine own bed, in mine own body and bosom I am a stranger with
thee. Wherein the holy Prophet both acknowledges the Lord the proprietary, of
whom he held his Country and Kingdom. Lev. 25.23.
For it is as if he had said, I am a stranger in thy Country; my Country is
thy Country, and thy Country is my Country; and now I do but so^ourne a
while with thee in thy Country, till I return home and dwell with thee in my
Country. As also he insol^^th a motive, why the LORD should incline his ear
to his Prayer, and show him favor, because he is a stranger in the Lords
Country; and therefore committing himself to the protection and safe conduct
of the Lord of the Country, he doubts not, but to find grace in his eyes,
and by his means a comfortable passage, till he come happily to the end of
his way. For who should hear the complaints of a soiourner, but he with whom
he soiourneth?

4. But is it otherwise with David now, than with other men? No surely, but he
bears part in the common condition of his Fathers. Although he was dear to
God, and the King of Gods people; yet he is no better than his Fathers; he is
a stranger as all his Fathers were. He means not the fathers of his flesh
only, who were all dead, and gone to their iourneys end, but the Fathers of
his faith also; those holy Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their
posterity, which were the holy seed; who in their times accounted themselves
strangers, Heb. 11.13, 14.
and declared themselves so to be; both in that they chused to dwell in Tents,
Heb. 11.9.
and not in houses or Cities; as the posterity of Cain did, for they held
themselves strangers on earth, and expecting every day the word of God to call
them hither or thither, at his pleasure, they would not cumber themselves with
buildings or purchases; but betook themselves to poor and portable tents,
which were soon pitched up, and as soon taken down. As also in that they
were contented to wander up and down as Pilgrims, restlesly from place to
place, insomuch as the iourneyes and travels of Abraham recorded in his Story,
amounts to 1794. miles; Jacobs little less, whose posterity was a stranger in
Egypt four hundred years; and from thence were taken into the terrible
Wilderness; where they wandered forty years, and all the rest of them in the
wide wilderness of this world, and vale of Baca, only passed through as
Pilgrims unto the heavenly Canaan. All which our holy Prophet reuoluing in his
mind, subscribeth the same schedule, that he is a stranger also as they were.
Doct.


Hence we learn, That all the Saints of God, and true believers, are
strangers upon earth: for so was David, and all his Fathers of his flesh, and
of his faith, as himself not only here in sense of his affliction
professes: but elsewhere stirred up by the sight and sense of Gods abundant
mercy toward him, and in the time of his solenme joy and festiuitie utters
the same words, 1 Chronicles. 29.15. All things come of thee and of thine own hand
^ee have gi^en thee; (...).
for we are strangers before thee, and solourners like all our Fathers, 2 Cor.
5.6 while we are at home in the body, we are estranged from the Lord. And
indeed every Christian is a Gershom; that is, a stranger and in a strange land:
in respect, first of place, for they are absent from heavenly Canaan, their
own home and Country; here is not their fathers house, nor their brethren
and sisters, nor their treasure; they are Citizens with Saints, Ephesians. 2.19.
and heaven their home, where our Lord Jesus is preparing Mansions for them,
John 14. Secondly, as for the world, it is but a way to their Country, and as
a wilderness through which the Israel of God pass toward their Canaan. They are
indeed in the world, but not of it: for they are called out of the world; 1. by
Christ's separation, John 15.19. I have chosen you out of the world. 2. Christ's
interdiction, 1 John 2.15. Love not the world nor the things of the world, 3.
Christ's operation, Gal. 6.14. Commorandi diuersoriu^, non habitandi Cicero de
Senect.
The world is crncified to me, and I unto the world. The very light of nature
saw and said, that nature has affoorded us in this world only an Inn, and
not a dwelling: and should not grace much more acquaint us with Gods decree and
ordinance, which is, that man should be a while in the world, as in a way to
pass him unto his final estate elsewhere, or at most, but a trauailer in an
Inn, which he is ready to leave the next morrow.

Secondly, in their own account and confession they are strangers, Heb. 11.13.
All these confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims upon earth. And in
the account of the world also they are strangers, which uses them strangely
and coursely, as David was a stranger to his brethren Psalm. 69.8. And whereas,
were they of the world, it would know them, love them, and hug them in their
lap: they being strangers, it is an other Egypt to Gods first borne, and
knows them not but to vex and oppress them.

Thirdly, in respect of the short time of their continuance, for as a stranger
abides not in a strange place (as the natives do) but hasteneth through his
way, and so with his time cutteth and shorteneth his journey; Heb. 13.14
so the godly have here no abiding city, neither is this their resting place.
For this cause the whole militant Church is called a Tabernacle: Psalm. 15.1.
and the Saints call the time of their life for the shortness and
discontinuance of it, but a being in this tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.13
because first, as a Tabernacle is but a soiourning place, set up for a shift,
to hide our selves for a small while, as the Soldier hides himself in a
sconce or tent only for the time of a siege at the longest: so is it with the
Tabernacle of the body, set up for a small time, not so much for it self as
for the Inmate, the Soul which is contained in it. Secondly, as a Tabernacle
is a moveable tent, pitched for a day; ouer-night is set up, and perhaps, the
next day the stakes are pulled up, and the cords are slacked, and the covering
is folded up: no otherwise is it with the Tabernacle of the body, which no man
knows, whether it shall stand unmoved till the next morrow, no, nor till the
next hour.

Thirdly, as a Tabernacle is only a covering but has no foundation to settle
upon: so Job speaks of our bodies, as houses of clay, Job. 4.19.
whose foundation is in the dust: that if God did not fasten the silver cords
of them to his appointed time, every blast would overthrow them every moment.

Fouthly, the godly are strangers here below in respect of their business,
and employment; a stranger is unacquainted with the affairs of the place where
he takes up his Inn, he meddles not with the government, the offices, the
passages of causes in the town where he lies as a stranger; but intends
his journey, and only cares how he may pass through: and if he have any
business there, it is only to advance his estate at home in his own
Country. And so it is with the godly; they estrange themselves as much as may
be from the world, and the common courses of it: their callings they cast not
off, because they are commanded to abide in them with moderate care, to
provide for themselves, and theirs. And for earthly things they cannot be
without them, while they have a life to maintain by them; but yet they meddle
no more with them than needs must; and in the midst of their earthly
business are not earthly minded. They are Burgesses of another Corporation,
Col. 3.10.
and all their trading and traffic here is to make themselves a rich and
sure estate there. They have a chief business to do, which they principally
intend, namely, to seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness of it; to
repent of their sins, to believe in the Son of God; and to make their
election sure: whereto they give all diligeuce, as they are exhorted 2 Pet.
1.10.

Fifthly, The godly are strangers in respect of their affection; for, as
strangers long after home; and where ever their bodies be, their hearts and
minds are not there, but at home where their dear friends and estates are: So
is it with the Saints, whose minds and meditations, and conversation are in
heaven before hand; for there is their Fathers house, and there is their
inheritance; there is Jesus Christ their treasure; and no marvel if their
hearts be there where their treasure is. The worldling has his whole portion
in this life, and therefore he bestows all his heart, his thoughts, his
cares, his desires, and endeauours upon the world; he runs after it with a full
desire. But it cannot be so with the godly man, who is minded as was good
Nehemiah, 2.3. Who although his person was in the King of Persia his Court, and
was a near attendant at the Kings Table, yet his heart was at Jerusalem. And
as Daniel, who while he was in the land of his captivity, yet he opened his
windows every day toward Jerusalem.

Quest. But are not wicked men strangers here upon earth, as well as the godly?

Answ. Wicked men and worldlings are indeed strangers here, if we look toward
God, they are strangers with him, strangers from the Covenant of God; and
strangers from the life, and ways of God. Or if we consider the time of their
continuance here, they have no more continuance here, than others; they have
no Leases of their lives; nor no surer hold of their estates than others have.
The rich Glutton heard; Thou fool this night shall they take away thy soul,
and all. Or if we consider the place in which they live, they are strangers;
for the East wind takes away and hurles them out of their place, Job 27.21.
as easily as any other. And the mighty die suddenly, Job 34.20.
and are taken away without hand. And their houses and possessions which knew
them once, shall know them no more, but take in other strangers for a term of
days, as they took in them.

But wicked men are not strangers as the godly are, in four respects.

1. In their own account, or conceit; for, though their estate be as unstable
as any others; yet have they a strong conceit of continuance, and of taking
their rest for many years. They are described to be such as put off the evil
day; and make leagues with death; and are hardly brought to confess themselves
to be Pilgrims and strangers.

2. In the worlds account they be not strangers, but neighbors, and
Towne-dwellers. The world knows them, and loves them as her own: yea,
lulleth them in her lap as her children, she graceth them, enricheth them, and
aduanceth them as men of best deserts. In a word, she thinks nothing she
has too good for such fast friends, and diligent servants.

3. In their own affection they be no strangers; for how can they considering
they have no other portion but here? Psalm. 17.14. How can they but mind
earthly things, Phil. 3.19.
to whom God has showed no better? How can they but give away their
affections, and bury their hearts in earth, and drown themselves in the
delights of it, that have no other God, no other Heaven? What man will be
willing to give over a broken title, till he be assured, and seated in a
better? which because they are not; like profane Esaus, they hunger after
pottage, let the blessing go where it will.

4. In their course and conversation they do not declare themselves to be
strangers. All their study, their pains, their sweat and endeavor, is to get
a sure and contented estate in earth: they treasure all in earth; If they can
increase their Corn, their Wine, their Oil, their Coin, their Commodities,
they rest as in a good portion; seldom or never seeking in earnest that good
part which should never be taken from them, nor they from it, if once they
could attain it. Thus much of the Doctrine, and this question. The Use
follows.

First, In that the godly man is a stranger and Pilgrim here, we learn sundry
duties. As first to practice Christian sobriety, in the affecting, Christian
sobriety in 1. affecting.
enjoying, and using the things of this life. For 1. a stranger in his way
affects not, desires not, looks not for great things for himself in the City
he trauelleth through; he lightly regards the honors, offices, revenues,
and privileges of it: his chief desires and affections are elsewhere; all the
privilege he expects there is how to pass quietly and safely through; Even
so ought the Christian Pilgrim by the weaned carriage of himself toward
things below, declare plainly (as the Patriarchs did) that he seeks a
Country. Heb. 11.14.


Seek thou great things for thy self (says the Lord to Baruk) seek them
not. Ier. 45.5.
And why must he not? because he was but a stranger in that Land, now
presently to be given over into the hands of strangers.

Secondly, 2. Enjoying.
A stranger enioyes the things of a strange place as a stranger; he uses other
men's goods for a night, but he sets not his heart on them, nor takes much
delight in them, because he knows he must leave them next morning, and may
take none away with him; Even so a Christian stranger takes but little delight
in his journey, because he thinks not himself at home, neither does he
enjoy things here as his portion, nor as his own, because he is to be
countable for them; and because he well knows, that too much delight in
fleshly and worldly pleasures gives life to corruption, and weakeneth grace in
him; he attends that wholesome Apostolical exhortation, 1 Pet. 2.11. Dearly
beloved, as strangers and Pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight
against the soul.

Thirdly, 3. Using the world.
a stranger uses the necessary comforts he meets with in his way as a
stranger; he uses them rather for necessity than for satietie, only for
present occasion, and that with moderation and sobriety; Even so a Christian
Pilgrim must learn to use the world as not using it: 1 Cor. 7.31.
and in the midst of his wealth and abundance, in the fruition of his greatest
delights and pleasures, to take his mind off them, and to lift up his thoughts
to heaven, the place of his abode. Which duty the Apostle strongly enforces,
Phil. 3.20. Carnal men mind earthly things. and forgetting both heaven, and
the God of heaven, Make their belly their God, that is, drown themselves in
the pond and puddle of sensuality. But far be it from us who profess the
teaching of grace so to do, Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we
look for a Savior; they have their portion in this life, Psa. 17.14.
but our portion is in another, and contrary courses beseem men of contrary
Countries.

Secondly, In that we are strangers here, we learn another Dutic, which is,
the exercise of Christian patience and contentment in all estates, be it
sickness, poverty, reproaches, abuses or wrongs in any kind: a stranger is
contented to endure the wrongs that meet him in his way; he digesteth, and
puts up all patiently; he complains not, and much less seeks revenge:
for he knows he shall have little rest or redress till he come home: Even
so the Christian Pilgrim must learn patiently to endure the afflictions, and
course and cross vsages of this strange Country, 2 Cor. 4. last verse, the
blessed Apostle was contented to endure all indignities and wrongs; because he
was of another country, the high privileges and excellencies whereof, Eye
has never seen, nor ear has ever heard, nor ever entered into the heart of
man. Ioh. 14.4.
When the Disciples of our SAVIOVR took it heavily that Christ said he must
leave them: for now what could they expect but to be exposed and laid open to
all the worlds malignitie, destitute of their Lords presence and protection?
he comfort them by this same argument; That this is not their place of
rest, but he goes to prepare a place for them. Moses chused to suffer
afflictions with Gods people, Heb. 11.26
because he was a stranger here, and looked for a recompense of reward
hereafter. A cloud of Martyrs as witnesses seal this truth, who were slain,
hewn a sunder, wandered up and down in sheep skins, in goats skins, being
destitute, afflicted, and tormented; and would not be delivered God had
prepared better things for them.

A stranger turns not against every Dog that barketh at him; let Doeg
accuse, and Shemei revile, let Currs bark, there is no hope to still them; the
best way is to contemn them, and attend and ride on thy way. A stranger
shrinkes not for every shower of rain, nor is disheartened with the roughness,
Nubecula est, transilis.
and foulness of the way; but he will through thick and thin, through
drops and drought, and all because he is going home. Neither must thou that
art a Christian Pilgrim, shrink for the storms of the world, nor the
asperousnesse of the way, which is all strewed with crosses; but hearten thy
self as the Passenger who usually says, it is never an ill day that has a
good night; and though many bitter pills of harsh and strange vsages must be
swallowed by these strangers, yet the consideration of home is as sugar in
their pockets to sweeten them all.

A stranger measures not his own worth, nor thinks worse of himself for
things befalling him in the way; but esteems and valueth himself, according
to his estate at home: So must the Christian stranger, live by faith, look
upon things not seen. Let the world undervalue thee, content thy self, that
thou have credit, and reputation at home, where thou art known, and thy worth
is known, which by no disparagement in the way can be obscured, or diminished.

Thirdly, a third duty hence that we are strangers here, is to learn to
estrange our selves from the world, and courses of worldly men. A stranger when
ever he travails, reteineth the manners, fashions, and customs of his own
country; a Christian stranger although he be in the world, yet he is not of
the world, he is of another corporation, and therefore though he walk in the
flesh, 2 Cor. 10.3 (...)
yet he must not war according to the flesh. He carries this body of flesh
about him as others do, but he must fight against flesh and the lusts of it,
contrary to the Patrons, and defenders of the corruptions that are in the
world through lust. The world may and must enjoy our presence for a time, but
must at no time gain our conformity to it, Romans 12.2. Fashion not your selves
according to this world, that is, the customs and guizes of it; because it
lies in wickedness, and the Christian is cast into another form of doctrine
and conversation, Art thou now solicited to follow the lusts and fashions of
this world? think with thy self, that thou art a stranger here, and of
another Country; thou live under other laws; thou may not cast in thy lot
with the wicked of the world; nor give voice or suffrage in their meetings; but
be as Lot, who though he were in Sodom, was not of Sodom; but was
perpetually vexed with the unclean conversation of those wicked men. Art thou
provoked to swear, to drink excessiuely, to lie for advantage, to break the
Sabbath for gain, to uncleanness, or any other foul lust? Now say to thy
self; I am of the kingdom of light; but this is a work of darkness; this
is an unlawful act in my Country, and why should I practice it here? seeing
my Lord and King must needs know it: if I commit treason here against my King
and Country; my King has informers enough, and I shall loose my whole estate
there, and be banished out of my country for ever. Shall I (says Joseph)
commit this sin against my God, against my Master? Seeing my Master has kept
nothing from me but sin; I will not do this thing, I will not sin, and
commit this high wickedness.

Fourthly, A fourth duty is, that seeing we are strangers here, to learn to
affect our own country, and highly to esteem it. Every man by nature loves
his native Country best; neither thinks himself so well in any foreign
land; and strangers, especially having parents, kindred, and great revenues in
their native soil; and being hardly entreated where they soiourne; would be
glad to return home, and enjoy the sight of those whom they have long longed
to see: Even so the Christian Pilgrim. Never did Israel more affect and extol
their own Country in their banishment from it, and captivity in Babylon,
than the Christian stranger does affectedly desire, and prefer his heavenly
Country above this strange land, the Country of his captivity; For, he
discerns that this is not his Country, first, That is a man's Country where
he was borne and brought up, but whence takes a Christian his spiritual
birth, or where is he brought up but in the Church and kingdom of Christ?
Earth gives him a birth and being as he is man, but as a Christian he is
borne of God. Secondly, again, that is a man's country where his parents, his
ancestors, and dear kindred dwell, and inhabit. Now where dwells the
Christian man's Father, but in heaven? Where is his elder brother but there?
Where are all his brethren and sisters, sons and daughters of the same
parents but there? and therefore heaven is his Country. Thirdly, Further, that
is a man's Country where his principal estate, and goods are, where his
patrimony and inheritance lies; and where is the chief portion, the treasure,
the immortal inheritance of the Christian, but in heaven? And where else is
his Country? Now then, a Christian considering on the one hand, that he is in
a strange Country, and how hardly he has bin entreated in it, and so likely
to be still; and on the other hand, that he has an home and a father there
that loves him dearly; and that his elder brother Jesus Christ, and all his
spiritual kindred, the Saints of God are there; And besides that, he has a
rich portion and a large patrimony, even an immortal inheritance in heaven;
how can he choose but to be reared in his affections, yea, ravished to be
there? desiring nothing in the world more than to be dissolved hence, and to
be with Christ, which is best of all. Phil. 1.23.
A Traveler has his mind, and thoughts still upon home, and says with
himself, Home is homely. And the Mariner, or Seafaring man in a storm, or
rough Sea, has his desires on the Shore, and his mind is not where his body
is. So is it with the Christian Passenger, his mind is not where his body is;
and if he cannot get home in the body as soon as he desires, yet in his
spirit, he will mind heaven, and heavenly things; he will get as near home
as he can; if he cannot get into the heart of the city, he will be sure to
get into the suburbs, the Church of God. If he cannot get suddenly into that
Jerusalem which is above, Reu. 21.2.
he will get into the Jerusalem which is from above; and where his person
cannot be for the time, his conversation and meditation shall be in heaven;
Matt. 6 21.
for where his treasure is, there will his heart be also.

Use 2. In that we are strangers with God, we learn diverse things;

1. The sovereignty and power of God, who is the great owner, Zach. 4.14
and ruler of the whole earth. Kings themselves, who are the highest earthly
Lords, and commanders, are but strangers with God, Psalm. 24.1.
for the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is: And no man sits in his
own, but are Tenants at will under this great Landlord. The greatest of men,
yea, of Kings, are but as David was, soiourners in his sight, Leuitic. 25.23.
The Land is his, and we are but strangers and soiourners with him.

2. We must hence gather out our own duty toward God, in whose Country we
soiourne; and our duty is manifold;

1. To ask leave of GOD, to pass through his Country; so did Israel of Edom,
a wicked Prince and people, Numbers 20. I pray thee that we may pass through
thy Country, etc. It is fit to ask leave where no right is. Besides, that by
daily prayer for Gods leave, and favorable love in our way, we both ascribe
unto God the honor of sovereignty and bounty; as also sweeten his mercies
which he gives us leave to enjoy, all which are sanctified to us by the word
and by prayer. 1 Timothy 4.5.


2. Bind thy self from trespassing in the way and Country through which thou
passest; So did Israel unto Edom, Number. 20.17.
We will not go through the fields, nor the vineyards: neither will we drink
of the water of the wells; we will go by the Kings way, and neither turn to
the right hand, nor left, till we be past thy borders; So must the Christian
be careful he transgress not the laws of the Country in which he
soiournes, to stir up against himself the wrath and revenge of the Lord in
whose Country he soiourneth; but frame himself to please him, by whose leave
he trauelleth through his Country. How careful and diligent were Joseph's
brethren to please their unknown brother, Genesis 44.
the Lord of that strange Country? Much more ought we to please our brother
Jesus Christ, the Lord of this strange country, through which we pass to our
own Canaan.

3. Cast thy care upon God, and depend upon him for all needful supplies; so
did holy David here, because he was a stranger in Gods Country, he therefore
casts his burden upon the Lord, desiring him to hear his prayer, and to
hearken to his cry, and not to be silent at his tears. A stranger ouerloadeth
not himself with cares, and carriages; but carrying a competent viaunce with
him, depends for all necessaries upon them where he soiourneth; so a
Christian stranger need be in nothing careful, Phil. 4.6.
but in all things let his requests be showed unto God (the King of the
Country) in prayer. All distrustful and excessive carfulness is to be
avoided of a Christian, yea, suppose the care be about things lawful, if it
be excessive, it is sinful, and unseemly in a Christian Pilgrim. Let thy
chief care be, Psalm. 37.5. 1 Pet. 5.7.
to commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to
pass, Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy care upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee.

4. Be much in thankfulness unto God for all the comfortable blessings thou
receiuest in thy Pilgrimage: a stranger thankefully accepts all the favors
showed him in a strange Country: and so did holy David, when God had enabled
him to prepare abundantly for the building of the temple, break out into
abundant praises; We thank thee our God, 1 Chro. 29.13.14.
and praise thy glorious Name. But who am I? or what is my people, that we
should offer unto thee? for all is thine, and of thine own have we given thee;
for, we are strangers before thee, and soiourners, as all our Fathers were.
And surely, it well beseems the just to be thankful, seeing they are
strangers in the Lords land, and all the comforts they enjoy, are his by right,
and possession, and theirs only by leave, and thankful acceptance.

5. Be contented and patient, if this great Lord deny thee any thing thou
would have whilst thou passest through his Country; Numb. 20 21.
so was Israel when Edom out of a churlish and hurtful mind, denied them
peaceable passage. But the Lord of this Country knows what is fit for us,
and never denies any thing out of a churlish mind, neither can deny any thing
good in it self, and good to us; and if he withold any hurtful things, we
must be not only patient but thankful.

Use 3. In that we are strangers here, and traveling to our country, as all
our Fathers have done before us, it appears that our wisdom will be to
resolve of pains and travel all the days of our life, and not to expect rest
till the night of death come, when dying in the Lord we shall rest from our
labors; and because this is not our rest, Mica. 2.^0.
we must arise and depart hence. And seeing we can no more avoid this weary
journey, than any of our Fathers could do; we must rather bestow wise and
careful thoughts, in fitting our selves to our journey, and in behauing our
selves through our way, than to expect to avoid the tediousness and
difficulties of it.

Quest. How may we fit our selves for our journey home into our own Country?

Ans. A traveler fitteth himself to his journey two ways especially;

1. By casting off, and leaving behind him whatsoever would burden or hinder
him in his way.

2. By providing for himself things fit for his journey.

Of the former sort there be three especial encumbrances that the Christian
Pilgrim must lighten himself off. The first of them is sin, which as an
intolerable burden presses us down, Heb. 12.1.
and hangs fast on; and therefore the Apostle counsels to cast it off, if
we mean to run the race before us. Now the way to lighten our selves of
this weight, is to exercise every day the grace of repentance and
mortification, and daily to take some sin or other in hand, and at least to
slake and abate the power of it, that if we cannot be rid of the sin in
respect of the presence of it, yet we may be rid of the reign and command of
it.

The second, are earthly cares, profits, and pleasures, which are as heavy
stones tied unto us, and pressing us from heaven to earth, making heavy and
sad the soul, and unweildy in her motions. The way for us to lighten our
selves of these encumbrances, is daily and continually to eleuate, and raise
our thoughts homeward, and heauenward, and exercise our selves in holy
meditations, prayers, and praises, sundry times through the day.

For as he that would keep a Clock in true motion, must every day sundry
times wind up the plummets, which are still drawing downward; even so must we
do with our hearts; the cares and pleasures of the world are as plummets of
Lead, pressing down the soul incessantly, in her motion toward heaven; and
he that would continue his motion must daily wind up his heart toward God:
and by maine strength of grace fetch it up from earth, that it may be sirmly
settled on heavenly things, delighting it self with the riches of heaven; and
with contemplation of those pleasures, that are at the right hand of God for
evermore.

The third encumbrance, is the fear of death, which presses us all our life;
and the Christian must lighten himself of this burden by looking beyond it to
his own home; by longing after the living God, whom none can see in the body
and live; by considering that the nearer he is to death, he is so much nearer
home. And what stranger fears to go home; or is sorry when after a long
absence, he is entering into his own City?

Secondly, A wise Christian will furnish and provide himself with necessaries,
and needful supplies, to help him through his journey.

There be five things especially which a traveler must fit himself withal,
that his journey may be less tedious, and more prosperous to himself.

1. The knowledge of the direct way. Now whereas no man knows the way to the
heavenly country, without Gods teaching, every one must go to God himself
first, and then to such as God has appointed to be the directors, and
instructors in this way. The former we see in holy David, Psalm 119.19. I am
a stranger upon earth, therefore hide not thy Commandments from me. He knew
well how hardly a blind man could perform a far and dangerous journey, and
thus it is only the Commandment that shows the way to this heavenly
Country. Why, was David a blind man, or did he not know the ten
Commandments? Even David who was not stone blind, but much enlightened, was
blind in part, and still earnest, that the LORD would further open his eyes,
Psalm. 119.18, 34, 35.
to see the way more plainly, and clearly than yet he did: And though he
knew the words, and true sense of the ten Commandments, yet he desires still
to be led further into the particular use, application, direction, and
obedience of them; and of all other parts of the Word, which he says, is
exceeding large. knows the way better than himself; and will observe the
several marks, and statues, by which he may know, whether he be right, or
no: So must every Christian Pilgrim be inquisitiue of his way; for which
purpose he must frequent the ministry of the word diligently, which God has
erected to be as A light in a dark place; as the Pillar of the Cloud and
fire by night and by day, to direct us through this dry and desert wilderness;
as Ariadnes threede to help us through this trouble-some Maze and Labyrinth;
and as a voice behind us, saying, this is the way, walk in it. An inquisitiue
Christian will be still consulting with Gods Ministers about the way of God:
and conferring with private Christians, be they never so mean in place or
appearance, concerning their great journey between heaven and earth; and will
take special notice of the marks of their way, as whether it be the narrow
way, or the broad way; whether it be strewed with crosses, or pleasant to the
flesh; whether it be a clean way, or a foul, dirtie, and mirie way of lusts;
whether it be an old beaten way by the feet of ancient believers, the
Prophets, the Apostles, and holy men, yea, of Jesus Christ himself; or a new
broken and devised way, unknown unto them, and the Scriptures; whether it be a
right way, Hos. 14.9.
or a crooked path of by lanes, and turnings to the right hand, or to the left;
whether it be a lightsome, or a dark way, Pro. 4.19.
and the like. Thus inquisitiue and careful will a Christian Pilgrim be of
the best directions he can get; as the poor iaylor will know of Paul his
prisoner, what he may do to be saved; and it is none of the lightest plagues
of God, to have an heart unwilling to ask about the way of heaven

A second comfortable help in an unknown way, is a good guide. The Christian
stranger has need of a guide, and the best guide is God himself, yea and
more, God is the only guide. In any other way or journey, the natives or
inhabitants can guide a stranger from place to place, but here none but God can
be our guide, Psalm 25.9. He will guide in Judgment, and teach the humble
his way.

Quest. But how then may a man get God to be his guide?

Answ. By two special means;

1. By earnest Prayer. David knowing that none but God could guide him,
prays, Psalm 143.8. Show me the way that I shall go. And verse 10. Let thy
good Spirit lead me unto the land of righteousness.

2. By constant subjection to Gods word; for God goes before us by his word,
as he did before Israel in the Pillar of the Cloud and fire, and willing
obedience to Gods word makes God our guide.

Thirdly, A stranger in his way needs his viance, or provision for his
expense. The word of God is the Christians viaticum, and supplyeth all his
needs, it affoords him food in his hunger, being the bread of life, and the
Mannah that came down from heaven; it yields him drink in his thirst, being
water of life, and whosoever thirsts, is called to these sweet waters of
consolation, drawn out of the wells of salvation; it affords him Physic in
his souls sickness; strength in his weakness; and never leaves him that
leans upon it, without sufficient means to help him through his journey.

Fourthly, a traveler has need of a weapon to defend himself, and to wound
or keep off his enemies. The same word of God is a special part of our
spiritual armor; it is the sword of the Spirit. And as David said of Goliahs
sword, Oh, there is none to that, give me that; so there is no sword to this
for the repulse of all spiritual enemies, and for the sure defense of him that
shall buckle it close unto him. Besides that, it directs him to obtain and
fasten unto him all the other pieces of Christian armor, so as in no part he
lie open or naked to danger.

Fifthly, A Traveler has need of good company, which is pro vehiculo, as good
as a Wagon or Coach, to carry him with the more ease through the tediousness
of the way. The same testimonies of God are sweet companions, and help to
deceive, and pass over our time comfortably; if we can talk of them in the
way, and in the house, and in the field; and if we can whet them upon our
selves and others; if we make them The man of our counsel, and meditate on
them night and day; he is never alone that has God and Christ conferring,
counselling, and directing him in the Scriptures; neither is he alone, who
when he is most alone, is in Soliloquie with God; this man wants neither
company nor comfort.

Now how happily shall this man compass his journey, Psa. 119.54.
and go singing through the most tedious ways of his Pilgrimage, that has
thus furnished himself with the understanding of his way; with a faithful and
unerring guide; with sufficient provision for his expense; with a serviceable
weapon; and with a sweet and cheerful Companion?

Use 4. In that we are Pilgrims in the way to our Country; In this way (...)
must learn to demean our selves as wayfaring men, and imitate the Pilgrim in
these particulars.

1. To be stirring early for our journey, and take the day before us, that we
may dispatch our journey before we be benighted It is our Lords counsel to
work while the day lasts, because the night comes wherein none can work,
Ioh. 11.9. And his own practice propounded for our imitation, Job. 9.4. and
imitated by the Saints, whose praises are in the Scriptures. Holy David served
out his time according to the counsel of God, that is, while he lived he was
a servant of God, for the good of the age in which he lived. And the Apostle
Peter exhorts, 1 Pet. 4.2.
that henceforth so much time as remains in the flesh, we spend according to
the will of God. Well did the holy men consider, what an advantage it is to set
out in the way of God early, even in the morning of the life; What a sweet
comfort it is to be early graced; that we have but a short day passed away in
a few hours to travel in; that this day stays not, but hasteneth from us;
that this day is the only time to walk in; and that this day being shut in,
there is no more time to work or walk in, and therefore did bestir themselves
lest they should fall short of their intended journey.

2. As a man in his journey, will be glad of any good company that will go
but part of his way with him; So must the Christian in his journey, be glad of
company in his way to heaven; and heartily embrace the fellowship and society
of the Saints, which mean to go through with him. Indeed if a man would choose
to sort himself with evil men, he might get more company, but they go the
contrary way; but a wise traveller will rather choose to go with one, or two,
yea or alone in his right way, than go a clean contrary way for company. Let
us be glad to meet our countrymen in this throughfare, be kind to them for
the same Country sake; and as we shall easily know them by their language,
habit, and conversation, so let us heartily affect them, and vndividedly cleave
unto them.

3. In this way be glad (as a stranger in a strange Country) to send home upon
enery occasion offering it self; send home thy prayers, thy daily desires, thy
thoughts, thy meditations, thy praises, thy sacrifices, thy love tokens. And
because some thing is to be done for thee at home now in thine absence,
beseech Christ thy best friend, to set forward thy business there, and to
look to thine occasions, lest all go to wrack, by preparing a mansion for
thee; by making intercession for thee; by sending out his Spirit for thy
direction and comfort, till thou returnest home unto him; eternal praises and
thanks for such great favors, so freely conferred upon thee.

4. In this way be content if sometimes thou are weary as one that goes up a
steep hill if sometimes thou sighest and pantest in thy painful travel,
through a foul way, and stormy weather; Let the tediousness of the way make
thee desire the ways end, and to covet to be at home with Christ, which is
best of all. But be sure in thy weariness thou sit not down; much less
look back with Lots wife; but press hard forward to the mark, Philip. 3.13.
as one resolved to go through and persevere to the end; considering that after
an hill comes a valley; after foul way comes fair; and after a storm a
fair shine and gleame again; Psalm. 30.
heaviness may endure for a night, but joy returns in the morning. If we
have need of patience for a while, Heb. 10.36.
it is but to enjoy the promises. If the sufferings for Christ increase. 2 Cor.
1.
so shall also the comforts. Psalm.34.
And many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out
of all. The end which crowns all thy labor is worth all thy pains and
patience

Use 5. Seeing all the Saints are strangers here as all our Fathers have been;
Here are sundry grounds of comfort arising hence to believers.

world, the world would love them as her own. Every Corporation prefers
into offices her own free men, and inhabitants; and it were folly for a
stranger passing but through, to expect those places, and preferments; he must
rather cast to endure wrongs, where his worth is unknown, and expect no
remedy or release at any of their hands; but herein comfort himself that he
has credit, and can have right in his own country, and if he were once at
home, he should put up no such wrongs and indignities.

is a ground of comfort.

1. That all the fury of the enemies, exiling and banishing the godly, can but
make them strangers, and so were they before, whersoever they dwelt in any
place of the earth. It is no great addition of misery to banish him, that was
in banishment before; or to drive a man out of one strange place into another:
He that is already a stranger upon earth in affection, can easily become come
actually a stranger, if God call him unto it.

2. When the enemies have exercised all their rage, they cannot banish them out
of GODS Country; but they are strangers before God, who is equally present
with them in one corner of the earth as well as in another, to protect them, to
provide for them, to pity them, and guide them home to their own Country.

3. Although the enemies would be endless in their rage against the Saints;
and were they to live ever, they would ever nourish and exercise an immortal
wrath against the people of God, yet can they not inflict so much mischief on
them as they desire; For besides that themselves are mortal, and besides the
justice of God breaking quickly to pieces the rods of his wrath, and casting
them into the fire; the godly themselves are but strangers here, and of short
continuance; so as, suppose their sufferings be sharp, yet they be but
short. The rods of the wicked shall not always lie upon the lot of the
righteous (as they desire they should) seeing the godly are strangers as well
in time as in place, and themselves not continuing, their misery cannot be
continual.

Nay, in that great and final destruction of the whole world by the dreadful
fire of the last day; 2 Pet. 3.10.
When the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt
with heat, and the earth, with the works that are therein shall be burnt up:
When all other men shall be loosers of all their whole estates, only the
godly (because they are Strangers here) they shall escape all these things, and
be no losers at all.

If some whole City should be consumed by fire, when the whole multitude of
Inhabitants sustain loss, and beggary, by that Accident; a stranger that is
but passing through the City, and has his estate and dwelling elsewhere, he
loses nothing at all; So the godly shall be glad in that day, that they have
no stock nor portion with them, who had no other portion but in this life.

Lot that he was a stranger, Genesis 19.9.
and scorned as a stranger by the Sodomites; for when all they were scalded with
a shower of fire and Brimstone, the Lord being merciful unto him, his person
was in safety. Sever thy self from the condition of sinful men; estrange
thy self from the condition of sinful men; estrange thy self from their
courses; walk as one delivered from this evil world, if not yet in respect of
place, yet in respect of new qualities; thou shall have Gods protection, and
see the salvation of the LORD, when all the wicked Inhabitants of the earth
shall call for the hills to cover them, and the mountains to fall upon them,
to hide them from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of his wrath is
come, Rev. 6.16, 17.
and who can stand? (*)

FINIS.
A PROFITABLE MEMORIAL of the Conversion, Life, and Death of Mris. MARY
GVNTER, set up as a Monument to be looked upon, both by Protestants and Papists.
I Could not better spend some part of the days of my mourning for the loss
of my dear wife, than in setting down briefly some Passages of her course and
Pilgrimage, that the happy memory of her graces and virtuous life might ever
live with me, both for incitation, and imitation. And if my desires were strong
to make them more public for the direction of some others, I hope it will
rather be charitably ascribed to the working and stirring of my affection
toward her Ashes, than to any vanity of mind, or ostentation in her.
Besides, I am sure, that if a Protestant had been seduced from us (as she was
called out of Popery) and had lived and died so zealous in that Religion, as
she did in this, the adversaries would have made their advantage of it, and
published the same as one of the miracles of their Church. And I see not but it
may be as lawful for me, as it may prove profitable for others, to set down
the known Truth concerning her; that as she was in her life, so also she may
happily continue now after her death, an happy instrument of Gods glory in
earth, as I am assured she is a vessel before him filled with his glory of
heaven.

THis gracious Woman was for birth a Gentlewoman, Her birth.
but descended of Popish Parents, who dying in her infancy, she was committed
unto the tuition of an old Lady, Popish education.
honorable for her place, but a strong Papist, who nousled and misled this
Orphane in Popery, till she came about fourteen years of age; at which time
this Lady died. Upon which occasion, God (having a merciful purpose toward
her conversion) by his good Providence, brought her to the service of that
Religious and truly honorable Lady, the Countess of Leicester, who
entertained her with more than ordinary respect, both because of her young
years, as also because she was allied to Sir Christopher Blunt, then husband
to the honorable Countess; at whose request his Lady had taken her into her
care.

To this Honorable Countess she came a most zealous Papist, and resolute, as
soon as possibly she could apprehend a fit opportunity, to convey her self
beyond the Seas, and become a Nun; for she then thought that that was the
surest and likeliest way to get Heaven: which as she had an earnest desire to
attain, so would she take the nearest way which she thought would bring her
thither. This religious care of the honorable Countess, as she did all her
life thankfully acknowledge it, so is it very obseruable both for the high
commendation of her honor and for the imitation of others of her honorable
rank.
But she could not so closely carry her secret devotions and intentions, but
that by the careful eye of her Honorable Lady, they were soon discovered,
and not sooner discovered than wisely prevented; for presently her Lady took
from her all her Popish books, Beads and Images, and all such trumpery, and
set a narrow watch over her, that she might be kept from her Popish Prayers,
and not absent her self from the daily Prayers of the Family, which were
religiously observed: further, requiring her to read those Prayers that her
honor daily used to have in her private chamber with her women.

Her Ladyship also carefully prevented her from her Popish company and counsel
by word or writing, for neither might she write nor receive any letter without
the view and consent of her Honor.

She also constrained her to be countable for the Sermons which she heard in
the house, which were constantly two every Sabbath day, (for the increase of
the sound knowledge of God, which is the only Hammer of Popery.) And hereby
she in short time obtained great ability to communicate to others the
substance of those Sermons which she heard, the rather because it was
constantly observed by all the women in that honorable Family, to come together
after the last Sermon, and make repetition of both.

And this she did as yet for fear, but still with this reservation, that she
would keep her heart for Popery; and trusted that God would be merciful unto
her (as Naaman) in this which she did only through fear and constraint. But
God (who in his own time works in his own means) began to work in her
first a staggering in her old way; For, when she saw the holy conversation of
that Reverend Preacher, Master I. W. who was then Chaplin to the Countess; she
began to persuade her self, that surely this man's godliness must needs bring
him to Heaven. And then the reverend respect of the man made her begin to give
some better care to his Doctrine, to examine his proofs, and to reverence his
Ministry; whereby in short time, Her new birth.
it pleased God that she was won to believe the Truth, and renounce her
former superstition and ignorance. And, as it is the property of a true
Convert, John 1.45.
being converted her self she endeavored the conversion of others, and was a
great help and furtherance to the public Ministry that way; For this was a
thing which that honorable Family took special knowledge of; and there were
many that had great cause to bless God for her in that respect.

Revel. 12.
Now presently Satan (that Dragon that watches to devour every manchilde which
shall be borne unto God) begins to rage, Her long and strong temptations.
and reach at her with strong and violent temptations: and first he terrified
her in that she had sinned the sin against the holy Ghost; for she had
played the deep dissembler; and being in heart a Papist, yet joined with the
Protestants whom she held for Heretics, and all this against her knowledge
and conscience, and so fiercely and incessantly he followed this temptation,
as that she was persuaded it was impossible that ever this sin should or
could be pardoned. And this temptation was pointed and sharpened with that
dreadful and foul suggestion of self murder, as if the remedy of the sin
against the holy Ghost, were to destroy ones self. While she was thus long
tossed and tumbled in these waves and billows of Satanicall suggestions,
wherein she was so low cast and dejected (still concealing her grief) as she
almost despaired of recovery; It pleased God to direct that Reverend Preacher
(who was her Father in Christ, and whom she ever after embraced with the most
entyre love of the most natural Child) to entreat of this sin; and to show
what it was, and by whom and in what manner it was committed. To which Doctrine
she diligently hearkening, and by examination of it, and her self, finding
that she had not so sinned after illumination, nor with obstinate malice
against God or his Truth (which when she was most superstitiously devoted,
she desired to find out) it pleased God to quiet her mind for that; and so
led her over that temptation.

But Satan that departed from our head, Jesus Christ, only for a season, was
not long away from the molestation of this his member, but returned and brought
leven worse spirits (were it possible) than before, and now his name may be
Legion; for now he would confound and oppress her with multitudes of
blasphemous thoughts, and doubts. Now must she believe there is no God: That
the Scriptures are not his word, but a Policy: or if it were his word, who
must interpret it? or how could she a silly woman get the understanding of
such deep mysteries as are contained in the same? Besides, as she was of mind
that she was gotten out of one error, so she knew nothing but that she was
misled into another; for, how could she be sure that this was the truth which
she now professed, seeing there are as many or more learned men of the one
opinion as of the other, and all of them maintain their opinions by the
Scriptures. Thus was she vexed and exercised with Armies of rouing and
unsettled conceits for five or six years together, till God (whom she often
solicited for direction and assistance in the combat) brought her to this
resolution, that she would hold these conclusions, whatsoever disputes Satan
might weary her withal. That there was not only a God in himself, but a God
that was her God: and whatsoever opinions there were in the world, that there
was but one Truth, and that was to be learned out of the Scriptures; and
though there were much in the Bible which she did not understand, yet she was
persuaded, that if she would diligently read and search the Scriptures, with
earnest Prayer to God for a good understanding in them, she should attain
thence a measure of knowledge, sufficient to bring her to heaven; and holding
strongly these grounds, she found the temptations waste away by degrees, and
her self daily more strongly settled upon the foundation.

Neither was she only by the grace of God a Conqueror in these temptations,
but I may say with the Apostle, in a manner more than a Conqueror by them; for,
God (who brings light out of darkness) made these temptations a sweet
seasoning of her whole life. By occasion of which, she tied her self to a
strict course of godliness, and a constant practice of Christian Duties, which
she religiously obserned even till her dying day.

For first, Her religious life.
that she might be stablished in the Truth, and confirmed against those
former wauerings and weaknesses, she vowed, that God assisting her, she would
every year read over the whole Bible in an ordinary course, Extraordinary
diligence in the Scriptures.
which course she constantly observed for the space of fifteen years together,
beginning her task upon her birth day, and reading every day so many Chapters
as to bring it about just with the year. By which exercise she gained a great
increase of knowledge, and no less strengthening of her faith; for she did
not read carelessly or negligently, but always kept a note of what places she
did not understand, and would still be inquiring the meaning of them, as she
met either with Ministers, or such as she thought were able to inform her in
the same. And her custom was ever before she opened her Bible, to send up a
short prayer unto god, for the opening of her blind eyes, to the understanding
of those sacred mysteries, that so they might be as a Lantern to guide her
feet in the ways of holiness, until she had attained her desired happiness.

And not here with contented, as a good Mary she pondered the Word of God in
her heart, for by her great industry in the Scriptures, she had gotten by
heart many select Chapters, and special Psalms; and of every Book of the
Scripture one choife verse: all which she weekly repeated in an order which
she propounded to her self: and being asked why she was so laborious in
getting and retaining those Scriptures in memory? Her answer was, that she
knew not what dayest of trial, or persecution might come, wherein she might
be deprived of her Bible, and other good books and helps; but so much of the
Scriptures as she could get into her heart, she knew no Tyrants or Enemies
could bereave or rob her of (God make thee that read, and me that writes
this, so Christianly provident, as in these days of plenty to lay up somewhat
for the days of straitness and famine.) Secondly, Her instance in her private
Prayers.
from that time of her trouble she resolved upon Daniels practice, wherein she
was also constant; namely, besides the family duties, which were twice a day
performed by the Chaplin in that Religious house in which she lived till
within one year of her death; And besides the private Praicrs that she daily
read in her Ladies Bedchamber, she was thrice every day on her knees before God
in secret, like a true worshipper, whose delight was to be in Gods presence.
By means of which daily exercise, besides all other comfortable fruits, she
attained a singular sweet gift in prayer, whereby she could both strongly
wrestle, and happily prevail with God, whose grace suffers himself to be
overcome with the prayers of his weak servants.

And because she knew that religious fasting is the whetstone of Prayer, she
tied her self to set apart six days in every year, wherein she was
extraordinarily humbled in fasting and prayer, for her own sins, and the
sins of the times. At all which times she was in special manner earnest with
the Lord, that he would be pleased further to reveal unto her his whole
Truth, needful for her salvation, and keep her constant in the obedience
thereof unto the end.

And because she knew that the right and worthy Receiving of the Sacraments
affords a Christian special strength, and much stability in the course of
godliness: as she diligently apprehended that comfort when she could
conveniently receive that Sacrament; so for many years she had laid a band
upon her self, never to receive it, but the day before to fit, and examine her
self seriously, deeply humbling her self before the Lord in fasting and
prayer all the day long.

Thirdly, The tenderness of her conscience.
the trouble of her conscience, made her ever of a tender conscience: fearful
she was of offending God and her own conscience; and watched her self
narrowly; and to keep her self in awe; for the space of five years before
her death, she kept a Catalogue of her daily slips, and set down even the
naughty thoughts which she observed in her self, that one day in every week
she might extraordinarily humble her self for all the failings of that week,
and this with such moderate abstinence as might best fit her weak body to
humble and fervent prayer. And all these private religious duties, she
performed so secretly, that none but her bosom friend knew of their
performance. As she was thus fearful of sins present, and to come, so her
conscience was tender in respect of sins past as may appear by this memorable
instance. Whilst she was a child bred up in the chamber of that old Lady, she
was entised by lewd servants who fed her with figs, and other such toies, fit
to please children withal, to steal money out of the Ladies Cabinet which
often stood open in her Chamber, and which they knew she had the fittest
opportunity to do of all other: whereunto her childishness giving way, she
found it not missed, and so continued it for seven years or thereabouts
without any great check of Conscience. But when the light of God came in and
made a privy search in the heart; and made her able to take her self with the
fact; now she was ashamed and confounded in her self, and her stirred
conscience gave her no rest, nor could she conceive any hope of quiet, beeause
shesaw, she had done that which she could no way undo. If she looked at the
sum of money taken (...) given away, (...) conceived that by continuing in
that course seven years together, she might have wronged that Lady thirty or
forty pound. If she thought of restitution, she was no way able. Thus she
carried the burden of this sin a long time, easing it as well as she could with
a resolute purpose, if ever God pleased to make her able, to make restitution
to the heirs of the deceased Lady. And accordingly so she did. For when that
honorable, and bountiful Lady, whom she so long served, gave her a large
portion when she bestowed her in marriage, she forthwith made choice of a
Reverend Minister, whom she employed therein (enioyning him secrecy) and
because she would be sure to make full restitution, she delivered him sixty
pounds, to tender unto this Ladies heir, as from a concealed servant of the
Ladies, who had unjustly taken it away from her. And when the Gentleman
returned ten pounds of it back again, such was the tenderness of her
conscience, that she would receive none of it to her own use; but gave it away
to poor and pious persons and uses. And this childish error God turned to her
good; for in all the two and twenty years of her service unto that honorable
Lady, she never durst make use of any thing that was under her charge, were it
small or great, but set it down in writing, and once every year did make it
good, either in the kind, or in some other thing which she bought for her
Ladyships use.

Fourthly, Her charitable disposition.
the sense of her own weaknesses and wants made her of a pitiful, and
charitable disposition toward the wants, and miseries of others. She had ever
a large heart to the poor, especially the godly poor; she never did see or
hear of any that were in want, but her heart did mourn if she had not to
relieve them, neither was her hand shut, for she did yearly lay aside a
portion of money to the uttermost of her ability (if not beyond) for their
relief. Thus she lived holily, happily, and desiredly: Neither could so
gracious a life be shut up but by an answerable, that is, an happy death and
dissolution, whereof I will add but a few words, and so leave her to her
happiness till we meet happily again.

True it is, Her Imgring sickness.
that the life of a Christian should be a continual meditation of death, as
it is a continual motion to death: and such was the latter part especially of
the life of this Christian woman, who was of weak and sickly constitution many
years before her death, which made her so much the more prepared for her last
combat and sickness, which lasted ten weeks; in all which time she
certainly apprehended and expected her dissolution, it being the principal,
and almost only subject of her discourse, six months before it came. But
thirty days before her departure, she finding her pains increasing, and
growing very sharp and tedious, she spent an hours talk with me concerning
her desire for the things of this life; and having said what she purposed,
she thus concluded her speech: Now sweet Heart, no more words between you
and me of any worldly thing, only let me earnestly request, and charge you,
that as you see my weakness increase, you will not fail to assist me, and call
on me to follow the Lord with prayer and patience; For, now I know, that Satan
will show all his malice, because his time is but short against me, and he will
easily epsy my weakness, and make his advantage of it, and therefore now
especially help me with your counsel, comfort and prayers.

In all the time of her sickness, our gracious God who as a fast friend
stands closest to his servants when they have most need of him, showed his
gracious presence with her, as in all other comfortable supplies answerable to
that depth of distress, so especially in hearing and answering her prayers,
and desires of her heart.

There were four requests which we ^bs^rued she especi^^^^ preferred unto
God in her sickness, Four requests (...) them all.
and in none of them was denied.

before her death, she began to be dejected in the sense of her own
dullness, and thereby began to call in question Gods love toward her, and the
truth of Gods grace in her; for said she, were I the Lords, why should not I
lift up my head now, seeing the time of my dissolution draws on so near? But
these complaints continued not above six hours, but she had much
cheerfulness and comfort again, which she expressed, both in earnest and
excellent Prayers, (wherein her gift was more than ordinary for her sex) as
also in many cheerful thanks and praises to God for his great mercy, for that
he had now so chained Satan at this time of her great weakness, that having
been formerly molested, and daily vexed with his assaults, for the space of
above six years together, now he would not suffer him to rest on her with his
malice above six hours.

the end; and herein she was as graciously heard as in the former, for although
she was full of pains, and assaulted with many strong fits, in which no part
was exempt from deadly pains, and every of these sits of many hours
continuance, yet was she never heard to utter any word of impatie^ce in her
self, or discontent to any that were about her, and much less to charge God
foolishly, in whose hands she was as the clay in the hand of the Potter.

of her in this request, was very apparent in her joyful expectation of death;
the time whereof she truly foretold five days before it came; and as this
time approached, her joy increased; so as she was able to comfort her
mournful husband and friends, saying; Mourn not for me, but for your selves,
for I shall very shortly be more happy than the wishes of your hearts can make
me, and therefore cease your mourning and help me thither by your prayers as
fast as you can.

on her profession; for she said, If I through pain or want of sleep (which
she much wanted) should have any foolish, or idle talk, I know what the
speech of the world uses to be; This is the end of all your precise folk,
they die mad, or not themselves, etc.

And as she prayed, God gave her her memory to the last gasp, Her happy
departure.
that she died praying; for a little before her departure, she called us that
were about her and hasted to Prayer, for now (said she) I shall be gone
presently: (which words we then believed not) but Prayer being ended, she said
with more strength than she had spoken any thing four hours before; Amen,
amen. Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit. Lord Jesus have mercy on
me, and receive my soul. And thus with her last breath and words, her soul
was carried into Abraham's bosom in the Heavens, to which her eyes and hands
were lifted. This was the life and death of this sweet Saint, as it was
observed, and now faithfully witnessed by her mournful husband, who wishes
both his life and latter end like unto hers.

FINIS.
A GLASS for Gentle women to dress themselves by.

By THOMAS TAILOR Preacher of Gods word to the Town of REDING.

LONDON, Printed by I.H. for John Bartlet at the gilt Cup in Cheape-side. 1624.

A GLASS for Gentlewomen to dress themselves by.
BEcause I know that sundry women fearing God, fail in the matter of their
attire and ornament, because they want direction, which might lead their
consciences in stead o^ the common error o^ riotous times: And because it is
requisite that all that profess the Name of God, should be more careful of
adorning their profession, than their persons: I have here set down a few
brief directions in general for their help that are willing to be ruled by
God and his Word; and are more desirous to approve themselves unto him, than to
please themselves, or others, with his high displeasure.

I.
First then, such must know, that the practice of godliness depriueth no
person of the good creatures of God, neither for the necessary, nor delightful
fruition of them, (for, it only gives right, and liberty in them) but it
orders the use of them, and the users of them; and sets them in the due
place of their goodness, wherein only they are beautiful and lawful. Rebecca
a woman fearing God, Genesis 24.30. and 41.42.
wore ornaments. So Joseph and Mordecay, Ester 8.2. and Daniel. 5.29.

II.
Know, that we are not at our own hand in the use of outward ornaments, but
under rule and appointment. GOD prescribes women how to dress their heads, 1
Pet. 3.3. and takes order for the habit of the body, and finds fault with
the dressings of the daughters of Sion. Isa. 3. And threatening the Princes and
Kings children clothed with strange apparel, Zeph. 1.8. speaks to our
Gallants that build towers upon their heads, or erect them as with large
horns, or any way take up an unlimited liberty in their dresses with some
special vanity, and offense. For such dressing of the hair the Lord
threatens the dainty women with baldness and shame, Isa. 3.

III.
Such must know, that as the kingdom of God stands not in any of these
outward things, 1 Cor. 8.8.
so they must not be suffered to hinder the kingdom of God in our selves or
others: And though they being things so indifferent in themselves, as they
commend us not to God; yet in the use of them all, we must exercise certain
virtues in which we must be acceptable to God; and avoid such vices in the
abusing of them, as will else discommend us before him. For suppose they be
things in their nature neither good nor evil, neither commanded nor forbidden;
as, Whether. I should wear cloth or lether, whether a plain band or a ruff,
whether single or double, whether white or yellow; yet in the use of any of
these outward and indifferent things, my action is either good or evil,
according to my exercise of virtue or vice in it. Neither can any thing be so
indifferent in it self, How indifferent things become evil to us.
but it may become evil and sin in me many ways: as,

1. By my election and choice of it without assurance of my liberty in Christ,
or with doubting whether I do well in using it, or no.

2. By my intention, which may be corrupt and vicious in my self, and
prejudicial to others.

3. By many accidentary events: as, if others be by my use of lawful and
outward liberties occasioned to sin, or thrust forward in carnal
licentiousness. All which I rather propound to be wisely considered for the
removing of that common objection and conceit, That the things are not great,
and God cares not so much for the dressing of the body, so I keep my heart to
him, and give him content in my soul. As if these persons conceived, that the
body is not the Lords as well as the soul, or that that soul can be Gods,
when the devil has the dressing of the body.

IV.
We must know, that although the word of God afford not particular directions
for every particular habit and attire, yet we may not think it a defective
rule, or short and wanting to guide us even in the least or lowest action of
our lives: because it supplieth us with many general rules, to all which we
must reduce every particular action of common life, for the allowance or
refusal of it. And therefore for the help of such as are teachable, I thought
it might be profitable to apply unto those generals, and bring to their
trial, this particular of habits, and attires; unto which while they are
squared, none have so much right to use them as women fearing God: but if they
depart from those rules, they are not so unseemly in any, as in them.

The general Rules are these, reduced to four heads.
1. Some concern God. 2. Some our selves. 3. Some our brethren. 4. Some the
ornament it self.
For unto all these we must have respect even in our attires and ornaments.

I. In respect of God, we must attend three rules.

1. The first concerns our warrant, and is this: No ornament must be used,
but by warrant and leave from God. Our warrant is from the word; our leave is
by prayer: the rule for both is express, 1 Timothy 4.5. Every creature of God is
good, sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. Whence it follows, that
whatsoever ornament, attire, or fashion, is not warranted to the heart by some
part of the word, the ground of faith, or for which it cannot send up a prayer
of faith for Gods blessing upon it: that cannot be warrantable to a godly
heart. Which of our Gallants in their strange fashions ponder that of the
Apostle, Col^ss. 3.17.
Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of Christ? that is, 1.
By the warrant of his word. 2. With invocation of God in the name of Christ.


2. The second rule concerning God must look to the right end, namely,

No ornament or attire of any fashion or color may be used till the heart be
assured that this be the proper end, that in adorning the body it honor God. 1
Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God. The word whatsoever, being a word of universality, fetches in
the smallest action of life, in which we are bound chiefly and principally to
intend, and set up the glory of God, for which end he created not our selves
only, but all his works, first for himself, and then for us. Whence it
follows, that whatsoever fashion, attire, or ornament does spot or stain the
glory of God, the Gospel of God, or our holy profession, that is unwarrantable
and unlawful.

3. The third rule concerning God, is, That

No ornament may be used to correct Gods workmanship, which even a skillful
Artificer would take ill at any man's hands. It is true, a woman may nourish her
hair, for it is her glory; and may seemly adorn her self with her own,
Cant. 4 3.
for so was the Church in Christ's eyes; yea and in want of their own, if for
seemelinesse they borrow of others, it may be excused (so modesty be not
exceeded:) but of very wantonness or pride to dislike their own, or to affect
such ornament of strange hair as their natural and proper hair will not
reach unto, argues vanity and coffeehouse with the work of God, saying
unto God, Why have thou made me thus, or why have thou made my hair of this
color, and not of that?

And much more to grow out of liking with Gods workmanship on their faces, and
by painting to refine them to their own sancies, is an immodest sin
condemned in whorish Iezabel. 2 King. 9.30.
We deny not but it is lawful to cover a blemish, or hide an hurt or
deformity in seemly manner: but by defacing Gods workmanship, and by stamping
pride on their faces by painting and colors, can by no color be warranted.
Say not, It is custom; for all custom must be ruled by the word of Christ,
who said, I am Truth; and not, I am Custom. Nor say, I must be handsome and
comely, and therefore I may; for this is but to cover pride under this
pretense. Neither say, I am young and may take liberty; for young men and
women must be sober as well as other. Titus 2.4.6.
Nor say, I must please my husband. True; but it must be in the Lord, and in
things honest and lawful. Or can it please any husband, to come before him in
a visard, a borrowed and adulterate face and fashion?

II. The second sort of rules respecting our selves, are five.

1. No ornament or attire may be worn, till the heart be resolved that it
will be fitting and pleasing to the holy Ghost, whose Temple the body of every
believer is. 1 Cor. 6.19. Know ye not that your bodies are the temples of the
holy Ghost? Now because this holy Spirit cannot take pleasure in any ornament
but such as becomes holiness, neither indeed can any other beseem his
temple; therefore all good Christians will make conscience of what they offer
to adorn this temple withal, and be sure it be no light, strange, odd, or
swaggering fashion or attire, taken from light and wanton persons, that they
present the blessed Spirit of God with, for the beautifying of his temple.

And besides, seeing every believer has put on Christ as a garment, Romans
13.14. it will be the wisdom of every Christian to see that his ornament be
suitable to his apparel, that neither his ornament shame his suit, nor his suit
disgrace his ornament. Every thing in a Christian, from a Christian, on a
Christian, or about him, should savor of Christ, and express him. Be sure
that thy ornament suit with the same mind that was in Jesus Christ. Phil. 2.5.


2. No ornament may be used with affection or affectation. 1 Pet. 3.3. the
Apostle forbids broydred hair: and 1 Timothy 2.9. he forbids not that
only, but gold, and pearls, and costly apparel. Which we must not
understand as if he simply and absolutely did forbid and condemn the wearing
of gold, or chains, rings, bracelets, billiments, spangles, and the like: but
the thing forbidden is the affecting and study of these things.

When women (for to those he writes in both places, as being more impotently
carried away with this vanity than the other sex) not only take pleasure in
outward ornament, but study bravery, and strive to be as brave or beyond
others, at least not behind them in vain and new-come fashions, which is a
sign of a sluggish and delicare mind, given up to the delights of the flesh,
and far from mortification.

Our Lord in Matthew. 6.28. allows not Christians to bestow their thoughts on
apparel which is more needful than ornament. And his Apostle commands us to
use the most necessary things as not using them, 1 Corinthians. 7.31. Then must we
restrain our selves even in lawful liberties, when we find our selves prone
to be brought under the power of any of them, as 1 Cor. 6.12.

3. No ornament or habit may be worn or used against shamefastness and
modesty. 1 Timothy 2.9. The women must array themselves in comely apparel, with
shamefastness and modesty. We know, that since the fall, nakedness is a
shameful thing, and sin has cast shame on every part, and calls for a
cover over all but for necessity; and garments were ordained to hide
nakedness, no^ to display or discover it. And me thinks it cannot stand
either with religion, or modesty, or with the shamefastness of that sex, so
to attire themselves, as to display their naked breasts, and some somewhat
lower; or bare their arms beyond that which is fit for every one to behold. I
cannot enter into the heart to judge any: but I must fear whether they are, or
have ever been dejected with a deep sense of their souls nakedness, and
therewith ashamed and confounded before God, that are not ashamed to uncover
their bodily nakedness (beyond that which is comely) before men.

4. No ornament or attire may be used to the impeachment of our good name,
which is better than the most precious ointment or ornament: Eccles. 7.3.
as if it carry a brand of pride, wantonness, lightness, or inconstancy, or a
note to be an inuenter or follower of new and strange fashions: whereas the
Apostle would have the outward habit and attire express the fear of God which
they profess, 1 Timothy 2.10. and would have women to bewray the hidden man of
the heart in all their outward artires, 1 Pet 3. that is, the new creature, and
divine nature, which is hid and seated within, but showed forth in virtuous
behavior, and sober carriage. But alas, how do they provide for their
reputation, that (as Chrysostom complains of some women in his time) so
lightly and wantonly tire themselves, that when they come into the Church or
Oratorie, they seem rather to come in to dance than to pray. And the evil is
greater, that the hurt falls not only on their own names, but on the name of
God also.

5. No ornament or attire may be used to the wasting of our outward estate, or
the abuse of Gods blessings in riot or prodigality, or the disabling us from
being helpful to others. The reason is, because we sit not in our own, but
are stewards of these things, and must be countable how we expend them. The
godly heart must be sure therefore to lay out nothing for attires, or
fashions, but that which it may comfortably bring in accounts unto God.

Besides, the word of God lays necessary injunctions upon us to do good,
and distribute to the necessities of the Saints; to be rich in good works,
thereby both to testify the truth of our faith, as also to be furthering our
own reckoning. Now what an unanswerable oversight were it, by excess and
superfluity in things (comparatively) unnecessary, to disable our selves for
so necessary duties, and prevent our selves of so large and comfortable
retribution.

III. Now follow the rules concerning our brethren.

1. No ornament or fashion may be used to offend our Christian brother. Romans
14.21. It is not good to do any thing (suppose it more necessary than attires)
with offending the weak brother. If the heart suspect or discern, that this
or that attire may or do offend any Christian; if the just cause of the
offense rise not out of the thing which may be allowable enough, but out of his
weakness that takes the offense, the precept of the Apostle binds it, to
tender the weakness of his brother, and now to forbear his or her lawful
liberty; and upon very good and grounded reason. 1. Because charity is better
than outward ornament. 2. The nourishing of our brothers faith, is far more
precious than the nourishing of our own flesh. 3. The edification of our
brother is to be preferred before our own pleasure. So as a conscience well
informed will be very tender to offend a weak brother by undue and untimely
use of his liberty, although himself be persuaded well of it.

2. No ornament, attire, habit, or fashion, may be used to the strengthening of
any vain minds in their newfangled and strange guises. Romans 12.2. And fashion
not your selves to this world. A godly mind may not like, or be like
vaine-minded persons in their fashions, form, and courses; no not so much as
enter into their way, Prou. 4.17. nor be companions with them in any of their
works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.7. Now as it will be a sorry plea for thy self in
thine account to say, I thought I might do this or that, because I saw some
before me whom I thought well of; so will it justly increase thy judgment,
that thou have by thy practice strengthened the hands of sinners, and hardened
them in their sin, whom by thy sober and seemly carriage thou should have
actually and really reproved. Yea and in that rule of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
14.26. Let all things be done to edification, thou art cast as guilty, who
have destroyed him by thy example, whom thou should have edified.

3. No ornament or attire may be used, which may become either a snare to our
selves or others. There are some habits framed to draw eyes, to get lovers, and
to occasion unlawful desires. The daughters of Sarah detest such whorish
habits, and are careful that by nothing about them any eye or heart may be
entangled. Their endeavor is not to avoid only apparent evils, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
but appearances of evil. To discover by our habits some naked parts, as many
do, is a danger of temptation to many beholders. And as in the Law, be that
dug a pit and left it uncovered, must answer for the ox or ass, or beast
that fell into it: so here; although they are beasts that fall into the pit of
lust upon such spectacles, yet are they not free, that covered not the pit.
Neither will it excuse, to say, But I intend no such thing by my habit; for if
thou know it may be an occasion of moving evil lusts, and do not
prevent the occasion, thou art blameworthy, as the first in that sin. Veneni
poculum porrexit aspicientibus, etsi nullus sit inuenius qui biberet. Chrysostom.
in Matthew.
Thou have filled a cup of poison to the beholder, although there be none to
drink it, says Chrysostom.

IV. Now follows the last rank of rules, concerning the ornaments or attires
themselves.

1. No outward ornament or habit may be used upon the body, which is severed
from the inward ornaments of grace upon the soul. The Apostles no where
mention this argument, but they commend this to the chief care of Christian
women, to be more sollicitous and curious in adorning the soul with grace,
than the body with gay clothing: and plainly teach that the true ornament of a
Christian woman is her sanctification, 1 Pet. 3.3.
which beautifieth the hidden man before God. This is the ornament for her head,
Prou. 1.9.
and chains for her neck. This is the borders of gold and studs of silver,
which make her comely in the eye of Christ, Cant. 1.10, 11. Yea this is her
grace among men, Proverb. 31.25. favor shall prove deceitful, and beauty to
be vanity, then shall a woman fearing the Lord be praised. All ornaments of
nature, all artificial colors and couers are but filthiness, where this is
wanting. See Proverb. 11.22. A jewel of gold in a swines snout, is a
beautiful woman without inward comeliness. Sever this from outward ornament;
and though she may please her self a time in her conceit of bravery; I shall
assure her, she shall have no rejoicing in heart, no hope in death, no joy in
God, no boldness in judgment. Take the counsel of Christ in time, Reuelat.
3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me white garments, etc.

2. No ornament or attire must be worn against the judgment and example of
the modest, frugall, and grave persons of our own rank. Philipp. 4.9. We must
think and do whatsoever things pertain to good report, and whatsoever things
have any virtue or praise in them. Now to imitate the most modest, sober, and
virtuous of our rank, is virtuous, and praiseworthy, and of good report:
whereas to be inuentors of evil fashions, or imitators of light, wanton,
garish, or proud persons, in their proud or fantastical fashions, brings a
just blot upon the person, and a gash into the name and reputation, which will
not easily be healed. And how just is it, that such as will pride themselves,
and glory in themselves, against the glory of Jesus Christ, and the Gospel of
Christ which they profess, should meet with shame and contempt amongst men of
sound judgment, and be sent away with a little contemptuous flattery only of
such wantons as themselves?

3. No ornament must be used which is not as well expedient as lawful. 1 Cor.
10.23. All things (meaning things indifferent) are lawful for me, but all
things are not expedient. Even such things as are lawful, may be inexpedient
for a mean estate and condition, whether it be in degree, or in ability.

What an inconvenient excess is it, to wear gold for ornament, when they want
silver for necessaries: now to wear jewels for pride, and then pawn them for
need: to ruffle it in silks, when they can scarce pay for cloth: to make an
idle show and ostentation of abundance, when indeed they are in great wants?
Is it fit for such to follow fashions? No, but as we must eat according to
that with which the Lord has blessed us; so must we also in our attire and
habits. The Lord has called such persons to frugalitie and thriftinesse, and
to suit their clothes and ornaments to their present estate. Even a civil
wise man will fit his mind to his estate, if his estate be not fitted to his
mind.

Besides, costly ornaments fit not every degree that are able. As it was a
diforder for Nabal to keep a feast like a Kings (although he was able) so in
attires and ornaments, 1 Samuel 25.
for mean persons to suit themselves with great personages, breeds a great
deformity, and lets in a confusion in degrees, and a neglect of distinction of
persons, offices, and dignities, which the God of order has set amongst men.

Add hereunto, that such things as are lawful, may be inconvenient at some
times. It was noted riotous in the glutton, that he went in purple, and fared
deliciously every day. Luke 16.
There be wedding garments for times of joy and feasting; but some times are
mournful, and call for mourning garments, Ion. 3. and Daniel 9.3. It is more
than inconvenient to be in pomp, excess, and delicacie, when there should
be weeping, humility, fasting, and renting of hearts and garments. I trust
godly women will be content by looking upon the afflicted estate of the Church
of God every where at this day, to restrain themselves in their excesses in
their lawful liberties, and follow the Lord calling them to consider the
afflictions of Joseph.

FINIS.

