THE PARABLE OF THE SOWER AND OF THE SEED. DECLARING IN FOUR Several grounds,
among other things:

1. How far an Hypocrite may go in the way toward heaven, and wherein the
sound Christian goes beyond him.

And 2. In the last and best ground, largely discourses of a good heart,
describing it by very many signs of it, digested into a familiar method: which
of it self is an entire Treatise.

And also, 3. From the constant fruit of the good ground, justifies the
doctrine of the perseverance of Saints: oppugneth the fifth Article of the late
Arminians; and shortly and plainly answers their most colorable Arguments
and euasions.

By THOMAS TAILOR, late Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge, and Preacher
of the Word of God, at Reding in Bark-shire.

Imprinted at London by Felix Kyngston, for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at
the sign of the gilded Cup, in the Goldsmiths Row in Cheapside. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL, MASTER WALTER BATEMAN, Mayor of the Town of Reding,
Master EDWARD CLARKE, one of the Masters of the Chancery, and Steward of the
same Town, Master JOHN SAVNDERS, Justice of Peace, Master NICOLAS GVNTER, late
Mayor, Master CHRISTOPHER TVRNER, my especial friend; with all the rest of the
Magistrates, and Burgesses of the same Corporation: Grace and plenty of peace
from God, etc.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL:
WE read, that when Obed-edom entertained the Ark of the Lord, the Lord
blessed Obed-edom, and all that he had, because of the Ark of God. That Arc
was a sign of Gods presence, and a type of our Ministry, to which Jesus
Christ has tied his special presence. That Arc was graced with many
miracles: By it, the waters of Jordan divided themselves, and gave way to
Israel to pass, as on dry land. By it, the huge walls of Ierico fell down to
the ground. By it, Dagon, the Idol of the Philistims, was thrown to the earth
and dis-membred. This our Evangelical Arc is countenanced with as many, and
mighty miracles as ever that was: It passes all the Israel of God through the
mighty floods, and impassable streams of afflictions and impediments, that
otherwise would stop them in their way to Canaan. By it, the huge walls of
wickedness, and lusts, even all high thoughts, lift up against God, and reared
up against heaven, are thrown down, and cast to ground. By it, the adored
Dagon of Popish Idolatry, and superstition; of errors, heresies,
false-worship, and ignorant conceits, is cast upon his face, not able to abide
the presence of the Arc, and truth of God: and a thousand such miracles are
daily wrought by it in the conversion of men. From that Arc, the Lord gave
immediate answers, and divine Oracles. From ours, we have as sure directions,
in all cases of faith, and sound doctrine, and also of Christian manners. In
that, were the Tables of stone written with Gods finger: In this, are those
Tables, not laid up, but unfolded, and Christ, the end of the Law, included.
Before that, was the Pot of Manna, and the flourishing Rod of Aaron. This
exhibiteth Christ the Bread of Life, and the Manna that came down from heaven;
together with his Rod and government, which seemed quite cut off, and withered,
in his death; bur gloriously budding, and flourishing again in his powerful
Resurrection. Now the way to meet wi^h blessing, is, to entertain our Arc,
as Obed-edom did that. For it was not the presence of the Arc, but Obed-edoms
reverent entertainment of it, that procured his prosperity. No more is it the
presence of a powerful Ministry (suppose by Christ's own person and presence)
but the kind and loving respect of it, that may expect blessing from it. This
kind entertainment Obed-edom expressed in these particulars.

1. He loved God himself first, and for his sake, the Arc of his presence.
He that loves not God, can never entertain the Arc: and a sure sign of a
man hating God himself, is the hatred of a faithful Ministry.

2. Obed-edom embraced the Law of God with a reverend affection; and for the
love of that, entertained the Arc, in which the Law was preserved. For if
Obed-edom had violated the Tables of stone, or broken the Rod of Aaron, or
mis-vsed the Manna; he had been so frrre from being bettered by the presence of
the Arc, that it would have proved his destruction. No man can friendly
embrace the Ministry, that lives in the ordinary violation of any of the
Laws of God; or despises any of the rules by which Jesus Christ governs his
Church. Yea, for such a man to live under a godly Ministry, it rather furthers
his Judgment, than any way procures his prosperity.

3. Obed-edom entertaining the Arc, entertained also the Officers of it; he
brake not off the rings, nor the bars in the rings, by which it was carried
to and fro. No man can benefit himself by the Ministry, that despises such
godly Ministers, who as the bars in the rings of the Arc, propagate the
Truth, and carry the Word of salvation among the Nations. This entertainment of
the Ark of God, has promise of blessing to our selves, and all that we have.
It is true, that Gods presence is not to be desired for outward blessings: but
yet even these are annexed often unto it. For godliness is never without some
great gain; nor the doctrine of godliness so sorry a ghest, but it leaves some
bountiful gratuity for kind and loving entertainment. The Arc was never
separated from the Mercy-seate; to show, that Gods mercy is near unto him that
affects Gods presence.

To you (Right Worshipful) I commend this care of prizing God's Ark, set up
amongst you, because I thirst after your prosperity. Fail in this, and you
have let out the vital spirit of your Corporation, which shall run upon
rocks and ruin, as the ships on a stormy Sea, whose Mariners have cast away
their Card. Your wisdoms know what Gods Wisdom is plentiful in teaching,
that declining in goodness, for most part brings a declination in the
outward estate: whereof Solomon had woeful experience; whose departing from
Gods ways, lost him ten parts of his Kingdom at one clap. The dying speech of
Phineas his wife is memorable; that when the Arc was taken from Israel, The
glory is departed from Israel. Many things I might here move in, but I spare
both you, and my self, seeing I can weakly speak unto you. Only now I will
turn precepts into prayers, that as the dew from Hermon, and Mount Sion, did
distill on the valleys round about them; so may this Town, by your prudent
government, be a pattern of piety, charity, and sobriety, to the whole
Country about you. And as this famous Town for pleasant situation, and rich
commodities, for prudent government and civil state, but especially for the
plentiful means of knowledge and grace, is as a light set up in a
Candlestick, as a Tower on the top of an hill, and as a Beacon to the whole
Country: so your godly care may be so much the more to walk worthy your great
privileges. For if darkness should be on this Hill, what can be expected in
the valleys? And if your faith should not be published, and your obedience
should not come abroad, among whom God's Ark has been seated so long, who can
expect the continuance of your prosperity? I speak not, to blot you with
dis-respect of your Ministers, or the means of Gods presence which you enjoy;
for I praise God, to see the House of God so frequented, and your selves can
confess, how God has been a good Play Master already for some good affections
this way, in much increase added of late years to the outward estate both of
your public Corporation, and many private persons: but to encourage you, both
to the continuing, and adding to that you have begun; as knowing, it is no
less virtue to keep, than to get; and that the more respect you give to the
Ark of God, the more will the Lord respect you in goodness. Your example that
are in eminent place, shall greatly further in others with Gods glory your own
reckoning. Of Vespasian we read, Bonis legibus a se latis multa correxit, sed
exemplo probae vitae plus effecit apud populum: Good Magistrates do more good
by good examples, than by good Laws: and on the contrary, Plus exemplo nocent
quam peccato: Their sin is not so hurtful as their example. But I have
enjoined my self silence; and only for your furtherance to the duty
persuaded, make offer to your Worships this little help and direction. A
signification of my love, a testification of my duty, and a piece of my
thankfulness for sundry fruits of your loving respect of me both public and
personal. And to whom should I rather dedicate this labor, than to you, who
heard it preached with much gladness? some of whom have often professed the
much comfort and content which you received in the hearing, and since have been
instant spurs and perswaders for the publishing, that you might have it by
you for a more continual and constant direction. As I have given way to your
desires: so God give a plentiful blessing unto it, as also to your whole
government and Corporation, that it may still be happy in the Arc, and for
the Arc. Amen.

Your Worships in the Lord, THOMAS TAILOR.

REVERENDIS FRATRIBVS ERVDITIONE ac virtute praestantibus, Ecclesiarum
Redingensium Pastoribus, Iohanni Denison, in S. Theologia Doctori, Hugoni
Dicus; and Theophilo Tailor, fratri suo tam Christi, quam carnis sanguine
coniunctissimo: gratiam Christi precatur and salutem a font.
MIremini forsan (viri spectatissimi) quid in causa sit, quod ab assiduis meis
laboribus, a quibus vix aliquid spacij ad requiescendum, and liberius
cogitandum conceditur; in hanc scriptionem quasi furtim relabor. Instituti mei
rationem paucis habete. Quae Deus sacro vinculo simul deuinxit munera, ea
diuellere and seperare nefas censeo. Publica praecipue illa, simulque
augustissma (magistratus intelligo and ministerij) quorum vnum altero tam
carere nequeat, quam manus dextra sinistra sua. Cum ad Praelumigitur (importuna
quorundam amicorum prece) libellus iste quasi e manibus meis ereptus esset, and
sese Burgi nostri Praefectis obtulisset, non incommodum putaui; si and vos
dignos Ecclesiarum nostrarum Praepositos; quos vna seeds, fides, men's
coniunxerant, vna dedicatiuncula ijs adiungerem. Neque dubito, quin pro candore
vestro, benignam aliquam interpretationem adhibere velitis; dum Christanum meum
officium, and studium vobis probare cupiam, and tam animi mei beneuoli
indicium; quam affectus mei in vos synceri extare velim publicum aliquod
argumentum. Nihil equidem magis cupio, quam saluam inter nos beneuolentiam
manner; qui pacis Praecones, Principi pacis, in Euangelio pacis, ad pacem inter
Deum and homines stabilienda^ iugiter inseruimus. Et testis est mihi (praeter
and supra conscientiam) Deus, me quamdiu versatus fui inter vos, vnice
studuisse, vt pacem fouerem, and concordiam. Aliquando tamen (...), nec mirum:
nouit enim quam multum Ecclesiis obsint paruae ministrorum dissentiunculae;
nouit quam paruae res concordia crescant; cui sum inuidens, eam obliquis
cuniculis multifariam labefactare conatur, variisque modis conuellere. Nouit
iste inimicus (...), zizania sua seminare. Nouit incautos abripere nos, and
opprimere inopinantes. Nos itaque (vt cordatos and ingenuos Christi seruos
decet) nobis vndique deinceps prospiciamus* (...). Memores Domini nostri,
discipulos suos relinquentis sic alloquentis: (...): vos fratres pro animi
vestri synceritate in hanc partem haeriditariam nostram mecum totos impendite.
Sed pro pace multum laborare apud pacis amatores superfluum est: quod Bernardus
de iustitia. Quid restat, nisi vt (pace vestra) calcar addam vobis, and mihi in
stadio hoc muneris nostri sanctissimo decurrentibus? Onus grauissimum and ipsis
Angelis formidandu^ nobis incumbere nos non latet: sacra illa and honorifica
functio, cui nos Deus addixit, viros cordatos requirit, and quadratos: viros
inquam strenuos, nec taedijs fractos, nec laboribus fatigatos, nec discrimina
reformidantes, nec resilientes ad obstacula. Deuoranda sunt digno Ministro
multa indigna; dura patientia hic opus est and inuicta animi fortitudine: canes
vndique allatrant: quicquid calumniarum fingi potest (quibus ex consuetudine
ego obdurui) in nos congeritur. Sed agite fratres. Patiamur, vt potiamur:
animose nos geramus and fortiter in hoc praelio: vna manu (cum Israelitae Dei
sumus) strenue agamus in opere; altera gladium teneamus ad hosts repellendos.
Oues Christi famelicas (pias intelgo animas quae esuriunt Iustitiam) pascamus
(...), nec ulla lucri spe, vel ambitione, abripi nos sinamus, quin gregi
Dominico quasi affixi stemus, cui diuina bonitas nos praeposuit. Precibus porr^
nos, sermonibus, scriptis, lachrymis pugnare prima nostra laus erit. Certame^
illud; haec arma. Mundi illecebris ne implicemur, quae stellas in orb
Ecclesiae splendentes, sicut e coelo solent deijcere in terram. Canum
latrantium, forsan and mordentium molestias, and ferociam eo minus faciamus,
cum and dux viae Jesus noster hominum (...) putidas calumnias effugere non
potuit: and abibunt breui in fumos omnes illae calumniae vetustae, and rancidae
in sanctissimos quosque olim, and nunc dierum excogitatae. Stemus (fratres) in
acie iunctis animis, viribusque (...). Viam quam ingressi sumus asperam licet
arduam, and carni molestam teneamus, and in illa constanter incedamus, vt ad
palmam supernae nostrae vocationis tandem aspiremus. Non excedam epistolae
modum, nec indiget prudentia vestra monitione nostra. Accipite quaeso libellum
hunc, eo quo venit in manus vestras animo, amico scilicet, and candido. Vtinam
in eo omnia essent adeo ex voto composita, vt nulla ex part doctorum iudicia
reformidem. Praeiudicia non moror, omnes indignitates tacito moerore paratior
deuorare, quam vt Ecclesiae pro mensu, and modulo meo non prosim. Non vno gradu
incedunt omnes boni, sed vna via: si non cursum eundem, eundem tamen cum
optimis portum tenere me confido. Dominus Jesus vos nouis Spiritus sui
incrementis cumulet, pios vestros conatus vbertim benedicat, and vos
benedictionibus augere pergat, vt in specula vestra, ad finem vsque fructuose
perstetis, donec Iustitiae illa Coronain coelis reposita, capitibus vestris sit
imposita a Iudice illo iusto, in die illo. Amen.

Conseruus vester, THO. TAILOR.

THE PARABLE OF THE SOWER, AND OF THE SEED.
LVKE 8.4, etc. 4 Now as much people were gathered together, and were come to
him out of all Cities, ^e spoke by a Parable.

5 A sower went out to sow his seed, and as he sowed, some fell by the
way-side, and it was trodden under feet, and the fowls of heaven devoured it up.

6 And some fell on the stones, and when it was sprung up, it withered away,
because it lacked moisture.

7 And some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprang up with it, and choked
it.

8 And some fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an hundredth fold.


GReat is the similitude between the spiritual Manna of Gods Word, and that
corporal of the Israelites in the wilderness* That refreshed hungry and
famished bodies: this* hungry souls. That was small both in substance and
show, but great in virtue and power: so this seems weak, when it is most
powerful. That came from heaven, and fell with the dew: so this is heavenly,
and with it comes the dew of grace. That was white as snow, and sweet as
honey: so this is pure, and rejoices the heart. That fell every day, and all,
both good and bad gathered it, but not all to the same end: so all must daily
gather of this Manna. Every one hears the Word, but not all alike: some it
feeds, to some it putrifies, as Manna that was kept against Gods Commandment.
That ceased so soon as they came into Canaan: so in our heavenly Canaan shall
be no gathering by the Word and Sacraments, the fruits of the good Land shall
feed us.

He that was the true Manna, and the Bread from heaven, our Lord Jesus, in this
Parable shows the nature, quality, use, and diverse sorts of gathering, and
gatherers of this little, white, and sweet seed of Gods Word, affoorded to feed
and strengthen us through the barren wilderness of this world.

In the words consider, 1. A Preface, verse. 4.2. A Parable, 5, 6, 7, 8.

In the Preface, 1. The Ocasion, as much people were gathered, etc. 2. The kind
of Doctrine, he spoke by a Parable.


The occasion was, the gathering of much people together, and coming unto
Christ out of all Cities. Christ had powerfully taught them, and with
authority, not as the Scribes. He preached a strange Doctrine to them, who had
been set so fast in the Rudiments of the Law. He had wrought many great and
potent miracles, mightily declaring himself the Son of God. The course of
his life was most innocent in himself, most charitable and helpful to others.
Great was the fame of Christ in all the country: so as people came flocking
and thronging upon him out of all the Cities, by sea and by land. Multitudes
came, all in the same action, but not with like affection: some, to see his
Person, some, to hear his Doctrine, some, to admire his Miracles, some
(perhaps) to pick or catch matter of accusation. But, what ever their intent
was, our Lord, who never slipped any opportunity of doing good, apprehends
the Occasion, and begins to teach them.

Here something is to be learned, both from the example of this people, and of
our Lord himself.

By example of the people, learn two things:

I. To prease with diligence to hear the voice of Christ. He is the well-beloved
Son, Be diligent to hear the Word.
in whom the Father is well-pleased, Math. 3.17. therefore hear him, chap.
17.5. Reasons. Reas. 5.
1. He speaks the words of life, Ioh. 6.66. and without them we abide in
death. the truth and the life, chap. 14.6. not the Author only, but the
publisher of it. 2. Consider the recompense: Where Christ sees multitudes of
men He that is of God, Ioh. 8.47.
hears Gods Word. And not to frequent the voice of Christ, is to withdraw
ones self unto perdition. And such, Heb. 10.
though they be in the Church, yet are not of the Church. 4. All other service
and devotions are lost and unfruitful, if thou be not a diligent and
reverent hearer. Prou. 28.9. He that turns his ear 5. Consider the future
danger. If so many sorts of hearers be condemned, as three of four, for want
of a right and good manner of hearing, how great damnation abides such as will
not hear? Math. 10.14. If any will not hear your words, shake off the dust of
your feet against that person. Verily I say unto you, it shall be easier for
Sodom and Gomorra than for that City or person. Act. 3.23. Every one that will
not hear that Prophet, shall be cut off.

Use. See that ye despise not him who speaks from heaven: for if they escaped
not, which refused him that spoke on earth; much more shall we not escape, if
we turn away from him that speaks from heaven, Heb. 12.25. Object. If
Christ would speak from heaven, we would come and hear, and flock together,
as these multitudes did. But now we cannot hear Christ's voice. Answ. Himself
has said, He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you,
despises me, Math. 10.40. Ioh. 13.20. Malice against the servant, proceeds
from malice against the Master, and so the Lord accounts it, Act. 7.51, 52. The
holy Ghost is resisted, when his messengers are resisted. Object. But we have
other business to do, our Trades to follow, Luke 10.42
etc. Answ. 1. One thing is necessary: godliness is the greatest trade, and
the greatest revenue. 2. This people left their trades and businesses, and
flocked after Christ. Object. Then should we incur slander, reproach,
disgrace. Answ. 1. Thy praise shall be of God, if thou be a good hearer. 2.
These feared not the breath of men, or the Magistrates censure, or sentence as
against Innovation, though after a most unusual manner they flocked by
multitudes out of all the Cities. Object. But they be but a few poor mean men
that flock to Sermons. Answ. 1. Here is Christ's word true, The poor receive
the Gospel, Math. 11.5. 2. Neither Christ, nor his Word accepts persons, but
gladly teaches and encourages such.

II. In that the people came flocking together, Be forward in hearing the Word.
with zeal and forwardness, we learn thus much: that we ought cheerfully and
diligently to come together to hear the Word, and be ready beforehand when
Christ is to speak. These were present before he began to speak.

Reasons. 1. This was prophesied of Believers, Reas. 1.
Esa. 2.3. Many shall go up to the Mountain of the Lord, and shall say, Come,
let us go up. Psalm. 122.1. I rejoiced when they said, Let us go up to the
house of the Lord. Esa. 60.8. Who are these that fly like a cloud, and as Doves
to the windows? 2. God looks not only that the substance and matter of an
action be good, 2
but the manner must be suitable. He cares for no careless service. 3. A good
heart finds nothing so sweet as God and his presence: 3
and this is promised to true seekers. David, in many wants, Psalm. 27.4.
desires but one thing, and that is, to dwell in the house of God all his
days, to see the beauty of his face: and, Psalm. 84.1.
Oh how amiable are thy Tabernacles! my soul longs after the living God:
when shall I appear before him? 4. These Jews perceiving some temporal good
from Christ, 4
who filled their bellies, healed their bodies, raised their dead, etc. did
thus flock after him, sea and land could not separate them. But he that finds
the sweetness of the Son of God, bringing down the bread and water of life
to eternal life, healing all diseases of the soul, which no herb or plaster
could do, but one made of his own heart-blood, raising the dead and rotten in
their sins, stinking in the grave, to a new and eternal life, must needs
flock after him, and follow him as cheerfully as ever did this people.

Use. Let this shame our dullness, who are so slack and heavy in the service
of our God. If Christ will wait upon us, and our leisure, we will sometimes
hear him a piece of an hour. It is an unconscionable sin of this place, that
though you come at length, you come not flocking, or together, as this people,
nor go out together. Act. 10 33.
Cornelius (a great man) and his company were ready against the time of Peter's
coming. We are all now here before God (says he) to hear the things that are
commanded thee of God. Not that this attendance is due to the persons of your
Ministers, but to their work and office. But you cannot say when your Preacher
comes, We are all here present; nay, scarce a few of so great a Congregation.
Take heed; if you do any thing for God, do it cheerfully, do it freely: Let
your prayers, and praises, and obedience wait upon God in Sion. A reverent
heart affected with love of the things of God, Psalm. 119.147.
will prevent the watches in Gods worship; that is, no watch shall quicken it,
but it will be beforehand: And as the two Disciples, having a desire to see
Christ, did outrun one another toward the grave, and strive who might come
first; so the true followers of Christ creep not like snailes to Church, or
strive not who shall come last in, (as many slip in, in the middle of Sermon,
some almost at the end, most after the beginning:) but run and strive who shall
come foremost. Oh that the warm affection of our Congregation would afford us
this cheerful expectance!

Now out of the example of our Savior Christ, Apprehend all good opportunities
within thy calling.
who seeing the diligence and confluence of the people, took occasion by that
their thirst and desire to hear the Word, to teach them, we learn a special
Christian duty; namely, to take all occasions of doing good, within the
compass of our callings; especially where we may receive or impart the
greatest good. If the Minister see his people about him, ready to hear the
Word of God, let him imitate his Lord and Master. Now he has a large field,
and thereby strong hopes not to lose all his seed. Now he has before him an
object of pity and compassion. What pity to see a flock without a shepherd to
feed and fold them? This Christ mourned for, Math. 9.36. What pity to see a
whole field of corn white for the harvest, but rotting on the earth for want
of a man to gather it?

So if the Word of God be to be heard, beware of slipping that opportunity.
Thou can not absent thy self from the Word preached, no not once, but to
thine own great loss and damage. Ioh. 20.24. Thomas was absent from the
Disciples, when Christ came and showed himself to the rest. He was absent but
once, and (perhaps) upon some weighty cause. It may be he lurked and kept
himself close for fear of danger by the malice of the Jews: or (it may be)
he might be providing and settling his own private affairs, now his Master
was apprehended and slain, and taken from him. But, what-euer the cause was,
the effect was grievous: for he was not only deprived of the comfortable
presence of his Lord, nor only of that grace which the rest, met together, had,
and were confirmed in: but, when his fellow-Disciples were willing to
communicate unto him the grace of their Lords Resurrection, he not only
believed not their report, and made slight of such a cloud of most faithful
and eyewitnesses, but resolves, not to believe them. To incredulity, he ioynes
a wilfulness and obstinacy: Nay, he is so far from believing them, that if
Christ himself should show himself in person unto him, and would not suffer
him to see the prints of the nails, and to put his finger into the prints of
his wounds, he would not believe.

So, how-euer men make it not a rush-matter to absent themselves from the Word
preached, once and again; yet be assured thou slippest such an opportunity of
thine own good, as (perhaps) thou shall never have offered again. If thou
absentest thy self of negligence, thou depriuest thy self of some grace and
comfort, which the presence of the Lord amongst his people makes offer of. If
of worldliness, and to gather a little profit in that time, all thy gain will
not counteruaile thy loss. But if of wilfulness and contempt, (as many) thou
not only thrustest away grace and comfort offered, but pullest on thy self
the wrath of God for contemning his gracious Ordinances, and the blessed means
of thy Salvation.

We see the occasion of our Saviors Sermon.

Now of the kind of his Doctrine: He spoke by a Parable.

A Parable in Scripture signifies two things. 1. Some serious matter and of
great moment: Psalm. 49.4. I will incline mine ear to a Parable, and utter my
grave matter upon my Harp. Thus the grave and wise speeches of Solomon are
called the Parables of Solomon, Prou. 1.1. or, prouerbiall sentences of
Solomon. 2. Some dark or obscure speech, when a truth is wrapped up either in
some similitude and comparison, or in some hard and obscure words. John 16.29.
Now speak thou in plain words, and no Parable. Ezekiel. 24.3. Therefore speak
a Parable to the rebellious house, and say, Prepare a pot, and power water into
it, etc. in which obscure type is largely declared both the sin and the
judgment of the city Jerusalem. And thus it is taken here, for an obscure
manner of propounding the truth, under a continued similitude or allegory. And
this is the most proper acceptance of the word Parable, taken from the Greek
(...), assimilare, and most frequently used in the New Testament: as Luke
21.29. And he said a Parable, Behold the fig tree and all trees, that is, he
propounded to them a similitude. And a number of Parables begin in these words,
The Kingdom of Heaven is like a treasure, leaven, a Merchant man, etc. Matthew.
13.24, 31, 33, 44, 45, 47.

Quest. Christ spoke in Parables for four reasons.
Why does our Savior Christ speak in Parables, and dark comparisons? It
seems neither so fitted for the profit of his hearers, nor to his own office
and function, who came from the bosom of his Father to reveal the mysteries
of the Kingdom?

Answ. 1. This he did for the accomplishment of Prophecies of Scripture: for
Christ did nothing which was not foretold, Esa. 6.9. Matthew. 13.13, 14, 34.
Therefore do I speak to them in Parables: for in them is fulfilled the
prophecy of Esaias, who says, By hearing, ye shall hear, but not understand.

2. In respect of the manner of teaching: which being once understood, does
delight the understanding, help the memory, move and strike the will, by
collating spiritual things with sensible, and wind themselves secretly into
the heart to convince modestly, but strongly, and to draw confession from
euill-dooers against themselves: as David was convinced by Nathan in that
Parable, 2. Sam. 12. And Matthew. 21.40. our Savior asks what the Lord of the
vineyard will do to the ungracious husbandmen: they say, He will cruelly
destroy them, and let out the vineyard to others: then he infers in the 43.
verse, Therefore I say unto you, The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you.

Difficilis in Scripturis, magna ingenia exercent, Aug. in Psalm. 140.
3. In respect of the Elect, 1. To stir up in them humility: for they seeing
how Parables contain many difficulties above their understanding, are forced
to conceive lowly and submissely of themselves. 2. To work in them diligence
in the means of knowledge and profiting, and to go both to God in prayer, and
to others whom God has made more skillful then themselves, to get the
understanding of it. For the kernel is in the reddition of a Parable, which
lies hid till it be explained. Therefore the Disciples ever came to Christ,
and questioned, and asked him the meaning of the Parables; as verse 9. the
Disciples asked him, demanding what Parable that was. 3. To work in them care
of keeping that, which by so much study and labor they have attained. Hardly
come by, highly set by.

4. In respect of wicked men: that the Pearl of the Kingdom should not be
cast to Swine, nor the Childrens bread to dogs: for they must not partake in
the chief prerogative of the godly, which is, to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom. Matthew. 13.10. When Christ had uttered this Parable, the Disciples
asked, Master, why speak thou in Parables? and our Lord gives this answer,
Because to you it is given to know the mysteries, to them it is not given. And
why to them, not to others? Answ. To them, out of divine grace and love,
especially, who were disposed by that grace to give assent and affection to the
truth; yea, with hungring souls and thirsty desires drank in those holy and
mystical Doctrines. Not to others: not because God does not truly offer the
same grace, but because of their own incredulity, and indisposition, who
resist and oppose the grace offered, and wilfully put from themselves, and
leave to others the Doctrine of eternal salvation.

Use 1. Note a manifest difference between a godly man and the ungodly. The
former will search out the truth of Gods Word, and will profit by any kind of
teaching. The Spirit of God, wheresoever he is, is heroike. Obscurity and
darkness in some points tyres him not, but only awakes drowsinesse, and whets
diligence. Something he will get out of the darkest kind of teaching. The
latter bewray their negligence, will be at no pains in beating out holy
mysteries, that all may see they have no part in them: And yet are they made
without all excuse, in that they may see as others do, but shut their eyes,
and will not: and by contemning this kind of teaching, make themselves
unworthy of any other.

2. Note what a price God sets on his Word: he thinks it too good for a wicked
man to understand or know. For, will God give such a pearl to him that wants
desire of it, endeavor after it, a right use of it if he had it, and a care of
increase, yea or of keeping it; whose sloth and idleness would only extinguish
the spark, and never blow it up to be comforted or directed by it? Was it fit
Christ should speak otherwise to Scribes, Pharisees, Sadduces, who came only to
carpe?

3. Note who it is that only can open the mysteries of Scripture: the
Disciples ever had recourse to Christ: he is the only Master and chief
Doctor of his Church, Matthew. 23.8. he is that true light that lightneth every
man, John 1.9. Reu. 5.5, 6. No man was found worthy to open and read the
book, save only the Lion of the tribe of Judah. Therefore come to Christ as
the two blind men, and say, O Lord, we desire our eyes may be opened. Come to
the word to be (...), taught of the Lord, Esa. 54.13. Never rest in the
teaching of man. Come not without prayer, that God would open thine eyes.

4. Note a brand of Gods judgment upon that man, who hears plain Doctrines
as Parables. If our Gospel be now hid (says Paul) it is hid to them that
perish, 2. Cor. 4.3. If in such a light a man be ignorant of the principles and
mysteries of Religion: If old men be as yet babes in knowledge, and
understanding of the things of God, their case is lamentable. A more fearful
sentence cannot be uttered in this life against a man, then to be said as
Christ said of some, Omnia ipsis in Parabolis fieri, All is spoken to them in
Parables. He that sees not the light of the sun when it shines, is a blind
man: and so is he, who sees not the shining brightness of Christ in such
glorious means.

See more fully the misery of this man, who sits as a sott under the Word.

1. He reiects and despises the goodness of God in the gracious offer of
means of Salvation: The misery of a senseless hearers, in five things.
He is an unhappy condemned man, that refuses a pardon. As if the blind man
having received sight, should revile Christ for it: or the dead being raised,
should storm at him for offering to raise him.

2. He is made inexcusable, and his mouth shut. He is prepared for judgment,
and judges himself unworthy of eternal life. He may see, but will not. Act.
13.46
He may live, but had rather choose death.

3. By the just judgment of God, the unworthy or unfruitful hearer is more
blinded, further hardened, and made more obstinate. He is filthy in himself,
but more filthy by the Word; yet the Word no cause hereof, but his own malice
against it, and the dunghill that is in him. For Christ came to judgment into
this world, that they which see, might be blind. He is blind in himself, but
the Word is a light that more blinds him, as the Sun to bleare-eyes, in them
only is the fault. He is a dead man in himself, but more deadly by the
Gospel: which in it self is a savor of life, 2. Cor. 2.^6.
and to others, but the savor of death unto him: God as a just Judge,
punishing sin with sin. Satan blinds primarily and by himself,
instilling malice. Wicked Pharaoh blinds himself by yielding to Satan, by
rejecting the motions of the Spirit, and holy counsels, Exodus 8.15. And God
blinds, Non impertiendo malitiam, sed non impertiendo gratiam. Aug.
not infusing evil, but subtracting his grace, and delivering men to Satan,
and themselves, 2. These. 2.10, 11. most justly rejecting them that have
rejected his grace. And the Gospel blinds, not as a cause, but as an
occasion, stirring up their malice and corruption against it.

4. He is hereby branded not to be of God. Let him hear, and be ceremonially
and formally as good as any, yea outstrip others in sembled sanctity: yet if he
be a fruitless hearer, and the Word be as a Parable unto him, he is not of
God, Io. 8.47. So said Christ to the Pharisees, who externally were holy enough:
they heard not while they did hear, because they were not of God. And not
being of God, they are given into the hands of the devil, as Gods executioner,
to blindfold them, and lead them at his will to destruction, 2. Cor. 4.4.

5. This hardening or execution by the preaching of the Word, is an infallible
sign of future perdition even at the door. When Israel was extremely hardened
by the Prophets Ministry, they were carried into Assyria, and never returned.
Judah and Benjamin were also extremely hardened, 2. Chron. 36.13, 16. and were
carried into Babylon. The Jews were hardened by Christ and his Apostles, Act.
13. and were delivered to the Romans. So of Elies sons, 1. Sam. 2. They heard
not their father: for God would destroy them. So now in the time of the
Gospel, the axe is laid to the root of the tree; the next thing is hewing
down. What else can we fear of our Land, and many our Inhabitants, to whom
Gods Word is as a tale told to a dead man? no understanding of it, no
reformation by it.

So much of the Preface. Now we come to the Parable it self. Behold, a sower
went out to sow his seed.

To the right and true interpreting of a Parable, a special help is, to
consider attentively, and find out the proper scope and aim of our Lord Jesus
Christ in propounding it: and not too curiously press other things, lest in
stead of milk we press out blood.

In this Parable, both in the whole, and parts, we fear not to fail of the
true and proper sense, because this, and one more of the tares of the field,
(Mat. 13.36.) at the request of the Disciples, are privileged, and graced with
Christ's own interpretation, who best knew his own meaning, and has left the
same as a sure direction to lead us, that we should not guess at
uncertainties, or lose our selves in fond conjectures, as many do in other
Parables; the exposition of which he pleased not to leave so assured from his
own mouth, as this.

The scope of this Parable.
The scope hereof is apparently twofold. 1. Whereas our Savior saw a multitude
of Hearers, but not all coming with the same intent, nor all hearing with the
same fruit and profit: he manifestly propounds this Parable, to show the
diversity of Hearers. For the state of the Church and visible Congregations are
mixed, resembling the Arc which was full of creatures, of diverse kinds, but
most kinds unclean. So Christ and his Apostles found it, and so do we after
them. In the great concourse of people about us, the Word has not the same
success in all Hearers, nor the best entertainment and welcome in the most
that hear it. Some come to hear news, some to carpe, some to scoff, some to
run to the Rulers, some to censure, some to correct, and sit as Judges of the
Word, which shall judge them: only a very few to hear aright, to faith and
obedience. How plainly is all this set before us in these four sorts of
Hearers, of whom only one sort was good and approved in their hearing? 2. That
every man might enquire and make trial of himself, in which form or rank of
Hearers himself is; and so frame himself for time to come, that he may be
found in the number of them, in whom the Word of God, as good seed cast into
good ground, may bring forth plentiful and abundant fruits of grace in his
life and conversation.

Behold.] This here is a note, 1. Of certainty: and so is usually set before
promises and threats. 2. Of intention, or excitation, being set as a star
before matters of weight, that is, Let him that hears, consider, remember,
apply. 3. Of castigation, or check to our dullness in beholding such material
things. Elsewhere it is a note of admiration and great expectation.

Note. Orators use large prefaces to get attention, and win the minds of
their Hearers to that they would persuade. Christ ordinarily uses but one
little note of attention, Behold. For, 1. The least word from him is enough to
bind the conscience, and persuade the heart. 2. The less external Rhetorike
and pomp of words is used, the more it beseemes and is answerable to the
simplicity of the Gospel. 3. All that persuasion of words is supplied by the
gift of the Spirit inwardly, who opens the care of the heart (as of Lydia) to
believe the Gospel. Act. 16.14


But what must we behold?

A Sower went out.] Our Savior borrows his comparison from easy and
familiar things, such as the Sower, the seed, the ground, the growth, the
withering, the answering or failing of the Sowers expectation, all of them
things well known: And by all these would teach us some spiritual
instruction. For there is no earthly thing, which is not fitted to put us in
mind of some heavenly. Christ cannot look upon the Sun, the Wind, Fire,
Water, Hen, a little grain of Mustard Seed, nor upon ordinary occasions, as
the Penny given for the days work, the Wedding garment, and ceremonies of the
Jews about it, nor the waiting of Servants at their Masters table, or children
asking bread and fish at their fathers table, etc. but he applies all to some
special use of edification in grace.

Use 1. We must not content our selves with the natural use of the creatures,
Translate the book of nature into the book of grace.
without the spiritual: for then the beasts enjoy as much of them as we. But
by them all, behold the Creators wisdom, power, goodness, and mercy.

2. Let us take occasion to further our salvation by them, and not hinder it,
nor hasten our perdition as many do, by drunkenness, riot, or covetous
holding them in our hearts and hands.

3. No man can excuse his ignorance of God, seeing no man wants teachers. The
rudest husbandman has his seed, his earth, his seasons, as books to teach
him. Even these books of the creatures, leave not God without witness: even
these books leave men without excuse. Romans 1.28
Every creature should lead us, and further us in the honoring of God. And
therefore the Gentiles that honored not God according to that natural
knowledge, gotten by the book of the creatures, were given up to vile sins,
and grievous punishments. How excuselesse then must ignorant Christians be, to
whom Gods wisdom, power, and goodness, shines seuen-fold brighter in the
work of Redemption, than of Creation? to whom God is more clearly revealed in
the Book of the Scriptures, than of the creatures? seeing the more excellent
means of knowledge we have of him, the greater is our sin and punishment, to
be carelessly ignorant of him.

Now in the Parable are two things considerable in general: 1. The sowing. 2.
The success, according to the several grounds on which the seed fell. These
grounds, according to their condition, were either fruitless, or fruitful.
The bad and fruitless grounds were of three kinds: 1. Callosa, padled and
highway ground: 2. Lapidosa, stony and rocky ground: 3. Spinosa, thorny and
choaky ground. The good ground was the fertile and fruitful ground.

The sowing is in the first words: A Sower went out to sow his seed.]

And here be three things to be considered: 1. The Agent, A Sower. 2. His
Action, he went forth. 3. His Intention, or end, to sow his seed.

I. The Sower is Christ himself, verse. 37. The Agent or Sower.
He that sowes the good seed, is the Son of man. He is that good Husbandman,
without whose labor the field of the whole world had layne in perpetual
barrennes. The labor of this second Adam was notably typified in the first
Adam, dressing the garden, resembling the Church of God, dressed and brought to
fruitfulnes by the infinite labor of Jesus Christ. This husbandry of Christ
was alse resembled in Noah, the builder of the Arc, who was an Husbandman.

Quest. Are not Ministers Sowers?

Answ. Christ is the principal Sower, and properly the Sower: Ministers are
rather the sowers basket, than the Sower: but yet they are taken in, as
co-workers with Christ, and for their honor and encouragement called Sowers:
as 1. Cor. 9.11. Difference between Christ his sowing, and the sowing of his
Ministers, four.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, etc. But with these differences.
1. Christ sowes his own field, which he has dearly purchased with his
precious blood: they sow not their own fields, but his, not being Lords of
the heritage of God, 1. Pet. 5.3. 2. He sowes his own seed: so in the Text,
the Sower sowed his seed: they have no seed of their own, but fetched out of
his Garner. Pastors and Teachers of the Church sow not their own seed, but
his. Nay, the Apostles themselves have it in their Apostolic Commission, to
teach men to observe no other things but whatsoever Christ himself commanded
them, Mat. 28.20. Hence Christ used to say, Verily, verily, I say unto you: but
all other, whether Prophets, Thus says the Lord. 3. They differ in the manner
of sowing. He was the most skillful Sower that ever was: he knew exactly what
grain every ground was fitted for: with him were treasures of wisdom. We
that have but drops from his fullness, are unskillful in comparison. He could
speak to men's private and personal sins, as the woman at the Well. He could
answer to men's Paul, or Apollos himself, we can give no increase, nor make
any thing to grow. But he can sow, 4. Things make to fruitfulnes: rain,
^unbeames, winds, application of all, to s^t and ripen the seed. All from
Christ.
and give increase at his pleasure. This Sower can give the first and latter
rain on his field, Joel. 2.23. He can warm it with the beams of grace,
streaming from his own brightness, Mal. 4.2. He is the Sun of
righteousness. He can blow upon his field with the prosperous winds of his
gracious and quickening Spirit, Esa. 3.8. Cant. 4.16. He can fatten and fill it
with all abundance of blessing, Psalm. 65.10. Thou blessest the bud of the
earth, thou crownest the year with goodness, 2. His action. Christ goes
forth to sow, three ways.
and thy steps drop fatness.

II. The Action. This Sower goes forth.]

Christ goes forth to sow, three ways: in Spirit, Person, Ministry.

1. In Spirit, by inward inspirations, and heavenly Adam, Noah, Abraham, and
the Prophets, who were, with other holy men, immediately inspired and acted by
the holy Ghost, 1. Pet. 1.21. So with the Penmen of Scriptures, and the
Apostles.

2. In Person: according to his Humanity he

3. In the Ministry of his servants he goes forth: both the Prophets and
Teachers before him, 1. Pet. by which Spirit he preached in Noah's time;
namely, in Noah himself, to the spirits now in prison. He says to Prophets,
as unto Jeremy, chap. 1.10. Behold, this day have I set thee over the Nations,
to pluck up, and root out; to destroy, and throw down; to build, and to
plant. And Ezekiel. 3.17. Son of man, I have made thee a watchman to the house
of Israel; therefore hear the Word at my mouth, and warn them from me. And
since his own Ascension, he went forth in the Ministry of his Apostles, and
still goes forth in the Ministry of Pastors and Teachers to the end of the
world. Math. 28. vlt. Behold, I am with you to the end of the world: and, He
that hears you, hears me, Luke 10.16.

But this Parable seems to have special eye and reference to his own
appearance, and labor in the days of his flesh, in the publishing of his holy
Doctrine through Judea and Jerusalem. Yet so, as look what success his own
sowing found, the same might his servants expect even to the end: For the
servant is not greater then his Master: and, if the Word in the mouth of his
Ministers prove fruitless, it is no marvel, seeing the same befell our Lord
himself.

3 His intention.
III. The Intention is, to sow his seed.] To sow: that is, to preach: for
preaching resembles sowing, as we shall see through the Parable. His seed:
the seed is the Word of God, contained in the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, verse. 11. which by Christ and his Ministers is cast into the furrows
of the heart, as seed into the furrows of the earth by the Husbandman.

It is true, that he cast some seed among the Heathens: For the law of nature
written in their hearts, (the sum of which is, that what we would not
another should do to us, we should not do to the^:) even this was the seed of
this Sower; for he enlightneth, even with natural light, whosoever comes
into the world, Ioh. 1.9. But here is meant that seed, which he casts into the
field of the Church; which is partly the Law Moral, written with the finger of
God, and delivered to the Church by Moses, who was faithful in all his house,
as a servant: but especially the Doctrine of the Gospel, sowed in the hearts
of Believers, both by himself and his servants.

His seed. This Seedsman sowed no fables, no traditions, no unwritten verities,
no Canons of Councels, or Decretals of Popes: which are but chafe: nay he
often condemned the decrees of the Elders, and traditions of Pharisees, and all
seed fetched out of men's Granaries: Ioh. 7.16. My doctrine is not mine, but
his that sent me: and chap. 8.26. The things that I have heard of him, those
speak I to the world.

Doct. Gods word preached, is the sowing of Gods seed into the earth of men's
hearts: For six reasons, or resemblances.

1. As seed is a small and contemptible thing, The Word preached, resembled to
seed, in six things.
altogether unlikely to bring such a return and increase: so the Word preached
seems a weak and contemptible thing, 1. Cor. 1.23. We preach Christ
crucified, a scandal to the Jews, and foolishness to the Gentiles: Yet by
the foolishness of preaching, God has ordained to save his, and not without
it, as, without seed, without harvest.

2. As the seed in the barn or garner fructifies not, unless it be cast into
the earth: so the Word, unless cast into the ears and hearts of men, is
fruitless, regenerateth not, produces no fruits of faith. Keep the Word in
thy Bible, or thy Bible in thy chest, and not in thy heart, covering and hiding
it, thou abidest fruitless and barren. Romans 10.14. How can they believe,
unless they hear, or how can they hear, without a Preacher?

3. As the sower pricks not in his seed, nor sets it, but casts it all
abroad, and knows not which of his seed will come up to increase, and which
will rot and dye under the clods, or coming up into the blade and ear, will
wither away: so the Minister (Gods Seedsman) speaks not to one or two, but
casts the seed abroad to all in general; neither knows he which and where
the Word shall thrive to increase, and where not; but, where it does increase,
it rises with great beauty and glory, as the grain of Mustard Seed becomes a
tree in which the birds of heaven may build their nests.

4. As seed has a natural heat, life, and virtue in it, by which it
increases and begets more seeds like unto it self: so the Word cast into
the good ground of a believing heart, has a supernatural heat in it, being as
fire, Iere. 5.14. and a lively power to frame men like it self, to make them
of fleshly, spiritual; of blind, quicksighted; of dead in sin, alive in
grace. And as one grain quickened brings sundry tillowes, and many grains in
each: so one Christian converted, and receiving this power in himself, Act.
26.29.
gains many unto God, desiring that every one were as he is, except his bands
and sins. Philip being called finds Nathaniel, and brings him to Christ. And
the woman at the well calls all the City, Ioh. 4.

5. As seed cast into the ground lives not, unless it dye first, 1. Cor.
15.36: so the Word preached brings no fruit or life, unless it kill first and
work mortification; yea and by continual sense of frailty, and acquaintance
with the cross, it keeps under such natural pride and corruption as resist
the work of it. Ioh. 4. Christ brings the woman at the well to know him, by
bringing her to the knowledge of her self. And the Conuerts, Act. 2.37. then
bewrayed heavenly life, when being pricked at heart they cried out, Men and
brethren, what may we do to be saved?

6. As seed cast never so skilfully into the earth is not fruitful, unless God
give it a body, 1. Cor. 15.38. so neither is ye Word, unless God add his
blessing. 1. Cor. 3.6. I have planted, and Apollos watered, but God gives the
increase: verse 7. Neither is he that planteth, any thing, nor he that
waters, but God that gives increase. What would plowing, sowing, harrowing,
or any husbandry on the earth avail, if God should not by the raines, winds,
and warmth from heaven prosper and cherish the seed?

Thus have we compared the Word of God to seed, and preaching to sowing. But
still remember, Seed of Gods Word more excellent then all other seed, in
four respects.
that this seed of the Word is far more excellent then all other seed, in
four respects: 1. That is from earth, this from heaven: My doctrine (says
Christ) is from above. 2. That serves to preserve natural life received of
God, this both to begin and maintain spiritual life. 3. That is mortal and
corruptible seed, this immortal, 1. Pet. 1.23. an eternal Gospel: Heaven
and earth shall perish, Reu. 14.6.
but the Word of God abides for ever. 4. The fruit is like the seed: All
corruptible seed brings fruit corruptible like it self, but this brings
Immortality and life, it is a seed sown for continuance and eternity, so is
not other.

Use 1. This concerns Ministers, in whose function there is both honos and
onus, Dignity and Duty. For the first: The Ministry, though despised in the
world, is a most glorious office, The dignity of the Ministry.
and an honorable function, which Christ came from the glory of heaven to
undertake. The Son of God himself undertook to be a sower of the Word: and
shall great Clerks and Divines think it too base a thing to be diligent
Preachers? Or shall that which honored Christ, be a bar to preferment,
namely, to be diligent sowers? Or shall any man think his son too good, and
of too high birth for that office, which the Son of God himself despised not?

For the second; the burden or charge. We read not that Christ said Masses,
or anoyled, or sprinkled holy water, but was all in sowing. Popish Priests are
quite contrary, all in these, and seldom or never do preach: The du^y and
charge, in four things.
As if our salvation consisted in ceremonies, or an harvest could be brought in
by gestures without sowing. But our charge stands in four things.

go forth to sow: 1. They must go forth to sow.
Christ went forth to labor; and he that goes into the Lords field to loyter
or stand idle, gets no thank from his Lord. What need is there of a loyterer
in seed-time, or in harvest? And Ministers must consider: 1. That they are
compared to such persons, as in whom is required the greatest care and pains:
sometime to shepherds; What a painful and careful life led Jacob while he
was Labans shepherd? what sorrows by day and night did he sustain and
swallow? Sometime to watchmen; who must stand on the walls of the City of God
night and day: Sometime to day-labourers, and builders: All of them works of
extreme pains and industry. So as they mistake the matter, who undertake this
function to set up themselves in ease and idleness. 2. Let them set before
their eyes this chief Sower, who did wear out himself in labors and
sufferings, making himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.7. and as a good candle,
consumed himself to enlighten others: Yea he swet at it that admirable sweat
of water and blood, and sorrowed to the death, and all to sow the seed of
grace and salvation in the hearts of men. 3. Remember that counsel of the
Wiseman, Eccles. 11.6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not
thine hand rest: for thou know not whether shall prosper, this or that.

2. Ministers must sow his seed: not their own, 2 Not any but their Lords
seed.
Christ himself sowed only pure and precious seed: so must his Seedsmen
cleanse and pick their seed at home, that it be not blended with chafe and
darnell of man's brain; much less with corrupt doctrine, and devices fetched
every where but out of Gods own garners. Remember that law which holds here
in force, Deuteronomy. 22.9. Thou shall not sow thy vineyard with diverse kinds of
seeds: much less may the Minister of Christ sow his Lords field with mixed
seed, false doctrine with true, or men's inventions with Gods pure Word and
worship. As a man sowes, so he reapes. If any man sow husks for seed, his
harvest shall be husks. If any sow words and phrases, without matter and
substance, he sowes the wind, and shall reap nothing but wind and vanity.
Accursed is that sower that sowes any other seed, suppose he be an Angel, Gal.
1.8.

3. Ministers must sow all their Masters seed: so did the chief Sower: 3. All
his seed.
Whatsoever I received of my Father, A faithful Seedsman leaves upon the ground
all the seed his Master allows. Paul was a good sower, Act. 20.26. I have
delivered the whole counsel of God, I have kept nothing back. A good Steward
will deliver to the servants the whole allowance of his Master. Micah was a
faithful sower: who being entreated to speak to Ahab, as four hundred
Prophets had done before him, 1. King. 22 14.
answered, As the Lord lives, whatsoever the Lord says unto me, that will I
speak.

4. To his advantage.
propounding a pure end to themselves. Why goes the Sower to sow his seed, but
for fruits in the harvest? Why did Christ so painfully sow the seeds of
salvation in the ears and hearts of me^, but that such as believed in him
might have everlasting life? This then must be the end of our preaching, as of
your hearing, that our seed-time may be returned with increase in the harvest.
He that by preaching seeks the praise of men, or ambitiously to climb up to
preferments, or aims at his own private present ends, misseth the mark and
aim that the chief Sower propounded unto himself, and every wise Sower:
Besides, his own expectation and hope in the harvest is cut off; he has the
praise of men, and the pomp of the world, he found what he sought, and of him
it is true as of hypocrites, Verily they have their reward.

Mat. 6.2, 5.
Use 2. This concerns our Hearers in sundry respects.

Prepare thy ground for this seed.
1. If the Word be seed, then must they prepare their ground for it. A field
must be prepared, except a man will lose both his seed and his labor: so also
must the heart be prepared. Quest. How may that be? Answ. The earth is prepared
for seed by plowing and renting it up: so rent your hearts, says the Lord,
Joel. 2.13. and plow up the fallow ground of your hearts, and sow not among
thorns, Iere. 4.3. Every man knows, that plowing must go before sowing: So
before the seed of grace can be sown in the heart, the Law must be urged, to
break the clods, and vnroote the weeds.

2. Hearers must receive this seed, and retain it: Receive and retain it.
But with this difference: that the earth receives seed but once a year, but
the heart must receive the Word continually. 1. Ioh. 3.9. It is a note of one
borne of God, that the seed of God abides in him. And the exhortation to every
Christian is, that the Word of God dwell plentifully in him, that is, Col. 3.16.
abide and continue to increase; else slender will the expectation be in
harvest. What return expect they in the harvest, who affect the Alehouse
better then the House of God? whose chief care and love being set upon the
profits of the world, utterly neglect the better part, and the one thing
necessary. Luke 10.42
God offers to cast this seed into their hearts, but they will reap the world,
even for the present, and care not to receive such seed as brings not in a
present harvest. And, as these receive not the seed of the Word, so others
seem to receive it, but retain it not, afford it no rooting, but negligently
lose it. This do idle and negligent Hearers, who sleep in Summer, slack the
seed-time, and slip their season; not greatly caring which end goes forward,
so they may not be counted Atheists. Let such consider, that Gods Word will not
stay where it is not highly esteemed, and heartily entertained. And can the
great harvest of eternal life be so worthless, as to be cast upon him who so
idly wastes his seed-time, and so meanly esteems the harvest?

Bring answerable fruits to the seed.
3. Hearers must be careful to bring forth fruit answerable to the seed. As
that grain which comes up of seed, is of the same kind, and resembles that
which is sown; so also must Hearers, as the seed of the Word is pure and holy,
resemble it in purity and holiness: which is the Apostles reason, 1. Pet.
1.22, 23. and the same with that exhortation of Paul, Romans 6.17. Obey the form
of doctrine, into which ye were delivered. But now the Ministers, who sow good
and wholesome seed, may complain as the servants in the Parable, Master, did
not thou sow good seed? whence then are these tares? Do not we set figs?
whence then are these thistles? Is not the seed which we cast, that is, the
doctrine which we preach, pure and sound? whence then are these tares? whence
is this general profaneness, this contempt of the Word, horrible oaths and
swearing, impious and profane Sabbath-breaking, foul and beastly drunkenness,
filthy whoring and wantonness, riot, gaming, and idleness, so contrary to the
seed sown? Surely the envious man has sown them: the Devil that rules in
the seed of the wicked, has sown and husbanded these wicked seeds, which
having found a fit and friendly soil, come up so fast. But the end of this
blessed seed sown amongst us, is, that we might be set and grow up in that
blessed seed, that we should become the seed of Abraham, and the seed of the
blessed of the Lord.

4. As a small seed increases, of small becomes great, of a little becomes
more, Look to the daily growth of it.
the season cherishes it, time dilates it, and it grows stronger, firmer, and
whiter to the harvest: so must Hearers labor, that the Word rooted and
quickened in their hearts may prosper and ripen, and by the gracious season,
may receive daily increase and strength, as the year and the harvest draws
on: that is, they must grow higher toward heaven every day than other.

Use 3. The Word preached as necessary to salvation, as seed to an harvest.
See hereby the necessity of the Word and Ministry: as of seed and husbandry
for the harvest. 1. A madness it is to look for an harvest without a
seed-time: so it is as great a folly to expect salvation without the Ministry.
As well may thou expect an harvest without laborers, as a Church without
Preachers. No seed, no harvest. For the harvest is potentially in the seed: so
is eternal life potentially in the Word of God preached: Romans 1.16. It is the
power of God to salvation. 2. No care of seed, no care of harvest: so no care
of Gods Word, no care of salvation: except thou will be so mad as think to
reap where thou have not sown. 3. He that sparingly sowes his seed, must
expect a sparing harvest: so, 2. Cor. 9.6.
slack thou thy hand and care in the use of the means, thou shall come short
in the comfort and fruition of salvation. 4. He that refuses to be sowed upon,
refuses to be found fruitful in the harvest: and seeing the heart yields no
good fruits of it self, needs must that heart be an accursed ground, that
refuses the seed of grace, faith, and goodness to be cast into it. An evil
man, out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil things. 5. He
that hinders the Word, or resists it either in himself, or others, withstands
the Lords Husbandry in his own salvation, and in the salvation of his people:
as those that hinder sowing, must needs hinder reaping and harvest.

And as he sowed, some fell by the way-side, and it was trodden under foot, and
the fowls of heaven devoured it up.]

Here begins the event following the former action. Where first note, that he
says not, The Sower sowed by the way-side: (for no Sower would do so, because
he knows it were but lost, labor and seed,) but, in sowing, some seed fell by
the way-side, beside the intention of the Sower, who desires to lose none of
his seed. Secondly, the same seed, in it self as good as any, falls by the way
side; in it self as fit for fruitfulness as any, but altogether fruitless by
the hardness of the soil it falls into. As the heart is, into which the Word
comes, so is the fruit. Suppose Christ the Seeds-man, and his own Word from
his gracious lips the seed, yet in many Hearers it shall not profit; and yet
neither the Sower, nor seed is to be blamed, but the indisposition, or bad
disposition of the heart.

Let us therefore enquire, 1. What is the nature of this ground: 2. The reason
of unfruitfulness: twofold: one inward, the seed was trodden under foot; the
other outward, the fowls came and devoured it up.

For the kind of soil, it is the highway side. Our Savior plainly
interprets it, verse. 12. They that are besides the way, are they that hear,
but the devil comes and takes it away out of their hearts: and Math. 13.19.
When a man hears the Word, and understands it not. This first sort of
Hearers is compared to an highway, for these reasons.

1. As an highway lies careless, neglected, Some hearts and hearers compared
to the highway, for 3. reasons.
unbounded, common, not several; but is trodden and beaten with the feet of
all sorts of passengers: so these Hearers hearts are not enclosed and made
several for the seed of Gods Word, and for heavenly things, but lie common and
open to all tentations and suggestions of Satan, to the covetous and carnal
desires of earthly things, which eat up heavenly; to vain, wandering, idle
cogitations, and thoughts; all which make a thorow-fare and beaten path in the
heart.

2. As in an highway if any seed fall, no man looks to cover it, no man
respects it, as looking for no good at all of it, but leave it to be trodden of
beasts, and eaten up of birds: so with these Hearers: when the Word is preached
they hear it carelessly, without all attention or affection, they care not to
understand it, never cover it by meditation, nor receive it further than by
giving it the hearing; they expect no good from it; let errors and lusts come
and tread it down; let the devil by suggestions and tentations devour it up;
they care neither to understand, nor receive, nor remember it.

3. As highway ground can neither receive nor cover the seed; or if it should,
it is so hard and padded, that it cannot afford it the least rooting, at least
to come unto fruit; the crop will never fill a man's hand: Even so these
Hearers, like hard and paued earth, continually trodden and trampled with
wandering thoughts, and fruitless cogitations, and tentations of the devil,
hear the Word sometimes, but without heart, mind, affection: A little seed
may lie on the superficies or top of their brain, or tongue, or may make a
little show on the outside, but nothing of it gets within them, nor takes any
root, and consequently yields no fruit of faith, of Gods fear, of piety or
Christian conversation.

Now for the causes of this unfruitfulness: The former is in their own
disposition, they tread the seed under foot, that is, despise and undervalue
it. It is the careless hearer, who understands not, nor attends. Careless
Hearers, the worst Hearers.
Doct. The careless hearer is the worst hearer of all: as this first ground is
the worst ground of all. The other two are bad both, yet they give the seed
some cover, and receive it in; but these hold it out, and leave it where they
found it. Both the other give some regard, and bestow some affection upon the
Word: but this treads it under, as a most despised and disaffected thing. Both
the other, while in some sort they affect the Word, are drawn aside by some
profit, pleasure, fear, or persecution; but these by the immediate work and
malice of the devil, (at whose will they are given up to be ruled) are so
robbed of the Word and means of grace, as they will neither make nor meddle
with it further than the hearing. Lastly, the other bad grounds are far from
salvation in the end; but the devil suffers not these so much as set foot in
the way; and therefore their case is most hopeless.

This careless Hearer is he that not only does not understand, but he that
does not attend, or apply his mind to understand: for so Beza translateth the
word (...), and proves both out of the Syriake, and out of the opposition of
this ground to the next, which receives the Word with joy, that it were more
conveniently read and translated, which attend not, than understand not.

Use 1. Lectio haec (says Gregory) non indiget expositione, sed admonitione.
Christ has expounded this to our hand; and therefore this needs not an
Interpreter, so much as a Practiser. Thus then I proceed: If the worst ground
of all hears the Word, and those Hearers, which shall be deepest in
damnation, are Hearers of the Word, what shall then become of them that will
not hear? What harvest can they expect, who will suffer no seed to be sown in
their fields? Or what earth is that, that is let lie vnsteared and unsown, but
some barren Common, or some dry Heath and Wilderness, which brings nothing but
thorns and briers, whose end is to be burned? Heb. 6.8.


What shall we say to our Popish Recusants, Against Recusants.
who run from the Church, and stop their ears against the Word; as if
Religion and devotion stood only in flying the Scriptures, the rule of all
Religion? Were they here present to hear me, I would tell them, 1. That if
they were of God, they would hear his Word; Ioh. 8.47.
but (as Christ said to the Jews) Ye are not of God, because ye hear not his
Word. 2. If they were the sheep of Christ, they would hear his voice, Ioh.
10.27. But Christ's mark is worn off, and they bear the mark of Antichrist.
3. Were they of Christ's kindred and acquaintance, they would hear his Word.
Luke 8.20. My mother and brethren are they, which hear the Word of God and
keep it. 4. Were they not wedded to that Man of sin, they would not so sin
against their own souls: Prou. 8.35. He that sins against me (says
Wisdom) hates his own soul, and all that hate me, love death. 5. Were they
heirs of blessing, they would not run from the blessing of them that are
Hearers of the Word, and doers of it, and so wrap themselves in that curse,
Act. 3.23. It shall be, that every person, who will not hear that Prophet,
shall be destroyed from his people. 6. Were their Religion of God, they would
not thrust away his Word with both hands, contrary to the man of God, Psalm.
119.48. who lifted up both his hands to the Word of God, as if he would pull
it to him with both hands. Were their Religion any other but a mystery of
darkness, it would brook the light; which whosoever fears or flies, Ioh.
3.20.
he is an evil doer. Were it any other but an heap or pack of Idolatry, it
would abide the trial of the Word. But Dagon must down before the Arc. Every
contrary flies and expels the contrary. Gods Word is the breath of Christ's
mouth, which must blast and wither the kingdom of Antichrist: and therefore
all the kingdom of Antichrist hates and shunnes it, as the thief the gallows
set up for his execution.

Against dispisers of the Word.
Again, what shall we say to the despisers of Gods Word? Many there are, who
make light account of a Sermon: they had rather hear an Interlude than a
Sermon: A game at Maw or Irish, is as good an employment. They can pass a day
and a night at these sports, with far less tediousness than one hour at a
Sermon. To these I say, 1. You shall be arraigned at Christ's Bar, for
despising the Lord Jesus himself: Luke 10.16. He that despises you, despises
me. 2. You shall be cast and condemned to the most woeful damnation that ever
befell the most notorious sinners in the world Believe not me, but jesus Christ
himself, Math. 10.14, 15. He that shall not hear the words of his messengers,
it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in that day of Judgment, than for
that man. Oh woe worth thee that thou art a despiser! Christ has read the
sentence of thy damnation already; and unless thou repent, he has with
strong asseueration adjudged thee to an heavier load of curses, than shall be
laid on Sodom and Gomorrah, those filthy sinners, which were burnt with fire
and brimstone for their crying sins. See the greatness of thy sin in this
grievous punishment: and, if thou will not be deeper in hell than filthy
Sodomites, beware of despising the Word, Heb. 12.25.

Object. If I escape so long, I shall care the less.

Answ. No, but for the present thou art as a condemned man, bound and hampred
with the plagues of God, and especially that great plague, that thou see them
not. Deuteronomy. 28.15. If thou will not hear my voice, then cursed shall thou be in
the City, and in the field, in the fruit of thy body, and of thy ground, in thy
coming in, and thy going out. These, and more than these awaite thee in every
corner. Again, Gods curse is upon thy soul evidently: thou did never
taste of the Kings Supper: thou never knew the felicity of Gods people: thou
art a leading with a guard of devils to thine execution; have thine eyes
covered as with a napkin of error and ignorance, as a felon ready to be turned
off; and think thou thy self in good case all this while?

Against persecuters of the Word
Lastly, what may we say to Persecutors of the Word, and the Preachers of it,
such as would (if they could) with a sword slay those that seek to save them?
Like the Hearers at Nazareth, who would kill Christ himself, Luke 4.28. Eliah
shall be counted a troubler of the State. Daniel shall be watched and accused
in the matter of his God. Amos shall be accused to the King, as one whose
words the whole Land is not able to bear. 1. What need we say more, than they
proclaim against themselves? For who be they that stand against the Gospel,
and Preachers of it, but Swearers, Libertines, Gamesters, Drunkards, Ruffians,
Covetous, Adulterous, and in their whole courses enemies to Righteousness,
that they must needs be good men, and dear to God, that are encountered with
such adversaries? 2. That Word which thou persecutest, and would drive out
of thy conscience, or wilt not hear, the same shall pursue thee, and follow
thee as an Hue and Cry, and thou shall hear it, and condemn thy self,
because thou could not endure, it should condemn thy sins. 3. The time
comes, wherein (if thou timely repent not) thou shall see and say thou tookest
the wrong end of the staff, and did kick against hard pricks: and thy
conscience shall convince thee, that what thou did against Christ's servants
and Gospel, (whatsoever thy pretense now be) thou did it against Christ
himself, who will pay thee home with thy own coin. Julian that cursed
Apostate, finding himself at last too weak, cried out, Vicisti, Galilaee,
vicisti. Christ was far enough out of his reach, he persecuted his servants and
Professors, but his conscience now tells him it was against Christ, who is too
strong for him. Writing against Christians, he alleged many things, that they
were enemies to Magistracy, to Iudgement-seats, to lawful wars, and that
Christianity let in all confusion into the world: that their Religion was
against common sense, and cut the sinews of all humane society, and it was not
fit they should live: whose calumnies Athanasius and Cyrill answered: But all
these were as wind when God takes him in hand; none, nor all of these carry
any weight in his own conscience, but he was (...), one that fought against
God, and (as Basil speaks) (...) a resister of Christ.

Use 2. If careless Hearers be the worst Hearers, then beware of careless and
negligent hearing, without attention, affection, or understanding. The Apostle
James (chap. 1. verse. 23.) describes many of our Hearers, to be like a man that
looks his natural face in a glass, but goes away, and forgets immediately
what a one he was. The Word is Gods looking-glass, held before men in the
Ministry: this lets them see their faces, their blemishes and spots; but they
(like fools) look upon the glass, to see themselves only, not to reform
any thing. Others fitly compare many of our Hearers to Idols, that have eyes
and see not, ears and hear not; for they want the seeing eye, and the hearing
ear; no more profiting, than the very Images on the walls; as immovable by
the promises or terrors of God, as the pillars in the Church, and as senseless
as the seats they sit on: mere Idols, have their bodies present, not their
souls, neither is the breath of the Spirit in the^.

Motives to careful hearing, 4.
Let such be requested to consider a little these ensuing Motives.

1. What a great deceiving of men's selves this is: Iam. 1.22. Be ye doers of
the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. What delusion is
it, to think it enough to see a Sermon, or be at a Sermon, without attending,
or marking any matter delivered; or to hear words, but no more conceive the
sense and meaning, then children that are brought in their laps? Thou deceiuest
thy self in a vain persuasion, that thou do an acceptable service, when
indeed thou further enthrallest thy self to Satan, and procurest a more just
and fearful condemnation.

2. It is a mark of a Disciple of Christ, to understand the Word, Luke 8.10.
To you it is given to understand the mysteries of the Kingdom, to others in
Parables. Call thy self a Christian while thou will, thou art indeed no
Disciple that attendest not the Word, but a stranger to the Word, a stranger to
the life of God through the ignorance that is in thee, Ephesians. 4.18.

3. It is one of the seuerest plagues, to hear and not understand, Mat. 13.15.
For the Lord usually gives up such, 1. To strong delusions in matter of
doctrine and judgment, to receive any thing but truth, 2. These. 2.10. 2. To
vile affections, and outrageous lusts, in conversation, Romans 1.26. 3. To a just
damnation, for receiving the grace of God in vain, and for neglecting so great
salvation, Heb. 2.3.

4. Consider we what it is we are called unto; namely, to hear and
understand, as our Savior exhorts, Mat. 15.10. Understand what is the good and
acceptable will of God, Romans 12.2. Else all our and your labor is lost: as
Nehem. 8.8. It had been in vain for Nehemiah to read in the Book of the Law
distinctly, and give the sense, unless he make the people understand the
reading.

Object. 1. But I am a simple man, and want that capacity that other men have:
I am not booke-learned; but I mean well, and have a good heart, and I hope,
God will accept my good meaning.

Answ. 1. This is certain, Simplicity no excuse for bad hearing, for 5.
reasons.
that without understanding, the mind is not good, Prou. 19.2. God accounts
not the man or mind good, that cares not to understand his Word. 2. Simplicity
gives no dispensation to be the worst Hearer, or destitute of desire after
knowledge: And remember one thing, that if thou be too simple in some good
measure to know and understand the Word of God, thou art too simple to get to
heaven: the God of light cannot accept an ignorant and blind meaning for a good
mind and meaning. 3. See whether thou be not more heedlesse than simple,
and so thy simplicity be wilful: None so blind as he that will not see.
Do thou shut thine eyes, and then say thou can not see; or stop thine
ears, and say thou can not hear with understanding? Do thou indeed
attend as thou would to thy learned Counsel, when thy freehold is called
into question? 4. Try thy self, whether thy conceit fail thee not more in the
things of God, than in the matters of the world. Perhaps thou shall find thy
wit quick and nimble enough at a good and safe bargain. Thou have reach
enough to fetch in the profits of the world, art subtle enough to circumuent
thy brother, and wise enough to do evil. Now must thou blame thy self for
want of attention, and affection, not for want of capacity. 5. Suppose thou be
very simple, behold, God has given his Word, to the end that simple men might
understand, Psalm. 119.13. And if thou be not booke-learned, lo, he has
given store of learned men, and teachers, and appointed them to teach thee: and
the more simple thou art, the more art thou bound to follow the means, and not
to flatter thy self in thy negligence.

Object. 2. But I have an ill memory, and cannot bring things away as many men
can.

Nor a bad memory can excuse careless hearing.
Answ. This is the common plea of our common Gospellers: they are most
careless Hearers, without all attention, and all is presently forgotten, and
then they accuse God for giving them an ill memory But, 1. Consider, O Man, how
thou do affect that thou hear. Many come to hear, because they dare not
open their Shops. Others, because they have nothing else to do, will go to
Church with their neighbors; but have no affection to that heavenly business.
And now (I say) thou would remember if thou affectedst the Word. Thy memory
is sure enough at a Play. In any worldly matter thou can carry away, and
repeat long discourses from point to point: only here is a short memory,
because of short affection. 2. Consider how thou bendest thy wits, and
attendest to that which thou say thou can not remember. Do thou not
think these are matters not so nearly concerning thee to know?

Worldly matters which concern thy calling, thou can remember: for thou
think them nearly belonging unto thee, and art content to be taken up
wholly in them. 3. How do thou attend? Thou sit down, sometimes hear,
sometimes sleep, sometimes talkest, sometimes read; and now, while thou
do every thing but the one thing necessary, do thou complain of an ill
memory? No, it is an ill heart and disposition, a sure note of a carnal man,
who yet thinks himself sure to be saved. 4. How do thou prepare thy
ground? Do thou pray to God to open thine eyes, that thou may see the
mysteries of his Law? Thou say thou lackest wisdom: do thou ask it of
God? Do thou mingle the Word with faith, without which it cannot profit?
Heb. 4.2.
Do thou attend thy thoughts in hearing, that thy mind be not taken up with
other matters, and by-thoughts? Alas! How can thou keep that in thy memory,
which never comes in thy head? Lastly, do thou meditate on that thou have
heard? How can thou that neglectest these means, complain for want of
memory, and not of conscience?

Quest. But how shall I know that I understand the Word, and am not the worst
ground?

Answ. 1. In true understanding many good motions are stirred up: 4. Notes of
true understanding the Word.
as 1. Cor. 14.23. when the secrets of his heart are discovered, he falls on
his face, and says, God is in you indeed. This is one fruit of understanding.
2. A rejoicing that we have heard and understood: Neh. 8.12. All the people
rejoiced when they understood things taught. And this joy is joined with an
inquiry after that which we understand not our selves, as in the Disciples,
Matthew. 15.15. 3. A more cheerful assembling to the place of Gods worship:
Act. 13.34. The next Sabbath all the people came to hear the Word. 4. A good
understanding have all they that do thereafter, Psalm. 111.10. and this doing
of that we know, is a special mean to increase good knowledge and
understanding: Ioh. 7.17. If any man will do the will of my Father, he shall
know the doctrine, whether it be from God, or no. And the fowls of heaven
devoured it up.

Here is the second, the outward cause of fruitlesnesse in this highway
ground, arising out of the malice of the devil: so verse. 12. Then comes the
devil, and takes the Word out of their hearts, lest they should believe, and
be saved. Where are three things to be considered: 1. The description of this
malicious person, both by his name, and by a similitude. 2. The exercise of his
malice: he comes. 3. The end of his coming: threefold, 1. to steal the
Word, 2. to hinder faith, 3. to bereave men of salvation.

In the person so malicious, we have 1. his names: 2. the similitude.

names are three in the three Evangelists. Matthew calls him the evil one,
chap. 13.19. Mark calls him Satan, or the enemy, chap. 4.15. and our
Evangelist calls him a devil, that is, an accuser of the brethren. Lay these
together, and then observe, 1. That being an evil one, he is full of evil in
himself, the author of much evil in others, and one that delights himself in
the evil, both of sin and punishment, in others. 2. In that he is an enemy
to us, he must needs intercept all the means of our good, and tempt us to
fruitless hearing, by which he hinders us of the greatest good that God
offers unto us. 3. In that he is a devil, that when he has prevailed
against us, and made us careless hearers, he will then accuse us for such
hearing: A just recompense of him, who while he pretends a service to God,
yet performs it to the devil.

The similitude, whereby he is described, will acquaint Reasons why wicked
spirits are compared to fowls of heaven, 4. 2. Cor. 12.2
being called the fowls of heaven, that is, of the air, the lowest of the
three heavens. In these respects: 1. They are many, and seek to overthrow us
by multitude: there be not so many birds flying in the air, as wicked spirits:
the Prince that bears rule in the air, Ephesians. legions to command into one
man, if God permit him: as in that example, Mark. 5.9. Luke 8.30. 2. They be
fowls of heaven, that is, of the air, above us, have advantage of the in high
places. We can no more hinder them from us, then we can the birds from flying
in the heavens above us. 3. As the fowls or birds are swift and nimble, and
naturally in their element lighter and of more

We have descried the malicious person: Now for the exercise of his malice, it
is said, he comes: which is observed by all the Evangelists, and therefore by
us.

In this coming of Satan, consider 1. Whither, 2. When, 3. How he comes.

1. Whither comes he? Answ. He comes to Church: he is no Recusant himself,
though he make a number. He comes to Church diligently. He fears not the
holiness of the place. He fears not the consecration of it to the worship of
God. He fears no ringing of Bells, no Holy Water, no kind of Crosses in the
place, or in the face: Nay, he fears not the consecrated Host, nor Crucifix,
no nor if Christ's own blessed presence were there. He presumes into the holy
City. Matthew. 4.5.
He glides into Paradise. Nay, while our Savior is now preaching this Parable
to this multitude, he comes with his whole train and flight of devils. Let us
therefore expect and prepare to meet with foulest spirits in the holiest
places. Fowls flock not so fast after the Sower, as Satan to the place of the
Ministry.

2. When comes he? Answ. Why Satan comes when men hear the Word, 3. reasons.
Whenever any man hears the Word of the Kingdom, Mat. 13.19. 1. When any
man. He fears no person, nor spares him. He comes to Adam and Eve in
innocence, when they had heard the Word of the Lord. He comes and word of the
Kingdom is preached, that is, such Doctrines as tend to bring men to the
Kingdom of God: Oh this touches his freehold, and makes him bestirre himself
where Gods Word is soundly and sincerely preached. Let a man deliver corrupt,
erroneous, or frivolous doctrine, the devil makes no such haste, unless to
make way for it: But, come to a conscionable and fruitful Ministry, be sure
to find him there, or he will be sure to find thee. 3. Satan highes him to
these places at this time, because he knows, now being at so good Whenever a
man, that is, any man hears, then comes Satan: he is busy with every one,
but so, as thou may not conceive him so busy with others, as that he will
pass over thee.

Use. Take notice hereby of his diligence and vigilance, who is not only busy
and stirring in evil and wicked actions, to thrust them forward, but even in
the best actions; which if he cannot hinder, he will corrupt and deprave, if it
may be. Most will confess, being detected of some evil action, Oh it was the
devil who was busy with me, he owed me a spite: but few discern how busy
and spightfull he is in good actions, to hinder God of so much glory, and the
godly of much comfort in such actions as he cannot hinder.

3. How comes Satan to take away the Word? Answ. The Word shows, that Satan
is not always present, nor always tempting. Not because he wants will, but
because God suffers him not always. But howsoever, he will sure be with us
in the hearing of the Word, above all other times. And so he comes, sometimes
inwardly, sometimes outwardly.

Satan comes inwardly 3. ways.
Inwardly: 1. In many rouing by-thoughts, which filling the fantasy, turn
the mind quite from the business in hand. He casts into the mind some
thoughts of profit, some of pleasure, or some vain and idle cogitations, that
run up and down the mind, and all to draw the heart away from the Word. Now
is the devil come, and has caught the Word from thee: A just recompense of
him that in Gods service will not give God his heart and mind, the devil must
have them.

2. In drowsinesse, sleep, and heaviness, which steal away the mind from
attention: A fearful snare of the devil, in which he has taken many, who
scarce sit down to hear, but presently are cast on a dead sleep, and we may
as well speak to dead men, or the pillars they sit by, as to them; and say as
the Apostle does in another abuse in the Church of Corinth, Have ye not houses
to eat and drink in? so, 1. Cor. 11.22.
Have ye not beds at home to sleep in? See you not how the devil has cast
you into a nap, lest you should hear, and believe, and be saved? or that you
have taken some grains too many of that hellish opium, which makes you sleep
unto death?

Object. But do you think the devil casts me asleep? I am heavy by nature,
and cannot help it, and I sleep not long. Answ. If thou were at some other
exercise, as a Play, or a game at Cards or Tables, or perhaps in thy Counting
house, thou could wake well enough, or not be half so heavy: or if thou were
in the Kings presence, to receive a charge from his mouth: though thou were
very heavy naturally. Assure thy self therefore, that Satan adds his weight,
and works with thy corruption: And it is not the sleep of thy body he
intends, but the sleep of thy mind, and of thy soul unto death.

3. He comes in many inward suggestions, which stir up natural corruption
against the Word: that if it must be heard, it may not be believed: as, 1. It
is but a man that speaks; a simple, ordinary, weak, and poor man: and, if he
speak well, I can speak well too, says one. 2. Thou know as much as thou
need: and, what can he teach me which I know not? Am not I as able to judge
what is fit, as he? Nay, I doubt not but I am as good as all the Sermons in the
world can make me. Now the devil is come apparently: for Gods Spirit ever lets
a man see his ignorance, his nothing. 3. What good is gotten by all this
preaching? My father lived honestly without it: And what care many of our Noble
men, and men of great account for it? And if I go to Service, and obey the
Kings law, and do as my neighbors do, and as my forefathers did, what need
more preciseness? Here now the devil is come: For no suggestion of Gods
Spirit can extenuate the Word of God. 4. But this man (says Ahab) never
speaks good to me, I would hear any man but this Micah, 1. King. 22.8. But
here the devil is come; he that set four hundred false prophets to deceive
Ahab, would have him hear any, believe any but Micah, lest he should be saved.
If thy heart were upright, Mic. 2.7.
the words of God would be good unto thee. But thou have a pathway of lusts,
and thou will walk to the end of them, thou must swear and blaspheme, must
drink and swagger, must profane the Sabbath, must be an Usurer, must use
deceit in trading, lies in selling, must scorn zeal and grace, and run in
the excesses of sin after the fashion of the world, and the devil within
tells thee, Why may thou not? who shall hinder thee? 5. But I know many good
Preachers, and good men of another mind, of another practice, and though this
man be earnest against it, they would not do thus, if it were so bad. Here
the devil is come, who out of the opposition of corrupt Teachers, and
Libertine doctrines, which he by them broached, would falsify the truth in thy
mind: dealing as a cunning Fisher, who by one fish will catch another, that
he may feed upon both. And he would bring thee from a strait rule, to a
crooked example.

Thus the devil comes inwardly. Outwardly he comes three ways.

1. By drawing the senses to outward objects; Satan comes outwardly 3. ways.
Luk 4.20.
as the eye on this or that person, or object, to divert the mind from the one
thing necessary: which we must watch against, and (as Christ's Hearers) fix our
eyes upon our Teacher; which greatly helps attention.

2. By the evil counsel of carnal Politicians: You are a man whose
conversation will be observed, you are rich, you have an Office, you have
respect; If you should be led away by Sermons, you will be noted for a
Puritan, and a favorer of such as will make little for your credit. But here
the devil is come in one of his children: Act. 13.7. Sergius Paulus called
Paul and Barnabas to him, and desired to hear the Word of God: but Elymas
sought to turn the Deputy from the faith. Paul spyed the devil now come, and
said, O full of all subtilty and mischief, the child of the devil, and enemy
of all righteousness, that ceasest not to pervert the strait ways of God!

3. By scoffs and reproaches of wretched men, who scorn the Word and ways of
God: What, will you believe all that he says? Nay, we must not let him make
fools of us: What has he to do with such and such points, our government,
our callings? Let him meddle with his Text, and not with us. Just like the
Epicures and Stoikes, Act. 17.18. who said of Paul, What will this babbler say?
(...).
He will teach us some strange things to day. And by such scoffs Satan comes
to many, and hinders their faith and salvation. For as those Heathen Stoics
and Epicures counted that the strangest Doctrine, which taught Jesus Christ: so
do Christian Epicures that which most directly leads unto Christ.

The third general thing proposed, is, the end of Satan's coming: which (as we
heard) is threefold: 1. To steal the Word out of the heart: 2. To hinder the
Hearers faith: 3. To rob him of salvation.

1. End of Satan's coming, to steal away the Word.
For the first. As birds follow the Sower, to pick up the seeds and grains
that lie uncovered: so the devil haunts the Assemblies of Saints, to steal
away the Word preached, where it is carelessly heard. The Action of Satan is, to
steal and carry away the Word, which is not his, but belongs to others. But
not as other thieves, to convert it to his own use, but only that the right
owners should not enjoy it: not to profit himself, but to disprofit others. As
for the manner of his Action, he steals, that is, closely and secretly takes
it away. He is a slye and privy thief. As a thief only fears to be seen
and discovered: so Satan is loath to be seen, and therefore takes us at
advantage, when we can least espy him. He that steals, steals in the night,
as they that are drunk, are drunk in the night, 1. These. 5.7. He takes us in
the night of our ignorance, and in the sleep of security, and spoils us most,
when we can least discern it. But whence does he steal the Word? Answ. Out
of the heart. Because of his sly and subtle nature: who being a spirit, can
easily and nimbly enter into the most secret closet of our breast. And although
he cannot directly know our hearts and thoughts, which is Gods privilege, yet
by outward means he can give a great guess at the temper of them, and as
birds can easily find when seed is uncovered, and as easily pick it up: so
Satan can easily see, where men's care is not to cover and hide the Word in
their hearts, when they have heard it. And, if he cannot by himself, and by
violence take the Word away, if the owners will hold it: yet he can, and does
take it away by themselves, and with their own consent and good liking: who
neither were willing to give it room, or sink it deep into their hearts, nor
to cover it with gracious affections; nor had any great love to it to look
after it, as thinking themselves not a grain the worse, when all this seed is
gone.

And why out of the heart? Answ. 1. Because he knows, that the heart is the
right furrow, in which the Word can become fruitful; therefore he uses all
his skill to keep it thence, or fetch it thence. He cares not how much of the
seed lie in the head, or on the tongue, so he can keep it out of the heart.
For as we say, The mind is the man, so the heart leads the whole man, and is
the lodge either of God, or the devil. 2. Because nothing but the Word puts
him out of possession of the heart. The strong man holds the hold, till a
stronger come. If the Word as good seed once root in the heart, he must away.
Where Christ by his Word takes the heart, the Prince of this world is cast out.
The Disciples by their powerful preaching saw Satan fall down like lightening
from heaven. It stands him therefore in hand to bestirre him, and to turn
himself to all his stratagems: One principal whereof is, that if he cannot
hinder thee from the Word, he may hinder the Word from thee: or, if he cannot
hinder it from the ear, he may from the heart: or, if he cannot intercept it
from the heart by catching it, he may defeat thee of it by stealing. Note this
stratagem, and do thy best to prevent it.

2. End of Satan's coming to hinder faith
His second end is, to hinder faith: lest they should believe. And why? First,
he knows the Word is the parent of faith: Ioh. 17.20. Christ prays for the
Elect, that they might believe through the Word of his Disciples. And the
Iaylor and all his house believed by hearing Paul, Act. 16.31. Secondly, he
cannot but be an enemy to our faith, and therefore winnowes us as the
Disciples, that our faith may fail; because faith 1. Makes us the sons of
God, Gal. 3.26. 2. Marries us to Jesus Christ, Hos. 2.20. 3. Makes our hearts
temples of the Spirit, purifying the heart, Act. 15.9. 4. Makes us free
entrance to God by prayer, to ask what we will, and we shall obtain, Ephesians.
3.12. And 5. It is our shield to resist all the darts of the devil: the gates
of hell shall never prevail against it. Thirdly, if he can keep us from
faith, the Word (he knows) shall be altogether unprofitable, Heb. 4.2. and, if
he can keep this weapon from us, he easily foyles us; and makes God also our
adversary, because without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.
Hence he lays all his engines against our faith, and seeks by all means to
root it out of the heart, and out of the world, if God would give him leave.

3. End, to rob men of their salvation.
His third end is, to rob men of salvation, lest they should be saved.

First, Satan knows, that the end of faith is salvation, 1. Pet. 1.9. and that
by preaching, God saues them that believe, 1. Cor. 1.21. If he can keep thee
from faith, he has robbed thee of salvation. Therefore if he cannot hinder the
Word, he will (if he can possibly) hinder faith. Secondly, Satan is a deadly
enemy to every man's salvation: 1. Out of hatred: for the evil angels by their
fall lost the love of God, of his glory, and of his Image, and now hate
whatsoever belongs to God. 2. Out of envy: therefore he is called in the
Parable, the envious man: He repines and enuies, that man should stand in
innocence which he lost; and therefore set upon Adam, and drove him by his
tentation out of Paradise. And he enuies more, that any man should enjoy the
glory of heaven, which himself can never recover; and therefore he lays all
the blocks in their way that he can devise. And as when Gods people were
going to Canaan, he stirred up many armies of the Heathen against them, to make
them fall short of that good Land: So now he raises armies of tentations, and
impediments, to make us fall short of that heavenly Canaan, which he knows to
be a good Land, and thinks too good for us. 3. Out of his contrariety to God
himself. He sees God careful of his Church and children, that (as a good
shepherd) he uses all means to save and preserve them: therefore he clean
contrarily seeks to kill and destroy them, and defeat them of that salvation
which the Lord has prepared for them. And this seems to be the Apostles aim,
1. Pet. 5.7, 8. He cares for you: but watch for the devil, who as a roaring
Lion seeks to devour.

Use 1. In that the devil comes, learn not to content thy self with coming
to Church, but see thy end be better than his, yea contrary to his. He comes
with a purpose to hinder the power of the Word in thy heart, to hinder thy
faith and salvation. Come thou with a purpose to set forward the power of the
Word in thy heart, to set forward thy faith and salvation.

That the Word has been fruitful, four notes.
Quest. How may I know that the work of faith and salvation is set forward in
me by the Word? Answ. 1. If it have brought thee to the sight of thy sin,
and the sense of thy danger by it. This is the Peter tells the Jews, Act. 2.
that they had slain Jesus Schoolmaster to Christ, Gal. 3.24.
have sent thee out of thy self, to apprehend the remedy of the Gospel: as
the Iaylor being cast down, said, Oh what shall I do to be saved? Believe in
the Lord Jesus (said the Apostle) and thou shall be saved, Act. 16.30, 31.
This is the method of sound Ministry, first, truly to humble, then to raise
again. Received ye the Spirit by the works of the 4. If thou carriest it into
thy soul as a light into a dark place, 2. Pet. 1.19. to follow the directions
of it, and to guide thy ways according to every precept of it. If now thou
intendest, when thou come, to be led further into the sight of thy sin,
led nearer unto Jesus Christ to draw of his fullness, led further into the
sanctification of the Spirit, and led as a blind man by the guidance of the
Word, certainly the Word is of power to set forward thy faith and salvation,
notwithstanding all Satan's malice.

Use 2. The devil knows, that faith is by heareing, and salvation by faith:
1. I would our Popish Recusants knew so much, so they would make a better use
of this knowledge, than to withstand both faith and hearing. 2. I wish our
formal Protestants knew it, who will scarce step out of doors to hear, but in
policy will hear so much as they may be counted no Atheists, or Papists, but
indifferent men, as they be too indifferent whether they hear or no. 3. I wish
they knew it, who by reading at home will believe and be saved by their eyes;
which are insufficient to breed faith. For God has given the sense of hearing
this preeminence, Romans 10.14. How can they believe, unless they hear? The
sight is a sense of discipline, but hearing, the sense of faith. 4. I wish our
Atheistical scorners, who think they know so much as they contemn the
Ministry, that they knew as much as the devil: then would they not bar and
excommunicate themselves so wilfully from the means of faith and salvation:
they would not turn away the ear, if they knew that faith were dropped in by
the ear. 5. I would our careless and sleepy hearers knew it, who shut the
door of faith, lest they should be saved. Never will God open their hearts as
Lydias by the Word, who shut their ears. 6. I wish they also would learn a
lesson from the devil, who content themselves to live in dry and barren
places, destitute of the means of faith and salvation; as Lot, who chose
Sodom, for the fruitfulness of the ground, before Canaan; and delight in the
hills of Samaria among idolatrous Papists, rather than in Sion Hill among true
worshippers. I am sure thou would choose to dwell with the Lord hereafter;
then choose to dwell now where the Lord dwells. In a word:

Let us all persuade our selves of that, whereof the devil himself doubts
not: 1. That God has appointed hearing for the engendring of faith: For as by
hearing the devils voice, we lost our faith and happiness; so the Lord has
appointed by hearing his voice again, as the most convenient means, to
recover our faith and salvation. 1. Cor. 1.21. It pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe. And he has tied faith
and salvation to preaching, both by precept and promise, and tied us to them,
though himself be free. We have no other ordinary means. 2. We would rate our
selves, if we should carelessly or wilfully lose our money or gold, or slip the
means of getting and increasing them: But behold, faith is much more precious
than gold, 1. Pet. 1.7. and salvation far more precious than faith. If it were
a small thing to lose faith, yet it is something to lose salvation, and more,
to lose it so wilfully.

Thou never come to Church, but Satan comes with thee.
Use 3. Seeing Satan comes to Church to steal the Word, know, that thou never
come to Church, but Satan an enemy, a thief comes with thee, to rob thee of
the Word, of the treasure of faith, and bereave thee of life everlasting:
Therefore deal with him as with a thief. 1. Suspect him, trust him not; only
a watchful eye preuents an untrusty fellow.

Motives. 1. Thus we do for our money: we are careful of our Evidences,
Jewels, Plate, and things of worth: Motives to watch against him, three.
let us also esteem the Word (as David) above thousands of gold and silver. 2.
Natural wisdom teaches a man, if he have some special Jewels, and knows
he has thieves about him, not to leave them abroad, or lay them in the way of
a cunning thief, from whom he can scarce, by all his care, keep them. 3.
Satan cannot steal, if thou leave not thy wealth abroad: Therefore do for the
Word, as for thy seed in thy field: the Husbandman, so soon as he has cast
it, couers it with the Plough or Harrow, and so preuents the picking up of
birds: so must thou cover the seed of the Word in the furrows of thy
affections, and lay it deep in the ground of thy heart, by serious attention,
meditation, conference, practice: Else if the seed lie on the ground,
uncovered, vncared for, these birds presently pick up all to thy loss and
sin.

3. If thou perceive that this thief has stolen away the Word from thee,
follow him with Hue and cry, repent thy sin, lament thy loss, complain to

Quest. How may I know the devil has robbed me of the Word?

Answ. 1. If after much plain and powerful preaching and hearing thou have
learned little. 3. Notes to know that the devil has robbed thee of the Word.
Many will commend Sermons, where the devil gets all from them. Many commend
the Preacher, he is a good man, never man spoke so, etc. bless God for him,
and bless the time he ever came among them: But what have you learned? Here
they have nothing to say, but they hope they take good, because he is a good
man. Now we have found an highway ground: hellish birds have picked up all.

2. If thou be capable in other things, and incapable here; as many are quick
in all their business, and can carry away difficult discourses of worldly
matters, which they are affectionate and attentive unto; but cannot carry away,
either in their understanding or memory, a point of necessary doctrine, because
they have no pleasure in it, the devil keeps them from profit by it.

3. If being incapable and silly in other things, they are witty and subtle
for maintaining of sins and lusts. A plain case, the devil is their
teacher, and will not permit them any other master. Many come (...) Church, and
after twenty years hearing are very blocks, having got nothing but some texts
of Scripture, wrested to maintain their sins.

Use 4. Seeing Satan lays all his plots to get the Word, or keep it out of
the heart, (...) in coming to hear, must especially labor to get and keep
it in our hearts. Prou. 5.3. Write my words on the table of thine heart* and
chap. 4.4. Let the heart hold fast my words* and verse. 21. Keep them in the
midst of thy heart. As Mary pondered Christ's speeches in her heart.

Now that we may thus lay the Word to our hearts, and apply our hearts to it,
6. Means to lay the Word upon and in our hearts.
1. Consider and meditate on the great Majesty of God, whose Word it is: that
we may hear it, not as the word of man, but of God, 1. These. 2.13. spiritual,
and binding the conscience, and one word or tittle whereof can never fail. 2.
Consider the matter of it, Jesus Christ, and salvation by him. In the Word
preached, behold Christ crucified, Gal. 3.1. 3. Consider the power, use, and
end of it; that it is the power of God to salvation, and able to save our
souls, if it be ingraffed. 4. Consider that it is the same Word which binds or
loses us for the present, and shall judge us at the last Day, Ioh. 12.48. 5.
Make room in the heart beforehand, by bewailing those sins which may keep
back Gods blessing, or stuff the heart. Thrust out all sin, and all purpose
of sinning. Put not sweet liquour into fusty vessels. 6. Apply we all to our
selves in particular, not to others, as Adam posts it to Eve, and she to the
Serpent. And so long apply, till it be fastened in the heart. And then it is
fastened, when the promises are believed, the threats feared, the precepts
sincerely obeyed.

Use 5. This shows us what is the reason, Why most men continue brutishly
ignorant after long hearing: 3. Reasons.
why most men, after long hearing, continue ignorant and brutish as at first.
They can give no answer to the Articles of faith, can render no account of so
many precepts delivered plainly and profitably, cannot remember of 500.
Sermons, scarce so many words. Is not now the Word of power to teach and
instruct them? Yes, but 1. The heart is a barren and highway ground, paued by
Satan: no seed can spear or sprout in it. Yet these most boast of the goodness
of their hearts. 2. A flight of devils has lighted on our Congregations, and
almost picked up all. A man that having laid up money in a chest, finds none
when he comes again, will say, Surely the thief has been here. So we may
say, The devil has bin here. 3. A just revenge of God it is on careless
Hearers, to set the devil in their necks, to steal and catch away all the
Word that they set so light by, lest they should believe and be saved. Would
thou avoid this revenge of God? Then be advised: As Abraham drove away the
birds that troubled him in his sacrificing, Genesis 15.11. So drive thou away
these hellish birds that trouble thee in thy hearing; by preparation,
attention, meditation, prayer, and practice. And thus, though thou can not
hinder these birds from flying about thy head, yet thou shall give them no
room to nest or rest in thy heart.

So much of the first ground. Now to the second. Verse. 6. And some fell on
stones, and when it was sprung up, it withered away, because it lacked moisture.

HEre consider three things: 1. The kind of soil; some fell on stones: 2. The
success of the seed in it: In the beginning hopeful, and commendable, it
sprung up: In the end doleful, and lamentable, it withered away. 3. The reason
of that uncomfortable success, it lacked moisture.

Bad hearers compared to stony ground in 5. things.
The soil is the stones, or stony ground: verse. 13. They which are on the
stones, are such as hear the Word, etc. A kind of bad Hearers, compared to
stones, or stony ground. 1. For their natural hardness, which cannot be
broken, nor softened. 2. For their coldness: not warmed with the heat of the
Sun of righteousness, nor the Spirit of God; but abide cold as stones. 3.
For their heaviness: A stone will not easily be removed out of his place: his
proper Center is the earth: Cast him by maine strength as high as may be
imagined, and let him alone, he will fall to the earth again. So these Hearers
are not easily moved out of their natural corruption; but move them and lift
them violently up by the Ministry, long they stay not, but down they fall to
the earth, and earthly things, which is their proper place and element. 4. For
their unprofitableness, and resistance of the fruits of the earth: for as
stoninesse of ground, by the curse upon man's sin, became very noisome to the
fruits of the earth; so the stoninesse of heart, a part of the curse, more
hinders fruits of grace, than any stony ground can hinder seed cast into it. 5.
As stony ground, and common stones are little esteemed, but rejected of men: so
this stony ground is as little respected of God.

Yet herein our hard hearts are worse than stones: they increase not their
hardness; but ours is daily increased by wilfulness and perverseness.

Now to the success of the seed in this stony ground: and first, the
hopeful, and commendable, Stony ground commendable in 4. things.
in the beginning: it sprung up. Which implies that of Matthew, chap. 13.20. He
which hears the Word, and incontinently with joy receives it. Where we have
four things considerable. 1. This bad ground receives Hearers, who only
heard the Word, but left it as soon as they heard it: let the devil, or any
devouring bird eat it and take it from them, they care not. The former gave it
hearing, but cared not to understand it: these receive it attentively, and
seem greedily to digest it. They did not one whit affect it: incontinently,
(says Matthew:) when God speaks, they will hear, and without delays or
excuses, willingly receive when God proffereth. They seem to know their
season, and seedtime: and is it not commendable in Christianity to know the day
of visitation? Or how can he expect a crop in harvest, that sleeps and trifles
away his seedtime? And surely we cannot but commend such as esteem the Word
worthy of present entertainment, and in comparison of it, undervalue inferior
things and occasions, which would put off the present receiving of it. Note.
Where note by the way, that bad Hearers may think the Word a matter of haste,
and weight, 3. These bad Hearers and stony ground receive it with joy. They are
no scorners, or railers on their Preachers, but give their Ministers great
reverence, as Herod did John Baptist. They hate neither Micah nor his message,
but hear gladly, but give the Word good words, and good welcome; they rejoice
in the Word, and receive it with good hearts; confer of it willingly, rejoice
in their travel and pains to hear the Word, conceive great joy in the
remembrance of several points, as distinctly as they hear them, are exceeding
glad and desirous of means of sound instruction. Alas that all this while
these should be bad Hearers, and never a whit nearer their salvation, but in
the state of damnation. 4. This stony ground brings up the seed it sprung up,
says our Text. This seed of the Word rises up, and appears, and seems to
tend toward heaven, shooting up from earth.

1. It rises to external obedience, The seed springs up in stony ground to
sundry degrees.
and reformation of many, (perhaps) most things; as Herod did many things for
John. Judas received this seed, it sprung up in him, that he not only
understood and preached the mystery of the Gospel, but carried himself in an
honest and reformed conversation a taste of the heavenly gift, and the powers
of the world to come, by which they are partakers of the holy Ghost; that is,
something they have so like true sanctification, that both themselves and
others may think them truly sanctified. And yet these so bad Hearers, as they
may, and sometimes do fall into that irrecouerable sin against the holy Ghost,
Heb. 6.4, 5. and as our Text, yet they withered away: as some of the Israelites
tasted of the fruits of the Land of Canaan, and did thereby perceive what a
good Land it was, and desired part in it, and conceived good hope of enjoying
and possessing it, yet never enioied it, but perished in the wilderness.

Doct. A bad Hearer may go far in Christianity.
Learn hence, how far a bad Hearer may go in Christianity. A man may hear
the Word with diligence, receive it with joy, believe with some assurance, grow
up to high place in the profession of Religion, bring forth fruits of
commendable obedience, and all this while be bad ground, and in damnable
estate. See it more distinctly in these four degrees.

1. Reprobates may be forward Hearers, hungry and desirous Hearers, so glad to
hear, as, if they have not the Word at home, they will with zeal and
forwardness seek it abroad. Ioh. 6.34. The Jews hearing Christ speak of
bread from heaven, and such as gives life to the world, flocked after him
every where, and with earnest desire say, Lord, give us evermore this bread,
and yet many of them fell away from him, verse. 66.

2. They may be joyful Hearers, receive the Word with joy, as our Text has
it. Act. 26.28. Agrippa having heard Paul delivering the sum of the Gospel,
and of the strange manner both of his own conversion, and of man's salvation,
by Christ's humility and glory, ravished with the excellency of it, cries,
Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian. And of John's Hearers our Savior
says, Ye rejoiced in his light for a season, Ioh. 5.35.

3. They may be believing Hearers for a time: so says the Text, which for a
while believe, and according to Matthew* endure as believers for a time. They
are verily persuaded of the truth of the whole doctrine of salvation, that
every word shall be accomplished in the salvation of Believers, and just
condemnation of unbelievers. They believe, it alone teaches the right way to
heaven. Of Simon Magus it is said, Act. 8.13. that he believed, and was
baptized: not that he had true faith, (for even then Peter saw him in the gall
of bitterness, and band of iniquity:) but he yielded to the doctrine of Christ
which Philip taught, and behaved himself as if he had believed indeed, and
had been a Disciple of Christ.

4. They may be growing Hearers: 1. To a great measure of illumination:
Balaam, a wretched sorcerer, was enlightened so far as to see the blessed
estate of Gods people, and desirous to partake of their happiness, he cried
out in great passion, Oh that my soul might die the death of the righteous!
Judas, a wretched Traitor, and son of perdition, could never have preached
the Gospel, without a great measure of the illumination in himself. 2. They
may grow to a great place in the profession; as Judas to follow Christ himself
at the heels, and call him Master. 3. To a great measure of reformation of
life, and obedience to the Gospel: being in the same pastures with the sheep
of Christ, he is taken for a sheep, when indeed he is a goat for a time in
the same fold with the sheep.

Reasons. 1. Men may be drawn to hear gladly, where faith is not, for
illumination sake, or enlightening sake. It is a pleasant thing (says Solomon)
to behold the light of the Sun. There is a great force and power in the
light, to draw all men's eyes after it: So is there power and force in the Word
soundly taught, to draw men's affections of joy and delight, at least for a
time. And even natural men also, who are of quick apprehension, can rejoice
to hear deep points learnedly and soundly opened, and cases of Conscience, or
questions of Religion soundly discussed. Math. 12.37. When our Savior disputed
with the Scribes and Pharisees, and put them to silence, it is said, much people
heard him gladly. No marvel then is it, if supernatural illumination
(although a common gift) bring men with much joy to hear the Word: For is it
not a joyful thing to hear of the way of salvation, and of so many promises,
and an eternal happiness after this life? Who would not come running, as
gladly as the young man, to hear he should be saved, who not liking the
conditions, went away as heavily? So, who will not throng and thrust after a
pleasing Preacher, or so long as he dwells in Promises? If a Preacher pipe, the
profanest will dance. But if he come to the Law, oh they cannot abide to hear
of damnation, and, He has nothing but condemnation in his mouth, I will (...)
him.

2. A man may go thus far in Christian duties, and be bad ground, by a
delusion, and mistaking his own estate: namely, by a false conception of
faith, or an unfound apprehension of the excellency of Jesus Christ, and the
blessed estate of Believers united unto him. An hypocrite may see what is the
comfort of remission of sins: what a tranquillity and heaven on earth it is,
to have a good conscience, washed and sprinkled in the blood of the Lamb: what
an happiness, to have free access to God in prayer, to live with God, and
enjoy him here below. But he sees it in others, not in himself: and he will
go a great way to have part in them, and lay out something for them: but he
will not be at so much either cost or pains for them as they are worth, and
as he must pay before he have them.

3. A man may be carried a great way in temporary faith, for temporary causes,
and selfe-respects: Temporary faith raised on temporary causes.
which respects as they fail, so also must his faith and hopes.

One is curiosity and nouelty. A new Preacher, or some new strange matter,
never heard of before, Paul preach, and enquire the meaning of his doctrine,
because they say, he brought strange things to their ears, and their life was
to hear and tell news. But Athenians grow weary both of that matter and man,
who cease to be new. And unthankful Israelites, when Manna first comes,
admire it, rejoice in it, feed upon it, grow strong by it: Why? Because it is a
strange kind of meat. But afterward they murmr, and loathe it, because not
new, tho it was every day new.

A second selfe-respect that may make a man diligent in the means, is pride and
conceit. They desire men to profess the Gospel, and line according to it
outwardly, they will do it. Judas himself can fashion himself outwardly to
the holiest Disciples. A Pharise can fast and pray, and give alms, to be seen
and praised of men. Many Pharisaicall Protestants can play on both hands, or
(as we say) fast and loose: In some company can speak good words, commend good
men, speak of some good notes of Sermons, confess and condemn many of his
own courses, and take hold on the better end of the staff: But the same man
(as if not the same man) in another company can be as loose, as scornful, and
apparently hateful of goodness as ever before.

because of the loaves, Ioh. 6.26. Profit and preferment will make a man hear
diligently, profess openly, preach painfully, at least till the preferments or
profits choke both Preachers and Professors. But Christ, if the bring no
loaves, shall fail of much of his company. How far did Demas go in his
profession, that the Apostle Paul reckons him among the Saints who saluted the
Colossians, chap. 4.14? but all this was for some preferment, which when he
got, 2 Timothy 4.10.
Paul changed his note, Demas has forsaken me, and embraced the present world.
If ever the complaint was just, Phil. 2.21
it is now of Christians, All men seek their own: and as Augustine in his
time complained, Vix quaeritur Jesus propter Iesum, Scarce any seek Christ for
Christ his sake. But our wisdom will be to seek Jesus for Jesus, that is,
salvation. Seek him for that end he came into the world; not to make thee rich
in the world, or heir of the earth, but to enrich thee with grace, of
justification, and of sanctification, and make thee heir of eternal life.

So much of the third Reason.

4. God sees it fit, that hypocrites should go thus far in the way of
salvation, and yet fall short: 3. Reasons why hypocrites go so far.
1. Because he will have his own ways justified, and allowed by his very
enemies: Even they shall give him witness, both by word and deed, that it is
the best way, though they cannot hold it. 2. Hereby he cuts off all cause of
judging others before the time. Thou can not judge between a sheep and a
goat: only the chief Shepherd can. 3. Seeing it befalls reprobates to be
esteemed and go for good Christians, and be so like as none can discern them,
he will have us hereby take occasion to judge our selves, what ground we are,
and go to the balance of his Word, and make just trial whether we hold
weight or no, whether we be sound, and differenced by true marks of
Christianity from apparent Christians.

Use 1. How may this doctrine dant and terrify many of us, who take our selves
to be in good estate, when yet we are not comparable to this bad ground? whom
yet if we come short of, we must needs come short of salvation. If the ground
that goes thus far, Numbers (...) com^ (...) of many that come (...) 4.
instances
shall be damned, what damnation abides such as come not half way with them?
More specially:

1. Do we see a stony heart receive the Word speedily and hungrily? See we
here a graceless ground and heart swift to hear, and painful in travel to
get the Word soundly taught? What then shall become of us, that are in no
readiness, make no haste to receive? to whom the small time of an hour in a
week is tedious, while we sit at our ease. Shall forward Hearers be
condemned, and the backward in hearing approved?

2. If we see some that attend the Word, love it, and find sweetness in it, yet
shall be kept out of heaven; how can contemners, raylers, persecutors,
(notwithstanding they hear) hope to get in, where many that have attended,
remembered, and marked, yea and come to a great measure of knowledge by it,
shall be shut out?

3. If we see in our Text, that many who are much affected with the Word, who
have received the same with joy, and delighted many times to confer of it by
day, and meditate of it by night: (for who will not speak and think often on
that which joys his heart?) if (I say) we see here a rocky heart, relenting
and rejoicing at the Word, yet shut out of heaven; what may we think of many
of our drowsy Hearers, who are no more moved, almost, than the seats they sit
on, or the stones in the pauement? They are not terrified by denunciation of
all the judgments of God, which are their own portion: not comforted with
promises, though they falsely conceive them their own: but as the froward
Jews, Math. 11.17. are like froward children: whether they be piped or mourned
unto, they be all one, moved with neither.

4. See we in our Text a great many, who grow up by the Word, and by their
delight and diligence are furnished with a great measure of knowledge (that
they can fruitfully confer of the Scriptures, they can try Doctrines by
Scripture, and judge between truth and falsehood, yea they are grown up to a
glorious profession, with much zeal and forwardness: and not only so, but to
such a reformation as they seem thoroughly sanctified, make much of Ministers,
and be at cost to any good purpose, and as forward as any:) and yet with more
than all this be bad ground, and reprobate? Alas! what then shall become of a
multitude of our careless and forgetful Hearers, of our brutish and senseless
Hearers, who are resolved to remain so? What of those barren hearts, whose
fallow grounds the Lord has plowed up, sowed on them the seeds of eternal
life, watered them with continual dewes of heaven, and looks for the fruits
of obedience, but reapes only tares, and cursed fruits of ignorance,
wilfulness, opposition of sincerity, scorn of his faithful Ministers, and
contemning of his grace offered unto them?

Oh my brethren, if ever you were serious in any thing concerning your good,
think seriously of this one point. And if God ever made me able to speak to
your hearts, Oh that I could carry this point in, and reach the hearts of you
all! Or rather let the Lord, who made your hearts, take this his own honor,
and speak so as they may hear: That numbers of you come short of these bad
Hearers, and that multitudes of Reprobates in the Day of the Lord, shall rise
up in judgment to condemn many of us, who never receive the Word so readily,
so hungrily, so painfully, so joyfully, so fruitfully, as they have done. That
numbers of cursed caitiffes shall be able to say more for their own salvation
then numbers of us: They shall be able to say, Lord, we have stepped many a mile
to hear thy Word; we have carefully attended, marked, remembered, meditated,
conferred, and applied it: It was our joy and delight to gain the knowledge of
holy things, and to our knowledge we joined zeal, forwardness, and
reformation: We professed thy Name, suffered many things for our profession,
loved thy House, reverenced thy Ministers, and would have parted with our eyes
to have done them good: Also we were liberal to the poor Saints, and to other
good purposes. Can thou say thus much for thy self? If thou can not, thou
come behind a Castaway: If thou can, thou art not yet before a
Reprobate: And, if he that cannot say more, shall never come to heaven, how
shall he come there that cannot say half so much? Why should we not hence
shame our selves, that Reprobates, and such as heaven shall be shut against,
are so far before us? Can we have comfort or hope in such an estate, as is
outstripped by hopeless and damned hypocrites?

Object. What, do you mean to drive us all to despair? Is this the way to
reach us the assurance of our salvation, to which you so often call us? Can we
be assured by such a desperate and uncomfortable Doctrine?

Answ. 1. This Doctrine seems harsh and uncomfortable to such as feign would
presume of a good estate, but have no good cause, or ground. Luke 12.29
Such as would hang like Meteors in the air, between hope and doubt, leaving
the assurance and good evidence to such as care for it, are by this Doctrine
discarded and disappointed: And yet not driven to despair by it, because God
has appointed a means to draw them out of the danger and despair of their
present estate, by Jesus Christ, and the sincere embracing of the means of
salvation and assurance.

2. This Doctrine directly intends the most assured comfort and consolation of
Gods children, which will hold out in the day of trial, because it enforces
the Christian to soundness in his course, and to run his race of Christianity
not as at uncertainty, 1. Cor. 9.26. which is indeed most uncomfortable. It
forces him to diligence in proving himself: and suffers him not to stay where
bad Hearers do, but to go further, even so far as they cannot come.

Use 2. Seeing many shall seek so diligently to enter, and shall not be able,
A serious examination whether we have gotten beyond hypocrites, in 4. things.
Luke 13.24. let us seriously examine our selves, and prove, whether we go
beyond the scantling of Reprobates in hearing. We see how many great things
they attain unto, who by them never attain to eternal life; and many hope to
attain eternal life, who never attained such gifts as many wicked men have.
But for our assurance of salvation, let us sift our hearts to the bottom, and
gage these hollow vessels, and not content ourselves in any of these gifts,
till we can say in truth, Herein I go beyond a Reprobate, never could
hypocrite attain this.

Here for our better furtherance in so weighty a business, I will enter into a
more special examination of these four things: 1. Of desires. 2. Of
illumination. 3. Of joy. 4. Of growth by the Word. In the trial whereof we
shall the better judge of our own soundness.

I. Jn holy desires. For,
I. Examine thy desires after God and his Word, in these particulars.

1. Their ground.
1. In the ground of them: Then only are they gracious and acceptable, first,
when thou have proved and discerned that the doctrine is of God, and yeeldest
not to it in any other respect, but as to the authority of God: And secondly,
when thou have prized the thing desired above all that may be compared with it,
and so taking thy heart from all other things, bestowed it only on it as the
chief good. This an hypocrite cannot do: He may attain a desire, but it is
altogether ungrounded. This stony ground desires, and receives the seed
immediately, indeed too hastily, (the desire being an heritage hastily gotten:)
Either out of simpleness, and leuity, and lightness in believing, as Prou.
14.15. The fool believes every thing: and they yield presently, without any
good warrant. Or out of policy and wariness, for indirect and present
respects, they so consent to the truth, as that they are as ready to consent to
error, if it be delivered with any show, or urged on them by superiors. The
wind drives not the clouds about more usually, then are these windy Professors
with winds of doctrine.

This therefore thou must do in the first place: Look that thy desire be
thus soundly grounded. It was the commendation of the Bereans, that they
received the Word with all readiness, but so, as they searched the Scriptures,
and knew them to be so. Act. 17.11.
And let us do in our way to heaven, as Peter in his way to Macedonia, Act.
16.10. After he saw a vision, he immediately prepared to go into Macedonia,
being assured the Lord had called us unto them.

2. Examine thy desires in the matter of them: 2. Their matter.
which is twofold: 1. In respect of God the chief Good: 2. In respect of the
Word, the means to it.

For the first. An hypocrite may desire happiness, as Balaam, for self-love;
but properly desires not the love of God for it self. See therefore that thy
desire be rather of reconciliation then salvation: rather to glorify God, then
be glorified of him: esteeming the light of his countenance better then life it
self. This is a pure and holy desire after grace and favor, above all things.

For the second. 1. Thou must desire not the Word so much, as God in his Word:
seek after the living God in his Ordinances: love him in the Word, who there
shows he loved thee first. Many profess love to the Word, who love not God.
2. Desire the Word of the Kingdom for the Kingdoms sake. For an hypocrite may
desire the Word of the Kingdom for fear of hell. 3. Desire the whole Word. An
hypocrite may desire some part of it: the promises affect and ravish him, but
the conditions are distasteful. Gods indulgences and recompenses please him
wonderfully, but restraints and impositions are burdensome and tedious.
Therefore see thou desire the conditions as well as the promises, and love the
work of the Word as well as the wages, yea, if there were no wages: So cannot
he.

3. Their ends.
3. Examine thy desires in the end of them: thus: 1. An hypocrite may desire the
Word for science sake, not for conscience; to puff himself up, not to humble
himself; for discourse, not for direction. If thou desire the Word to learn
self-denial, to yield conscionable obedience in all things, and to take the
constant direction of it, as Israel by the pillars in all their iournies, thou
art beyond any hypocrite. 2. Hypocrites may desire the Word to be like the
children of God in happiness, but not in sincere obedience; to meet them at
the end, and be saved, but not to join with them in the means; or, if they
do join in the means, it is by starts and fits for most part, and
inconstantly. See thy desire be to keep the way as well as the end of it,
though it be all strawed with crosses: and be as desirous of the means as of
the end: Especially desire the Word as a constant light, direction, comfort,
and strength: For such are the groans and desires of the Spirit. An hypocrite
likes Heaven well, but not the way to Heaven.

4. Their companions, six.
4. Examine thy desires in the companions and qualities of them. One is sense of
want: They proceed Word; they always set a man forward to the Word of the
Apostles, to be instructed by them: as in the former examples: whereas an
hypocrite will comfort himself, and rest satisfied without the Word, in blind
ungrounded hopes. A third is vehemency and feruencie: they Samsons, almost
ready to die; as the Heart chased pants for water: an hunger that would break
stone walls, and contemn fire and water, even the utmost perils: more eager
then any worldling can desire silver and gold. Hypocrites have desires, but
faint, not so earnest within as they seem to be. A fourth is the good
affections that attend it: as an earnest constancy: as a thirsty man desires
drink till his thirst Hannahs for a child till she had one: so is the
Christians, till Christ be formed in him, and then to be still knit nearer
unto him. An hypocrite may desire by starts and moods, as Pilate desires to
know what is truth, Ioh. 18. but stayed not to know it. He desires the good
things of the Kingdom, but they are held at such a rate as deads his desires:
as the young man: They are cooled and quenched before he attaines the thing he
seemed so earnestly to desire. Do thou see, that thy desire be not satisfied
before thou get the thing desired, even Christ and his merits: The more true
taste thou gettest, the more earnestly thou will desire him; no rate will be
too dear; all things will be dross and dung in comparison of him. The sixth
or last is, growth in desires Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. 2. Cor. 13.11. Be perfect, desire perfection. But an hypocrite
faints in his desires: the labor of using means is soon (if not quite given
over, yet) lessened and abated.

Get these desires of the Word, thus qualified, for the ground, matter, end,
and companions of them, and then know to thy comfort, that no Reprobate ever
came so far: no bad ground attaines such desires.

II. Do we hear, that hypocrites who shall never be saved, II. Illumination.
For
attain a great measure of illumination, and the knowledge of the mystery of
Christ, whereby they discern and approve of the truth in Jesus Christ, refuse
and reprove errors both in judgment and practice, and having escaped such as
were wrapped in errors, yet are entangled again, and overcome, whose latter
end is worse than the beginning? Then be careful to try thy knowledge and
illumination, 2. Pet. 2.18, 19, 20.
whether it be got beyond the illumination of hypocrites or no: In four
particulars.

1. The matter.
1. In the matter of it: thus: 1. An hypocrite may know the story of Christ's
death and resurrection, and the merits of them: but never did any hypocrite
know the virtue and power of his death and resurrection, as the Apostle Paul
desired, Philip. 3.10. Object. Why, did he not know it, and preach it before
that time? Answ. Yes, he knew well the death and resurrection of Christ, as
also the virtue and power of them: but he would feel in himself that power
more and more, standing in the death of sin, and the life of righteousness.
This experimental knowledge far passes the theorie, and is the knowledge
but of a few. 2. An hypocrite may know in general, that Christ is a Redeemer,
and discourse excellently of the manner, means, and end: and this swimmes in
the brain. But there is a particular knowledge, with application, to say with
Job, Job 19.25.
I know my Redeemer lives: and Paul, Gal. 2.20.
-- who gave himself for me. To this never Reprobate came: If he could speak
it, he knew not what he spoke; he knows and speaks only in gross. Therefore
see thy knowledge be distinct. 3. An hypocrite may know Christ as God has
described him in the Scripture, but not as he is made of God unto us wisdom,
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. 1. Cor. 1.30.
He may know him by hearing and reading, as the Samaritans did Christ by the
woman's relation; but not by his comfortable presence in his heart. Hypocrites
may know him as he is in himself, the Son of God, the Savior of the world,
and as he is an head to others, but not to themselves an head or Savior. See
thy knowledge be not knowing only, and contemplative, but a knowledge passing
knowledge, and proceeding to feeling; as that of the Samaritans, when
themselves had seen and heard Christ.

2. Examine thy knowledge in the end of it; 2. The end.
both in respect of thy self, and God, and thy brethren. 1. An hypocrite may
attain a great measure of knowledge, to inform his judgment, not to reform
his mind; to swim in his brain, not to season his heart. Col. 3.10.
See thy knowledge be a renewing of Gods image in knowledge. 2. An hypocrite
may know much of God and Christ, but little for God and Christ: and aim not at
Gods glory, or the honor of Christ, but to puff up himself, and swell
against others: so as though it be a true knowledge of the true God, in
respect of the object, yet it is false and unsound, in respect of the use and
end: only knowing, to be known to know. 3. Hypocrites may know much in
themselves, but a little for others: as many content themselves to be counted
great learned men, but no man the better for all their profoundnesse; it is so
far to the bottom, that it cannot be come by. Sound illumination edifies,
and is communicatiue. The light of grace is like the light of the Sun,
conspicuous and comfortable to all eyes: as Elihu speaks of himself, Wine in
vessels will have vent; so sound knowledge will vent to the family, friends,
neighbors, and strangers.

3. The companions, four.
3. Examine thy knowledge in the companions of it: 1. Humility: God teaches
only the humble: and swelling knowledge is carnal knowledge. None Psalm. 25.9.
cannot but be Love of the brethren: 1. Ioh. 4.7. He that loves not, knows
not God; that is, powerfully and effectually: for, from love of God, flows
love to his Constant hearing: 1. Ioh. 4.6. He that knows God, hears us.
And the Spouse says, It is the voice of my Beloved, Cant. 2.8. Sheep will
hear Practice: 1. Ioh. 2.3, 4. Hereby we are sure that we know him, if we
keep his Commandments: He that says, I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. An hypocrite may know
idly and unfruitfully, but never produces his knowledge into sound practice,
which is universal: Tit. 1.16. They profess they know God, but in their deeds
deny him: Whereas all sound knowledge is practical. If ye know these things
(says our Savior) blessed are ye if ye do them. And to such as know
abundantly, so as they be able to preach powerfully, but join not practice to
their knowledge, though they profess they know Christ, yet shall he profess
he never knew them, Math. 7.23. Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity.
Therefore I say unto thee, as David said to his son Solomon, 1. Chron. 28.9.
Know the God of thy father, and serve him. Be not a follower of Christ, except
thou be a friend. Ioh. 15.14. Ye are my friends if ye do what I command you.
And consider these two things; 1. Knowers and not doers, shall be beaten with
the more stripes, Luke 12.47. 2. Only doers shall enter into heaven, Math.
7.21.

4. Examine thy knowledge in the growth and continuance of it. First, see it
grow: 4. The growth.
Grow in grace and knowledge, 2. Pet. 3.18. But this growing is not in the
understanding only, but in feeling: And here an hypocrite fails. Secondly,
see thy knowledge continue. An hypocrite may know much, but it is as a
lightning, a flash that soon vanishes. His knowledge may light him a little
way, but lasts not to set him through to the Bride-chamber. For hypocrites being
children of darkness, as their light for the present is mingled with much
confusion and darkness, so it ends in darkness. If thy knowledge be sound,
it is like the light of the Sun, Pro. 4.18.
that shines more and more till perfect day.

Look that thy knowledge be thus qualified, for the matter, apprehending not
the story, but the virtue of Christ; not in general, but with special
application; not as Christ is in himself, but as he is to thee: And for the
end, that it be as well for God, as of God; that it renew the mind as well as
the understanding; that it be for others as well as thy self: And for the
companions, that it be attended with humility, love, hearing, and practice:
And lastly, that it grow and continue. Now it is beyond all knowledge of
hypocrites: and now thou may comfort thy self in thy illumination.

III. In joy. For
III. Hear we from the Text, that a man who shall never come to heaven, may
receive the Word with joy, taste of the heavenly gift, have some apprehension
of the excellency of Christ, some sight of Gods favor, some sense of grace in
his heart, some worthy gifts of the holy Ghost, and an hope of enjoying
everlasting glory, (all which makes up his joy?) Now let us not deceive our
selves, or trust in vain hopes and persuasions, as if we were good Christians,
because we have either been stricken sometimes in hearing with sorrow and
amazedness for our sins; as Felix trembled, and Ahab was troubled at the
word of Eliah: or because we have had sometimes in our selves great joy in
hearing. Thou may weep at a Sermon, or rejoice at a Sermon, yet be bad and
barren ground: though we deny not these to be good motions.

But let us examine both our joy, and the ground of it, which is our taste and
apprehension of Christ, and see if we can find that in them, which is not, nor
ever was in the joy and taste of the hypocrite.

1. Examine thy joy in the ground of it, namely, 1. The ground.
a taste and apprehension of Christ. An hypocrites apprehension is but a vain
presumption, which makes him rejoice when he has no just cause. He mistakes
himself and ouerweenes his estate. He thinks his faith unfeigned, his
regeneration sound, his repentance true, when all is otherwise: And as a
beggar, dreams he is rich and full of gold, when all is a delusion. Besides,
his apprehension is for measure a taste, not a feeding: as a Cook, not as a
guest. And what he does apprehend, he bestows not in the bottom of his
heart, where some stone or other lies, and allows it not rooting.

2. Examine thy joy in the matter of it: 2. The matter.
1. It must be heavenly things: as 1. The favor of God, Psalm. 4.6. 2. Our name
written in the Book of life, Luke make the Almighty himself their delight,
Job 27.10. as the hypocrites do not, neither can do. It is a joy of
salvation, but in the God of our salvation, that has covered us with a robe of
righteousness, Esa 61.10. An hypocrite may delight in holy things, but for
nouelty, or vainglory, in uttering such knowledge as others have not, or
self-love, or the like. 3. Sound joy is more in the time sudden, as the Text
says, incontinently it receives the Word with joy, and soon abates. And in
present things, a conceit of a present good, at least in appearance; but in
good things that are further off, v.c. in Gods election, or eternal life, it
reioiceth not so much, because there is ever more sense than faith in it.

3. Examine thy joy in the measure and degree of it. 3. The measure.
The joy of the regenerate in holy things is the chief joy: Psalm. 119.72. Thy
Law is better unto me than thousands of gold. And Psalm. 137.6. -- If I
prefer not Jerusalem to my chief joy. In hypocrites it never exceeds the joy
in the world: the profits, and pleasures, and aduancements of the world, do
more comfort and affect their hearts, than the joy of the Word: and therefore
they forsake the Gospel for them. The wise Merchant sels all for the Pearl,
and goes away rejoicing, Math. 13.46. The Martyrs ioyed more in the Word, than
in riches, honors, liberty, life, or all the world.

4. The companions.
4. Examine thy joy in the companions of it: which are of two sorts.

1. Holy affec^^ons.
First, holy affections, three in number: 1. Fear and reverence: Sound joy is
never dis-ioyned from true fear of God, Psalm. 2.11. Rejoice before him with
trembling. Phi. 2.12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling. 2.
Love of grace above all things. David never danced so, as before the Arc,
because he loved Gods presence. And Simeon was never so joyful; as when he
had Christ in his arms, because he loved him. 3. Sorrow to see the Word not
kept: Psa. 119.136. Mine eyes gush out with rivers of water, because they keep
not thy Law. And indeed sound joy comes out of sound sorrow for sin. Ioh.
16.19. Ye shall sorrow, and the world shall rejoice, but your sorrow shall be
turned into joy. Lots righteous soul was vexed with the unclean conversation
of the Sodomites, 2. Pet. 2.7.

Secondly, 2. Holy graces, five.
there are certain holy graces attending it: 1. Humility. It issues from true
humiliation in the sense of his own infirmity. The joy of an hypocrite
Regeneration: The Faith attends the joy of the regenerate: therefore the joy of
faith. The hypocrites joy is a joy of affection, not of faith. He rejoices to
conceive of rare novelties, and deep mysteries, but not as deeply rooted in
himself. 4. Righteousness attends everlasting consolation, 2. These. 2.16. And
of this joy Christ has said, You shall rejoice, and, your joy shall none take
from you, Ioh. 16.22. Yea this joy increases according to the increase of
grace, and continuance of means. It holds in adversity, in persecution, in
life, in death, and is most unspeakable and glorious in heaven. But the joy of
hypocrites is a blaze at first, and soon out: it is suddenly and irrecouerably
lost: a little persecution or trial turns all into sorrow and heaviness: but
at their death, and afterward, not a spark remains. So as Job said truly, The
joy of the hypocrite is but for a moment.

If thou find that thy joy is thus qualified, no hypocrite falling from his
joy, need dismay thee, thou art beyond his farthest reach: Thou have drunk of
the Well of consolation, and shall never thirst again. Pro. 14.10
The stranger never enters into this joy.

IV. In growth. For
IV. Hear thou from the Text, that a wicked man may grow up, and rise up to a
far degree of profession, and reformation? yea that an hypocrite may
outwardly perform all that true Christians can do, and lead his life so
seemly, so innocently, as how ever he shall never come to heaven by it, yet his
pains shall be less in hell, where it shall be easier for some than for
others? Hear thou this? Then what great need is there, that every one of us,
who would not at length prove reprobate ground, should try our growth in our
profession and standing, not contenting our selves with a form of godliness,
(which now goes for good Christianity:) denying the power of it!

1. Examine thy growth from what root it is: two ways.

1. The root.
First, an hypocrite springs from no root but only the old Adam, and whatsoever
is of flesh (says Christ) is flesh. But sound growth in profession or
reformation, is from a new creation, a tree of righteousness, Esa. 61.3.
the planting of the Lord, transplanted out of the old stock of old Adam, and
new rooted into the second Adam by spiritual regeneration: and from this Root
all acceptable growth rises, according to our Saviors speech, First make the
tree good, etc. Secondly, all the growth of an hypocrite is from an heart which
at best restrains some evil, but never changed unto good. But sound growth
is from an heart renewed, a soul mortified, a pure heart, and good conscience,
1. Tim. 1.5.

2. Examine thy self in what fruits thou growest. 2. The fruits.
The best fruit of an hypocrite is in external things, and by external
things. As first, by education he may grow in ciuility, and in moral virtue,
which many think Religion enough. This was the righteousness of the Heathens,
of the Scribes and Pharisees. Secondly, by the means of salvation he may grow
to an external holiness. v. c. he may grow in knowledge, in hopes and
confidence, in zeal, in many outward seemly duties, and rest in these, or in
some other things, in stead of some inward graces, which would better bestead
him.

But a sound Christian, because he knows that without faith nothing is
pleasing to God, Heb. 11.6.
looks especially to grow in faith. And knowing that pure love must flow from
faith unfeigned, he seeks to grow up in fervent love of God, of his Word, of
his Image, 1. Tim. 1.5
of his children, and all holy things. And because humility is the foundation
of all good graces, he lays a good ground there, and builds all upon it. And
because he cannot be zealous as Iehu, who still followed the vile sins of
Jeroboam his father, he grows most in most inward hatred of his most inward
and secret corruptions. Thus whereas a barren tree stays in leaves and shows;
he, as a good tree, grows to bring the best fruits, even the best, and most
sound, and shining graces.

3 The measure.
3. Examine thy self in what measure thou growest. A sound growth is filled
with fruits of righteousness, laden with the fruits of the Spirit: Ioh. 15.8.
Herein is the Father glorified, that ye bring much fruit. And sound growth is
in every part, in every affection, and in every grace. But the growth of an
hypocrite is two ways peccant: 1. It is delicate. 2. It is partial.

It is delicate. He will profess and reform so far as he list, but will
keep a brothers wife, or spare some Agag, or hold some sweet morsel under his
tongue. He may, and will amend many faults, but some one or other he reformes
not, nor will reform. Whereas, were the growth sound, it would conscionably
respect all the Commandments: Psalm. 119.6.
it would somewhat reform all sins: it would strive to be unblameable in
spirit, soul, and body, 1. These. 5.23.

Again, it is partial, and so the hypocrite deceiues himself two ways: 1.
Sometimes he grows in the profession of faith, not in the grace of faith, as
it is noted by Christ of certain Disciples, that they believed not, Ioh. 6.64.
Many pretend faith, when they are without feeling, without application. 2.
Sometimes on the contrary, he rests in a supposall of faith, without the
profession of faith: Now his policy is his Religion. Against both these
deceits, see thy faith and profession grow alike, and be able to say with the
Prophet, Psalm. 116.10. I believed, therefore I spoke: and with the Apostles, We
cannot choose but speak what we have heard. Act 4 20.


Indeed sometime the child of God may have faith in the heart, and not
profession in the mouth, but that is either in the beginning of grace, as
Nicodemus, or in tentation, as Peter for fear, or Gods desertion, till Christ
look back again.

4. Examine thy affection in growth. 4. The affection.
Growth in grace is unlike the growth of nature. In nature the more a thing
grows, the higher it is; in grace, the lower; the further thou growest, the
more humble thou art. And why? 1. Because no grace outgrowes humility, which is
planted before any other. 2. He that is more grown, sees more clearly his want
of growth, and is humbled in his want, as the poor man, Mark. 9.24. I believe,
Lord, help my unbelief: and as the Apostles, Luke 17.5. Lord, increase our
faith. 3. This spiritual poverty keeps him hungry, and he will grow still
till he be best at last.

Contrariwise, unsound growth sees not his vnproficiency in growth, and so is
proud of that he has, and quickly grows to saciety, and security, and
thinks himself grown far enough.

5. Do thou continue in growth, 5. The continuance.
even in opposition, and to the conclusion? As 1. Does grace grow against
nature, when nature pleads peace and profit, and Master, pity thy self? This
is a sign of soundness, when nature takes one part, and the Word another: now
the Commandment preuailes: for an hypocrite abides no thorow-mortification.
Heb. 11.1.
It is the evidence of things not seen: and will hold his persuasion against
sense. If Job feel God killing him, yet his faith will trust in him: And
Abraham will hope against hope, Romans 4.18. 3. Do thou grow in this frozen
and wintrous time, so stormy and blustering against sincerity? Do thou
flourish like a green Bay Tree, in the winter of this age, in want of
encouragements and example? This is necessary. For an hypocrite may seem to
grow in the Sun, and peace of the Gospel, but hardly shares in the scorn
and contempt of it. Some selfe-respect may hold him in a while, but he hardly
grows in the want of Discipline, and in terms of leaves wither or fall off,
Psalm. 1.3. because there is a continual supply of moisture of grace, a Well
flows in his belly to eternal life. Job for all his trials will persevere in
his uprightness. And if Satan shall winnow as wheat, Christ shall pray that
thy faith and fruits fail not.

These are sure notes of trial, whether our growth be sound, and gotten beyond
that of hypocrites noted in the Text. It stands us all in hand to try our
selves, whether we be sound in faith; and not to content our selves with
profession, or outward reformation. If Reprobates be before us, where is our
comfort? what our portion? If Herod hear, and be damned; if he do many
things, reverence John, and the like; and thou hear not, reform little or
nothing, contemn the means, etc. what can thou think will become of thee?
Lastly, what comfort can it be to come behind the devil, who believes and
trembles; or Judas, who confesses his sin, makes restitution, and seems to be
gracious? It withered away, because it lacked moisture.]

Having spoken of the success of this seed cast into the stony ground, in the
commendable hopes it gave in the beginning: Now we proceed to the lamentable
and doleful success in the conclusion, with the reason of it; both in the
words now read unto you, 1. It withered away. 2. Because it lacked moisture.
But that which our Evangelist here shortly sets down as the reason of this
withering, we have more at large in the other Evangelists, who being laid
together, afford us the causes in this order.

Some are Inward: 1. Positive: hardness, stoninesse. 2. Privative, want of 1.
Moisture: in Text. 2. Earth, Mar. 4.5. 3. Roots, verse. 6. ibid.

Outward: Persecution, Math. 13.21. Tentation, Luke 8.13.



First, of the withering of these glorious Professors: then of the causes.

What withering is.
This withering is a falling away, but not all at once, but by little and
little, as a leaf loses his greenness and flourish, and withers by degrees.
For the word implies the manner of their falling. Neither is it a falling away
in part, or for a time, as the Disciples, and Peter in the time of Christ's
Passion: but a final falling away from all their graces; from which falls is
no return or rising. And therefore neither is this a withering of persons
truly justified, or a fall from justifying faith, which they never had, (as
Papists would have us believe) but from temporary faith of hypocrites, as the
Text is most plain, calling them (...).

Here consider four things: 1. How men wither away in grace. 2. The danger of
withering. 3. Notes of a man withering. 4. The Use and Application of all.

in the Church, wither four ways: Men wither in the Church 4. ways.
1. In judgment. 2. In affection. 3. In practice. 4. In the use of the means.

In Judgment: 1. In Judgment.
when they fall off the grounds of sincerity and truth, whereof they were once
persuaded: as many who decline, and for by-respects are carried from the truth
which they once embraced: such as Demas, who forsook the truth, to embrace the
present world. Thus did the Galatians wither, and by little and little fell to
another Gospel: Gal. 1.6.
at first in part, and through weakness afterward in whole, and by obstinacy.
Such were Hymenaeus and Philetus, who once held the truth concerning the
doctrine of Resurrection, but in short time erred concerning the faith; saying
that the Resurrection was already past, and destroyed the faith of many, 2.
Tim. 2.18.

As this was prophesied of these latter ages, so our eyes have seen the same
abundantly verified in numbers, who in these later times have departed from the
faith, and given heed to spirits of errors, and doctrines of devils, 1. Tim.
4.1.

I will not speak of such learned men, as in Queen Mary's days fell from the
truth of the Gospel, which themselves had professed and defended; Instances of
Apostasy or withering in sound judgment.
such as Bonner, Gardener, etc. But numbers now in this Light are declined, and
darkened in comparison of their own light. As for example: 1. Our Doctrine a
long time has been, that our Justification is by who now will have works dipped
in the blood of Christ, come into the matter of Justification? Opera tincta
sanguine Christi.
so that Christ is but half a Jesus, half a Savior. 2. The common Arminius?
concluding them to be conditional, depending upon man's willing or nilling to
receive the grace of God. How does the Doctrine of universal Redemption and
grace creep abroad euery-where as a Gangrene? teaching, that effectual and
sufficient grace is offered to all and every one, by which they may repent and
believe if that Antichrist, and Rome Babylon, (as the Jesuits themselves
confess:) and therefore we have done well to separate from them. How many are
withered from this truth, and are loath the Pope should be that notorious
Antichrist, but the Turk rather, (who never yet sat in the Temple of God?)
and have devised a new Rome or Sea for him, only discovered by Popish
Geographers. 4. The common judgment heretofore was, that now we differ but in
circumstances, and there needs but a small modification in most points between
us: An English, yea or a Popish Cassander might bring us together; though
heaven and earth shall come as soon together, as these two Religions agree in
the fundamentals.

Time would fail to speak of the general withering in judgment, in the
doctrine concerning the strict observation of the Sabbath, which some think
alterable and obseruable at the will and pleasure of the Christian Prince;
though it were written by Gods own finger in Tables of stone, as no alterable
Law was. So concerning Christ's local descending into hell, in his soul.
Concerning the restoring of Auricular confession, with separating some abuses
only in the manner. Concerning the needlesnesse of so much preaching: as if
the honor of the Ministry were, to thrust down the exercise of it. And
lastly, concerning a man's falling wholly and finally from Grace, who is truly
justified and sanctified.

Thus are numbers of men tossed with the waves of contrary doctrines; to whom the
truth is yea and nay, now this, now that, according to their occasions: now
they are resolved, now unresolved.

2. Men wither in affection, 2. In affection.
falling from their first love, from the heat and zeal for God and goodness,
which once they had: As old men that are withering, grow cold and chilly,
abated of their heat and vigor, which they had in their state and strength. How
have many, who seemed once fervent in spirit, and most forward maintainers of
Religion, now cooled their affection, and come to a state of indifferency, if
not of neutrality, and framed themselves to such a moderation, as will just
serve the scantling of the time, the Law, their own profit, preferment, and
reputation? Yea some that are fearfully gone from their first love, commend
their own wisdom in it: they were (they say) forward and foolish in the
heat of youth, to speak against this, or that; but now they see their error,
and admire their present stayednesse, and the golden mean which they have
attained: till all affection to goodness be expiring and gasping. Some that
formerly were (...), burnt in spirit against superstition, profaneness, Oaths,
Sabbath-breaking, etc. are grown key-cold: the sway of times has been as
water cast upon the coals of their affections, or in some has been as
bellows to blow up an anguish and distempered heat for the contrary. Some
that have given the right hand of fellowship to godly brethren, and have taken
them into their bosom, for the Image of God and his graces, can now look
asquint on them and dis-affect them, as men too far on the right hand:
whereas, they being in the same way they were, these be gone not further from
them than from themselves.

3. In pract^ce.
3. Great Professors wither in practice: as the Galatians, chapter 5. verse 7.
did run well, but something let them, and cast them back. Have not many
made themselves trespassers, in destroying what they seemed to have builded?
How have many begun in the spirit, but end in the flesh; who having escaped
the filthiness of the world, are entangled again therein, as the dog
returning to his vomit, and the Swine washed to her wallowing in the mire? How
many have we observed so strict in their course, that they could endure no
sin, no nor the appearance of evil, in themselves or others? They seemed to
hate the very garment spotted by the flesh. Now they see many of the same
things to be more indifferent, in which men may be more nice then wife. Nay
they are grown so strong, as their stomachs (like Ostriches) can digest Oaths,
Plays, profane and wanton speeches, in themselves and others. Every one sees
them withering apace, but themselves see it not. Lastly, how many out of their
love to Religion, were formerly much and often in dear and costly duties for
God, for his Gospel, and Saints, as the Galatians, Gal. 4.15.
who would part with their eyes to do Paul good? But now they can slinke away,
except the duty be cheap and easy. If good countenance to Religion, or good
words (which are good cheap) will serve the turn, that they will afford: no
more.

4. Men wither in respect of means, 4. In use of means.
which should preserve their gifts and greenenesse. Some have made conscience
of the Word preached, and tasted the sweetness of it, so as nothing could
hinder them from hearing all the Sermons they could come at. But now the man is
nothing so sharp set, every straw is a Lion in his way, he has not so much
leisure as he had, or he has a greater charge: Whereas indeed he only has
not the same thirst and desire after Grace in the means of it, but rather (as
an unthankful Israelite,) loathes the sweet Manna, which at first was so
precious. Others were wont to pray much and often, and that with such
earnestness, as if they had been right Israelites, who were resolved to
wrestle it out with God: but now much of that labor is remitted, the hand
grows so heavy, and so ready to fall down, that Aaron and Hur have much ado
to support them. Some were once diligent in instructing their families, in
reading the Scriptures with them, in careful watching over their behauior, as
if they had meant to have gone through with Joshua his resolution. Josh. 24.15
But now more then half the allowance of the family is taken away.

Thus as a man in decay casts off some of his train, and sets himself at a
lower rate: So, he that is withering in grace, sets down himself in
judgment, affection, practice, and diligence in the means.

And this is the first general thing proposed.

The danger of this withering, in respect of 1. God.
1. In respect of God, they are most hateful, seeing they can find nothing
more worthy forsaking, then the good way, and esteem every thing better worth
keeping then Gods image and graces. Therefore he styles them Dogs and Swine,
2. Pet. 2.20. and most unclean beasts which his soul hates: as in whom his
Spirit cease to work, by illumination, sanctification, consolation, and
gives way to the devil.

2. The church.
2. In respect of the Church: they bring scandal to the weak, and the scorn
of the wicked upon themselves and all Professors. They wound the hearts of Gods
children, who in them are made vile to the World. They open wicked mouths to
speak evil of the way of God. Lastly, they confirm and harden many in their
libertine and loose courses.

3. In respect of the sin it self: 3. The sin it self.
none more dangerous. For first, relapses (we say) are far more dangerous
then first diseases. Secondly, Satan returning, comes with seven more wicked
spirits then himself: and so he is for ever held under the power of Satan.
Thirdly, this sin is commonly punished with other sins; which is Gods most
fearful stroke: to which he seldom gives up his own. Fourthly, it is in
the degrees of the sin against the holy Ghost, and easily brings a man into
that estate, Heb. 10.26
that there may be left no sacrifice for his sin.

4. In respect of the judgment that awaites and ouertakes this sin. First,
4. The Judgment.
the house not founded on a rock, must fall, and the fall is great and
irreparable, Matthew. 7.37. Secondly, the judgment is certain, as which is
already in part inflicted: The talent is already taken away, and nothing
remains but casting the unprofitable servant into hellfire, Matthew, chap.
25. verse. 28.

The third general thing proposed, is, Notes of a

1. A resting in a common and general hope of a good estate, 6. Notes of a man
withering in Grace.
without desire or endeavor to seek marks of certainty, or special assurance
in himself: As a foolish Tradesman hopes his estate is good enough, and
bears his Creditors in hand it is so; but he is loath to cast up his books,
or come to a particular view of it. No surer argument of a man decaying.

Augustine.

Where men commit more, more is expected? Others come to Church as others do,
and live ciuilly and soberly, yea, have as much knowledge as such and such of
their rank, and they hope, as much conscience too; and are not very ambitious
to step before others in this course: But for the patterns of Scripture, and
the example of Saints (registered for our imitation) they think concerns not
them, because they cannot be Saints. Here is a mark of a man withering, and
growing worse and worse; who will not be drawn beyond them that are but a step
beyond the worst: because he scorns the best examples, as too singular.

willing excommunicating himself from the Assemblies, when he list. That man's
strength is abating, who falls from his meals. He must eat, that must live.
And the plant that would not wither, must draw moisture daily. Or, if using
public means diligently, he neglect private, he is on the withering hand.
We cannot have our ruinous hearts stand upright, further then we daily repair
them. The Word and Prayer daily used, are sovereign means to heal daily
infirmities. A sound Believer, whose leaf shall not wither, is a tree standing
by rivers of water.

5. Secret sins ordinarily committed, not bewailed,

6. Hatred of Gods children, and the way of just men, whether open or secret.
How can they keep They that hate Sion, shall be as grass on the house top,
which withers before it come forth. And (whatsoever many conceive of
themselves) this is certain; If thou avoid society with Gods people, and be
ashamed of them, or fellowship with them in the Gospel; if more perilous
times come, thou will easily wither, and stand (as Judas) with them that
apprehend Christ.

Use. Seeing so many great Professors wither away so dangerously, let him that
stands, take heed lest he fall, 1. Cor. 10.12. See we men of so great
illumination, affection, and reformation (as in this stony ground) wither quite
away? How necessary then is that exhortation of the Apostle, Heb. 12.15. Take
heed that no man fall away from the grace of God, and Chap. 3.12. Take heed
of the evil heart of unbelief, to depart from the living God. A necessary
exhortation for all: the hypocrite, because he is in danger of final
withering, and shall perish in it; and the less he fears it, his danger is
not the less: As also the sound Christian, who, though he cannot fall quite
away, because the Lord puts under his hand, yet by fearing to fall, he auoydes
falling, and being fallen, recouers himself again.

Let every godly man look he stand on firm ground: for Reprobates may seem
to stand, and be green for a while. Neither let any content himself, that he
hears good Sermons, or that he rejoices therein for the present. For, as we
read Ioh. 5.35. John's hearers esteemed him a burning and shining light, Ioh.
5.35.
and rejoiced in his light, but it was but for a season. And this Text of ours
tells us, that many heard our Lord himself, and that with joy, yet withered
away: and Ioh. 6.66. many that had heard Christ, and followed him for a time,
as if they had been sound Disciples, (as the Text calls them) went away from
him, and walked no more with him.

Object. There is no fear, so long as we be Protestants, and not Papists; so
long as we profess the truth, and deny the gross points of Popery, which
cut men from Christ.

Answer. There is a twofold withering: one in judgment, the other in
practice. That in judgment is twofold: either total, or partial. Total:
when a man departs from the whole doctrine, as they that turn from the truth
of Christ, and sup up the whole filth of Antichrist. Partial: when a man holds
most truths, but departs from the sincerity of it. And this ouerturnes many
Protestants, who will neither be Papists, nor yet sincere Protestants, but so
far judge Religion worth holding, as they can gain by it.

Withering in practice, is either in profession, or in action. Thou may hold
the profession of Religion, and yet by persisting in wicked manners, manifest,
thou acknowledgest not Christ thy Lord, and that thy self art not of the
truth. Do we think Demas cast off the whole profession of Religion, when he
forsook the truth, and exchanged it for the world? Or did the Galatians turn
Gentiles, and quite forsake the profession of Christ, when they turned to
another Gospel? Or did the Pharisees, or such as sin the sin against the
holy Ghost, wholly renounce the profession of Religion? Oh then never stand
upon profession, but use the means to preserve thee from withering in
judgment or practice, in whole or in part.

6. Means to keep us from withering in grace.
Quest. What be the means to keep us from withering?

Answ. 1. Get sound judgment, to discern the truth from error. And this is
obtained in the public not quench the Spirit, we must not despise prophecy.
1. These. 5.19, 20. Ephesians. 2.20.
If we would not fall, we must be grounded on the foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles: by private reading, meditating, and conferring of the Scriptures,
which notably begets and confirms soundness of judgment: And by prayer,
which obtaines the Spirit, who is called the Spirit of judgment. Esa. 4.4.
The Lamp fails without oil: And they that forsake the Assemblies, shall
find their light of judgment and understanding to grow dimmer daily, till
they be wholly put out.

sweetness of godly life, of Gods blessing accompanying it, of inward peace,
and tranquillity of mind, of safety under the wing of God, and the many
privileges which go with the careful watch over the heart and life: This man
shall not easily fall from his fruitfulness, nor be drawn to such sins as
blast and ouerturne others by the roots, and that suddenly. Whereas he that
holds his Religion, because the Prince holds it, will run with the time,
and swim with the stream; the times and winds are not more mutable than he:
let the times change but a little, his Religion is withered and gone. Or if men
hold holy Doctrines only swimming in the brain, and attain understanding
rather to furnish their discourse, than to guide their course; and want the
experience of God, the sense of faith, the breath and motions of heavenly life,
in the seat of life, that is, their hearts and souls; they shall easily bid
truth farewell, if with conuenience they cannot hold it in their judgment, or
hold it forth in their practice.

3. Sound affection and love to the truth, vpholds from withering in it: when
the wise Christian esteems Demas loves the world better, and easily forsakes
the Truth. How many lights in the beginning of their profession, have been
extinct by the world coming upon them! The profits, pleasures, and
aduancements of it, have made them idle, dissolute, almost profane. If thou
would avoid that fearful Apostasy threatened against the limbs of
Antichrist, 2. These. 2.10, 11. the^ must thou receive the truth in the love of
it.

1. Sincerity. 2. Tenderness.


The former, when a man is inwardly a true Israelite, nourishing no guile, no
deceit willingly. Never was there hypocrite, but became a withered reuolter.
The latter fears all sin, checks all sin, even the least, the dearest, and
closest bosom sin. Sound conscience allows not his Master the smallest
sin, but deals faithfully with him, and gives him no rest till he have rid
it away: Which is an excellent means of upholding in grace. Whereas an evil
conscience makes shipwreck of faith, and this blasted and withered Hymeneus
and Philetus, 1. Tim. 1.19. And a sluggish conscience, which swallows small
things, easily grows by degrees to digest greater, and at last falls from all,
to recoyle almost at nothing.

hears the Word of God and does it. And God uses to recompense practice of
grace with increase of grace. No surer strengthening of faith, than by
obedience to the faith. Ioh. 7.17. If ye do these things, ye shall know my
doctrine. Psalm. 15. vlt. He that does these things, shall never fall. The more
thou use thy Talent, the more thou shall gain: as the woman's meal in a
barrel, 1. King. 17.16.
the more they spent, the more it increased.

reprehension, counsel, comfort. Every member is made for the good and
strengthening of every one. And we are commanded to stir up the gift of God
in any: 1. These. 5.11. Exhort one another, and edify one another. Also to
strengthen the weak knees, Heb. 12.12.

Now that we may be the more effectually moved to use these means of not
withering, let us consider, Motives to beware of withering.
1. That Popery increases daily, in all places, in all How soon are they
withered, Mat. 21.20
and come to nothing! A manifest argument that the sentence of Christ is out
against them, Verse. 19.
Never fruit grow on thee any more.

Having spoken of the withering of the seed in this bad ground, we come now
to the causes thereof, as they are set down by the Evangelists: and first to
the inward, and positive cause, stoninesse or hardness. It fell among stones.

Hence observe, that the seed of Gods Word brings forth no saving fruit out of
an hard heart, Doct. Seed of the Word not fruitful to salvation in an hard
heart.
or stony ground. Now when I speak of an hard heart, I mean not every heart
that has some hardness in it: for so has every man's heart, even the most
softened: but there is a threefold hardness of heart: 1. Total and final, as
in the wicked and Reprobate. 2. Total and temporary, as in one elect, but not
yet called. 3. Partial and temporary as in all the Elect, now converted. In
the two former, because there is reigning hardness, the seed of Gods Word is
fruitless, unless by preparing one to condemnation, the other to conversion.
In the last it is fruitful to salvation: where the work of it is, daily to
abate and mollify the remaining hardness.

Now for proof of the point: Psalm. 95.10. The Jews being hardened in heart,
would not know his ways. Zech. 7.11. They refused to hearken, stopped the
ear, pulled away the shoulder, and made their hearts as an Adamant. Ier. 7.25.
The Lord complains, that ever since the day he brought them out of Egypt, he
sent all his Prophets, rising early, but they would not hear, nor incline
their ear, but hardened their neck, and did worse than their fathers. Ezec.
3.7. The house of Israel will not obey thee, for they will not obey me: the
reason follows, The house of Israel are impudent and stif-hearted.

The Reasons hereof arise out of the similitude.

1. Stones resist the stroke, and can endure a great strength of strokes before
they will be broken: so the stony heart resists the stroke of the Word: the
hammer of the Law, with all the strength and terror of its judgments and
curses, do not a whit pierce it: as the Leuiathan described by Job, chap.
41.15. his heart is as the nether millstone, and he accounts iron as straw: the
stones of the sling are as stubble to him: he laughes at the shaking of the
spear: he will not rise for ye sword, or the spear, or the dart, ver. 17, 18.
A notable resemblance of a wicked hard-hearted man, as Pharaoh for example; he
heard the Word, Tot verba, tot verbera nihil profuere Pharaoni.
saw the miracles, and felt the mighty hand of God; but at the end of every
plague, the foot was, But Pharaoh hardened his heart, and would not let the
people go. Of the same invincible hardness were Steuens adversaries, Act.
7.51. Ye stif-necked and uncircumcised of hearts, and ears, ye have always
resisted the holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do you.

2. To bring forth fruits of grace and salvation, the ground must be soft, and
the soil must be mellow for the seed. But what way can you make a stone soft?
Let the Sun shine, or the rain fall on it, yea cast it into oil, it is a
stone still. So the heart abiding hard, no means can mellow or soften it: the
comfortable heat and light of Gods gracious Spirit, which changes other
hearts, changes not this: the raines of the Word, and dewes from heaven
continually distilled, soften it not: the oil of gladness, or of Gods
bountifulness, which leads others to repentance, mollifies it not.

3. Unto fruitfulness in Grace is necessarily required a change and conversion
in the ground of the heart. For all hearts naturally are so stony, as no fruit
can be expected, no more than from an vnsteared ground. And therefore as the
ground must first be rent up with the Plough, to soften the earth, and then
laid even by the Harrow and Rollers: So the ground of the heart must be rent
up, and cut with the Plough of Gods Law, and laid even again by the Doctrine
of the Gospel, before fruits of grace can be produced. Act. 2.37. The first
preparation to fruits in those Conuerts, was the piercing and pricking of their
hearts. But how can you cut a stone, what compunction can you work in it? how
can you prick and pierce it, while the native hardness remains? Hence the
Lord by the Prophet Jeremy, 5.3. expressly makes this hardness of heart the
maine let and hinderer of this conversion and change, which is the first thing
in this fruitfulness: They have made their faces harder than a stone, and have
refused to return.

4. Unto fruits of grace is necessarily required moisture of grace, as to the
fruits of earth, moisture in the earth. But what moisture is in a stone? A
stone indeed may be moist on the outside, in moist weather. The walls and
Marbles seem to weep, and drops stand on them in rainy seasons: not because
moisture is in them, but moisture offers it self unto them, but they hold it
not, so as they remain as hard and dry within as ever before. So with this
stony heart, where hardness of heart reigns, no moisture of Grace, no
relenting, or giving within. Indeed in foul weather, when the storm of God is
risen, an invincible hard heart, as hard as a Marble, may seem soft: Pharaoh
yields, and gives again on the outside. You may see drops of water standing in
Esaus eyes, who wept when the blessing was gone. Judas seems moystened with
repentance. Balaam melts a little, and wishes to die well. Foelix moulders a
little, and trembles.

But we must distinguish this from sound moisture of grace. 1. These be
flashes, and sudden motions, and as seldom as the weeping of walls. 2. This
moisture comes not from an heart softened, but from slavish fear, or present
smart; even from the present disposition of the weather, from without. 3. So
soon as fair weather comes again, the stones are as dry as ever they were:
so these return to their former lusts so soon as the foul weather is over;
as Pharaoh, Foelix, etc.

Use 1. Do thou hear the Word preached, without any great fruit? Then lay
the blame where indeed it is. Some impute it to the difficulty of the Word.
Others to the fault of the Minister, who pleases them not, either in the
matter or manner. But it were far more commendable for thee to impute thy
unprofitableness to the hardness of thine own heart, and so take thy sin
home to thy self: so did the Apostle Paul, Romans 7.14. when he perceived that
the Law of God was not so efficacious to him as he desired, he accused not the
Law, but maintained it to be spiritual, but himself as sold under sin: He
condemned himself, not the Word: so do thou; for the Gospel is the power of
God to salvation, it is spirit and life, and mighty in operation. Romans 1.16.
Heb. 4.12.
If it work not so mightily on thy heart, then see thy hardness, bewail it,
let godly sorrow and grief, Gutta cauat lapide^, non vi, sed saepe cadendo.
daily dropping, make this stone hollow, till it have broken it.

Use 2. That of the Apostle, Hebr. 3.7. To day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts. All the seed cast upon an hard heart, is lost, as if a
man should sow on a rock, where is no place for root or moisture. Beware of
an hard heart: there is no curse to that, almost no sin to that. Better that
all thy field were covered over with stones, than thy heart should. Nay, it were
better for thee to be a dead stone, than a living stone.

Now the marks to know an hard heart, are these:

Six marks to know an hard heart by.
1. When Gods Word makes no impression, or gets not within the heart, to renew
or reform the man: though sometimes it may scratch the outside, and restrain
him. When the Law is threatened, he either blesses himself, or turns his
ear from it, or applies it to others, not himself. And the Gospel enters
not, because the Law has not pierced, nor been as a needle to make way. Let
all the mercies of the Gospel be showed to the wicked, he will not repent, nor
learn to do well.

2. Neglect, or light ouer-passing the works of Gods Mercy or Justice, upon
himself or others. For mercies: when the goodness of God leads him not to
repentance, Romans 2.4, 5. Our Lord makes this a cause, even in his own
Disciples, in whom the sin reigned not, that they forgot the matter of the
loaves, because their hearts were hardened, Mark. 6.52. For the Judgments of
God: his works of Justice do move somewhat more than Mercies, but nothing to
amendment. Exodus 9.27
Pharaoh, when judgment puts him to a plunge, could say, I have sinned: here
is a little scratch on his heart as on a Stethy, but the hardness recoyles the
stroke that should break the heart to pieces: so as after all the strokes of
God, there is no reformation.

3. Vnfeelingnesse of hardness, and unwillingness to feel it: no mislike of
it, no desire to understand the danger of it: When men desire to sit quiet in
sin, and nothing so offends them, as to hear their sin disgraced; when they
turn their backs, and stop their ears, Zech. 7.11. Being as loath to be
drawn to a Sermon powerful against sin, as Israel to come near the
Mountain. Whereas a soft heart is most sensible of much hardness in it, and
counts no burden comparable thereto.

4. For the maintaining their estate, credit, and favor in the world, or their
lusts and pleasures, to oppose and dislike such Doctrines, courses, and persons
as have the Word on their sides. Pharaoh must not seem to be overcome by such
mean people: and therefore, seeing evidently the Lord stand for them, he
obdured himself. The Scribes and Pharisees, convinced in their conscience of
the truth of Christ's Doctrine, and the innocence of his person, did out of
hardness of heart ever oppose both his Doctrine and Person; because they must
maintain their credit in the world, and uphold their pomp and glory against
him: though he had truth, and equity, and innocence on his side. The like of
all hardened persecutors of the poor Saints.

5. Out of resolution of following a man's own present course, whatsoever
persuasions or Doctrines he hears to the contrary, to fly occasions and
companies which might touch or work upon his conscience. Some cannot abide to
hear strict Preachers that allow them no unlawful liberty, no not afford
them a look on the forbidden fruit. Others cannot endure the society of a
faithful friend, that will truly tell them of themselves. No such string must
be touched. This argues a soul or soil settled in hardness.

6. Habits, and customable sins, which make the heart as a pathway. A soft
heart smites it self for once sinning, and for small sinning. David's heart
smote him for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment: How would it have smote him
for cutting off his head? But custom of sin hardens exceedingly, Heb.
3.13. Take heed lest any be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. And by
hindering repentance, it holds men in the trade of sin: Hardness, and the
heart that cannot repent, are joined together, Romans 2.5.

Use. 3. As ever thou would hear the Word to salvation, labor for a soft
and melting heart, such as good Josias had, whose soul melted to hear the
words of the Law read. The greatest blessing here below, is an heart flexible,
and bowed to the obedience of God.

And hereunto consider these Motives: 1. That Motives to labor for soft hearts.
to have his native hardness mollified, and his natural stubbornness
corrected and altered by the Spirit of sanctification, 2. These. 2.13. 2. It is
one branch of Gods Covenant, I will put a new Spirit within their bowels, I
will take away the stony heart, and give them an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26.
3. Never can thou be same Sun that softeneth wax, hardens clay.

Therefore use all good means to get thee a soft heart. One is, the Word of
God: the Law, Means of a soft heart.
which is as a Plough to break up our fallow grounds; and Thou art a
stiff-necked people: remember, and forget not, how thou prouokedst the Lord. A
third is, in time of affliction to set in seriously with God, Esau, that lift
up his voice and wept, but still kept revenge within: but put away a froward
heart, Psalm. 101 4
give sin a bill of divorce, hate it, and put it away. Fourthly, look much
and often upon the death of Jesus Christ, and apply it to thy own soul.
Incidit gemmas, at non inciditur ipse: Hircino tantum sanguine mollis erit.
Goats (...).
whom he vouchsafes in Christ to call a son. Lastly, pray often, yea
continually, that the Lord would give thee a soft heart, which may be fashioned
by the Word, to his own liking and likeness. Depend upon the promise, Ezekiel.
36.26. And praise him, if thou have received such a soft and sanctified heart,
wherein the seed of Gods Word shall rise up with abundant increase of grace
here, and of glory hereafter. Because they have no roots.]

Having spoken of the inward positive cause, why the seed (falling on this
stony ground) withered, which was stoninesse, or hardness: now we are to
proceed to the inward privative causes, both here, and in the other
Evangelists: namely, want of Moystnesse: Earth: Roots.


Now all these proceed from the former hardness. For the heart being rocky
and stony underneath, it cannot afford either earth, or roots, or moisture to
the seed. Which we must not understand, as if there were no earth, or roots,
or moisture: (For we have seen this ground bring forth much hopeful fruit,
which without all these it could not. Mark. 4.5.
) But as Mark says, (...), it had not much earth, but as a rock covered with
a little crust of earth above, all stones below. It wanted depth of earth,
Mark. 4.5. So it had no roots, that is, no deep roots, no roots to feed the
stalk and blade that was come, no roots which could save it from withering in
time of heat. This is implied by all the Evangelists, who say, Because it
wanted roots, it lasted but a while. Again, for the same reason it wanted
moisture, that is, sufficient moisture. For the property of stony ground is, 1.
To be hot and dry, and so drinks up moisture apace. 2. It suffers not the
moisture to descend deep, so as the external heat soon draws it and licks
it up.

Hence note what it is that makes many goodly Professors fall short of
salvation, Doct. The cause why many goodly Professors fall short of salvation.
after they have gone a long time in a glorious profession: to wit, want of
sufficient earth, roots, and moisture.

By sufficient earth, I understand a particular and distinct knowledge of the
Word, and of their own part in it. For they content themselves with a kind of
general knowledge, and agree to it in their understanding, that it is the Word
of the Kingdom, that salvation is by these glad tidings, etc. and rejoice in
the taste of some sweetness of it: But they give it not entrance enough, by
applying their mind unto it, nor receive it as a distinct direction in all
things, nor will trouble themselves with careful examination of their whole
way by it, and much less with application of the signs of faith toward God,
or of Gods favor toward themselves: And so are justly guilty of their own
withering, for want of sufficient earth. All their graces at length become like
seeds sown on the top of a rock, which sprout suddenly, but wanting depth of
earth to feed them, wither as certainly.

By rooting here I understand stability, certainty, and sincerity of faith and
other graces, which these Hearers want. For although there be some earth on
the top, yet it is but shallow: and the shallower the root lies, though the
blade may sprout more speedily, yet want of depth makes root, and blade, and
all fail together. So although there be some faith, and joy for a time, with
some other comely graces, yet are they superficial, they give not their whole
hearts to the Word, there is no sincerity in the bottom, and consequently, no
rooting, no stability. Their care is more for the blade, than for the root
which bears it. Their unsettled faith is set, not in sound inward
apprehension, but on outward causes, which being changeable, so is their faith;
themselves also carried about with every wave of doctrine, and with wheeling of
times, and at last led away with the sins of the times, of their callings, or
of their own hearts.

Humor vnctionis, and compunctionis.
By moystnesse here I understand both the moystnesse of Unction, and of
Compunction.

The former is a sound supply of saving grace, which continually feeds and
cherishes the root. For as the seed in the earth is brought to fruitfulness
by continual showers: so is the seed of grace in the heart, by continued and
renewed acts of the Spirit: whose graces are compared to water, and said to be
shed on us, in regard 1. of mollification, 2. of ablution, 3. of refrigeration,
and 4. of fructification. Now this sound supply of grace these Hearers want,
and justly, though they want not all moisture: but they go not to the
fountain, they draw from some spouts, or some streams, which are dried up in
the summer heat: Whereas, were they by faith carried to the Fountain it
self, Jesus Christ, their waters would be indeficient, and could not be
exhausted: for these waters would be a Fountain in the belly, still springing
up to eternal life.

The latter, namely, the moisture of compunction, is sound sorrow for sin, and
the sound exercise of mortification. Psalm. 6.6.
The Saints used to water their couch with these waters of tears and
repentance. Now these Hearers want not all sorrow for sin, nor want not
something like it: but, they never carried this water, nor admitted this
moistness deep enough: the hardness of the rock, hindered the descent of
these waters to the bottom: it was too much pains to afflict themselves
seriously: their tears were soon dried up, their sorrow slight, and
themselves never truly humbled: And therefore fail, and come to nothing.

Use. It is no certain mark of a child of God, willingly to hear Sermons,
nor to delight in the hearing, nor to receive the doctrine with joy, no nor in
many things commendably to practice for a time. All this is common to the
Reprobate with the Elect. If David count the testimonies of God the joy of his
heart, Psalm. 119.111. so Herod hears John gladly, Mark. 6.20
and this bad ground receives the seed with joy. If they that are newborn
again, taste the graciousnesse of the Lord, 1. Pet. 2.3. so also they that
after enlightening, sin beyond possibility of repentance, taste the good Word
of God, and the powers of the world to come, Heb. 6.4, 5. And therefore we may
not rest in hearing, or rejoicing, or commending, or obeying the Word, unless
we find in our selves that which shall make us able to hold out in all these;
that we start not away or wither, as this bad ground, when trial comes.

Quest. What is it that we must bring with our hearing, to make us hold out?
by which we may have testimony, that we are the Lords, and shall be found
fruitful in the harvest?

Three things must be prepared to make us hold out.
Answ. This Text warns us to provide and make sure of three things: 1. Saving
and distinct knowledge, to walk by. 2. Sound and stable rooting, in faith and
grace, to stand by. 3. Sufficient measure of grace, still to grow by.


1. Saving and distinct knowledge.
Quest. What is this knowledge?

Answ. It is not only to know Christ a Savior, but to know thy own salvation
by him: And consequently thou know, 1. The vileness of thy sins, and thy
need of a Savior, 2. The pardon of thy sins, and the comfort of salvation,
3. Thy own change and conversion, and thereby the beginning of salvation, 4.
The voice of Christ calling thee, and the inhabitation of his Spirit, guiding
thee in all needful duties, to the end of the way, which is salvation.

Notes of sound knowledge four.
Q. How may I know I have this saving knowledge?

Answ. By these notes: 1. If thou give thy self to be taught by the Spirit
of God, and leanest not to flesh and blood cannot reveal this wisdom, but
the Spirit of God, Mat. 16.17. If thou will not believe or receive any
doctrine, or opinion, but what the Spirit out of the Word teaches, now thou
have saving knowledge: Carnal and deceitful knowledge is always measured by
the scantling of reason, of humane laws and wisdom, of praise and profit.

2. If thy knowledge be not only speculatiue, but

3. If thy knowledge lie deep, as having depth written in the heart and
bowels. Pro. 4.5. Let thy heart hold fast my words. And easily may a man know,
if his heart hold this knowledge, by the change it will work there. And that
is the fourth note: thus.

4. Know sound and saving knowledge by the effects, transformed into the same
image, 2. Cor. 3.18. as meat is turned into the substance of him that eats.
Thirdly, whereas an hypocrites knowledge may work some joy, it seldom works
love of God, fear of God, or trust in him. But this changes all affections.
It loves the Word as well as joy. The fear of God is the beginning of this
wisdom. And this knowledge carries the heart beyond all hypocrites in the
affection of joy in it, as the chiefest and most desirable good.

Now get this knowledge, and thou have gotten depth of earth. This is constant,
settled against all contrary blasts. This knowledge shall grow up, and have
much assurance, when the frothy and superficial knowledge of hypocrites shall
vanish as dew in the Sun, or smoke in the wind. Get this light, and it shall
be as the Star to the Wise men, to bring thee to Christ: as the cloudie and
fiery Pillar to the Israelites, to bring thee to Canaan: as the lightsome Lamps
to the wise Virgins, to bring thee into the Bridegroomes chamber.

2. Deep rooting, in 3. things.
The second thing required, is, to look thou be strongly rooted and grounded
in the faith, in love, and all the graces, Ephesians. 3.17. Col. 1.23. If ye
continue grounded and stablished in the faith, not moved away from the hope of
the Gospel: where the Apostle shows, that true justifying faith is the root
of all virtues, and that it only keeps the heart vnmoouable in time of trial.

More specially, look to thy ground and rooting, 1. In the doctrine of faith,
2. In the grace of faith, 3. In the exercise and profession of faith. Believe
God. Believe in God. Avouch both.

1. In the doctrine of faith.
First, settle thy self in the doctrine of Faith, as one that must be built on
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20. Else thou laiest all
the frame on a sandy foundation, and laiest thy self open to be a prey to
seducers, Papists, and Atheists. And what other is the end of many common
Protestants and Professors, who were never busy in the true understanding of
their Principles of Religion? If they see alterations of State, and change of
times: or if deceivers, as Priests, or Jesuits, or Libertine teachers assail
them by subtilty of wit, and cunning persuasions: or if they see men of great
note fall to errors in judgment, or profaneness in life: if many fall from
love of the truth: How can they now withstand the blasts of these winds? being
at best but shaking reeds, unstable in their grounds, how can they but fall as
an house set on the sand, and the fall is great? how needful therefore is it
for us to be fully settled and rooted in our grounds of Religion?

Quest. How shall I know I am thus rooted in the Doctrine of faith?

Answ. By a spirit of discerning, which enlightens Notes 3.
and supplies (even to simple ones) a sharp insight, and cleernesse of
judgment, through use of the Word, in all needful matters of salvation: For
faith brings in the Spirit, which leads into all truth, and the eye-salue still
clearing the sight more and more. 2. By building our hearts on this foundation;

Secondly, 2. In the grace of faith: Where,
look well to thy rooting in the grace or gift of faith. Content not thy self
with any thing, but only that faith which is called unfeigned, 1. Tim. 1.5. and
the faith of the Elect, Tit. 1.2. This is the faith by which the just shall
live, Hab. 2.4.

Quest. What is the rooting in the grace of faith?

1. What it is.
Answ. It is a sound work of Gods Spirit, whereby the heart attaines a true
assurance and persuasion of remission of sins, and the favor of God in
Christ. A work of the Spirit: because no man is borne a Believer, but newborn. A sound work: for true faith is no empty or windy thing, but a
subsistence and ground, Heb. 11.1. (...).
without hollownesse and deceit, as all the special works of Gods Spirit in
the hearts of the Elect are. A true assurance and persuasion: because many are
deceived by a temporary faith, by blind hopes of mercy at the last, by colors
either of civil honesty, or religious performances; are misseled with the
example of such as they admire for wisdom, place, or power, and mistake a
conceit for faith; that because they be not so ill as they were wont to be,
they be as good as they need be. But this man, out of good grounds, rises to
good assurance.

Quest. How may I know my self soundly rooted in the gift of faith?

Answ. By five notable effects of it.

2 The notes and signs of it. 5.
1. Sound affection to Jesus Christ, prizing him above all the world, and
counting all but dung in comparison: in so much as our life is not dear unto
us, but (as Paul) we dare dye for him. And this affection is always joined with
affiance in Christ, or holding fast our assurance by him. For as God will still
own his people, even in the furnace, in the deepest trouble, so must they own
him, Zech. 13. vlt. yea when Christ may seem to withdraw, and neglect them, as
the woman of Canaan. Abraham rested in the naked promise, and believed above
hope, Romans 4. so must we: not hasting to evil means in the want of good, Esa.
28.16. He that believes, shall not make haste.

2. If it purge and renew the heart from all kind of sins, especially secret
and inward. Till faith come, the heart is full of reigning guile, and
deceitfulness, and hollownesse cannot hold out: Act. 15 9.
but faith purifieth and garnisheth the heart as a Temple. So faith and inward
purity grow together.

3. If it keep the heart humble, and hungring. For it is a light in the
bowels, causing a man daily to see his sin more clearly, and to seek pardon
for it in Christ, casting it out daily by confession and godly sorrow: and
still it hungers after righteousness insatiably.

4. If it be joined with good conscience. These two go undivided. Now a good
conscience, being persuaded of Gods love in Christ, first excuses the man,
that his sins are pardoned; and then in way of thankfulness, has respect to
all the Commandments, Psalm. ^19.6
and endeavors obedience to all: Also it hates, fears, and auoideth all
sin, because it offends God.

5. If it be a shield enabling thee to withstand the tentations of Satan, and
such as run with thy own natural inclinations, now it is well grounded.
That faith which shall stoutly withstand all sin in time of prosperity, shall
prevail mightily against all troubles in time of trial. But if thy faith give
thee up to be led away to vanity, or any ordinary prevailing sin, now in the
time of peace, suspect it, trust it not for time of trial. Such as fall from
the Religion of God, when times of change come, being led away either by the
seduction of deceivers, or persecution of Tyrants, are such as shall find by
examination, that the faith they pretended, was never of power against some
known sin, and so was never strongly rooted in Christ.

This faith, thus qualified, is strongly rooted. Cast it into the fire, it will
come forth purer than gold, 1. Pet. 1.7. And when the best faith of hypocrites
(forsaken of carnal helps, on which it stayed it self) shall prove dross,
and be consumed, this faith shall set the Christian on a rock, safe in the
midst of storms, and waves of adversity.

3. In the profession of faith.
Thirdly, look to thy rooting in the profession and holding forth of thy faith.
For faith well rooted, will break forth in confession, profession, and defense
of Gods truth: 2. Cor. 4.13. I believed, and therefore I spoke: and Act. 4.20.
We cannot choose but speak, say the Apostles.

Quest. How may I know I am soundly rooted in the profession of faith?

3. Marks.
Answ. 1. If policy or fear hinder thee not from Nicodemus, as if it were a
work of darkness to profess the light* Common faith holds it no wisdom to
be so forward* pulls in the tender horn, if any scorns, losses, or
oppositions be abroad. Carnal reason swayes against it, Master, pity thy
self, it shall not be so unto thee. Carnal friends easily persuade a man not
to be too busy. The fear of a chain, or the wrath of superiors, quite
blast it. 2. If by these cold and pinching Jeremiah caused the same to be
written again with many more words. The more evil men oppose holy Doctrine,
concerning holy life, and the worship of God, for matter, manner, time, etc.
the more godly men will justify and maintain it.

This confession is an acceptable thing to Jesus Christ, and honorable: and
Christ looks for it, Math. 9.28. saying to the two blind men, Do you believe
that I can do it? Not that he was ignorant of their faith: but, for them that
were present, he would have them confess him: plainly showing, that it is not
enough to believe with the heart, but confession also must be made with the
mouth, and practice in the life. This is the fruit, by which we know the roots
of faith, though under ground.

So much for sound roots, to stand by.

The third thing for continuance in fruits, Sound moisture of compunction.
is sound moisture.

First, that of compunction, or humiliation. Not a scratch of the heart as with
a pin, but a through breaking of it with the hammer of the Law, and piercing it
as with a sword. And good reason: for, 1. The deeper the Well, the purer the
water, and the more plentiful: so in deep sorrow for sin: whereas a slight
sorrow, a sigh and away, is like an hasty rain, a little moystening the top,
but soon dried away. 2. Deep sorrow sticks by the soul, and keeps it soft,
and supple, and in a continual fitness for the practice of piety: whereas a
slight sorrow leaves it as dry, as hard, and as barren as before. 3. The water
of true repentance is like a Spring Water that runs continually; not in public
only, but in the private closet: the Fountain issues still, and every godly
man mournes apart. Zech. 12.1^.


This get unto thee, 1. To be a note of godliness. A godly man shall still
find his heart a continual fountain of sin, and therefore cannot but with
Jeremy, Ier. 9.1.
wish his head a fountain of tears. 2. If thou would lay up grace safe,
lay it in a broken heart: a broken and humble heart will endure the brunt,
where an unmortified and proud professor will start back at the mention of
trouble. One uses this comparison: Lay an egg, or a chestnut whole in the
fire, when the fire begins to seize on him, he flies and leapes back: but
break them, or crack them before, they abide the fire till they be dressed.
The same may be said of an heart not soundly broken, nor subdued by sound
humiliation.

Now for thy sound humbling, behold the issue of thy corruption ever running,
and let the issues of godly grief run as fast, as often.

Sound moisture of unction.
The second sort of moisture is that of unction, or sound regeneration: the
graces whereof are compared in Scripture to water, or moisture, Ioh. 4.10. A
springing or living Water, which is never dried up, but is ever in motion, and
lives in the issues of it. A godly man, whose leaf must not fade, must be
planted by the rivers of this water, Psalm. 1.3. And, as it is water of life,
still moving, so it quickens the dead soul with new life, and brings the
Christian at last to everlasting life; In his belly rivers of waters do flow,
Ioh. 7.38.
to life everlasting.

Quest. How may I know I have this sound moisture?

Answ. By the sound effects of it. Known by 4. marks.
1. Sound ablution: It washes the soul from the foul spots and issues of
sin: 1. Cor. 6.11. Ye are washed and sanctified 2. Sound refrigeration,
Zacheus; all the thirst of pride and malice against the Saints, in Paul; all
the thirst of wantonness and foul sins, in Mary Magdalene: Of Matthew
drinking it, it was said, Qui prius rapi^^at aliena, postmodum contempsit
propria: The Horse-leach became a Pelican.

3. Sound nutrition, or nourishment in grace: As Hence it is called milk, for
strength, and wine, for cheerfulness and comfort. Job. 8.11.
But how can a rush grow without mire, or grass without water?



Means of this moisture are five.
Quest. What means may I use to attain this sound moisture?

Answ. 1. Thou must be transplanted out of the dry and barren heath and
wilderness of this world, and become a member of the Church. For these waters
run from under the Sanctuary. The fountain is opened to the house of Judah
and Jerusalem; which were types of the Church. This moisture is (as we heard)
sometime called milk, feeding the babes of Christ that hang on the breasts of
the Church: and sometimes wine, ( Come buy wine and milk, says our Savior,
Esa. 55.1.) which is only to be had in Gods Vineyard, not in the Waste or
Forest of the world.

2. Thou shall not want moisture, if thou want not thirst and desire. The woman
at the Well, (Ioh. 4.) wanted this Water, because she had no knowledge of it,
or desire after it. But the promise is, no sooner to thirst, than be refreshed
and satisfied, Math. 5.6.

3. Thou must have right to the Fountain of living Water, which is Christ
himself, in whom dwells all fullness, Ioh. 1.16.
and of his fullness thou must receive grace for grace. Members can want no
life or sense, so long as the head is living: neither can rivers be empty, if
the fountain be not dry. He that drinks of this Water, shall never thirst more.

4. Thou must provide a Bucket to draw from this Fountain. The Well is deep:
thou must therefore provide the Bucket of faith, which draws virtue daily from
Christ. The poor woman that came behind Christ (because her faith durst not
look him in the face) yet sucked from him virtue and grace sufficient for her
cure.

5. Provide a clean vessel to put this water in, even the vessel of a
purified and regenerate heart, emptied first from all dregs and filthiness
both of flesh and spirit, Romans 1.4.
and washed clean by the Spirit of sanctification.

So much of the inward causes of unfruitfulness in this second ground, both
positive and privative. Now to the outward. But in time of tentation go away,
Verse. 13.] and, when the Sun arose, were parched. As Soon as tribulation or
persecution comes because of the Word, by and by he is offended, Math. 13.6, 21.

Here are two things to be considered: 1. That persecution comes because of
the Word. 2. When it comes, a number of forward and zealous Professors fall
quite away.


For the former. Persecution properly is a part of the Churches affliction,
because of the Word. In which description we have it distinguished from other
afflictions and sufferings: 1. In the kind, 2. In the subject, 3. In the
causes. For these are not common troubles with other men in the World, which
attend common nature, or common occasions, as sickness, poverty, pain,
reproach, or common corrections of sins: But proper and peculiar troubles,
befalling only the members of the Church, either in truth, or in appearance:
and that not for any other cause then the Word, as here our Savior expresses;
or for righteousness sake, or for the Name of Christ, and well-doing: So as
when either for profession of the Word of God (suppose, no more) or for
confession and defense of it and such courses agree to it, or for the practice
of it in conversation, and keeping conscionably to the rules of it, a man is
reproached, wronged, indures loss, poverty, restraint, etc. this is properly
persecution.

Doct. Persecution and Gods Word undivided.
Now this persecution is as inseparable from the Word, and Professors of it, as
beams from the Sun, or heat from the fire. Math. 16.24. If any will be my
Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me. 2.
Tim. 3.12. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution:
where the word all admits no exception, no exemption. And why?

Reas. 1.
1. Christ has foretold it, Math. 10.22. Ye shall be hated of all men for my
Names sake: and Ioh. 16.33. In the world ye shall have affliction. So also did
his Apostles, 1 Thessalonians. 3.4. For verily when we were with you, we told you
before, that we should suffer affliction, even as it came to pass, and ye know
it.

2 The cross inseparable from Christian profession.
2. Christ and his cross are inseparable, in respect of Gods glory. For now he
is glorified, first, in his power and care, supporting, strengthening, and
comforting his children, and in greatest trials giving the 4. Reasons from Gods
glory.
which brings good out of evil, and light out of darkness. Out of the eater
he brings meat: As a skillful Phisician tempers poison, to a remedy. Out of
the evil dead Sea of prosperity, in which commonly no grace lives, to keep
life and motion in their faith, fear, prayer, love, etc. A man that is
fainting, the best way to fetch him, is, by pulling and wringing his parts: So
does the Lord with his children, lest their graces should faint. Fourthly, he
is glorified in his truth; for persecution draws out Phil. 1.13.
as Paul's bonds were famous in all the judgment Hall: and the persecution
raised at Jerusalem against the Disciples, dispersed them and the truth by
them, Act. 8.1, 2.

3. This comes to pass by the inueterate hatred of Satan, and that
irreconciliable malice of the world Saul was quiet enough before his
conversion, and so long as he carries the Letters against the Saints: but in
stead of those Letters, let him once carry the Name of Christ, now the devil
buffets him, and raises up tumults in every place against him, and he is sure
yt now nothing but affliction and bonds abide him every where; Acts 20.23
So the wicked of the world ever hated God himself, and whatsoever belongs
unto him, and most hates that which has the most express image of God.
Christ himself, because he is the express form of his Fathers image, can
never be held out, but he is presently a But or mark of contradiction. The
Word of Christ, resembling the nature of God, they hate, because it is the
sentence of condemnation against their sin: The Spirit of God, in his motions
and graces, because he conuinceth them, and reprooueth them of sin: The
profession and Professors of the Word, because it is a light held out,
reproouing their darkness, and manifesting their deeds to be evil. Godly
admonitions and counsel they hate, because they are in love with their evil:
Pro. 15.10.
Instruction is evil to him that forsakes the way. And they that do evil,
hate the light, and will not come unto it, lest their deeds should be manifest
to be evil, Ioh. 3.19. Let him be publicly taught, or privately admonished, so
long as he is resolved to hold his sin, he makes no other or better use of it,
then to raise up thence his distempered passions against the truth, both in the
bringers and Professors. Yea, sometime while such men think they stand for
Gods Religion and truth, they are most desperate enemies and persecutors of it;
through ignorant zeal and blind superstition, would set up that which pulls
down truth: Gal. 1.13.
as Paul beyond measure wasted the Church, out of blind zeal for the
traditions of the Elders: so do the most devout Papists at this day.

the holy Ghost elsewhere, shows the same, comparing affliction and persecution
to the scorching of the sun: Persecution compared to the scorching of the Sun
in 4. things.
Cant. 1.5. The Sun has looked upon me, Psalm. 121.6. The Sun shall not smite
thee by day. For 1. The Sun does not more ordinarily or daily arise, then
persecution ordinarily awaits the word. 2. As the Sunbeams diffuse and
disperse themselves into every place: so the beams no man can hide himself
from the heat of the Sun, Psalm. 19.6. So no godly man can hide himself from if
it were possible) the very Elect should be seduced. Mat. 24.24


Use 1. This confutes plainly the error of Bellarmine and other Papists, whose
proposition in the marks of the Church is, Quicunque florent prosperis
successibus, ij sunt vera Ecclesia, Those that flourish and prosper in the
World, they are the true Church. In the eighth of Daniel, ver. 13. there is a
Prophecy of Antiochus Epiphanes, that little horn, who cast down some of the
Host of heaven, and the Stars of heaven, and troad them under his feet, and
extolled himself against the Prince of the Host, and took away the daily
sacrifice, and cast down the place of his Sanctuary, and cast the truth to the
ground. Then the Text adds, Thus shall he do, and prosper. Lo, Antiochus,
who is mad and furious against the Church, has prosperous success: Does this
agree with Bellarmine? And by this proposition Cain should have been the true
Church, not Abel whom he slew: and Ismael of whom were twelve Dukes, Genesis
25.16. not Isaac whom he scoffed and persecuted: My Lord Esau that has four
hundred men at his heels, Genesis 33.1. and not Jacob, who dares not look his
Lord in the face, nor come near him till he had bowed seven times. What
outward prosperity had the Church in Egypt, in Babylon, in the ten
Persecutions for 300. years together before Constantine? Or how stands that
assertion with our Saviors prediction, Mat. 10.16
that true Christians should be appointed as sheep for the slaughter? Yea,
with our Saviors condition, who was the Head of the Church, to whom the
members are conformable? He was borne in an obscure place, lived despised among
his own, a man of such sorrows as never was any sorrow like his; his poverty
such, as he had not water to put in his head, not a cottage to put his head in;
his death painful, shameful, accursed. And such is ordinarily the afflicted
and despised estate of his Church on earth.

Use 2. Dream not of a Religion pleasant to flesh, if we will be truly
religious: for this is to deceive our selves: but make account of hatred and
trouble in the world, if thou meanest to keep the Word. For the Church being
seated in the world, which is the Kingdom of Satan, it cannot be other then a
very Egypt or Edom to the Israel of God; where that hellish Pharaoh raises
all his power to pursue us into the red Sea of terrors, temptations, and a
thousand deadly dangers on every side, if we indeed set forth to Canaan. Let us
therefore wisely cast our costs, and reckon our charges, Luke 14.28
and weigh whether we can contentedly suffer so much loss for the Word as it
may cost us.

Use 3. This shows us the true cause, why the world hates and persecutes godly
men. It will be ready to tell you they are pestilent fellows, and as seditious
as Paul was; as great enemies to Caesar as Christ was, no good subjects; as
factious and schismatic as Micah, who will not speak as the 400. false
Prophets. The wicked of the world clamor against them as evil doers: for so
did they against their Head, If he were not an evil doer, we would not have
brought him to thee. And what are they but a pack of dissemblers, and
hypocrites, and never a good of them all?

But what? Can the world that lies in wickedness, hate and prosecute
wickedness indeed? Why then does she not hunt out open and outrageous evils in
any other sort of men? Or does she not love her lovers, and reward most
bountifully most prodigious evil men?

4. True causes of the worlds hatred of the godly.
But if we will believe our Lord, who was best acquainted with the worlds
hatred, he tells us here, that persecution is raised against them for the Words
sake: and that is the proper cause, whatsoever other Cains of this World see
their their own works evil, and theirs to be good, and therefore hate them,
1. John 3.12.

The thing then which is hated and persecuted in good men, is goodness, the
Name of Christ, the Word of God, soundly held out, and stuck unto.

The thing ^ated in good men is goodness.
And this must be so far from discouraging good men, whether Preachers or
Professors, who are most extremely hated, as they must rather suspect
themselves, that their hearts are not sound, or their courses not sincere, when
all men speak well of them. Sound profession and persecution are inseparable:
and Luke 6.26. Woe to you, when all speak well of you.

Use 4. Not to condemn a Religion, or refuse a Doctrine, because it is
persecuted and gain said by many, and by Great ones: for this is a mark of
true Religion, and the condition of the Word of Christ; Persecution (says our
text) comes because of the Word: So as neither is that Religion which is so
plausible to the world, to be therefore embraced; nor that which the world
hates, to be refused: multitude being as false a note of the Church, as the
former external prosperity. Strait is the way that leads unto life, and few
there be that find it. Therefore look not on the blackness of the Church,
though the Sun look on her, Cant. 1.5. for within she is comely.

Use 5. To comfort those that are persecuted for the Word and well-doing.
First, Comforts in persecution.
that the cause is good, which the world persecutes so eagerly: 1. Pet. for the
Name of Christ, blessed are ye; for the Spirit of glory and of God rests on
you, and is glorified by you. Secondly, behold the reproach of Christ. Thou
helpest Christ to bear his Cross, and he helps thee. Col. 1.24. I fulfill
the sufferings of Christ. And conformity with him in the Cross, brings
conformity in the Crown. If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him.
Thirdly, burned with fire, but consumed not, Exodus 2.3. Nay, wait with faith
and patience, and according to Moses his prayer for Joseph, The good will of
him that dwelt in the bush, shall come on thy head, Deuteronomy. 33.16.

So much of the first Doctrine. I proceed to the second: namely, Doct. 2. Many
glorious professors fall off in persecution.
that

When persecution for the Word comes, many glorious Professors, who joy in it
in the time of peace, renounce and forsake it: so the Text has it, In the time
of tentation they go away: and Matthew, They are offended immediately: that
is, even those Hearers, which readily attended, joyfully received, willingly
believed, and hopefully sprang up; these now go away. And whence go they?
Answ. 1. From their affection and love of the Word in the heart: They fall from
five things.
the root within is dried up with this heat of the Sun. Had they been of us,
(says John) 1. Ioh. 2.19. 5. From their faith, joy, zeal; in a word, from all
they formerly tasted sweetness in: they utterly and wholly depart from their
faith, comfort, etc. now blade and root and all is gone.

And why do they thus fall off from all goodness?

Reas. 1.
Answ. 1. Persecution is so distasteful and contrary to nature, as where
nothing is but nature, it shuns it vitijs and modis, by all means whatsoever.
Nature will suffer nothing for Christ, or for salvation by him. And no marvel,
seeing tribulation for the Gospel danteth many good Hearers, who being
converted, and having attained to a sound and saving faith, but having yet also
flesh as well as spirit, and too much love of flesh, easily shrink from Christ
and profession, at least for a time; as Peter did, till Christ looked
graciously back upon him: And who can deny, but that the rest of the Disciples
were graced with a true faith? yet after many warnings, and much confirmation
of their Lord, so soon as ever he was apprehended, before themselves were
sought for, they all left him and fled, every one willing to shift for
himself, and save his skin. So as persecution makes sound and unsound fly
off, but with great difference. For the sound Christian goes away as Onesimus,
for a season, Philem. 15. that God his Master may receive him for ever: the
hypocrite in persecution utterly, and wholly, and for ever departs from the
faith, from the comfort and Profession of it. One flies the field, and comes no
more: (...).
the other returns, and is more valiant. In one word, the difference is; the
faith of the one is temporary, in the other not his faith is temporary, but his
failing.

2. These fair professors in persecution go away, 2
because they never gave the Word sound rooting in them: and therefore as a
blustering wind easily ouerturnes the tree that is but shallowly rooted, so
does the storm of persecution throw up him that wants firmness. Or to insist
in our Sauiors instance. As we see the scorching heat of the Sun burn up and
wither the corn that is not deeply rooted, though it come up never so goodly
in show: so the sun of persecution dries up the greenenesse of these shallow
and vnrooted Professors. The same thing our Savior expresses in a clean
contrary Metaphore, Luke 6.48. comparing persecution or troubles for the
Gospel to water: when the waters rise, and rain falls, and floods beat on
the house, it falls by and by, because it was not strongly founded on a rock.

3
3. They are offended at the Word, (says the Text) and so go away: Math.
13.21. by and by he is offended: Two ways: 1. When the Word puts them to this
choice, whether they will leave Christ, or their temporals; whether they will
forgo their goods, liberty, friends, and life, or forgo Christ. This choice
offended the young man, who rather than he will part with his possessions,
bids Christ farewell. This choice offended the false apostles, Gal. 6.12. who
would confound Law and Gospel together, because they would not suffer
persecution for the Cross of Christ. This choice offended many forward
Professors in the days of King Edward the sixth, who in the days of Queen
Mary were by and by offended, and fell off. And if times should turn, and this
choice should offer it self upon many forward ones, experience of former times
shows plain enough, what they would do. They that the day before, while
Christ rides in triumph, cry Hosanna, Hosanna: the next day after, when he is
apprehended, will cry, Crucifige, crucifige: so immediately are they offended.
Persecution and affliction for the Gospel, is like the worm that smote Jonas
his flourishing Gourd, and that so suddenly will put but a little time between
their freshness and fading. 2. When the Doctrine pursues them within, follows
them home to their consciences, and seeks to set in the light their inward
corruptions, presently these glorious Professors are offended, Ioh. 6.60. When
Christ powerfully taught the Jews, that he was the Bread which came from
heaven, and the Fathers ate of him, and themselves must feed on him to eternal
life: this was an hard saying: What, are they all this while out of the way to
heaven, unless he bring them in? Now they murmr, from thence go to
opposition, and from thence go quite away, and refuse to hear him longer.
Even so not a few, that boast sometimes of their faith and love to Religion; of
their settlednesse and resolution to die with Christ, rather than deny him; of
their reverence and good affection to his Ministers: Let the Gospel begin to
meddle with their Herodias, or bosom sin; let it call them from service of the
world, and pull them from their lusts; let it be busy with their usury, their
pride, wantonness, malice; let it seek to pull them from their disordered
customs, their unlawful pleasures, their profane courses; let it lay nothing
but the yokes of Christ upon professed Christians; let it discover to them
their inside, and lead them to that filthy sink which is within, and stir a
little in that mud: A wonder it is to see how many suddenly fall off by
degrees; Now they are angry at the Word, and he is the greatest enemy that t^^s
them the truth: Now they distaste the Word, then pick quarrels, then begin to
shake it off, and at last openly to resist it.

4. Those must needs fall off, who never received the Word purely, for it
self, 4
but for other sinister respects; as either of glory and praise, if they see
the profession in credit; or for profit, so long as they may gather with
Christ, and be gainers by him: they would stand on Mount Tabor with Christ, and
while he is in his glory, Mat. 17.4.
Oh it is good being here: but are loath to go with him to Mount Caluary. Or
they receive it only so far as may stand with their ease, delicacy, and
slothfulness, but will put themselves to no hardness at all. Now all these
that love themselves better than their Religion, must needs fail when the ends
fail, that put them on their profession. He that professes for praise of men,
when the world being inconstant withdrawes her applause, he is gone: Gods Word
shall have no further credit with him, then it has from men. If Demas for love
of profit shall profess, the love of this present world shall cause his
Apostasy, 2. Tim. 4.10. If they of Asia receive Paul, only because they may
with ease and safety do it, they shall turn away from Paul when he is in
prison. And he that receives a Religion without further ground then is the
general custom of the world; (namely, to be of that Religion, which the King
and Parliament is of:) let this man go never so far, yet he shall fall off,
and his fall shall be great.

Use 1. See hereby the nature and end of persecution: it tries who are sound,
and puts a difference between such, as peaceable and calm estate cannot
distinguish. In a fair and calm day, Apples and Pears on a tree seem all
sound and good; but a blustering storm or tempest makes difference between
those that are sound, and such as for want of moisture fall off: just so it is
in the storms of the Church. Persecution is like a mighty wind, which
discerns between wheat and chafe, that before lay quiet together in the
same floor: it shakes not the wheat, but blows away the chafe. And as the
furnace consumes the dross, but refines the gold; so does the furnace of
affliction. We are now all shuffled together, the hypocrite with the
sincere-hearted Christian: but (to end this point with our Saviors instance)
as the heat of the Sun and summer discouers barren, dry, and stony soil,
from good ground: so the scorching beams of persecution shall discover barren,
husky, and empty hypocrites, from good and fruitful Hearers. And thou art that
indeed thou art in trial. A man in peace may personate and disguise himself,
1. Kin. 14.2
as Ieroboams wife going to the Prophet, and seem another; but affliction for
the Word will uncase him. Peter was not the man in trial he vaunted to be
when he would dye with Christ. And the winter-weather of affliction for the
Gospel will discover, who be the Swallows that will take their summer in the
Church, but in the winter of it take them to their wings.

Use 2. Let us not take offense, when we see forward Professors offended at
Christ, and shrink in trial; but make account, that some such must forsake
us. For all are not of the Church that are in the Church: Some are tied only
by a thread of external profession, to the members, that are not united to the
Head by the band of faith: these must fall off and wither. Let Hymeneus and
Philetus, two great lights, fall away and lose their shine in the firmament of
the Church, yet the foundation of God abides sure. 2. Tim. 2.19.
And, if we see some shrink before the wetting, and in days of peace and
protection of the Gospel white-liuer'd, and ready to deny their profession at
the breath of a silly Damsel: that the frown of a Superior, a word of
reproach, a fear of change, shakes off their leafie profession: let us not
marvel, if many of them would deny Christ in trial, rather than dye with him.

Use 3. Let him that stands, take heed lest he fall. And the rather,
because, 1. Our nature is prone to defection, or backsliding: 2. Never was
there more defection, either in Doctrine or manners, then at this day: 3. When
we see others slide back, we are too soon moved and offended. So as the best
need continual exhortation and admonition, to beware they fall not away from
the grace of God. Else would not our Lord have still beaten on this point with
his Disciples, who for all his warning of them, when it came to the point,
forsook him and fled.

Now the means to uphold us in trial from falling, are these:

1. Meditate much and often of such Scriptures as foretell persecution for the
Name of Christ: 7. Means to uphold us in trial.
and call to mind the examples of such as have valiantly endured the loss of
temporals, and joyfully suffered the spoiling of their goods, the forgoing of
liberty and life for Christ, etc. Especially read diligently the whole 11.
Chapter to the Hebrews.

2. Cast the costs of thy profession: Think it not enough to hear, and
receive immediately, and rejoice, yea and believe, and grow: But know, thou must
not only believe, Phil. 1.29.
but suffer for his sake. The seed that is immediately received, must endure an
hard and sharp winter, before it can come up kindly. He that forecasts only
the pleasure and joy of his Religion, and not the sorrow, losses, and crosses
of it, is like the foolish builder, that thinks he can finish a building with
so little charge as will scarce serve to lay the foundation. Paul knew, and
made account, that bonds and imprisonment abode him every where: and so must
thou.

3. Labor for soundness of judgment, and sincerity in affection, in
receiving the Gospel. A sound judgment in matters of faith, to believe
firmly and distinctly the truth of Religion, must go before undaunted
confession: 2. Cor. 4.13. I believed, and therefore I spoke: Romans 10.10. We
must believe with the heart unto righteousness, before we can confess with
the mouth to salvation. This is the rooting and stablishing in faith, which
shall abide. Then for the second: sincere affection is only blessed with
continuance; when we bestow the chief affection of our heart upon it, even our
principal love, and our chief joy and delight. For this is a cause why this
bad ground fails; not so much the dislike of Religion, as the liking of other
things better: and the not receiving of truth in the love of it, 2. These. 2.10,
11.
is a cause why many are given up to believe lies.

4. Purge thy heart from the reign of corrupt lusts. Weed out sinful desires,
labor in mortification and selfe-denyall, get further power to dye unto sin,
get out of the love of the world and the things in it, resolve against
self-love, that in case of confession thy life may not be dear unto thee:
Else shall not all thy wisdom, or ciuility, or learning keep thee from
backsliding. For if the Apostles themselves, who professed they had left all to
follow Christ, yet shrunk in trial; how shall they stand, that come with
hearts thrust full of the world and earthly desires?

5. Labor to find full contentment in the good things of the Gospel. Think
it full happiness to enjoy naked Christ. Esteem peace of conscience above all
worldly peace. Account the favor of God, the joy of the holy Ghost, the sweet
hope of the pleasures of Gods right hand, and the treasures of a better world,
worth all thou can give in exchange, and above all that may be compared with
them. This will make thee (with the wise Merchant) fell out thy self, and
forgo all for the Pearl, and go away rejoicing.

6. Examine thy heart, how it stands affected in lesser trials, now in the
peace of the Church. If it shrink in smaller trials, I must not look to trust
it in greater. If now it will not endure the threat of a Superior, the fear
of loss, the dread of dis-fauour: If it now shrink from good men, because of
their troubles and sufferings, which are their crown: if thou can join with
the times in disgracing men fearing God; assure thy self, if greater trials
come, thou shall be given up to greater delusion and Apostasy.

7. Because to stand in persecution is a work above natural strength, and
ascribed to the holy Ghost, to stablish men to this trial, and strengthen them
to all patience with ioyfulnesse, Col. 1.10. We must pray the Lord not to leave
us in tentation, but preserve us constant both in peace and persecution.
Presume not of thine own strength. None have more boasted of their valor at
home, then they that most cowardly lost the field. Remember Peter: and pray for
the mighty power of the Spirit, to make thee of weak, strong, and altogether
immovable in this work of the Lord, 1. Cor. 15. vlt. Always remembering the
great danger of falling away, both in the good things lost, and in the
multitude of evils pulled upon thy self.

Thus much of the second sort of bad ground:

We come now by Gods assistance to the third. Verse. 7. And some fell among
thorns, and the thorns sprang up with it, and choked it.

THat which our Savior taught his Disciples, namely, what an hard thing it is
to be saved, we have evidently seen in the explication of the former ground:
wherein we have discovered a number of Hearers, who have gone so far in the
way of heaven, (as most of our Hearers come not near them:) to be but
reprobate ground, and lose all their labor and expectation. But yet we shall
more clearly discern that truth, and have more occasion seriously to consider
of it, when we shall in this last ground, (the best of all the bad ones) make
manifest, that they that step before and beyond the former, shall yet fall
short of their aim, and be shut out of heaven as well as they. For there was
nothing good in the former, which is wanting in this: but some further
commendation in this, which was not in the former.

Consider here with me three generals.

1. The kind of soil: some of the seed fell among thorns. 2. The success
of the seed in it: 1. commendable, 2. lamentable. Method of this part of the
Text.
3. The reason, or the causes of failing.
For the soil, it is thornie ground.

For the commendable success: 1. It goes as far as the former: in hearing,
verse. 14. in receiving* Math. 13.20. and Mark. 4.14. and in growing, as our
Text has it. 2. It goes far beyond it: for first, the ground is softer, the
mould moyster, the soil deeper, and so more hope: secondly, it springs beyond
the other: the other grows, but this sprang up, not only to a blade, but to
an ear, though not a ripe one; neither does the stone hinder the rooting,
while they are hearing; but, after they are departed, thorns choke it:
thirdly, they hold on their profession still, which the other lose; they are
not driven off by persecution, but would obey still, did it not cross their
pleasures and profits.

For the lamentable success, it is set down, ver. 14. they bring forth no
fruit: that is, either no good crop, or no lasting fruit to the harvest, or
(...), bring no fruit to the end, or to maturity: for fruit they bring, though
not to perfection.

The causes of this failing are set down, 1. in general, to be thorns,
namely, inward lusts, carnal affections, and corrupt desires. 2. In special,
of three sorts: 1. Cares of the world, verse. 14. and Mat. 13.22. 2. Riches,
verse. 14. called deceitfulness of riches, Math. 13.22. 3. Voluptuous living,
verse. 14. called by the other Evangelist, lusts of other things: these enter
and choke the Word, Mark. 4.19.

Thus in one view you have the sum and method of the Text, enlarged out of
the other Evangelists. Now for the exposition of the first, consider, 1. Why
lusts are compared to thorns. 2. Why these Hearers are compared to thornie
ground.

Carnal lusts are fitly compared to thorns in five respects: 1. There are
some flowers, Carnal lusts compared with thorns, in 5. things.
and some show on thorns, small fruits, and many pricks: So whateuer
appearance these lusts make, no good fruit rises of them, but many pricks and
sorrows by them 1. Tim. 6.10.
pierce themselves through with many sorrows. 3. As a thorn held softly
pricks not, nor hurts, but when it is held hard, and crushed, it easily 1.
Cor. 7.30.
So a man may use this world as not using it, without danger, and hold softly
the profits and pleasures of this life; but gripe them, and fasten on them,
there is certain hurt. 4. Thorns and Pharaohs lodgings. As Israel not content
with Gods daily allowance, but out of a covetous and distrustful desire,
against Gods Commandment, saved some of the Manna till morning, but it was all
full of worms, and stunke: So do fleshly minds, by nourishing unlawful
lusts, turn Manna Heb. 6.8.
and prepare the ground it self, (which all worldlings are:) without timely
repentance, as fuel for the fire of hell, which is unquenchable.

Bad hearers aptly compared with thorny g^ound.
These bad Hearers are as aptly compared to thornie ground. For as a thorny and
weedy soil chokes and kills at length such seeds as come up hopefully: so an
heart stuffed with unmortified affections, at length resists and chokes the
Seed of Gods Word, that it shall not prosper to the salvation of that Hearer
thorns supplant the Word, and vnroote it again, as thorns, to root apply
that which is heard, and as small leave to bring things into practice.

Doctr. In that our Savior compares bad Hearers to thornie ground, we
learn, Lusts of any kind cher^shed, spoil the work of the Word.
that thorns and lusts of any sort, suffered to grow in the heart, do soon
ouergrow the Word of God, and suffer it not to prosper. For as the Husbandman
that suffers thorns and weeds to choke his seed coming up, loses his
harvest: Even so that man loses his part in the Gospel, that cherishes lusts
and disordered desires in his heart, together with the Gospel. Hence the
Apostle James, chap. 1.21. tells us, that if we would hear the Word so as it
may be ingraffed in us, we must first cast away, or put off as an old ragge,
the superfluity of maliciousness and filthiness; that is, the abundance of
carnal affections, looseness of life, pride, disdain, wrath, contention,
earthly pleasures, vanity, evil speaking of divine doctrine, Iam. 1.22.
etc. and in the next verse shows, that with these lusts men may be Hearers of
the Word, but never doers, till they be weeded out; they will at length
ouergrow it.

See this in the examples of wicked men.

Herod let his lust and inordinate affection to his brothers wife grow with the
Word: therefore, notwithstanding he reverenced John, and did many things
gladly, yet this lust choked the Word, and it came to nothing. Judas heard the
Word from the mouth of Jesus Christ, and by it grew to a great reformation: but
suffering the lust of covetousness to grow up with it, it soon ouergrew the
Word, and he betrayed his Master. Simon Magus heard the Word, believed, walked
with Philip as a Disciple, no gross thing appeared in him, a man would have
thought the Word wondrously powerful in him: but he suffered the lust of pride
or covetousness to spring up with the Word, and when occasion was offered, it
ouertopt the Word, and bewrayed it self, in seeking to buy the gifts of the
holy Ghost with money.

See it also in the examples of good men. Romans 7.19, 20, 21. Paul professes of
himself, that he cannot do the good he would, because evil is present with
him: and generally of all Believers, Gal. 5.17. the flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, 2. Chron. 16.10.
so that ye cannot do the things ye would. Asa a good King, being reproved by
Hanani the Seer for his vain confidence in the King of Syria, was wroth with
him, and put him in a prisonhouse: for (says the text) he was in a rage with
him because of this thing. And so was Jonah with the Lord himself.

Reas. 1.
Reason 1. Ill weeds (we say) spring apace: good seeds or herbs not half so
fast. We shall see a Bramble grow more in seven months than an Oak in seven
years. So our text: the thorns grow up with the seed, 2
but choke it by ouergrowing. 2. Our grounds are fit and prepared to produce
thorns rather than bring up the good seed. Our hearts are the natural mother
to lusts, but a stepmother to seeds of Grace. For there lies in our nature a
sea of evil lusts lurking: our own original lust is a fountain, and an
inordinate disposition to all evil. From which fountain issue innumerable
streams of actual lusts, which are the innumerable motions of the soul,
contrary to every Commandment of God: All which in their several armies and
bands issue out against God and his Word, as the Philistims still warred
against Israel. Now our ground being so apt to weeds, they will soon ouergrow
the Word, if but a little neglected. 3
3. A part of the curse on man's sin, is, Genesis 3.18.
that the earth should bring forth thorns and thistles. The earth should have
brought them forth, if man had not sinned; but they should not have bin so
noisome and hurtful to man and the fruits of the earth. Even so it is a part
of the curse of our sin, that there should grow up such noisome lusts (as
thorns) in the ground of our hearts, as do far more hinder the growth of
grace in our hearts, and choke the Seed of the Word sown in our souls, than
all the weeds and thorns in the world can choke the seeds and fruits of the
earth. Lusts are still remaining in the best, but not now as a curse, but only
as the Canaanites, to keep them humble. 4
4. The reign of lust cannot but thrust down the reign of the Word: for
first, that the Word may reign, it Reign of lusts thrust down the reign of
the Word, many ways
but thorns hinder the light of the Sun from the seed. How can a man see
objects, that has a thorn run into his eye? So one thorn is enough to darken
the eye of the understanding. And therefore, 1. Pet. 2.1. The Apostle wishes
us to lay aside all evil affections, not some, not a little, not the waste
boughs, but the root and stumpe. Secondly, answerable to the means of divine
regeneration, unless we put away the former prauity of nature: As a man can
never set up a new frame, till he have the Father purge it, Ioh. 15.2. How can
a man walk on cheerfully in his way, that has a thorn sticking in his foot?
No less do these thorns cast men back in their way of obedience: these
superfluities of lusts and inordinate desires are as dead branches, that must
be lopped off before fruit can be expected.

Use 1. See hereby the reason, why numbers have either grown so slowly, or not
at all, after much labor of the Lords husbandmen: namely, because their hearts
are as thorny ground. Some came with minds stuffed with covetous desires, some
with fleshly imaginations, or filthy cogitations, others with proud conceits of
their own knowledge and wisdom, others alienated with contempt and hatred of
the Word, which crosses their lusts. Partial Hearers hear with respect of
persons, or degrees. Popish Hearers never profit, that come with obstinacy and
prejudice of our doctrine. Where these or the like lusts sway, expect no
profit: No planting, no watering, can make seed prosper, where these thorns
grow with it.

Object. One lust can do no great harm: in other things we are honest enough,
but only in usury, or gaming, or a little Oath, or Lie now and then. Answ. One
thief is enough to betray an house; one devil suffered to enter, brings seven
worse than himself, and let any come with purpose to continue in any one
sin, nothing shall move him, nothing shall convert him. One Swine spoils a
whole garden: One dead Fly, the whole ointment: One hole in a ship, the whole
vessel.

Use 2. If we desire the Word should prosper in us: do as the good Husbandman,
Means to keep our hearts, as good ground in good kilter.
who would keep his ground in good kilter, on which his seed is cast, or to be
cast. First, he will bring in the Plough to prepare it, and lay it fallow both
to rot, and vnroot the weeds that would choke the seed. For it is a Plough up
the fallow ground of you hearts, and sow not among thorns.

Secondly, the Husbandman ploughes it again, Take heed that no root of
bitterness spring up, and trouble you: according to that in Deuteronomy. 29.18. Let
there be no root among you, that brings gall and wormwood. If there be any
lust, be it never so secret and hidden as a root, or never so fixed and
fastened, as a root is, spare it not; nip it not off, but pluck it up by the
roots: be not content to bridle lusts, but kill them: satisfy not thy self
with an absence of fleshly operation, as if it were sanctification, but only
with a slaying of it: for if there be a living root within, it will show it
self when the seed springs, and soon overtake it too.



5. Means to set the seed of the Word, above the weeds of lusts.
Quest. How shall I do that?

Answ. 1. By daily exercise in the Word, reading and meditating: this discouers
the weeds and thorns. 2. By daily prayer, and confession of known sins:
this is a getting of the weeding hook into our 4. By avoiding occasions of
sin, and sinners: especially The Spirit lusts against the flesh, that is,
both in curbing and restraining evil motions, and ingendring good cogitations,
motions, and desires, agreeable to the will of God. Romans 13. vlt. By putting on
the Lord Jesus, repress the lusts of the flesh. Prou. 12.5. A godly man is
said to have right thoughts: and chap. 11.23. His desires are only good, not
that he is without evil desires sometime, but he resists and fights against
them, and God imputes not that which he hates and repents of.

We see the soil: Now let us see the hopeful success of the seed in it, The
thorns grow with it.]

Though there be a further growth of the seed in this ground then in the
former, yet at length it is as fruitless. 1. Here are soft and tender hearts
brought to the Word, better prepared for the seed than the former. 2. Here is a
deeper rooting: a further measure of understanding, a more vehement carriage of
the affection unto it, in motions of joy, love, and delight, and a more settled
purpose to follow the Word. 3. Here is a further show of fruits: a standing in
a glorious profession, an hopeful sprouting and springing in the fruits of
good works, and a longer hope thereby than before. Yet these so softened, so
rooted, so far grown above many zealous Professors, are ranged in the rank
of bad and fruitless Hearers: for, as it is in verse. 14. Afterward they are
choked.

A good Hearer ^eares for afterward.
Doctr. The fruitful and commendable Hearer is he that hears for afterward,
Esa. 42.23. A bad Hearer can hear well for the present, but afterward all is
lost. Prou. 4.18. The way of the righteous shines as light, that shines more
and more until perfect day. They add unto their knowledge as men do to their
stock, and save what they get, and so grow abundantly rich in grace; whereas
he that spends as fast as he gets, and only maintains the present with his
gettings, must dye a beggar.

Many are the exhortations to lay fast hold on the Word, and to lay it up safe
in the midst of the heart, and to keep it as a man's life, Prou. 4.4. As a man
that has a Jewel, will be careful to lock it up in the safest chest he
has. 1. Tim. 3.9. Keep the mystery of faith. Reu. 3.11. Hold that thou have,
hold that thou hear.

As many are the dehortations, that we negligently lose not the Word, Heb. 2.1.
We ought diligently to give heed to the things we have heard, lest at any time
we let them slip: a Metaphore taken from riuen vessels, that let all the liquor
run out. But here, the more precious the liquor is, the more must be the care
of the vessels soundness. 2. Pet. 2.21. Better not to have known the way of
truth, then after the knowledge to depart from the holy Commandment.

Many are the commendations of them that were Hearers for aftertimes: as of
David, Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy Word in my heart: and of Mary, who
pondered Christ's sayings, and hid them in her heart, Luke 2.51. And as many are
the dispraises of such leaking vessels, who like the women, 2. Tim. 3.7. are
always learning, yet never come to knowledge: and those Jews, Heb. 5.12. who
for the time might have bin teachers, yet needed to be catechized in the very
Principles.

Reason 1. From the nature of the Word, Reu. 14.6.
which is in it self a perpetual truth, an everlasting Gospel; Heaven and
Earth are most stable, and firmly founded by God; but not so stable as the
least jot of Gods Word, which shall not fail or fall to the ground for ever.
And to us it is a certain rule, a constant law, and binder, not for the
present only, but for all time future, yea and for all eternity.

2. This is a main difference between a godly man, and an hypocrite. Many
things may affect an evil man for the present hearing of the Word. Sometime he
may hear a novelty with great affection, but as children delight in a new toy
for an hour, but presently contemn and lose it. Sometimes the power of the
Word makes an hypocrite tremble, as Felix, and grow to some promise with
himself, and perhaps to some purpose and resolution of amendment: So Israel
hearing the Lord speak in so terrible a voice, promise fair, All that the
Lord our God says by thee, (if he will no more speak by himself) we will
hear it and do it. But the Lord saw there was no such heart in them, Deuteronomy.
5.27, 29. Sometime some affliction prepares them to hear, and now while the
iron is in the fire, and the hammer upon it, it may be wrought to some fashion
till it be cold again: so Pharaoh sometime will confess his sin, and
acknowledge Gods righteousness and beg Prayers of Moses; but only so long
as the plague is upon him. Sometime some natural motion, or some spiritual
motion may stir them, and for a flash they are earnestly resolved for Heaven:
so the young man comes hastily, and hears gladly, but not purposing to do all
that is required, goes away heavily.

The hypocrite in all these motions is like Ephraim, whose goodness was as the
morning dew, suddenly dried up, Hos. 6.4. The Word comes into a bottomless
heart, wherein is a bottomless gulf of guile and deceit, and all is lost at
length. But the godly man, by the Words dwelling plentifully in his heart,
attaines the commendation pronounced upon the Church of Thyatria, Revel. 2.19.
I know thy works, thy faith, etc. that they be more at last than at first. He
has on him a mark of one that is planted by the Lord in the House of the
Lord; Psalm. 92.14.
he is more fruitful in his age, more fat and fresh daily, and exceeds his
former times in feracity, and fruitfulness in good works and graces.

In a word, whereas all other things are common to all, the Heavens, the Earth,
the Creatures, yea, the Ministry of the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, and many
common graces wrought by them; this alone is the special right of Believers,
incommunicable with hypocrites, to have the Word of God everlastingly fixed in
their hearts: Esa. 8.16. Seal up the Law among my Disciples: now a seal is a
means of secrecy from them whom the matter concerns not, and of assurance to
them whom the business concerns.

This is the second reason.

3. The best of Gods Word is after the hearing. Our Parable compares hearing of
the Word to sowing: now the best of sowing is long after, in the reaping.
Elsewhere it is compared to food: and the best of eating is after eating, in
the nourishment and strength. For let men eat and drink with great appetite,
good taste, and much pleasure; yet if after the eating, bad humors in the
stomach suffer it not to stay, or not to digest if it do stay, it does much
hurt in stead of nourishing. So in the state of the Soul, where many wicked
humors resist the work of the Word heard.

But to show in special, that the Word is best after the hearing, consider,
Gods Word is best after the hearing for 5. reasons.
1. That it frames a man to the life of faith, and vpholdeth that life. It is
a means to make a man good, and continue his goodness. Because it both storeth
a man with graces, and preserues preserve thee, and understanding shall keep
thee, that is, both in the good way, and from the evil way: so Psalm. 119.11.
I have hid thy Word in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. 2. The
Word speak of wisdom, Psalm. 49.3. He is fit and ready to counsel, exhort,
rebuke, and comfort others. For the Word of God, 2. Tim. 3.17.
which is able to make the man of God ready and absolute to every good work,
is much more able to fit private Christians thereunto. David said of
himself, If thy Word had not been my comfort, I had perished in my trouble: so
if the Word be not thy sword in the day of temptation, if it be not thy health
in sickness, thy life in death, if it plead not for thee in judgment, thou
art everlastingly lost, because thou have wilfully lost thy part and portion of
that O Lord, thy Word endures for ever in Heaven, Psalm. 119.89. that is,
although never so many things in earth seem to cloud and cross the gracious
promises, that thou have made to thy children, yet in Heaven shall they taste
the sweetness of thy Word, more then ever they did in earth; when they shall
enjoy all the fruits of that eternal love and decree, which they believed in
this world. Besides that, the same Word of God, which now the Saints lay up in
their hearts, is the Law and Charter of heaven, by which being fully conformed
to the obedience of it, we shall walk eternally before God in the perfection
of that obedience, which is here begun. And thus it is our eternal direction
in heaven also.

Use 1. To reprove many Hearers, Four sorts of hearers hereby reproved.
who are affected in the act and time of hearing, or while the Doctrine is
delivering, but presently lose the matter, the motion, affection, and all. Some
come as our When they heard, they marvelled, and left him, and went their way,
we hear no more of them. Many hear desirously, as with open and erect ears;
but both being open, it goes in at one, and out at the other; it stays not for
after-vse, but a little present admiration, as in those Hearers of our Savior.

Others hear, and the Word smites them, works a little on their conscience,
wounds them, and tells Nathan did David, Thou art the man. Now were a fit
season to work with God: 2. Sam. 12.7.
but they go away, other distractions meet them at home, the motion dies, and
they are as men sea-sicke, while the Word tumbles them, and makes their
conscience wamble within them, but are all well again, so soon as ever they
come to land.

Others hear with soft hearts, and the Word coming home, they begin to melt,
can resolve into unworthiness of the promises, and how liable they be to all
the threatenings, which they conceive their own portion. But as the metals are
only soft and pliable while they are in the fire; so these in the hearing, but
shortly after lose all the efficacy of the Word, and become hardened as before.

went not. So we have many hearers many times in good moods; but corruption of
nature not subdued, nor mastred, (which is not always stirring alike) watches
the fittest time to resist the Word* so as present purposes are seldom or
never followed to practice and future performances.

4. Motives to lay up the Word for after-vse.
Use 2. Look well to thy hearing for aftertimes, that with knowledge thou
may join obedience, and by the Word, grow in grace, as thou do in days.
Content not thy self to hear with a soft heart, or with a joyful heart, if
it be hollow, and rimie to let it slip. Consider for motives heereunto: our
souls, that the doctrine of life and salvation should run out. 2. The world
casts nothing upon Psa. 101.2.
and (as David) walk uprightly in the midst of his house.

Means to hear for afterward.

1. Be abundantly covetous, 4. Means of this duty.
to lay up a good store for thy self against time to come. Enlarge thy
affections insatiably, to gather all thou may. This is a more worth than
much fine gold, Psalm. 119.127. Account it thine heritage, and the joy of thy
heart, verse. 111. 3. Let it be in thy heart first, treasure it there: A man
reserues his barn for Bind it on thy fingers, Prou. 7.3. as a Ring that is
ever in sight. Practice The thorns sprang up and choked it.]

Now we are to entreat of the failing of the seed in this ground: wherein,
because there is but little difference from the withering we spoke of in the
former grounds, but that it proceeds from other causes; we will therefore
inquire into those causes, as they are particularly and in order set down in
the 14. verse: Cares, Riches, Pleasures. These are described as the special
thorns, which choke the seed of the Word.

Doct. Abuse of lawful things damnable, as well as the pursuit of unlawful.
Whence note in general, what it is that lets us from heaven; not only the
pursuit of unlawful things, but the abuse of lawful. It is not whoredom,
adultery, theft, murder, Sabbath-breaking, and the like, that here are said
to choke the seed, and hinder our harvest; but the abuse of lawful profits,
pleasures, cares, and desires. Math. 24.38. As in the days of Noah, they did
eat, and drink, and marry, and give in marriage, until the day that Noah
entered into the Arc, etc. What? was it a sin to eat, to drink, to marry?
were these the things for which they were destroyed? No, but the abuse of these
things: they were so wholly in these, as they securely cast off all
admonitions, and all prediction of judgments: these became thorns, and choked
all counsel, and all the preaching of Noah; and so their destruction was
sudden, not because it was not foretold, but it was not believed or regarded.

Luke 14.16. What was more lawful than to buy a Farm, and a yoke of Oxen, or
to marry a Wife? But yet, these shall never taste of the Supper: not because
they did these things, but because they were so inordinate and intent on them,
that they refused the call to the Kings Supper. And these three sorts of
invited ghests, refusing the Kings gracious inuitation, do notably resemble
and express these three sorts of thorns choking the Word: the Farm notes
riches; Oxen, the cares of life; and the Wife, Note.
voluptuous living: All which, or any of them, hinder men from the heavenly
banquet. So 1. Cor. 10.7. The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up
to play.

Reason 1. Sins in lawful things are both more ordinary, and less sensible,
both for the avoiding and preventing, as also for the recovery and repentance
from them. What a number of natural and indifferent actions does every man go
over every day, into which creep a number of sins, because men take
themselves free to do as they list in them, and only content themselves in
their liberty unto the thing, unwilling to hear of any of Gods restraints or
impositions in the manner or fruition of that liberty!

This point is very useful, Instances of most lawful things unlawfully
abused, 7.
and therefore we will give some instances, to show, how men do infinitely
abuse their lawful liberties, with the great hazard of their souls.

1. In eating and drinking, 1. Eating and drinking.
which is not only lawful, but necessary. Yet here Christians offend
exceedingly, many ways: 1. When they eat not their own bread, 2. These. 3.12.
2. When they eat without fear, Jude 12. not before the Lord. 3. When they
corrupt themselves in the creatures, losing sobriety, modesty, chastity, health
and reason, as the drunkard drownes his soul, senses, body and all. 4. When
they never taste the sweetness of God in the creatures, more than beasts: nor
sanctify themselves after feasting, Job 1.5.
as Job his sons. 5. When they waste the creatures, not remembering the
afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6.6.

2. Apparel.
2. What is more necessary than apparel, decently to cover nakedness, to fence
the body from injury of weather, and to put us in mind of sin? But what a
number of sins do men and women put on with their apparel? 1. For the
matter, which is not skins, as Adams, but stately, and costly? 2. For the
manner, while they take liberty to disguise themselves in strange attire, and
monstrous fashions, showing no other hidden man of the heart, but lightness,
vanity, wantonness, and slauishnesse to every newfangled fashion; for which,
the Lord threatened to visit the Kings children, Zeph. 1.8? 3. For the measure,
while they pass all bounds of sobriety, and waste more on their backs most
prodigally, than would clothe a number of the poor servants of Jesus Christ?
And all out of this conceit, that they may wear what they list, and how they
list; not considering, that the Lord has tied them as straightly to the rules of
piety, sobriety, and charity, in the wearing, as to the necessity of wearing it
self; besides the waste of time, and thoughts, etc. which should be better
occupied?

3. Recreation.
3. What is more lawful, yea more necessary than recreation? But, how do men,
out of the lawful liberty that God has allowed them, break out most
unlawfully, and most insensibly! 1. In respect of the matter, when with the
fool, (Prou. 26.18.) they make a pastime of sin: as of Dice, condemned by
the Laws of the Land, and Cards, and lascivious Dancing, Plays, Enterludes,
and all merriments, wherein is no praise, virtue, or good report. Phil. 4.8.
Sports become unlawful, being immoderate, unseasonable, profane, uncharitable.
2. In respect of the manner; when they turn their vocation into a recreation;
when they power out their hearts unto pleasure, as lovers of pleasure more than
of God; when they waste their time, and ingrosse it for sports, to the
hinderance of better duties, in the public and private calling; when the
public or private duties of Gods holy Sabbaths are interrupted Solomon says,
He that loves pastime, shall be a poor man, both in grace and goods. Yet what
Gamester of a thousand sees himself tumbling in these sins? Or where is one
of a thousand, that will be reclaimed from them?

4. What is more lawful and necessary than Marriage, for the comfort of man,
4. Marriage.
for the continuance of the world, and the Church, by an holy seed? But how
many make up a great heap of sin, by the abuse of this holy Ordinance! Some
conceit they may marry where they list, the sons of God to the daughters of
men; not remembering the Apostles Canon, always in the Lord: but join with
Infidels, 1. Cor. 7.39.
and enemies to Religion: as Solomon, to the turning away of his heart from the
Lord. Others use it rather to stir up natural corruptions, than to beat
them down. Some, rather to help one another to hell, than to heaven, or in
earth; while the Husband loses his authority by unthriftiness, bitterness,
or lightness; and the Wife shakes off his authority by sullenness, and
contempt, both of his person and commandments. Others sin against it more
directly: as when the Husband leaves the Wife of his youth, to embrace the
bosom of a stranger; or the Wife forsakes the guide of her youth, and loves a
stranger better. Thus was the sin of David heightened, that having wives of
his own, he must needs have Vriahs also, 2. Sam. 12. For this is to sin
against the remedy.

5. The calling.
5. How lawful is it, and necessary, to employ a man's self in his calling? But
(besides that, many live in unlawful callings, or in none:) where is the man
that sanctifies the particular passages of it by the Word and prayer? Where is
he that retains an heavenly mind in following his earthly business? How
many stick not to gather Manna on the Sabbath day, which shall rot between
their teeth? How many all the week long gather goods, and drive their Trades
with as many Oaths, lies, and glozings, almost as words? How many turn their
Trades into Crafts, getting as much by craft, deceit, and injustice, as by
fair and lawful following of their calling? Where is the man that chokes not
his general calling with his special, and incrocheth all the time of the
week, that scarce any can be allotted to the service of God, either in Gods
House or his own? How is it, that men thrust themselves as busi-bodies into
other men's matters, and fail in their own?

6. What is more lawful or necessary, 6. Care of family.
than to provide for a man's own? Is not he that provides not for his
household, worse than an Infidel, 1. Tim. 5.8? But hence how do numbers
confound Christian and carking care, not seeking first the Kingdom of God for
themselves and theirs, but becoming Drudges to the world, and to their
children, providing no otherwise for them, than the beasts for their young
ones, present food and harbor; forgetting the words of the Apostle, Ephesians.
6.4. Bring them up in the nurture and instruction of the Lord? (...).
As if a Christian, who takes care of the body and baser part of such as belong
to him, can forget or neglect the soul, which is the far more noble part of
man. Or as if he which performs it to his family, (which the very Law of
Nature calls for at his hands) should utterly forget that, which Gods Word
every where charge him withal.

7. What is more sweet and necessary upon earth, 7. Society. (...).
than company and society with men? whence the Philosopher calls man A sociable
creature, as the beasts be not. But how many mischiefs creep into the life,
and sins into the soul, by the abuse even of lawful society! as when men
choose or fall into swearing, drinking, or idle company: when they run
promiscuously into all companies, and fall to such exercises as they find: as
Peter in Caiaphas his Hall when he should have been better employed: or when
they frequent societies where God and Christ is not, but Satan and his Agents,
and a whole troop of tentations. And what hurt comes by men's communication,
which naturally is profane, unsavory, uncharitable? Besides, even good men in
bad companies acquit not Gods glory, nor themselves, as they ought; and in good
company, either do not, or receive not the good they should.

This is the first reason.

2. In things lawful, men are most secure, and think themselves safest: and
there Satan is most, where he is least suspected. As the Serpent lies in the
greenest grass: so Satan lies in ambush against us in our most lawful
liberties. As he laid his train against our Savior Christ himself in the
matter of meat and drink, when he was hungry: so also against us, chiefly in
things, wherein God has given us allowance. Wherein was it that Satan overcame
Lot? was it first Incest with his two daughters? No, that was heinous, but
first he foiled him in that which was lawful: he first abused himself in
wine, and then his daughters in Incest.

3. Whereas our nature spider-like, turns our best and sweetest things to
poison, Satan to our corruption adds his weight, putting us forward to abuse
good things, and lawful; because this both hinders God of his glory in the
means of our good, and our selves in the end for which God allows them. God
has given us all our lawful liberties, as helps to heaven: we us them as
hindrances. His grace puts them into our hands as staves, to support us in our
way and weariness: we, by the abuse, make them burdens and clogs to cast us
back. He allows us them as spurs, to provoke us to cheerfulnes in his
service: we pervert them, and they become as thorns to choke us, and hinder us
in his service.

Well knows Satan, that the best things abused, become evil to him that so
uses them. Christ himself shall be a Rock of offense. The Word, 1. Pet. 2.8.
if it kill not vices, it kills souls. And the Sacraments are rank poison
to the unworthy receiver. He cares not how many gifts of nature, no nor of
grace a man has, so as out of them arise pride, ambition, envy, etc. which
are as a Canker consuming them. And much less cares he how many gifts of
Fortune, (as they call them) that is, wealth and honor, a man has, so as they
make him swell with disdain, or vainly confident in his wealth, or secure in
his course, or licentious in the bold committing of sin. Let wealth flow in, as
waters from a full fountain, so they drown the soul in perdition. Thus Gods
glory is impaired, which he expects for his goodness, and man's sin enlarged,
which has made himself so miserable by so great mercy.

Use 1. To let many a man see his sin and error, who never suspects hurt and
danger in such lawful things, as riches, and pleasures, and cares of the
world: They wonder they should be thorns, who never felt the pricking, but
have tasted much sweetness in them, and in nothing more. But our Savior well
knew the nature of them, through the malice and infirmity of men abusing them.
He well saw, that no thorns do so choke the seed, as these the Word: and
that many, who found such sweetness in them, have fallen short of salvation by
them. If thou had never eaten forbidden fruit, nor fed upon stolen bread,
the abuse of lawful and allowed profits and pleasures, will keep thee out of
heaven. The Farm lawfully gotten, but unlawfully affected, may make thee never
to taste of the Supper: And the having and inioying the wife thou have married,
may make thee say flatly, I cannot come. Think thou the devil has no baits
but in his hellish tentations? Luke 14.20.
Yes, his baytes lie every where. If thou be a rich man, he has
deceitfulness of riches: If a poor man, he has the cares of this life: If
any other thing affect thee, he has lusts of other things, to make thee fall
short of salvation. Say not with thy self, I am no adulterer, no murderer, no
thief, and therefore am in a good way to salvation; unless also thou have
watched Satan, and carried thy self clear and fair in thy calling, in thy
wealth, marriage, recreation, company, meat, drink, and apparel. Neither
say, I thank God I am no Recusant, I come to Church, I hear good Sermons, and
if any could tell me a better way to heaven, I would surely take it: But
bewail thy abuse of lawful liberties. Here were many that heard Christ
himself, and yet were damned for nourishing at the same time these thorns
that choked all. Neither say, I am a Professor of the Gospel, and am zealous
against sin every where, and love them that fear God: For when Professors
revolt to the world, and give themselves to an unjustifiable liberty, in
following the profits and pleasures of this life, they shall see grace thrive
as corn among thorns; which as they eat the seed, so our hearts and lives
are eaten up with the cares and delights of this life.

Use 2. If such lawful things as these prove sharp and piercing thorns, what
sharpness must we imagine in unlawful? What an evil thing and bitter is it,
to venture upon sin expressly prohibited, to reach out the hand for bread of
deceit, to drink in with greediness stolen waters, and with delight to feed
upon forbidden fruit? What is this but to walk upon snares and thorns, which
will sting the conscience, and wound the soul to certain and speedy death?
Luke 17.28. As in the days of Lot they ate and drank, bought, and sold,
planted and built, etc. Here one asks, why our Savior makes no mention, nor
charge the Sodomites with those far greater sins, of which we read in the
story, Genesis 19. as the contempt of the Word, their violence against Lot, their
horrible and crying sin of Sodomie; but only those which seem light, or no
sins in comparison. And the answer is; that we might conceive what a
fearful plague belonged to such fearful enormious courses, when as even
lawful things, and such as without which life cannot be maintained,
immoderately used, were punished with fire and brimstone.

Think it too much to offend in thy lawful liberties, although thou venture
not upon unlawful. For if he that offends in the former, cannot but break
through a thorn hedge, not without pricking and tearing himself: How much more
shall he wound himself, that dares venture over that sharp hedge of curses,
wherewith God has mounded and hedged his Law! Oh that bold sinners, shameless
harlots, debosht drunkards, blasphemous swearers, and profane Sabbath Breakers,
would think on this!

Use 3. Learn we to moderate our lawful and natural desires, as wherein so
many snares do lie: Desire no outward favors, without inward grace to use
them; without which, Gods mercy proves but thy judgment. 5. Rules of
moderation in natural and lawful desires.
And for thy better direction in the right use of lawful things, take these
Rules.

1. Consider, that lawful liberty used to the full, is exceeding dangerous,
and restraint is necessary. He Deuteronomy. 25.3.
whereas they might give forty: 2. Cor. 11.24. Of the Jews five times received
I forty stripes save one. Let this be thy care also, to cut thy self somewhat
short, even in that which is lawful: for, the more flesh is pampered, the more
is the Spirit weakened and foiled.

2. Consider the Author of all thy liberties: that of whom, and by whom, and
for whom are all things, by Jesus Christ, Romans 11. vlt.

the soul, and so in the rest. This one calls an holy Alchemy, to draw gold
out of lead, heaven out of earth, grace out of nature.

4. Consider, that the right use of peace and plenty,

5. In our freer and more joyful use of the creatures Job, when his sons
feasted together, sanctified them, and sacrificed according to the number of
them all, saying, It may be that my sons have offended. Do thou the like for
thy self: Job 1.5.
mingle none of thy joy with sin; for then it must end in woe. Are choked
with cares.]

Now we come in special to treat of the three kinds of thorns, which choke
the Word, and make it fruitless, as they are laid down in the Text.

The first of them are cares, called by Matthew, The first sort of thorns are
worldly cares.
cares of this world; And this is to distinguish them from the cares of heaven,
and of that better world, which are every where commended to us: Mat. 6.33.
Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness. 1. Cor. 7.32. The
unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, and how he may please the Lord.
And for a man thus to place his cares and desires, is, to walk with God, and
begin his heaven beforehand; every where commanded, as the following and
pursuing of his true felicity. Our Parable speaks of another sort, of noisome
and thorny cares for the things of this world, which are not allowed us.

Here sundry pertinent questions come to be resolved.

Quest. 1. Whether no worldly care be allowed us; seeing the Apostle says,
Phil. 4.6. (...), Be careful for nothing?

Answ. The Apostle does not command us to be idle, or careless in the doing
of our callings, wherein every one must carefully abide. Adam in innocence must
have a care of dressing the Garden: and all the sons of Adam after the fall,
must eat their bread in the sweat of their brows. Else a man lives
inordinately, and ought not to eat. Yea the Apostle himself confesses, 2.
Cor. 11.28. that he was cumbred daily, and had the care of all the Churches.

Non dicit, (...), sed (...).
Neither does he forbid a necessary care for the things of this life, to the
sustentation both of our selves, and others belonging to us. For it is not
only lawful, but necessary for every Christian to have a care, not only of
his vocation, but of his condition and state of life in this world, how he and
his may comfortably, and with the honor of God and the Gospel, pass through
the world. And he that has not a provident care for his family, has denied
the faith, 1. Tim. 5.8. Such are a generation of debosht and vile persons, who
cast all care away, and let the world slide; let wife and children shift for
themselves; let debts and charge come on them; worse than the most unnatural
brutes, they cast off all calling and cares, and with them, all piety, honesty,
and humanity it self.

Thus we see both a diligent and a provident care commanded: As a man in a
journey takes gold, silver, meat and drink, to set him forward in his way;
his care is not for these chiefly, but to finish his journey: so we that are
Christians, may take with us the things of earth by the way, but must not set
our care or affection on them, only so far as they serve for heaven.

Quest. 2. How far are these cares lawful?

Answ. Cares of the world are twofold. The one, Sollicitudo diligentiae and
diffidentiae.
a care of diligence, called (...), that is, an honest study, and warrantable
care, well confined, and kept within bounds of moderation. The other, a care of
diffidence, called (...), a doubtful and diffident care, arising out of
distrustfulnesse of God, and fear of wants, and so suffers not it self to be
bounded within the rules of Piety and Christian moderation. That is
commendable, this damnable.

Quest. 3. How shall I know these unbounded and distrustful cares?

Answ. 1. They are cutting and distracting cares: 5. Marks of distrustful
cares.
(...), the cares of a man's vocation or condition, or both, divide and distract
his mind, torment him, make him unquiet, within himself and with others, at
board, in bed, every where: so Solomon describes this man, Eccles. 2.23. All
his days are sorrows, and his travel grief; he takes no rest in the
night. And chap. 4.8. There is a man, and there is not a second, there is no
end of his travel, etc.

Cura interdicta, non officii, sed euentus.
For in the duties of vocation are two things: 1. The care and labor of the
work of the calling. 2. The care of the success and event. The former is
ours, the latter is Gods. A sober and moderate care does the duty, but leaves
the care of success unto God. But this care enters upon Gods right, and
troubles it self about the event of his business, and success of his
labors, and cannot rest in Gods issue, neither before nor after it is
manifested.

Object. May we not lay up for our selves, and our children? Answ. 1. Not with
distrustful care, nor with choking thorny care, which eats out better cares.
2. Though a Christian may enjoy abundance, if God cast it upon him, yet may he
not seek abundance, above that which is necessary for his person, nature, and
estate. He must be content with daily bread, and pray for no more: nay, the
King himself must not seek superfluities, Deuteronomy. 17.16. Object. May we not
care for the morrow, as our Savior implies, Math. 6. vlt? Answ. Christ had a
bag for his provision, and for his Disciples. Joseph provided for the seven
years of famine: and the Church for the great dearth, Act. 11.28, 29. So may
men in their youth provide for age, while strength lasts, and sight and
senses are good: always remembering, not diffidently, not distrustfully, or to
cross the practice of faith, whereby we should daily depend on his hand and
providence, who renewes our days and times upon us. For to this care our
Savior opposes trust and confidence in God, verse. 30.

4. If a man by indirect and unlawful means gather

5. It is a choking care, if a man neglect the service

These are the cares here called thorns: Doct. Worldly cares great chokers of
Gods Word.
The effect of them is, to choke the seed of the Word. Where consider two
things: 1. How they choke the Word. 2. The use that is to be made thereof.

For the first. They choke the Word, 1. Before: 2. In: 3. After hearing.

1. Before hearing, 2* ways.
Before hearing, two ways: 1. In that they hold men away, and keep them from
the preaching of Gods Word. Luke 10.40. While Mary was set at Martha encumbered
her self about many things, etc. Her care and love in entertaining our Lord
Jesus himself, was excessive and immoderate, and hindered her from hearing his
Word out of his own mouth. The same was the cause why those unthankful
ghests, invited to the Kings Supper, Luke 14.18. they all made excuses; their
inordinate care about Farms, Oxen, and Families suffered them not to come when
they were called. So now, especially on a weeke-day, numbers keep away from
this Exercise; because the desires after the world have eaten out the desires
and care of Gods Word: They cannot let their business, and servants would be
idle, and I know not what. Whereas a man might name some places of idle resort,
where they let ten times so much in a

2. Jn hearing, two ways.
In hearing, they hinder two ways also: 1. When men bring their business in
their breasts with them; plotting their own employments: and this hinders both
attention, and understanding, and affection; without all which, the Word heard
is unprofitable. 2. These inordinate cares keep out, and bar out

1. The Word, in the daily preaching of it, Three instances.
labors to confirm and increase faith and confidence in God: it bids us
believe, and trust in the Lord for all

2. The use of Gods Word, as it is from heaven, Col. 3.1, 2.
when it urges us to seek things above where Christ is, and persuades us to
pull our thoughts from things below, and set them on things within the Veil.
But these cares nourished in the heart, choke all such exhortations: for they
wedge down, and stake down the soul into earth, and earthly things: they
will care for heaven when they come there, but for earth while they are here.

3. Gods Word, in the powerful preaching of it, thorns are nourished, all
these denunciations are choked, they will set the tongue on lying and swearing,
the hands on coozening and deceiving, the whole course on usury, oppression;
and all is fish that comes to net.

Thus where the world is taken in, the Word is shut out, or choked.

3. After hearing.
After hearing also, these thorns choke the Word: so the Text says, and
afterward, or after they are gone, the cares of the world enter in again, and
as a wedge drives out all before it. Many come from their earthly business,
and hear with affection, and may hold it for a while; but at last, the throng
of their business and cares of the world conquer the Word, and drives it both
out of their memory and practice.

For the memory: see Exo. 16.3. When Israel was without food in the
Wilderness, and knew not how they should sustain themselves, their wives and
children, they begin to scorn and take on against Moses and Aaron; Number. 14.2
Oh that we had dyed by the hand of the Lord in Egypt: Why? What was the
reason? Had they not many promises from the Lord, of his care and providence
for them? Nay, did they not see the hand of the Lord for them in that mighty
deliverance through the sea, in the pillar of a cloud by day, and of fire by
night, in that extraordinary sweetening of the waters of Marah, not many days
before, chap. 15.25? Did not that promise yet sound in their ears, verse. 26?
But these distrustful and distracting cares choked presently the remembrance
of Gods promises, and of his great blessings bestowed on them.

For the practice: we see it evidently in the young man, who presently lost
Christ, and all, Mat. 19.22
because he had great possessions, both in his hand and heart.

Use. Seeing these worldly cares do thus choke the Word in us, let us always
remember the counsel of our Savior, Luke 21.34. Take heed, lest your hearts
be oppressed with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and
that Day take you unawares. Then the cares oppress us, when they dull the mind,
and make it heavy and untoward to the love and consideration of heavenly
things. We must strive in casting off these cares, which our natural love of
the world inuites and pulls upon us.

Motives to rid our selves of them. 5. Motives to rid our selves of worldly
cares.


1. Because they are the cares of the world, that is, of worldly things, and
worldly men, and Christians must have another care. This is our Saviors
reason, Math 6.32. After all these things do the Gentiles seek. And it is
sufficient that we have lived in such lusts; but now let us walk no more after
the will of man, but of God, 1. Pet. 4.3. Shall our Profession be Christian,
and our practice Heathen? What do such a number of Heathens in a visible
Church, whose heads, hearts, and hands are more stuffed with cares, fears, and
distractions, than the most Heathenish Heathens? For men to follow the world
with a full spirit, to place their felicity here, and make it their chief joy
to increase their estate here, is to live like an Heathen: For after all these
things do the Gentiles seek.



But there are cares for a better world, which as it is a Kingdom of glory and
happiness, so it is unshaken, of perpetuity and eternity. There are cares for
the life of the soul, which as it is more excellent than the body, so are all
the good things belonging to it: And these cares are worthy of room and place
in a Christian heart. There is a life not common with beasts, but with the
Angels, to be cared for; nay, common with Jesus Christ: the care of which, our
Savior has commended to us above all other cares in the world, when reproving
Martha for her too sollicitous and busy care in entertaining his own blessed
Person; he told her, and us in her, One thing is necessary; and, this care is
of the good part which shall never be taken from us.

The former, in that they would fasten upon God, want of knowledge, power, or
will, to relieve our wants. For if God take knowledge, and be able, and
willing to supply them, what need I vex my self further? For his knowledge:
Math. 6.32. Your heavenly Father knows, that you have need of all these
things. For his power: Go into the Wilderness, behold him feeding Israel
forty years without all earthly means, giving them bread from heaven, which
ordinarily comes out of the earth, and water out of hard Rocks, than which
nothing is dryer; preserving their clothes from wearing, while they were worn
forty years together. For his Will: Psa. 37.28. The Lord forsakes not his
Saints, they shall be preserved for evermore. But these distractfull cares
deny the Lord the honor of wisdom, power, and mercy, and so are express
signs of an ungodly heart.

Secondly, they argue a foolish mind, two ways: 1. That when a little will
serve a man in his way homeward, through a strange Country, he will lode
himself with needless burdens. Nature is content with little, Grace with
less. Jacob craves no more of God, but food and raiment. And we are
commanded, If we have food and raiment, to be therewith content, 1. Tim. 6.8.
2. What an extreme folly is it, when a man has enough for the present, nay,
and for his time, if he were to live over two lives, yet to spend his days in
scraping and gathering, not so much for himself, as he knows not for whom?
It may be for a fool, Eccles. 4.8. It may be for a waster and spend-thrift;
it may be for a stranger, chap. 2.19. nay, it may be for an enemy, as Haman for
Mordecai.



a broken bag: Hag 1.6.
and God ouerthrovves their conceits; they think their care must do all: but
the more they care, the less they have; to teach them, that if they would
care less, they should need less.

4. Means to rid our selves of th^se ^arking cares.
Means to thrust off these carking cares.

1. Labor to get assurance of thy adoption: For, if a man be persuaded of
this, he can easily stay himself upon God for all needful things. The prayer
is, Our Father, and then, Give us this day our daily bread. No marvel if men
be unquiet in their hearts, who have neither care nor assurance of their
adoption. Math. 6.30. Christ makes them a sign of incredulity, O ye of little
faith.

Paul, Phil. 4.11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, to be content, I
know how to want, and to abound: Where? in what school? Not in the school of
nature, for that teaches impatience and coffeehouse in wants; but in the
School of Christ, through Christ inabling me. A man coming out of this
School, is as comfortable and cheerful, as if his small portion were the
whole world.

3. Because these cares will ever be incroching and thrusting in, we must know
upon whom to turn Cast all your care on him; for he cares for you. Cast them
off far away from thee, as a man pressed with a burden, or something that
hurts him. But with this difference: he casts his burden on the earth, thou
must cast up thine into heaven. Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord,
and he will nourish thee: as an Anchor is cast to stay the Ship, against all
waves and billows of diffidence and distrust.

Quest. How should I cast my care upon God?

Answ. 1. By faith believe his gracious promises, To cast our care upon God,
sieve helps.
and apply them to thy self. 2. In nothing be careful, but let your requests
be showed, Phil. 4.6. Prayer is a casting of our care on the Lord: therefore
call upon The Lord is at hand, in nothing be careful: there is no cause of
these choking cares and distractions, seeing we have the Lord so near, and may
with confidence call on his Name: Psalm. 145.18.
for the Lord is near to all that call upon him, to all that call upon him
faithfully. Therefore hold his presence in thine eye, who is with his in six
troubles, and in seven. A child under his fathers eye and wing cannot be
neglected. 4. Walk religiously and holily: be such a one as over whom his
care extends: Be a fearer of God, for no good thing shall be wanting to him
that fears the Lord, Psalm. 34.9, 10. The Lord is near to fulfill the desire
of them that fear him. Tertull. contra Esau
So Tertullian observes, that there was more in the blessing of Jacob, then of
Esau, a profane man; namely, the dew of heaven, as well as the fatness of the
earth, and first that, then this, I have graued thee on the palms of my hands:
and what is a more present help than the hand of a man? All thy walls are
ever in my sight. God does ever behold the defenses and means of protecting
them, who cast their care upon him. Go along with me to Mount Moriah, and
consider the business of Abraham, which would have rent asunder any worldly
heart with worldly cares: But casting the whole care of it upon the Lord, the
very name of the place tells thee, Jehovah prouidebit, God will provide, he
will be seen in the Mount; if not before, yet then at furthest.

Instances of needful cares consuming unneedful.
makes a man abound in unnecessary; therefore let us take up such lawful and
warrantable cares, as may consume and eat up the other. The Scripture
commending many unto us, I will note some.

1. Seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and then other things
shall be cast upon you. Mat. 6.33.
The If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the Land. If a
great Prince be in chase of a Kingdom, will he spend his thoughts on a
Copyhold?

2. Be careful about our sins; both to get pardon For this thing, that ye
have been godly sorry, what great care has it wrought in you! what clearing of
yourselues, etc! This is a thoughtfull consultation, as in the Conuerts being
pricked for their sins, Act. 2.37. What shall we do to be saved? A care to
mortify the sin remaining. A care to prevent sin to come, and a careful
watch against the first motions of sin. A care to keep on our weapons, and
to hold the sword of the Spirit in our hands, to cut off the heads of tentation.

3. Use great care about thy soul: Prou. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all
diligence: as a City besieged is continually watched, day and night. Civil
honesty makes many careful, that murder, adultery, and gross filthiness
break not forth of their bodies and hands: but Religion has special care to
keep these out of the heart, as well as the life. And as Nature does instinct
a care for providing bodily food and necessaries: so Grace quickens the care
for the food and refreshings of the soul, in good means ordained for that
purpose.

Moses, not to turn therefrom, either to the right hand or to the left, Josh.
23.6. A care of every good work, both of the general and special calling:
both for watching and apprehending all occasions of good, that are offered: and
of cheerful doing all duties, which are laid in our power: and to do them in
such manner as God requires, with sincerity of heart: and to do them to those
ends which beseem uprightness, Gods glory, man's edification, our own
discharge: and to do them to the end, with constancy and perseverance.

keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Peace, if it run from us,
to be followed, Heb. 12.14
Ephesians. 4.3. In one word; Let thy cares be for God, for thy soul, for thy
neighbor: All other things either hate, or care not for. And the
deceitfulness of riches.]

The second sort of thorns, is deceitfulness of riches.
The second sort of thorns, which the Parable mentions, are riches: to which
the Text ascribes two qualities, both prejudicial to the Word, and salvation:
1. They are choking thorns: 2. They are deceiving thorns. Of both which I may
say with Gregory, Greg. Mag. in Lucae 8.
Quis mihi crederet, si spinas diuitias interpretari vellem, cum illae pugnant,
istae delectent? Who would believe me, if I should interpret these thorns to
be riches, seeing thorns do prick and vex a man, but riches delight a man?
Yet our Savior Christ, who is the eternal Wisdom of his Father, gives us
this interpretation: and that most aptly.

1. Wealth is spina pungens, pricking thorns, Riches aptly compared to
thorns, in 4. things.
full of molestation. For as thorns pierce men's bodies, so, they that will be
rich, pierce themselves through with many sorrows, 1. Tim. 6.10. And as a man
walking upon thorns, is pricked on every side; so is a man greedy cogitatio
comparandi, round about him, labor augendi, behind him, timor amittendi, dolor
relinquendi, periculum iudicandi: The craving thoughts of getting, the labor
and toil of increasing, the fear of losing, the sorrow in forsaking, the
danger of reckoning, prick him on every side.

2. Wealth is spina vulnerans and cruentans, it wounds Ahab brings the blood
of Naboth upon his soul and family, for Naboths Vineyard. And Judas brought
the blood of Jesus Christ upon his own soul for ever, for thirty pieces of
silver.

3. Wealth is spina spolians, a worldling in seeking his wealth, loses his
soul, as Shimei seeking his servant,

4. Wealth is spina suffocans, choking the Word, seed cast into the ground.

Doctr. There is great danger in riches, to choke a man's Religion, Doct.
Riches, great enemies to Religion and salvation.
and disappoynt his soul of salvation. For as thorns are to a ground sown,
so are riches to the soul, or the soil where the seed of Gods Word has been
cast. As corn can hardly prosper where the one grows, as hardly can the Word
where the other grows up with it. 1. Tim. 6.17. Timothy must charge rich men
concerning the dangers of riches: so vehement a charge needed not, if they were
without danger. Math. 19.23. Verily I say unto you, that a rich man shall
hardly enter into the Kingdom of God: which our Savior would not have so
asseuered, if the way to heaven had layne so open and smooth for riches, as
their Masters think. And he observed in his preaching, that the poor received
the Gospel, Math. 11.6. Rich men had other matters to do, and greater things
in their eyes. 1. Cor. 1.26. Brethren, you see your calling, Not many mighty,
not many rich are called; but God has chosen the poor and base things, etc.

Quest. Cannot a man be rich and godly? or may not riches sort with salvation?
If a rich man cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven, who then can be saved,
say the Disciples?

Riches, good blessings in themselves. 3. Reasons.
Answ. 1. Riches are good blessings in themselves, and of themselves hinder
not. For the promises of them are made to those that fear God, Psalm. 112.2.
Riches and treasure shall be in their house. And, as simplicity, baseness,
poverty, saues none; so wealth, power, wisdom condemn none, in themselves. 2.
The prophecy is, that the rich shall come to the people of God, and join with
the Church, Esa. 60.11. Psalm. 22.29. 3. The Lord acknowledges of many rich
men, that their riches are a crown on their heads, by the many good works
they do thereby, Prou. 14.24. Some there are, whose wealth lifts them not up
in pride, but exalts them in works of mercy. As a crown is an ornament to the
head: so riches commend the wisdom, and piety, and faith, and charity of a
godly man. They cannot make a man good or evil, wise, or foolish, but only
manifest a wise man or a fool. So in Eccles. 7.11. Wisdom is good with an
inheritance: it is good without it, but more eminent with it, more conspicuous,
more useful.

Therefore for resolution of the doubt, note, 1. That our Savior says not, It
is impossible for a rich man to be saved, but very hard. And the Apostle says
not, Not any, but, Not many. 2. Christ speaks not so in respect of the
possession or use of riches, but only of the abuse, as it is expounded, Mark.
10.24. when a man trusts in riches. 3. With God (says our Savior) this is
possible, who made Job exceeding rich, and fenced all about him that he had;
yet so godly withal, that there was not another so godly upon earth as he,
chap. 1.8, 10. And it is Augustines observation: Seruatur pauper Lazarus,
August. in Psalm. 51.
sed in sinu Abrahami diuitis: Poor Lazarus was saved in the bosom of rich
Abraham. 4. Riches choke not, and condemn not as a cause, but as an occasion.
The cause is not in them, that we are choked by them; but in our selves, in
our corruption and weakness, who abuse a good thing, by which we might
further our salvation: not watching against the neglect or contempt of the
doctrine of salvation, which usually attends them. Now they are as a sword in a
mad man's hand; and must not be rejected themselves, but only their abuse.

Quest. How do riches choke the Word?

Answ. Three ways: Before hearing, In hearing, After hearing.

Riches choke the Word 1. before (...), 3. ways.
I. Before hearing they choke and hinder from receiving the Word, three ways:
1. Great men have great employments in their hands, and cannot be at leisure
for preaching: they may not let their business one hour in a week. Felix
has no leisure now Paul, but will take another time. And Martha cannot let the
time, to hear Christ himself. And hence are those many objections against
weeks Lectures, as altogether unseasonable, and indeed needless. But was not
Martha reproved for so slighting the preaching of Christ? And what? Is not this
loss of time (as some call it) the best redeeming of time? When Paul preached
to the Gentiles at Antioch, (...).
the Gentiles desired him to preach the same words the next Sabbath between,
Act. 13.42. Was this commendable in them, and is it reproouable in us
Christians?

rich men charged, 1. Tim. 6.17.
that they be not high-minded. Riches commonly breed pride, and high minds.
Pride in a man's self breeds contempt of God, and his Word: as Pharaoh, Who is
the Lord? and the Prophet says, Hear, and give ear, and be not proud, Ier.
13.15.

3. Great men have a great happiness in their To the thirsty, Esa. 55.1.

II. Riches choke the Word in hearing. As thorns spread themselves, and occupy
the room where the seed should grow: 2. In hearing.
So the inordinate love of the world stuffes the heart with worldly desires and
motions, and takes up the room from all spiritual. Judas his heart once taken
up for covetousness, there is no room left for the gracious admonitions of
Christ himself. The Lord observes and forewarnes Ezekiel of this choke-weed in
his Hearers, chap. 33.31. They shall come as people use to come, and sit before
thee, and hear thy words, but they will not do them; nay, they will make
jests with their mouths, because their hearts go after covetousness. Can
your thoughts be carried to heaven and earth at one time? When you bring your
business to Church, and suffer your thoughts to range upon your work, and
worke-men, wares and returns, Farms and profits, can you carry away any good
lesson? While you come with a purpose to hold your usury, injustice, or deceit
in word or trading, do you not make a jest of Gods Word condemning these
things, and you for them? Do we not read in the Gospel, that whereas Christ
was often opposed in his Doctrine, he was not mocked but of the covetous, Luke
16.14?

3. After hearing.
III. Riches taken into the heart, choke the Word after hearing, both in the
profession, and in the practice of it. 1. Hinder profession.
1. They hinder the Word in the profession and confession of it. It is thought
good policy for him to follow Christ, that has nothing to lose for him. But
take heed none of the Rulers believe in him: or if they do with him well, let
them come with Nicodemus, Mat. 11.6.
in the night. Let the poor receive the Gospel, and be forward Professors;
but you are a rich man, soon espied, and if you come once to be noted, you may
be no small loser by it. So rich men will say, Your doctrine is good, and I
would the times would bear it, and we might be allowed to follow it, 2.
Hinder practice, as in six instances.
but I have many eyes upon me, etc. 2. They hinder the practice and obedience
of the Word: as we shall see in some instances.

1. The Word persuades to humility, and low conceit of our selves: But riches
do swell up the heart with loathsome pride, and make a man think of himself
so much better than of another, as he has gotten wealth (perhaps by wicked
means) above others: whereas wealth well gotten, makes no man better; but ill
gotten, far worse. How contumeliously did Nabal use David, 1. Sam. 25?
Because he was wealthy, he was proud and haughty.

2. Gods Word persuades to trust and confidence in God, who is our life, and
the length of our days, only of power to do us good. But wealth easily
persuades the heart to make gold the hope. Holy Job disclaimes this practice of
a wicked man, Chap. 31.24. If I said to the wedge of gold, Thou art my
confidence; If I rejoiced, because my substance was great, or because my hand
had gotten much, etc. it had been iniquity: for I had denied God above. The
rich man's riches is his strong Tower in his conceit, he thinks himself
well-walled and entrenched within his wealth, and rests under the shadow of the
wing of his wealth; which he is not content to have, unless it have him, his
heart and trust.

3. Gods Word persuades to works of charity and mercy, and to be rich in good
works. But love of riches choketh this Word, shuts up the bowels of compassion
against his brother, shrinkes up the hand that should open and stretch it self
to the necessity of the Saints, suffers not to honor God with our riches, nor
to provide for our selves any other wealth but that in earth. Thus the
miserable man has riches while he lives, and when he dies, they are goods,
never do good before.

4. Gods Word teaches to leave our riches for Christ, and that naked Christ is
wealth enough. But love of the world chokes that Word, and makes us, for an
handful of the world, to forsake Christ, and the holy profession: as we see in
the young man, who went away heavily, because he had great possessions. Judas
must have thirty pieces more than he could gain by his Master. The like of
Demas.

5. Gods Word teaches, to restore ill-gotten goods, as by usury, deceit,
oppression, lies, etc. Zacheus, so soon as he was converted, restored
fourfold. But the love of the world choketh this Word, and hinders
obedience: worldly men part with unlawful profits, as with their joints, nay,
will rather part with their souls.

6. Gods Word teaches, that every man should maintain himself and his family
in a lawful and honest course of life, and not to esteem that penny his, for
which he may not praise God as the giver. But this Word is choked in a number,
both Ministers of justice, and Ministers of the Gospel, and Tradesmen, that
receive a great deal of wealth from the devil, and not from God; in a number
of unconscionable courses: And especially they that live by wicked and unlawful
Trades, Dicing-houses, filthy houses, Play Houses, and such places of idle and
hellish resort; which one not unfitly calls, The devils house of Office. And
such Victuallers, Vintners, and Ale-sellers as suffer brutish creatures to wash
away their reason and discretion, so they may lick away their money: as if it
were not a foul sin, to live on the foul sins of others. Thus riches
choke the obedience of the Word, and suffer not a man to serve God, or obey his
Word, further than serves his own commodity.

Use 1. Take notice of that vanity with Solomon, Eccles. 5.13. who observed
riches reserved to the hurt of the owners. Men have given them the name of
goods, as if there were no danger in them, or evil to the possessor by them;
who yet (we see) may easily dispossess himself of Christ, and salvation by
them. How many have we seen, while they were in low estate in the world,
humble, gentle, meek, forward and zealous; who now in prosperity are grown
fat, proud, disdainful, and slothful in spiritual things? How many in their
low estate were diligent Hearers, profitable conferrers of the Word, careful
obseruers in sanctifying the Sabbath, fruitful instructers of their families?
But now the world is come in upon them, and the business of it thrusts in, and
the poor man that cannot serve two Masters at once, is gone back, and grown
lazy, yea and at length lothing that good Word, the sweetness of which he
has tasted, and decreased in the Spirit, as fast as he increased in the flesh.
As the Moon never suffers Eclypse, but in the full; So these in their fullness
suffer the earth to come between them and their Sun, who in their wane were
safe enough.

Here for our further instruction, we will consider two things: 1. The Marks
of a man, in whom the world choketh the Word. 2. The Remedies.

I. The Marks are five.

1. In his whole desires he is more earnest after goods, than after grace.
Psalm. 4.6. 5. Marks of a man in whom the Word is choked by wealth.
Who will show us any good? This is the speech of many. But a few say, Lord,
lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. The blessing of Esau, the
fat of the earth, most men desire most: But the blessed dewes of heaven, and
saving grace in the means, are as refuse wares not asked after. Tell a man of
a good bargain, or a good purchase, he will give you both his ears, he will
bestirre himself, and his only fear is, to be prevented: Tell him of the
bargain of heaven, and of the purchase of that inheritance among the
sanctified; Act. 26.18.
yea, (says he) God send us that inheritance above all; but if God send it
not, he will neither be at pains nor cost for it. If God should put many of
us to our choice, whether we would have wisdom, or wealth, or long life, or
power over enemies; we would scarce, with Solomon, choose wisdom in the first
place; but would either have wisdom with an inheritance, or an inheritance
without wisdom.

2. His speeches will bewray him, in whom the world choketh the Word. For
as he chiefly savors the things of the world, and affects them; so out of the
abundance of the heart his tongue runs chiefly on them. 1. Ioh. 4.5. They are
of the world, therefore speak they of the world. Follovv this man from a
Sermon, you shall mark, that presently being out of the Church, he falls into
discourse of vvorldly matters, and earthly things, as if the Word heard, were
not vvorth speaking of: his earthly heart is carried naturally to his center:
Follovv him from a Play, or from the Market, you shall hear him tell the
whole story accurately, and articulately, from point to point; or discourse as
he comes home, of his penny-vvorths, of the chief commodities and prizes. But
alas! when God sets open his Market, that all might buy without money, or
money-vvorth, things of such high price, no man speaks of them, or for them,
because they see no need of any such commodities.

3. In his calling, know him by clogging himself with too much business: an
evident sign of an earthly heart, in which the Word cannot thrive. Martha
troubles and distracts her self with many things, and so slippes the
opportunity of hearing Christ: so, when men surcharge themselves, and in hope
of gain, grapple in so much business, as they leave from their affairs no
convenient time and leisure for the service of God, in public or private, but
God offers the means of salvation in public, they cannot intend it, having mo
irons in the fire; the instruction and prayers of the family are interrupted,
and no time is left for Gods Worship in the family: or the world affoords no
time to meditate on what they have heard; all the thoughts put into their
hearts by a good Sermon, dye as a spark for want of blowing. Here is a sure
note of the Word choked: Choke the worship of God at home, it is choked also in
Gods House, and in public.

4. Unjust getting or sparing of riches argue the choking of the Word: when men
can dig down to hell, or fall down before the devil for wealth. For, had the
Word any place in men's hearts, they would not use injustice, or any unlawful
means to get riches: knowing that the Lord will avenge all such things. So are
they as wickedly covetous in saving and sparing, when just and reasonable
causes in the Commonwealth, or God and good causes call for it: as numbers are
prodigal enough, when the devil or their lusts call for pounds, that grudge
at a penny parting for God, or any good purpose.

5. When a man, by reason of his wealth, grows either secure in his course, or
licentious in his sin, or scornful of admonition, or hateful of reproof,
or puts off duties wherein the Word is clear even to his conscience, that
either he will not undertake all, or not yet, or not at all: This cleares to
such a man, that many thorns lie on his heart, and have beset him to hinder
obedience. Sincerum est, nisi vas, ^uodounque infundis, acessit.
Put a drop of honey into a bottle of vinegar, it is as sharp as before: So,
drop in the sweet Word of God into such an heart sowred with the world, the
taste is not changed, the Word is ouer-mastered.

II. Now follow the Remedies against these choking thorns.

4. Remedies against choking thorns.
1. Consideration: that above all men, rich men should embrace the Word, and go
on cheerfully to heaven. For to whom God has been more bountiful, they are
bound to be more dutiful. Luke 12.48.
To whom much is given, of them much is required and expected. Besides, they
are more free to good duties, not so straightly tied to bodily labor for their
present maintenance, are not burdened with so many distractions how to live,
as poorer men. And further, they must give account for more time, more
opportunities of well-doing, more ability to further the duties of piety, and
works of mercy, than others. How then will they answer it, if they seldomer
hear, know less, obey less, and sin more than others? Therefore in the
first place consider seriously of the large reckoning thou art to make for all
thy large both receipts and expenses.

Psalm. 62.10
2. Circumspection is another help: If riches increase, set not thy heart on
them. Thou may have riches in thy hand, not in thy heart: In thy hand, as a
Steward in trusted to distribute; not in thy heart, as a Treasurer to hoord up:
In thy hand, to save by disposing, what thou losest by reposing in thy heart:
In thy hand and power, so as the world be thine; not in thy heart, whereby thou
becommest his: and yet the world so in thy hand thine, as still the evil of it
be his own. Account it thine to dispose of, others to partake of.

3. Moderation of mind in having and inioying the profits of this life: 1.
Cor. 7.30. -- They that possess, as if they possessed not, and they that use
this world, as if they used it not. Motives hereunto. 1. Consider how much of
all thou have, thou have deserved or art worthy of. Jacob confessed, O Lord,
Genesis 32.10
I am less than the least of thy mercies: and thou art less than Jacob. 2.
Consider how little will serve nature, if a man's mind were not more craving
than his back or belly. And yet grace is content with less. 3. He that
desires but a little, cannot want much; and he that wants not, is wealthy
enough: as he is great enough that is his own master, and can command his own
desires. Consider Agurs request, Prou. 30.8. 4. If God give thee not much, but
scant thee in the things of this life, and it make it precious and comfortable,
it is all one. A little box of Diamonds is more precious than a Mountain of
lead. Pro. 17.1.
Better is a dry morsel with peace, that is, of mind and conscience, than a
stalled Ox with contention. And if he have given this little as a pledge of a
better inheritance, be contented, yea thankful, that thou art an heir in
right, though not in possession. 5. Consider that it is an high point of
Christian wisdom, if the estate and condition be not to a man's mind, to bring
his mind to his estate: Phil. 4.11.
as Paul had learned in all estates to be content.

4. Christian covetousness is a forcible means to draw out these thorns out
of the heart: and has these properties. 1. It makes God the portion, and
accounts not him happy that has wealth enough; but as David, Psalm. 144. vlt.
Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord. 2. It couets that which he may
have both here and hereafter. It is best coveting of that, which a man may
have here, and carry away with him. 3. Because it knows it must leave these
things behind, and cannot carry them away, it will be sure to carry the
comfort of them out of the world, by wise and provident disposing of them to
God, his Church, and servants. 4. It is assured it shall be countable for all;
and therefore is more careful to give a good account of a little, than to make
it more. There is greater praise in managing a little well, than in getting
much together, though never so well.

Use 2. To check the foolish conceit of carnal rich men: who think
themselves the only happy men, because of their wealth. To whom I say, (yet
not I, but the Lord) If thy conscience can charge thee of deceitful getting
thy wealth, God is greater than thy conscience: and, as Judas now thinks his
thirty pieces dearly earned; so shall thou one day, which will mar all thy
mirth. But if thou have gotten them never so fairly, if thou have stuck thy
self fast in this thick clay, and have laid for thy self of them a log in
the way to heaven, go and boast of thy happiness, which has made thee most
unhappy, proud, secure, licentious, and choked the good Word in thy heart. I
say to thee, it had been good for thee thou had never seen penny of thy
wealth, and that thou had lived in beggary all thy days. For that might
have drawn thee near God, at least not have driven thee so far from him.
Thou shall curse the day that ever thou had a penny in thy hand, or heart:
that ever thou dotedst upon so base pelf, to make thee forget thy self and
thy God so far: that ever thou did so ouerload thy self with wealth and
wrath. For all thy present joy in thy wealth, because it keeps the Word out of
thy heart, will be as bitter to thee as wormwood, when thou shall see the same
wealth keep thy soul out of heaven, which in earth kept the Word out of thy
soul: and thou shall bewail thy lost estate everlastingly, when thou shall
see, that had it not been for thy wealth, thou might have been saved.

Use 3. Observe carefully these few rules against these thorns. 1. If we must
seek them, How to carry our selves to these thorns: 6. Rules.
do it not for themselves, but to stop a gap. 2. If we must meddle with them,
be afraid in touching them, as Agur. 3. If we must hold them, gripe them not,
nor clutch them hard; for then they wound. Thorns slightly held, or laid in
the open hand, are harmless. 4. Fence we our selves from them, with love of
God, fear of God, love of his Word, and watchfulness over our corrupt
desires. 5. If we be beset with them, let us warily get out of this thicket,
and lighten our selves of them, by glad and cheerful imparting them, when
godly uses offer themselves. 6. Let us of these thorns gather figs, by doing
good with them, and distributing: Heb. 13.16
for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Or rather turn them into sweet
flowers, of which make emplasters to supply the wants of the needy, and delight
the neighbors with the sweet smell of them.

We see how riches are chokers.

Now see how they are deceivers.

Doct. Riches, full of deceitfulness.
Doct. The danger of riches is not more in choking goodness, than in deceiving
and bewitching the heart that addicteth it self unto them. And therefore the
Prophet calls them deceitful vanities, Psalm. 31.6. For indeed they never
choke, till they have first deceived us.

They deceive men of,
This will better appear, by considering, 1. Whereof they deceive us. 2.
Whereby, or how.


I. They are such deceivers as pilfer not trifles, or base things, but (without
grace in the heart) the best things we have, and might least spare. 1. They
deceive us of Gods Word: 1. Gods Word.
this is in the Text, and was proved before. So in Ier. 2.31. O generation,
take heed to the Word of the Lord: but the people say, We are Lords, we will
come no more to thee. And Chap. 22.21. I spoke unto thee when thou wast in
prosperity, but thou said, I will not hear. And in the Parable, Math. 22.5.
the Farm, and the Oxen, and Merchandise made the ghests make light of the
inuitation to the Kings supper. And is it a small thing to be robbed of this
heavenly wisdom, to which no treasure is comparable? Prou. 3.14. which is
more precious than all Pearls, and all thou can desire is not to be compared
to her. Yet prosperity makes men grow, first, lazy, then, lothers of the
wisdom of God.

2. Their Religion.
2. Riches deceive us of our Religion: 1. To err from the faith, 1. Tim. 6.10.
2. To forget God, Deuteronomy. 8.10. Beware when thou art full, lest thou forget the
Lord thy God. Hos. 13.6. As in their pastures, so were they filled; and their
heart was exalted: therefore have they forgotten me. 3. To forsake God, Deuteronomy.
32.15. He that should have been upright, when he waxed fat, spurned with his
heel: Thou art fat, thou art gross; therefore he forsook God that made him.
4. They easily unfit men for the service of God. Here many do fondly delude
themselves, saying in their hearts, Thus much wealth I will attain unto, and
when I have done that, I will addict my self to the service of God. For
commonly the effect of affluence and abundance, is, to say with Pharaoh, Who is
the Lord? As in Ierem. 5.7. When I fed them to the full, they rose up like fed
horses, every one neighed after his neighbors wife, and committed most brutish
sins.

3. Riches deceive us of our hearts: 3. Their hearts.
as great a deceit as any of the former: while they draw our trust, love, joy,
and principal affections from God to them. The rich man, Luke 12.16. is not
charged that he got his goods wickedly, but of trusting in them, and putting
too much hope in them. Whence the charge is, If riches increase, set not your
hearts upon them, Psalm. 62.10. And thus, with our hearts, they deceive us of
our time, our labor, our thoughts, and endeavors; all which they engrosse from
God, and from our selves.

4. Riches deceive us of sound judgment, 4. Sound judgment.
in three respects: 1. In regard of themselves, to think of them better than
they be; yea, to think basely of grace and the things of heaven, in respect
of the profits of this life. This was a brand of profaneness in Esau, Genesis
25.32. What is this birthright in comparison of the pottage? So of all profane
men, who despise the blessing for the back and belly, and things of this
present life, and set more by an Ox or two, than by the Kings Supper. A
general disease of most men, esteeming riches the greatest blessing that is to
be attained on earth, and finding the sweetest contentment in them. 2. In
regard of our selves, and our own estate. They commonly make a man think
himself better than he is: He can persuade himself he is highly in Gods
favor, because he is rich, and hold himself contented with a false felicity,
which hinders him from seeking to better his estate. Whereas not being of
themselves good in their nature, they cannot make him better that has them:
and Solomon tells us, that these outward things befall alike to all, Eccles.
9.2. How many delude themselves, while they say, If I were not a good man, God
would not bless my labors, so blessing themselves in their riches? And many
think they have received their wealth of God, Zech. 11.5
and thank God for all, when God gave them little or none of them, but a great
part of it is the devils wages, or the worlds wages for some service of
iniquity. And, were not his judgment blinded, he could not look on his
wealth, but withal on his sin and wretchedness in getting and holding it:
and so indeed esteem himself so much the worse by his wealth, as he is
indeed, but not any whit the better. 3. In regard of others, they deceive us of
true judgment and discerning. They make us think, such as enjoy most wealth,
to be the happyest men, and they most miserable that most want it: Whereas we
cannot give instance of more happy men, than those that wanted it: as Lazarus
an happy Saint, which wanted crumbs; and the Apostles happy men, when they said,
Silver and gold have we none: Act. 3.6.
and none more miserable than they that had most of them; as Nimrod, Ismael,
Esau, Saul, Ahab, Baltazer, Herod; And the greatest at this day against the
Church, The Turk, and the Pope, with their adherents, have the greatest part
of the world in their possession. And surely if these things made men most
happy, God would not cast them so liberally on the worst men. For wise men give
to swine but draffe, and swill, and husks, but provide better for their
children and servants.

5. Riches deceive us of our salvation: 5 Of salvation.
according to that of Solomon, Prou. 10.16. The revenues of the wicked tend
unto sin. 1. While our corruptions make them snares to take and hold us in
manifold lusts: To transgress for a morsel of bread, Prou. 28.21. To become
instruments of cruelty, pride, injustice, security, licentiousness, covering
sin with money. To catch at shadows, and lose the things of the life to
come: as our Savior implies in that speech, What shall it profit a man to win
the whole world, Mat. 16.26
and lose his own soul? Lastly, while they take up the heart so, as the Word
shall be no further taken in, than shall serve for their commodities. 2. While
they rob us of many graces, they must needs also rob us of glory: as 1. Of
faith: they make men say to the wedge of gold, Thou art my hope, the staff of
my life, and the stay of my posterity. 2. Of humility: before wealth came, they
were humble, meek, and gentle; now they are proud, disdainful, scornful. 3.
Of zeal: wealth in many has been as cold water to quench their zeal, who
formerly were most careful and forward. 4. Of patience: they make the mind
soft, delicate, effeminate, that it cannot constantly bear any thing for Gods
cause. 5. Of faithful expecting Christ's coming to Judgment: they make the
remembrance of death terrible and bitter. 6. Of perseverance: Demas will
forsake the truth rather than his wealth. And most Apostates have been rich men.

II. The other general point proposed, is, Whereby, or wherein riches without
grace do thus every way deceive us. And that is by false promises, and false
performances.

Riches deceive by false promises of 6. things.
1. They promise contentment, and saciety, but perform nothing but vexation and
discontent. As a man having the Dropsy, drinks still, but is not satisfied by
drinking, but the more he drinks, the more he thirsts: so the worldly mind,
the more superfluity, the less saciety. And needs must that desire be
infinite, which is not satiate with God, who only is infinite: thinking none
in worse estate than himself, if any be better. The heart is larger than the
barnes, or chests.

2. They promise peace and security, which indeed they never bring nor allow
him that does not proclaim war against them. For they lay men open to all
Satan's snares, 1. Tim. 6.9. and to all the violence of men: make them obnoxious
to malice, envy, and theeuery: and as his largeness and thickness of boughs
makes every one desire to lop him, so oftentimes he falls down by his own
weight; whereas without his wealth, he might have stood longer. 2. King. 25.5.
The wealthinesse and stateliness of Jerusalem, did but toll on Nebuchadnezzar
to spoil it: and when it was taken, the King, and the rich men were led away
captive, but the poor were left in the Land, and lived better than ever.
Abundance of wealth proves oftentimes but an halter, or a weapon of death for
the owner.

3. They promise freedom and liberty, but make men drudges to the world, and
slaves to wealth, yea, to sin and Satan for wealth.

4. They promise fitness and forwardness to do good, that they will fit a
man to duties of piety and charity. Many say, If they had wherewithal, they
would relieve the poor, maintain the Ministry, and do more good with their
goods, than they see others do. But as the Mountains, in the bowels of which
is most gold, or silver, are most barren: So they that abound in wealth, for
most part are most fruitless and unprofitable, in respect of fruits of grace
or charity.

5. They promise good wages for faithful service of the world; but deceive
many with false wages. They pay Achan for his service, with loss of his Wedge,
and life. Gehezi, in stead of wealth, for his lie, is paid with a Leprosy,
that stuck to him and his posterity for ever. Saul with loss of all, for
saving a few beasts against Gods Commandment. Ahab, in stead of access to his
Kingdom, for a small plat of Naboths, lost the whole Kingdom.

6. They promise continuance, but are uncertain riches, 1. Tim. 6.17. and have
wings to fly away, when a man has most need of comfort. Men think they have
got a Fee-simple, and made sure for perpetuity: but it is but a mouable, thou
must leave it where thou gotst it. No man can assure himself to hold his
wealth till night: though the fool thinks he lays up for many years. One
spark of fire may suddenly ouermaster a man's whole substance. One unadvised
word or action may confiscate his whole estate, and of an happy man in his own
eyes make him a beggar, a prisoner, without hold of wealth or life. Prou. 23.5.
Will thou cast thine eyes upon wealth which is nothing? for riches takes her
to her wings, and flies away. What are these wings of wealth? Answ. Rust,
moth, thieves, usurers, fire, sword, oppressors, Lawyers, sickness and death:
Other Eagles have but two wings, this has an hundred. And oftentimes it goes
into the hand of strangers, yea very enemies: as a lost Hawke, having lost his
Master, is taken up by them whom he thought not of: Job 27.17. He may prepare
it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver.

Thus let a man serve an hard Apprentiship to the world, he shall be deceived
in his wages; as Jacob by Laban; and being deceived of his expectation, must
content himself, in stead of fair Rachel, with Leah for his labor.

5. Rules to preserve us from the deceitfulness of riches.
Use That riches may not deceive us of so precious things with so fair
promises, consider these Rules.

First, esteem them as they are, and as God and his Word esteems them, and
not as the world does. 1. Esteem them as they are indeed, not as in men's
esteem.
Worldly men put fair titles upon them: as first, they call them goods,
whereas indeed they are nothing less to most that enjoy them. Secondly, they
call them substance, and those that have them, Men of good substance, or
Substantial men: whereas Gods Word calls them shadows, and the pursuit of
them, the running after a shadow, Psalm. 39.6. It calls them vanity, Eccles.
1.2. that is, not only subject to vanity, as all creatures be, Romans 8. but
make a vain show of much good, which they do not perform. Hence also are
they called lies, and nothing, without substance, Prou. 23.5. Psalm. 62.9.
Either take these things on our Fathers judgment, or be deceived with toys
still. The judgment of the world is clean contrary to the judgment of Gods
Spirit, who is so far from calling them substance, as that they are made
non-ens, a mere nothing. Thirdly, men call them profits: but how unprofitable
are they! 1. They profit not in grace, but are step-mothers unto it: and
therefore the poorest men are chosen to be richest in grace: And generally, are
not the richest in wealth, poorest in good works, poorest Christians? 2. They
profit not in the day of sickness: Prou. 11.4. Riches avail not in the day of
wrath. No money will buy the favor of a wrathful King; nor buy out the pain
of one tooth. 3. They profit not in the day of death: cannot buy one hour for
repentance, not a quarter of an hour to set the house in order. 4. They profit
not in the Day of Judgment: a whole world cannot buy out one sin unrepented
of. Lastly, men call wealth, gain, as if all were gain that is gotten: But 1.
What is the gain of an handful of earth, perhaps with the loss of the soul,
and heaven? 2. Our Savior Christ, who best knew what riches are, oppos^th them
to the true gain, Luke 16.11, 12.

Indeed, if they could buy pardon of sin, or merit eternal life, or make a
purchase of heaven, as Papists teach us, then were they goods indeed, and
substance, and profits, and gain: but these titles which the Scriptures
afford them, show us plainly how far they be from such effects.

2. Take them from God.
2. Rule. Take them from God in the right ends, for which God has reached them
to thee: Not to riot on lusts, or employ them as a furtherance to sin; Not to
lay them in thy heart, a room reserved for better purposes; Not to make thee
proud, and swell thy heart, to insult against others that have not thy measure:
For four good ends.
But for four maine ends, which the Lord intends: 1. To exalt and advance
Gods mercy, who has given thee more than others, being in thy self less than
the least mercy, and in way of thankfulness to honor God with thy wealth,
Prou. 39.
in upholding his service and glory. 2. For the necessary and honest
sustentation of thy self; and thy family, in sobriety, humility, and
moderation. Thus Parents may lay up for their children. 3. For the common good:
to uphold the good estate of the Commonwealth, in public payments, tributes,
taxes, etc. Romans 13.6. 4. For the relief of the poor members of Jesus Christ:
to be rich in good works, to do good and distribute, 1. Timoth. 6.18. And
thus to become (as Job) fathers to the poor, eyes to the blind, feet to the
lame: that the loins of the poor may bless us.

3. Rule. 3. Look on them as receipts.
Consider seriously with thy self these three things: Who thou art that have
received wealth: What thou have received: And on what condition thou have
received.

First, Who art thou that have received wealth? 1. Thou art not an Owner, but a
Steward: the money and wealth is thy Masters: thou must not hold it to thy
self, nor lay it out but at his appointment. 2. Thou art not a Freeholder,
but a Tenant at will: thou sit not in thine own, but owe homage, rent,
suit and service. 3. Thou art not a Citizen, but a stranger here, in a strange
Country. If thy wealth were thy own, and might stay with thee, yet can not
thou stay with it.

Secondly, what have thou received? Goods, thou say. But I say, Thy wealth
is not good in it nature, (as not evil) but in it self at the best,
indifferent, and only good in a good use. A worldlings goods are never goods,
till he come to dye: for then they are set at liberty to do others good,
though not himself. They are not good to all men, but to good men only: nor
good, further than they are servants to a further good, and helps to the chief
Good, even God himself.

Thirdly, on what condition have thou received them? Namely, to be countable
for them. And what account can he give, that has defrauded both his Master,
and his fellow-seruants? How dares a servant bring that into accounts, which
he has spent on whores, gaming, drunkenness, Dice and Cards, bolles and
bowls, contentions, and frivolous suites of Law, etc? Hence when at some time
God calls the conscience to reckoning aforehand, that which was so sweet a
morsel, vpbraids him, and is ready to choke him, as Judas; and as the Prophet
says, Ezekiel. 7.19. They shall cast their silver into the streets, and their
gold shall be cast a far off. A worldly and wicked conscience once awaked,
shall wish the Master cast into the sea, or under the bottom of the
Mountains, so it might escape the account and reckoning.

4. Look beyond them on true and substantial riches.
4. Rule. Cast thine eye upon true and substantial riches. First, God in Christ
is true riches: what can be wanting to make a man fully happy, who inioyes God
as his portion? Secondly, Christ himself is the true Treasure, in whom all
treasures are hid; and the Pearl, for which the wise Merchant sells all, and
Paul counts all but dross and dung. What a world of wealth is in the blood of
Christ, one drop of which redeemed a whole world? How rich is his prayer and
intercession? 1. Tim. 6.6
Thirdly, Godliness is the chief gain; that is, the knowledge and profession
of the Gospel: this has the possession of the rich graces of God, Faith,
Love, Hope, Patience, Righteousness; in comparison of which, gold and pearls
are but dross. Fourthly, the Treasure of heaven is worth looking after: Col.
3.1. To have the conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20. Sell all thou have (says
Christ) and thou shall have treasure in heaven.

Now this wealth is undeceivable, performs all that it promises,
contentment, perfect freedom, sound and stable peace, fitness to do good,
abundant and sure wages; with continuance, being a durable riches, not left in
earth, but carried with us to heaven; not consumed with use, but increased. And
therefore was it so sought by the Saints, Heb. 10.34. They joyfully endured the
spoiling of their goods, because they knew they had in heaven a better, and an
enduring substance.

The eager pursuit of these riches would soon and easily bring the other out
of request.

5. Rule. 5. Pray for wisdom well to use them.
Pray first for wisdom and understanding to use these things, before thou
prayest for the things themselves. Pray first for goodness, and then for
goods. For first, they never become truly goods, till grace make them so.
Secondly, they are like wild beasts, not more dangerous in keeping, than in
taking: and must be well watched, that we be not spoiled by them. Thirdly, this
wisdom is promised to them that are good in Gods sight, Eccles. 2.26. wisdom
to provide, knowledge to use, and joy in fruition or right use.

To conclude this point: If we, being to deal with a man in great matters,
were advertised by a friend to look well to ourselves, because we deal with
a Cheater, and one that has deceived almost all that ever dealt with him, we
would thank him heartily, and look to our selves carefully. Now the Lord in
this Text tells us of a great deceiuer, that aims to spoil us of great
things: Why then should we not be thankful to him, and take warning? Why
should we not believe him, but be willingly, continually, and senselesly
deceived, not so much by the craft of the Adversary, as our own simplicity and
corruption? And voluptuous living, or pleasures.]

The third sort of thorns are worldly pleasures.
The third sort of thorns which choke the Word, are pleasures and delights.
Where two questions offer themselves to our consideration, for the opening of
the matter.

Quest. 1. Whether are all pleasures condemned or no?

Answ. Pleasures are of two kinds: some heavenly, others earthly. In the former
there is no danger, but we are every where in Scripture called to them: as we
shall see hereafter. Our Text speaks of the latter.

Quest. 2. Whether are all earthly pleasures condemned?

All worldly pleasures not condemned: 6. Reasons.
Answ. No: for 1. Adam in innocence was furnished above all men now living,
with pleasures and delights in that Garden of pleasure. 2. Since the Fall, the
Lord has still decked the earth with most delectable flowers, in their several
beauties, and varieties of colors and smells, to delight the senses of man:
And he has filled the air with sweet and melodious birds. 3. The Lord that
could now feed us with one kind of meat, as Israel in the Wilderness,
allows us much variety of the creatures for our honest delight: And though he
could preserve us with water, yet he allows us more pleasant drink, and in our
feasts gives us wine in varieties. Yea, himself has given skill to workmen,
to make curious musical Instruments, to delight men with their sweet music
and harmony. 4. He has allowed men, according to their estate and place, to
enjoy many worldly pleasures. It was the blessing of Assure, Genesis 49.20. that
he should give pleasures for a King: that is, his Country should abound with
delicate fruits, acceptable and fit for Kings. In which phrase we see, that
Kings have more right to enjoy pleasures, than ordinary men: and Deuteronomy. 33.24.
He shall dip his foot in oil. 5. The Lord himself appoints some festiuities
and solemn feasts, in which a more liberal and delightful use of the
creatures is requisite: as Nehem. 8.10. Go, and eat of the fat, and drink of
the sweet: for this is a day holy unto the Lord. 6. The Spirit of God
concludes, (though some learned otherwise expound it, as the Atheists speech
brought in by a Prosopopoeia:) Eccles. 3. vlt. that nothing is better, than
that a man should rejoice in his affairs; for that is his portion. And who is
worthy to enjoy Gods blessings about him, in wife, children, family, calling
and estate, that does not rejoice in the same?

So as the thing, which our Text, and this whole ensuing treatise condemns,
is not any lawful and allowed pleasure, of any kind, but that pleasure which
choketh the Word of God, as thorns do seed; whether unlawful pleasures, or
lawful pleasures unlawfully used.

Which I would have observed by the way, to remove a scandal cast upon
Religion and godly life, that it is altogether unpleasant, and heavy, and
strips a man of all delight. This is not so. But first, All the ways of
wisdom are ways of pleasure, Prou. 3.17. Secondly, godliness takes not away
any earthly pleasure, nor the use of Gods mercies, but orders, and moderates,
and sweetens them.

Doct. Earthly joys, shrewd enemies to the Word, and salvation.
Doctr. The prevailing of earthly joys, and carnal pleasures, choketh the
Word, and hinders salvation. An example we have in Eve, whose pleasure of the
eye choked all that Word of God which she had learned, and repeated but even
then to the Serpent. And in Herod: he heard John gladly, reverenced him, and
did many things, Mark. 6.20. but the pleasure of his brothers wife made him
cast John in prison, yea and behead him too: which he added above all his
sins. Judge. 16.17. Samson had undertaken a most sacred profession, of the
Nazarites, in which he was a most eminent type of Christ. While he kept the
law of his profession, not cutting his hair, the mighty power of God was with
him, and for him. But that impotent and base lust, and sottish attending his
pleasure in Delilahs lap, how did it make him forget the Law of God, and so
inslaue him, as he must needs tell her all that was in his heart, till God was
gone from him! 1. Tim. 5.6, 11. What made the widows to break their faith
given to Christ, but wantonness, and living in pleasures?

Object. These are dishonest and unlawful pleasures and lusts: these must
needs choke the Word. But do lawful pleasures do so too?

Answ. Yes, we shall see even in those that had ^ound godliness, how even
lawful pleasures choked the Word, and cast them back in the way of God. How
the love of pleasant meat set the love of good Isaac upon him whom God hated,
see Genes. 25.28. And Solomon tells us the danger of proving the heart with
pleasures, Eccles. 2.2. they brought him to be mad with them: these were
honest and lawful pleasures: but himself tells us, that as they entered into
the heart, so godliness decayed. For as thieves set upon true men to rob and
bind them: so pleasures assaulting good men, bind them, and rob them, yea
often wound them, only kill them not. And hence it is, that in the profession
of Religion, some are found lovers of pleasure more than of God, 2. Tim. 3.4.
and holding a form of godliness, and proclaiming a defiance of vain pleasure,
are yet so moyled and entangled with them, as they grow heavy in good duties,
and drawn on with the persuasions of these pleasing Orators. Had not the
Disciples renounced all for Christ? Yes; Master, we have forsaken all, and
followed thee. But yet do we not see them long, who should be superior, and
contend for greatness one with another, and affect pomp and high place even
in the Kingdom of God, where the smallest is the greatest?

Reasons. 1. Pleasures make, Reasons 7.
that men cannot attend the Word. Some are so carried away with sports, that
neither weeke-day, nor scarce the Sabbath can draw them away to any better
duty. Their delights are so fastened in their hearts, as nothing can fasten on
them. Their thoughts do so attend upon pleasures, that all other thoughts,
tending to the bettering of their estate, are unpleasing.

2. They make, that men cannot conceive the Word aright. The Word offers
pleasures at Gods right hand, which is an object of faith: But the man trampled
on by pleasures, becomes sensual, and judges of all things spoken, by his
corrupt sense, and carnal reason: For his desire is to hear, not what is
best, Non quae optima, sed quae suauissima.
but what is sweetest.

3. Pleasures, where they do prevail, make men securely contemn the Word.
They cast the heart on sleep, and make it vnwatchfull against the threats of
God, Amos 6.1, 3. Woe to them that are at ease in Sion: that put far off the
evil day, and approach to the seat of iniquity. Whence our Savior exhorts, to
take heed lest the heart be oppressed with these excessive pleasures, and so
that day come unawares: as it did on the old world. And no marvel, seeing they
can brawne the heart, and make it senseless against the judgments and
scourges of God. Esa. 5.12. The Harp, the Violl, and Fluit, and wine are in
their feasts: but they regard not the work of the Lord, nor consider the
operation of his hands. Famous in this kind is the example of Nebuchadnezzar:
the Lord sent him his Prophet Daniel to expound his dream, that he must be a
beast for seven years together: yet within one twelve months he forgot all,
and said, Is not this great Babel, etc? Dan. 4.25, 26.

4. Pleasures prevailing in the heart, do make men hate the Word, as a bitter
and deadly enemy. The Word of God is the sword of the Spirit, to cut off these
lusts which are as dear to them as their eyes or hands: And therefore it is so
despised and hated.

5. They thrust out the Word, which reuealeth and offers the pleasures of a
better world. The heart of the fool is in the house of mirth, Eccles. 7.6.
Yea, though God call to mourning, and fasting, or any occasion (whatsoever)
come; he has set himself on a merry pin, he cannot abide to hear of
change, so he may hold his pleasure here still. Babylon will be a Lady for
ever, and set her mind on no other things besides, nor remember the end: Gods
Phisicians would have healed her, but she would not be healed; she laid none of
those things to heart, Esa. 47.7, 8. therefore her end was utter desolation.

6. These pleasures are seldom procured without sin, being the ordinary
baits of Satan cast before men; which while they play withal, and nibble at
them, they are caught in his snare: as Eve by the Apple, which seemed pleasant
to the eye and taste. Balaam knew there was nothing of so much force to allure
the Israelites to Idolatry, and to make a breach among them, and so set God
against them, as to besot them with unlawful pleasures with the daughters of
Moab: then was Israel presently coupled to Baal Peor, Numb. 25.1, 2, 3. Thus
Satan (as a cunning Fisher) baytes his hook with pleasure, and catches
innumerable.

7. These pleasures are of great strength to hold men in sin, against all the
threatenings of the Word, and inuitations to repentance: will not suffer the
heart to think of death, and judgment, and accounts to be given: yea, they
make him maintain a continual war in himself, Iam. 4.1.
against his own conscience, being carried headlong to such things as seem
pleasant, delectable, glorious, and profitable. And against others also: This
man will hate his Preacher to the death, because he condemns his unlawful
pleasure. If John dare say to Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have her, it
shall cost him dear. As for his poor neighbors: he will maintain his
pleasure by oppression, cruelty, injury, any thing: he cares not how sorrowful
and unhappy he make many other men's lives, so he may enjoy his supposed
pleasure. Judas must have his thirty silver pieces, though it cost Christ his
life, and himself his soul, and fill all his fellow-Disciples with much
heaviness. Lastly, such a man is well content to endure any vassalage and
slavery under Satan, so he may enjoy a present pleasure: and Satan is well
content on that condition to allow it him; dealing herein as Cyrus with the
Lydians, Justi. lib 1
who having overcome them, (to gratify and gain them sure to himself:)
allows them to eat, and drink, to feast and play, with all kinds of sports,
games, and gambals; but in the mean time takes away their horses, and armor,
so as they are unable ever to think of recovering their former liberty.

And therefore, seeing these pleasures hinder men from attending and
understanding the Word, make them securely contemn and hate the Word, thrust
out the pleasures of the world to come, are seldom procured without sin, and
are of such strength to hold them in sin: we may well conclude with the
Apostle, 1. Pet. 2.11. that they fight against the soul.

Use.
And seeing they do so, we must abstain from them. The service of lust and
diverse pleasures, is noted for a course of the unregenerate, Tit. 3.3. And
these two go hand in hand, disobedient, serving pleasures. Therefore beware of
the prevailing of pleasures, and as thou meanest the Word should profit in thy
heart, and tendrest thy own salvation, weed out this voluptuousness, a mere
choke-weede of grace.

Here for thy further help in so necessary, and withal so difficult a duty,
I will set down three things: 1. Motives, to resist these pleasures. 2. Marks
of a man, in whom they prevail above the Word. 3. Means, or Rules how we may
enjoy them, without choking goodness.

I. Motives, or reasons to dissuade from the pursuit of pleasures, are six.

1. Consider where thou art. 6. Motives dissuading the pursuit of pleasures.
We are now banished out of the Garden of pleasure: we are in this world, kept
out of Paradise with the shaking of a sword: and do we expect another Paradise
in this Wilderness of Baca, and valley of tears? Wast thou not borne weeping,
into the valley of weeping? Shall thou not dye, and go forth weeping? and can
thou live in laughing and merriment? While thou art here obnoxious to so many
miseries, laden, and daily loding thy self with so many sins, conflicting
with so many tentations, beset with so many enemies: can thou be so
senseless, or mad rather, to give up thy self to carnal pleasures and
delights? Remember thou art now in Babylon, and sit by the waterside of
afflictions. A member of the Church, that now remembers Sion, and his own
Country, whence he is for the time banished, will rather sit down and weep,
and mourn in the Country where they be strangers, The vigill must go before
the holy day: the fast, before the feast.
and cannot sing the songs of God, rather than addict himself to carnal
pleasures, and profane delights. This seems to be the Apostles argument, 1.
Pet. 2.11. As strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts. Now a
stranger looks for no great matters in his journey, nor expects pleasure till
he comes home.

2. Consider what little content or saciety there is in these pleasures. Let
him try this conclusion who will, after Solomon: he shall find he shall
sooner surfeit of pleasures, than fill himself with them. One sweet morsel
drives down another, and still is the carnal heart insatiable. And it is with
a man drunk with pleasures, as a man drunk with wine: his drunkenness
increases his thirst, but quenches it not. Let a man compass his pleasure in
any kind, he may think, the attaining of his desire will quench his desire:
but it proves but as water which the Smith casts on his coals; it seems to
abate and quench the fire, but it makes the inward heat and concupiscence more
burning and raging than before.

Besides, the eye of the wise is clear to discern how little of true pleasure
a carnal mind is capable of: and they themselves, who most enjoy worldly
pleasures, can sometimes conceive their own joy to be only in the face, and
not in the heart: and that their laughter is like to madness, from the teeth
outward, and not so inward as it seems.

And seeing such pleasures as delight the carnal appetite, are seldom
compassed without sin, what true joy can be there, where, in the heart, is
fixed a sting of sin, which marreth all the sport? Or, if the delight be
sinful, the conscience that smarts not for it in inioying it, is the worse,
benumbed, and seared, and far from true joy or pleasure, though outward
delights tickle him never so much: He laughs as a man in pain being tickled,
but his vexation within is never the less.

3. As there is little content in earthly pleasures, so is there less
stability or continuance: the time is short, 1. Cor. 7.29. One well says of
pleasures, that they come like Oxen, slow and heavily, Dolor and voluptas
innicem cedunt: Ereuior voluptas.
but go away as Posthorses, all on the spur, and stay not. How long does
the pleasure of most delicate drink stay beyond the swallowing, or of the most
sweet music beyond the hearing; or the most odoriferous smells, longer than the
flower is held to the nose? Spend whole days and nights in merry sports,
Plays, pastimes: does the delight last longer than the present fruition? And
then leaving us empty, do they not recompense men with some sorrow and grief,
that they seem now robbed, either of their pleasures, or of their time spent
in, and for them? How truly are pleasure and sorrow called twins; no sooner
is one borne, but the other holds his heel? Yea, the fairest and sweetest
earthly pleasure is as hardly found without some molestation, as a Rose without
his thorn. Make the world thy Paradise, and thy belly thy god; thy Paradise
shall cast thee out shortly, and thy god which thou seruest, shall pay thee the
wages of thy service, and then thou shall see it was but (...), pleasure for a
season, Heb. 11.25. like Jonas his Gourd, soon worme-eaten and withered.

4. Consider the danger of inioying worldly pleasures, 4. Great dangers in
worldly pleasures.
which is fourfold. First, a voluptuous life is a walking upon snares and
ginnes, which the wisest and most oculate man hardly auoids without being
taken. Alas, how vain is the pleasure of birds, feeding about the snare yt
immediately shall bring them into the Fowlers bag! How vain is ye sport of
fishes, playing with a deadly bait! So dangerous and unsafe is it, to addict
our selves to these alluring baits of worldly pleasures. Now go a while into
your own hearts, and see whether in those worldly pleasures you have most
swallowed, you have not sometimes smarted: if not so, whether if there be any
smart in sin, you had not cause by them. Be not like the horse or mule, Psalm.
32.8. yet the poor beast having once fallen into a hole, will not fall into the
same hole again, if he see it: and poor silly birds will avoid the same nets
and ginnes, Aues vagae in easdem pedicas retiaque non incidunt. Hieron.
which had beset them.

A second danger is, the slaying of the soul, by the pampering of the body. 1.
Tim. 5.6. Delicate widows are dead while they live: there is no way to
reconcile the seeming contradiction, but to say, that the delicate living of
these widows deprived their souls of the life grace, and Spirit of God: and
so being dead in sin, and in soul, were utterly unprofitable, immovable in
duties of grace and heavenly life: This fearful estate, the following of
pleasures brought them into.

A third danger is, the loss and refusal of heavenly joys and pleasures. For
God is not so prodigal of his best blessings, as to bestow them where himself
shall be sure to have least thanks for them, or themselves are vnder-valued.
Shall Esau have the birthright, that preferres pottage before it? And shall
he have heavenly treasures, and lasting joys committed to him, and thrust
upon him, that prefers every trifling vanity, and base pleasure before them? A
carnal man is a natural fool: he had rather have a piece of painted glass,
than a Diamond: and would a wise man bestow a precious Pearl on such a fool?
No, let him have his choice, and envy it not to him, but pity him, that with
Esops Cock, contemnes a Pearl, and scrapes after a Barley corn. The misery of
this man is, to be delighted with his misery.

A fourth danger is, the indissoluble connection of pleasure and judgment, to
them that are lovers of pleasures more than of God or their duty. If thou will
eat the forbidden fruit, and reach forth thy hand beyond Gods allowance, to
please thy senses, in the day thou so do, thou shall dye the death. If the
Pastor will take his ease, and fail in his pains, the blood of his people
shall be required at his hands. If the young man will take his pleasure, and
walk in the sight of his own eyes, he must remember, Eccles. 11.9
that for all this he must come to Judgment. Luke 16.25. The Parable bids the
rich man remember, Thou had thy pleasure here, and Lazarus pain: now
therefore thou must be tormented, and he comforted. And woe to you that laugh
now, for ye shall weep and mourn, Chap. 6.25.

Nay, not only are these two tied fast together, as with an Adamant chain;
but every dram of this sweet pleasure, shall be recompensed with a Talent of
sorrow and grief: As he that by a moments delight in meat and drink, has
surcharged his stomach, and surfetted himself, must recompense half an hours
pleasure, with some months of deadly pain.

5. Consider the difference between godly and wicked men: One has lusts and
pleasures, the other serves lusts and pleasures. Pleasures will be knocking at
the godly man's door, and he sometimes lets them in, but he takes not thought to
accomplish them, as the other does, Ita curandum corpus, vt and castiganau^: 1.
Cor. 9. vlt
Romans 13. vlt. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the lusts
and affections, Gal. 5.24. The one holds his pleasures and lusts against the
Word, as we have heard; the other takes the Word, the two-edged sword, the
sacrificing knife of our lusts, the pruning knife of our pleasures, and applies
to himself, 1. The precepts, which command to cast down every thing that is
exalted against God, 2. Cor. 10.4. and to possess our vessels in holiness and
honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, which is directly contrary
thereto, 1. These. 4.4. 2. The threatenings, which tell us, If we walk after the
flesh, we shall dye, Romans 8.13. 3. The promises, which are all made to them
that cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, (whereof
voluptuousness is one) and to such as grow unto full holiness in the fear of
God, 2. Cor. 7.1. 4. The examples of Scripture, as 1. Cor. 10.6. that we should
not lust after things evil, as they lusted, with whom God was not pleased.

6. Consider the examples of holy men, which will plainly demonstrate, that the
people of God, and his dearest Saints were far from a life led in pleasure.
Genesis 47.9.
Jacob professed, Few and evil have my days been, that is, full of
affliction. And Moses chose to suffer affliction with the people of God: Heb.
11.25, 26.
when he was of age (says the Text) he refused the pleasures of Pharaohs
Court, and the treasures of Egypt. The like of the Apostles, and other Saints.
But especially if we will be conformable to our Head: Did he spend his days or
nights in pleasure? Yea, was not his life painful and sorrowful, etc? Do we
ever read of him that he laughed? but that he wept, we often read.

The ordinary estate and condition of Gods people, is, to suffer adversity,
Heb. 11.25. The way to heaven is all strawed with crosses. By many afflictions
we must enter into heaven, Act. 14.22. And all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus, must suffer persecutions, 2. Tim. 3.12. And we must acknowledge the
bitter things laid on the breasts of the world, to be of God, to weane us from
the love and pleasure of it.

II. The second General proposed, is, 7. Marks of a man in whom pleasures
choke the Word.
Marks of a man, in whom pleasures prevail above the Word. And they are seven.

1. An vnder-valuing of better pleasures; as of Gods House in earth, or in
heaven: when men account of no such pleasure, as that they enjoy in earth and
earthly things. This mark is given, 2. Pet. 2.13. They shall receive the wages
of unrighteousness, as those who account it pleasure to live deliciously for a
season, that is, when men, as Epicures, place their felicity in present
pleasures, which is indeed the life fitter for brutes, (whose soul, if it be
not their sense, rises not beyond their sense:) then for men, who are not
only reasonable, but Christians.

Yet many such there are in the world: Men undervalue better pleasures, five
ways.
as 1. When men are heavy to the Temple: which argues no pleasure in Gods
presence, nor in the presence of Christ, who walks in the midst of the seven
golden Candlesticks, Revel. 1. Nor in the presence of the Spirit, who blows
especially there: nor in the presence of the Angels, who desire and stoop
down to see the things handled, 1. Pet. 1.12. nor of the Saints, who are said
to meet the Lord in Sion, Psalm. 84.7. Now where could a good heart with more
pleasure rest it self, than in Gods resting place, in Christ's society, in the
way of the Spirit, in the Ministry of Angels, and fellowship of Saints? Psalm.
84.10
Did not the Prophet count one day in Gods house better than a thousand
elsewhere? And did he not profess, Psa. 26.8. Lord, I have loved the
habitation of thy House, and the place where thine honor dwells? And was it
not prophesied of all Believers, that they should assemble as Doves fly to
their windows, and as clouds driven by the wind, Esa. 60.8?

2. When the delight is more in temporal food, than in spiritual; and a man
can be more joyful at his own table, than at Gods. Whereas David found
nothing so sweet to his taste, as the Word, and preferred it before his daily
food; yea, before his sleep, Psalm. 119.148. Will not every man say, that to
taste how good God is, is the best taste? yet most men taste more sweetness in
the white of an egg, than in him.

3. When men have more delight in the devils books, than in Gods: and can be
more jolly in tossing and shaking the cards and dice, than in turning and
reading Gods Book. Or to speak of more lawful recreations than they; If a
man take more pleasure in any recreation, than in better exercises, his
pleasure is sinful and choking.

4. When men take more pleasure in their special calling, than in their
general: in gathering money, than in gathering grace: in worldly riches, more
than in heavenly; now it is choking. David esteemed the Word above thousands of
gold and silver. The wise Merchant esteemed the Pearl above all his estate.
And a good heart (as Paul) esteems all things dung and loss, for Christ. And
according to the estimate of things, is the pleasure and delight in them.

5. When men prefer an empty joy, above fullness of joy: the pleasures of
Gods left hand, before those of his right, Psalm. 16.11. a drop of pleasure,
before a river; and a drop of life in misery, before the Well of Life in mercy
and glory, Psalm. 36.8, 9.

2. Mark. When men make light account of Gods Call, in respect of the call of
their pleasures; let them be otherwise never so lawful, now they are sinful.
Gods Commandments must stand by, while their pleasures command them. 1. Sam.
15.3. Saul had an express Commandment to smite Amalek, and have no compassion
on man, woman, infant, suckling, Ox, or Sheep. But it pleases Saul to have
compassion on the King, and the fat beasts: A good booty: He shall enrich
himself with the Kings ransom, and such a large prey will spare his own
beasts, at least serve him for sacrifice a long time. Lots wife had an express
charge and menace, on pain of death, not to look behind her: But the care of
her house and goods, with the love of her friends, made her forget the
Commandment, to her own destruction. God commands, not to swear at all, but
pass the ordinary speech by yea and nay: Yet men ordinarily swear, and
accustom themselves to break the Commandment: Why? for it is their pleasure,
and custom, and they cannot leave it. God commands to do no servile work on
the Sabbath day, nor to meddle with the duties of the calling, no manner of
work: Oh but now it would pleasure my neighbor, and advantage my self to
serve a customer. Now a man is at the command of his own pleasure, and Gods
Law must stand aside. God commands, not to run easily out of our calling on
the weeke-day, or if any time be to be spared, to redeem it to the general.
But games, or sports, or drinking-company calls day by day: now farewell the
Commandment, Gods Book, and counsel: farewell both callings, nothing can call
so forcibly as his play and pastime; nothing so necessary, nothing so pleasing.
What other is the cause of all adulteries, slanders, reuenges, railings,
murders, and effeminate contentions among men, but that they are as slaves to
their own lusts, and the command of them, and Gods Commandments can take no
place?

3. Mark, When a man will not be at so much charge for God, for good duties,
and his own salvation, as for his pleasures and lusts. When men can waste and
riot out abundance of money in feasting, gaming, excess of apparel; but to
maintain Gods Worship, to feast or cloth the poor servants of Christ, they
have no will or desire: nay, their hawks and dogs are more chargeable to many,
than God himself, his service, and all the poor members of Jesus Christ. Let
pastime call, there are pounds and pieces ready: But let the poor call, let
the Law, and good order call for them, there are not pence wrung out: let
Preachers call, not good words.

4. Mark. When a man cannot be at so much leisure for God and good things, as
for his own pleasures, and carnal desires. He grudgeth no time spent in
pleasure, but all, or the most time in Gods service is but lost. He can waste
out hours, and weeks, and months, in sports, can sit nights and days at
Cards, or Dice, or other vain exercises; but with much tediousness sit out an
hour in Gods House. He has sundry hours in a day for himself or his friend,
to communicate and talk together, to order family-businesses, but very seldom
takes half an hour to confer with God privately, in reading the Scriptures,
in prayer, meditation, or instructing his family: one half hour in a month
is too-too much, and may not be spared. How little is God and his Word beholden
to these men, who are underlings to their pleasures?

Yea, some are so dogged, and such enemies to goodness, that as they cannot
take any time themselves, so will they not be persuaded to allow any time to
others about them, for any good exercise. No time that their servants and
children waste otherwise, is comparably troublesome to them, as that which they
employ in reading, hearing, or such like exercises. So malignant is the
constitution of many, that although their servants would redeem the hour of a
Lecture, twice over in a week, yet like hard taskmasters, they will not
afford it at any hand, but esteem of Gods Word and service as Pharaoh, Exodus
5.4, 17.
Ye are too idle, and Moses and Aaron make the people idle; and so hold them
straiter on that Day, though they remit all the week after. Let Pharaohs
strokes warn them betime. It was noted a great disproportion in Solomon
himself, to spend seven years in building Gods House, and thirteen in his
own: Yet our times spend seven, and thirteen in their own houses, none, or
very little in Gods.

5. Mark. When men shun all molestation, and the means which would set them
free from their slauishnesse, and service of pleasures. When in Gods house they
cannot endure such teaching, and teachers, as would pull them both from
unlawful pleasures, and the abuse of lawful: Such men as Micah never
prophecy good unto them: For who would willingly have his eye pulled out, or
part with his lusts as dear as his eyes? Hence are all the stirs and tumults
against godly Ministers: they would prevail against wicked men's pleasures: but
they will not be tormented before their time: they will rather abstain from
Gods House hereafter, ordinarily and wilfully.

So when men at home shun all gracious and sauory communication, driving away
all mention of God from their tables, from their discourses, and please
themselves in following unsavory and unfruitful, if not hurtful speeches, all
the day long. Also, when they distaste godly and fruitful company, by whom they
might help their souls out of the snares they are in: the man is an
abomination to them, that has good and sauory words in his mouth. Oh this is
to bind him for the time to his good behavior: he must not swear, nor jest,
nor scorn, nor be loose and corrupt in his speeches; and then must he sew up
his lips, and say nothing. But loose and libertine company, that will swear,
and drink, and game, and rail against these strict fellows as fast as he,
these are his delight: now he can be pleasant and jolly, and as a fish in his
own element.

6. Mark. Immoderate sorrow when he cannot obtain his pleasure, is a note of
a man subdued by pleasures, in whom Gods Word has no part. 1. Kin. 21.4. Ahab
is sick, and cast upon his bed, for Naboths Vineyard: for he cannot tell how
to compass it. All Hamans honor and favor with the King pleased him not,
because Mordecai bowed not unto him. 2. Sam. 13.2, 4. Amnon was vexed sore for
his sister Thamar, grew sick and lean. He that inioyes a thing moderately,
can be moderate in the forgoing of it: What I lightly love, I can lightly
leave. But if David love Absalom too well, he will grieve because he cannot
dye with him, nay for him: Would God I had dyed for thee, O Absalom, my son,
my son. Affections are so much the more impotent in the loss, as they are
more potent in the fruition of any thing.

7. Mark. The immoderate fear of death, as the end of all pleasures and
delights: the memory of it is bitter to a man ouer-ioyed in his pleasures, the
approaching of it dreadful, but the stroke of it most doleful: because he has
no better, or other pleasure in his heart for the present, than that which the
world affoordeth, which has gone with him as long as she could; and much less
any expectation of any hereafter.

These are sure marks of him that is ouercarried with pleasures against the
Word.

The goodness of the giver commends the gift.
III. Now seeing we are not Stoics, to condemn all pleasures, nor unthankful
declamers against Gods goodness, that has filled our lives with comfort,
neither may unwisely cast away the good with the refuse; and seeing our lives,
without some pleasure, would be as a long journey without any Inn; much
labor, no comfort or refreshment: Let us learn in the next place, how to
carry our selves toward, and through our pleasures, so as they may not be
choke-weeds, either of the Word, or our own salvation by it.

^. General rules how to carry our selves through our pleasures.
The first Rule concerns the person affecting pleasures, who must look he be
a sanctified man. For (says the Apostle) only to the pure, all things are
pure, Tit. 1.15. Neither is there any true peace or pleasure, without peace of
conscience, and the sense of remission of sins: 1. The person must be
sanctified.
for sin thrusts out true pleasure; and here we say, as Iehu in another case,
2. King. 9.22. What peace, so long as thy sin remains? And we read in
Scripture, that only the godly and righteous are commanded to rejoice, Psalm.
32.11. And 40.16. Let all those that seek thee, rejoice and be glad in thee.
It beseemes only the upright.

2. The choice: for
The second Rule concerns the choice of our pleasures, three ways: 1. For the
matter: 2. For the circumstances: 3. For the kind of them.

Matter.
1. For the matter, they must not be pleasures of sin, which every godly man
must refuse, with Moses, Heb. 11.25. For to rejoice or delight in sin, is the
top of wickedness: and all such end either in repentance, or damnation. But
for the matter, they must be in their nature either good, or at least not
evil. Therefore they that pass their days in surfeiting, drunkenness,
chambering, wantonness, lusts, uncleanness, unlawful sports and recreations,
have made an ill choice for themselves, of that which should be hateful to
all Christians: see Esa. 5.22. Habak. 2.15. Math. 24.45.

2. Suppose our delights be good in their nature, Circumstances.
and matter, yet if they be bad in circumstances, we may not now choose them, as
indifferent. If any lawful delight have some blot upon it, or be become a
fashion or guise of profane men, who are excessive and inordinate in it, if I
may forbear and choose another, I must not meddle with that. The Apostle, Phil.
4.8. will have us delight in nothing but that which has some virtue, praise,
or good report in it.

This Rule will make choice of the best recreations, of best example, best use,
and least abused. It will choose the best fashion of apparel, of the most sober
and grave of our rank, and shun such as have the note of lightness,
curiosity, vain affectation, new-fanglednesse, and fashioning to the times.
But how many cast off all consideration of advised circumstances? out of which,
the inioying of lawful pleasure is most unlawful. As for example: Suppose
some kind of Stage Plays were lawful, were it not unlawful to play in a
Church? Suppose dicing and carding were as lawful as most men would have them,
must therefore Ministers be gamesters, women dicers, children and servants
pass away their time in such games? Nay, because eating, drinking, and sundry
games, as bowling, shooting, be lawful, must I therefore, or may I do these
in all companies? May I sort my self with swearers, ruffians, riotous persons,
without respect of company? were not this to ensnare my self, and offend
others? Yes: For fit circumstances are the grace or disgrace of most lawful
pleasures.

Kind. Non subtra^untur voluptates, sed mutantur pijs August. in Psalm. 74.
3. For the kind: Make first choice of the best kind of pleasures: First,
because it is a note of a good man to desire to rejoice with the joy of Gods
people, Psalm. 106.5. Secondly, as the godly are different from the world in all
their courses, so also in their pleasures: now the worldlings chief pleasure
is, when his corn, and wine, and oil is increased, Psalm. 4.7. Thirdly, this
kind of pleasures will make us not merrier only, but better both in body and
mind.

Quest. Wherein stands the joy of Gods people?

Joy of Gods people is in 7. things.
Answ. 1. In the Lord himself: Psalm. 37.4. Delight thy self in the Lord.
Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, Rejoice. And why? For
first, a man hereby returns to his true pleasure again. When man forsook
God, true pleasure forsook man: and when men chiefly delight in God, they go
back again to the chief Good and pleasure. Secondly, why do we love or
delight in any outward thing, but because of the beauty and pleasantness of
it? But, can there be so much beauty or pleasantness in the creatures, Greg.
as in the Creator? Thirdly, what a shame is it for Christians, not to be able
or willing to find so much joy and delight in the Lord, as wicked men do in
forced merriments? Fourthly, is not that the perfect joy, which arises out of
the presence of that which is most perfect, and shall be most perfect in
heaven, because of the immediate fruition of him who is most perfect? Fifthly,
is not this the next way to perpetuate our joy and pleasure, to set it on him
who is everlasting and indeficient?

Besides all this, we all know, that the true pleasure of a Christian is, 1.
For the present, in the favor of God, reconciled by Christ: only by his
atonement, the soul is at sweet peace and repose in his love, as the child in
his fathers arms, Romans 5.11. 2. For time to come, in his mercy and salvation,
Psalm. 9.2. and 13.5. 3. In his presence, when he shall be a Sun unto him,
to refresh and revive him, Psalm. 84.11.

2. In Jesus Christ; Phil. 3.3. We worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in
Jesus Christ. The wise Merchant takes more pleasure in the Pearl, than all his
substance beside. Paul accounts all things loss and dung in comparison of him.
The blessed Virgin rejoiced in God her Savior: and Zacheus received him
joyfully. How can the faithful soul, being the chaste Spouse of Jesus Christ,
delight in an^^hing in the world, above, or comparable to her so sweet Head,
and dear Husband? If we, as chaste Virgins, conceive Christ in our hearts, and
claspe him with the arms of faith, as Zachary, here is cause of sound joy, and
true pleasure indeed. Take delight in his Nativity, but especially in thy
nativity by him.

3. In the testimony, and graces of the Spirit. First, in the testimony of the
Spirit, that our names are written in the Book of life; in this rejoice, Luke
10.20. This joy in the holy Ghost is unspeakable and glorious, 1. Pet. 1.8. He
is the great Comforter of his Church, an everlasting Spring of joy and
pleasure, which no wicked man ever tasted of, Ioh. 14.16. Secondly, the graces
of the Spirit are full of delight: faith has a special pleasure, called, The
joy of faith, Phil. 1.25. Even temporary faith has great joy, much more
justifying faith. Hope also has his pleasure, even the expectation of pleasure
at Gods right hand for evermore, Romans 12.12. Rejoice in hope. What a sweet
pleasure is it in the spring, to see our seeds and plants grow and come up in
our gardens? How much more pleasant is it, to see the buds of the Lord grow in
our hearts, to the vn-rooting and ouer-mastering of the weeds of sin? Sweet
is the contentment of grace: but the comforts of Gods Spirit, bedewing the
foul in the thirst of it, is like a shadow in a great drought.

4. In the Word and Ordinances of God: Ps. 112.1. Fearers of God have great
delight in his Commandments. The Gospel is a deep Well of precious promises;
and the Spirit works consolation by the Scriptur^^ Romans 15.4. There is the
joyful tidings of salvation: there the doctrine of free Remission of sins,
and Redemption by Jesus Christ, is proclaimed: there are the pleasures of Gods
House, and the Word which is food for Gods children; Cloth an infant with gold
and pearls, and make it heir of the whole world, yet nothing pleases it but
the brest-milke: so here. In the Word also are described the ways of
wisdom, which are ways of pleasure, Prou. 3.17. and all thou can desire,
is not to be compared to her.

5. In the testimony of a good conscience: that they walk in simplicity, and
godly pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom, 2. Cor. 1.12. and have not
willingly moyled their conscience in lusts and pleasures, but have cherished
the lust of the Spirit against the lusts of the flesh.

6. In the communion of Saints; to enjoy their fellowship, being present, and
rejoice to hear of their welfare being absent: To rejoice in the prosperity
of the Church; as Iethro, when he heard of all the good that God had done for
Israel, Exodus 18.9. Yea, to prefer Jerusalem before our chief joy, Psalm.
137.5, 6. when the Gospel runs with free passage.

7. In Evangelical obedience, both in action and passion for the Gospel.
First, serve God with cheerfulness, Deuteronomy. 28.47. as Christ's meat and drink
was to do the will of his Father, in this he rejoiced, Psalm. 40.8. Secondly,
rejoice even in afflictions for the Gospel, and for the Name of Christ, as
wherein is greater pleasure then in the honor and greatest pleasures of the
world. Gal. 6.14. God forbid I should rejoice in any thing but the Cross of
Christ. Heb. 10.36. the Saints with joy suffered the spoiling of their goods,
and would not be delivered. Col. 1.24. Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you,
etc. For, is there not more true pleasure, in helping Christ (as Simon) to
bear his Cross, tha^ by the ouerflowing pleasure of the world to forget
Christ and a man's self?

Oh therefore let us lay fast hold on these pleasures, what ever profit or
pleasure we forgo for them. Bodily pleasures are not so always, but as the
body is disposed to them: what can delight a sick, pained, and dying body? But
these pleasures, being in themselves true and sound, are never irksome, never
loathsome as the other. And whereas bodily pleasures are at last fugitives and
runnagates, when their Master has most need; these never forsake their Master,
never take their leave, but are perpetual, yea, eternal.

That is the second Rule, for the choice of pleasures.

The third concerns the manner, and measure: in four particulars.

3. The manner of using our pleasure. 1. Weanedly
1. Use them weanedly: rejoice, as not rejoicing, 1. Cor. 7.30. Power not out
thy heart to pleasure, but be moderate and retired. A wary Christian will ever
be allaying his wine with water, and make a measure to his pleasure. Prou.
25.16. If thou have found honey, eat not too much. We may soon take too much
of these hony-sweet pleasures.

2. Watchfully.
2. Use them watchfully. Consider how easily they steal the heart, and filch
the time: How Satan wraps up infinite sins in these sweete-sugred pleasures:
And how hard it is to escape shipwreck by them, impossible to escape danger;
some have avoided one, never any avoided the other.

3. Wisely.
3. Use them wisely. First, not seeking, or not addicted to pleasures. It is no
wisdom to be foremost, or Instigators. Secondly, rather using pleasures than
inioying them. To use a thing, is for some other thing: to enjoy it, is for it
self: August. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 11. cap. 25.
whence Augustine speaks of some who enjoy their gold, but use their God;
because they bestow not their money for Gods sake, but worship God for moneys
sake: So, many among us may truly be said to enjoy their pleasures, and use
their Religion. Thirdly, distinguish recreations from the vocation: both for
instance in them, which is the sin of our Gentry and their followers, who
have no vocation but recreation: and for the end; the vocation is to get means
of living, to enrich a man's self, and get money, for his own and others good;
but God has never set apart play to this purpose; and how fond are they that
use sport, to beggar themselves and their Family? Fourthly, restrain wisely
thy passions about thy pleasures, and use them not as occasions of discord,
impatience, swearing, or any impotent passions.

4. Use them Christianly: 4. Christianly.
1. Maintaining the fight between the flesh and the Spirit: 1. Pet. 2.11.
Lusts do always fight against us, and therefore we must always fight against
them. 2. Manifesting, that we love not the pleasures of our pilgrimage better
than the pleasures of our Country: for no wise man will be so delighted with
the light of the Moon, as to contemn the light of the Sun. 3. Fearing
pleasure more than misery: because the bitter root of affliction (as the
Fig Tree) brings oftentimes most sweet fruit, but the ordinary end of pleasure
is bitterness and sorrow.

Now consider here how great was the temperance of former ages, in regard of
outward pleasures. How plain and homely the ages before the giving of the Law
were, the whole story shows. Under the Law, how coorse was Eliahs mantle! how
sparing his diet! that when he had eaten, the Angel came the second time, and
bad him eat more: but our superfluity is such, as we have need of an Angel to
come daily and bid us eat less. How coorse was the fare and diet of the new
Testament, in John Baptist! how remote from the pleasures of this life! Timothy
so abstinent, as Paul bids him drink no more water, but a little wine for his
healths sake. But if Paul were to write to a number of our Timothies, who are
so busy with health, he would charge them, if they loved their health or life,
to drink no more wine.

Such was the austerity of former ages, some few hundred years after the
Apostles, as brought a great superstition and blind devotion, wherewith the
Church and world has been ever burdened since, and could not be delivered.
But now, so far is the world degenerate, and gone to the contrary, as the
excesses and superfluities of it have brought in every whit as much Epicurisme
and Atheism: and the true God was not more departed from in that blind god,
than in this belly-god. So hard it is to walk in a mean, in the offers of
pleasures.

Consider also what great losers they become, that dote upon pleasures. As the
foolish Fly, delighted with the light of a candle, regards not the heat of the
flame, but burns first one leg, afterward another, and still takes no warning,
till it be wholly consumed. So worldly pleasures make men, first, senseless to
good things, then, dead and deaf to admonition, and senseless of smart, till
they lose Religion, I had almost said, reason it self.

The fourth Rule concerns the season of pleasures. 4. The season of pleasure.
Eccles. 3.4. There is an appointed season for every purpose under heaven: a
time to weep, and a time to laugh: therefore there is a time, when it is
unseasonable. It is the Epicures fashion, at all times to have his garments
white, and at no time to have oil wanting to his head, Eccles. 9.8. And of the
rich Glutton, to be arrayed in purple, and fare deliciously every day, Luke 16.
He that follows pastime, is a waster and scatterer, and a gamester is none of
Gods creatures: God allows him no place in heaven, or earth. To follow sport
every day, draws a man to as much profaneness as Esau, whose wantonness
brought him to forgo his time, the blessing of his father, the favor of God,
and his own salvation.

First therefore, Four unseasonable times for pleasure.
the season of worldly pleasures must not be the time of our calling; in which
every man must abide. They are not so good as the calling and duties of it, and
therefore this must not be hindered by them. Whence one aptly calls pleasure a
parenthesis coming between our labors, which hinders not, but helps the
series and course of them.

Secondly, the season of worldly pleasures, is not walking and wandering about
pleasures and pastimes. And seeing our Text has taught us, that there is such
a force in pleasures to choke the Word, the taking of pleasures on the Sabbath,
when we should be at holy exercises, must needs be more dangerous to distract
the mind, and drive out the Word, and dead all motions and affections stirred
by it, than to work in the calling: Whence a Father has well said, In Sabbato
melius est arare quam saltare.
that It is better to go to plough on the Sabbath, than to go a dancing.

Thirdly, the season of worldly pleasures is not, Suffer affliction, sorrow,
and weep; let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into
heaviness; cast your selves down before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
This is to work with God, the other against him.

So when men are afflicted with sickness, and God calls to sackcloth; now
must neighbors come in, and help him to pass the time, with cards, dice,
drinking, swearing, and all carnal merriments. O miserable comforters! Is any
among you afflicted? let him pray, says Saint James, Chap. 5.13. Is any sick?
let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray, etc. But these
say, Let him play, and call the Elders of the Parish, and let them play with
him. See how you comfort the sick, Prou. 25.20. As he that takes away garments
in a cold season, so is he that sings songs to an heavy heart. And see how
he is comforted! he thrusts mourning out of his house, when his heart remains
the house of mourning.

Fourthly, the season of worldly pleasures is not, Vriah refused comfort, 2.
Sam. 11.11. and Mordecai, Hest. 4.1, 2. And Nehemiah, Chap. 2.1, 3. And the
sin of the great men in Judah (Amos 6.6.) was, They drink wine in bolles,
and stretch themselves on Iuory beds, and anoint themselves, etc. but, no man
remembers the afflictions of Joseph. Or when the hand of God lies heavy upon
our neighbors, that are of the same flesh with us: Romans 12.15. Weep with them
that weep. For we are all one body, and one members of another; and if one
member suffer, 1. Cor. 12.26.
all ought to suffer by consent.

These are unseasonable times for the prosecuting of pleasures: and therefore
now we must refrain from them.

The fifth and last Rule concerns the end of pleasures. 5. The end of our
pleasures.
The goodness of a thing is measured by the good end of it: and (we say) All
is well that ends well: so here. The end then of pleasure must not be for
pleasure: for then pleasure were the chief end, and the chief good. Nor to
take pleasure in pleasure: only we may take our use of some pleasures, and
not power out our hearts unto them. For this infatuates a man, and puts out his
reason and senses, that he can see no shame he puts himself unto. What a shame
was it, (which yet Samson discerned not:) that he, who would not turn his
face from a thousand men at once, should now become a slave to a lewd woman
that had used him most vilely? Nay, he that was strong enough to match a Lion,
is foiled by his lust, and sottishly vanquished under the feet of an harlot.
Look on a man given to drinking, gaming, whoring, etc. this man will sort
himself with the basest companions in a Town, rather than sit out: even great
Princes, loded with Flagons of wine, will stretch out their hands to scorners,
Hos. 7.5.

Three ends which we must aim at in our pleasures.
This must not be the end of our pleasures: but, 1. To make us better, not
worse: not more loose or dissolute, but more thankful to God, more cheerful
in the duties of our callings, more able to pray, meditate, pleasure: so David,
from the abundant Table that God had spread for him, from his full and
ouer-running cups, from the oil wherewith God had anointed his head, gathers
strength and resolution to dwell a long time, and spend all his days in Gods
House and service, Psalm. 23. vlt. and Psalm. 34.9, 10. because the Lord
suffers his Saints to want no good thing; therefore they are stirred up to
fear the Lord.

Attain this end of pleasure, and thou have attained an endless pleasure.

Reasons thus to carry our selves through pleasures. Motives thus to carry our
selves through our pleasures.


1. Slaves to pleasure, never conquer with Christ, and therefore shall never
reign with him. 2. A regenerate heart desires liberty from the slavery of
pleasures, and counts it a death to be inthralled to them, Romans 7.24. They go
to God with Rebecca, when they feel the struggling of flesh and spirit in
themselves, and complain as she of the Twins in her womb. 3. Christ came
into the world, and made choice of an afflicted way to heaven, Greg.
rather than a fair way of earthly pleasures: that we might follow him
therein, as the safest way to our Country.

So much of the three sorts of bad ground.

We come now to the fourth, which is good. Verse. 8. And some fell on good
ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an hundredth fold.

Compared with the 15. verse. 15. But that which fell in good ground, are they,
which with an honest and good heart hear the Word, and keep it, and bring
forth fruit with patience.

HEre consider, as in the former, 1. The soil, good ground: where, first, how
it comes to be good: secondly, how it is known to be good, namely, by hearing
with honest and good hearts. 2. The success of the seed in it, fruitfulness:
1. For the measure, or plenty, an hundredth fold. 2. For the continuance, or
constancy, with patience. Of these in their order.

And first, how the ground does come to be good. Answ. It is called good, non a
priori, because the Word finds it so; but a posteriori, because by the Word it
is made so. Every man's heart by nature is a stiff ground, a barren and cursed
earth: The whole imagination of man's heart is only evil continually: Every
man is a beast in his own understanding: Paul himself, now an elect Vessel,
is by nature the child of wrath as well as any, Ephesians. 2.2. But as stiff and
bad ground becomes good, by good husbandry and manuring: so do our hearts, by
the husbandry of the good Husbandman: Ioh. 15.1.
He alone changes the heart: He takes away the stones and stiffness of it, Si
debeo totum me pro me facto, quid debeo pro me refecto? Aug. Doct.
and makes it a soft heart. So the Apostle Paul, speaking of himself
converted, says, By the grace of God I am that I am, 1. Cor. 15.10. He only
can create a clean heart, and renew a right spirit in a man, Psalm. 51.10. and
put his fear into his heart, that he shall never depart from him, Ier. 32.40.

Some ground which the Word falls upon, is good.
Doctr. Some seed falls on good ground. Though there be but a small parcel of
good ground, in comparison of the bad, yet some there is where the seed is
cast. It is true, that where the Word is preached, it is to most in vain; as
here, three to one lose their parts in it: But yet some good there be; the
seed falls into some good ground; in some, though very few, it is successful.
When the whole world was a field of brambles, fit for the fire of Gods wrath,
yet of Noah he says, Thee have I found righteous: and he being a Preacher of
righteousness, shall make an Arc, if it be but for eight souls, Genesis 7. When
all Sodom was as a cursed Heath, and a dry Wilderness, yet Lots family was as
a little pikle exempt, in which the Word became fruitful, Genesis 19. In the
Ministry of the Prophets, much of their labor was lost, as themselves
lamentably complain, Esa. 49.4. and 53.1. Who will believe our report? or to
whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? showing, that very few will believe the
doctrine of Christ's humiliation and abasement: to which, that place leads us
in Ioh. 12.38. and yet there was one of a City, and two of a Tribe, and still a
small remnant whom the Lord would save.

Our Lord Jesus, while himself preached the doctrine of the Gospel most
clearly, and confirmed it powerfully by many miracles, yet but one here and
there received it, scarce one of a thousand: so as himself laments their
hardness of heart, and weeps over Jerusalem: and says plainly, that few
shall be saved, and that the way which leads to life is narrow, and the gate
strait, and few find it. But yet he has a little flock: Fear not, little
flock, Luke 12.32. When many took offense at his doctrine concerning the
eating of his flesh, Ioh. 6. yet his Disciples acknowledged that he had the
words of eternal life. Ioh. 10.20. When some said he was mad, and had a
devil; others said, These are not the words of him that has a devil, nor yet
the works: for, can the devil open the eyes of him that is borne blind? When
the multitude decreed to excommunicate whosoever should confess him, yet the
blind man will justify him in the Synagogue, Ioh. 9. When the whole Council
and body of Jews assemble against him, there is a Simeon, a Zachary, Hanna,
and Elizabeth, which adore him: yea, at his Cross, his mother, his Disciple
John, and many other good women.

The Disciples of our Lord, when they preached after him; some raised up
persecution, but some believed; sometimes one of a City, as Lydia, Act. 16.14.
And sometimes a few more, as at Athens, Act. 17.32. some mocked at the
Resurrection, but some claue unto Paul, as Dionysius the Areopagite, and
Damaris, and some other: see Romans 10.16. And ever since, the smallest number
receive the Gospel; yet some do, who are as the gleanings, to the harvest;
and as the Grapes to the vintage, and but an handful to the rest.

Reasons. 1. From the similitude in our Parable: such is the wisdom and care
of the Husbandman, Reas. 1.
that he will not bestow his seed where is no hope, but that all the seed and
labor will be lost: though there be many stones, and many thorns in a field,
he will sow, because all is not so; but if it were all so, he would not lose
his seed: so the Lord, the wise Husbandman of his Church, will much less
bestow, his labor and husbandry on a soil altogether hopeless and
fruitless: but he will see some good ground intermingled, for whose sake he
does bestow his seed. Again, does the seed belong to any but good ground? or
does the Word properly belong to any but the true Believers? No: it has an
effect in others, but it is the portion only of these.

2. The proper end and use of the seed is, 2
to gather in an harvest: and the proper end of the Word is, to gather and
preserve a Church unto Christ. God has sanctified a Ministry, for the
gathering of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.11. Christ's own Ministry in Jerusalem was,
to gather them to life and safety, as the Hen gathers her chickens, Math.
23.37. and to work faith in so many as are ordained to eternal life, Act.
13.48. And therefore, where God sends and continues his Word faithfully
preached, there are some to gather, some to be brought to the faith, one time
or other. The grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation, Tit. 2.11. And
therefore ordinarily, where God affoords this grace, it brings salvation to
some, though never so few: ordinarily the Word attaines even this end in some.

3. As the Lord, when he will prosper a people, and maintain their natural
lives, 3
blesses the seed sown, to increase, and thereof gives them an harvest: but
on the contrary, when he will send a famine to consume, he affoords them no
seed, or no harvest: Even so, where he has a good purpose to preserve any to
eternal life, he sends the Word to this purpose. Paul must go to Corinth,
and stay there a year and six months, because the Lord had much people in
that City, Act. 18.10, 11. For their sakes it is sent, and for their sakes
continued: insomuch as the Apostle, 1. These. 1.4, 5. doubts not to make it a
note of the election of some, where God sends a powerful Ministry. And
contrarily, where God has no delight in a people, and none to call by the
ordinary means, he sends a famine of the Word, Amos 8.11. When the Nation of
the Jews proves so barren, as the labor is not worth the while, then the
Kingdom shall be taken from them, and given to a better people, Math. 21.43.
As in the times of ignorance, and darkness of Popery, for many hundred years
together, when was no preaching, no ordinary means: which times God has now
ouer-passed, and now admonishes all to repentance. So as we doubt not, but
where Christ utters his voice, he has some sheep to hear him, Ioh. 10.27.
see Act. 22.18.

4
4. Those many epithites and titles given to the Scripture, show the same. The
Word is called, The ministry of the Spirit, of life, of righteousness, 2.
Cor. 3.8. because it ordinarily finds out some, in whom it is effectual, and
upon whom it bestows the Spirit, and life, and righteousness. It is a Word
of wisdom, (subiectiue and effectiue) it will find out the children of
wisdom, who will justify their mother, Luke 7.35. Act. 20.32.
And the Word of Gods grace, given of grace, and giving grace to some or other
where it is sent.

5
5. A reason hereof may be taken from the extent of the Church, which is now
stretched out into all Nations: so as the Gospel of Christ is the power of God
to salvation, to Jew and Gentile, Romans 1.16. Now God has some friends every
where, and in all places some that belong to his Election, and shall be
brought to the faith; some in Sodom, some in Egypt, some in Nero's house,
Phil. 4.22.

Use 1. To comfort poor Preachers, and faithful Ministers: that though most
Hearers be unprofitable, yet some shall take good; there is a fourth part of
good ground. No field so barren, but true pains will bring up some seed,
though but thin, and a little in comparison: So no Town or people so bad, but
the faithful preaching of the Word will in time win some.

Object. Oh I see no fruit: I have labored in vain, and spent my strength in
vain, Esa. 49.4. Answ. 1. Seed comes not up so soon as it is cast. Wait a
winter, and thou shall see it again. 2. Thou losest much labor, and in
comparison labourest in vain: but it were hard, if all were lost: ordinarily
some labor proves. 4. Thou may sow, another may reap thy seed: and all
the time thy labor has been preparing to fruitfulness, and now produces
fruits. 4. Thou may not see any fruit of thy labor, and yet thy labor not
lost. Elias was of a clear sight, yet saw not one of 7000. that profited by
his Ministry. 5. If all thy labor were lost in regard of men, yet thy work
is with the Lord, and thy judgment with thy God: with him it is not lost.

Again, the Minister has no grief to an obstinate and wilful people; that
he seems to sow upon a Rock, some on a pathway, and some on a thicket of
thorns: He that was ignorant, is ignorant still: He that was Popish, is
Popish still: the profane, the swearer, drunkard, contemner, mock-God, is so
still. Thus is he disappointed of his end, being willing to save all, and
spoiled of his Crown and glory, 1. These. 2.19.

4. Comforts for a godly Minister, who seems to lose much labor.
But consider for thy comfort, 1. This was Christ's own case: he taught in the
best manner; never man spoke so, Ioh. 7.46. yet most of his Hearers
unprofitable. Now thy seed is no better than his, thy skill short of his, thy
labor nothing to his. 2. Be thou so much the more diligent as the ground is
stiff: Secundum laborem, non secundum prouentum.
and thou sha^^ receive according to thy pains, not thy increase. The more
distempered thy Patient is, as a good Physician, be thou so much the more
careful: though thou can not cure him, but he die under thy hands, thou
losest some comfort, some labor, that he might win some: for he knew he
should never win all, 1. Cor. 9.22. Romans

Use 2. Seeing of all the flocks and troops that followed Christ, his flock
was a little one, his part the smallest; it teaches us, not only to attend
the Ordinance of preaching; but also to look to our hearing. A great number of
people attended about the Poole, Ioh. 5. but only one was cured at once; even
he that stepped first in, after the Angels stirring of the water. So numbers
throng and flock in populous Congregations, about this Poole, but in very few
it is effectual to conversion and salvation: it were happy if we were sure
one stepped in, every Sermon. Our Savior tells us, that many are called, but few
are chosen, Math. 22.14. Rest not then in outward hearing, continuing in
unfruitfulness. Take heed how you hear, says our Savior, Luke 8.18. If
three parts of four lose their labor in hearing, and if not Hearers, but
Doers of the Law shall be justified, then must we so hear, as we may
believe, obey, and be saved. And if many of them that use the means of
salvation, shall not be saved, where shall wilful Recusants, obstinate
absenters, and careless contemners of the Word, appear? He that uses
physike, may dye: but he that refuses, or wilfully scorneth physike, and
Physicians, must dye, and that deservedly.

Use 3. Not to define a Church by multitude: Leave that absurdity to Papists.
Here are three parts of four, bad ground, which reiects the truth, and chokes
the Word. Some shall hold the truth, but a few in comparison; and three to one
against it; nay, sometimes three hundredth, or four hundredth to one; as all
Baals Priests against Eliah, and 400. false prophets against Micaiah. Nay, not
one voice of four, but all parts are against the truth: all cried, Crucify,
crucify Christ, let him be crucified, Math. 27. and not one voice against the
Calfe, Exodus 32. The triumph of truth must be held and maintained in the world
by a few, in one Enoch, one Noah, one Lot. Let none doubt of the truth, because
it is held by a few: three parts of four must reject it: And this is sure,
that the best things commonly have not most voices, but the greater part
ouercomes the better.

Use 4. To confirm us, both against the paucity of such as receive the
Gospel, as also the apostasy of many forward and hopeful Hearers. If Noah
had looked what the old world did, or Lot what the Sodomites did, or the tenth
Leper what the nine did, or Elias what the false prophets did, they had sped as
ill as they. Not to look what others do, but what our selves should do.
Therefore let us look, not what others do, but what our selves should do.
Neither let us be as many, who condemn the whole profession for some
Professors that have declined and shrunk in persecution, or have been choked
with cares, riches, and pleasures of the world: for our Savior here teaches,
that three to one, who seem to receive the Word, yea, many that rise up into a
blade, stalk and ear, never come to fruits and ripeness: and the Apostle, 1.
Ioh. 2.19. Some went out from us, because they were not of us. But let us
strive to be of this little flock, these few that fructify and persevere.

Use 5. To stir us up to thankfulness, when people enjoy this mercy, that
God has some good work in some of them: and express our thankfulness, in
being of their number and company. Quest. How shall I know that? Answ. If thou
be not only called by a general calling, but by a special. Why, what is the
difference? Answ. The former is a bare inuitation to Christ, by the preaching
of the Gospel, sounding in the ear. The latter, a drawing of the Elect unto
true faith, by the mighty work of Gods Spirit in the heart. That brings men to
knowledge, profession, external reformation at farthest, without inward change
and renewing of the heart. This inlightneth the mind, distinctly to know the
doctrine of salvation, as it is laid down in the Scripture; and boweth the
will to embrace it readily, joyfully, constantly; and to begin to obey it
unfeignedly.

Now, as there is some good ground, we are in the next place to inquire what it
is, or how it may be known: And this ground is called here a good and honest
heart: Using a double Epithet, either by way of exposition, showing, that by a
good heart he means an honest heart; or by way of collection, noting a double
grace, both of inward purity, and of external fruits, and reformation.

I. It is called a good heart in two respects: The heart called good in two
respects.
1. As emptied of bad qualities, 2. As well qualified by grace.

1. It is emptied of bad qualities, being clean contrary to all the bad
disposition of the three former kinds of ground. For the first ground
neglected keeps the seed. The second received the seed, but the Sun withered
the fruit, that it continued not: but this brings fruit with patience, says
our text. The third brings fruit, but among thorns, and so is choked: but
this seed is cast in good ground, freed from such choak-weeds and lusts. So as
being contrary to all the other, it receives willingly, retains constantly,
and perseueres fruitfully unto the end.

good ground. 2. It hears the Word beyond the other: the former heard it, but
without desire: this hears with study to learn, and industry to understand.
3. It keeps the Word in memory, mind, and practice: the other heard, but
kept nothing, because there was no fit place to keep it in. 4. It brings
fruit: in the other was some care to hear, but here is a care of
fruitfulness. 5. It is careful to proceed in grace, to double and increase
the measure of fruits, from thirty to sixty, and so to an hundredth fold: but
the other soon fall from their measure. 6. It has obtained by grace an
invincible fortitude against temptations and trials, so as no fears or forces
shall remove them from the study of piety, and fruits of grace: for they bring
forth fruits with patience, as the other did not.

An honest heart, why so called.
II. So also it is called an honest heart. As good is a general word, excluding
evil qualities, and including good: so honest also is a general word, and put
for the whole approved disposition of the soul, containing both civil and
religious honesty.

Civil honesty is enjoined, Romans 12.17. Providing things honest before all
men: that is, in such gravity, sobriety, equity, and comeliness, as may
beseem your persons; avoiding lightness in speech and talk, in deeds and
actions, in apparel and gesture, in gate and behavior. For even civil
honesty is more than to be honest of a man's body: even to mind things honest
and comely in the whole course, and to walk in all things gracefully and
seemly, Phil. 4.8. It fights therefore against civil honesty and seemlinesse;
to see a Magistrate running after plays and gamballes, like boys: a Minister
carowsing and quaffing among boon companions: an ancient man garish and light
in attire and youthful fashions: an ancient woman tricking her self, and
trimming like a wanton girl: a young man frequenting Tauerns, Innes, and
Alehouses, or lascivious with the other sex: a young woman full of talk,
much in the streets, or familiar with others, than of her own sex.

But that is civil honesty, when men in their places carry themselves before
men, as may win reverence and grace to their persons.

And yet that is the least part of the honesty here meant. There is further a
religious honesty of the heart, namely, the inward purity, integrity,
simplicity and sincerity of the heart, when it is plain and single, as
Nathanael, A true Israelite, in whom was no guile. It is known by opposition
to hypocrisy or guile: it makes not a show of goodness, nourishing sin
within. And it labors to produce things honest, not before men only, but also
before God, 2. Cor. 8.21.

From this rank of honest-hearted persons, are excluded, 1. Debosht persons,
who having shaken off the fear of God, and shame of men, care not for, but
cast off all honesty, both before God and men: as the unjust Judge, Luke 18.3.
2. Civil honest men, who walk honestly before men, but care not for honesty
of heart before God. 3. Hypocrites, who will seem to be honest-hearted before
God, but neglect honest, equal, and approved carriage before men.

Doctr. Goodness of Hearers, esteemed by goodness of heart.
Doctr. The Lord esteems the goodness of an Hearer, by the goodness and
honesty of his heart. And this is the difference of a sound and elect Hearer,
from the reprobate and fruitless, that the Word makes the heart of the one
honest and fair, and so keeps it; but the other abides stubborn and
deceitful still. David is commended in Scripture for a man after Gods own
heart, because he hid the Word in a good heart, Psalm. 119.11. And Josiah,
because his heart melted at the reading of the Law: and Mary, because she
pondered things in her heart.

Reas. 1.
Reasons. 1. As in all other parts of Gods worship, so in this, the
Commandment calls for such an heart. Prayer must proceed from this good and
honest heart, Psalm. 119.10. With my whole heart have I sought thee. Praise
must proceed from it. Psalm. 86.12. I will praise thee with my whole heart.
Repentance must be a turning with the whole heart, Ierem. 24.7. They shall
turn to me with their whole heart. In a word, all duties performed to God or
man (in the Ministry, and servile subjection) must be done heartily, Phil.
1.8. Col. 3.23.

2
2. Both the promise of acceptance, and acceptance it self is with this
condition. The promise is in Ier. 29.13. Ye shall seek me, and find me,
because ye shall seek me with all your heart. And of Judah in the time of Asa
it is said, that they had sworn to the Lord with all their heart, and sought
him with the whole desire, and the Lord was found of them, 2. Chron. 15.15.
Acceptance also, and approbation from God, is, when the heart is single,
entire, and true in good duties, and the intents of them: not reaching after
private ends, nor cunning in the secret carriage and contriuing of sin or
hollownesse. He cannot abide a double heart, a varying, and a deceitful
heart, nor a heart divided between himself and the world: that rests
satisfied with the deed done, but cares not whether it proceed from soundness,
or no. One property of sinners, hateful to God in their pretenses, is, that
they are double-minded: and Ezekiel. 33.33. Iam. 4.8.
The Lord scorns the show of hearing the Prophet, when the heart goes after
covetousness.

3. This Hearer is only approved of God, 3
because it must be a good and honest heart indeed, that must yield to all the
parts of Gods Word. It must be a good and honest heart, that will endure
mortification of all lusts, and suffer the very heart of his dearest sins to
be broken: that will for the Word endure cutting off of hands, and parting
with eyes. It must be a good and honest heart, that with Paul can set up the
excellency of the knowledge of God above all advantages: that can be content
to sell all, and buy the Pearl: that with the Disciples can leave all, and
follow Christ. It must be a good and honest heart, that must yield obedience
to the whole Law of God, without reseruations; especially in difficult, costly,
or dangerous duties. It must be a good and honest heart, that is not offended
at the baseness of Christ, and simplicity of his Gospel; but can for his sake
suffer with joy the spoiling of goods, yea and resist unto blood. And (which is
the chief goodness of it) to resolve to yield universal obedience, not by
starts and fits, but with constancy to the end.

4
4. Only this Hearer is approved of God, because this heart only can mingle
the Word with faith, receiving specially the Word of promise with distinct and
particular application, and affiance of the soul, drawing the man nearer unto
God: whereas any heart, but this, is an evil heart, and unfaithful, making a
man depart from the living God, Heb. 3.12. This heart only cleaues unto the
Word, and holds it fast, so as the Word of God abides in it, and lodges not as
a stranger, but dwells in it: whereas a bad heart is like a bad stomach,
which receives meat, but retains it not, and casts up all again, so as all
is lost; as precious liquor put into a leaking vessel.

Use 1. To frame our judgments to Gods, and account them that are the best
Hearers, to be honest-hearted men. But our judgment generally is clean
contrary: For if we see men addicted to the hearing of the Word, commonly they
are esteemed a few hare-braind men, a pack of hypocrites, all alike, and never
a good. Ask any man almost of the state of one of his neighbors, who is
diligent in good duties, frequent Sermons, etc. you shall hear him say, Oh, he
is a reasonable honest man, but that he is so forward to hear Sermons, and so
precise, etc. Thus, that which Christ made a mark of an honest man, is now a
bar or hinderance to his honesty: he were an honest man, if he were not an
honest man. Caius Seius vir bonus, sed Christianus.
It was said of old by Heathens, Oh, a good man, wise, and learned, but a
Christian: so in these days by heathenish Christians, He is a good man, but a
Precisian, but a Puritan. What is this, but to give the Son of God the lie, who
says here, that he is the honestest man, that hears the Word most carefully?

And as we condemn the righteous, so how general is it in our judgments, to
pass our voices in justifying the wicked? Inquire of such a man's estate, as
cares more for a Pigge than a Sermon, a right Gadaren and worldling: he will
tell you, He is a right honest man, a substantial man, a jolly housekeeper, a
quiet neighbor, a well-dealing man, and well beloved of his neighbors, a man
good to the poor, etc. All this is well. But how loves he Religion? how
follows he the Word, for hearing and practice? how affects he the Ministry,
and Ministers? Oh, as for that, he is well enough, gives the Church and
Churchmen their due, and pays his Tithes well: but he cares not for these
runners to Sermons, he is none of them: he keeps his Church, and hears
Service, and a Sermon, if there be any, and is a very honest man. Now you see a
difference of honest men. Christ's honest man runs after and follows the
Word: this honest man, so generally commended for honesty, is no such, and
cares for no such. Such honest and substantial men were they that put Christ
to death; as good housekeepers; as good, and as just Tyth-payers, even in Mint
and Anise: but they hated him and his Doctrine to the death. If he be an honest
man, that loves a Play better than a Sermon; or he that affects a pair of
cards or tables, above the Scriptures, our Lord verily was deceived in
describing honest men. But accursed be such honest men, and such as call them
so, without timely repentance.

Use 2. In coming to hear, look most to that which God looks most unto,
namely, the goodness of thy heart. Thy care is to make thy self handsome, to
come honestly and seemly in apparel: But if thou come with a foul, nasty,
sluttish heart, God cares not for thy coming. God accounts him the best Hearer,
that has the best heart. Prepare therefore thy heart first, and then, and
thence offer service to God.

Use 3. Let every man that would be esteemed good ground, and get the
commendation of a good and fruitful Hearer, look that his heart be a good
and an honest heart.

Here for our further direction in so weighty a business, we will consider
three things: 1. Means, whereby to attain a good and honest heart: 2. Marks,
to know when it is so: 3. Motives to the attaining of such an heart.

2. Means to attain a good heart.
The Means are generally two. 1. Let us see our defect in nature, that our
hearts are not good by nature, but stiff and stubborn, as the stiffest
ground; little worth, Prou. 10.20. So the Jews (Ezekiel. 2.4.) are called,
impudent, stiffe-hearted, and exceedingly void of all goodness. And (which is
worse) they are stuffed with deceitfulness and guile: All the imaginations of
the heart of man are only evil continually, Genesis 6. No ground so stony as our
hearts by nature: no soil so full of thorns as they: no ground under heaven
carries such apparent marks of the curse of God, as our hearts do. 2. Let us
therefore seek a supply by grace. This grace is twofold: 1. Of Action. Graces
required to a good heart, are of 1. Action. 2. Acceptance.

2. Of Acceptatio^.


The grace of Action is threefold: 1. Preparation. 2. Of new Creation. 3. Of
Irrigation.


First, there must be the grace of Preparation. Bad ground must be well
prepared by the Plough, before it can become good. Our ground is prepared by
mortification and repentance, being in it self as hard as an Adamant,
immovable by any means of God. Now by hearing the judgments of God denounced
against sin, and sinners, it grows more soft, and fitter to work upon: the
Fallowes of the heart are plowed up: The Law, as Gods Plough, rends up hearts,
and vnroots the weeds, and rots the stubble of our corruptions.

Secondly, there must be the grace of new Creation: Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a
clean heart, O God. This is a work of God, who only can create, and a
framing of something, where nothing was, Creatio est motus a non ente
simpliciter ad ens.
and a work total, in all parts; here is a new Creature, 2. Cor. 5.17. as the
old nature is a Leprosy spread over all parts. This Creation is a renouation of
the whole soul and man, which for this work absolutely depends on the
Creator, as every creature does. And then God creates a good and honest heart,
1. When the holy Ghost creates in the soul saving faith, by which a man is
united as a member of Christ, to the Head, and applies to himself Christ's
righteousness. For thus Faith is said to purify the heart, Act. 15.9. 2. When
the same Spirit inwardly mortifieth all corruptions in the soul, mind, will,
and affections, and puts, in stead of them, holy desires, and good motions,
and renueth in the heart daily the Image of God, which is the goodness and
honesty of it.

Thirdly, there must be the grace of heavenly Influence and Irrigation. No
ground can be good, which has not a favorable aspect from the heavens, so as
both the shine of the Sun, and the showers and dewes of heaven may cherish
and water it. So our hearts are made good, when the heavens answer the earth,
Hos. 2.21. that is, 1. When Christ the Sun of righteousness darteth the
beams of his grace and favor daily upon our hearts, to inlighten them with
saving knowledge, and to warm and cherish them with influence of grace:
without whom we can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5.
nor have any life in us. 2. When the ground of our hearts is daily mollified
and moystened, by a threefold moisture: First, of the blood of Christ daily
sprinkled and applied to the conscience. For as the blood of beasts applied to
the roots of trees, makes them more fruitful: so the blood of this Immaculate
Lamb, sprinkled on the roots of our hearts, makes us fruitful Christians.
Secondly, by the moisture of the Word of grace, which as the rain from the
clouds, is every way beneficial to the ground of our hearts, to mollify them,
and keep them in fitness unto fruitfulnes. Ier. 31.33. God makes our hearts
good, by writing his Law therein. Thirdly, by the moisture of the Spirit of
grace, whose work alone it is to apply ye two former, namely, the virtue of
Christ's blood, and the power of the Word, to the conscience, for the clensing
of the heart: By which work of his, the heart of a dead and barren heart
becomes more fruitful than ever Egypt did by the inundation of Nilus.

But because all this grace of Action is imperfect in this life; therefore that
our hearts may become truly good and honest, there needs also the grace of
Acceptance. The best ground is good but in part, and, No man can say his heart
is clean, Pro. 20.9.
but much evil and guile will cleave unto it. Yet where God has begun a good
work, and beholds a constant purpose of good, resolving against all sin, and
to please him in all things: he is pleased to behold only the work of his
own finger, and to see us only in our Head, in whom he beholds us all fair
and good, Cant. 4.7.
imputing his goodness to us, and covering our remainders of evil in him.
Thus he esteemed Nathaniel (in whom great weakness appeared) a true
Israelite, in whom was no guile, Ioh. 1.47. that is, none reigning, none
imputed. And so he esteems us also, according to that we are coming unto,
and shall attain; not by that we have attained.

These are the Means whereby our hearts become good.

Now of the Marks whereby they may be known so to be.

And here, because the heart of man is deceitful above all things, Ier. 17.9.
and every one challenges to himself a good heart, which yet is given but to
a few, scarce a fourth part, and a better gift is not given by God to the
sons of men: therefore we will insist the longer to anatomize a good heart,
and discover the several passages and signs of it: which in every thing will
discover it self one way or other: Turn it any way you will, it is good and
honest.

Marks of a good heart reduced to 7. heads.
These Marks, because they are many, we will in general reduce them to seven
heads, and consider this good heart: 1. In respect of God: 2. Christ: 3. The
Spirit of God: 4. The Ordinances of God: 5. It self: 6. Good duties: 7. Sin
and evil.

I. In respect of God, a good heart has 5. properties: as 1. It desires nearer
union with God.
I. In respect of God, it has five excellent properties.

First, it desires nearer union with God daily, and all things shall set it
nearer unto God. For it knows, that every thing is so much the more good, as
it approaches unto the chief Good. David's heart was a good heart, and herein
the goodness of it bewrayed it self, Psalm. 73.28. It is good for me to draw
near unto God. Whereas an evil heart flies from God, and keeps aloof from
him, even when it draws nearest him in his worship, Esa. 29.13.

2. Seeks him with the whole heart.
Secondly, if it seek God, it will seek him with the whole heart, Psalm.
119.10. which is a sound conformity of the inward and outward man, directed in
the service of God according to the truth of his Word. And because it is
hearty, he will uphold the worship of God, and seek him at all times, morning
and evening, on weeke-dayes, as well as on the Sabbaths; out of Lent, as
devoutly as in Lent; not only when he is sick, but when he is well: In all
places, in his own house, as well as in Gods House, like Moses, who was the
same in Pharaohs Court, as among Gods afflicted people: In all companies, a
good heart is ever like it self, and stands to God with whomsoever it
conuerseth; Paul is a good Confessor and Christian, not only among the
Disciples, but even those that count Religion heresy, Act. 24.14. Nay, it
seeks and serves God alone, if it can get no company, as Joshua, c. 24.15.

Whereas a bad heart doubleth with God, and diuides it self between God and
Mammon: It can pretend service to Christ, and blanch with Antichrist, as those
Samaritans that feared the god of the country, because of the Lions, and the
God of the nations, 2. King. 17.33. It cannot pray at all times, Job. 27.7. but
in affliction diligently, Hos. 5.15. nor in all places; never so kindly, as
when it stumbles into a Church, as the Samaritans thought God would only be
worshipped in the mountain. It can frame and sort it self to all companies,
Ioh. 4.20.
entertain all practices, either of Protestants or Papists, please the most
profane, speak for and against good men, and good things, as the occasion
serves.

Thirdly, 3. Stands wholly to Gods approbation.
a good heart will only and wholly stand to Gods approbation in that it does
or does not. Thus far it looks to men, 1. To walk innocently, and cut off
occasion of scandal, 2. To please his neighbor in that which is good, Romans
15.2. 3. To acquit himself, if he may come to a just Apology, and to the
faces of accusers say, as 1. Samuel, 12.3. Behold, See Acts 20.33.
I am here this day, whose Ox, or whose Ass have I taken, etc. But it looks
not to please man principally; the first care is to please God: nor to please
man by doing any evil, nor by leaving undone any good it is bound to by the
calling; it will not be afraid to depart from any good purpose or practice, for
men's displeasure. Again, it can set it self naked before Gods presence, to
whom it desires to stand: it desires living and dying to be acceptable unto
him, 2. Cor. 5.9. A true Israelite has praise enough to be praised of God,
and to be a Jew within, and can more satisfy it self with Gods allowance,
than a thousand witnesses. Further, it dares appeal to God, and fly to his
Tribunal, Psalm. 7.8.
when men accuse it; as David, Judge me according to mine innocence; and Moses,
when Israel would not hear, turned to the Lord, saying, I have not taken so
much as an Ass from them, nor hurt any of them, Numb. 16.15. Lastly, if men
will condemn him timerously, unheard, vnconuinced, if all his wary carriage
cannot obtain a right judgment and sentence, then out of sense of innocence,
and goodness of conscience, he can contemn such unjust judgment, and
fearelesly expect the Judgment of God, Psalm. 37.6.
who will make his innocence shine as the light: as David against his scoffing
and slanderous Michol, 2. Sam. 6.22. It was before the Lord: and Paul against
the carnal Corinthians, 1. Cor. 4.3. I care little to be judged of any man. A
good heart cares not for man's allowance, if God allow him.

This is comfort for the servants of God, whether public or private: that the
testimony of their conscience makes them care no more for the obloquie of
profane men, than the barking of dogs. A little they may be moved sometimes
(more than needs,) but much they care not.

But an evil heart cannot abide the presence of God, but flies as Adam, and
sets him out of sight. It dreades the Judgment of God, and trembles like
Felix. It looks asquint, and dares not stand in a good cause for fear of men:
as Ioh. 12.43. Many believed, but durst not confess: for they loved the praise
of men. And, if it cannot be approved of God, it is content with Saul to be
honored before the people. 1. Sam. 15.30.


Fourthly, a good heart rests and rejoices in God, as in the best and only
portion: Psalm. 73.25. 4. Rests and rejoices in God as his only portion.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee, or whom in Earth in comparison of thee? It
holds all other things as moouables, using them as not using them, and is only
comfortable, that it wants not him in whom is no want. It knows, the Lord has
designed his portion, and maintains him out of his own fullness, as out of
his portion: both for his spiritual and temporal estate.

Hence his joy in his presence is the greatest, and so is his sorrow in his
absence, stepping aside and clouding his presence; now the good heart mournes
after him, and thirsts for his presence as the Heart for water: And as the loss
of the whole world is nothing to this, so the whole world cannot make it up;
nothing but God himself satisfies it. And, seeing God has made himself his
portion, he is careful to make himself Gods portion, by entering covenant with
him, as the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 32.10.

But an evil heart affects God in his gifts more than himself: Professing him
the best Benefactor, and thanking him for all; indeed it minds earthly
things: And his Psa. 17.14. 5. Aymeth directly at Gods glory in all his 1.
Parts. 2. Actions both 1. Natural. 2. Spiritual.


portion is in this life, or else has none.

Fifthly, a good heart aims at the glory of God in all things. In all his
parts, 1. Corinthians. 6.20. in his body, because it is his; and in his spirit,
because he is a Spirit. In all his actions: whether natural, as eating,
drinking, 1. Cor. 10.31. or spiritual, the parts of his worship: He will
cleave to the Word, to know and obey it; in prayer gives him the glory of
hearing; and so in confession, Josh. 7.19. and in praises, Psalm. 50.23. and in
believing, Romans 4.20. and a reverent use of his Name and Sabbath. Yea, he will
glorify God, what-euer it cost him: nothing is so dear to him, as to lay it
in the scoales with Gods glory: And if there be an opportunity, he will show it
even in difficult commandments, as Abraham; and dangerous, as Daniel; and
costly, as Zacheus.

Whereas an evil heart makes shows of glorifying God in spiritual actions,
but not in natural: or in his actions, not in spirit; neither God nor his Word
get any of his thoughts. As for duties of difficulty, danger, or cost, it casts
them quite off, as Saul, and the young man.

Thus a good heart behaues it self toward God.

II. Jn respect of Christ, a good heart has five properties. 1. Prefers
Christ above a thousand worlds.
II. In respect of Christ it has five other excellent qualities.

First, it prefers Christ before a thousand worlds: All other things, all
advantages whatsoever, are but loss and dung in comparison of Christ, Phil.
3.8. The Church esteems her Well-beloved the chief of ten thousand, Cant. 5.10.
Why, what sees she in Christ above other? what is thy Well-beloued above other
well-beloueds? Answ. She sees in him such purity of nature, such power of
merit, such perfection of love, such freedom in promises, and such truth in
performances; as nothing in the World can so affect her: She sees him every
way more beautiful then the sons of men, Psalm. 45.3. therefore she sels all
for the Pearl: as the Disciples left all, to follow Christ.

But can an evil heart espy such beauty in Christ? or can it thus affect him?
Is not a Pigge better to a Gadaren, or a mess of pottage to a profane Esau?
Who almost preferres not the riches of the world, above the riches of Christ?
Nay, Christ and his profession are generally esteemed the greatest loss.

Secondly, 2. Rejoices in Christ above all worldly joys.
a good heart rejoices more in Christ and his love, than in all worldly joys:
Cant. 1.3. We will rejoice and be glad in thee: thy love is better than wine.
And David will make the Lord his song all the day long. Quest. Why, what cause
of joy is there in Christ? Answ. 1. A good heart sees in Christ a full
redemption from wrath, and pardon of sin: therefore rejoices in God his
Savior, as Mary, Luke 1.46. Esa. 61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord,
says the Church: for he has clothed me with garments of salvation. 2. It
sees in Christ Gods favor returned, a new covenant and league of friendship
made with God; himself, of an heir of wrath, made an adopted son, an heir
of God, Romans 8.17.
and co-heire with Jesus Christ. 3. It sees by Christ the Spirit put into his
soul, sealing up Gods love, chasing away ignorance, being the Spirit of light,
working faith, and kindling the prayer of faith, sending it boldly to the
Throne of grace, and making it cry, Abba Father, with assurance that we can but
ask and have, and that we are not so ready to knock as he to open. It feels
the virtue of Christ's death, killing corruption, and perfecting his
sanctification. 4. It sees in Christ a blessed future estate of glory prepared
for it self, in which he shall behold the face of God in Heaven, Ph^l. 3.21.
and in body become like the glorious body of Jesus Christ, when all fruits of
sin shall be absent, and no part of blessedness wanting unto it.

But can an evil or carnal heart thus rejoice, which has no part in Christ,
no portion among the sons of God, no spirit, but that which rules in the
world, no portion but on earth? No, their joy is lower than so: in their
wisdom, wealth, strength; in their Wives, Children, cattle; in honor,
pleasure, lusts and sins. The stranger enters not into this joy, Prou. 14.10.

3 Gives it self wholly to Christ, who has given himself wholly to it.
Thirdly, a good heart seeing, that Christ has given himself wholly to it,
gives it self wholly to him. For by virtue of the mutual covenant made
between Christ and the believing heart, and the spiritual contract and
marriage, Christ the true and loving husband of his Church, gives himself and
all his substance to the faithful soul: And she being allured by his loving
and faithful promises, gives her self wholly to him in duty and affection:
Cant. 6.2. My well-beloved is mine, and I am his. He is mine:] not in common
graces, or general favors, but in special and saving graces, by an inward
and secret presence, by a most near and undivided conjunction. For two persons
to say they are man and wife, only because of some common favors passed, He
did me a good turn, gave me such a gift, etc. is absurd. It is the chamber and
bed-presence, secret and inward company, that is a sign of marriage. So say,
Christ is thine, not by common favors, but when he meets the soul with sweet
refreshings, and comes and lodges in thee by the faith of thy heart.

And I am his.] His Spouse and wife, and have given my whole self unto him:
for herein I see all my happiness placed. He communicates his nature to me,
even the Divine nature, 2. Pet. 1.4. and changes mine: he makes his wife
glorious, Ephesians. 5.27. Moses marryeth an Ethiopian, and cannot change her
color: But he makes me, of a sinner, a Saint; of a Saint in earth, a Saint in
heaven. He aduanceth my estate every way: he being rich, I cannot be poor;
he communicates with me all his goods; his righteousness, his life, his glory
are all mine. And he ever commiserates my estate, as a loving husband does his
wives: in all my troubles he is troubled. Esa. 63.9.
And therefore well said I, I am his.

But an evil heart contracts it self to the world, to the service of lusts,
as Ephraim follows after many lovers, Hos. 2.5. committing spiritual harlotry
with all base suitors, and estranged from Christ. And Christ not being thine,
thou can not say thou art his.

Fourthly, 4. Prepares a sweet room in it self for Christ to dwell in.
a good heart prepares a room in it for Christ to dwell in. It knows, that in
spiritual contract, cohabitation is most necessary: Ephesians. 3.17. -- that
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. It knows, that Christ will dwell
there, not only as a Master in his house, ruling, preserving, providing; but
as a Lord in his Temple. It knows, that a common man will not dwell in an
hog-sty, much less will the holy Lord in any but an holy place. It knows
also, that Christ has prepared for it a sweet room in heaven. And therefore
it will fit it self as a sweet lodging for Christ: still repairing the ruins,
and proceeding to full sanctification: still beating out more lights, because
the light abides not dark corners: sweeping out daily with the besome of
mortification, all lusts both of heart and life, and watering the chamber with
tears of repentance: It receives nothing in, that may offend him or grieve his
Spirit: And, as the Lords Temple, perfumes it daily with the morning and
evening sacrifices of Prayer and Praise. Finally, it trimmes and decks it self
with graces, that Christ may take delight to dwell and content himself there.

But an evil heart cares not where Christ lodges, so he lodge not in it: in
the mouth or hand he may. Neither cares it how nasty it lie; it is always
sweet enough for the devil and lusts, and looks for no better ghests: like a
Tavern door, open to all ghests.

5. Conformeth it self wholly unto Christ. 1. Ioh. 2.6.
Fifthly, a good heart conformes it self to Christ, and will walk as he gave
example. For it knows, the Scripture has set him out, not as a Redeemer only,
but as a pattern of good life and imitation: And that there is almost no
Christian duty, unto which we are not urged by his example; as humility, Phil.
2.5. patience, 1. Pet. 2.21. love of the brethren, Ephesians. 5.2. forgiveness of
others, Ephesians. 4.32. fidelity in our function, Heb. 3.1, 2. beneficence to
poor Saints, 2. Cor. 8.9. and obedience, both active and passive, Heb. 12.2.
and constancy in profession, 1. Tim. 6.13. Hence it is, that as a servant, it
strives to do as his Lord, according to his Lords own precept, Ioh. 13.15

Whereas a bad heart will have Christ a Savior, not a samplar: takes what
benefit it can by his death, but never looks to his life, to tread in his
steps: and protests he believes in Christ, and he is his Lord, but never
conformes it self to his practice. But, no direction by the life of Christ, no
salvation by his death.

This is the disposition of a good heart toward Christ.

III. It looks unto the Spirit of God; III. In respect of the Spirit of God.
4. Kinds of notes of a good heart. 1. Kind, spiritual assurance, from
in four kinds of Notes: 1. In respect of spiritual assurance: 2. Spiritual
worship: 3. Spiritual graces: 4. Spiritual growth.

For the first: Because this heart is in union with Christ, it has the Spirit
of Christ working the assurance of his adoption. This is the heart, into which
God sends the Spirit of his Son, crying Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. that is, he
assures us that we are actually sons by grace, who are no sons by nature.

And this assurance is, first, 1. The witness of the Spirit.
from the witness of the Spirit, Romans 8.16. which is a secret information of
Gods love and fatherly affection, and a still voice from heaven into the heart,
that God in Christ is become thy God: And is ever met with a motion of the
soul, inspired by the same Spirit, steadfastly resting it self in the favor
of God, now a Father in Jesus Christ. This being witnessed by the Spirit to all
Believers, we know, his testimony is true, being a Spirit of truth that cannot
lie, Ioh. 14.17. and being the searcher of the deepes of God, 1. Cor. 2.10.
Suppose thou had an Angel (as Daniel, chap. 9.23. and Mary, Luke 1.28.) come
from heaven, to tell thee thou art greatly beloved of God, this were a great
privilege and confirmation. But thou have another manner of messenger than
either Angel or Arch-angell, speaking not to the ear, but to the heart, to
testify Gods affection: and no child of God is deceived in this witness.

2. The first fruits of the Spirit.
Secondly, this assurance comes by the first fruits of the Spirit, Romans 8.23.
These first fruits are the sweet graces of the Spirit, which we receive in
small measure in comparison, an handful of righteousness, peace, joy, etc.
But as by the first fruits in the Law, the Lord, who had given them beginnings,
assured to put them in possession of the whole: so the Lord, for our comfort,
delivers us presently first fruits: And as he dealt with Israel in the
Wilderness, caused the Spies to bring clusters and fruits of the Land, partly
to put them in possession, partly to provoke an earnest desire in them by
tasting, and partly to refresh them in so wearisome a pilgrimage: Even so the
Lord Jesus, who is gone into heavenly Canaan, not to view, but take possession,
has sent down other manner of fruits, not by Spies, but his blessed Spirit,
for our comfort and confirmation.

3. The seal of the Spirit.
Thirdly, this assurance comes by the seal of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. Ye are
sealed by that holy Spirit of promise. Letters and Deeds are sealed, that they
may be ratified and authentical: so God has not only given us his word and
promise, but sealed for our confirmation: Implying four things: 1. A Writing,
which is the promise of adoption, or inheritance of Saints. 2. Ink, namely,
the Spirit of God exciting faith. 3. The Table or parchment, the believing
heart. And 4. The seal by which it is ratified, and that is the gift of the
holy Ghost, which, as a seal, leaves an impression of it self, sanctifying
the heart, and renewing it to a new creature: All these in 2. Cor. 3.2.

Fourthly, this assurance comes by the earnest of the Spirit, 4. The earnest of
the Spirit.
Ephesians. 1.14. which is the earnest of our inheritance: 2. Cor. 1.22. Who has
sealed us, and given us the earnest of his Spirit. Now where an earnest is,
there is, 1. A contract or bargain: namely, the covenant between God and us,
of our adoption and inheritance. 2. The earnest confirms the seller, that he
shall receive the whole price as certainly as that: so the gift of Regeneration
confirms us, that we shall receive whatsoever is promised in the Covenant. 3.
The earnest is a part of the price, and reckoned in the payment: so the work
of grace begun, is a little part of eternal life, and of that great sum,
which being promised and earnested in this life, shall be fully paid in the
other.

Fifthly, this assurance comes by the liberty of the Spirit, called every where
a free Spirit: 5. The liberty of the Spirit. 2. Cor. 3.17. Psalm. 51.12
freeing the mind from ignorance, and bringing in a new light to know God and
Christ as ours: freeing the heart from hatred, and working new sparkles of love
to God and our neighbor: freeing the will from rebellion, and working new
motions, to fly and avoid sin, and to embrace righteousness and holiness:
freeing the affections from slavish fear and terrors, which kept them from the
Throne of grace, and sending them before God as children, with child-like
affections, of boldness and assurance to speed in their prayers: Also from the
slavish fear of men. Finally, freeing the conscience and conversation from
dead works, and bringing forth sweet and heavenly motions, with much assurance
and settling in the grace received, so as no water can quench the spark of
life and love breathed in by this Spirit of the Lord. And freeing the members,
to be weapons of righteousness: Romans 6.18, 19, 20.

I have been the larger in this Note, because here is a most essential
difference of a good heart from a bad; and to meet with the error of Papists,
and profaneness of Protestants, who reject so sweet assurance, as not
possible, or not needful.

No bad heart ever attained any of these, which no good heart is* without.
But, as no good heart can be without it; so no bad heart ever attained it. 1.
A false heart has a presumption, in stead of the witness: for Gods Spirit
never witnesses an untruth; this inward testimony cannot stand with outward
profaneness, or the reign of any sin. 2. It will say, it has the first
fruits of the Spirit, joy, peace, and the like; which indeed is senselessness
and deadness, fruits of the flesh. It knows not what those fruits mean,
scarce whether there be any holy Ghost, Act. 19.2.
or no. It can hope for full fruits, though it never had first fruits; for
glory, though it reject grace; and for salvation, without sanctification. 3. It
will hold it self sealed: but where is the impression? If ignorance, contempt
of the Word, earthlinesse, or following of lusts be the stamp of the Spirit,
none can deny it upon them: But if holiness, the Image of God, purity, piety,
righteousness be it, there is no such thing. 4. It brags of an earnest, but
has gone through with no bargain: it comes to Gods Market, and sees, and
cheapens, but leaves the commodity as too dear, cannot part with all his
lusts. 5. It boasts of freedom, which indeed is liberty or licentiousness:
Slaves they were to lusts and sins, and slaves they are; drunkards,
adulterers, slanderers, haters of goodness, both in themselves, and others. If
these can bring assurance, they are sure enough.

Labor for this assurance, without which thou have not the Spirit of Christ,
and if thou have not his Spirit, thou art none of his, Romans 8.9. But if thou
have him, Monendo, mouendo, remouendo. 2. Sort of rules concerning the Spirit,
is for spiritual worship.
thou may discern him by gracious counsels, heavenly motions, and holy
reluctations.

The second sort of Rules, concerning the Spirit of God, is, for spiritual
Worship.

And this must proceed, 1. From Gods Spirit. 2. From our spirits.


From Gods Spirit: 1. In respect of inspiration and motion: the good heart
knows, that no part of Gods Worship, which is not the breath and birth of Gods
Spirit, can please him: for, that which is of flesh, is flesh. 1. Cor. 12.3. No
man can say, Ioh. 3.6. From Gods Spirit, 1. Inspiring, 2. Directing, 3.
Assisting.

Jesus is the Lord, that is, either confess, or praise, or pray, or obey in
faith and confidence, but by the Spirit: that is, a special gift of the
Spirit. And therefore, as of prayer, Romans 8.26. The Spirit makes requests in
us: so of all Divine duties, the Spirit is the Author and inspirer. 2. In
respect of direction: as in that one part of worship, so the Spirit directs the
good heart in all, Romans 8.27. To ask according to the will of God. It is
careful to keep it self to the Commandment, lest it be said of any of his
services, Esa. 1.12.
Who required this at your hands? It will neither go blindfold, nor by any
light but God own; knowing, that as we see the Sun by his own light, so we
can go to God only by his own light and direction. 3. In respect of
assistance: A good heart sees his own weakness, and in entering any holy duty,
to which it is most unapt, labors to get the Spirit to help his infirmities,
Romans 8. For as we know not what to pray, so we know not how to turn our
selves to any spiritual worship, unless the Spirit help us. The Disciples
cannot pray, unless they be taught. The Eunuch cannot understand without a
guide. We are borne deaf, and dumb, can neither hear God, nor speak to
God; and blind, and cannot see him. But at the command of the Spirit, the
dumb speak, the deaf hear, and the blind see.

Again, this spiritual worship must proceed from our own spirits: Romans 1.9.
-- whom I serve in my spirit. And this spirit must be, 1. A contrite and an
Hannahs, A woman of a bruised spirit: Psalm. 51.17 ^. Sam. 1.15. and from our
spirits 1. Contrite. ^. Cheerful. 3. Sincere. 4. Fervent.

for, in such sacrifices God delights. Because this has grief for want of
grace, and present corruption, and a thirsting after God, and the Wellsprings
of grace, to which the promise of acceptance is made. 2. It must be a ready and
cheerful spirit, Exodus 25.2. and 35.5. The Lord will have none to whose heart
was free, and whose spirit made him willing. Gods Spirit being a free Spirit,
makes the spirit of a Believer free also. He loves a cheerful giver, a free
will-offering, void of guile and hypocrisy, void of reigning sin, offering
his worship, not for show and ostentation, not covering deceit and hollownesse
with a show of holiness. For well it knows, that God requires pure hands to
be lifted up every where: 1. Tim. 2.8
and that one sin suffered in the soul, ingrosseth and eats up all the
inward worship due to God; as the seven lean Kine did eat up the fat. 4. It
must be a fervent and zealous spirit, not worshipping coldly, nor fiery
tongues, with heat and feruency, in prayer, praises, and all the parts of Gods
worship. Act. 2.3.


Thus is God only and truly worshipped from a good and honest heart, which
only is the Temple of the holy Ghost. In this Temple, the Arc of the soul
keeps the Manna, the Word of God. In this Temple the sweet Incense of praises
is daily offered upon the Altar of a pure heart. In this, prayers are
preferred, which are the breathing of the Spirit, not only for us, but in us,
crying, Abba Father. In this, the candle of faith ever burns before God, and
never goes out. In this lastly, we have the Oracle of God counselling us, and
his Mercy-seate covering us.

But an evil heart cannot perform spiritual worship: cannot pray, or praise,
or confess, because it wants the Spirit. It never thinks it needs help to
pray or serve God, which is the hardest work of a Christian, never done
without help from heaven. It can sometimes easily speak of God, hardly unto
him: or to him can use many words of prayer, but wants the sigh^s and groans
excited by the Spirit. Any language is readier to it, than the language of the
Spirit. It can content it self with the deed done, and never care for the
Mouer or manner: whereas no sacrifice did ever please God, without fire from
heaven kindling it. It can perform bodily worship, offer a thousand Rams,
Mic. 6.7.
and ten thousand rivers of Oil, yea and the first borne of his body: but
cannot offer his heart, nor part with his dear sins. It is vncheerfull and
heavy in such parts of Gods service, because there wants an internal mouer:
he is driven from without, not drawn or led by the Spirit within, and is as a
Fish out of his element. Prayer and Sermons are too long, too many, and every
thing too much this way. It can pretend zeal and forwardness, but it is in
some superstitious and formal devotions: and in the mean time be most
zealous against the power and sincere practice of true piety. In a word:

Of all the service and sacrifice of wicked men, Solomon says, Prou. 15.8. It
is an abomination to the Lord. For 1. The sacrifice is an unclean beast, and
hateful, Tit. 1.15. To the unclean, all is unclean. 2. They lay it not on
the Altar, that is, tender it not in Christ's mediation. 3. They want fire and
feruency, zeal and affection, to put to it. 4. They lay not their hands on the
head of the Calfe, confessing in the sense of sin, their own unworthiness,
and guiltiness. How can God accept a service, wanting these four things?

3. Sort, in spiritual Graces. 5.
The third sort of Rules concerning the Spirit of God, is for Spiritual Graces.
These in soundness are a sure sign of a good heart. I will instance in five.

The first is humiliation, and sound inward sorrow, as there is cause what way
soever it looks. 1. If it Humiliation in respect of 1. God. 2. It self. 3.
Other things.

who yet is great, yea infinite in power and justice: therefore falls down
lower and oftener than Jacob before Esau, to procure compassion. Again, it sees
that a broken and contrite heart is a sacrifice of Gods delight, Psalm. 51.17.
It sees Gods eye ever upon it, and has an awful sense of his presence. It
sees the method of the Lord, who first smites, and then heales; who never
comforts such as never mourned, nor promised a joyful harvest but to a
sorrowful seed-time. Ps. 126.5, 6
It sees the Lord ready to dwell in a contrite soul, Esa. 57.15. to grace it,
1. Pet. 5.5. and to glorify it: for humility goes as an Usher before honor.
And therefore it humbles it self under the mighty hand of God.

2. If it look into it self, it sees just cause of humiliation:

3. If it look on any other thing, all increases his humiliation. It abaseth
it self under all creatures, least mercy; but exalts Christ and his merits
above all that heart can think; and thinks it happy, if as a dog it might
gather crummes under the Lords Table. It is thankful for small things, and
content with any thing.

Signs of soundnes of humiliation. 3.
And the soundness of this grace bewrays it self, 1. In that it mournes not
so much for offending God a terrible Judge, as a merciful Father: not so
David's heart will smite him for cutting Saul's lap, as if he had cut his
flesh: and for numbering the people, as if he had murdered them. It will startle
at vain oaths, as at perjury: at adulterous words, as actions: for secret
sins, as open, Heb. 4.13.
because all are open to him whom we deal withal: yea for faylings in good
duties, as well as for open Iosiahs heart melted at hearing the Law read. One
word of Nathan to David, brought him to confession. And it is no sooner
awakened than humbled, and not raised but by serious repentance.

But is an evil heart thus humble? or rather is it not hard, Exodus 5.2.
senseless, proud, as Pharaoh, Who is the Lord? 1. It suffers not it self to
be scratched or pricked, much less beaten to pieces: for it hates the means
to be pulled out of sin, as he did Moses and Aaron. Prou. 1.21. They hate
knowledge, they choose not the fear of the Lord. Yea, they resist the holy
Ghost in the Ministry, as the Jews, Act. 7.51. 2. It cannot abide to look
into his debts, because it knows his estate not good: or will not be at the
trouble, to hunt out all sin, nor at leisure to seek out small sins: what?
God will not be so strict, nor we need so to be. 3. It counts sorrow and
mourning for sin, a womanly and impotent passion, not fit for men of courage.
4. It is so far from sorrow for failing in good duties, that it is vnmoouable
as a pillar, and can scorn judgments denounced against his open and monstrous
sins: And therefore an evil heart is noted, that being smitten, it seeks
not after God, Ierem. 5.2.

The second spiritual grace is illumination, 2. Jllumination, for which a good
heart labors for 5. reasons.
by saving and fruitful knowledge attained in the means. It knows, 1. That
there is a dungeon of darkness within, further than the beams of heavenly
light dart in through the narrow chinkes of it: and that without knowledge the
mind is not good, Pro. 19.2. and that the day is not more necessary for work,
than knowledge is for salvation, Romans 13.12. 2. That it cannot offer to an
unknown God, Acts 17.23
but knowledge must direct holy worship, and further holy life. 3. That only
true knowledge is able to discern things that differ, and enables a Christian
to hold the grounds of faith and holy life, against all deceivers and carnal
counselors. 4. That the knowledge of the good things given us of God,
ministers the comfort of them: for there is no comfort of grace, that we know
not whether we have, or no. 5. That by it is attained a store and riches of
grace: whence it is called a rich knowledge, Col. 2.2. Yea, and of glory, even
for the present: whence our Savior calls it a part of eternal life, Ioh. 17.3.

Now a good heart knowing all this, does search for knowledge, as men do for
silver and gold, and prizeth the knowledge of holy things most highly.

6. Marks of soundness of knowledge.
But because it discerns, that an unholy heart may attain a great measure of
knowledge in holy things, and be not only it self enlightened, but be able to
instruct others in deep points of Religion: therefore it is most diligent for
saving and sanctifying knowledge, without which all is but darkness.

Ioh. 13.17.
If ye (...), blessed are ye if ye do them. 2. It esteems* (...) Christ, the
Author and matter of wisdom to a Christian.
till Christ be made (...) 1. Cor. 1.30. that is, first, the Author of
wisdom, teaching us inwardly, by piercing the ear, and vnlocking the heart:
which he only by his Spirit (...) do, Luke 24. Secondly, the matter of our
wisdom, whereby we understand him, not only in general, as he is in
himself, (for so the devils know him:) but in special, as he is to us, by
faith appropriating Christ and his benefits to our selves. By this knowledge
the righteous servant of God iustifies many, Esa. 53.1^. And thus to know
Christ, and God in Christ, is ^ternall life, Ioh. 17.1. Now this good heart
esteems it has true knowledge, when it knows a certain and safe way to save
his own soul. 3. It is not of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, shine into
it, unless himself grow like him, and be changed into that he know, 2. Cor.
3.18. just as a Pearl, by the beams of the Sun, and celestial bodies
continually beating on it, is made light and shining as they. This knowledge
will make thee resemble the light and holiness of Christ, and grow both in the
knowledge, and in the image of Christ. 4. This good

5. It busieth it self in getting distinct knowledge

6. It contents not it self to have the light within give witness to the
light: so did Christ, Ioh. 8.18. It will witness it by word, by countenance,
by practice, by suffering; as a clear lantern will shine out at all sides
from the light within. All the children of wisdom will justify their mother,
Luke 7.35.
and testify unto her. This clear light will not be thrust under a Bushel,
or any way hid, but will ever shine out, being both saving to a man's self, and
fruitful to others.

Now (as Solomon says) this knowledge rests not in the heart of fools: it
is too high a knowledge for them. An evil heart cannot prize true knowledge:
it soon knows enough, without searching Gods Book, or viewing his works: it
is too wise to hear, read, meditate, or pray for knowledge; and says, What
needs all this knowledge and preaching? It never saw the riches of wisdom,
and knowledge; and says, that running to Sermons, and studying the Scriptures,
will make men beggars. It runs at random, and walks by any rule but the
Word; that is an intolerable yoke. It hears many spiritual things, but savors
none. It least busies it self in the knowledge of his own happiness, as most
unseasonable, unprofitable, impossible. It says it knows God, but keeps not
his Commandments, 1. Ioh. 2.4. or hears not his Ministers, chap. 4.6. or
walks not in the light; or professes not; yea, professes against it, and
persecuteth the bringers of it, Ioh. 16.3.

3. Grace. Justification, by sound faith, which a good heart cannot want, for 5.
reasons.
The third spiritual grace is justification, or the grace of justifying faith:
which a good heart cannot want: Because it knows, 1. That only faith espouseth
unto Christ, and the assurance of marriage is in the contract, Hos. 2.19. 2.
That it is the condition of the new Covenant, and God is no further bound to a
man, than he is a Believer: Ioh. 3.16. Eternal life is intailed unto faith.
Nay, God is disabled from doing us good without it. Christ could do nothing in
Capernaum, Mark. 6.5, 6.
because of their unbelief. 3. Faith is the soul of obedience: as without
which nothing can please God, Heb. 11.6. No action, speech, alms, prayer,
hearing, preaching; all without it, is defiled, and sin, and the labor lost.
4. Faith is the comfort and strength of Christian life: no love, no joy in
Christ, before he be believed and apprehended, 1. Pet. 1.8. No hope for
hereafter, if faith believes not: no peace with God, till we be justified by
faith, Romans 5.1. No boldness in prayer, till by faith we can call God Father:
no strength in tentation, no joy in affliction, no comfort in death, till faith
have gotten Christ his victory, his strength, his life; then the bands of
tentations, afflictions, and deadly things dismay him not. 5. Faith opens
heaven, and makes way to see things within the Veil: to obtain by the prayer
of faith, the wealth of heaven; yea and the glory of heaven: for the end of
faith is salvation. Whereas an unbeliever shuts heaven against himself, Revel.
21.8. Without shall be unbelievers. If weakness of faith shut Moses out of
earthly Canaan; much more must want of faith shut men out of heavenly Canaan.

Therefore a good heart labors for soundness of faith: and the rather,
Soundness of faith manifested by 6. marks.
because much faith is counterfeit, and many things are taken for it: and there
is no better argument of a good heart, than to cast out deceit from faith, lest
it be mistaken in so great a commodity.

1. It hungers and thirsts after righteousness above

satisfied, according to the promise. Math. 5.6.
For, clasping fast the promises, it comes to a true persuasion of Gods
fatherly affection, believes the remission of sins, and comes confidently
into his presence as a father appeased; as the poor Prodigal, (Luke 15.18.)
comes to his father with shame in his face, and sorrow in his soul for sin;
but yet with confidence in his heart, that he should not be cast off: and so
was satisfied above his desire; he would have been but as a servant, but lo, he
is accepted as a son.



faith to live by, such as shall bring in a new life into the whole man. Hab.
2.4.
For faith being an instrument to unite us unto Christ, by it, as by the bond
of our union, we receive life and motion from Christ, that now the heart is
purified, the conscience pacified, the spirit of our mind renewed, the will
changed, the affections altered, the whole man moved and quickened to all good
duties. So in all occasions it will express the life of faith, which shall now
govern the whole life. First; in our labor and actions it makes us diligent
in the work, How faith governs the life in 5. things.
but leave the success to God. Secondly, in suffering for well-doing, it
vpholds it self with a patient expectance of a good issue, and, waiting the
Lords leisure, makes not haste. Esa. 28.16.
Thirdly, in prosperity and the midst o^ blessings, it uses them with
blessing, but swells not by them, trusts not in them, but furthers his
reckoning. Fourthly, in adversity and temporal wants, it says with Abraham,
God will provide: Genesis 22.8.
it will use no unlawful courses to help it self, and looks more for the
staff of bread, than bread it self. Fifthly, in tentation it will rest on the
naked promise: it will go against sense, and feeling: and apprehending nothing
but wrath, will rear up it self to trust in Gods mercy. Job will trust still,
if the Lord should kill him. Thus in every thing the good heart may say, I live
not now, but Christ lives in me, Galat. 2.20.

5. As every life must be maintained in natural Lord, I believe, Mark. 9.24
help my unbelief: and, as the Disciples, Luke 17.5. Lord, increase our faith.

6. It desires to come to the end of it, and wishes The Spouse says, Come. It
waits for the hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.2.

But an evil heart cares not for this faith unfeigned. 1. Tim. 1.5
1. It contents it self with a name and supposition of faith, not the thing:
or rests on knowledge, hope, or presumption of Gods mercy, in stead of faith.
2. It prizeth not remission of sins at a due rate; thinks it self never the
richer for it; holds it impossible to get assurance of it; so never attempts
it: nay, it sees the want of every thing, but faith. 3. It cannot be brought
to labor seriously in the application of Christ's merits and righteousness:
thinks not application to be of the nature of faith; or only applies it for
salvation, not sanctification, or change of the heart and life. 4. It can talk
of faith, not live by it: cannot believe for lesser things, as meat, and
drink, but uses unwarrantable means, much less for greater and higher
things: ca^ thank God for prosperity, but makes too much haste in adversity. 5.
It dares make no profession of faith, for fear of men, like Nicodemus: will
do nothing, nor suffer nothing for Christ; because it is not (...), there is
no substance in it. 6. It can boast of sound faith with the best, but it was
never begot by the Word, nor founded in repentance, nor cherished with the
means, nor conflicted with sense of unbelief, nor works any change, nor
cares for any; but fears to come to the end of it, it loves not the Lords
appearance, etc. Therefore all this is a fancy, not faith: a dead carcass, not
the body of saving faith, by which the good heart lives.

The fourth spiritual grace (which is a mark of a good heart) is sound
pacification, 4. Grace: sound peace, 1. With God. 2 With it self. 3. With
others.

or peace in the holy Ghost: 1. with God: 2. with it self: 3. with others.

1. Peace with God is next to justification by faith, Romans 5.1. And this is,
first, through absolution, that is, sense of remission of sins: for sin
only acceptance, by means of Christ apprehended, the Prince of our peace,
and our Peacemaker, Esa. 9.6. Ephesians. 2.21. Now a good heart, knowing that all
happiness stands in peace with God, (in whose favor is life) and that the
wrath of this King is the messenger of death; and what an uncomfortable thing
it is for a Tenant at will to live in the displeasure of his Landlord: is most
careful to make up his peace with God, and only is at rest in the signs and
means of his reconciliation.

2. It has tranquillity and peace of conscience,

3. It has peace with all men, so far as is possible:

Object. How can this be, Godly most peaceable, yet none more troubled: 4.
Reasons.
seeing none are more conflicted with inward terrors and tentations, or
outward crosses, and enemies? Answ. This is true: yet, 1. In the world they may
have affliction, in Christ peace: their felicity is in Christ, the Prince and
procurer of it: Psalm. 25.13. Their soul shall dwell at ease, if not their
bodies. 2. This peace is begun, but yet imperfect, as all graces be: the mind
and will, subdued to Gods mind and will but in part: the flesh subdued to the
mind and spirit but in part: it can delight inwardly in the Law, but sees
another law in his members, rebelling against the law of his mind: the Image
of God we see but in part, and cannot love perfectly. 3. This peace may be
disturbed, and interrupted for a time, but the heart is then supported by
patience under the cross, to the recovery of his peace. 4. This peace cannot
be abolished, but perfected by troubles. Your peace (says Christ) shall none
take from you. Mark and consider the good man, Psalm. 37.37. the end of that
man is peace. A tree, the more it is shaken with winds, the better it is
settled and rooted: and so the trees of righteousness.

Now this peace is the portion only of the Israel of God. Gal. 6.16. Wicked
men without peace.
To these Christ had promised it, namely, the refreshing of souls, Math.
11.28. To these he has left it, Ioh. 14.27. My peace I leave with you. But
there is no peace to a wicked man, says the Lord. 1. None with God, Esa. 57.21.
but only a truce: He dares live in a state of enmity with God, and be still
out in arms against him, as a professed enemy: He neither feels, nor fears
sin; which is not peace, but senslesnesse. God in heaven proclaims peace,
he refuses the conditions. 2. None with himself: but sometimes he is a
terror to himself, that it is death to him to live in such an estate;
witness Cain, or Judas. Or, if he be quiet, and without accusation, yet is he
without comfort; which is but a dead sleep of conscience, which shall awake.
3. None with others, out of a peaceable disposition, but being enraged, he is
fierce and cruel, as Lions, Esa. 11.6. Or as Ismael, whose hand was against
every man, and every man's hand against him. Yea, he can cry out of Elias, as a
troubler of peace, when it is himself: and declaime against faction, when
himself is the only factor.

The fifth spiritual grace is supplication, 5. Grace, supplication.
or the gift of prayer: the next to peace is, access to the Throne of grace,
Romans 5.2. For sin shuts us out of the presence of God. And as Absalom might
not come into David's presence, till atonement was made by Ioab: so Jesus Christ
having made up our peace with God, we being shut out, are admitted into
presence; nay, of rebels, not only pardoned, but honored to become the
Princes favorites and familiars, nay sons and children.

Now a good heart knows, No good heart without this grace. 4. Reasons.
1. That as an Infant newborn, if it cry, it is alive; if not, it is
still-borne: so, to send out strong cries to the Throne of grace, is a note of
Gods Child, and a sign of the new birth: Romans 8.26. Zech. 12.10. Therefore it
comforts Moral (besides the Commandment of Christ, and his Apostles) to
perform continually this part of worship to God; namely, by the affirmative
part of the second Commandment: which duty, even Adam in innocence, free from
sin, performed, and needed to pray for perseverance in the grace wherein he
stood, and else had he not kept the Law. But a good heart seeing it self
seized on by sin, and the curse of the Law, sees much more need in it self
to perform this duty to the Lord, and to it self. 3. That this grace
excellently vpholds the sweet society between God, and a believing soul. For
as and inflameth them: Even so herein (as Job says, chap. 22.21.) we
acquaint our selves with God, and grow into familiarity and fellowship with
him. He delights in us, while we acknowledge him a God hearing prayer, Psalm.
65.2.
to whom all flesh must resort. And the believing soul has exceeding comfort
in his gracious answers and supplies, who is so ready to hear, before we
call; and esteems it no small grace, that the Lord should not only admit it
into his presence, but set so easy a condition upon his promises; as for
asking, we shall obtain them. 4. It knows, that Legal sacrifices, agreeable
to Gods Institution, were answered with a special sign of Gods approbation,
of the fire from heaven to consume them: So will the Lord some way manifest his
delight in these Christian sacrifices, which himself compares to sweet
Incense, and Perfume; yea, to drops of honey, dropping from the lips of the
Church, as from an honey-combe, Cant. 4.11. And how can he but return a
comfortable answer on that, which is so delightful unto him?

Therefore a good heart is careful and frequent in this duty. But not so much
for the doing of it, as to do it well: and therefore is careful, 1. for the
mouer: 2. the matter: 3. the manner of his prayers.

Sound prayer tried by the 1. Mouer. 2. Matter. 3. Manner.

1. The mouer of prayer is not nature in the godly, as it is in the wicked.
Nature teaches, that what we conceive to be God, is to be prayed unto; and the
Heathen could pray to God as a Creator and Governor: But the mouer in a good
heart, is the Spirit, by which it cries, Abba Father, Romans 8.15. True prayer
is a proper action of the sons of God: therefore Christ commanded us in the
entrance of prayer, to say, Our Father. And it is the breath of the Spirit of
God. For he alone can lead us into the sense of our wants. He makes us see the
goodness of things that we crave. He bends our affections, and kindles our
sacrifice, without whom is no light or heat. Let the Spirit remit but a little,
and the holiest men, suppose Peter, James, John, shall be fitter to sleep,
than watch, or pray in the very hour of tentation, Math. 26.38.

2. For the matter: A good heart, Zech. 12.10.
moved by the Spirit of supplication, is most frequent and earnest, 1. For
things given by God in Christ, as Gods favor, Psalm. 4*6. Lord, lift thou up
the light of thy countenance upon us. 2. For spiritual mercies, able to
satisfy the better part, namely, the soul of man: as appears by the method
of the Lords Prayer. 3. For blessings proper to the Saints, saving faith, sound
repentance, etc. Lastly, for mercies of continuance: such as last both here,
and hereafter.

3. The manner of true prayer stands, True manner of prayer, in four things.
1. In a faithful eying and apprehending the promises: A good heart will ask
nothing, but what God has promised. 2. In feruency and instance, through
strong cries, Heb. 5.7.
and causes a man to prevail with God by wrestling: as the Canaanitish woman.
3. In repentance and humility: seeing God hears not sinners, Ioh. 9.31. that
is, such as purpose to live in the Name of Christ, Ephesians. 3.12. By whom we
have entrance, and boldness with confidence of faith. And by the hands of
Christ, Revel. 8.3. who is the Angel, at whose hands the Lord receives the
odours of the Saints.

This prayer forces the Lord, that he craves dimission, Exodus 32. Genes.
32.26. where the father says, Domine, quis te tenet? Lord, who holds thee,
that thou can not get away?

An evil heart cannot pray.
Now thus an evil heart cannot pray. For first, it cannot pray in the Spirit,
because the Spirit is not there. It can draw near with the lips, when the
heart is removed. It cannot pray in humility, because a proud heart never saw
his wants. It can say words of prayer, and do the action, but without faith,
without affection. And it is regardlesse of the promises, and leanes on second
causes. Secondly, the heart and tongue are at variance; the prayer of the lip,
and the practice of the life at discord. It can say, Hallowed be thy Name, but
swear vainly, falsely, ordinarily, profanely. It can say, Thy Kingdom come,
but persecute Preachers and Professors, and abet Popery or profaneness. It can
say, Thy will be done, but not by it self; and, when God has revealed his
will, it can be impatient, fretfull, etc. It can say, Give us this day our
daily bread, but be covetous, unjust, lie, swear, depend on unlawful means,
not Gods allowance. It can seem to pray for pardon of sin, but not against
the practice of sin, nor with repentance: yea, when they mean to live and
dye in sin. It can say, Lead us not into tentation, but run into every
snare, all companies, and courses: no corrupt fashion, but it soon can become
a leader in it. But the prayer of the Spirit is no such thing: it will indeed
practice what it prays.

Thirdly, an evil heart either prays not, or speeds not. What swarms of
Atheists are there, who out of a graceless contempt of all Religion, neglect
this duty? that whereas godly men are denominated such as call on the Name of
the Lord, 1. Cor. 1.2. these call not on God, Psalm. 14.4. And, whereas the
godly are such as think on the Name of the Lord, Mal. 3.16. these seldom or
never think on his Name, but in oaths, blasphemies, and cursing. Or if they
will needs be said to pray, yet they speed not: for first, their persons are
not acceptable: Psalm. 34.15, 16. His ears are open to the righteous, but his
face is set against the wicked: yea, their prayer is turned into sin, Psalm.
109.7. Secondly, they turn their ear from hearing the Law, and so it is
abominable, Prou. 28.9. And they make no conscience of other duties, or not
ordinarily: as if all the promises belonged to one duty. Nay, they pray, to
serve their own turn, not to return duty of any kind unto God. And if the
subject will not hear the Prince, justly does the Prince reject his suites.
Thirdly, such a man prays sometimes, not continually: in affliction
diligently, Hos. 5.15. In time of Lent, superstitiously: 1. These. 5.17.
Lectures and Church-prayers are nothing so good out of Lent. Or it can pray at
leisure times, but cannot set all aside for prayer, to wait upon it. For some
things it can pray, Nimis ardenter, (says Augustine) too fervently: that is,
for temporals; as corn, and wine, and oil, only, or chiefly, Hos. 7.14. But
in spiritual things, it is neither frequent, nor fervent, nor constant.
Fourthly, the voice of prayer is drowned with the voice of sin. The voice of
Abels blood cried down the voice of Cains prayer. The voice of Sodoms sin,
the voice of Abraham's intercession. So of the voice of covetousness, malice,
injustice, drunkenness, filthiness. Fifthly, it can wish for pardon of sin,
and reconciliation with God; but speeds not, because it will not be reconciled
with his brethren, Math. 5.24. Leave thy gift before the Altar, go thy way,
first be reconciled to thy brother. A wicked heart can send out of the same
mouth, both blessing, and cursing: can pray for blessing on himself, and the
plague of God on his neighbor. Papists can be at their Beads and Masses ^or
prosperity, while they call for fire from hell to burn Parliaments. Yea,
roughness and pride of spirit do often prevail against good men, that they
are disordered in their families, and their prayers interrupted, 1. Pet. 3.7.
Lastly, he can seem to pray, whiles he is an enemy to prayer. He cannot abide
these long prayers, and constant course of holy exercise in families. Oh beware
of despising any of Gods graces: especially this of prayer in any of his
children. Their prayers keep Gods vengeance from off thee, esteem them as
basely as thou can.

The fourth sort, in spiritual growth.
The fourth sort of Rules concerning the Spirit of God, is for spiritual
growth. Wherein a good heart is known by many excellent qualities.

1. It knows, that something in grace is still wanting, and all is not given
at once, and so still humbles it self in the measure received: Phil. 3.13. 2.
It knows, that without growth, that which is begun, decays: the one Talent,
not increased, is taken away, Math. 25. 3. Seeing the bitter fruit of
declining, and the woeful example of many that fall away, it is careful not to
be plucked away with the error of the wicked, but grow in grace, 2. Pet.
3.17, 18. 4. Because the good heart, being one of the Lords plants, is
fruitful in every part of the life, but more fruitful in the age, Psalm.
92.14. It prouokes it self more forward, more forcibly. 5. Because sound grace
cannot rest in beginnings, but grows to perfection, and is crowned with
perseverance, being like to the light of the Sun, which increases in
brightness till high noone, Prou. 4.18. Therefore it is most careful to grow
in sound grace: the soundness of which growth is discerned two ways:

First, Soundness of growth known by two things. 1. Outgrowing of sins.
by out-growing the ordinary sins of the age, of his calling, of his
speeches, and former behauiours: and avoiding as well the evils of his heart,
as of his life. A child coming to be a man, outgrowes all childish
behavior: so the Child of God, 1. Cor. 13.11.

Secondly, by growing in all graces, 2. Growing ^ all (...) especially in
as a child in all parts, or a tree in all the branches: as 1. In knowledge: A
child being ignorant of all things, grows first to a confused understanding
of things, and then to more distinct: So the Child of God, Humility.
utterly ignorant of the things of God, comes first to a general understanding
of them, and afterward to a more distinct: as the blind man, Mark. 8.22.
having his eyes opened* first, saw men walk like ^rees, and after^ward, like
themselves: so the Believer* first sees the things of God confusedly, but after
comes to be more expert in the Word of righteousness, more resolved in points
of doctrine, See Col. 1.9
more persuaded and settled in sound judgment, and able to walk by distinct
and particular direction.

Faith.
2. In faith, Romans 1.17. Righteousness is revealed from faith to faith; that
which was a grain of Mustard Seed, rises to a tree: that faith which is weak
and low, rises to a tallness and fullness. It grows up from present things,
to future, Psalm. 23. vlt. ascends from the means, to the promise: grows to
affiance in Christ, as well without means as with them; yea, against means,
Romans 4.18. wherein Abraham was a father of many believing children. Job can
trust, when God is killing him: as our Lord called God his God, when he felt
himself forsaken.

3. In love, both of God, and men: As for God, the more sins are found out and
forgiven, the more love abounds. Many sins were forgiven her, therefore she
loved much, Luke 7.47. The weak love of the Disciples before Christ's death,
afterward proved strong, that they who fled from him, could dye with him. A
little spark of this Divine love, grows to a great flame, and much water
cannot quench it, nor floods drown it; it is stronger than death, Cant. 8.6,
7. It grows to a great diligence in his service, to great hatred of what he
hates, and great liberality for his sake. Again, love of men grows in a good
heart, and abounds more and more, 2. These. 1.3. It grows from loving of
friends, to loving of enemies; from covering one or two offenses, to cover a
multitude of sins* from forgiving small offenses, to forgive great offenses,
upon repentance; and that not seven times, but seventy times seven times. It
grows from loving their bodies, to loving their souls most dearly; and from
compassion to the body, to mercy toward the soul, in helping it out of sin.
Yea, it grows to overcome evil with goodness. Romans 12.21 Patience.


4. In patience: A child at first can bear but a little burden; so the Child
of God: but as he grows stronger, he bears more. He grows to endure great
losses, and yet give glory to God, as Job: to bear great and long tentations,
waiting a good issue: to suffer not only small wrongs, but the greatest that
evil men can inflict, without the least revenge: to endure not only words, and
scorns, and threats, and small losses, but all kinds of persecution for the
Truths sake, Math. 5.15. It walks from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7. and
grows at last not to think much of the fiery trial, 1. Pet. 4.12.

5. In obedience: First, Obedience.
in negative Commandments. It grows in the reformation of former lusts, to
account the honey-sweet pleasures of sin, as bitter as gall. From the hatred
of some sins, it grows, not to retain the love of any sin, but auoids all
that it knows to be sin. It grows yet further, from avoiding evil, 1.
These. 5.22.
to avoid the very appearance of evil, and the occasions. It grows in the
victories against daily sins, and subdues them, as Israel the Canaanites, one
after another: yea and destroys the body of sin, Romans 6.5. Nay, it grows
from dying to sin, to rise out of the grave of sin, and stand up from the
dead, Ephesians. 5.14. Secondly, in affirmative Commandments: A good heart grows
to have respect to all the Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. From a small measure,
to a fullness of good works, Act. 9.36. From serving Mammon, to the serving of
God: and now doing Gods work first, then the own, Math. 6.33. To do
uprightly, not in the land of uprightness only, Esa. 26.10. But as Lot even
in Sodom, in the Land of wickedness* in discouragements, and losses. It grows
from well-doing, to continuance in well-doing, and so seeks glory, Romans 2.7.
yea, to a resolution not to depart from any thing that the Lord shall command
all the days of his life, Deuteronomy. 4.8, 9. Lastly, it grows from weakness and
unskillfulness, to dexterity and readiness in the practice of all duties and
virtues, to the Masters best advantage: as one expert in the trade of
godliness.

Heauenly-mindednes: 6. signs of it.
6. In heauenly-mindednesse: many ways. First, a good heart grows daily more
sundred and divorced from the world: from eager affecting and pursuing, spoke
of things belonging Act. 1.3. Fourthly, from earthly wisdom, to heavenly: he
was wise in his trade, or in a good bargain; now he grows wise in the
matters of God, and his Religion; a wise Merchant, who will purchase the best
commodity: He grows also in wisdom, to discern the season of grace, and
day of salvation. Fifthly, from My heart said, I will seek thy face. It is now
of the generation of them that seek the face of God, Psalm. 24.6. Lastly, from
seeking his presence in grace, to seek The Bride says, Reu. 21.17 2. Tim. 4.8
Come: and the title of Believers is, They love the appearing of Christ.

Thus is a good heart never weary of increasing the stock of grace, Only a
good heart thus grows.
no more than worldlings of gathering wealth: and is careful to grow from
knowledge to affection; from affection, to action; from action, to profession;
from profession, to zeal; and in all is still heavenly covetous.

An evil heart may make a little show, but grows not, like a body in an
Atrophy, feeds and eats, but prospers not, is in a consumption still. For 1.
it is unsettled and ungrounded, not rooted or stablished in the faith; but as
children, carried away with every toy, so these, with every wave, or wind of
doctrine: any seducer, or libertine teacher may take away his Crown: A very
easy thing, to make him esteem the Doctrine of godliness, and the practice
of it, but singularity and preciseness; and make him stagger between Popery,
and true Religion; yea, to possess him with a wicked opinion and conceit, that
Popery is better. 2. As a good heart to grow, grows in the powerful use of the
means of salvation; knowing, that he who must retain strength, must eat
daily; so the evil heart neglects the means of grace and growth. A good heart,
the more it grows, the more it is humble; but this grows proud of what he
knows, and is soon at a stand, not needing more: Whence else are such
speeches as these, What need all this preaching, so many Sermons, so much
knowledge? From pride, it grows to idleness in the use of good means, and
shall as soon grow rich in grace, as an idle fellow that casts up his Calling,
and makes every day holy day, shall grow rich in the world.

3. It grows downward, and goes backward: it easily slides back from degrees
of grace it had received, and from such practices it had begun and entered on:
first, because it professed without sincerity, for bad and by-ends: secondly,
because all his motions were not from the Spirit, but vanishing from the flesh;
his righteousness (as the morning dew) soon drawn up; his resolutions, but
starts and fits, and in good moods: thirdly, because of the love of ease, of
the world, of the favor of men, and lothnesse to be at so much pains, or
loss, as the power of Religion calls for: any of these makes them soon cast
up all, as Demas, and setting hand to the Plough, soon to look back. Luke
9.62.
How many (by examination) may find they are far worse, than many years
since? less heauenly-minded, seldomer in prayer, or reading, less watchful
against sin, less mindful of redeeming their time, more worldly,
scandalous, unprofitable? If ever any thing had been sound in this heart, it
would have been sweeter to them, than to have gone from it so carelessly. Oh
repent, Revel. 2.5. Verse. 19.
and do the first works, and let thy works be more at last.

4. An evil heart grows now apace, and to a kind of fullness and perfection:
namely, to be as full of unrighteousness as the Gentiles, Romans 1.19. as full
of wicked lusts, as that poor man was full of Leprosy, that came to Christ,
Luke 5.12. As the good heart grows in all kinds of graces, so this, in all
kinds of wickedness: for an evil heart cannot but grow from evil to worse.
Especially it grows full of guile and deceit, as Elymas, full of subtilty and
mischief, Act. 13.10. thus Satan filled Ananias his heart with hypocrisy: a
show without, but nothing else within. So also it grows full of malice and
wrath, in hearing the Word come against his sins: Act. 19.28. the Ephesians
against Paul, were full of wrath and rage: whereas a good heart will say, Let
the righteous smite me, it shall be a benefit, Psalm. 141.4. Lastly, it grows
full of envy and indignation, Beware of this ordina^y fruit of Apostasy.
that any should grow near it, and full of nips and scorns against godly
Preachers. Have these the mark of the Spirit in spiritual growth, that cannot
abide the growth of grace in any other: or rather the brand of that wicked
spirit, who lies in wait till the woman be delivered, to kill her child,
Revel. 12.4?

IV. A good and honest heart looks to the Ordinances of God, and so has many
excellent qualities. Marks of a good heart, in respect of Gods Ordinances.
In two general respects: 1. In respect of Christian Religion it self. 2. In
respect of the means, by which it is vpheld: and these are three: 1. The Word
and Sacraments. 2. The Sabbaths and Assemblies. 3. The Pastors and Ministers.

1. For Christian Religion it self: because it knows there is but one hope of
happiness, and one way to attain that hope; and as there is but one God, so
but one faith, and one true Religion, by which it can truly know God, Ephesians. 4.4,
5
and rightly worship that God it rightly knows, and so in the way of his
worship come to communion with him: therefore it is very careful to make
choice of the true Christian Religion; and therefore takes not a Religion hand
over head, but examines it in all the four Causes, and in the Effects.

1. It chooses true Religion, in the true 1. Causes. 2. Effects.

1. The Efficient, or Author: it knows, true Religion is not the constitution
of any earthly power, nor the birth and issue of Parents to posterity; but is
the daughter of God, seeing he only can make known his own will, he only
can prescribe his own worship, and command or forbid what is pleasing or
displeasing to him: Efficient.
And therefore, if it depend upon him for all that pertains to life, much
more for all that pertaines to godliness, 2. Pet. 1.4. It will not take a
Religion on the word of any man, any Church, any Council, or any Pope, nor any
Angel, Gal. 1.8. but on the Word of God only.

Matter.
2. The Matter of it, being from God, must be Divine, contained in the holy
Scriptures, by which alone we come to the true knowledge and service of the
true God. It will not hold for matters of Religion, unwritten traditions, nor
precepts of men, nor constitutions of Fathers, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Pro. 30.6. Reu. 22.18
or Churches, not grounded in the Word. As the Scriptures forbid all addition
or detraction from themselves: so a good heart holds them accursed, that for
Doctrines of God, shall obtrude precepts of men.

3. The Form of true Religion, Form.
is conformity with Gods revealed will in all things: as the form of the
Tabernacle, was the conformity with the pattern given to Moses in the Mount,
from which he might not depart, no not to a pin. It will not choose a Religion
that lays out of sight that pattern, that prohibits the use of Scriptures,
that holds ignorance the mother of devotion. It will not choose a Religion that
is clean contrary to the pattern: a Religion that makes more gods than one,
that makes every Pope a god, in forgiving sins, making something of nothing,
and Laws directly to bind conscience: that makes more Mediators than one,
contrary to the pattern, 1. Tim. 2.5. even so many as there be Saints in the
Popes Calender: yea, every man his own savior, and meriter of eternal life.
It will not choose a Religion that disableth the only Sacrifice and Oblation of
Christ, unless he be daily offered by greasy priests: nor that which teaches
in the day of trouble to call on the Virgin, Peter, John, all Saints, contrary
to Psalm. 50.15. nor that which disclaimeth civil obedience, and thrusts down
the authority of Princes in their own Dominions, against that in Romans 13.1.

4. In the End: End.
the principal end of true Religion, is Gods glory; the less principal, the
leading of men to true beatitude by the right way, which is Christ. A good
heart will not choose a Religion, which is derogatory to Gods glory, and carries
away from Christ: such as the doctrine of justification by works, of humane
satisfactions, invocation of Saints, propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of
quick and dead, the Popes head-ship of the Church, making laws against the
Laws of Christ, etc.

5. Effects of true Religion.
Again, it will examine the Religion in the Effects: 1. If it magnify Christ,
the end of the Law bind to God, from whom our sins had separated us: 4. If
it bring forth obedience Religio a religando. August.
in both Tables: 5. If it be pure, peaceable, full of good works, Iam. 3.17. A
good heart will not choose a Religion, wherein to be assured

Thus a good heart is careful in the choice of true Religion and holy, as from
the holy God, the object of which are holy things, practiced by holy men, begun
in Paradise, continued by the holy Patriarchs, described by holy Penmen,
Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles, and observed in all ages by the Saints to
whom it is delivered.

Having thus carefully made choice of true Religion, a good heart does
Christianly embrace it: 2. It Christianly imbraceth it, in
in regard of Internal affections. External effects.


The inward affections are three: 1. Inward affections. 1. Faith.
1. It firmly believes it, and labors still to be more firmly rooted and
stablished in the faith, Col. 2.7. The Scribes and Priests themselves
confessed, that the doctrine which is from heaven, must be believed, Luke 20.5.
2. It loves it fervently, 2. Love.
and hates all false religion contrary unto it, Revel. 2.12, 15. The Church of
Pergamus must not only keep the Name of the Lord, but hate the Doctrine of
the Nicolaitans, which the Lord hates. David appeals here to the Lord
himself, Love I not them that love thee, Psalm. 139.21.
and hate them that hate thee? So a good heart will esteem the enemies of
Religion, his own enemies. 3. Joy.
3. It joyfully imbraceth it, and vndiuidedly cleaues unto it: Act. 16.34. The
Iaylor rejoiced, that he and his house believed. The wise Merchant went away
rejoicing, that he had found the Pearl. 4. Constancy.
4. And it cleaues with full purpose of heart to the Lord, Act. 11.23. True
Religion in the heart is inseparable, most invincible. A good heart (with
Cyprian) admits no deliberation in divine things, for the substance of
Religion. Good Joshua will cleave to the Lord, though all the world go away,
chap. 24.15. and the Disciples will not forsake Christ, though multitudes do,
Ioh. 6.68, 69.

The outward effects of a good heart toward true Religion, are five. 2 Outward
effects, as


1. It will by all means promote it: 1. Promote it.
Abraham will teach his family, Genesis 18.19. It will further the causes of it:
Cornelius calls his family and kindred to hear Peter, Act. 10.24. Paul wishes
all that hear him that day, as himself, whole and entire Christians, Act.
26.29. If Scribes, Pharisees, hypocrites; if Priests, Papists, Jesuits would
(as the devil) compass sea and land to make one Proselyte, and seuen-fold
more the child of wrath, than themselves; how much more should a good man, will
a good heart, for the conversion of his brethren?

2 Profess (...).
2. It will profess and maintain it openly, boldly; David before Kings, Psalm.
119.46. Paul will profess his hope before Agrippa, Festus, Felix, because it
makes the conscience good, and that ministers boldness. It will come in the day
to Christ, not with Nicodemus by night. It will profess with dangers, and
loss of sweetest things. For nothing is so sweet to a good heart, Act. 20.24
as the truth of God. Paul held not his life so sweet: and so the Martyrs.

3. Adorn it.
3. It will study to adorn and beautify it, in holy life expressing the power
of it, and walking according to the rules of it: Tit. 2.9. Servants must so
walk, as they may adorn the Gospel: much more Gods servants. A good heart
cannot talk of Christ, but live in Christ: cannot with Judas profess Christ
his Lord, and by looseness of life deliver him to the scoffer, and buffetings
of his enemies. A good heart knows, that true Religion is to be esteemed by
the life and conversation: Prou. 4.2. He that walks uprightly, fears the
Lord. He is truly religious, that keeps himself unspotted of the world.

Iam. 1.27.
4. Suffer for it.
4. It will suffer the extremest loss, rather than lose his Religion; knowing,
that it is given to the Elect, not only to believe in Christ, but also to
suffer for his sake, Phil. 1.29. For true Religion so fortifies the heart in
the fatherly affection of God toward him, in the love of Christ Jesus, in the
assured care and providence of God, and the sweet comforts of the holy Ghost,
even in the midst of death, as death it self is not formidable, but a sweet
and easy passage to Jesus Christ, with whom to be, is best of all. This truth
is confirmed by a cloud of witnesses, even all the glorious Martyrs that ever
suffered in their Lords quarrel, who for his sake counted their greatest
losses, their greatest gain.

5. It will honor and embrace all the Professors of Religion: Psalm. 15.4. the
Citizen of Sion, 5. Honoar the Professors of it.
honors all that fear the Lord: as we see in the great change of the
converted Iaylor, toward Paul and Silas, Act. 16.31. A badge of Christ, and
Christian Religion is, to love one another: yea, of one translated from death
to life, 1. Ioh. 3.14. It will pray for them, and praise God for their graces.
It will encourage them, and help them forward in the good way. It will pity
and relieve their miseries. It knows, the love of God dwelles not in him that
shuts up his compassion, 1. Ioh. 3.17.

This an evil heart cannot do: How an evil heart carries it self in matter
of Religion, in 6. things.
1. It never makes choice of Religion, but takes the Religion he finds,
without further examination: never looks whether his Religion come so high as
from Heaven, but either superstitiously takes up and continues a Religion from
the forefathers, and will not endure light, because they lived in darkness (as
one could not endure liberty, because his father was in prison:) or
Atheistically measures the Religion by the length of the Scepter, or by
multitudes, authority of men that are with it or against it, succession,
success, outward pomp, etc. The Pharisees of our time say as those of old,
Ioh. 7 48.
Do any of the Rulers believe in him? and the most have the faith of God in
respect of persons. Iam. 2.1.


2. His Religion binds him not to God: for it never loosed him from his lusts,
but suffers pride, worldliness, malice, uncleanness in thoughts, speeches,
and actions, hypocrisy and the like, all unmortified. It pities some Agag,
some fat or darling sin, either of nature or custom. It rejoices and rises
by the revenue of some sin, and unlawful profits. It would bind God to it
self, not it self to God.

3. It has no care commonly of his grounds of Religion, and so runs (...):
still is wavering, and (...) in what Religion he means to (...) between God
and Baal, and sees no (...) between true Religion and Pope^^ (...) of one
trumpet would make them as forward Pap^^^s, as now they are Protestants.

4. It can pretend Gods glory, and Gods ends, but intend the own ends. Herod
pretends to come and worship Christ, but intends to kill him. Iezabel can make
Religion a pretext for her foulest fact of murdering an Innocent: so can
Papists finely in ordine ad Deum, and to promote the Catholic cause, raise
Massacres, etc. 1. Sam. 2.22. Women professing great sanctity, by coming to
the Temple, polluted themselves with wicked Priests. It were a sin to say so
of holy Popish Priests and their pure Nuns.

5. It will have a Religion for fashion, or show, but love it not, promote it
not, no, not in their own families, scarce profess it for present reproach or
after-claps: but, zeal and forwardness were madness (as Festus said to Paul)
and to become an hateful Puritan. They frame not their actions to the rules of
Christian Religion, but are loose, unsavory, earthly in all their courses: they
will lose nothing for it; Christ shall lose the glory of Heaven for them, and
so far they like their Religion; but they will not lose crummes of earth for
his sake.

6. An evil heart can make a profession of Religion, and scorn the
Professors, revile them as a pack of hypocrites. But our Savior packs such
out of his number, saying, They that are with us, cannot lightly speak evil
of us, Mark. 9.39.

Now of the marks of a good heart, in respect of the means, by which this
true Religion is vpheld. And first of the Word and Sacraments.

The equity of carfulness in these, A good heart carefully imbraceth the
ordinances of God.

4. Reasons. Cant. 2.9.


stands in these reasons.

1. Because a good heart cannot hear God himself speak, nor enjoy such near
and immediate fellowship with him as it desires, it is most glad to enjoy him
through the grates of the Word and Sacraments; to hear him speak by his
Messenger, to read his letters, and be enriched with such pledges of his love,
which therein he includes to his sons and daughters. Thus does a faithful
Spouse to him absent, whom her soul loves.

2. Because these Ordinances proceed from the holy Spirit of God, and are
means appointed for the sanctification of the Elect, a good heart will never
hear or read the Scriptures, nor speak of them but with great reverence. It
dares not profane the sacred Scriptures, using them vainly or wickedly, as in
jests, plays, charms: neither dares it come to the Sacrament without due
examination, preparation, instruction, correction, or strength and consolation
in the course of Christianity, 2. Tim. 3.16.

3. Because the good heart sees his continual need, it is careful in the
continual use of the means of grace. It sees hardness of heart still stealing
on it. It discernes spiritual weakness, and fainting of soul. It feels many
conflicts of the flesh against the spirit. It is acquainted with the thrusts,
and temptations of Satan. It sees the health of the soul stand in these
refreshings, and the strength of the heart decaying without them, as the body
does without repair. And therefore it still relieues it self by the Word,
Sacraments, Prayer, and the like: Psalm. 119.28. My heart melts for
heaviness: raise me up according to thy Word: verse. 92. Had it not been for
thy Word, I had perished in my trouble.

Ioh. 4.24.
4. Because it conceiues God a Spirit, and his Ordinances spiritual, therefore
in performing these, it never contents it self with the outward deed alone,
but especially aims at soundness and sincerity in the manner of doing: Psalm.
119.80. Let my heart be upright in thy statutes. All is out of sense, and
conscience, It makes great conscience of the Word preached. 3. Reasons.
not for shame, fashion, custom, law, or vain ostentation.

But now in special, for the Word preached: A good heart makes great
conscience of it, as is great able to bruise a stony heart; to tame, melt, and
cause to tremble a secure heart, as Felix: Esa. 66.2. -- that trembles at my
Word. Acts 16.24. The Iaylor came trembling and shiuering, as having a strong
Ague in his conscience. Also it is of power to open a shut conscience, as
David's by Nathan. 2. Because unsearchable riches of Christ, Reu. 3.20.
Ephesians. 3.8. and brings into acquaintance with him. This is the hammer, by
which Christ standing at the door of the heart, knocks, and if any open, he
comes in, and suppes with him: Christ not only inuites him to a feast, but
feeds him with his own flesh and blood: and he with Christ; that is, a
fruitful Hearer of the Word entertaines Christ, calls him (as the Church,
Cant. 4.16.) to a feast in his Garden, to eat of his pleasant things. Christ
is feasted, when he tastes the sweet fruits of repentance, faith,
mortification, and obedience, wrought by the preaching of the Word. Nay, it
makes us of near kindred with Christ, his father, his mother, his brethren and
sisters, Luke 8.21. 3. Because the Word preached brings in the Spirit of God,
Ministerium Verbi, vehiculum Spiritus.
with his saving the chariot of the Spirit, by which he rides gloriously into
the hearts of Believers; God who can give his Spirit without it, ordinarily
does not. He could have taught Cornelius, without Peter's so tedious a journey:
but Cornelius must attend Peter's Ministry, and while Peter was yet speaking,
the holy Ghost fell on them all, Acts 10.44. But see it in special 5. Special
saving graces wrought by the Word preached.
Acts 8.31. The Eunuch cannot understand without an interpreter; he must join
himself to Philip. Secondly, faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.14. and by the
foolishness of preaching, God will save them that believe, 1. Cor. 1.21.
Neither can actual faith be without some measure of actual knowledge.
Thirdly, the Let me hear the voice of gladness, that the broken bones may
rejoice. Lastly, Peter to Ioppa, Act. 13.26.
and he shall speak words, whereby both thou and thy house shall be saved. And
therefore is it called the Word of life and salvation.

Conscionable hearing in five things.
In these and other regards, a good heart is a conscionable Hearer:

1. It prepares it self as a fit casket or storehouse to lay the Word in,
conceiving it the most precious jewel, and richest pearl in all the world.
David hid the Word in his heart, Psalm. 119.11. 2. In sense of it own want,
and the worth of the Word, it preserues an appetite and hunger after the
preaching of it. As the babe sucks greedily the milk: 1. Pet. 2.2.
so it will feed heartily on this Bread of life. It will be at pains for it,
as a babe will cry after the breast. It will hear diligently, without omission,
intermission, or delay. It will wait at the gates of wisdom, as Cornelius for
Peter, Act. 10.33. We are all here ready to hear whatsoever is commanded
thee of God. 3. Because God speaks not to the ear only, but to the heart,
this heart will hear as well as the ear. If God say, Seek my face, the heart
will make echo, and answer, Thy face, Lord, will I seek, Psalm. 27.8. 4. This
heart makes the whole man hear and receive the Word: first, the inner man
shall delight in the law, Romans 7.22. The judgment shall esteem it above
thousands of gold and silver: the mind shall attend it: the heart shall
believe it: the memory shall keep and treasure it: the affections shall cleave
to it, and the conscience submit to it: secondly, the outward man shall be as
conformable. The ear shall hear it with reverence: the mouth shall speak and
profess it: the hand shall practice it, and the whole man be submitted to the
obedience of it: as in sound health, the nourishment is carried to all parts.
5. This heart embraces the whole Word, saying of all, as the Prophet, Mic.
2.7. Is not my Word good to him that walks uprightly? First, it loves the
Word which reuealeth sin, accuses, and condemns it; both because it
discouers sin, to be repented of, and forsaken; as also because it leads the
sinner to Christ, and sets him faster to him. Secondly, it applies the whole
Word to it self, as well for conviction as consolation. You shall ever see a
good heart more smitten with the sharp threatenings of the Word, than they to
whom they belong. Meat that must nourish, must go into the stomach and
bowels: so must the Word, that must profit us, pass through our affections,
either to humble, or direct, or comfort us.

An evil heart saileth five ways in hearing.
By this trial, many that brag of the goodness of their hearts, may see
themselves far off. For first, an evil heart cares not how far it be
estranged from God: As it flies his presence and eye, so his Word also, which
passes sentence on him, and judges him aforehand; desires no acquaintance
either with God or his Word. Many say as the people to Jeremy, Ier. 6.17.
The Word of the Lord in thy mouth we will not hear. The Popish Recusant stops
his ear, and will hear no voice. The Atheist, as he denies God in his heart,
so he denies his presence to the means: Both of them refuse fellowship with
God, bar out the Spirit of God and his saving graces, and wilfully debar
themselves of faith, which is dropped into the heart by the ear, and of the life
of grace and glory.

Secondly, an evil heart can come to hear, but brings not an hearing ear:
But it brings, 1. an heavy ear, or deaf rather; as many who cast themselves
asleep, who would be ashamed to sleep, if a man but a little better than
themselves should speak unto them. An argument of a sleepy, and dull heart:
And can we think God will open that man's heart, who will not open his own
ear? Or 2. it brings an itching ear, 2. Tim. 4.4
that cannot abide wholesome doctrine: Hardly can any Minister please them; he
is either too Legal in his threats, or too Evangelical in general promises,
or his life too austere, or too remiss. John fasts, and has a devil: Christ
eats, and is a glutton. Or if the doctrine be quick and powerful, then
inquire if he be not a Puritan: for if impure wretches once so style him, then
may he be advised better, than to trouble himself with such a man's doctrine.
Or 3. it brings a stopped ear, when in hearing, the heart goes after lusts,
or is stopped with ignorant conceits; as, that no such good is to be gotten in
Sermons; or, it were pity all should be true that the Preacher says; or, the
world was better when was less preaching; or, few great men love preaching, or
frequent it much; or, it is no great wisdom to be so forward as some, and
none are worse than such as run after Sermons. Cares also, and lusts, and
pleasures choke and stop the passage of the Word into men's hearts, that they
hear it as a story, or a tale, but are no more moved with it, than if they
were stocks and stones: the most dreadful threats of vengeance prick them
not at heart.

Thirdly, an evil heart can hear sometime with diligence and delight, but
will hear to know, not to practice: delights in contemplation, but hates
reformation: delights in the promises of the Gospel, Psa. 50.17.
not in the precepts of the Law; or if it do, yet not in an universal
practice, inward, and outward: For it is an vnfailing rule, An evil heart
cannot delight in the Law of God, touching the inner man. Romans 7.22
Oh how hard it is to bind the thoughts to conformity with Gods Law! Nay, a
loose heart cries out of too much preciseness.

Fourthly, an evil heart can hear sometimes carefully, but never truly apply.
For the promises and comforts of God, it is readyest to apply them to it self,
which belong not to it: for God feeds the impenitent with judgment: this is
the part of such an heart, but it lets that alone. As for rebukes, it hears or
abides none: it is loath to be drawn to a Sermon, that rebukes his darling
sins, as the people of Israel was to come near the Mount, Heb. 12.19. While
it hears, it is filled with wrath and envy, Luke 4.24. saying, Physician,
cure thy self: yea, it is ready to burst for anger, as Stephens adversaries,
Act. 7.54. And for afterward, they hate him to the death that rebukes sin in
the gate, and abhor him that speaks uprightly, Amos 5.10. He is their
enemy that tells them the truth: as Ahab said of Micaiah, I told you he never
prophesied good, but evil: and to Eliah, Have thou found me, O mine enemy?
And if Christ himself should never so wisely rebuke them, they would lay hands
on him, or run to the Rulers, as Joshua to Moses, Numb. 11.28.
Master* forbid them to prophecy. In one word: An evil heart pretending sound
love to preaching, is an utter enemy to sound preaching. To whom I say, Is Gods
Word an adversary to thee? So is God himself. Does the Word judge and condemn
thee? So shall the Lord for ever condemn thee, except thou timely repent. And
thou that can not endure the threatening of judgment, go on in thy sins,
thou shall endure the judgment threatened, eternally: stop thine ear against
the cries of Gods Word against thy sins, this Word shall take hold on thee,
and thou shall cry out for ever against thy sins and self, and thy cry shall
not be heard, pitied, nor ended.

Lastly, an evil heart can hear, but not pray beforehand, and so loses all
the power of the Word, and the blessing which depends on prayer: for Paul
planteth, Apollos waters, but God gives the increase, 1. Cor. 3.6. And Paul's
preaching was fruitful to Lydia, because the Lord opened her heart, Act. 16.14.

The second means, whereby true Religion is maintained, are the Sabbaths and
assemblies. In respect whereof, a good heart has many marks and qualities.

1. It knows, A good heart is very conscionable for the Sabbath. 6. Reasons.
God has appointed both a certain time and place for the public exercise of
Religion; both for the preservation of his worship, which else would speedily
run to ruin: as also that the Church might be known and discerned, as a City
on the top of a Mountain, by the meeting of his people: and that such as
forsake it, might justly, and inexcusably be damned, it being so visible and
sensible among them. Now this being a moral and perpetual Commandment,
written in Tables of stone, a good heart dares not bring the guilt of violating
it upon it self, by forgetting what God would have us remember, or profaning
what he commands to keep holy, or unhallowing the time or place which he has
blessed to holy uses: Leuit. 19.30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence
my Sanctuary: I am the Lord.

2. It knows, that the strict keeping of the Sabbath, is a fashioning of us to
Gods Image, who did all his work in the six days, and rested the seventh: To
the Image of Adams holiness in his innocence, who observed the seventh day
holy unto God: And to the image of the second Adam, Mark. 2.28.
The Lord of the Sabbath, who most absolutely kept the Sabbath, fulfilling all
righteousness. And the good heart, though it cannot attain this perfection,
yet strives to recover this Image.

3. It knows, that as it is the Pale and preservative of Religion, and the
heart of the Commandments, (as it is placed between the two Tables:) so it is
the trial of Religion. Whence it is usual in Scripture, to put keeping of the
Sabbath, for the whole worship of God; and the Prophets mentioning the decay of
all Religion, say, the Sabbaths are polluted, Lam. 1.7. and that he that is an
ordinary Sabbath-breaker, is a man of no religion, without God in the world.
The Jews could say, If this man were of God, he would keep the Sabbath, Ioh.
9.16. And enemies and hinderers of sanctifying the Sabbath, are called,
unbelievers, vagabonds, and wicked fellows, Act. 17.2, 5.

4. It knows, that fearful judgments linger and wait upon that person or
people, that negligently or wilfully profane Gods holy Sabbath. Neh. 13.18. Did
not your fathers thus, and our God brought all this plague upon us? Yet ye
increase the wrath, in breaking the Sabbath. Ezekiel. 20.13. God thinks on such,
to power out indignation upon them. Which is a fire that cannot be quenched,
Ier. 17. vlt. The bodily death, for the breach of the Ceremonial part, did
figure the death of the soul, for the breach of the Moral part: See Exodus
31.14. and 35.2.

5. It knows, that God showers down blessings, spiritual and temporal, of
this life, and a better, on the heads of conscionable obseruers of the Sabbath:
Esa. 56.2, 5. Blessed is the man that does this, that keeps the Sabbath, and
pollutes it not: Chap. 58.13, 14. If thou make the Sabbath a delight, thou
shall delight in the Lord: that is, in the sweetness of his Word and
Ordinances; thou shall mount on the high places of the earth: that is, be
exalted above all people in true honor; and be fed with the heritage of Jacob:
that is, enjoy all the good things of the promised Land of heavenly Canaan.
Here are blessings internal, external, eternal.

6. It knows, that the careful sanctifying of a Sabbath here, is the
beginning of that everlasting Sabbath hereafter, when we shall be gathered unto
the Congregation of the first borne, written in heaven, and enter into that
eternal Rest, of which this is a shadow: which who so begins not here, God
has sworn he shall never enter into his rest. Heb. 4 3.


Hence a good heart, first, remembers the Sabbath day to sanctify it. 5.
Properties of a good heart about the Sabbath.
It will all the week prepare for the Sabbath, and do all his own work in
the six days, as God did his, that he may rest on the seventh. It will
remove all things that may hinder the sanctifying of it, either in himself, or
in his family; 1. It remembers it before.
that all worldly business may be buried for that day, as Jacob buried his
Idols, Genesis 35.2.
before he went to Bethel, the House of God. It will remember it is a day of
rest from all bodily labor, which necessity or holiness command not: for Adam
himself in innocence could not both keep the Sabbath, and walk in his
vocation. And, that it is a Day of holy rest, not of idleness: a Sabbath of
the Lord. If God had liked idleness, (says Athanasius) he would not have
commanded so many things to be done, nor all the parts of his worship to be
doubled on the Sabbath: as Numb. 28.9, 10. nor so many duties of it, as the
longest day is short enough for them. Therefore every good heart will rest from
all his special calling, and wait on the general: Master or servant, young
or old, the buyer and seller, Neh. 10.31. All Carryers and Porters, Ier. 17.21.
Bear no burden on the Sabbath day: no not the Husbandman in harvest, Exodus
34.21. Yea, the Prince himself is not exempted, but must be among them, Ezekiel.
46.9.

2. Keeps the whole Sabbath. 1. Cor. 16.^.
Secondly, a good heart will keep the whole Sabbath day: which is the seventh,
in respect of the six following: namely, the first day of the week, as the
Jewish was the seventh, in respect of the six going before, namely, the last
of the week. If thou hirest a servant or labourer to work a day, do thou
not mean a whole day? When God allows thee six days, are they not whole?
and is not the seventh so too? When God rested the seventh day, was it not the
whole? Therefore a good heart thinks not, it has sufficiently kept a Sabbath,
to hear Service, or a Sermon, in the fore-noone, or afternoon, and all day
else do what he list: No, it will give him the morning, and give him the
evening too, Psalm. 92.2. It self would not accept of another the labor of one
or two hours for a days work, and dares not offer it to God, but will keep
the whole Sabbath, either in Gods House, or it own, in duties public, or
private: Ier. 17.22. Ye shall do no work, but sanctify my Sabbath.

3 With the whole man.
Thirdly, a good heart will make the whole man keep the Sabbath. For as man
stands of two parts, body, and soul, so the sanctifying of the Sabbath is
twofold; inward, and outward; which a godly heart is careful not to divorce:
and therefore, 1. Preserues the outward man from servile works of the calling,
but specially from committing sin, which is the most servile work, and most
contrary to the sanctification of the Sabbath: the Lord cannot abide the
Sabbaths, when the hands are full of blood, Esa. 1.13. But the Sabbath that he
chooses, is, to loose the bands of wickedness. 2. It binds the tongue to holy
speeches: If every idle word must be answered for, much more idle speeches on
the Sabbath, Mat. 12.36.
which is a double sin. A good heart must not speak his own words, nor a
vain word, Esa. 58.13. It cannot give reins to the tongue to direct worldly
business, to make reckonings, to prattle of other men's business, to busy it
self in the world, or worldly affairs, to talk of news, as the Athenians,
or sports and pleasures, nor things lawful on other days. A good heart, out
of a better store, will speak of better things. 3. It watches over the inner
man: rests his affections in Sabbath-duties, and makes it his delight: suffers
not his thoughts to roue, Esa. 58.13. Thou shall not think thy own will. For
the Lord requires the whole heart, soul, strength, and mind, Luke 10.27. In
one word: A good heart will care to occupy his mind, mouth, tongue, ear, hand
and foot, as God would have them.

Fourthly, 4. Will see it kept by others.
it will not only keep the Sabbath strictly it self, but see it kept of all
within his power: A Magistrate of a good heart will compel all within the
gates of the City thereunto, Ier. 17.^0. Hear, ye Kings, ^eare no burdens:
that is, suffer not others. A good Magistrate would set no Fats on the Sabbath,
nor Racks, by suffering others: nor buy and sell* by suffering others: nor
drink, and swear, or play away the Sabbath, by suffering others: all whose
sins become his, by his conniuence, Neh. 13.15. A father of a good heart will
command and compel all his children, Genesis 18.19.
as Abraham: He will not suffer them to play and sport, when they should be at
divine service; but, where he is taught, they shall be; when he prays, they
shall; when he hears, they shall; and to him they shall give account of their
hearing. A Master of a good heart will see his servant serve his Master in
heaven, as he serves him the six days: He cannot send him on errands, and
trifling business, running and riding to serve his own turn, and leave God
unserved; but, as he will not have him neglect his affairs in the six days,
so not Gods service on the seventh, but keep him in, to the duties of that
Day. Object. We cannot keep in our servants and children that Day. Ans. 1. You
can find means other days to hold them to your own business. 2. If they
will have liberty this Day, give it them for all the rest: for David would not
have a wicked person in his house, Psalm. 101.4, 5. but, he that is a servant
of God, shall be my servant.

5. Will join with the Assemblies in Gods House.
Fifthly, a good heart holds it self bound to join with the Assemblies of Gods
people, to frequent the House of God, and serve and seek him, to come on that
Day to Church, the School of God, to hear and learn his will; and the Market
of God, to make provision for the soul for all the week following. It dares
not forsake the fellowship, as some, Heb. 10.25. It mournes when urgent
occasion absenteth it: looks toward the Temple, hungers, and earnestly desires
the fruition of such a blessing, Psalm. 42.2. It esteems one day in Gods
House, above a thousand elsewhere, Psalm. 84.10. such sweetness it tastes in
his Ordinances, Word, and Sacraments. Lastly, being sensible of Gods presence
according to the promise, where two or three are gathered together in his Name,
Mat. 18.23
it comes not, but first puts off his shoes, because this is holy ground, and
looks to his feet, Eccles. 4.17. that is, Exodus 3.5.
prepares his affections, to come with fear and reverence, with joy and
cheerfulness, heed and watchfulness, faith and holiness, before that great
Presence.

Now an evil heart, first, How an evil heart carries ^t self to the
Sabbath, in five things. Parasceue.
never prepares for the Sabbath: though it will not be unprovided for a
Market Day: yea, it can dispatch his business, to set it self loose for any
lust. The Jews had a preparation to the Sabbath: and Joseph of Arimathea came
the day before the Sabbath, and begged the body of our Lord, and buried it
before the Sabbath, to free himself from the action and care of it.

Secondly, it can defraud the Lord of his Day, or the greatest part of it; and
holds it self loose after evening exercise, to what it list; as if himself
would give his servant leave after that time to cast off his service.

Thirdly, it makes no conscience of profaning the Lords Sabbath; many ways: 1.
Doing his own will, not the Lords; his own work, not the work of the
Sabbath: selling wares within the shop, and without, running up and down with
them; and other works of the calling; whereas the Commandment is, Thou shall
do no manner of work. 2. Turning the Lords Rest into idleness; as the
fruitless spending of it both within doors, and abroad in many vain
exercises. 3. Profanely, turning it into the plain service of the devil, by
Ales, gaming, drinking, and accursed riots, in exercises heathenish and
hellish. Is it a sin to open a shop window, and none to game, swill, and
swear? Is the Sabbath appointed to cleanse thy soul from sin, and dare
thou most soul and moyle thy self that day above other? 4. Iangling away the
day in company with idle chat: any words are ready but of God, and to God: or,
if alone, holding profane and unsavory thoughts free enough, to drive out the
meditation of God, his Word, and works. 5. Profaning it in their children or
servants, whom they suffer to be vain and idle, or force them not to Gods
service, or (which is worst) force them by commandment, or example, to pollute
it: for some Masters and fathers are like Pharaoh, who laid the heauiest taskes
on the Lords Day, above all the week, and then increased the burdens, when
Israel spoke of going to serve the Lord.

Fourthly, an evil heart can easily withdraw it self from the Assemblies, as
seeing no beauty, no presence of God; without all reverence of the Sanctuary:
whereas the Jews might not tarry at home, from the Synagogue; nay, some
Fathers say probably, that Christ himself came still to the Synagogues, that
he might observe the Law, which he came to fulfill. But this wilful
excommunication, (without repentance) goes before casting out of the great
Congregation in heaven.

Lastly, it can vpbraid others for precise, and curious, who are strict keepers
of the Sabbath, and cannot go with their neighbors, drinking and reuelling,
and using profane pastime. It can object great, and learned, and rich, and
noble, that like not such preciseness in keeping the Sabbath. But we have God
going before us in precept, and his own example sanctifying the Sabbath. If we
follow example, he is most vn-erring, and above them all in wisdom, nobility,
etc.

The third means, whereby true Religion is maintained, are Ministers and
Pastors. In respect of whom, a good heart has many eminent marks, and
excellent qualities: For sundry reasons.

First, it considers aright who they be. Why, who be they? Answ. 1. They are
spiritual fathers, A good heart honors Gods Ministers. 4. Reasons.
to beget men to God by the preaching of the Gospel: 1. Cor. 4.15. These
Fathers give us a being in Christ, being instruments, by whom, of children of
the devil, we are begotten to be newborn babes in Christ. 1. Pet. 2.2. Gal.
4 19. 1. It knows who they be.
2. They are spiritual mothers, that travel in birth of us, till Christ be
formed in us, sustaining great pains and sorrows, to bring us forth to Gods
Kingdom; Other mothers bear children into a miserable world; these into a
happy estate. 3. They are spiritual nurses, to feed, preserve, and bring
forward with much care and tenderness: 1. These. 2.7. gentle, as a nurse
cherishes her children. Other nurses are mercenary: but these are nurses to
their own children, more affectionate toward them. 4. They are the spiritual
light of the world, which without them lies in spiritual black darkness: and
stars, Mat. 5.14. Reu. 1. vlt.
shining to others in the light of doctrine and good example in this life; and
in the life to come shall shine as Stars in glory, Dan. 12.3. 5. They are
Stewards of Gods House, Luke 12.42. to whom are committed the keys of the
Kingdom, to open, and shut, Math. 16.19. 6. They are saviors of men, 1. Tim.
4.16. Save thy self, and others. Object. Christ only saues us. Answ. True, by
merit and efficacy: but none are actually saved, to whom this merit is not
communicated and applied, namely, by the Ministry.

2. Whence they be.
Secondly, a good heart considers whence they be: 1. Ambassadors sent from God
in the stead of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.20. called hence by a special prerogative,
1. Kin. 9.6.
Men of God, not in the old Testament only, but in the New, 2. Pet. 1.21. 1.
Tim. 6.11. 2. Tim. 3.17. 2. Bearing on them an image of Gods authority,
commanding in things spiritual, binding Kings in chains, forcing the
conscience. Magistrates have power to bind and lose men's bodies: but the
Minister says, 1. Cor. 5.5.
Tradatur Satanae, Deliver such a one to Satan, and has power to bind or lose
the souls of men, and what he does in earth, is ratified in heaven, Math.
18.18. 3. Not only from God, but in their office and Ministry are called
co-workers with God, 1. Cor. 3.1. God forgiues sin properly, and they are
said to remit sin. God properly saves, and they are said to save: God
himself communicating his own work unto them; and so far honoring them,
as he not only calls the Angels their fellow-seruants, Revel. 2.1.
but them by the name of Angels.

3. To what end they be.
Thirdly, a good heart considers to what they are appointed: 1. In the stead of
Christ, to seek and save what is lost: not the health lost, as Physicians, nor
wealth lost* as Lawyers, but the lost soul; namely, by applying the means
appointed by Christ: Job 33.14. To deliver the man, that he go not into the
pit: not by working the means, but applying them, and pronouncing him
absolved. 2. Cor. 4.7.
2. They are earthen vessels that carry an heavenly treasure, to dispose the
secrets of God, set over men by the Lord, and for the Lords business;
beseeching, exhorting, correcting, and instructing: by whose Ministry, as by
Gods own arm, men are drawn out of hell, sin, the world, to turn to God,
and believe in Jesus Christ, Esa. 53.1. Act. 26.18. and whereby, being
naturally void of the Spirit, without faith, and destitute of grace, they
attain the Spirit, and faith, and other graces: And hence they are called
Ministers, by whom we believe, 1. Cor. 3.1. and Ministers of the Spirit,
righteousness, and grace, 2. Cor. 3.6, 8, 9. 3. They are faithful shepherds
over the flock of Christ: to feed his sheep in green pastures: to call them
back from their wandering; and to refresh them with the waters of consolation,
healing the bruised and afflicted soul, as having a tongue of the learned, to
speak a word in due season, Esa. 50.4. 4. They are powerful intercessors
between God and us; to speak from God to men, whom we cannot hear in his
own voice and live; and to speak from men to God, as Mediators rising up in
the gap, able to lay open their wants, to confess their sins, to crave pardon
for them, to give thanks in their names of mercies, and to offer up all their
spiritual sacrifices to God for them: as Samuel professes, 1. Sam. 12.23. God
forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you: but I
will teach you the good and the right way.

4. That God will see all their word-fulfilled.
Fourthly, a good heart considers, that all their word shall be fulfilled, and
God will see to that for his own faithfulness sake: Esa. 44.26. He confirms
the word of his servant, and performs the counsel of his messengers: that
their work shall not be in vain, nor their word fall to the ground; as of
Samuel, 1. Sam. 3.19. And what is done to them in rejecting or receiving their
persons and doctrine, Christ takes as done to himself, Luke 10.16. Exodus 16.7.

How a good heart receives Gods Ministers: in 4. things.
A good heart considering all these things together, with the necessity of the
Ministry, (for, without vision the people must perish, Prou. 29.18.) 1.
Knows, reuerenceth, and honors them as the Ministers of Christ: 1. These.
5.12. Know them that labor among whom God has appointed Ministers of
reconciliation: give testimony how you honor the Word in them: as Cornelius
gave reverence to Peter, Act. receives them gladly, more than fathers of the
flesh, being fathers of the spirit; they being instruments of generation, these
of Regeneration: By them thou art a man, by these a new man, a Christian man:
They by a mortal seed begat thee into a wretched world; these by immortal
seed, into an happy estate in a better world. How joyful was Lydia to receive
Paul, Act. 16.15. and the Iaylor, ibid? Phil. 2.28. Receive Epaphroditus with
all gladness, and make much of such. The Galatians received Paul as an Angel,
yea as Christ himself, Gal. 4.14. Romans 10.15.
A good heart will esteem their feet beautiful; much more their faces. 3. It
will seek the Law at his mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts,
Obey them that have the oversight of you: yea, in doctrines of selfe-denyall,
in doctrines unpleasing to flesh and blood, knowing, it is not they, but the
Spirit that speaks in them, Math. 10.20. and that without their salt, their
corruptions would never be seasoned; therefore it concludes with Naamans
servant, that there cannot be an easier commandment, than to wash and be
clean: and will take warning of judgments, from these Watchmen, Eze. 33.4, 5.
4. It will every way be helpful to them, and comfortable:

First, with cheerful and honorable maintenance: will not stick at trifles,
yea dear things will be parted with. The Galatians would have pulled out their
eyes to do Paul good. Gal. 4.15.
It will acknowledge it owes it self and his soul for them, Philem. 15. and,
if it reap spiritual things, it will sow temporal: for the labourer is
worthy of his hire. Secondly, with earnest prayers, that God would thrust more
of them into his work, and double, yea treble his Spirit on them he has sent,
as Elisha, 2. King. 2.9. and open to them both a door of entrance, and
utterance, as Paul often requires of his Hearers. Psalm. 132.9. Ephesians. 6.19.
Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness. Thirdly, with comfort in
their troubles, even with his own loss, and damage, and danger. Good
Obadiah, with the hazard of his own life, provided for the safety of the Lords
Prophets: and with like hazard, the Shunamite for the Prophet Elijah. Fourthly,
it will crown their heads, 1. These. 2.19.
and comfort their hearts by his willing obedience and constancy in the truth:
when both shall know they run not in vain, nor their labor shall be lost in
the Lord.

An evil heart loathing the liquor, hates the vessel.
Now an evil heart, because it lothes the liquor, it does also loath the
vessel; hates the Word, and the bringer of it. Hence is it, that many cursed
Chams mock their fathers, till the curse rebound on themselves. The very habit
of a Minister is enough to procure scorn and contempt: though in all other
things a man be free enough. These scorners say, they reverence Christ, and
would not mock him, as the Jews did: but plainly lie: for they mock him in
his servants, and so he takes it: and therefore Christ keeps him out of their
way, and will have nothing to do with them. For as he would not come into his
own Country Nazaret, because they rejected and scorned their own Prophets:
so do thou mock the Prophets, Christ comes not into thine heart: seldom do
these scorners return, seldom or never escape they the severity and judgment
of God; there is no remedy, when they mock his Messengers, 2. Chron. 36.16.
Herod, as bad as he was, Mark. 6.20
reverenced John, because he was a good man.

2. Hence are those swarms of haters of Gods Word, who in stead of singular
love for their work sake, swell like Toads with poison and wrath against their
Preachers for their work sake: as Ahab, I hate Micaiah, he never prophecyeth
good unto me: so when a powerful Ministry discouers the filthiness and
hypocrisy of a wicked heart, crosses his corruptions, as a fretting corrosiue
to his conscience, torments him before the time, suffers him not quietly to
enjoy his sin, his Herodias, now says Ahab to Elijah, Have thou found me, O
mine enemy? Now is Paul become an enemy, for telling the truth. For sin is
so incorporate, and become almost themselves, that a man cannot be an enemy to
their sins, but (as they think) to themselves also. Now he pryes and watches
him narrowly, and takes hold of his least infirmities, if so be by casting some
shame on the Preacher, he can hide his own. Now he deuiseth against this
Jeremy: Ier. 18.18.
he is a spy-fault, a troubler of the State, a factious Preacher, or (as Festus
said of Paul,) Too much learning, or singularity, makes him mad, while he
speaks words of sobriety and wisdom, Act. 26.24, 25. And this is the double
honor wherewith he loads them. Dealing most unthankfully, as Saul, who when
David was playing with his Harp, to ease his distracted mind, cast a spear
at him, 1. Sam. 18.10. So while the Preacher seeks by playing on the heavenly
Harp, to solace and comfort them, and to drive evil spirits and lusts from
them, they cast darts, and spears, and arrows, of reproaches and slanders
against them: And now the most sauory salt, if they can do withal, must be
cast out and trodden under foot.

3. From this contempt of the Word and Ministers it is, An evil heart hates
the Word first, and then the Preacher.
that many will not come to hear the Preacher; as the deaf Adder refuses to
hear the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely; and so show
themselves not to be of God, 1. Ioh. 4.6. He that is not of God, hears not
us. Some hear seldom, and for shame: business of greater inportance stays
them: and if they chance on occasion to hear any thing that displeases them;
Oh then, as Corah said to Moses, Ye take too much upon you, Moses and Aaron,
Numb. 16.3. and are like them that contend with the Priest, Hos. 4.4. Wherein
the Prophet expresses the outrage of evil in the Jews. This is their
subjection, to resist the holy Ghost.

As for the comfort and maintenance of their Preacher, further than Law
forces, neither conscience, nor shame, nor example, nor persuasion moves them
to maintain the worship of God. But, if they can live of slanderous and
scornful speeches, of hateful and injurious actions, they will not suffer
them to want maintenance. Thus did Herod return John evil for good, and
Demetrius to Paul. Object. Though we hear not some, yet we hear some learned
and wise men: and therefore this is not hatred of the Word. Answ. 1. A wicked
heart will hear and receive doctrines and persons, so long as he is pleased:
and so long the devil himself is good: But let him meddle with thine eyes
once, or dear sins, now there is nothing but storming and raging, as a devil
incarnate. 2. A wicked man may hear a man, because he is learned, yet learn
no good from him: And it is hatred of goodness, that makes him refuse good
Sermons, under pretense they be not learned; he means not, indeed, that all
the learning in the world should make him better.

Object. Oh but we love the Word, and if God himself, or Christ would teach
us, we should say more: But what are Ministers more than other men?

Answ. 1. He that loves God, will not be wiser than God, who has described
his own means: but would obey them that have the oversight of souls. 2. It
is false, that thou would obey the Lords immediate voice, who wilt not obey
this voice. Did not the Lord speak to Cain immediately, to reclaim him from his
sin? but, did he repent at the voice of God himself? Did not Israel hear
Gods own voice, in giving the Law, with dread? and yet did they cease to
murmr and rebel against him? What was Judas and the Jews better for Christ's
own voice? No, no, this is like the Jews, Math. 27.42. Let him come down
from the Cross, and we will believe in him. Which had he done, they would not
have believed: for, did he not rise from the grave, which was more, Luke
16.31? If they will not believe Moses and the Prophets, neither would they
believe, though one should rise from the dead.

Therefore we conclude against all pretenses, that an evil heart hates the
Word first and principally, and then the Preacher of it.

V. A good and honest heart has many Marks in respect of it self: 6. Marks
of a good heart in respect of it self.
as the Scriptures ascribe many properties unto it, without which it cannot be
good. 1. Newness. 2. Softness. 3. Cleanness. 4. Singleness. 5.
Fruitfulness. 6. Watchfulnes. Of these in order.

The first is newness: Newness of heart in 4. principa^l faculties.
A good heart is every where called, a new heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart will
I give you, and a new spirit, etc. so called, 1. Because it has put off the
old malice and corruption: 2. Because there is a renouation in all the
faculties: as

Mind.
1. The mind is renewed in knowledge, Col. 3.10. It is given to this heart to
understand the mysteries of the Kingdom, Math. 13.11. While it was an evil
and old heart, it might attain a natural knowledge, or an historical
knowledge, or a moral knowledge, generally to discourse of Divine things: but
altogether unfruitful, making him a little the wiser, but never the better.
But here is a new knowledge, beyond the story or theory, a practicke
knowledge, and experimental of the virtue and power of Christ's death, Phil.
3.10. full of mercy and good fruits, Iam. 3.17.

Conscience.
2. The renewed conscience is an vn-diuided companion of a good heart: for,
whereas before, the mind and conscience were defiled, Tit. 1.15. either
senseless, or raging; now the heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, (Heb.
10.22.) becomes a pure and good conscience, excuses and imboldeneth before
God, cease all accusation and condemning, is peaceable, tender, waking, and
endeavors to keep the goodness of it before God, and all men, always, and in
all things, Act. 24.16. Heb. 13.18.

Will.
3. The will is renewed: It was as heavy as a Bear to the stake, to pray,
hear, obey: It was as a slave in fetters, under the bondage of sin and
Satan: It ran after lusts, as after sports: no sugar so sweet as the
pleasures of sin. But now it is carried according to the motion of a good
Spirit, after God: It willingly obeyes the Commandment: It has a free Spirit,
Psa. 51.12.
and now being drawn by God, runs after him, Cant. 1.3.

Affections, in 4. instances. 1. Love.
4 The affections are renewed: as in four instances. 1. Love. It is a sign of
a good heart to love goodness: first, the chief good, and best of all, God
himself, whom before he hated deadly: and he loves God for himself, not for
his benefits only. Secondly, he loves goodness, not only in the fountain,
but in all the streams: He loves the children of God, not for sinister ends,
of profit, credit, kindred, but for the image of God in them: He loves Gods
Word, not for knowledge only, but for direction and reformation. In a word, he
loves that most which has most goodness. 2. Joy is not carnal, 2. Joy.
in base and inferior things, as formerly; but the joy of a good heart feeds it
self on things most excellent, for kind and continuance: For kind; in God
himself who is his glory, and in the shining of his countenance, Psalm. 4.6,
7. in the sweet taste of his Word, above honey, above pearls: in the purchase
of the pearl, it goes away rejoicing: in the prosperity of the Church, which
it preferres before his chief joy: Psalm. 137.6
in heavenly and spiritual exercises, Col. 3.3. in the assured hope of
resurrection, Psalm. 16.9. and in the expectation of Christ's coming, to his
eternal redemption. These are things most excellent in kind to be ioyed in,
and the wicked enters not into this joy. Then for continuance: a good heart
rejoices in things of most continuance, for the perpetuating of his joy, Ioh.
16.22. Your joy shall none take away from you.

The third affection, is fear renewed: Before, 3. Fear.
it feared not God, but, this watchman of the soul being absent, it became a
spoil and prey to the devil and lusts; But now it fears God, yet not as a
slave, but as a child; not as a Judge, but a Father. And this fear of God
begets another fear of sin, and the fear of falling keeps it from falling
and final defection. Pro. 28.14.
Blessed is the man that thus fears always: It is a sign of some goodness
in the heart, worth watching and keeping.

4. Zeal.
The fourth renewed affection, is zeal, and feruency: Before, it was most
zealous against zeal, now it is truly zealous, 1. In earnest and affectionate
desires after Gods glory, his House, his worship: the zeal of Gods House
consumed David, Psalm. 119.139. 2. In thorow-hatred of the corruptions of his
own heart, against which he wrestles and cries out, as Paul, Romans 7.24.
Vehement fire soon ouermasters dross and stubble. 3. In contending and
warring against the profaneness and wickedness of the world and corrupt
times: Paul earnestly grieved to see men fall from God, Romans 9.2. and Lots
righteous soul was vexed daily with the unclean conversation of the
Sodomites: and Christ mourned for rebellious Jerusalem, Luke 19.41. Which is
always joined with an endeavor by all possible means to bring them back
again, as Elijah prayed for Israel, 1. King. 18.37. Matthew. 18.12. 4. In an
ardent love and defense of such as fear God, delighting in things and persons
that are sincere, and most affecting the most grace: Matthew. 12.48. Psalm. 16.3.

Thus have I given a taste of the newness of a good heart: which is his first
property.

2. Softness, in 3. things.
The second is softness: a good heart is soft and sensible. The best heart
indeed has some hardness, but it is sensible of it: for 1. It sees still a
burden of nay it sees more evil in it self, then in all other. Grace within,
as a strait line, is the measure of it self and that which is crooked. 2. It
sees to bewail the hardness and distemper of it self, with O Lord, why have
thou hardened our hearts against thy fear? Ah miserable man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death? These are the common complaints of
the godly, how they are toyled with their slownesse of heart to believe, with
earthlinesse of heart, finding themselves chayned to the love of earth, with
frowardness of heart, when they cannot hear, or bear reproves, Prou. 17.20.
And in all these, they are more severe, because they are more sensible of their
own lusts, than any other. 3. It still strives against this hardness, and
prays for a Why have thou hardened our hearts? Oh return, etc. And the poor
man in the Gospel, I believe, Lord, help my unbelief. Mark. 9 24


Whereas an evil heart goes on, neither seeing, nor suspecting, nor willing
to see the evil of it, till it be grown to the hardness of a stone, to which
it is compared, Ezekiel. 11.19. because there is no life, no humor, no aptness
to softness, more than in a stone: And so going on in hardness, comes to be
Adamantine, which is the hardest and invincible stone, Zech. 7.12.

The third property of a good heart is cleanness: 3. Cleannes, in 2. things.
every good heart is a pure and clean heart: Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a
clean heart, O God. Math. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart. Object. Can any
man say his heart is clean, seeing in many things we sin all, and if we say we
have no sin or foulenes, we lie, and our own clothes will defile us? Answ. The
best heart has much foulness and frailty: (What a heap of sins of
unsuspected filthiness lies within, see Mark. 7.21, 22.) But first, this is a
believing heart, and so comes to be clean; both by imputation of Christ's
purity, apprehended by faith, and by incoation of actual purity, in part. The
former is by the Lauer of Christ's blood; the latter by the waters of the Spirit
of sanctification: The former cleanses the guilt of sin; the latter, the
filth and corruption of it: Both ways, faith is said to purify the heart,
Act. 15.9. Secondly, this heart, when it does foul it self by sin, 1.
purposes and resolves not to defile it self, but sins against his purpose:
2. lies not moyling it self still, but is troubled and struck, as David for
numbering the people, and Peter for denying his Master: 3. has speedy recourse
to the Lauer of Christ's blood, renewing his faith, and to the tear^s of godly
sorrow, renewing his repentance; and so returns to his cleanness.

But an evil heart is an unclean heart, because unbelieving, departing from
the living God, Heb. 3.12. It can desire, yea purpose sin, as Absalom: Can
commit it habitually, hungrily, greedily: Can rejoice in sin and foulness,
and sometimes glory in it: And so is held under, and never rises from under
uncleanness.

4. Singleness, in 5. things. 1. It is plain.
The fourth property of a good heart, is singleness, or sincerity: which is
known thus. 1. It is plain, simple, open, not crafty to contriue or conceal
sin, not cunning in the methods of sin, but simple concerning evil, Romans
16.19. It is good, seeing we must sin, yet to bungle in sin, not as traded
and expert in it. Of all virtues, Satan would beguile us of this simplicity in
Christ, 2. Cor. 11.3. The world also scorneth it as silliness, and
sheepishnesse, to be so simple as to stick only to the revealed will of God.

A wicked heart can be witty to plot and devise, to excuse and defend his
sin. The hasty furious man, told of his cursing, swearing, blaspheming, will
tell you it is his nature, he is of a cholerike constitution, every man has
his fault, I cannot mend it. Here he has devised a strong argument to
strengthen his grossest corruption. But beat him out of his plea, tell him he
must resist corrupt nature; and, where grace is, there would be no such
outrageous behavior; Oh then he tells you, he was provoked and urged, or, it
would have angered a Saint, or made an Angel swear, to be so provoked; or
else, we cannot be Saints, or so strict, etc.

Tell a drunkard of his swinish sin, how disguised and scornful he made
himself to very boys; Oh it is his infirmity too, his brain is weak, or he
was in company, and urged by company, or customers whom he must respect, he
cannot do withal: and press him hard by Gods Word, his last answer will be
with the Vine in Iothams parable, I cannot leave my wine, nor my good liquor:
leave my drink, leave to live.

2. A sincere heart is a whole heart: 2. Whole. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
Love the Lord with all thy heart: not double, not divided: the Lord abides not
an heart, and an heart, but reiects double-minded men, Iam. 4.8. A manifest
note hereof is, to frame it self to the whole Word of God, as knowing, not
only that God is a Sovereign Commander as well in one thing as another, but
that there is no part of his Word, which is not worthy both to be known, and
brought into use: all the Commandments, for direction of the whole man; all
the threats, for humiliation: all the precious promises, for incitation and
consolation; all examples of virtue, for imitation; of vices, for caution and
prevention; of punishments, for terror. Thus shall a good heart hold the whole
Word, not only to teach and reprove others, but it self; and as a Lantern,
the light of which directs others, but himself most, and that for every step.

3. Secretly religious.
3. A sincere heart is secretly religious; cares not for seeming, but being; not
for talking, but doing; had rather be good, than seem so; had rather have
grace, than an empty show of it; and desires the power of godliness, rather
than the form. It will be inwardly clean: for a Pharise can wash the
outside, Mat. 23. and a sluttish Christian, like a sluttish maid, can sweep
the floor, but leave many dusty and nasty corners unswept, unlooked to. Pilate
can wash his hands, not his heart. A Pharise can pray in the Temple: an
hypocrite, if he can stumble into a Church: but the good heart, in his chamber,
in his closet. An evil heart can be sorry for external notorious foul
sins; as murder, shedding of innocent blood, as Saul, Ahab, Judas; but, when
was he heard confessing his mother-sinne in which he was borne, Psalm. 51 5.
as David; or saying, Psalm. 19.12
Who knows his secret sins? as a good heart will. An evil heart may
forbear or abstain from some outward act of evil, and dares not venture on
it; but inwardly cannot hate that evil, much less abhor it, as he is
commanded, Romans 12.9. whereas to a good heart, the sins which he most loved
once, he now most hates, as the stomach most lothes the meat it once surfeted
on.

4. A sincere heart will be religious, though alone, 4. Though alone.
as Joshua, chap. 24.15. Mary, if she cannot get Martha, will sit down alone
at Christ's feet. It will be good in a bad age, and shine as a light in the
midst of a crooked generation: so Lot, Elijah. A good note of soundness at
heart is, to abide vncorrupt in times of general corruption. The light of
grace, where sincere, is like a Lamp shining brightest in the darkest room;
and as fire, hotest in the coldest and sharpest weather. Heb. 11.7. the
commendation of Noah is, that he was most careful of himself, and for and
Arc, in the most careless age. But an evil heart looks and stays for
company, for rulers, rich men, etc.

5. A sincere heart willingly examines it self, 5. Often tries it self.
and yields it self to be examined: Often sets it self before God and his
Iudgement-seat, is contentedly judged by the Word: Holds it a benefit to be
smitten by the righteous: Can abide to be gaged, to have his conscience rubd
and ransackt, Master, is it I? Mat. 26.22
is it I, Master? Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my
thoughts. Psalm. 139.23.
But an evil heart has some hand or foot not cut off; some eye, for which it
falls out both with the Minister, and his own conscience. It runs from God,
as Adam, from his Word and trial, and trembles with Felix, at the mention of
Judgment: but refusing ordinary trial, shall be pressed to death ineuitably.

^ Motives to sincerity.
Oh labor for this sincerity of heart: consider, 1. the whole life of a
Christian is a continual Passover, unleavened of sincerity, 1. Cor. 5.8. 2.
If servants of men must serve with singleness of heart, Ephesians. 6.5. much more
must Gods. 3. This only is the heart

5. Property of a good heart is, fruitfulnes.
The first property of a good heart is fruitfulness: It is the Christians
Treasury or storehouse, producing good things, Math. 12.35. fruitful in
divine and heavenly meditations; as David in the Word and works of God, and
his own works: in fervent and effectual prayers, being the Temple of the
Spirit: in sauory and gracious speeches, tending to edification, Ephesians. 5.4.
The lips of the just feed many: also in charitable and helpful duties toward
his brethren, to show works of mercy, and strengthen the weake-hearted, as
Zacheus and Peter. But an evil heart is barren, and as fruitless as filthy;
his imaginations are only evil continually; God knows their thoughts to be
vain, 1. Cor. 3.20. their speeches unsavory, as out of a sink within, unjust,
unfaithful; golden promises, leaden performances: their actions and fruits
like the trees, most wicked, at the best, vain or worldly: Truly said Solomon,
Pro. 10.20. The heart of the wicked is little worth; and as worthless are his
speeches and actions; the most of them wicked, the best, vain and frivolous.

Labor therefore for such an heart as acknowledges the seed-time and season,
and in this season is diligent in sowing and dispersing: seeing the surest way
to keep seed, is to sow it, not to save it at home: and such as is fruitful
in every season, as ground receiving blessing of the Lord.

The sixth property of a good heart, is watchfulnes: 6. Property, watchfulness.

1. Watches it self narrowly.


extended many ways. 1. It watches it self most carefully, Pro. 4.23. Keep
thy heart with all diligence: because as he keeps his soul, he keeps his
life, chap. 19.16. While others watch, that nothing issue out into words and
actions, to disgrace them, this will watch to let and leave nothing within.

2. It watches against sin, both before, and in, and afterward.

Before sin: to avoid occasions, appearances, 1. Against all sin, before,
in the sin, and after it.
and beginnings of sin: as Joseph shunned not only the act of uncleanness
with his Mistrisse, but her company, Genesis 39.10. Mat. 26.42. Watch and pray,
lest ye enter into tentation: the first entrance is pernicious. Eve should not
have been led by the Serpent to look on the forbidden fruit, if she would not
lust and taste it. David would have his eyes turned away from vanity, as well
as his heart, Psa. 119.37. and Solomon counsels, not to go near the door
of the Harlot, Pro. 5.8. For as a bird keeping aloft, is free and safe, but
cannot come near the snare without danger: so here: The good heart cannot
give it self leave to run into infectious places, knowing the inclination of
nature to be taken. How careful are they that have Gunpowder in their
houses, that no fire or candle come near it? yet our nature is as Gunpowder
to the spark of tentation. 2. It will preserve his watch in occasions of
sinning: Genesis 39.6. Joseph was faithful, when no account was taken. No
difficulty for him to be true, that was never trusted: to be sober, where is no
drink: or for a woman to be chaste, whom none looks after. But, to withstand
evil, when it is offered, urged, forced upon him, this is strength, this is
Religion. If any sin assault the good heart more strongly, he flies to the
Antidote, as we for our heart against poison, because the life is shut up in
it. 3. It will watch against sin, though good men do it: will not be drawn
to sin for any man's pleasure, but reprove them rather, Ephesians. 5.10. as Paul
reproved Peter himself for the dissimulation, Gal. 2.14. 4. It will do no
evil, though the greatest good might come of it, Romans 3.8. because it knows,
no sin is eligible: and, not events, but causes can make a thing good.

In sin, the good heart watches in part: is not on a sound or dead sleep,
but, as of children we say, Their hearts are asleep, though their eyes be half
open: so on the contrary, Gods children have their eyes asleep, but their
heart waketh, Cant. 5.2. there is no full purpose, consent, or will.

After sin, it watches both to rise by repentance, as David's heart smote him
for numbering the people; and to avoid the like snares for time to come, lest it
become a slave again.

3. His graces both to keep, perfect, and exercise them.
3. It watches his graces: first, to keep them, as one that must give account
of his talents. As the Iaylor locks up the prisoner, looks the doors be
fast, and has an eye to the windows, that nothing be let in, to let him out:
So here; Job 31.1. Secondly, perfect them, and increase the best gifts, as one
most covetous to add to his stock. It never has grace enough, carefully
watches all opportunities to do himself good, sets out with the first in his
race of Christianity, and strives to keep before. Thirdly, to exercise them in
all opportunities of well-doing: seeks good, Amos 5.14. to further his
reckoning, and will do good within his calling, whateuer evil may follow on
it; and is careful in the matter of doing good, of due circumstances, called,
(Romans 16.19.) wisdom to do well.

4. It watches his whole conversation, both alone, and with others: and frames
his life so, 4. His whole conversation, both alone, and
as it be led soberly, and honestly, without scandal, 1. Cor. 10.32. justly,
without deceit or guile, 1. These. 4.16. peaceably, without strife, so far as
is possible, Romans 12.18. Heb. 12.14. humbly, without pride or swelling, Col.
3.12. boldly in good causes, resolving not to give Gods cause away to wicked
men, nor basely for private ends stoop to honor ungodly persons, which makes
them scorn him and his Religion the more: Never praise the wicked, but
contemn their dispraises and scorns. His words may pass as a vain blast
against a godly man, when his heart is afraid of him, his conscience admires
him.

With others: he watches his communication, With others
to season his speech with the salt of grace, for edification, to refrain his
tongue from scandalous, hurtful, and sinful speech, Psa. 34.13. and hold it
to true and acceptable; knowing, that he who keeps his mouth, keeps his
soul, Pro. 22.23. upholding good speech, and by it good men, and good things.

So also for his company: 1. A good heart watches to avoid needless society
with evil men: Pro. 23.20. If they be scorners, and will not be corrected, it
will shun them, lest it be corrupted: as a man that means to keep his
clothes clean, will avoid Colliers and Chimny-sweepers; It knows, evil
company is as an infectious air, and will carry himself to such as to
plaguie persons, pity them, pray for them, relieve them, supply them with
food and Physic to preserve their life, but will not come among them, because
of infection. 2. It watches in all company to receive all good offered, and
offer all that will be received; never to consent to any evil, but be an
example of the Religion he professes, 1 Thessalonians. 1.7.

5. It watches the coming of Christ.
5. It watches for the coming of Christ, 2. Pet. 3.12. and therefore finisheth
the work in hand, remembering his account, the misery of the neglect, and
shutting out of such as forget their latter end: Whereas an evil heart puts
off the Day of the Lord: the evil servant says, Luke 12.45
My Master deferres his coming, and dares not say from his heart, Reu. 22.20
Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

A good heart provoke it self to good duties.
VI. Marks of a good heart in respect of good duties.

It considers, first, that it is Gods new workmanship created to good works,
Ephesians. 2.10. and that Christ's redeemed ones are a peculiar people, Reas. 4.
zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. that it is a note of a Disciple of Christ
to bring forth good fruits, Ioh. 15.8. and without them it cannot be a good
Tree, nor can have his calling, adoption, or ingraffing into Christ sealed up
unto him. Secondly, that it is to the praise and glory of God, to be filled
with the fruits of righteousness, Phil. 1.11. Thirdly, that it becomes the
Gospel, and adornes it, to shine as lights in the midst of a crooked
generation, Phil. 2.15. And, that the practice of obedience is the most seemly
and best garment of a Christian: therefore (1. Tim. 2.20.) even women
professing the fear of God, must apparel themselves with good works.
Fourthly, that according to our seed-time, shall be our Harvest, and according
to the proportion of the fruits of grace, shall be the fruition of glory: He
that gains five or ten talents, shall rule so many Cities.

Therefore it is most careful and diligent in good duties; and, not only to
do them, It cares to do them well in 7. circumstances. 1. Wisely.
but to do them well; in these seven circumstances.

1. Wisely: observing these Rules of wisdom in doing good. First, he makes
the tree good, or else it yields no good fruit. He looks to his faith, and
justification thereby: that they be fruits of faith, without which they are
sin, and cannot please God, Heb. 11.6. To do the works of God, a man must
first believe in him whom God has sent, Ioh. 6.28.29. Secondly, he will not
do them without light and direction, knowing the light necessary, as for
natural and civil actions, so for divine also: The Word is the light and
lantern, and all actions of Christian obedience is but the holding forth of
the Word: without which, he shall hear that expostulation, Phil. 2.16.
Who required these things at your hands? Thirdly, Esa. 1.12.
knowing that all duties done too late, are hopeless and fruitless, it will
wisely know the season of doing good: it will walk while day is, work in
Summer, sow in seed-time, apprehend means offered, and good opportunities. It
will seek God while he may be found, and enter with the wise Virgins, while
the door is open, and provide oil in time. The grace of a good action is the
seasonablenesse of it. God himself for our example, has an appointed time,
that is, a fit season for all his work, Eccles. 3.1. Fourthly, knowing that a
bad end spoils the best action, it does not things to be seen of men, but for
the glory of God, and the honor of his Gospel: for the testification of his
faith, obedience, thankfulness: for the edification of his brethren, (...).
and provoking of others to love and good works, Heb. 10.24. Fifthly, knowing
the difficulty of good things, it armeth and prepares it self against
difficulties, as, the heat of persecution, discouragement of Superiors,
coldness of times, scorns of men, etc. It fore-casteth the cost and charge,
the loss and danger, and accounts not his life dear, so he may finish his
course with joy.

2. Humbly.
2. A good heart does good duties humbly: first, with repentance, without which
all are rejected; Act. 26.20. Paul taught repentance, and turning to God, and
then to do works worthy amendment of life. Secondly, it can accomplish
nothing as it would, but supplies the defect of the action with abundance of
affection: Psalm. 119.5. Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes.
It pleases it self in nothing; It rejoices not in any performance: but
craves Gods gracious acceptance. Thirdly, it dreams not of any perfection it
has attained, but sets perfection before it, and runs toward it, Phil. 3.13.
but with daily sense and strife against imperfection. It complains of his best
actions, is ashamed of his wants in them, and is never quiet, till it get a
cover for them. It cries with David, O enter not into judgment with thy
servant, O Lord. Psa. 143.2.
It tenders them all in the perfect merit of Christ's obedience, without which,
all our righteousness is as a filthy clout.

3. A good heart does good duties heartily, 3. Heartily.
or cheerfully, Exodus 25.2. All the obedience of a good heart is from the
heart. Romans 6.17. Ye have obeyed from the heart the form of doctrine
delivered. It cannot content it self in doing a good work, out of this good
manner of doing: first, because it knows, the beginning of acceptable
obedience must be the heart, which must quicken all our duties, or else they
are dead: secondly, if servants must do to their Masters every thing heartily,
Col. 3.23.
much more the servants of God to their Master in heaven: Thirdly, the Lord
observes, which is eye-seruice, and which is heart-seruice: he reiects
compulsed worship, and accepts only free will offerings, and complains if any
piece of the heart be wanting, as in many Kings of Israel.

4. A good heart does good duties abundantly: 4. Abundantly.
an heart purged by Christ, brings forth more fruit, John 15.2. for herein is
the Father glorified, verse 8. 1. Cor. 15.58. abounding in the work of the
Lord. To this it strives, for these reasons. First, because it is ready pressed,
and forward to good, and kept in a preparedness for every good work, it
grows full of goodness, both in gracious incitations, and gracious actions.
Secondly, it not only takes, but seeks occasions of doing good, and so grows
rich in good works. Thirdly, the more it does, the more easy they be, and so
come off quicker; He that does them quick, rises apace. Fourthly, it is as
busy, and as glad to set forward Gods glory, in and by others, as by himself,
and so in all companies and occasions makes himself a gainer.

5. Universally.
5. A good heart does good duties universally: first, it diuorceth not the two
Tables, but aims at the service of God in holiness and righteousness:
secondly, Mat. 3.
it will fulfill all righteousness, as taught by the doctrine of grace, which
calls on us for all duties of piety, righteousness, and sobriety, Tit. 2.12.
The love of God produces works of piety, which are sacrifices of praises and
prayer, the calves of the lips, morning and evening, and on all occasions. And
because sacrifice is abominable, without judgment and justice, Prou. 21.3. it
is careful to give every man his right, and will serve God in serving man. And
because mercy from God, and mercy to man are joined together, it delights in
all occasions of mercy; the works whereof are so many odours of sweet smell,
Phil. 4.18. Thirdly, it attends to all duties, both of the general calling,
and special; is careful that one duty destroy not, but set forward another;
Phil. 4.8.
and is still in the exercise of whatsoever is honest, just, of any praise or
virtue. A good heart, like a good servant, will do whatsoever his Lord says;
as Mary to the servants, Ioh. 2.
Whatsoever he says, do it. As a man that is to plant an Orchard, will be
sure to get of every good fruit some: so a good heart will not know any fruit
to be good, but will carry some of it. Particulars were infinite; for works
spiritual, and corporal; duties to them within, and duties to them without,
works of justice, and works of mercy; in giving, and in forgiving; of
incitation to good, and hindering of evil.

6. A good heart does good duties constantly: 6. Constantly.
for first, grace knits the heart to God, that it may stick to his service,
not looking back: secondly, the writing of Gods finger, that is, the Law is
never blotted out, his workmanship never defaced; and so what it is once by
grace, as it desires ever to be, so it remains: thirdly, it sees Christ before
it, finishing his work, Ioh. 4.34. and so it is his meat and drink also, to
finish his work: fourthly, it will not give up, or cease to do well, for any
crosses, Job 2.3. In all this Job sinned not: the love of God and goodness in
that heart is like a raging fire, and much water cannot quench it: fifthly, it
is loath, after the suffering of many things, to lose the Crown promised only
to perseverance, Reu. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give
thee a Crown of life.

7. A good heart does good duties watchfully: 7. Watchfully.
beforehand, to apprehend occasions, as Abraham sat in the door of his Tent,
to entertain passengers; and after the doing, to reuiew them, as God did all
the works of his hands after the Creation; to find either peace and comfort
in them, if well done; or trouble and disquiet in failing. It knows they shall
enter into a strict examination of a strict Lord and Master: therefore it self
will first examine them, whether they were done sincerely, seasonably,
cheerfully, humbly, and according to the rules of well-doing.

Oh the wickedness of our hearts, A wick^d heart fails in all.
who yet conceive better of our selves! 1. Some good actions we would do, but
hate the light which should direct us, and such as walk in it. 2. Some good
deeds we would do at our death, but fearfully outstand the opportunities of
grace, and will know no season: Christ mourns over us, as over Jerusalem. 3.
How proud are we of a little, glorying of our good works, delighting to hear
them praised! whereas a good heart would dislike every thing. 4. How seldom
measure we our actions by the rules of Gods glory, good conscience, and
sincerity of heart, but by multitudes and examples of men, doing as the most
do, and for our own crooked ends! 5. We content our selves with the deed or
action done, never care with what affection, which the Lord most respects: as
in the widows two mites, and rich men's superfluity. 6. God has long manured
us, but where is our abundant fruit? for clusters, we cannot show berries. Can
God be content to find so little, where he expects so much? and may not he
expect much, where he has given so much? Shall we never come to answer for
our means, which we are so unanswerable in? 7. How many are fallen back from
their righteousness, which shall never be remembered? They seemed to begin in
the Spirit, but are unstable and perverted, whose latter end is worse than the
beginning.

VII. Marks of a good heart in respect of sin.
VII. Marks of a good heart in respect of sin.

It knows, first, that nothing is properly hated of God, but sin, as being
directly against his Law, and his Image, who is a God hating iniquity; and as
God himself is the chief and absolute Good; so only sin is the chief and
absolute evil. Secondly, that the proper effect of hatred being revenge, he is
not more sure to sin, than God to revenge, one way or other; yea, unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate him. Thirdly, that all and every
sin is upon record: there is an handwriting against every sinner, and an
obligation in every sin binding the sinner, who has not one farthing to pay
for an infinite debt, or infinite forfeit, Col. 2.14. Fourthly, that all and
every sin lies in the way, between God and us, and separates from him, Esa.
59.2. Ier. 5.25.
and holds good things from us; shuts heaven, curses the earth, and burdens
all the creatures. Fifthly, that it exposes to all misery within us, without
us, both here and hereafter. Within us, the destruction of all Gods Image, the
corruption and guilt of the whole nature; all evil inclinations against God,
and our neighbor; especially an evil conscience, where sin lies at the
door, either vexing and galling it, or dogging and watching it; which is a
very hell before hell. Without a man, all the calamities of this life,
sickness, poverty, madness, shame, death and corruption; all the proper
effects of sin: Genesis 2.17. In the day thou sinnest, thou shall dye the death.
And hereafter, the extreme misery of sin in all not delivered by Christ, is
that eternal death which is the wages of it: the unsupportable curse,
denounced on all that continue not in all things, Romans 6.23.
Deuteronomy. 27.26. and to be executed on all Reprobates in the Day of the Lords
appearing, Math. 25.41. Go, ye cursed, etc.

Hence, 1. it sees the misery of sin, 1. It sees the misery of sin.
and groans under the burden, both the sin of his nature, for which Paul
cries out of himself as a wretched man; and David, Psalm. 51.5. and of his
life, as the Prodigal, who acknowledged himself not worthy to be called a
son: and the sins against the Gospel, unbelief, despighting of Christ and
his Spirit, as the Jews pricked in their hearts, Act. 2.37.

2. Truly repents sin, in which are four things.

1. Confession against it self.


2. It truly repents for sin: for which, this heart may be called an house of
mourning, an Hadadrimmon, or the valley of mourning. In which repentance is,
first, confession against it self, Psalm. 32.5. It will not flatter it self,
but cast the first stone against it self, and will say more against it self,
then all men can: as David having numbered the people, before the Prophet Gad
came, cast the stone against himself, saying, I have exceedingly sinned, 2. Of
all sins known.
2. Sam. 24.10. Secondly, confession of all the sins it knows: as 1. secret
and hid corruptions: for the good heart knows, that God loves truth in the
inner parts; which made David complain of his original corruption, Psalm. 51.6.
and brooding sin, which none took notice of but himself; and the Apostle
Paul, of the law of evil rebelling against the law of his mind: 2. Small and
lesser evils; it extenuates no sin as little, esteems none as Gnats, Moats
or Mites, which Gods Law takes order against: It looks not so much on the
matter, as on the form: It is burdened, and takes notice of the least sins,
omissions, failing in good things, falling from the first love, etc.

Thirdly, in repentance there is remorse, or biting: A good heart cannot commit
sin without remorse; 3. Remorse.
not secret sins, because it knows, nothing is secret in respect of God,
with whom it has to deal; not most natural and inbred sins, to which it
self is most inclineable, because it knows, the more familiar the sin, the
more dangerous; not small sins: David's heart smote him for Saul's lap, as for
his head; the eye feels the least moat. And this by small means: as soft wax
is soon impressed, so is a good heart because of his softness. It will melt
and resolve more at the very hearing of Gods Judgments denounced against
others (as Josiah, 2. Chron. 34.27.) than an evil heart at the feeling of Gods
most dreadful Judgments, as Pharaoh, Exodus 7.23. Peter, when Christ only
looks back upon him, gets out and weeps bitterly. It is true, that a good
man may lie a while without sound remorse, as David nine months after his
adultery; though not that time without grudgings: but that time the evil and
corruption of it preuailes, and the Spirit will not suffer it to lie still, but
awake it must, and no sooner wakened then humbled.

Fourthly, in repentance there is revenge on it self, 4. Revenge.
with holy indignation, for playing the beast before God, 2. Cor. 7.11. Thus
the Publican knocked his breast: and Job abhorred himself in dust and ashes,
Chap. 42.6.

And all this a good heart will do, both secretly, and constantly. Secretly,
because he is a Jew who is one within, and he is praised whom God praises:
And it knows, that every sound action of grace, as mortification, repentance,
humiliation, must begin within, and flow from thence; Ille dolet vere, qui sine
test dolet.
the seat of soundness is the heart: and, to take notice of outward things, to
reform them, and neglect the heart, and soul, and secret passages, is to
begin at a wrong end. Constantly, because it sees such daily ruins in the
soul as make it continually mourn, and put it to a continual charge and
labor in repairing it. And this is to grieve sincerely, for sin as sin, as
the offense of God, not for punishment: whence it is called godly sorrow, 2.
Cor. 7.10.

3. Seeks pardon.
3. A good heart, because it knows, that the greatest happiness stands in the
pardon of sin, Psalm. 32.1. and the conscience can never be rightly quiet, but
in declaration of forgiveness, it labors most for assurance of the pardon of
sin, with strong cries for mercy, Psalm. 51.1. and to feel the joy of
salvation, verse. 12. in many several petitions, Wash me, cleanse me, purge me
with Hysope: with importunity, as Dan. 9.19. and endless repetitions, as ^he
poor starued beggar for relie^e, or the condemned person for a pardon; (...)
the poor Publicans prayer was, God be merciful to me a sinner. Luke 18.1^
It sees more need of Gods favor, then of life, and therefore more eagerly
desires it, and pines till it feel the sense of it. It sees his filthy
nakedness, and is never quiet without a cover: his horrible foulness, and is
ever washing and bathing in the Lauer of Christ's blood, and the tears of true
repentance. It feels a deadly sore, and cannot be eased without application
of Gods salvation.

4. It fears and watches all sin to come, as it hates and shameth for all
sin past. 4. Fears sin.
As nature shunnes and fears all Serpents, even little ones as well as great:
so grace shunnes all sins, and hates them, being the spawne of the serpent.
First, it knows all are hateful to God, all prejudicial to the soul, as one
hole in a ship, or one Swine in a Garden, or one Fly in the Apothecaries box,
is enough to spoil all; therefore it watches all. Secondly, seeing small
sins are commonly Harbingers to greater, it dares not venture on the
smallest. Thirdly, it knows that the way to avoid final defection, or
backsliding, is, to fear staying a little. Fourthly, it fears the show, the
taste, the occasions, the first appearances of sin, lest from the broth, it
easily fall to the flesh. Fifthly, it fears and hates his own sins, more than
all other men's: and not as it is said of Anthony, He hated the Tyrant, not
tyranny. Odit Antonius tyrannum, non tyrannidem
Romans 7.15. I hate that I do. Sixthly, it hates and fears his own inward
sins, as much as the outward; wisely damming the fountain and Wellhead, and
stocking up the root. Seventhly, it hates and fears the repetition of sin,
and much more shakes off the habit of it, lest he should suddenly grow to
expertnesse in the trade. Lastly, it hates and mournes for other men's sins,
and stops them when he can: Psalm. 119.136. Phil. 3.18. -- and now tell you
weeping. Yea, the sins of others against God, more smite a good heart with
sorrow, than their own sins can an evil.

5. It retains and still renewes a full purpose of not sinning, so as though
it sin, 5. Retains a purpose of not sinning.
the conscience can testify that it is carried against the settled purpose of
it. David swears and vows he will keep the righteous judgments of God: and,
Away from me ye wicked, for I will keep the Commandments: Act. 11.23. with
full purpose of heart cleave to the Lord. Psalm. 119.2. Surely they work no
iniquity: they do sin, but not as workmen, they cannot plot it, but are
simple to do evil, Romans 16.19.

Deceit of an evil heart in the business of repentance.
Now an evil heart may be humbled and grieved for some sin, but rather for
some actual sin past, than the sin of nature, and that not as sin, or an
offense of God, but either for some judgment feared: so Ahab put on
sackcloth, 1. King. 21.27. or some already executed, Exodus 9.27, 28. Or, if
there be any release, and the judgment be a little over, it returns afresh to
the old course, as a dog to the vomit, 2. Pet. 2.21.

2. It can make show of repentance, yet is but as a cloud without rain, his
tears are soon dried up, he goes away, and forgets he was washed; he can be
bold enough to sin, and is only ashamed to confess his sin; or if he do,
it is in gross, in the lump, with excuses and extenuations.

3. It will be at little or no pains for the pardon of sin: the assurance of
it, it thinks either impossible, or unnecessary. It cannot thoroughly resolve
to leave sin, and therefore cannot be so earnest for forgiveness.

4. It can purpose sin, and rejoice in a future sin. Esau says, the days
of his fathers mourning will once come, and then he will slay his brother.
Absalom carries a purpose of killing his brother Amnon two years together, and
then does it. This plotting and contriuing of sin is a sure sign of a wicked
heart.

5. It can repeat sin remorslesly, till it can trade, and come to be expert
by often committing over the same sins, and let them grow to customs, habits,
natures. 6. It can defend and plead for sin, cloking bad actions, with good
pretenses, or good meanings. Saul saues the fat for sacrifice. Absalom will be
King, to do justice; and he will begin to execute justice with rebellion and
treason, against his own indulgent father. 7. It can glory in sin: Phil. 3.19.
-- whose glory is their shame; which is true of drunkards, swearers, proud
persons, etc. all of them far from grace, farthest from a good heart.

These are the Notes of a good and an honest heart: of which I will say to you,
as the Lord himself sometime said of the Israelites, Deuteronomy. chap. 5. verse. 29.
Oh that there were such an heart in you, to fear your God, and keep his
Commandments always, that it might be well with you, and with your children
for ever.

Now having spoken, 1. of the Means whereby the heart becomes good, 2. of the
Marks whereby it is known so to be; we come in the third place to the Motives,
which is the last thing in the description of this last soil.

I. Only such an heart keeps the Word to salvation. Motives to get this
goodness of heart.
Fusty vessels are not fit for the precious liquor of sound and saving
knowledge, and the graces of the Spirit. The Law is spiritual, and the place
where the Lord lays it, is in the spirit, and heart of his Elect, in whom
only he has wrought a care to keep it: Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy Word in
my heart, that I might not sin against thee. The Lord having written his Law in
Tables, made choice of ye Arc, to lay up the same safe, Exo. 25.16. Thou shall
lay in the Arc the Testimony, that I shall give thee. Now this Arc must be
ouerlaid with pure gold, both within, and without: signifying, that the godly
heart, which must keep the Word, must be sincere within and without: and every
other heart but the good and honest, will shake the Word out, one time or
other: hence David prays, Psalm. 119.80. Let my heart be upright in thy
statutes, that I be not ashamed.

II. God esteems the goodness of our works, by the goodness of the heart:
Ier. 17.11. I the Lord try the hearts, to give to every man according to his
work. Hence many works of civil men, glorious and beautiful to the eyes of
men, are hateful to God, because they flow from the filthy puddle of a corrupt
heart. For as an evil action for matter can never be made good by a good
intention of the heart; so a good action for matter can never be good in
acceptance, from an evil and deceitful heart. If the spring be corrupt, so
are all the streams.

Hence also God esteems good duties perfect, when the heart is sincere:
because, what is wanting in the manner and measure of obedience, is supplied by
soundness, and made up by the goodness of the ^^art: and therefore in
Scripture, uprightness and perfection are put one for another. The widows
mite was in it self very light, but putting her heart to it, made it
ponderous: Add thy heart to thy mite, and it shall be accepted as a Talent.

Hence the Scripture says, God judges not as man: we judge from without, God
from within: we proceed from the effect to the cause; he, from the cause to
the effect: we judge the heart by the work; he the work by the heart: we
look first to the sacrifice, and then to Abel; he first has respect to Abel,
and then to his sacrifice. Hence we see a mite in sincerity accepted, and a
Talent from hypocrisy rejected.

III. Without this good and honest heart thou losest all thy labor, all thy
graces, all thy hopes, all thy expectation. If they come not from a pure heart,
he that is pure, and looks with pure eyes, reiects them all. If thou believe
not from the heart, Romans 10.10. it is vanishing and temporary. If thou liftest
not up pure hands in prayer; that is, the prayer of a pure heart, 1. Tim. 2.8
suppose thou did wear thy tongue to the stumps, and thy knees horne-hard,
thou losest all thy labor: therefore Paul describes true worshippers, 2. Tim.
2.22. to be such as call on the Lord with a pure heart. If thy love be in word,
and tongue, and not in truth, thy heart cannot assure thee that thou art of the
truth, 1. Ioh. 3.18, 19. If thou do not from the heart obey the form of
doctrine delivered, Romans 6.17. all thy obedience is lost, without recompense,
without acceptance, yea abominable. Finally, whatsoever we do, do it
heartily unto the Lord, and not unto men, Col. 3.23. The kernel of all duties
lies within, in the true disposition of the heart: without which, all is as an
empty shell, which when it comes to cracking and opening, the hypocrites hope
fails. See we not in the Day of Judgment many shall pretend great matters
done in preaching, or prophesying in the Name of Christ, and casting out devils
in the same, frequenting Christ's presence, We saw and heard thee in our
str^ets, and so expecting some great reward, for so great and glorious works?
But, not being sound at heart, all these things are no better esteemed then
working of iniquity, and recompensed as hateful sins; Depart from me, ye
workers of iniquity: for all the sacrifices of an hypocrite are abominable, his
very prayers abominable, Esa. 1. Bring no more sacrifices, but wash you, cleanse
you, and then come, let us reason together. Esa. 58.3. The Jews urge God with
their fasting, and yet are sent away empty.

IV. A good heart is the essential difference or distinction between a godly
man and an hypocrite: whosoever wants it, Mat. 24.51
shall receive his portion with hypocrites. The Pharisees make clean the
outside: A good Christian hears his Master say, Mat. 23.26
Thou hypocrite, first make the inside clean. As the hypocrites religion is
made but a cover or cloak, so he uses it as a cloak to cast on and off as he
list: And as men make their clothes, so does he his religion; so it be some
fine stuff without, they care not what base lining they put in: But the sound
Christian is as the Kings daughter, Psalm. 45.13. all glorious within, like a
late fashion of great men, lining russet or base Clokes with Taffatie or Velvet
clean through; or like the hangings of the Sanctuary, without, course Badgers
skins, within, fine linen embroydered, Exodus 26.1, 14.

The hypocrite desires to seem, either only or principally: the sound
Christian desires to be acceptable. 2. Cor. 5 9.
Saul, when he knew Gods mind in rejecting him, yet honor me (says he)
before the people, 1. Sam. 15.30. the sound Christian, knowing the mind of God
in electing, justifying, and sanctifying him, endeavors both living and dying
to be indeed acceptable unto him. An unfaithful and evil heart, that departs
from God, has fair shows, goodly green leaves, a kind of faith, joy,
profession, and will give God every thing but a good heart, which gift he only
calls for: which because he withholds, he shall never speed so well as a
sound Christian, who can give nothing but true desires of a changed and sincere
heart.

V. The whole comfort of a Christian under God, Goodness of heart a full sea
of comfort. 1. Inward.
is in a sound, honest, and good heart. As first, all inward comfort, 2. Cor.
1.12. This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of a good conscience, that in
all simplicity and godly pureness we have had our conversation. This joy is
the joy of Gods people, which the stranger enters not into: and of it our
Savior says, None shall take it from you: Ioh 16.22.
It is like a little vein or spring which ever runs: whereas the joy of an
hypocrite, which makes a greater show and noise then the other, is like a great
pond, clear at top, muddy at bottom, dried up in Summer when is most need of
the waters of comfort.

Secondly, in outward opposition, when men who cannot abide sincerity, 2.
Outward opposition.
object to us that all is hypocrisy, and scorn us for the things we do, when
Ismaels scoff us for the blessings sake; that from the world we have small
comfort and encouragement in our godly way; now we may find comfort and peace
in the sound constitution of our hearts: 2. Sam. 6.21. David being scorned by
Michol for dancing before the Arc, and called fool for his pains, contemned
that contempt: for he did it in the vprightnes of his heart, and would be yet
more vile. Paul teaching the strictness of Christian Religion, to bring Christ
into the hearts and lives of men, was counted an heretic, Act. 14 14.
but professed, After the way which ye call heresy, do I worship the God of
my fathers. Apply we this to our selves. A good conscience as a brazen wall,
fears not the arrows of scorners and adversaries. Jobs innocence will bear
his adversaries book of accusations, Job 31.36.
on his shoulder.

3. Personal affliction.
Thirdly, in personal affliction, this good heart ministers great comfort:

1. In inward temptation, when Satan shall object, as against Job, that thou
art an hypocrite (then which, no temptation more assaulteth or infesteth the
poor Christian:) look what way thou can, not hearing, not praying, not
fasting, reading or alms can answer it, but only the sincere and inward
disposition of an honest heart in all these; He is molested with hypocrisy,
but not subdued by it. So when Satan shall object the weakness of thy faith,
or the defects of thy obedience, and that God cannot accept so broken and
sinful performances; nothing can answer this dart, but sincerity of heart,
manifest in true desires and endeavors, which God accepts, beholding
mercifully what a man has, not what he has not. 2. Cor. 8.12
Sincerity makes light things massy and ponderous, where hypocrisy makes
talents lighter then feathers. So if he object thy heaviness and untowardness
in prayer, that thou prayest coldly and distractedly, the only answer is, God
regards not the tune of the voice, the phrase of speech, the sound of words, or
eloquence of tongue, but the affection of the heart, as in Moses, Exodus 14.15.
and Hanna, 1. Sam. 1.17.

2. In outward affliction, only a good and honest heart bears a man up. Job
in all his troubles had no other comfort, Chap. 27.5. Until I dye I will never
take away mine innocence from my self. When Abimelech was threatened for
taking Sarah, it was happy and comfortable to him that he could say, With a
good and an upright heart I did this, Genesis 20.5. What a strength is it, when
afflictions take a man in his way, and while with a good heart he goes about
his business? But if crosses come, while a man is wandering, or his heart
rouing after vanity, this disposition adds a sting to the affliction, when the
heart shall smite it self, that it suffers as an evil doer.

Fourthly, in respect of perseverance in good, a good heart only ministers
comfort. 4. For perseverance in good.
For as an Apple rotten at core must fail and perish, seem it never so
beautiful: so all graces shall wither, that are not soundly fixed in a good
and honest heart. It is not leaves and shows without, but soundness of sap
and juice within, that makes the tree continue in fruitfulness. One time or
other the Word of God blasts the hypocrite, as the fruitless Fig Tree, and
then how soon is it withered? Inquire after his graces, his zeal,
forwardness, diligence, joy, faith, love; his place cannot be found, his place
in the profession shall be as empty as David's when Saul asked after him. He
that builds on the sand, and in soundness of heart settles not himself on
Christ the corner stone, as our Savior said of the stately buildings of the
Temple, so may we say of this man who held a beautiful place in the Church,
and shined in many graces, See you all these things? the time comes, when a
stone shall not be left on a stone: the fall of his house shall be great: and
of the ruins of his graces we may say as the Merchants of the riches of Rome,
Revel. 18.17. In one hour shall so great riches come to desolation. But the
upright of heart shall never be ashamed.

5. In the life.
Fifthly, in the life time, the Lord will do them good that are true of heart,
Psalm. 125.4. He will be merciful to his defects, that prepares his heart to
seek him, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the
Sanctuary, 2. Chron. 30.19. He will show himself strong with the upright
heart, chap. 16.9. Let them be never so weak in themselves, Gods strength
shall perfect all their weaknesses. Let all the world condemn them, yet he
will justify them as true Nathaniels, in whom is no guile. In a word,
prosperity is their portion in this life, 2. Chron. 31.21. Hezekiah in his
works sought the Lord, and prospered.

6. In death.
Sixthly, in his death, this comfort shall never be shaken out of his heart: when
death shall sunder his soul and body, it shall never sever his heart from the
soundness of it; Hezekiah, when sentence of death was passed against him, the
conscience of his honest and sincere heart comforted him, Esa. 38.3. O Lord,
thou know, I have walked with an upright heart, etc. At this time it will
not comfort a man, to have done never so excellent works, but the manner of
doing, and his true endeavor shall comfort him.

7. In the Day of Judgment.
Lastly, in the day of Judgment, only the good and honest heart shall lift up
the head before the Judge of the world. As a faithful companion, it will go
with us before the Judge, and plead, where no other Proctor can be admitted, no
other friend can appear for us. But how dare an hypocrite, who has nothing
but chafe, and straw, and stubble, stand before the fire of that great Day,
which nothing but golden soundness and sincerity can abide? No matter how thou
can gild thy self; if thou be not golden, the fire shall consume thee.
But be thou the meanest creature, that the whole earth can present before the
Judge, with an honest heart, that have been faithful and sincere in a little,
in the basest calling and estate that ever was any; that Day shall prefer
thee above hollow-hearted professors, Preachers, yea Princes. For then it
shall be better (to use Augustines comparison) to be a little small finger that
can do no such service in the body, Better a sound finger, than a dim eye.
if sound, than to be an eye of admirable quickness, and use, for the guiding
of the body, if unsound, dark, or ready to fall out of the head.

Having thus largely showed the nature of this soil of good ground, and
therein both how it comes to be good ground, and how it may be so discerned,
with Motives thereunto; we proceed now to the success of the seed in it, which
is said first to bring forth fruits, which fruits are in the second place
described, 1. by the plenty, an hundredth fold: 2. by the continuance, with
patience.

Doct. 1. The good heart is a fruitful heart: Doct. A good heart is a
fruitful heart.
as good ground is fruitful ground. The good ground here is called in Math.
7.17. a good tree: and every good tree brings forth good fruits: and Math.
12.34. A good man, out of the good treasury of his heart, brings forth good
things.

Of these fruits. 1. The kind. 2. The season. 3. The Means.

Here, for the explaining of the Doctrine, consider three conditions of these
fruits: 1. for the kind: 2. the season: 3. the means.

For the kind: in general, they are the power of the Gospel in the whole
man, Phil. 1.27. and, as all fruits coming of seed, are of the same kind and
nature with the seed. Not fruits of the flesh, which are so ripe and rise every
where: Nor fruits of civil righteousness, in dealing with men, from which many
conclude themselves good ground, being void of piety, knowledge, and the fear
of God: Nor fruits of illumination, by which men are able to understand and
speak sensibly of matters of Religion, but care not how little they practice:
Nor fruits of the external profession of Religion, or external reformation,
which are as fair leaves, and green blades, that shall wither and fail. For
all these fruits we have found on the former bad grounds. But these fruits are
fruits of grace, resembling the Author, the Spirit of grace; and thence called
fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. and the seed, the Word of grace, Act. 20.32.
and fruits of righteousness to the praise of God, Phil. 1.11. and fruits in
holiness, Romans 6.22.

In special: these fruits are either inward, or outward: for a good man is
first fruitful within, and as all other fruits, so these come from a root
within.

Inward fruits are, 1. righteousness of nature, by sanctification of the
spirit, soul, and body: 2. good thoughts, and motions, and purposes of heart:
these counsels of heart make a man praised of God, 1. Cor. 4.5. 3. Good
desires, longings and faintings after God and his graces, Prou. 11.23. The
desire of the righteous is only good: 4. Good affections; as sorrow for sin,
love, fear, zeal, patience, compassion and tender-heartednesse, and many such
like, in Gal. 5.22, 23.

Outward fruits are, 1. good words, sauory, edifying, pure and wholesome:
therefore in Prou. 10.31. the mouth of the just is said to be fruitful in
wisdom, and his lips to feed many, as fruits do: 2. good works are good
fruits; because they issue from the root of faith and charity; because they
please God, as fruits the palate; because they witness the life of faith, as
fruits the life of a tree; and lastly, because they profit others, who are
relieved and comforted, as with most pleasant fruits.

Now we may not think, that only building of Colleges, Churches, Hospitals,
and great and bountiful Alms, which a few can perform, are good works, as
is defined by the Church of Rome: But those are good works, which every
Believer can and does perform within the compass of his calling, both
general and special; such as mortification of sin, faithfulness, diligence
in the duties of Christianity, and of the special callings, mercifulness to
the poor Saints, or whatsoever else is commended in the Word, or approved of
God as acceptable fruits, yea and rewarded, be they never so mean and base in
the eyes of men: A cup of cold water shall not lose his reward.

For the season: these fruits are ripe and timely, differing from the blasted
and withered fruits of the former grounds. We have seen sudden fruits as
sudden flashes, in the three former grounds, and great Professors like Ephraim,
whose goodness was as the morning dew, Hos. 6.4. We have heard of them, not
whose leaf only has failed, but the stalk, and blade, and all that made
show above ground, or fed it within. But this fruit gives not over till
ripeness, and the soundness of it is discerned by the constancy and maturity.

They keep the Word, and bring forth fruits. Lose the Word, and lose all
fruits. The former grounds kept the Word, but not long enough: they admitted it
to lodge as a ghest for a night, but not to dwell in them. But David voweth to
keep the Word even to the end, Psalm. 119.33. and he would not keep his life,
but to keep the Word, verse. 17. This ground keeps the Word, in the ear, by
hearing it, in the memory, in the heart, Prou. 6.20. Bind it on thy heart: in
the hand and practice, in meditating and thinking on it, in praying for
blessing, that it may be a fruitful Word, and in constant striving in new
obedience. And by these means it holds out, and brings fruits to perfection.

Now every good heart is thus fruitful, producing fruits answerable to the
Gospel, in due season, unto ripeness, by means of keeping the Word, Act.
16.30. The Iaylor, as soon as ever he was converted, what a number of good
fruits produced he? Now he cries out of himself, would feign know what he
might do to be saved: Now he brings the Apostles forth of prison, who had laid
them in: He washed the stripes that he had inflicted: he set meat before them,
brought them into his house, heard the Word, was baptized, and rejoiced that he
believed, and went to the Governors, and got them quite released. The like of
Lydia, verse. 14, 15.

Nay, a good heart, let it have never so small means, or opportunity, it will
show fruits. The thief converted, of a barren malefactor, is now become a
fruitful Professor. The ground even now ouergrowne with cursed weeds and
brambles, of heinous sins, is now in an instant, and almost for an instant
fruitful, in confession of his sins, in rebuking the sins of his fellow,
in giving a sound testimony to Christ, above all the Scribes and Jews, yea,
when his Disciples durst not, and in earnest prayer to Christ for a little
remembrance of him.

Reasons. 1. Because the person is set into so lively a stock, Reas. 4.
that he must needs be incontinently fruitful. Whosoever is set into Christ,
were he as dry as Aarons withered rod, he shall presently be changed into a
flourishing and fruitful tree. Romans 7.4. So ye brethren are joined unto him
that is raised from the dead, that ye should bring forth fruit unto God. And
because the Believer is not only set into Christ, but abides in him; therefore
he continues fruitful to the end, Ioh. 15.4.

2. Because the Believer is now become Gods worke-manship, in Christ Jesus
created to good works, which God has ordained for him to walk in, Ephesians.
2.10. And the Lord cannot fail of his end in his actions. But, as he commanded
man created at first, Bring forth fruit and multiply, so now creating him
again in Jesus Christ, he begets them, that they may go forth, and bring
fruit, and glorify him.

3. Because the Believer is now led by the Spirit, who is not barren or idle in
him, Romans 8.14
but fruitful in all variety of fruits of grace, as they are described, Gal.
5.22, 23. A tree must live before it bear fruit: Now we are quickened by the
Spirit. The same spirit plants us in Gods House, and adds his blessing to that
plantation, Psalm. 92.14. The same Spirit waters us with the waters from under
the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47.12. and so makes us fruitful by a spring of living
waters. The same Spirit purges us to be a peculiar people, zealous of good
works, Tit. 2.14.

4. There is the same reason of the parts, and of the whole. But the whole
field, the whole Church is a fruitful ground: Cant. chap. 4. verse. 13. The
Church is compared to the goodliest Garden that ever was heard of, stored with
the most precious plants under heaven, most delectable fruits, and the chiefest
spices; shadowed by Pomegranats, Camphire, Spikenard, Calamus, Saffron,
Cinnamon, etc. It is not a Waste, an Heath, a Wilderness, but a new Paradise of
God, planted by his hand: A Garden of greatest pleasure, and God takes pleasure
no where else: A Garden in which the Tree of life, that is, Christ Jesus is to
be tasted and fed on to eternal life: A Garden, in which a River runs four
ways from the same Fountain, that is, the Gospel runs freely, streaming
from the four Evangelists: A Garden, in which man was placed to til and dress
it, so in the Church, men are gathered to exercise duties of piety and love; A
garden furnished with all manner of trees for fruit or delight, Cant. 7.14. A
Vineyard, in which are all kinds of sweet fruits, old and new. Whence every
member being a part of the whole, must also abound and flourish in all holy
virtues, and the sweet fruits of faith and love.

Use 1. Let us try (as men do) the goodness of our ground, by the
fruitfulness of the crop it yields. If it be good ground, it brings fruits
answerable to the seed. The Rules of trial are these.

1. If barrenness be a sign, Trial of sound fruits by 4. rules.
and a true informer against bad ground, how many that have long professed
Christ, and been long Hearers, are convinced to be bad and cursed earth,
because of their barrenness and fruitlesnesse? Numbers of carnal gospellers
content themselves with a form of godliness, denying the power, like the
cursed Figtree, they have leaves, but no fruit: under the means, they live
void of faith, void of Gods fear, void of love to the Word, void of obedience:
scorn to reform any thing, are as loose and disordered as at first, as
hateful and scornful of the means, as ever: Are these good ground? No, no,
their fruits bewray them what they are. Let them beware in time at their own
peril: This barrenness in the Gospel is accursed with cutting down, and
with everlasting fire, Math. 25.41.

2. Rule. If good ground bring timely fruits, so soon as ever the seed falls
on it, are they good ground that are so slow and heavy to any good fruits, as
sometime they are, resolving seven and seven years to give up some
unwarrantable lusts, or undertake some commendable duty? Nay, some never
resolve to do good till they die; but, then they will repent and be better,
etc. But what? dare thou live so near the curse of God, as that ground on
which the rain often falls, Heb. 6.8. which yet is not seen on thee? Did
thou mark in the Thief converted, what a number of excellent fruits presently
appeared? See thou not the commendation of the Colossians, chap. 1.6. that
the Gospel was fruitful among them from the first day they heard it, and
truly knew the grace of God? (For thou never truly knew the grace of God,
who abidest unfruitful, and take days with God.) Considerest thou not what
a singular praise, yea and mercy of God it is, to have the Word work speedily,
and to hasten our fruits (were it possible) from the day that we heard it? How
many sins should then be cut off? how many good duties undertaken, and the
reckoning furthered? Oh hear at length Christ knocking, and resolve presently
to open: If thou hear his voice this day, harden thy heart no more. How long
shall he be with thee? how long shall he suffer thee? Take heed of that
sentence, Pro. 1.24. Because I have called, and you would not answer, behold,
it shall come to pass, that you shall call, and not be heard; yea, I will
laugh at your destruction, etc.

3. Rule. Good ground brings fruits in kind answerable to the seed: and the
fruitfulness in Christianity, is a godly conversation beseeming the Gospel,
Phil. 1.27. It brings not weeds, not Thistles, not brambles. But how comes
it, that the seed being so pure, holy, yielding, the fruits are so contrary?
Did not the Master allow, and the servants cast in good seed? Mat. 13.27
Whence then are these Tares, of general profaneness, ignorance, swearing,
lying, Sabbath-breaking in most unconscionable manner, contempt of Magistracy,
and of Ministry, injustice, usury, slandring, scoffing at goodness, drunkenness,
gaming, hatred of the light and bringers of it, repining at their prosperity,
and the like? Whence, I say, are they? Are these fruits beseeming good ground?
Or are they any way like the seed? I dare say, a man may find as good fruits
as these, among the Turks, and barbarous Heathens, where the seed never came;
nay, in hell it self, where is no other ground but such as this. Let no man
deceive himself: such rotten fruits argue rotten hearts: God will reap no such
harvest, he will own no such ground.

4. Rule. If good ground bring ripe fruits, with constancy and continuance,
even in their age, Psalm. 92.14. what goodness is in that ground, that has
given over his fruits? that having had leaves and shows of profession, and
some goodness, has even cast away the leaves, far worse than the cursed
Figtree, which had leaves, yet escaped not the curse? Mat. 21.19
These were never planted into Christ: for, had they been so, the Father had
purged them to have brought forth more fruit: Never members of the Church: for,
Ioh. 15.2.
had they been of us (says the Apostle) they would have continued with us:
Never good in deed and in truth; 1. Ioh. 2.19.
for a good man's leaf shall not fall, Psalm. 1.3. And, if every man shall
receive according to his fruits, Ier. 17.10. these men shall one day know, and
feed upon the bitter fruit of their declining and Apostasy, when they shall
believe, (or feel what they will not now believe,) that it had been better
for them never to have known the way of truth, 2. Pet. ^.21
then have departed from the holy Commandment.

Use 2. Labor to be fruitful Christians: content not your selves with leaves,
and the form of Religion, but as trees of righteousness, show forth your
Grapes and Figs, and sweet fruits: Let God and man gather them, and taste
them. For, what comfort is in a fruitless condition, by which a man must know,
first, that the Word of God for all his hearing was never rooted in his soul?
for then it had been fruitful in grace. It is no barren seed, where suffered
to root. Secondly, that he is an unbeliever, while he professes all the
Articles of Christian faith, and lives among Christians. For faith works by
love, and is fruitful. Thirdly, that he is destitute of the love of God,
which affection if it swayed the heart, it would unite it to the thing loved in
all duties of piety: If it loved God, it would keep his Commandments, Ioh.
14.15. It would constrain him to fruitfulness, 2. Cor. 5.14. Fourthly, that
he is liable to that deadly and irrecouerable fall that hypocrites come unto;
whose foundation being in the sand, the fall of that house is great: such are
the fruitless Hearers, who hear and do not, Math. 7.24. Lastly, that he is
ever under that heavy curse, which is never far off him, Heb. 6.8. The earth
that drinks in rain, and brings briars and thorns, is near unto cursing,
and the end is to be burned.

Object. But we are fruitful Christians. We come to Church, and delight to
hear good Sermons: We commend our Preachers, love some good men, speak
against common abuses, pray in our families, repeat Sermons, reform some evils
in our selves, and ours.

Answ. But beware you deceive not your selves with leaves for fruits, as all
this is in many. It is with many Christians, as the Fig Tree cursed by Christ,
so flourishing, as it deceived Christ's own expectation; whereupon it received
sentence, Never fruit grow on thee henceforth. Therefore look to thy self,
and to thy fruits: 1. See thou be a branch of the Vine. 2. Know the truth as
the truth is in Christ, to cast off all sin, to resist all lusts, to forsake
all known evils. 3. Walk as Christ walked, 1. Ioh. 2.6. Is thy life, thy
actions, speeches, yea, and thoughts squared to the Word? Endeuourest thou to
know further, and practice the whole will of God revealed? Do thou all
duties in true purpose and constitution of heart? bringing even thoughts (which
are thought so free) into conformity with the Word? This is to be a fruitful
Christian. All other blazes and shows will but bring thee to the end of an
hypocrite. An hundredth fold.

From the fruits of the ground which is good, we come to the measure. Our Lord
following his comparison, notes the profiting and prosperity of the Word in a
good heart, by the increase of seed cast into good ground, which increases
sometimes an hundredth fold. Neither speaks our Savior by Hyperbole, or
excessive speech: but according to the manner of the best ground in Canaan,
which brought an hundredth fold increase. Not to speak of other stories of
Herodotus, who writes of the Country of thy Cynipians, that it brings three
hundredth fold: nor of Pliny, Lib. 18. cap. 10
writing of Blazacium, a Country in Africa, where the people for every bushel
of seed received 150. fold increase: the Scripture (Genesis 26.12.) shows, that
Isaac sowed in Gerar (a barren Country in comparison of Canaan) and received
an hundredth fold increase.

Quest. Does every good ground bring increase an hundredth fold?

Answ. No: as this Evangelist shows, that there were three sorts of
unfruitful Hearers, so the other compared with this, show, that there are also
three sorts of fruitful Hearers: for Matthew and Mark say, that the good
ground brings fruit, some an hundredth, some sixty, and some thirty fold.
Therefore all bring not an hundredth fold.

Quest. Why does our Savior mention three degrees of fruitful ground?

Answ. 1. Some of the Fathers, as Augustine and Jerome, say, it was to note a
difference between virgins, widows, and married persons: some, as
Theophylact, apply it to Anchorites, Monks, and Laickes. An idle conceit: as
if any outward estate commended a man to God, more then other, who is (...), no
respecter of persons: or as if Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Lot, Moses, Peter, John,
both married, and some of them secular men, did not as well bring forth an
hundredth fold, as any of their Vestall Virgins.

2. The Rhemists in their Annotations on Math. 13 have a brainlesse device,
applying it to the difference of merits in this life, and of rewards in the
life to come; that virgins merit here, and shall obtain there an hundredth
fold, widows sixty, married persons thirty. As if any estate or person could
merit at all: Or as if our Saviors intent had been to show the difference of
the Saints glory in heaven, and not of Hearers in earth. But

3. Our Savior of purpose in the other Evangelists mentions the 3. degrees
of fruitful Hearers: for 3. reasons. First, to note the free disposition of
Gods grace and powerful working, who even in such, as in whom the Word is
fruitful, ties not himself to a certain measure, but distributes to every one
according to his good pleasure. For as in the same field, the soil, the Sun,
the air, the seed, the seasons are the same, yet in ye fruitful seeds some
bring more tilloes, some fewer, some but ten grains, some 40. some 60.
according to the blessing of God: So in this spiritual husbandry, wherein the
Lord is (as in all other things) a most free Agent, bound to no laws or
observations. Secondly, to comfort and encourage himself, his Disciples, and
Ministers, who, though they lose much labor in the 3. bad grounds, yet ye good
ground makes amends, in which none are fruitless, but if they bring not an
hundredth fold, yet they may 60. or 30. and, if there be but a few that bring an
hundredth fold, they shall abundantly recompense the barrennes of many grains.
Thirdly, to comfort and strengthen such as have not, nor can attain this
hundredth fold, though their endeavors be true and earnest. Those that have not
attained the highest measure of grace, but are in the middle sort of
Christians, nay, suppose them in the lowest forms who bring thirty fold
fruits, are not to be despised. Christ never quenched smoking flax: Himself
here honors them with the name of good ground, as well as those of the
hundredth fold: And as the Husbandman, if he see a grain bring an ear that
has never so few corns in it, far under 100. or 60. or 30. he reiects not,
nor scorns it, but is glad of it, and carries it into the barn: So the
inferior Christian, who has soundnes with the smallest measure, is esteemed
of Christ, and much set by: He that had but two talents, and gained but two,
heard as well Euge, bone serve, Well done, good and faithful servant, as he
that had gained ten, Math. 25.23.

Quest. But why does our Savior here speak only of the hundredth fold, the
highest degree of fruits? Answ. To set before us the aim and scope of every
good Hearer: teaching us, that

A Christian man must not content himself to be a fruitful Hearer, Doct.
Aspire to the hundredth fold measure of fruits.
but must strive to the greatest measure of grace, rising, if it be possible,
from thirty to sixty, from sixty to an hundredth fold. Phil. 1.9. the Apostle
prays they might be filled with the fruits of righteousness: as a vessel that
cannot hold a drop more: which though we cannot attain, yet every godly man
must aim at it. None will deny but that we should do righteously, and do
good works in this present world: But that is not enough, unless we be filled
with fruits of righteousness, and be rich in good works. Col. 1.9. the same
Apostle for another Church prays, not only that they may be fruitful
Christians, but fruitful in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge
of God; yea, fulfilled in all knowledge, wisdom, and spiritual
understanding: that as a full vessel has no emptiness or vacuity in it; so
no part of a Christians life or conversation be barren or empty of good fruits.
2. Pet. 3.18. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ:
comparing Christians to trees, which flourish to a goodly stature, but herein
unlike them: Ordinary trees have their seasons to grow, but these trees of
righteousness must ever grow, Esa. 61.3.
every time and age is their season, and most in their age, when other decay.
And again, whereas they may grow to bring a great measure of fruits, every one
of one kind, these must not only bring abundant fruits in measure, but in
variety; every one tree must be abundant in all the fruits of the Spirit,
described, Gal. 5.22, 23. as might be showed in the particulars.

Reasons. 1. A great measure of grace makes greatly for the glory of God: Ioh.
15.8. Reas. 1.
Herein is the Father glorified, that ye bring much fruit. Papists think there
is no use of good works, unless we say they merit, justify, and save us. But
they set out of sight Gods glory, the mayn end of them, to advance themselves.
For as it is the praise of the Husbandman, when his field, Orchard, or Garden
is fruitful above other men's: Even so we being his husbandry, a part of his
Garden and Paradise, branches of his Vine, planted, tilled, sown, and set by
his hand, care, Word and Spirit, do then commend his husbandry, when we are
laden with fruits of the Spirit, which are to the praise of God. 2 Thessalonians.
1.12. The Lord fulfill the work of faith with power, that the Name of God may
be glorified.

2. The striving to a great measure of grace, conformeth us, 1. to the image of
God, 2
who is an unbounded Ocean, and an immense Sea of grace and goodness, and the
more fruitful and full of grace the creature is, the liker it is to God, and
the nearer to his nature: 2. to the image of his Word, both the Law which
requires perfection of grace, and the Gospel, which is the wisdom from
above, full of good fruits, Iam. 3.17. 3. To the image of Jesus Christ, making
the members like the Head, who was full of grace and truth, Ioh. 1.14. 4. To
the image of our first estate in innocence, where was no defect: and 5. of
that blessed expectation which we are to frame and aspire unto, in which, the
Saints already gathered to God, have put off all defects, and, being full of
the glory of Christ, do see him as he is, and see him to be like him.

3. The being of a Christian stands in truth of grace, 3
but the well-being in strength of grace. His acceptance is for truth of
grace, never so small; but his commendation is in strength and further measure
of grace. Christ quenches not, but accepts a small measure of grace, but
commends grace in great measure. Nay, where sometime he reproues a small
measure of faith, O ye of little faith, he magnifies a greater measure, O
woman, great is thy faith: and of the Centurion, I have not found so great
faith, no not in Israel. Not love, but loving much is commended, Luke 7.47.
Many sins were forgiven her, for she loved much. It was the great
commendation of Stephen, that he was full of faith and power, Act. 6.8. and of
Dorcas, that she was full of good works and alms which she did, Act. 9.36.

4
4. The abundant measure of grace, is the maine strength and comfort of a
Christian: First, in tentation; for Satan assailes the weakest, when and where
the weakest; so do seducers and deceivers. Now a strong faith is a strong
shield, great knowledge as a strong wall and trench, great love of God, a
strong binder. Secondly, in persecution or affliction for well-doing: strength
of faith and patience will make them grow as the Palm and Camomile, under that
burden which sinketh and oppresses weaklings. Jacob persecuted by Esau, flies
to God, and by strength of faith and prayer wrestles with God, and prevailed
with God, and men. The Canaanitish woman overcame Christ himself by strength
of faith. Thirdly, in death he can be bold, fearelesse, and joyful, the
conscience testifying of his fruitful life. Faith clasping Christ fast to the
soul, makes him depart in peace. Fourthly, in judgment it shall hold up his
head, when he can bring in an increase of five or ten Talents; at what time,
according to the measure of fruits, in grace shall be the measure of glory,
five Talents, five Cities, ten Talents, ten Cities.

5. A Christian must strive to an hundredth fold measure, 5
because he that labors not in addition to his fruits, is on the losing hand,
and at last shall lose them all. To sit down, and not persevere, is to lose
all his labor. He that continues to the end; shall be saved. Math. 10.
A sound Christian therefore expects not his Sabbath or rest here, nor to cease
from his labor, till he come into heaven; which makes him with Paul forget
things behind, and press still forward, Phil. 3.13. And the commandment is,
to finish our salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. And the end (we
say) crowns all.

Use 1. To reprove such as stand at a stay in Religion, as having grace and
Religion enough, and they need no more: Who are to know, that they may suspect
the truth of that grace which flatters it self, and conclude those beginnings
to be deceitful, which are not followed with constant increase. Again, they
mistake true grace, which is not so soon attained as they think, being as a
grain of Mustard Seed, Straite-neckt vessels are long a filling.
which neither roots, nor grows, nor spreads to a tree suddenly, but by
degrees, and is dead further than growing: and the Lords Talent, which thou
must occupy to increase till he come, Luke 19.13. And, give up thy Trade once,
thou must needs prove bankerupt and beggarly. Lastly, every man would conclude
thus in natural things: If he see his corn in the field stand at a stay and
never shoot forward, he will soon conclude, he shall never receive a
comfortable harvest of it: And if he see his child stand still at a stature,
and never increase, nor grow stronger and bigger, he will easily say, Surely
he will never come to be a man. So may I say truly of those that will still
be children in knowledge, faith, obedience; They shall never attain the
measure of the age of the fullness and tallness in Christ, Ephesians. 4.13.

Yet those are in more fearful estate, who in stead of growing to an hundredth
fold, fall back from the measure they once had: as the grass or corn that
grows on the housetop, which was green and flourished a little while, but
incontinently withers away, and falls to nothing. Be it known unto all these:
1. That they never had a grain of true grace; for that would be rising, if
not to an hundredth fold, yet to sixty, or thirty. 2. Let them be assured, that
no man ever went to heaven backward; but, whom God has a good purpose to save,
he brings forward. 3. If any withdraw himself, the Lords soul has no
pleasure in him, that is, hates and abhorres him.

Therefore look to it, and awaken thy self in time, who had begun to set
thy hand to the Plough, but have looked back, and had set out of Sodom,
but have looked behind thee, and out of Egypt, but runnest back again. Thou
could and did see and sorrow for sin: now thy conscience is feared.
Thou could and did pray privately, and in thy family: now have given up
this duty. Thou did read the Scriptures, redeem the time, durst not
swear, nor break the Sabbath, nor neglect the preaching of the Word: now
Cards and Tables eat up thy time, thou can swear, and swill, and drink,
and scorn the preaching of Gods Word, on the Sabbath day, or on other days,
can disdain and wrong the Preachers and Professors of the Gospel. To thee,
I say, Better thou had never seen the light of nature, or grace, than have
proved such an Apostate, such a dog, such a swine, 2. Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. Know
for a certain, the trees of Gods Garden shall not lose their leaf, Psalm. 1.3.
Remember whence thou art fallen: repent, and do thy first works, Revel. 2.5.

Use 2. To move us to strive to the highest pitch of grace, to get beyond
others, yea our selves daily, toward the hundredth fold fruitfulness. Motives.

5. Motives to aspire to the highest pitch of grace.
1. Consider thine own weakness and wants. Thou that know most, know but
in part, beleeuest but in part, and the most holy is holy but in part; and, one
of the first and best effects of faith, is, to see the weakness of faith. It
lets thee see how far thou art from the perfection of Gods Law and Image,
from the mark and high calling, from the pitch and stature of the Saints,
whose praise is in the Scriptures. It sees natural fullness a stepmother to
the desires of grace, for increasing it. And if thou have not attained a sense
and strife against imperfection, thou art not yet in the way to Christian
perfection.

2. Consider the nature of true grace, the least taste whereof is so sweet, as
he cannot but desire a full draught: as the taste of the fruits of the Land of
Canaan quickened up Israel in the wilderness to go forward, to take full
possession; so the sweetness of the first fruits in grace exciteth an earnest
desire for the full fruits in glory. Our Savior compares true grace to a
Leaven, which a woman hides in meal till all be leauened, Math. 13.33. It will
season every part, and the least fullness in parts desires and endeavors to
fullness in degrees. He that finds a small measure so sweet and joyous,
assures himself, if he can attain a greater measure, he shall attain greater
joy, and out of a full measure, a full joy, as Christ promised.

3. Consider the worth of grace, how precious a thing it is. If men could see
the worth of it, as of gold, and silver, they would as eagerly desire it, and
be as restless till they had a large measure of grace, as of wealth, whereof no
man says he has too much. Or if they were of Paul's mind, to esteem all the
world dross and dung in comparison of the least drop of faith and holiness,
we should see them lay about them otherwise than now they do. But till this
time, they will content themselves with a small show, and lay aside this
heavenly covetousness.

4. Consider the effect of true grace, which is as the most precious liquor,
the more of which thou can attain and contain, the more honorable a
Vessel thou becommest for the Lords use. 2. Tim. 2.22. If any man purge
himself, he shall be a Vessel of honor: that is, not only be so, but known
so to be: both separated from the common uses and courses of the world, and
sanctified to an holy use; as also inwardly furnished and enriched with grace,
as base earthen vessels, that is, wicked and earthly men are not.

5. The Lords expectation is, that we be not (...), but (...), not
fruitless, but very fruitful. For unto whom much is given, of them much shall
be required, Luke 12.48. Even a man will look, where he sowes liberally, to
reap liberally. If he bestow much seed and costs, he looks for a large crop:
The Lord has done 5. things for our fruitfulness.
much more the Lord, Esa. 5.4.

Quest. What has the Lord done for us, that he may expect so much?

Answ. What has he not done? what could he do more? 1. He has made choice
of us, that we should be fruitful, Ioh. 15.16.
and that our fruit should abide and abound, that is, we should persevere, and
daily add to our fruitfulness: As once he knew the Jews above all families
in the earth, Amos 3.2. to make them precious, a peculiar people, a chosen
generation. We were branches of the wild Olive: but now he has set us into
the right Vine, that we might bring forth much fruit, Ioh. 15.5.

2. He has regenerated us by his Spirit, and made us his own workmanship, by
the effectual calling of grace, and created us to good works, to walk in
them, Ephesians. 2.10. which phrase implies both diligence, and constancy.

3. He has given us his Gospel, which brings forth and increases, Col.
1.6. not only in it self, and the spreading of it, but in the effect and
operation of it. Our Sun of righteousness is in it self seven times
brighter, than in the shady time of ceremonies: Nay, never since the Apostles
days was Christ so lively described and crucified in the powerful, Gal. 3.1.
Ezekiel. 47.1^.
plain and pure preaching of the Gospel, as now to us. And for the effect:
these being the sweet waters from under the Sanctuary, refreshing the people
of God with new comforts, produce new fruits every month, that is, continual
fruits of renouation, and so grow to their height every day more than other.
Have we the Gospel, which is a wisdom full of good fruits, Iam. 3.17.
and shall we not show the fruits of it?

4. He has sent his servants among us, to call us on to bring forth fruits of
amendment of life: He has raised up of our sons for Prophets, and our young
men for Nazarites, Amos 2.11. milke-white, Lam. 4.7. for purity both of
doctrine and life; excellent Teachers and Ministers, enriched with far more
excellent gifts, and graces, of knowledge, wisdom, utterance, zeal, piety,
than the ordinary Teachers of the Jews: the least of them greater in Office,
than John Baptist. These cry for fruits beseeming the Gospel, which carries
abundance of spirit, life, and grace in it. Where are the abundant fruits of
our abundant hearing? Shall Wisdom send forth her maids, still inuiting us to
her preparations, and means of strength, and refreshing, that we might walk
more strongly in the way of understanding, Prou. 9.3.6. and shall we be
weaklings still? Shall we feed daily at the table of Wisdom, where is so
full provision, and never grow in strength and stature? Is not this to
frustrate the Lords expectation, to let his servants lose all their labor?

5. He has given us raines and fruitful seasons, such a season for increase
as never had any people, nor all our forefathers before us: Witness the warm
sunshine of the prosperity of the Gospel, with a largess of peace and
plenty. For the Gospel has not come beggarly and niggardly, but with a full
horn of blessing, peace, plenty, renown above the Jews, and all other
nations round about us. who while they are wasted with mutinies or invasions,
we sit every one under his Fig Tree, enjoying God, his Gospel, our peace, our
goods, our earthly happiness. Witness the Wall and Hedge of his gracious
protection, under a peaceable, sweet, and Honorable Government, which
preserues to us with the Gospel, our wealth, honesty, liberty, and lives, and
hammers down the Popish Dagon, Antichrist himself, and all his banded vassals
against us, and keeps us without walls. Witness the removing of stones,
obstacles, and lets which might hinder our fruits, working for us in turning
off many monstrous mischiefs and plots against the Church, in corrupt
doctrines and errors of false and libertine Teachers, and as many mischievous
devices against the Land, from Furies without, and Vipers within.

Now what could he do more for his Vineyard? What can he expect less, than
abundance of sweet Grapes? Judge now between the Lord and his Vineyard,
whether, if it deceive his expectation, he may not lay it to waste.

For this place, the savor of it, in respect of the means, might be like the
smell of a field, which the Lord has blessed, Genesis 27.27. Take heed it be not
like the Heath in the Wilderness, Ier. 17. which knows not when good
comes, but notwithstanding, Sun, rain, and gracious seasons, abides an
Heath still: Or like that ground, which (after rain often falling on it)
brings thorns and briers, and is near a curse, Heb. 6.8. Surely if God
gather no better fruits of all his labor from many, then his servants and
Ministers do, the cause is on all hands pitiful. Oh that we could say as
Isaac, Genesis 26.12. that we did reap an hundredth fold in our people! nay,
where is our thirty fold? nay, many of us would be glad to see our seed again.

4. Notes to know thy proceeding in the degrees of grace.
Quest. How may I know I am proceeding in the degrees of grace?

Answ. By these notes: 1. The highest pitch of perfection is full and final
separation from all sin. Thou art daily proceeding to that measure, when all
sorts of sin, secret or open, gainful or profitable, are forsaken, resisted,
and in part conquered. 2. The partaker of the Divine nature, 2. Pet. 1.4. that
is, by the inhabitation of the Spirit of God, united unto Christ, thou growest
daily like him in spiritual life, sense, and motion, in the graces of faith,
love, humility, obedience, patience, in the powerful and constant resisting of
tentation, in dying to sin, in rising from sin, in ascending after him, and
walking as he walked, 1. Ioh. 2.6.

3. Earnest strife, purposes, and endeavors to perfection: David, Psalm. 119.5.
Oh that my ways were directed in thy statutes, and Paul, 2. Cor. 5.9.

4. When thou find the work of the Word the brim, set thy self under these
spouts, and never come to the Ministry, but with intent to be fuller than
thou wast before. If the Word raise thee daily out of the world, and make thee
more heauenly-minded, richer in good works, more loving to Gods people, more
gracious in speech, more diligent in private duties, more watchful to prevent
sin, with the occasions, now thou art increasing, else art at a dangerous
stand, if the Word cannot move and prevail with thee. With patience.]

Here we have another difference of the good ground from all the bad Hearers
that are in the Church. The first received not the seed: this receives and
retains it. The second chokes the seed, as so many thorns: this cherishes it
in a good heart. The third comes up fair, as seed in a gravel, or near a
rock, but withers when the heat of the Sun rises: but this continues
fruitful, and perseueres in goodness, brings much fruit, even an hundredth
fold (...), and as Beza observes out of one Greek Copy, (...), much patience.

Doctr. For producing of ripe fruits of Christianity, we have need of much
patience. Doct. 1. Patience necessary to fruits of grace.
For, as after the seed is sown into the ground, it endures many violent
storms, and cold blasts, the pinching frosts and snowes of Winter, the
parching and burning heat and droughts of Summer; exposed to all casualties, so
as the Husbandman cannot look for a present Harvest of his sowing, but must
wait for the precious fruit of the earth, ((...)) and has long patience for
it: Even so the hearers and receivers of the Word into good hearts, ordinarily
endure great and violent afflictions, and all the storms which Satan and his
instruments can raise up against them, before they can bring forth fruits: And
therefore, Iam. 5.8. be patient, and settle your hearts to the coming of the
Lord. Heb. 10.36. Ye have need of patience: and, that the Apostle speaks to
this very purpose there, he opposes to this (...) in verse. 38. If any withdraw
himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Heb. 12.1. Let us run with
patience the race set before us: Our life being a Christian race, patience
holds us in breath, and makes us long-winded, that we tire not, and give over
before we obtain the goal and crown of glory.

Here for our further direction, we will consider, 1. What this virtue of
patience is, 2. Why it is so necessary, 3. The use of all.

I. Patience is a grace of God, Patience, what it is.
by which we passiuely obey God in all the crosses he imposes upon us,
willingly, quietly, and constantly. It is a grace of God,] a fruit of the
Spirit, Gal. 5.22. not growing in our own grounds, but derived from God, who
is therefore called the God of patience, Phil. 4.13. Not a common grace, but a
special issue of faith and love; never sown, nor sprouted in the waste of the
world, among Heathens, but specially bestowed on the Elect, and Believers. By
which we passiuely obey God:] Here is expressed the object, and the act of
patience. The object of it is grief, and passion: take away passion, there is
no use of patience; as, where no enemy, no use of weapons; where no disease,
no use of Physic. The act is obedience to God, as Christ in all his suffering,
Not my will, Mat. 26.39
but thy will be done; and old Eli, 1. Sam. 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do
whatsoever he will.

In all the crosses he imposes upon us:] not such as we call and pull on our
selves, as Baals Priests, 1. King. 18.22. or such as in Monks, Friars,
Eremites, of themselves whipping themselves: to make show of hypocritical
patience and satisfaction. This is a voluntary, blind obedience, under their
own hand, and not Gods.

Patientia Lombardica.
And because patience perforce is no virtue, I add the manner of Christian
suffering, that it is willingly, quietly, and constantly. Willingly, because
there must be correspondence between our wills and Gods, in things so greatly
making for our good. The Patient willingly submits himself to the bitter
Pills, and tastlesse Potions of Phisicians, because he hopes for good by them.
But here is more assurance, that God will turn all to the best. Quietly and
meekely: Psalm. 39.9. I held my tongue and said nothing, for thou Lord did
it. And herein our Lord has gone before us in example, who was dumb before
the shearer, and opened not his mouth, Esa. 53.7. Constantly: A good Disciple
must take up his cross daily, not startling at the greatest afflictions, as
Paul, he is ready not only to be bound, but to dye for the Lord Jesus, Act.
21.13. nor fainting under the heauiest burden, seeing it is but for a moment,
and the burden shall not be above our strength, and in the issue we shall see,
The light afflictions of this life are not worthy the glory that shall be
revealed, Romans 8.18.

II. The necessity of patience in the Christian course, appears by these
reasons: Reasons for the necessity of patience, fix.
1. The scope of the Gospel is, to make men fruitful Christians. But this can
never be, without the persecution of the world. For Christ* and his cross are
inseparable: Whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persecution, 2. Tim. 3.12. No Disciple can expect to avoid or shun the
cross, but expect that entertainment which our Savior foretold, Math. 10.22.
Ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake. The shadow does not more
vndiuidedly follow the body, then persecutions and trials follow the profession
of the Gospel. This necessity of suffering afflictions, implies and inferres a
necessity of patience. For as he that is to stand under an heavy burden, must
have strong shoulders, or else he must needs sink: so, unless patience bear
such burdens as do ineuitably follow the profession of the Gospel, the godly
cannot but sink under them.

2. It is necessary in respect of the manuring and preparing to fruit. The best
ground brings no fruit,

3. In respect of the producing of fruits, there is great need of patience:
seeing there is no fruit of sprouting and first appearance; as the child in his
birth, Reu. 12.4. And the wicked world seeks to blast them with the East-winde
of reproaches, yea to nip and pinch them, outface and destroy them, with strong
and violent persecutions: so as without patient enduring the cross, Heb. 12.2.
and despising the shame, this thirty fold cannot be expected, much less an
hundredth fold. As a woman brings forth no fruit of the womb, unless she
patiently endure her sorrows: no more can the Christian any fruit of grace,
without his sorrows. Thus Christ himself brings forth to us all his blessed
fruits, not without the greatest patience, proportioned to his greatest
sufferings: and after the same manner must we also bring forth our fruits to
him.

4. It is necessary, in respect of the growth and first, the blade, then the
ear, then ripe fruit, Mark. 4.28. So all our graces and fruits are small at
first, and receive increase by little and little. And therefore as the
Husbandman expects with patience his fruits, and plucks not up his corn,
because it is small and weak at first, and comes not up full corn: So the
Christian must patiently wait for the growth and increase of his fruits, even
till they come to some perfection. Iam. 1.4. Let patience have her perfect
work: Nothing can come to perfection but by patience.

Five hindrances of spiritual growth prevented by patience.
if patience prevented not: as first, the smart of present afflictions; for
every affliction is grievous for the present, Heb. 12.11. the mention thereof
oftentimes makes us shrink, and startle, and grow out of heart, because of the
roughness of our way. But now by patience we shall possess our souls, the
present remedy of the Disciples greatest persecutions, Luke 21.17, 19. whereas
by impatience we lose our selves, and lessen our fruits. Secondly, the common
crosses which accompany our mortal life, will make us weary enough, unless
patience supply some strength, and vndershore us. But by patience we give glory
to God, and his sovereignty, and right in disposing of us, and to us according
to his good pleasure: Job 1.20. and 2.10. Patience makes us say, Not my will,
but thy will be done; If I must drink of the cup, I will drink of it.
Thirdly, inward temptations, and disquietnesse of conscience, the wounds of
spirit, are so intolerable, that the violence of them often shakes off many
fruits, and makes the Christian walk weakly many days. Now patience alone
keeps the soul at peace and quietness, waiting for God unto succor or
issue. It holds the heart in expectation of the accomplishment of Gods
promises, and our happiness in Christ. Though the vision tarry, yet it waits
for the appearing of Gods face, and the healing of the soul, and is not
disappointed. Fourthly, there are enemies without, which hazard our fruits. How
easily and suddenly are we overcome of evil, and drawn to return injury
with injury, and being provoked, follow our own reuenges? But now Christian
patience steps in, holds the bridle, and turns the course. Now the Christian
can bless, being cursed, and do good for evil, and overcome evil with
goodness; which is a singular fruit of grace. Fifthly, infirmities of brethren
with whom we converse, were a great means to shake off our fruits (as
Barnabas lost his sincerity for a time by Peter's dissimulation: Gal. 2.
) if patience did not uphold to discern and bear the infirmities of the
weak, Romans 15.1, 2. and not please our selves. But this will put an hand to
help them under their burden, and from under it: as 2. Tim. 2.24. The servant
of God must be gentle to all, suffering evil men patiently, proving if at any
time God will give them repentance: And much more it endures, and (if it can)
couers, and cures the infirmities of brethren.

That is the fifth reason.

with patience, that is, with patient expectation of the full fruits, the first
fruits whereof are already attained. Romans 8.25. It patiently abides for that it
sees not. And in this respect, the Apostle says, We have need of patience,
Heb. 10.36. that after we have done the will of God, we may receive the
promise. And thus we now inherit the promises, as did the Saints, namely
through faith and patience, Heb. 6.12. How strong the expecting of the
recompense of reward is, to uphold the heart unto fruitfulness, see in
Abraham, Heb. 11.10. and in Moses, verse. 26. And that this Harvest is only
promised to patient enduring, our Savior notes, Mat. 10.22. He that
continues to the end, shall be saved: And the Crown is given only to the
Conqueror, not to him that forsakes the field.

III. The Use of all now follows.

1. This serves to reprove the delicacie of our times: Use 1.
For generally men profess a faith severed from patience. For what? Have they
suffered for Christ or good conscience any thing all their life long? Nay, they
resolve to suffer nothing: not a word of disgrace, not a frown of a Superior,
not the least trifling loss or inconvenience for Christ: but rather farewell
Christ, and his profession. Let these men know, 1. that sound grace never comes
without a sound burden of crosses to be taken up daily: 2. Refuse to suffer
with Christ, refuse to reign with Christ: Reu. 1.9. John a companion in the
Kingdom, and patience of Jesus Christ; never expect to be a companion in the
Kingdom, if not in the patience of Jesus Christ; He need no such companions as
fly away when he has most need of them: 3. Refusest thou to suffer a
Flea-biting in comparison, a blast of words, a frown of bad times, now in
days of the peace of the Gospel? what would thou do in the stings of
Scorpions, and the fiery trials of former times, but shame both thy Lord and
thy self? 4. Did thou ever look so high as the hope of the high calling,
Phil. 3.14. or ever poyze the eternal weight of glory, 2. Cor. 4.17. that thou
would forgo them, by avoiding a light and moment any affliction, not worthy
the glory yt shall be revealed? Lastly, shall Christ suffer so much for thee,
and will thou suffer nothing for him?

2. Let this stir us up to get unto us so needful and useful a grace as
patience is, Use 2. Motives to provide our selves of so useful a grace as
patience. 3.
so great a preserver and continuer of fruitfulness, and furtherer of
salvation. And consider some Motives hereunto:

1. The act of suffering for Christ, is an higher degree of Christian
excellency, then believing only) Phil. 1.29. First, because it aduanceth the
glory of God, whose power can make Christians as Salamanders, not only live,
but thrive and be glorious in the fire of persecution and suffering. The same
power is daily put forth in his servants, by which the three children walked in
the midst of the fire, and only their bands were loosed. Secondly, because it
conformeth us unto God our Father, who in his admirable patience endures
wrongs at men's hands, which men and Angels could not put up: unto Christ our
Head, while we follow him in his sufferings, and by bearing his cross, go on
to the Crown: and to the blessed Spirit of God, who for his meekness and
patience is resembled by the Dove.

Patience strengthens the Christian 3. ways.
2. It is a maruailous great strength to a Christian: first, for the setting and
ripening of his fruits; for how comes it, that sin wastes in him, and
corruption abates, yea consumes, which still reigns and swayes the most? or
that grace thriues and prospers in him, which is scorned and trampled by the
most? but because he is patient to have his lusts mortified, so are not they;
he is patient to endure the labor of faith, and love, so will not they. An
heavy Christian, when he is to go about duties of mortification, or
sanctification, is soon discomfited, as were the ten spies; there were so many
enemies, so high walls to scale, Number. 13.31.
so many Lions in the way: But where patience preuailes, it comes in like the
two hearty spies, Caleb and Joshua: Tush, it is nothing to overcome these
Canaanites, why, they be but men, in Gods displeasure, the Land is ours
already, and, what if we abide a brunt or two, or endure some difficulty? the
good Land is worth it. Secondly, Nulla anceps luctamen in it virtute sine ista
Virtus: nam vidua est quam non patientia firmat. Prudent. in Psychomachia.
what great strength does it fortify our faith withal, then which no one, nor
all graces are more assailed? Patience as a shield steps in, and bears off
such thrusts, and blows, and shot, as otherwise would foil Faith utterly. It
is a preserving virtue, and is for the conservation of the soul, Heb. 10. vlt.
Cyprian in his book de bono perseuerantiae says, that as Faith is the
foundation of Christianity, so patience is the roof and cover, that keeps the
whole work whole and dry; and therefore is said to hold our souls fast to our
selves, as Faith holds them to Christ. Hence it is called the Anchor of the
soul, without which, Faith and all graces in the soul, as in a ship, do
totter and reele, as a ship without an anchor. Thirdly, what great stability
affords it to a Christian, 3
when it makes him, and holds him constant, and himself, in all the changes of
his outward condition, and external occurrences? Let what storms can bluster
abroad, he possesses his mind at home: His heart is settled by patience,
which frames his mind to his estate, when his estate is not to his mind. He
is the same man in prison as at liberty, in sickness as in health, in trouble
as at rest. Where others go for current Christians, till trial come, and the
whistling winds rise which blow off their leafie profession; but then are
proved counterfeit, because they stored not up patience, to part with dear
things, rather than with Christ and his Religion: these are constant to Christ,
and themselves, seeing Christian patience supports them in doing and suffering
for God and good conscience.

^. Sweet fruits of patience.
Great are the sweet and comfortable fruits of patience, even above peace.
First, a Christian hereby may try the sincerity of his faith, Iam. 1.3. The
trial for faith is such as it is in trial. Hence did the Apostle Peter, (1.1,
7.) tell the Jews, that by patient enduring of affliction, their faith was
tried to be much more precious than gold. Would thou try the sincerity of
thy faith? Have Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown
of life. Whatsoever patience lays out for Christ, Christ has given assumpsit
to repay an hundredth fold, Mark. 10.30. And the Lord takes special notice of
it, to approve and testify unto it, Revel. 2.19. to the Church of Thyatira, I
know thy faith and patience, that is, I acknowledge, and accept, and commend
it. Thirdly, Mat. 7.14.
which is narrow and strait, all strowed with crosses, difficult and
unpleasing unto flesh: Act. 14.22. By many tribulations we must enter into the
Kingdom of God: and he shall not enter, who will not be at the pains to
seek, and find, and enter. Fourthly, it makes the whole life, though
afflicted, David in his peace and prosperity said, that is, craked and vaunted
he should never be moved, Psalm. 30.6. But patient enduring of affliction
turns all evils into good. Be any thing never so evil in it self, it is not
so to thee, but by thine own default. If thou have patience, so many crosses
will be so many comforts: Thou shall suck sweet out of sour. Misery cannot
make thee miserable, whose patience turns all poisons into medicines: Thou
have by thee a sovereign remedy for all sores. And in the end, the issue is
blessed, and immediately after the combat, comes the Crown.

3. This serves to reform our judgments, who are so ready to mistake the
sufferings of godly men. Use 3.
The world esteems them most miserable, that suffer most persecution: as
Christ himself in the days of his flesh was despised of men, and therefore
thought also rejected of God, Esa. 53.3, 4. But this Treatise has declared,
that the better the person is, the more is his suffering; and the better the
fruit, the more need of patience. Paul's work was holy, himself an happy man;
yet bonds and afflictions did abide him in every place: he was twice in prison
before Nero, and at last put to death by him. Yea, the more holy and innocent
our Lord himself was, the more heavenly and powerful his doctrine and
miracles, the more was his suffering, and so the more use of patience; that in
him the Head, we might see the estate of the members. His forerunner John
Baptist, the friend of the Bridegroom, and greatest of the Prophets; was not
his work good, in seeking to draw Herod from his Incest? yet what was his
wages, but wrongful imprisonment? and at the suite of a dancing Damsel, he
was unjustly beheaded, without course of Law. What other fruits did the
Apostles bear through the world, but the sweet and comfortable light of grace,
both in their doctrine and conversation? And what other cup did they drink,
but the cup of affliction, persecution, and death it self? Now who dare
conclude us unhappy for suffering, who in suffering have the same cause, and
such partners in our griefs, who have with us the Head of the Church, and the
whole Church either going before, or accompanying, or following after us?

Use 4.
4. This teaches us, not to be ashamed of the afflictions of the Gospel, but
to be willing partakers of the sufferings of Christ, as Timothy is exhorted, 2.
Tim. 1.8. Here is the patience and faith of the Saints. Reu. 33.10
Moses esteemed the rebukes of Christ greater riches than the treasures of
Egypt. And as the sufferings of the Gospel are the wealth of a Christian, so
indeed a chief honor: What needs Christ our witness, who has so many
witnesses in heaven and earth, Angels, creatures, yea devils in hell? But yet
he honors us, to give testimony unto him.

Quest. How may we willingly and patiently take up the Cross, and endure the
shame of our Profession, as our Lord did?

6. Helps or means to the patient enduring of the Cross.
Answ. By these means. 1. Consider how inseparably the Lord has joined
persecution with the profession of the Gospel. He might, if it had pleased
him, have severed affliction from the Gospel: but for sundry ends has joined
them together: first, for his own glory, who will erect and preserve a Church
in the world, in despite of the world, and of the devil, and his wicked
instruments. Christ will rule and show his power in the midst of his enemies.
Secondly, he will have the light manifest it self by discovering and chasing
away darkness, between which a continual fight must be maintained. Thirdly,
to stop the mouth of Satan, who would accuse us, as Job, that we did not serve
God but for ease and outward prosperity. Now cleaving unto God in so many
trialls, we make the devil a loud liar. Fourthly, to try his children, who
will abide with him in affliction, and to make their rest sweet after so many
conflicts, etc. Therefore wisdom will patiently bear what is hopeless to
avoid.

2. Consider we the goodness of our cause, which is better than the best thing
we have: and this will encourage us to defend it with the loss of the best
thing we have. Consider, that Christ suffers with thee, and that the Spirit of
glory rests upon thee: 1 Pet 4.14
Cast thy self upon the hand of thy God, as Hester, saying, If I dye, I dye,
and his power shall be perfected in thy weakness.

3. Consider there is no cause we should be ashamed of the afflictions of the
Gospel. 1. Nothing is a just cause of shame, but sin: not that which helps
us out of sin. 2. There is no shame in witnessing to a truth, especially a
divine truth from heaven. 3. Christ was not ashamed of thy cross, and will thou be ashamed of his? 4. Compare thy shame now from wicked men, with theirs
at the day of Judgment. 5. All thy shame for Christ is sanctified and seasoned
in the shame of Christ for thee. 6. He that is ashamed of Christ while he was
in his lowest abasement, Christ will be ashamed of him in his glory. And
besides, thou that ought not to be ashamed of him in his abasement, dare
thou now in his glory and advancement?

4. Meditate much and often on the comforts of another life; and that Christ
makes it a sign of blessedness, when we suffer persecution for well-doing:
and Math. 5.12. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven; even
so great, as the afflictions of this present life are not worthy the glory that
shall be revealed.

5. Accustom thy self to conquer thy lusts: as, 1. ignorance, which hinders
from seeing the excellency of the Gospel: 2. pride, lest the disgraces of
Religion cast thee off, as we see in men unmortified: 3. passion and
head-strength of natural corruption, which makes men impotent and impatient:
see Heb. 12.1. 4. earthly and covetous desires, that thou may still be
easily weaned from the world, the desire and use of it.

6. Labor for the helps of patience: as, 1. sound judgment in the truth,
allow it a deep rooting: 2. sound faith; which ministers boldness, Psalm.
116. I believed, therefore I spoke: 3. true hatred of sin, to endure any
sorrow rather than sin, and admit the greatest sorrow, rather than commit the
least sin.

So much of the first Doctrine. The second is this:

Doct. 2. True grace is blessed with continuance.
The blessing of the fruitful Christian is, because he brings forth fruit
with patience, he shall persevere unto the end: Or, Truth of grace is blessed
with continuance. Wherein this good ground is distinguished from all the three
former, whose best fruits at last came to nothing. Esa. 40.31. They that wait
on the Lord, shall renew their strength as the Eagle: they shall run, and not
be weary; they shall walk, and not faint. Psalm. 112.6. The righteous shall
never be moved. Hence the Scripture compares the faithful to trees planted by
rivers of water, whose moisture being indeficient, Psalm. 1.3.
their leaves fall not off: which living Water is Christ, apprehended by faith,
of which whosoever once drinks, he never thirsts more, because there is in
him a Fountain springing up to eternal life, Ioh. 4.41.

This Doctrine being both of old, and of late opposed, we must, 1. open the
nature of perseverance, which the Adversaries at this day would obscure: and 2.
confirm and prove it by arguments, which they would elude.

The former, by a short description of it.

Perseverance is a singular or special gift of God, Perseverance, what it is.
by which the saving grace of Christ is so preserved in the heart of the true
Believer, as that he neither wholly, nor finally falls from it, but abides
unchangeable in that estate of grace.

It is a special gift of God.] Ephesians. 3.14, 16. The description explained.
I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, -- that ye might be
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man. Phil. 1.6. He that has
begun the good work, will perform it, until the Day of Christ. Heb. 12.2. He
is the author and finisher of our faith. Where note the error of Arminians,
who deny perseverance to be truly and properly called the gift of God, but
the sole action of man, and the proper cause of it, the will of man: for so
they write, Voluntas proxima and sola est perseuerationis causa physica: as if
the will does not therefore persevere, because God makes it so to do, who is
the God of all grace, 1. Pet. 5.10. and works in us both to will and to do,
Phil. 2.13.

The object, subject, and means of preservation.
By which the saving grace of Christ is preserved in the heart of the true
Believer.] Where are three things considerable: 1. The object, saving grace: 2.
The subject, a true Believer: 3. The means of perseverance, preservation of
grace.

1. The object of perseverance is the saving grace of Christ: for the question
is not of seeming graces, or common graces; as illumination, external
reformation, temporary faith, and the like; but of true and saving faith, love,
holiness, fruits of election, and of effectual vocation; wrought by the
Spirit, not restraining, but renewing. Arminians deny, that Gods Election is
any cause or foundation of perseverance, yea or of calling to salvation: they
deny any such principle of heavenly life by effectual vocation: they deny
that there is any substantial difference between the faith, holiness,
righteousness of them that shall be saved, and that temporary which damned
Apostates had, but only induration and continuance. Quite contrary to the
Scripture, which tells us of semen manens, 1. Ioh. 3.8, 9. seed remaining in
us: of an ingraffed word, Iam. 1.21. of an ointment which abides, 1. Ioh.
2.21. of an immortal seed, 1. Pet. 1.23. and a fountain of water springing to
eternal life, Ioh. 4.14.

2. The subject of perseverance is the true Believer, one truly justified and
sanctified: for look what grace soever an hypocrite has, he may, and shall
lose it totally and finally. We doubt not but hypocrites may fall from the
whole profession of faith, and afterward persecute it, as Julian: But the
question is of true Believers, and all the examples of hypocrites falling away,
touch not the question.

3. The means of perseverance is, that saving grace is preserved in the heart
of the true Believer.] We deny not but grace in respect of it self, as in
Adam, and in respect of the subject, the Elect, is subject to change, and may
as easily be quite shaken out of the heart, as the grace of creation out of
Adams. But, this saving grace is preserved (not by the Believer himself, by
his own watch and care, though not without it, but) partly by the privilege
of spiritual life, flowing from Christ, who is risen from death, and dies no
more: partly by the promise of God, who is faithful in his whole covenant,
Ierem. 32.40. partly by the protection, aid, and custody of God, whose power
preserves his to salvation, 1. Pet. 1.5. partly by Christ's intercession and
prayer: and partly, by means appointed to preserve that spark of heavenly
life, the Word, Ministry, prayer, exhortation, etc.

For these are certain rules: 1. That neither the promise of perseverance on
Gods part, nor the assurance of it on man's, do hinder the means, or make
exhortation and prayers unfruitful, (as Arminians teach us:) but rather imply
and include them. Luke 22.46. Christ had told Peter he had prayed his faith
should not fail, but yet exhorts him withal to watch and pray: who dare say
it was idle, though Peter might be certain of perseverance? Mark the same
argumentation in 1. Ioh. 2.27, 28.

2. Conditions hinder not the certainty of the promise. For the Lord will
uphold them to all conditions requisite: He that makes them persevere to the
end, makes them persevere in the means.

3. Conditions hinder not the absolute both promise and performance: For the
same thing may be both absolutely promised, because it shall certainly be
accomplished, and with condition, that it shall not be accomplished but in such
means, as wherein man's care and will comes in, which being made to
persevere, perseuereth.

4. Much less can this assurance stand with a deliberate purpose of sinning,
or cause any such boldness: Because it is begotten and nourished by godly
exercises, and begets also and nourishes them.

That he falls not wholly and finally.] 1. That the Elect may fall, and sin
often, and foulely, we deny not, nor is that the question. That they may admit
grievous evils, with their will and consent, appears in Peter, David, etc.
That they may by their sins deserve the sentence of eternal damnation, and
(so much as in them lies) incur the sentence denounced on them that continue
not in all things written in the book of the Law, is out of question. But that
they may sin to death, we deny: that they do sin with whole consent of
will, that any of these sins are ever imputed to their damnation, or to cast
them quite out of favor, Non dicit nullu^ damnabile, sed nulla condemnatio.
or the right of children, we deny with the Apostle, Romans 8.1. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

2. That true grace may be not weakened only, but quite lost, that is, such as
serve to their well-being in Christ, as joy, peace, cheerfulness, etc. is
yielded on all hands. But true grace, which serves for our being in Christ, as
faith, love, holiness, cannot be quite lost, because the member of Christ is
inseparable from the Head.

3. That true saving grace, serving to our being in Christ, may be lost in
part, in some degree, in the measure, sense, and comfort of it, we affirm: The
Church of Ephesus falls from her first love. Revel. 2.4. Perseuerantia
radicis tantum persistentiam infert, non fructuum et foliorum omnium.
But to be quite lost in all parts and degrees, we deny: because he that
begins a good work in the Elect, will also finish it, Phil. 1.6.

4. That the act of true faith and grace, and the work of it may be stopped,
and lost for a time, we yield; even as it apprehends Christ a loving Lord and
Mediator, which is the proper act of faith; and also in respect of outward
fruits it may be stopped and interrupted, and contrary fruits taken in. But
that the habit of grace, or grace it self should ever be lost, we deny: for,
though the faith of the Elect may be lost, according to his degrees and act,
yet never according to his essence and habit.

5. We deny not but that Satan may pluck at them, and violently assault them
every way to seduce them by errors and heresies, within, and the strength of
lusts; and outwardly, by terrors and persecutions: And that by the violence of
such temptation, their faith and graces may be sore shaken and shattered, yea
hide themselves as a small spark of fire under a bushel of ashes; and
themselves by their improuidence, vnwatchfulnesse, and yielding to corruptions,
may get many knockes, and take many grievous falls, to the breaking of their
bones. Yet, that though they be plucked at, they shall not be plucked away,
appears, Ioh. 10.28. Heretics may assault and stagger the Elect, but it is
impossible they should seduce them, Math. 24.24. Tyrants may prevail against
their persons, not against their faith, Mat. 16.18. Their building may be
shaken, not overthrown, because it is founded on a Rock, Mat. 7.24. Though
they may be cast down, Lapsus est, non prolapsio.
yet not cast off. Though they may fall, yet the Lord puts under his hand,
Psalm. 37.24. So as the conclusion is,

All the Elect persevere in the state of grace unto the end.] And whereas the
Arminians hold, that the Elect do persevere by a discontinued perseverance,
and shall at length be saved, though sin drive them quite out of the state
of grace, and drive all grace away: We plainly affirm, that the Elect
persevere in the state and habit of faith, by perseverance continued, and not
interrupted; and in the act or exercise of faith sometimes discontinued, but
after returns to it, and holds it on (though with combat) unto the end.

The perseverance of Saints stablished by 6. grounds or conclusions, cleared
from the exceptions of Adversaries.
Thus have we seen the description of Perseverance, in the several limbs of
it: Now let us see some grounds or reasons out of the Scriptures, and the
fewer, because we will clear them from the exceptions of the Adversaries, as
briefly and plainly, as my best art could contriue.

1. Ground: drawn from the promise of the Lord, whose promises being sealed
and ratified by the blood of Christ, are all faithful, Yea, and Amen, 2. Cor.
1.20. But God has promised, the faithful shall persevere, Ierem. 32.39, 40. I
will make an everlasting Covenant with them, etc.

Object. Thompson in his Diatribe, chap. 12. answers, that such promises
especially concern the Catholic Church, and so would slightly avoid them all.
But, if they be made to the whole, then to the individual parts, which are
Believers: for the whole consists of all his parts, and every member has right
in that, which the whole has right in.

Hence seeing how insufficient his answer is, he would afterward mend it, in
saying, This, and such promises belong to the Kingdom of glory. But, 1. has
God so great care to preserve them from falling and departing from him, there
where is no such danger of falling, where is no possibility of departing from
him? where Adams posse non peccare, in this lower Paradise, shall be turned for
ever into non posse peccare? 2. Who would have thought a man (who would seem
so acute) would give so sudden an answer, not reading the place? for read the
next verse, 41. The Lord says plainly, I will plant you in this Land, etc.

The Arminians in their Remonstrance to the States of the Low Countries,
answer to this place, thus, that God indeed by his motion offers to convert
men, so much as is in him, and yet a man may be not converted: as if a Master
(say they) should say to his Scholar, I will make you another boy, I will
teach you another tongue, etc. and yet fails, because the Masters endeavor is
not well observed. So God does all he can to convert, and to contain in
grace, but we fail hereof, and so the promise also.

Answ. 1. It seems God promises not to do any thing, but to endeavor to do
his best: which cannot stand with verse. 27. I am the Lord of all flesh: Is any
thing hard to me? 2. It is all one to say, that the heart of man is not in the
hand of the Lord, to dispose it as he pleases, contrary to Prou. 21.1. 3. If
the Covenant, which they say on Gods part is true, may by our default be
frustrate, then is it not the New Covenant, but that Old one which the Jews
brake and made void: For that was firm on Gods part, but frustrate by their
sins. But this is another manner of Covenant, Ier. 31.31. not a covenant of
works, but of grace, including faith, repentance, perseverance, and all
conditions to be observed on our part; and this, our sins cannot frustrate:
else has it no privilege above the other. 4. The similitude is absurd and
unreasonable, unless they will say, that God has no more power over a man,
than a Master has over a boy: He may say what he cannot do, and intend what
he cannot perform, because he cannot give the boy a disposition, which God
can, who cannot say more than he can do. Besides, they will not deny, but the
Lord can, and does put out another manner of power in converting, and
containing in grace, than the Master can in teaching and informing a Scholar:
for, the Master does but stir up natural faculties, God creates
supernatural. Lastly, it were happy if Schoolemasters were so happy in their
teaching, among whom, all that are taught, learn not; But here, all that are
taught of God, do come unto Christ, Ioh. 6.45.

2. Ground: taken from the strait conjunction for ever unto my self, in
truth, in mercy, and in faithfulness. The Lord marries us, never to depart.
This espousall is twofold. One by the outward covenant: so all and every of the
Jews were espoused to God. The other, by inward and powerful operation: so,
not all the Jews, but the Elect among the Jews, are espoused to him, as Romans
9.24. These espousals cannot be dissolved, but those may.

Object. 1. The Lord marries himself for ever: but the bond is broken on our
part. Answ. Then is it not for ever, if the bond be broken.

Object. 2. Thompson answers the place, that all such promises habent annexas
conditiones, quibus suspenduntur, and quarum praestatione determinantur: so the
Arminians, That is only promised, which on Gods part is to be performed, but
on our part the condition is required, that we repent and depart not from him.
Answer 1. Contracts of marriage use not to be conditional, but simple and
absolute; else it is no binder. 2. It is true, this condition is implied and
required of us, that we believe, repent, and never depart: for, who can
persevere in faith, or repentance, that wants them? But 1. this condition is
not an antecedent or cause of the contract, but a fruit and effect of it. 2. It
is the Lord himself that maintains this condition in us: As he will not
depart from us, so he puts his fear into our hearts, not to depart from him:
And, in that he will not depart from us, we shall not depart from him. For
then we depart, when his grace first departs from us. Therefore David prays,
Uphold me, O Lord, and I shall be safe. In a word: Christ alone performs all
this condition to his Church, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. he makes her, forms her,
cleanses her, and saves her.

Object. 3. To avoid this place, they add, that these promises are of
temporal things, not spiritual, not eternal. Answ. Under temporal things,
spiritual are promised, as we see in verse. 20. I will marry thee, that thou
may know the Lord: And so the Apostle applies it, Romans 9.25.

We are kept by his power unto salvation. Object. By faith, says the Apostle,
not in the faith. Answ. Yes, therefore in the faith: the Israelites were led
through the Wilderness, therefore were kept in the Wilderness: Noah was saved
by the Arc, therefore both the Arc, and himself in the Arc were saved.

Esa. 63.1. The Lord Omnipotent, mighty to save. 2. Tim. 2.12. He is able to
keep that which I commit unto him. 2. Cor. 1.21. It is God who stablisheth us.
Object. True, God cannot be overcome, he is able to make us stand, Romans 14.4.
but we are weak and quickly overcome. Answ. That God cannot be overcome, yet
we may, is false: for, because he is able to make us stand, we shall be
established, Romans 14.4.

Object. A posse ad esse non valet argumentum: It is no argument, He can,
therefore it shall be so: He can make Christ's body in mo places at once,
therefore it is so. Answ. It is weak indeed, where Gods Power is abstracted
from his Will and Decree: But join his Will to his Power, and it is a sound
argument: What God can do, and will do, shall be done: From both which
resulteth that strong Bulwark of this cause, Ioh. 10.28. My Father is stronger
than all, and none shall pluck his sheep out of his hands.

Arminius answers, Quamuis rapi non possunt dum sunt oues, non sequi tamen,
eos non posse desinere oues esse, aut e manu Patris transfugere per peccata:
They may cease to be sheep, and wander away by sin. Ans. 1. This is an idle
begging of the question: for, what does Christ promise in all that place, but
because they hear his voice, and follow him, and none shall pluck them away;
therefore they shall never cease to be sheep? And, if they be never plucked
away while they are sheep, they shall abide long enough, even till Christ have
given them eternal life: so long shall they be sheep. 2. If the power of the
Father be superior to all power of the Enemy, as the Text affirms, then it
is above all tentations, and suffers no power to make them of sheep no sheep.
3. Though the sheep be weak and straying, of themselves, yet they have a good
Shepherd, whose office is to keep his sheep, and rescue them from the Lion
and Bear, as David: and to lead them in the paths of righteousness, that
they err not from the Fold, Psalm. 23.3. Therefore vainly say they, they may
slinke out of the Fold, and out of the Fathers hands, though none can pluck
them. Besides, though these sheep be in themselves mutable and foolish, yet by
Gods power they are preserved from total mutation or change.

Object. Ezekiel. 34.16.

Answ. Judge between cattle and cattle, and distinguish of sheep: Some are
so only by external profession, rather goats in sheep skins, as ver. 17.
and Math. 10.6. and 15.24. Others are true sheep, inwardly marked for Christ's,
by inward sanctification. Those may be exposed to many calamities, but shall
never perish, as in the last verse of the Chapter, as the other may verse. 16.
and be fed with judgment.

The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Where first the
explication, then the replication.

By gifts, are not meant corporal, natural, moral, not all spiritual,
common to good and bad, no, not all special gifts proper to the Elect; for
some not being of the essence of faith, and union with Christ, may be lost. But
here are meant the gifts of Election, and of effectual calling; such as
faith, hope, charity, remission of sins, justification, repentance,
perseverance in grace, and glorification. These are irreuocable gifts.

The calling of God.] There is a twofold calling: one ineffectuall, the other
effectual: the former according to means, not flowing from Election: for,
many are thus called, Mat. 22.14
but not chosen: the latter, according to purpose, which is ever effectual to
the change and renewing of the heart.

Are without repentance.] That is, are not changed; repentance a cause of
mutation, put, by a Metonymie, for change it self: for in God, whose wisdom
and power attends all his counsels, can be no shadow or change: therefore gifts
of this kind are unalterable.

And this is the intent of the place: namely, to show, that though the Jews
became enemies of the Gospel, and unworthily abused the gracious blessings
afforded them by God, yet the Election and promise of God, of calling many of
them, and leading them to salvation, is stronger than to be made void by such
their unworthiness: and the reason is, because these gifts which belong to
Vocation and Election, are such as God cannot repent of. So Augustine: the
Apostle speaks de donis and vocatione Dei secundum propositum. And the Papists
themselves, as Suarez the Jesuit, Dona Dei sunt (...), id est, dona illa quae
proficiscu^tur ex electione, vt verba proxime praecede^tia indica^t. De
praedest. lib. 2 cap. 6. sect. 36.


Now for the reply: This exposition meets with two errors of Arminius. First,
that this place is not meant of Gods immutable Decree of Election, nor of the
gifts of faith and perseverance, but of the Jews restitution, and calling to
the communion of the Gospel: whereby they take in the effect, and quite iustle
out the cause. Secondly, that these gifts and calling proceed not from
Election: contrary to the second verse of that Chapter, Has God cast away his
people whom he knew before? and to the 5. verse. Even so now a remnant is
reserved through the election of grace: and to the 7. verse, The election has
attained.

Thompson has two answers to this place. 1. He says, These gifts are so
called, in respect of the event and end, eternal life; but so, as in the mean
time God may repent again and again. Clean contrary to the constant nature
of God, and the constant tenor of grace, the characters of which are indelible.
2. They are (says he) (...), in respect of God promising, not of man
receiving. Vain man, who will make the gifts according to purpose, to reele
and stagger according to the wavering and flexible will of man. What? Shall
Gods stable counsel depend on the leuity and temerity of man's will?

The Remonstrants answer, that though God repent him not doni sui, of his
gift, yet man may repent doni accepti and retenti, of the gift received and
held: besides, that God does repent of his gifts, if man abuse them: as Genesis 6.
1. Sam. 15. so as though God take not away his gifts, yet man may cast them
away: though God revoke not, yet man may revolt, and scatter those gifts.

Answ. 1. Thus Gods mighty power is made subordinate to the power of the
creature. 2. The promise of God fails: for the tentation exceeds their
strength. 3. Gods wisdom gives not such gifts to such as will cast them away,
or to none but such as know the excellency of them. The new name is not known
but to him that has it, and he that has it, knows it. 4. God not only not
takes away the gifts he thus gives, but preserves them: for this is the
difference between the grace of Creation, and Regeneration. God frames our
will, and makes it willing to persevere, that all the glory may be his: Nothing
is ours, therefore boast of nothing. In nullo gloriandu^, quia nihil est
nostrum: Cypr. ad Quir. l. 3. ep. 4.
5. It is true, that all conditions required, are easily broken on our part,
our worthiness being like Isreal's, Deuteronomy. 9.6. But the Lord works all
conditions for us and in us; Psalm. 61.7. He shall dwell before God for ever: O
prepare mercy and faithfulness, that they may preserve him. Which may better
be seen by comparing these places together, Exodus 19.5. with Ezekiel. 36.27. 2.
Chron. 15.2. with Ier. 32.39. Ioh. 15.7. with Ioh. 17.11, 15, 17.

5. Ground: Whatsoever our Lord Jesus prays,

To the Proposition they answer, that it is not true always; for Christ
prayed for his enemies, that his Father would pardon them, but was not heard.
But how rash and dishonorable to Christ is this answer, beside the falsehood
of it? For 1. Was there not absolute conformity between the will of God, the
Father and the Son? Could Christ ask or desire any thing, which stood not
with the will of his Father? 2. Did Christ pray for all and every of his
enemies? as if he had not said, that some of them sinned against the holy
Ghost; for whom he must not pray, Math. 12.31, 32. And, if he prayed for some,
was he not heard, seeing by virtue of that prayer so many thousands were
converted at one Sermon, Act. 2.41? Surely he prayed for all his own, and was
heard. 3. This their answer is a mere cavil: for, our question is of that
which Christ asks for the Elect, and not for his enemies: And here they
expressly grant, that whatsoever he prayed for, for the Elect, he is heard in,
and obtains.

Then they answer to the assumption: that Christ prayed not absolutely for the
perseverance of the Saints, but conditionally. To this I say, 1. We never read
of this condition in petitioning perseverance. 2. Their Champion Thompson, cha.
19. denies it, saying, Oration Christi pro Petro proculdubio ex absoluta
voluntate processit, and fuit efficax, and exaudita. Christ's prayer for Peter
proceeded (no doubt) from his absolute will, and was effectual, and heard.

Therefore they answer again; that it was made for Peter upon special
occasion. I answer, no: 1. Christ intends his speech and prayer further then
Peter. Peter (says he) Satan has sought to winnow, not thee, but you, (...):
though as a good Phisician he applies the plaster to the part affected, but
neglects no part of the body, so Christ turns him to Peter, now most
distressed and diseased, hereby putting him in mind, 1. of his fall, to humble
him, 2. of his rising, to comfort him, 3. of his duty, to quicken him, Thou
being conuented, strengthen thy brethren. 2. Christ prayed the same for all the
Disciples, Ioh. 17.11. Holy Father, keep them in thy Name: And not only for
these, but such as shall believe in their Word to the end of the world, verse.
20.

Object. But Peter failed in faith for the present, for all that, and so may
Believers: and by that word, failing in faith, we say, Christ signified only
actum finalem; and so, notwithstanding the prayer of Christ, Petrus mortaliter
peccare potuerit, he might sin unto death. Itaque defecit fides, and non
defecit: Thomps. ibid.

Answ. 1. Augustine understood better then he, Aug. de corrept. and gratia.
ca. 8.
what it is to fail in Faith, namely, not to persevere unto the end: And
therefore he that is wholly cut off for a time, perseuereth not. 2. Christ's
prayer was heard, which was not (...), but (...), not that his Faith should not
fail in part, but not utterly and altogether vanish. So Chrysostom: non dicit
(...). For by Christ's care and favor it was, that Peter's Faith did not
altogether vanish. He failed in confession, not in affection. His Faith was not
ficta, feigned, therefore not fracta, broken: It was concussa, non excussa,
shaken, but not shaken off. Cord tenuit illum quem voce denegauit, says
Gregory: He denied Christ with his mouth, but held him still in his heart. We
grant Peter's Faith wounded, not dead: his confession oppressed with fear, not
wilfully rejected: his sin miserable, not mortal or deadly in Thompsons
sense.

6. Ground: taken from Gods continual being

First, the presence and aid of God in trials, will not suffer them to be
tempted above that they are able, 1. Cor. 10.13. God is continually present
with his, Esa. 46.4. in six troubles, and in seven, in their passage through
fire and water: and to this end, that they be not drowned and overcome, but to
supply both strength, and evasion. Object. In that place God promises (say
they) sufficient strength to overcome all temptations, but, only to them that
are waking: yet God abides faithful, in forsaking them that forsake him. Answ.
1. But the question is, Whether is God faithful in this promise of preserving
them in Faith, and in not suffering any tentation to befall above their
strength, or whereof he will not give a good issue? And if he be, whether they
shall forsake him whom he forsakes not? 2. The whole Word is given, not to
them that sleep, but them that wake: But who is it that makes us awake, and
keeps us waking, but the Lord? Psalm. 121.4. Or who calls us out of our beds,
but he? Cant. 5.2.

Secondly, their in-being in Christ preserues them as living members of a
living Head: who therefore is called the savior of his body, Ephesians. 5.23.
Object. This is true of his members, so long as they be living, loving,
dutiful, obedient members. Answ. 1. There is no elect person, and regenerate,
but is a living member: for the Head preserves life in every member. 2. He
that made him a member being no member, can and does restore and recover him,
though sick, unsound, and hurt: dealing with his members as we do with ours,
who tender, and wrap, and make much of sore and weak members, not considering
them as full of corruption, but as members. Ioh. 6.37. Whatsoever the Father
gives me, comes to me, and he that comes to me, I cast not out. Object.
True, if he always come to Christ: but he may depart and go away of himself.
Answ. No: Christ shows in the 40. verse, what he means by not casting out,
namely, he shall ever abide in my fellowship, and family: for I will effect,
that he shall have eternal life. Again, Ioh. 17.12. Whom thou have given
me, I have kept, that not one of them is perished: and Jude 1. Such as are
called and sanctified, are also preserved of Jesus Christ. But how is he
preserved, that departs and goes away?

Thirdly, in whomsoever the Spirit dwells, he must needs persevere in grace,
so long as he dwells there: but the Spirit dwells always in the Elect, after
conversion, Ioh. 14.16, 17. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever: Which cuts off their
threadbare answer, of, So long as the Spirit dwells, and also their distinction
of abiding for a time, and for ever.

Whosoever has the Spirit of God, is borne of God; and whosoever is borne of
God, sins not, that is, so as sin recover his reign and power: The reason
is, because the seed of God abides in him, 1. Ioh. 3.9. that is, either the
Spirit of God, whose virtue is a principal efficient, or the Word, whereby as
an instrument we are regenerate and begotten to God. Object. True, so long as
they are borne of God, and so long as the seed abides in them, they sin not.
Answ. So Bellarmine answers, Bellarm. de iustif. Lib. 3. Cap. 15.
Non potest lethaliter peccare quamdiu perseuerat filius Dei, changing the
casual particle of the Apostle, quia, into a conditional quamdiu. So Thompson
also, cha. 20. But the Apostle is express against their absurd evasion: He is
always borne of God, because the seed of God abides in him, and is in him for
ever. Nay, his nativity of God keeps him, that he cannot fall from God
finally, and return into the Kingdom of Satan again: so chap. 5.18. He that
is borne of God, sins not, but preserues himself, and the wicked touches
him not; that is, has power given him of God, whereby to preserve himself,
that Satan touch him not in his Freehold, or snatch him back again to death
and destruction.

These are some of the grounds, by which this comfortable Doctrine is
confirmed: with which (to avoid prolixity) I will content my self. Most of the
objections prevented in four positions or conclusions.
Now for the manifold Objections, which are made against it, I will endeavor to
prevent them all in some few Conclusions.

The first is this: No precept to beware of falling away, no promise to
perseverance, no commination or threatening against Apostates, does prove, that
a true Believer can fall away wholly, or finally.

For the former: where we are exhorted to beware of falling away from the grace
of God, Heb. 3.12. and to take heed, that standing we fall not, 1. Cor. 10.12.
and where blessedness is promised to him that fears always, Hortatio ad
tantam diligentiam ne de^iciant, no^ arguit de^ectabilitatem absolutam omnili
ad quos exhortatio adhibetur, sed cum certa perseuerantia conuenit, vt media
cu^ fine, causa cum effecto.
Pro. 28.14. none of these exhortations to so great diligence, and fear, and
watchfulness, argue such an absolute defect in all them to whom they are
given, and in whom they are found, but agree with certain perseverance, as
means with the end, the cause with the effect: Because,

1. They are delivered to hypocrites, as that in 1. Cor. 10.12. Let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall: because they wanting Faith, deceive
themselves with a vain presumption, and opinion of Faith, and fall away. But
what is this to the sound Believer?

2. If they be delivered to the godly, who may also grievously fall from Faith
and other graces, they prove not they can fall from true saving grace, at least
in the habit and gift, but only in the measure, degree, and parts; all which
they ought to maintain and preserve. But one thing it is to fall, another to
fall away: One thing to fall from the first love, another, from all love.

3. No fear of falling impeacheth the certainty of not falling away. Christus
ipse timuit, vt exemplo doceret, timorem omnem no^ esse frustraneu^, vbi
perseuerantia est certa.
Our Lord Jesus himself feared, and fasted, and prayed forty days and forty
nights, before his temptations, that in his example we might see, that our
fear is not then frustrate, when perseverance is certain.

4. Means of perseverance and not falling away, cannot be certain proofs of
falling away, but rather against it. But exhortations are such means, while 1.
they admonish us of our imbecility in our selves, 2. drive us to our hold, to
get strength from God, and implore his aid and help, 3. daily to awaken us
out of our dullness and security, 4. to uphold us, being ready to faint and
grow weary, by cherishing Faith and other graces, 5. not to bring in doubting,
but keep us in good assurance, while we use the means prescribed, still
looking at the promises.

And for threatenings and comminations against Apostates and back-sliders, as
Ioh. 15.6. Every branch that bears not fruit in me, I take away and cast out:
and Heb. 10.26. If we sin willingly, after we have received the knowledge of
the truth, there remains nothing but a fearful expectation of vengeance. 1.
These and the like threats are properly meant of seeming branches, that bring
leaves, but otherwise are barren and fruitless, as a true branch in Christ
cannot be, verse. 5 2. All these comminations are conditional, if a branch
bear not fruit, which though it be impossible in a true branch, yet they are
of use to them, to stir up their care and watch; and further can conclude
nothing. 3. Many such places, as Heb. 10.26. are of such as sin against the
holy Ghost, which themselves say is not incident unto a true elect person.

2. Conclusion: No prayer or petition in Scripture, either for not losing the
Spirit, or for restoring the Spirit, concludes against the elects perseverance
in grace, but for it: Because first, prayer of the Spirit argues the presence
of the Spirit, and being a prayer of Faith, cannot be denied; Secondly, it is
ordinary for the Saints to pray, Psalm. 51.11 12.
Take not away thy holy Spirit, Psalm. 51.11. for he is sometime taken from
them, not in respect of his existence, but of his powerful working; not in
respect of the saving gift, but of the measure, degree, and operation of it: As
he is taken away from the wicked, not in respect of the gift of Regeneration,
which they never had, but of some common gifts, either natural, or civil, for
office or the like, as in Saul, 1. Sam. 15.16. Thirdly, it is as ordinary for
them to pray for the return of the Spirit, and creating a new Spirit, who is
indeed quite gone, not in himself, but in their sense and apprehension: But
this concludes nothing, that because they feel him not, therefore he is not
there, no more than a man in a swoone may conclude he has no life, or a child
in the womb not to live, because it understands not the life of it. Fourthly,
it is not (as they say) in vain for them thus to pray, though they cannot fall
away, because 1. it is an obedience to Gods Commandment: 2. a testimony, that
we depend on his strength and promise for perseverance: 3. that we shall attain
this gift in Gods own means, which is Prayer.

3. Conclusion: No phrase in all the Scripture concludes against the
perseverance of the Elect; though in some phrases they pick many quarrels. As
we may see in some of most seeming contrariety.

For this in the Text, that some believe only for a time, we have formerly
showed, that this was far from justifying faith, of which our question is,
but is meant of temporary faith, which has no promise of perseverance, as this
has. But how weak were the conclusion, Some fall from temporary faith,
therefore others may fall from justifying faith?

Gal. 3.3. Some begin in the Spirit, and end in the flesh. Answ. 1. The Apostle
writes not to particular Believers, (of whom we speak) but to foolish
Apostates, that never truly believed. 2. By spirit, is not there meant the
Spirit of Regeneration, but, they begun in the doctrine of the Gospel, called
spirit and life, Ioh. 6.63. and the ministry of the Spirit, 2. Cor. 3.8. 3. By
ending in the flesh, is not meant the state of a man unregenerate, but the
fleshly doctrine of false apostles, sauouring wholly of fleshly and carnal
wisdom. So as the Apostle charge them not with falling from true
Regeneration, (which they had not, and of which we now speak) but from the
profession of the Gospel, which they had received. Now how inconsequent is
this, Many fall from professing the truth, therefore the Elect fall from grace?

Exodus 32.32. Some are said to be blotted out of the Book of Life: not wicked
only, Psalm. 69.28. but the Elect, as Moses prayed that he might. Answ. 1.
Symbolicall or figurative arguments prove nothing, as this is, for God needs no
books. 2. Moses wishes not simply, but conditionally, If it might be, If Gods
glory and his peoples good might thereby be preferred. Conditio nihil ponit in
esse.
Suppositions are no positions. 3. The Lord himself denies, that Moses or any
Elect could be blotted out, saying, Not thee, but him that sins against me,
that is, lets sin reign in him. 4. There is a twofold book, a twofold
writing, and a twofold blotting. First, there is a Book of Gods eternal
Decree of Election; in which Book of life who ever are written, they are never
blotted out: for the foundation of God abides sure, and has his seal, 2.
Tim. 2.19. This Book is sealed. And if a man say, Quod scripsi, scripsi, What
I have written, August. in Psalm. 69.
I have written, Ioh. 19.22. Number Deus quenquam scribit and delet, says
Augustine? Does God write any man in his Book, and blot him out again?
Secondly, there is a book of the execution of that Decree, which lies in
earth, as that in heaven, the Church-booke, wherein men are actually enrolled
into the company of the Church, and received into Gods Covenant and Family, by
professing the Word and Sacraments.

Now such as are written in this Book, are written in, in the judgment of
charity, not of certainty. True members are indeed written, the hypocrite only
in the opinion of himself and others. And this is the twofold writing, one
true, the other imaginary. Augustine on Psalm 69. expresses it excellently,
thus: Dicuntur scripti, quia sic putant and putantur: nec sic accipere debemus,
etc. sed hoc dictum est secundum spem ipsorum, qui ibi se scriptos putabant.

So also there is a twofold blotting; 1. Out of the Church, when their
hypocrisy is discovered, and they thrust out of the company of the faithful,
among whom they were written and numbered. Delentur, cum declarantur ibi non
esse, August.
2. Out of the other Book in heaven, when they are declared and manifested
never to have been written there.

Now the argument is weak, Because some are blotted out of the book of the
Church, therefore some out of the Book of Election: and, because some are
declared never to have been written in the Book of Life; therefore those that
are indeed written there, may fall away.

Romans 14.15. We read of some destroyed, for whom Christ died: therefore
members of Christ may fall away, and perish. Answ. 1. By destroying is meant,
not a casting off the foundation, but a scandalizing of our brother in
indifferent things, (of which, the Apostle there treats) whereby we destroy
so far as is in us, and pluck him from Christ: but if he be a true
Believer, the mighty hand of God vpholds him, perhaps not from falling, but
from falling away. 2. Christ is said to dye for a man two ways, 1. Improperly
and generally, for the whole visible Church, for whom his death is sufficient:
2. Properly, truly, and specially for the faithful and Elect, to whom it is
effectually applied in the virtue and merit of it. Many of the former may be
destroyed, none of the latter. 3. Members of Christ are so two ways: 1. In the
judgment of charity, and of the Church, all outward members of the Church are
to be reputed, redeemed, and justified, till by their Apostasy they declare
themselves hypocrites; for whom Christ never dyed: 2. In the judgment of
certainty he dyed not for all, and every one. Now the weakness of the argument
appears evidently, That because some fall away, for whom Christ's death is
sufficient, therefore they may, to whom it is effectual; or because some, who
in the judgment of charity only are redeemed, fall away; therefore such as
are certainly redeemed by his death, may.

2. Pet. 1.9. We read of one who was washed, but forgets he was purged from
his old sins. Answ. There is a twofold washing: One outward, by the water of
Baptism, by external profession, and outward reformation, as Simon Magus: The
other inward, true and real, by the blood of Christ, applied by the Spirit and
faith, by means of the Word, and by the waters of sanctification. And
accordingly there is a twofold purging, one real and existent, the other in
opinion, profession, and judgment of ones self and others. The former being
truly washed, cannot forget their purgation, as the latter may. One drop of
that water springs up to eternal life. But it is no good argument, Some
professing cleanness and purity fall away, therefore such as are clean
indeed; some washed with outward water, therefore such as are baptized with the
holy Ghost and fire.

Heb. 6.4. and 10.26. Some that are enlightened, and taste of the good Word of
God, and are partakers of the holy Ghost, and are sanctified by the blood of
the Covenant, fall away, and cannot be renewed by repentance; Therefore Elect
persons may fall away finally. Answ. 1. In general: None of all these phrases
implies true Regeneration: Besides, the Apostle speaks of hypocrites, and
such as sin against the holy Ghost, not of any true Believer. 2. In special,
and to the particulars.

Some that are enlightened, fall away.] But this is of knowledge in judgment,
not in affection: of knowledge in the brain, not in the heart: of bare
illumination, without thorow-renouation, or reformation: of science, without
conscience, experience, practice. What a great measure of knowledge had Demas,
Judas, and Julian attained, by which they seemed to have clean escaped such as
are wrapped in error? And yet they were again entangled in error, the
greatest error being to know, and not to do. Now what argument is this, It is
possible for some truly enlightened, to fall away, therefore for some truly
regenerate?

They taste the heavenly gift, and the good Word of God, and yet fall away.]
Answ. By tasting, may be understood two things: 1. An approbation in judgment,
seeing in some measure the excellency of the gift, Ioh. 4. but this in
general, not in special; in others, not in himself, as Balaam and Agrippa:
2. An inclination in the affection, ravished with that excellency, as the bad
ground received the seed with joy, and hearing and seeing the happiness of the
Saints, wish and desire to partake of it, if by wishing they could win it:
but deal as hard Chapmen, who see a commodity, and their own need of it, and
prize, and cheapen it, but will not give so much as it must cost them, and so
go away without it. Balaam wished to dye the death, but would not live the
life of the righteous. And the young man in the Gospel was loath to sell all,
and so went away without salvation. Whereas a sound Believer will sell all with
the Disciples, and account all but loss or dung, with Paul, and exchange the
treasures of Egypt with the Cross of Christ, as Moses. Thus the hypocrite,
only tastes the gift, and feeds not, but the Elect feed on the Bread of
life, and drink of the water of the Well of life, unto life eternal. Now this
is no good argument, because some that taste, do fall away; therefore so may he
that feeds on Christ.

They that are partakers of the holy Ghost, and sanctified by the blood of the
Covenant, fall quite away.] Hypocrites are sanctified by the blood of the
Covenant, 1. in respect of profession, not of the power of holiness, 2. in
respect of external communion with the members of the Church, in the Word and
Sacraments, not of inward society or sanctification, 3. in respect of the
application of the blood of the Covenant, not by the Spirit, but by the means;
but diversely from that to the Elect: To the Believer, truly, by faith, and to
his salvation: To the hypocrite, in outward show and appearance, in opinion, in
the judgment of charity only, and to his greater condemnation, 1. Cor. 11.27.

They are also partakers of the holy Ghost: that is, excellent gifts of the
holy Ghost: as 1. the spirit of fear, howling for sin, and sorrow, wishing
the sins had never been committed, as in Cain, and Judas; but always want the
Spirit of love; 2. External reformation in great measure, as Herod did many
things, but kept one Herodias; 3. Fervent zeal for the Lord, as in Iehu, 2.
King. 10.16. but, for a start, at the beginning, and for the sins of others,
not the own: 4. Holy motions, with which the Spirit inspires them, and often
purposes and promises to follow them, as Saul had many.

But, 1. they never have any but common gifts, not the special gifts of faith,
charity, true repentance, proper and peculiar to the Elect: 2. Though they have
the gifts of the sanctifying Spirit, yet not the gifts of Sanctification: 3.
They never come to be sanctified throughout, in body, and soul, and spirit, 1.
These. 5.23. nor to be thoroughly changed into the Image of God, 2. Cor. 3.18.
Now this is a weak argument, Because some having the gifts of the sanctifying
Spirit, fall quite away, therefore some also that have the gift of
sanctification.

They that taste of the powers of the life to come, fall away.] This tasting
also is incident to hypocrites, and stands in two things: 1. Thoughts and
meditations of the life to come: 2. A powerful working and forcing of the
heart to look somewhat that way, and to do something, seeking to enter. Yet
they shall never enter, 1. Because they only taste, not digest these
meditations, to follow them home: 2. Because if they perform any thing, they
do it not purely, not for Gods glory, but themselves; not for love of God, but
self-love; Gods glory and service shall be subordinate to their own benefit.
3. Because they are not vpheld with patience to fruition, as the Elect are.

Thus much of the Phrases of Scripture, which seem to infringe the Doctrine of
the Elects perseverance. Many more there be, but these are the principal. Now
to examples.

4. Conclusion: No examples in all the Scripture prove falling away, wholly and
finally, from saving grace. Bellarmine brings in a great number: as if what he
cannot effect by weight of argument, he would by a number of examples. We
will quickly dispatch them, by reducing them to five heads.

1. Of Angels, who fell wholly and finally from grace: Which instance is clean
out of the socket: For our question is not of Angels, but Elect men; not of the
grace of Creation, but Redemption; not of Legal inherent righteousness, but
Evangelical imputed by faith in the Mediator, of which they are not capable,
because Christ took not their seed, but man's.

2. Of Adam in innocence, who lost all grace, thou^^ he was perfectly
righteous; therefore much more those who have grace imperfect. Answ. 1. This
example is to no purpose, the question being of men truly justified in Christ:
as Adam in innocence was not. 2. They must prove, that Adam fell from his
estate of Renouation and Faith in the Messiah, or else they prove nothing. 3.
That he fell from all grace of Creation: which is hard for them to prove, and
many of the learned hold the contrary. 4. Adams grace in innocence, and ours
now are far unlike: He had more measure of grace, but ours has more
privileges: He had grace whereby he might have continued if he would: we
have grace whereby we both can and will. So the argument is utterly naught.

3. Of whole Churches, as Romans 11.20. The natural branches are cut off. Answ.
The Jews were cut off in respect of the outward Covenant, and the common state
of that people, as any Nation may, but not in respect of Faith, if inward and
effectual. So of the Galatians, Chap. 3.1. they were cut off from Christ: this
is spoken of the visible face of a Church, not of the invisible; or, of such as
had a profession only, not faith, or not true. So in Esa. 2.22. Most true of
Rome, and the Church therein.
The faithful City is become an harlot: That is, the City, which was a seat of
faithful men, is corrupted with idolatry, not the faithful in the City.
Again, faithful men may be corrupted, but not wholly, not finally.

4. Of hypocrites, as Judas, Demas, Saul, Simon Magus, Hymeneus, and Philetus,
who made shipwreck of faith and a good conscience. Answ. 1. They might spare
their bead-roll: for the question is of none such; for they have no true grace
to fall from. 2. These must fall from all the shadow of grace they have: the
Talent must be taken from them. 3. Hypocrites are said to depart from the
faith, not the grace of justifying faith which they never had; but either the
doctrine of faith, so called in Jude 3. or the profession of it, or from
temporary faith.

5. Of good and truly gracious men: Folia abiecit, radix vixit: Theoph. in Luc.
22.
for whom I answer thus: 1. David, the act of his faith was interrupted, not
the habit; the flame of faith appeared not, but the sparks remained; and
besides, he repented, as we see in Psalm. 51. 2. Of Peter it is true which
Theophylact says, The leaves faded, the root lived. 3. For Solomon, he fell
not quite away, but was saved: both because it was never said of any Reprobate,
that he was loved of God, as of Solomon, 2. Sam. 12.24. and because he was an
holy Penman of Scripture, and a Prophet, therefore sat in the Kingdom of
God, Luke 13.28. and because of the promise, to scourge him with the rods of
men, but not take away mercy from him, 2. Sam. 7.14, 15. 4. For the prodigal
son, who is thought quite lost, and dead after he was a son: 1. It is a
symbolicall argument: 2. He was dead and lost, that is, to his father, and in
his own sense; and so may Gods children be: 3. He returned, and was received.
5. For Paul, Romans 9.3.
who wished himself cut off for his contrymen. 1. He spoke not simply, but
with implicit condition, if God might rather glorify himself in his
reiection, than in casting off his Contrymen: 2. He only manifests his
affection to them, but concludes not such an effect in himself: 3. He says
not, he could be separated from Christ, but in this case he could desire it.
And whereas he says in 1. Cor. 9.29. he endeavors and beats down his body,
lest he be a Reprobate: I answer, 1. He speaks not positiuely, but
suppositiuely: 2. Reprobate is not there opposed to Gods Election, but man's
approbation: He would not be reproved for not having his life answerable to
his Doctrine: 3. If it were opposed to Gods Election, yet it proved nothing,
but rather the contrary: He endeavors not to be a Reprobate, or not to be so
manifested, therefore being an Elect Vessel, can he be cast away? No,
therefore he shall not.

In a word, if the faithful be said to fall from grace, it is lapsus, not
prolapsio, a falling, but not a falling away: it is from the measure, or the
degree, or the sense, not the whole grace given; as the Pastor of the Church of
Ephesus fell from his first love, Reu. 2.4.
not all love. And it is inconsequent, The faithful may fall for a time, and
in part, therefore wholly and finally.

Therefore we conclude, that no regenerate man can fall totus, a toto, in
totum, the whole man with full consent, from all grace and goodness, into all
evil, or any evil for altogether, to the end. So as when all is objected
against this Doctrine, that can be, true grace (we see) is blessed with
continuance.

Object. This Doctrine of perseverance does much hurt, to make men secure, and
take liberty to sin. Answ. 1. Fire can never make a man freeze for cold, nor
the fire of grace to freeze in sin. 2. No good man can hence purchase a
license to sin: for, 1. to be Elect, and given up to sin, implies a
contradiction, for we are chosen to be holy, Ephesians. 1.4. 2. To persevere, is to
cleave to the Word of Christ, Ioh. 8.51. 3. As he that believes he may quite
fall from Christ, is no true Believer, no more is he that thinks he cannot,
and do what he list: for faith is most industrious in the means. 3. Though
wicked men will pervert Paul's writings, yet he must write: 2. Pet. 3.16
and though they do pervert truth to their destruction, yet we must propound
such profitable and necessary truths: for 1. This confirms the faith of the
Elect, and raises them out of despair, and excites them to repentance, by
leading them out of themselves, to fix their eyes, not on the ouglinesse of
their sins only, even after grace received, but upon Gods promises, Christ's
prayers, and power preserving them to salvation. 2. Nothing makes the Saints
more love God, than so free and unchangeable love. 3. It excites them to much
thankfulness, when being acquainted with their own weakness, and Satan's
daily assaults, they see themselves set into so firm an estate of happiness,
as they are armed against the dread of utter foyling or forsaking. Whence Bucer
on Ioh. 6. says, Nihil vtilius quam praedicare credentibus, impossible esse
vt vnquam gratia excidant, Bucer in Ioh. 6.
Nothing is more profitable, than to preach to Believers, that it is impossible
for them ever to fall from grace.

Use 1. Let all this move us to the earnest desire of so permanent a condition,
and so to labor for truth of grace, which only shall continue. Content and
please thy self with no seeming or unsound grace, which shall leave thee in
thy greatest need. In earthly things men desire such as are most durable, and
lay about them for long estates, of life, or lives, or fee-simples: And why not
here, in so great necessaries and expectations?

2. Let this provoke us to perseverance in the state and measure of grace
received. And hereunto let us consider, 1. The end of Redemption, to serve the
Lord in righteousness and holiness all our days, Luke 1.75. 2. That
righteousness departed from, is vain and forgotten, Ezekiel. 18.24. All labor,
prayers, hearing, yea, all sufferings are lost, as the Galatians suffered many
things in vain, Chap. 3.4. 3. Thou shall be judged as thou art found when the
Lord comes: the question shall not be, what thou wast once, but what thou art.
As the tree falls, so it lies: If of straight it be grown crooked, so it
shall be judged. 4. This makes Election sure, and is a note of the saved of
the Lord, to continue to the end, Math. 24.13. Glory and immortality is the
part only of such as by continuance in well-doing seek it, Romans 2.7. And our
Savior is express, Luke 22.28. To you which have continued with me in
tentations, have I appointed a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed me a
Kingdom. The Lord make us upright, that by continuing in his Word, we may
manifest our selves Disciples; so following our Lord with patience and
perseverance in holiness, until he bring us unto an vn-discontinued
happiness purchased by his own blood. Amen.

Prima perit, perit altera, and altera, quarta perennis. De terra infrugifera,
and frugifera.


FINIS.
THE ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF THE MOST REmarkable points enlarged in this Treatise.
ABuse of things lawful, is damnable, as well as the pursuit of things
unlawful. Reasons 3. 164 Abundant measure of grace is the strength of a
Christian, in a fourfold afflicted estate. 395 Sound Affection to the truth,
vpholds men from withering. 107 Of Affections renewed, four instances. 347
Apparel abused, how. 166 Apostates in dangerous estate, three reasons. 397 Not
to be Ashamed of the afflictions of the Gospel: six reasons. 417 The aim of
every good hearer, must be to bring forth an hundredth fold. 392
B
Behold: what it notes. 16 Book of nature to be translated into the use of
grace. 18 Brutish ignorance after long hearing, three reasons. 61
C
Callings abused, how. 168 Calling of God without repentance. 430 Care of the
family abused. 169 Cares of the world are great chokers of Gods Word, 1. Before
hearing, two ways. 180 Word, 2. In hearing two ways. 181 Word, 3. After
hearing. 182
Four true Causes of the worlds hatred of God and his truth, among many false
pretensed ones. 134 Church, not to be defined by multitude. 259 Christ, the
Author and matter of true wisdom. 292 Christians must aspire to the highest
pitch and measure of grace, for five reasons. 393 Circumstances necessary to
do good duties well, seven. 359 Cleanness of heart, wherein it is. 349
Coming to Church, Satan ever comes with thee. 58 Comforts in persecution,
three. 135 Companions of holy desires, six. 78 Companions of true
Illumination, four. 82 Companions of sound Joy, 1. Holy affections, three. 86
Companions of sound Joy, 2. Holy graces, five. 87 Company and society abused.
169 Comforts for a Minister, who seems to lose much labor among a rude
people, four. 258 Conscience if sound, has, 1. Sincerity. 2. Tenderness. 108
D
Dangers in enjoying earthly pleasures, four. 227 Deceitfulness of heart in
the matter of repentance, in seven particulars. 370 Defects of an evil heart
in the matter of his Religion, in six things. 319 Delicacy in Christianity,
condemned by five reasons. 411 Holy Desires examined in their 1. ground, 2.
matter, 3. ends, 4. companions. 76 Sound Desire of the Word tried by three
things. 77 Differences between sound knowledge, and hypocritical, three. 81
Differences between Christ's sowing, and his Ministers, 4.19 Despisers of Gods
Word in fearful case, two reasons. 36
E
Earnest of the Spirit, what. 283 Effects of true Religion, five. 316 Effects
of saving knowledge, three. 123 Elect, how far they may fall, in five
conclusions. 422 Ends to aim at in our pleasures, 3. 250 Examination whether
we are gotten beyond hypocrites, in four things. 75
F
Faith especially impugned by Satan, many reasons. 54 Te^porary Faith is raised
on te^porary causes, and which they be. 69 Justifying Faith necessary to a good
heart, for 5. reasons. 294 Faith governs the whole life, five instances. 296
Forwardness to hear the Word of God, urged by 4. reas. 5 To Fruitfulness in
grace, four things required. 20 Fruitfulness necessary to Christians, five
reasons. 388 For our Fruitfulness the Lord has done five things. 399 Sweet
Fruits of patience, four. 414 The better the Fruits, the more need of
patience. 415
G
God glorified by joining of the Cross to Christian profession, four ways.
129 Gods glory is the aim of a good heart in all his parts, and in all his
actions. 276 Godly men are most peaceable, and yet none more troubled than
they, four reasons. 299 Godly man keeps the whole Sabbath with the whole
man. 332 God esteems the goodness of our works, by the goodness of our
hearts. 372 Goodness of heart is a full Sea of comfort in all afflictions, 1.
Inward, 2. Outward. 375 Good ground brings forth fruits answerable in kind
to the seed. 386 The thing hated in Good men, is goodness. 134 Goodness of
hearers, esteemed by goodness of heart, for four reasons. 264 Grace, if
sound, grows still, five reasons. 307 Graces of the Spirit, compared to
water, in 4. things. 120 Graces special and saving, are wrought by the Word
preached, five. 323 Sound Grace is blessed with perseverance. 418 Grounds of
perseverance in grace, 6. cleared from exceptions. 424 Growth in Grace tried in
the 1. Root, 2. Fruits, 3. Measure, 4. Affection, 5. Continuance. 88 In
natural Growth persons are higher: but in spiritual they grow lower. 91
Growth of hypocrites deceitful in sundry things. 98 Some Ground on which the
seed of the Word falls, is good ground, five reasons. 252 True Growth is in
all graces, six instances. 307 The good heart only Grows. 311
H
Heart, called good, in two respects. 261 An Heart qualified by grace, is
beyond an evil heart, in six things. 262 The Heart is softened by a threefold
moisture. 270 A good Heart has five properties in regard of God. 272 Has five
excellent properties in regard of Christ. 276 Rejoices more in Christ, than in
all worldly joys, 4. reasons. 277 Gives it self wholly to Christ, who has
given himself wholly to it. 278 Makes in it self a sweet room for Christ,
and how. 279 Conformeth it self wholly to Christ. 280 Carefully embraces Gods
ordinances, 4. reasons. 321 Makes great conscience of the Word preached, 3.
reas. 322 Is very conscionable of the Sabbath, six reasons. 329 Honors the
Ministers of God, four reasons. 337 It will be helpful to them four ways.
341 It does good duties wisely, five reasons. 359 It does them humbly, three
reasons. 360 It does them heartily, three reasons. 361 It does them abundantly,
four reasons. 361 It does them universally, three reasons. 362 It does them
constantly, five reasons. 363 It carries it self against sin, in five
actions. 365 It is a fruitful heart, four reasons. 383 It is the essential
difference between a good man, and an hypocrite. 374 It is called an honest
Heart, and why. 262 It seeks approbation from man, three ways. 273
An evil Heart affects God more in his gifts, than in himself. 275 An evil
Heart, for all his shows, grows not, 4. reasons. 311 An evil Heart fails
five ways in hearing. 326 Senseless Hearer, his misery, in five things. 13
Hearers duty toward the seed of the Word, in 4. things. 28 Hearers and hearts,
compared to the highway-ground, in three things. 33 Careless Hearers, the
worst of hearers. 34 Hearers compared to stony ground, in five things. 62 Bad
Hearers may go far in Christianity, as in four steps or degrees. 66 Bad
Hearers moved to hear, for four reasons. 67 A good Hearer hears for
afterward, three reasons. 156 Four sorts of Hearers reproved. 161 Heavenly
mindedness discerned by six signs. 310 Conscionable Hearing is in five
things. 324 Helps to cast our care upon God, five. 187 Helps to the patient
enduring of the Cross, six. 416.418 To Hold out in grace, provide three
things. 122 Hindrances of spiritual growth 5, preserved by patience. 408
Sound Humiliation looks 3. ways at once. 289 Hypocrites, why they go so
far, three reasons. 71 Hypocrites fall from five things. 136 Hypocrites, why
they fall from all goodness, four reasons. 137
I
Ignorance now excuselesse. 18 Illumination necessary to a good heart, for five
reasons. 291 Illumination tried to be sound, by four rules. 80 Instances of
such as come short of them who fall short of salvation. 71 Instances of most
lawful things unlawfully abused, seven. 165 Instances of most needful cares,
thrusting down unneedful, five. 188 Instances how riches hinder the practice
of the Word, six. 196 Joy examined, in the 1. Ground. 2. Matter. 3. Measure.
4. Companions. 85 Joy of Gods people, in seven things. 240
K
Kinds of good fruits sundry, Inward, Outward.
380 Knowledge, if sound, has three ends. 81 Soundness of Knowledge, examined
by five rules of trial. 88
L
Lusts compared with thorns, in five things. 147 Lusts of any kind cherished,
spoil the work of the Word, for four reasons. 149
M
Manna compared with the Word, in six things. 1 Manner of true prayer, in
four things. 303 Right Manner of using pleasures, in four things. 244 Marks
to know an hard heart by, six. 114 Marks of a man soundly rooted in the
profession of faith, three. 128 Marks to know distrustful cares by, five. 177
Marks of a man in whom the World choketh the Word, five. 199 Marks of a man in
whom pleasures choke the Word, seven. 231 Marks of a good heart in general,
reduced to 7. heads. 272 Marks of soundness of knowledge, six. 292 Marks of
sound faith, six. 295 Marks of a good heart, in respect of it self, six.
345 Marriage abused, how. 167 Marriage between God and man never broken. 427
No certain Mark of the child of God, willingly and joyfully to hear Sermons.
121 Matter of spiritual prayer, especially for three things. 303 Means to lay
the Word in our hearts, six. 61 Means of a soft heart, five. 116 Means of
sound moisture, five. 126 Means to uphold us in trial, seven. 142 Means to
keep our hearts as good ground, in good kilter, three. 153 Means to set the
Word above the weeds of lusts, five. 154 Means to lay up the Word for
afterward, four. 162 Means to hear for afterward, four. 163 Means to rid
our selves of carking cares, four. 186 Means to attain goodness of heart,
two in general. 268 Meat and drink many ways abused. 165 Ministry, the
dignity of it. 25 Ministers must go forth to sow, three reasons. 26 Ministers
must sow only their Lords seed, and all their Lords seed. 27 Ministers sent,
for four ends. 338 Means to keep men from withering, six. 106 Motives to
careful hearing, four. 40 Motives to watch against Satan in hearing, three.
59 Motives to labor for soft hearts, four. 116 Motives to lay up the Word for
afterward, four. 162 Motives to rid our selves of worldly cares, five. 183
Motives to moderation of mind, in seeking, and having riches, five. 203 Motives
dissuading the pursuit of pleasures, six. 225 Motives to carry our selves
Christianly through our pleasures, three. 251 Motives to sincerity of heart,
three. 354 Motives to get the goodness of heart, five. 371 Motives to aspire
to the highest pitch of grace, five. 398 Motives to provide our selves of
patience, three. 411 Moisture of grace, the kinds. 120 Moisture of grace is of
1. Unction. 2. Compunction. 123
N
Newness of heart in four principal faculties. 345 Notes to know whether
Satan has robbed thee of the Word, or no, three. 60 Notes of a man withering
in grace, six. 101 Notes of sound knowledge, four. 122 Notes of a man rooted
in the doctrine of faith, three. 125 Notes of a man soundly rooted in the grace
of faith, five. 126 Notes of a good heart in respect of the Spirit of God,
reduced to four kinds. 281
O
Objections against diligent hearing the Word, answered, four. 4 Objections
against the pers^uerance of Saints, most of them prevented and answered. 438
Object of perseverance. 420 Occasions of doing good to be apprehended. 7 Many
Offended at the Word, sundry ways. 138 Offense not to be taken, when we see
great Professors offended at the Word. 141 Outward effects of a good heart, in
respect of true Religion, five. 317
P
Patience necessary to fruits of grace, six reasons. 407 Patience, what. 405
Patience strengthens a Christian three ways. 412 Parables what, with their
distinction. 9 Parable of the seed has a twofold scope. 16 Why our Savior
spoke so much in Parables, 4. reasons. 10 Peace with God and man, a fruit of
the Spirit. 298 Persecution differs from other sufferings, in three things.
128 Persecutors in dreadful estate, three reasons. 38 Persecution inseparable
from Christian profession, if sound, four reasons. 128 Persecution compared to
the scorching of the Sun, in four things. 131 Persecution distasteful to
nature. 136 Persecution tries who are sound. 140 Perseverance, what it is. 419
Pleaders for some one sin or lust, answered. 153 Pleasures earthly, not all
condemned, six reasons. 218 Pleasures, great enemies of the Word, and
hindrances of salvation, seven reasons. 220 Best Pleasures undervalued, five
ways. 231 Phrases of Scripture seeming to impugn the perseverance of Saints
explaned. 441 No Prayer against falling away, implies that the Saints can fall
away. 440 Price of Gods Word. 12 Many goodly Professors fall short of
salvation, and why. 119 Profiting in degrees of grace known by four notes.
402 Properties of Christian covetousness, four. 204 Prosperity a Popish, but
a false note of the true Church. 132 Properties of a good heart about the
Sabbath, five. 331 Prouocations to good duties, four. 358
Q
Questions, whether no worldly cares be allowed to Christians. 176 How far
worldly cares may be lawful. 177 Whether a man cannot be rich and godly. 192
Question of perseverance in grace handled at large. 424
R
Reign of lusts thrusts down the Word three ways. 151 Recusancy a dangerous
sin, 6. reasons. 35 Remedies against the choking of riches, four. 202 True
Religion described at large in the true causes and effects of it. 314 Religion
truly embraced by four inward affections of a good heart. 317 Receiving of
Gods ministers is in four things. 340 Repentance stands in four things. 366
Riches compared to thorns, in four things. 191 Riches are commonly great
enemies to Religion, and hinderers of salvation. 192 Riches choke the Word,
1. Before hearing, three ways. 194 Riches choke the Word, 2. In hearing. 195
Riches choke the Word, 3. After hearing, two ways. 196 Riches full of
deceytfulnesse. 206 Riches deceive men of five of the best things they have or
can have. 206 Riches, how they deceive men of salvation. 209 Riches deceive by
six false promises. 210 Riches falsely called profits, being so unprofitable
in the most needful things and times, four instances. 213 Riches given by
God, for four good ends. 214 Riches are receipts, and so to be held, three
reasons. 215 Riches, true and undeceivable to be procured, and of them four
instances. 216 Riches in themselves the good blessings of God, 3. reasons. 192
Rooting in grace is in three things. 124 Rules to try whether we continue to
grow in grace, four. 91 Rules of moderation in natural and lawful desires,
five. 174 Rules how to carry our selves toward riches, that they prove not
thorns, six. 205 Rules to preserve us from the deceytfulnesse of riches, 5.
212 Rules in general how to carry our selves through our pleasures, five. 238
Rules concerning perseverance in grace, four. 422
S
Sabbath profaned by wicked men, five ways. 335 Sacrifice of wicked men
abominable, four reasons. 288 Satan comes with men to the hearing of the word,
3. reasons. 47 Satan comes to steal the word away. 1. Inwardly three ways.
48 Satan comes to steal the word away. 2. Outwardly three ways. 51
Satannicall suggestions against the word, five. 50 Satan has three ends in
stealing away the word. 52 Satan aymeth especially to steal the word out of
the heart, two reasons. 53 Satan is a deadly enemy to man's salvation, three
reasons. 55 Satan is there most, where he is least suspected. 170 Seed, a
resemblance of the word, in six things. 23 Seed of the Spirit what. 282 Seed
springs up in stony ground to three degrees. 65 Self respects may make a man
diligent in the means of salvation, three instances. 69 Seeking of God,
wherein it st^ndeth. 272 Signs of sound humiliation, three. 290 Sin thrusts
us under woeful misery, five reasns. 364 Singleness of heart is in five
things. 350 Softness of heart in three things. 348 Soundness of heart
comfort, 1. in life, 2. in death, 3. in day of Judgment. 378 The Sower is
Christ, who goes forth to sow, three ways. 20 Spiritual worship is from Gods
Spirit: 1. inspiring, 2. directing, 3. assisting. 285 Spiritual worship must
be also from man's spirit, qualified with sundry spiritual graces. 286 The
Spirits indwelling in the Saints assures them of perseverance. 437 Sports many
ways abused. 167 Supplication necessary to a good heart, four reasons. 301
Suspect most danger in most lawful things. 171 Symplicity a bad excuse for bad
hearing, five reasons. 41 Syncerity of heart how discerned. 351
T
Thorny Ground and bad hearers resembled in three things. 148 Trial of sound
prayer, by 1. the mouer, 2. the matter, 3. the manner. 302 Trial of sound
fruits of grace by four rules. 385 Times unseasonable for pleasure, four. 247
V W
Of true Understanding of Gods word, four notes. 43 In the Use of natural
things ever join a spiritual. 174 Watchfulness of heart looks to five
things. 355 True Watch against sin, in eight things. 369 Men Wither in race
four ways. 95 Withering in grace dangerous in four respects. 100 To Wise
using of pleasures, four rules. 245 Wicked men are without peace. 300 Wicked
men loathing the liquor of the word, hate the vessels and Ministers. 342 Wicked
men cannot pray: many reasons. 340, etc. Witness of the spirit, what. 282 The
Word diligently to be heard, five reasons. 3 Word as necessary to salvation, as
seed to the harvest. 31 Word known to be fruitful, by four notes. 56 Word
of God best after hearing, five reasons. 159 Word applied, is the pruning knife
of our pleasures: as in the four parts of it. 230 Worldly cares argue impiety
and folly. 184
Z
Zeal renewed, known by four notes. 348
FINIS.

