A MAP OF ROME: LIVELY EXHIBITING HER MERCILESS MEEKNESS, and cruel
mercies to the Church of God: Preached in five Sermons, on occasion of the
Gunpowder Treason, by T. T. and now published by W. I. Minister. 1. The Romish
Furnace. 2. The Romish Edom. 3. The Romish Fowler. 4. The Romish Conception. To
which is added, 5. The English Gratulation.


APOC. 17.6. I saw the Woman drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the
blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for John Bartlet, and are to be sold
at sign of the Talbot in Paternoster Row. 1620.

TO ALL THAT WISH WELL TO OUR SYON, HEARTILY AND Unfeignedly: Grace be
multiplied and peace in our Lord Jesus Christ.
BRethren, beloved in the Lord: You see by the Title, what you may expect in
the book following. I hope what it promises, shall be indeed performed. I
wish it were more complete and accurate for your sakes: as it might have been,
if the grave and diligent Author could himself have set it forth: but blessed
be God, that his weightier employments do not give him leave or leisure. I am
glad I have it for you as it is, through my earnest request to him: whose
modesty thought it unworthy the publication, and my pains in writing it.

Reasons of this my request and pains, I can give you many. First, I think it
necessary, that our God, our gracious and loving God, may have the praise of
all his mercies (and namely that of this day) still reserved to himself
wholly. His works are glorious, and the benefit of them not confined to a
scantling of time. Therefore these Gratulations cannot be less seasonable now
than they were at the day of Deliverance. Secondly, this I hoped might be a
means to restrain our declining times from gazing and doting on that pompous
Harlot, the Church of Rome. For when our nation shall see, and consider a
fresh, how insatiable she has always been of blood, and English blood! I
cannot think we can be so inconsiderate, as to dream of any toleration, much
less any sound reconcilement with so implacable an enemy. Thirdly, I thought
it not altogether impossible hereby to stop the slanderous mouths of
misse-conceiuing persons, scattered abroad through all the Country, yet
pleasing themselves in the common error: who seeing in some good men a
difference of judgment in some small matters, presently conclude them enemies
of the State, etc. For this I will say of the Author, (and I say the truth in
Christ, Rom ^.1.
I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost:) that having
been partaker of his Ministry some hundreds of times, I never heard him more
earnest, or more faithful, than in this Argument. And the whole Town of
Reding will testify with me of his holiness, lowliness, peaceablenesse,
unweariable painfulnesse, and other graces beseeming his calling: which no
ill-willer could ever yet impeach. Fourthly, and lastly, my intent is hereby to
stir up our drowsy and forgetful hearts to due thankfulness for so great a
Deliverance. And this (me thinks) is more than necessary. For when I behold the
general view of the Land, and the quality of peoples manners, the memory of
that wonderful day seems unto me quite blotted out: And I know not who^
better to resemble our selves unto, than those of who^ the Psalmist speaks,
Psalm. 106.11.12.13.14. The waters covered their enemies: there was not one of
them left. Then believed they his words: they sang his praise. But they soon
forgot his works: they waited not for his counsel: but lusted exceedingly in
the wilderness, and tempted God in the Desert. Do we not so even in our
Canaan, a Land flowing with milk and honey? What horrible prouocations are
there daily and hourly amongst us, in all places, in every corner? Who can
complain sufficiently of the grievous temptings and out-brauings of God, which
our eyes do see? Who would judge by our strange demeanours, that God had ever
done any thing for us, either by sea or land, either against water-workes or
fire-workes? Ah sinful nation, laden with iniquity! Do we thus requite the
Lord for his loving kindness? Is this his reward for so great favors?

Hearken ye children of Syon, and consider: Though Israel play the harlot, yet
let not Judah transgress. Though carnal persons, Hos. 4.15.
who have no true sense of the grace of Christ, set themselves out in their
colors, and fashions, and Epicurisme, and Heathenisme, yet let it not be so
with them that profess the fear of God. Though others loathe the word, and
the means of salvation, yet let not Professors loathe them. Let it never be
said, that Professors are proud, earthly, contentious, vain, fantastical, or
willingly sweruing from the Rule of Piety. Exodus 19.5.
You are his peculiar people: and if he lose his honor in you also, he loses
it altogether. Therefore consider you the works of the Lord, and his intent in
them. Stir up your hearts, and frame your lives to a real thankfulness. Let
your moderation and discretion be quickened by zeal: and let your zeal be
bounded by discretion. You shall (perhaps) mee^e with shame, Heb. 12.2.
that is, reproaches and ignominies: despise these. You shall meet also with the
cross, that is, persecutions and damages: these endure. Here is patience, and
magnamity. Let your patient mind be known to all men: yet let it be valorous
in the causes of your God: saint not, neither be afraid. You may well take
occasion to grow the faster by this Antiperistasis, and unite your forces the
more strongly. Are you so spighted and maligned on every side by profane
Ismaelites? then let your love toward one another increase the more solidly,
and abound toward your selves mutually in the fullness of the blessing of the
Gospel. Romans 15.29.
Live fruitfully and peaceably in the Communion of Saints: here the Lord has
appointed the blessing, and life for evermore. Watch against Satan and his
eldest son that Antichrist: pray for the dissolution of their Kingdom:
especially see it be utterly defaced in your selves and yours. Give all
diligence to leave an holy seed behind you, which shall praise the Lord in
earth, while your selves praise him in heaven. (...).
A disgrace it is to godly Parents to have ungodly children, especially by
their own default. Make your houses, houses of God, by setting up, and then
establishing his pure worship therein. Cast up your accounts beforehand, and
prepare for the coming of Christ in the clouds. Accept my endeauours for your
good, and help me with your prayers.

Reding. Oct. 12. 1619. Your servant in the Gospel of Christ, WILLIAM IEMMAT.

The Authors Apology.
CHristian Reader, as I esteemed not the Sermons following sit for so public
a ^iew, so neither meant I to purc^ase to my self so much envy and wrath from
the ^atholiques, as these Sermons may (perhaps) bring upon me. But the
opportunity of the Publisher, who has taken pains in them, and of some others
desirous of them, drew out at last my consent to their request. If any phrases
may seem more warm and earnest, the subject may plead for pardon, which is a
fiery and furious Powder Treason: and fire uses to warm and kindle. If any
strains or phrases be met with oftener than once, consider these Sermons were
preached many years asunder; and every year the same matter in substance was
to be renewed among my Auditory. If I might hereby win of some Catholics,
but to consider of the grounds of their Religion, which (as they say of Nilus)
breeds almost yearly such monsters, I should be glad to gather that f^ui^ of
my pains: whose hearts desire for my seduced Countrymen, is (as Paul's for his)
that they might be saved in the day of the Lord: to whose grace I heartily
commend thee, and desire to be commended by thee.

THO. TAILOR.

THE ROMISH FVRNACE.
Daniel 3.22. etc. 22 Therefore because the Kings commandment was strait,
that the furnace should be exceeding hot, the flame of the fire slew those
men, that brought forth Sadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.

23 And these three men, Sadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, fell down bound in
the midst of the hot fiery furnace.

24 Then Nebuchadnezzar the King was astonished, and rose up in have, and spoke,
and said unto his Counselors, Did not we cast three men bound, into the midst
of the fire? Who answered and said unto the King, It is true, O King.

25 And he answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst
of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the
Son of God.


NEbuchadnezzar makes an image of gold, straightly enioyneth the worship,
prescribes the nanner of it, with all manner of music to draw and affect the
simple and superstitious: Himself begins the dance; his Nobles, Princes,
Dukes, Judges, Counselors, Officers, Governors, Verse. 3.
easily follow the Kings will and example, though in a most wicked decree:
Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.
and what way now may we think the multitude went, but after their leaders?

But certain Jews, disordered fellows (against whom in all likelihood the
image was purposely erected, that such Chaldeans as Daniel had set over the
Province of Babel, See chap. 2 49.
might by this means be removed from their places and charges:) are accused to
the King, Verse. 12. Sadrach, Meshach, and Abednego are with expedition
conuented, verse. 13. charged upon pain of present death, to conform to the
worship of the Land, verse. 15. But it is not the commandment of the King, nor
the consent of Princes, nor severity of Laws, nor threats, nor allurements of
Tyrants, that can prevail to draw the Elect from God: they will crave none,
nor take any time of deliberation if it were offered in this thing: they boldly
protest against that horrible idolatry to the Kings face, We will not serve
thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou have set up, verse. 18.

Hereupon as against confessed rebels (for so were Gods children ever
accounted in the world) the sentence of death, without respite or further form
of law passes upon them; that they should be cast into a fiery Furnace, seven
times hotter than ever it used to be: not that the King would quickly thereby
dispatch them out of their pain, but partly to show his own great indignation
conceived against them; and partly to terrify and affright them the more: for
Tyrants (if they could) would rather torment the minds of the Saints, than
their bodies.

^ra furor br^uis est. --
But they abiding undaunted at this sentence, the wrath of the King proceeds
into a fury and short madness, precipitating every thing, and with more have
than good speed, executes his wicked sentence: and lest any favor should be
showed them, he commands his strong men and warriors to bring them before
his eyes, and throw them into the Furnace, that he might feed himself in
their destruction: and so they did.

Division of the Text.
Now of all this proceeding, these verses, and the other following, show the
event; which is twofold. First, concerning the enemies of the Jews, that the
flame licked them in, who were the instruments of this wicked Tyrant: which is
set down with the accusation in the first words. 1. Because the Kings
commandment was strait, they were so intent upon the Kings charge, as (in
likelihood they forgate their own safety. 2. Because the Furnace was so
extraordinary hot, the flame licked them in ere they were aware. The second
event is concerning the persons of the Jews, and that is their escape and
evasion, even in the midst of the Furnace. Wherein three things are to be
considered. First, the manner of it; it was miraculous, in that the flame had
no power, either upon their bodies, or on their apparel, but only on their
bonds: whereby being cast in bound, they were able to walk loose in the
midst of the Furnace. Secondly, the means of this escape, a Son of God,
whom the Tyrant saw walking in the Furnace with them. Thirdly, the effect of
this deliverance, the acknowledgement of the true God, by Nabuchadnezzar, and
all his Nobles.

Wherein we have an express type of our own present estate, and of Gods
dealing with us; which when I have in one or two words parallelled, I will come
to the several parts.

The Romish Nabuchadnezzar, Affinity between Romish and Babylonish
Nabuchadnezzar.
head of that whore of Babel, not sitting over an hundredth seven and twenty
Provinces, as this, but challenging the power of both the swords, over all the
Princes and Provinces of the earth, has set up an Idol, in that the whole
chaos and vast body of Popery, is as base an idolatry as ever was among the
Gentiles: but especially their Molded first in the Laterane Council under
Pope Innocent the third. Popish Priests worse than Judas, who valued Christ at
thirty pence; for they buy 40. cakes (every one of which is Christ's body) for
one halfe-penny.
Breaden God in the Mass, (which the Gentiles would be ashamed to fall down
before.) He has sent out his Edicts, that all people, nations, and languages,
should worship the image which he has set up: and whosoever receive not the
mark of that Beast in their hands, and in their foreheads, these he
excommunicateth, and adiudgeth to fire and faggot, (as witness all the bloody
Martyrdomes, and fiery trials in other, and in our own country) his own
Kings, Princes, Dukes, and Governors in Italy, Spain, France, and other
Popish countries, bow down to this beast. But a few reformed Churches, as
England, Scotland, Ireland, Germany, Belgia, Hel^^tia, Bohemia, Saxony,
Denmark, and Sweueland, do not deliberate in this matter, that they will not
do this thing. He also hastily sends out his Bulls of Excommunication, and
furiously threatens worse matters, of blood and slaughter, which (by his hands
of mischief stretched into all countries) he puts in execution against
Princes and people, who conform not to the worship of his image.

Plentiful experience hereof we have had in our own country: witness those
many and outrageous conspiracies, both in the days of her late Majesty,
(blessed in all memory) as also of his Excellent Highness, both before and
since his solemn Inauguration. But all these proving no better than
paper-shot, This was preached Nouemb. 5. 1612.
and nothing so terrible and and deadly as he intended: seven years ago he
set his Captains on work, for the heating of a Furnace seven times hotter
than ever before; yea seventy times seven times hotter than ever
Nabuchadnezzars was. Romish cruelty surmounts the Babylon^sh, 3. ways.
For that was prepared only for three persons; but this, for the sudden
burning and blowing up of three Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland:
That, by heathens sanguinary this, by men (howsoever more bloody, yet)
professing such a religion as out-boasteth all other for sanctity of life, and
works of mercy. That, openly as in a this, in the depth of black darkness,
against all justice in the fountain, against the living Law, his Majesty
himself; against the honorable Judges, which are speaking Laws; against all
the Records and instruments of justice, which are silent Laws; and against the
whole Parliament, the makers of these Laws; and all this in such secret and
undermining manner, as any league might as soon be made with hell it self, as
with these pioners, who dug to the bottom of hell for mischief.

But mark, when all things were thus prepared, and these three flourishing
countries (after a sort) a casting into that hellish flame: the self same
event, wickedness returning upon the heads of wicked doers: wicked counsels,
the worst to the counselors: sowers of wickedness, (...).
reapers of destruction. The Agents and instruments of this Romish Tyrant so
intent upon the strait commandment of their Master, as forgetting their own
danger, were some of them licked into the flame, others eaten up by the
gallows, others devoured by the mouth of the sword; all of them made
spectacles of confusion, which they most intended; while those, (...).
whom they had designed as fuel for their flames, had not an hair of their
head, no nor of their garments touched. For which unspeakable mercy, the name
of our God be evermore praised.

Now to the several parts.

Therefore because the commandment of the King was strait, that the furnace
should be exceeding hot, etc.

Hence we note first, Idolatry and cruelty always coupled together
what spirit it is that reigns amongst idolaters, even the same which is
here discovered in Nabuchadnezzar, namely, the spirit of malice, rage, and
cruelty; which, when things succeed not to their mind, does breathe out nothing
but threatening, slaughter, and blood, against the Saints of God. Pharaoh a
notable idolater, who professed that he knew not the Lord, Exodus 5.2.
nor would hear his voice, nor let the people go; how began he his reign,
but by consulting to keep under the people of God by heavy burdens, and hard
taske-ma-masters? But when that succeeded not, but the more they were vexed, the
more they increased, he added to the former cruelty a charge, that the
Midwiues should kill all the males of the Hebrews in the birth. But neither
did this prodigious cruelty prove so successful as he desired; for the
Midwiues feared God, Chap. 1.17.
and did not as the King commanded them, but preserved alive the men children.
And therefore transported by rage, as one that had lost humanity it self, he
makes a more public and general law, charging all his people, Verse. 22.
that every man-child that was borne, they should cast into the river, and
drown it: With what fury and violence, after he had made them weary of their
lives by sundry oppressions, did follow them into the bottom of the sea,
thinking belike that God had divided the sea for no other purpose, than for him
to pitch his field in, against his people? It is plain, that had not God taken
him off, he would never have taken his rod from off the Israelites.

H^st. 3.6.
Of Haman that idolatrous Tyrant, the text says, being full of wrath against
Mordecai, for not bowing unto him, he thought it too little to lay hands only
on Mordecai, but sought to destroy all the Jews that were throughout the whole
Kingdom of Ahashu^rosh, even the people of Mordecai: and to this purpose
procured letters from the King, which he sent by Posts into all the Provinces,
to root out, to kill, and to destroy all the Jews both young and old, Verse. 13.
children and women in one day.

Manasses was a wretched idolater, who did evil in the sight of the Lord,
after the abomination of the Heathen; he built the hie places, which his good
father Hezekiah had destroyed; he erected altars for Baal, and made a grove,
he worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them; he built altars for all
the host of heaven, and that in the Court of the house of the Lord: 2. King.
21.3.
he caused his sons to pass through the fire; he gave himself to
witchcraft and sorcery, and used them that had familiar spirits, and were
southsayers. Now if to all this you would add an inseparable note to know a
wilful idolater by, you have it in the 16. verse; Moreover Manasses shead
innocent blood exceeding much, till he replenished Jerusalem from corner to
corner.

See 1. Match. 1. and Josephus de bello Iud. lib. 1. cap. 1.

Nequ^ tantae caedes satis fuere, sed Iudaeos cogere coepit, vt abrogato more
patrio nec infantes suos circumciderent, porcosque super aram immolarent;
quibus omnes quidem aduersabantur, optimus vero quisque propterea tru^cidabatur.


Antiochus Epiphanes, that monster of men, both for his horrible idolatry, and
savage cruelty against the Jews, called Epimanes; forced the Jews to lay
aside the institution of God in circumcising their children; as also in hatred
of God to offer swines flesh upon the altar, and eat swines flesh in their
houses; in stead of Gods worship he set up the worship of Jupiter Olympius,
and this within the Temple of Jerusalem. The books of Moses and the Prophets
he burnt, etc. All which horrible rage against God himself was attended with
such barbarous and despightfull wasting, and oppressing of the Church of God,
such murder and slaughter of the people of God, as never was since there began
to be a nation till that time; as witnesses Daniel, chap. 12.1. Insomuch as
stories report, that Jerusalem was left desolate and void of all good men.

In both which high wickednesses (by the consent of all writers) he was an
express type of that great Antichrist which was to come after him, and is now
in the world, consuming the Saints of the most High, and working no less
misery to the Church of God than he did; as we shall in part anon declare.

What shall I speak of the tyranny and cruelty of those Heathen Roman
Emperors, within the first 300. years after Christ? of whom not only the
Apostles themselves suffered violent death; but whosoever made any profession
of their doctrine, were most ignominiously tormented, no respect had of sex,
nor reverence of age, in so much as the dead bodies of men, and women, and
children, old and young together, were cast out and lay naked in the streets
like the pauement thereof. And (if we may believe history) in the days of one
of those ten Persecutors were ten thousand Christians crucified in one mount,
crowned with crowns of thorns, Hadrian.
and thrust into the sides with sharp darts, in imitation (or derision rather)
of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in the last of those
ten, in the space of one month were slain under the name of Martyrs,
seventeen thousand persons, beside a multitude more, condemned to the metals
and mines, with other most cruel slavery. In one word, the histories of those
times seem to be written in blood, of which those monsters of nature (in the
shape of men) made such effusion, as it seems true which was said in those
times, that no m^n could step with his foot in all Rome, but he should tread
upon a Martyr.

Rome Christian as cruel as Heathen Rome.
Now to apply this note to our occasion and purpose. This very spirit of cruelty
is the spirit of Antichrist, which reigns in Popery at this day; which one
religion exceeds and outstrippeth all other religions, in barbarous
blood-shead and cruelty (not the Turkish excepted.) Long it were to recite, and
incredible to believe those horrible slaughters, which might be induced to
prove this part: there is neither writer that can be so diligent, or writing
so exact, as can make a sufficient relation, of the barbarous butcheries made
upon the Saints by these enemies of God and nature. But yet so much as may give
a general view, and (as it were) a glimmering light, must be set down for the
euincing of this truth, which so gladly they would avoid.

2. These. 2.3.
And first to begin with the Scriptures. Who is it whom the holy Ghost styles
the son of perdition, but the head of this Romish Apostasy? which title is
commonly taken passiuely, for that he is appointed, destinated, and borne to
perdition: in which sense it is (besides this man of sin) only given to
Judas, Ioh. 17.12.
whom Christ calls the lost child, because being rejected and destinated unto
destruction, he could not be kept by Christ as the rest of the Disciples were.
But it is also fitly ascribed unto this man of sin actiuely, in that he is a
destroyer, and an author of destruction unto others, not only by seduction,
and infection; but also by persecution, wasting the Church of God with all his
might.

If any man stand in doubt hereof, let him further consider how the King of
locusts is called Ab^ddon, and Apollyon, Revel. 9.11.
that is, A Destroyer from his effect. Now it is made as clear as the Sun,
from the apt connection of all the circumstances of the place, that by these
locusts are m^ant the Popish Clergy, who are bred of ignorance, heresy,
superstition, and error, which is the smoke of the bottomless pit out of
which they ascend. Trigin^a bellatorum mill^a, qui bellica munera guauiter
^bire possent, nihil interpellato sacrorum cultu. Sabell Enead 9. lib. 6.
Thence come they by infinite numbers, like locusts, insomuch as that one sect
of Franciscans offered out of their Order for an expedition against the Turk,
thirty thousand strong warriors, which they might well spare without
hinderance of their holy Obseruances. And well might they so do, if that of
Polydore Virgill be true, that this one family of Franciscans suddenly filled
the whole world, no otherwise then locusts cover the face of the earth. How can
it then be other, but that these locusts, with all the other swarms of Abbats,
Monks, Friars, Pulchra prosecto pulliti^s, and aulae Antichristianae decora
familia. Grass. reg. p. 34. B. Verse. 4.
Priests and Jesuits, must needs suddenly destroy and eat up the fruits of
the earth? not the grass of God, which has the greenness and moisture of
grace, nor the trees of righteousness, which are the planting of the Lord,
(for over such no power is given them:) but only over such as the heavenly
Father never planted, and whose names were never written in the book of life.

But, were this more obscure; whither tend all those Prophesies, and where were
they ever accomplished (if not in this man) whereof the Revelation is full? It
is said of the second Beast, which rose out of the earth, Revel. 13.11.
and had two horns like a Lamb, but spoke like a Dragon, that he caused so
many to be killed as would not receive the image of the beast in their hands,
and in their foreheads. This Beast can be no other but the Pope of Rome, who
rises out of the earth, that is, out of most base beginnings, and steppeth or
rises above the earth, and all earthly power. He has horns like the Lamb,
that is, professes the meekness and innocence of Christ (which the Turk
never did:) but speaks like the Dragon, that is, not with outward force and
power, but even by his word and speech exercises all the power of the Dragon,
that is, of the Emperor: for, not the greatest Emperors or Monarchs in all
the world can translate and remove Kings and Kingdoms by all the power they
can make, which he can by his word alone.

The same is the Beast that comes out of the bottomless pit, Revel. 11.7.
and makes war against the two witnesses, and overcomes and kills them:
By which two witnesses whether we understand the Scriptures in the two
Testaments (as some) which are now overcome in Popery, AntiChrist an enemy
both to Scriptures and Scripture-men.
and their own Traditions made equal, or rather set above them, as triumphing
over them; or else we understand the zealous and sincere Professors of the
Word of God, who both by their Doctrine and Conversation give witness unto the
truth of it; it comes all to one: for the Beast that dare make war upon,
and profess hostility to the Scriptures, will war with, overcome, and kill
also the sincere lovers of them, and upright livers after them.

To conclude this point: that one Prophecy may serve for all, Revel. 17.6.
where is affirmed of the great Whore, with whom the Kings of the earth have
committed fornication, etc. that this woman was drunk with the blood of the
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. By this woman the Jesuits
themselves, will they ^ill they, confess is meant their Rome, Rib^ra. Bellarm.
but old Rome (say they) such as it was under the Heathen Emperors. But,
where are the scarlet colored Fathers but in the present Rome? In whose
forehead is the name mystery written, but in the present Romish Babylon?
Testantur hoc Iac. Brocardus Venetus in Apoc. et monachus quidam Celestin^s.
The Heathenish Emperors proclaimed open war against Christianity, and
carried not their enmity in secret, and in a mystery. These with sundry other
circumstances in the Text, will (perhaps) draw them one step further one day,
and force them to a free confession of the whole truth, when they can no
longer withstand it.

And thus having briefly propounded the Prophecies of this Antichr^stian
cruelty, Prophecies of Romish cruelty accomplished to the full.
let us in as few words see it in the accomplishment of them: Which if out of
most approved Histories we should enlarge as we might, it would easily appear
to be most matchless, and that no Scythian cruelty was ever comparable unto
it. But I must keep a measure, and give but a taste of that cup filled and
running over with blood, which the Saints of God in all Countries have drunk
up to the bottom.

The Romish History teaches us, that Romulus laid the foundations of the
City of Rome in the blood of his brother Rhemus. And as the foundation was
laid by him, so has the frame been vpheld by his bloody brood until this day.
Whence were the Emperors, who shed so much Christian blood in the first 300.
years after Christ? were they not Roman? Whence has almost all the blood,
Pandolph. Colonutius ex Aenea Sylu. hist. Austr. et Nicol. Machiauel.
that has been shed upon the earth since that time, issued, but either from
the edicts, persuasions, approbations, or encitements of these firebrands of
Babylon? Who commits Kings and Princes together, making them Woolues and
tyrants one against another, but this Romish Nebuchadnezzar? Who blows up
massacres, rebellions, seditions, treasons, in all Countries, but this scarlet
whore of Babylon? Who sends out cut-throates and villains with pardons, to
stab and poison Kings and Potentates of the earth, yea to blow up whole States
and Kingdoms with one terrible blow, but the holy Father of Rome? Where is the
Lord crucified every day in his Saints, or where are the Saints condemned for
heretics, and consumed with fire, but in the furnace which is made so hot by
the ministers of this idolatrous Romish Tyrant? What Doctrine besides, Romish
is a teacher and maintainer of cruelty, of homicide, of parricide in the
highest and most unnatural degree, so as the greatest Rebel or Traitor is
Popery it self? Whose Priests, or spiritual guides (who should be men of
peace) besides Romish* be the nimble and active hands and instruments of all
the former mischief, especially their Jesuits, who not only do these
things, Romans 1.32.
but as stout patrons defend those that do them?

If we look at the generality of this cruel^y, it has been almost without
bounds or banks: What Country in all the world have the Papists set foo^e into,
but they have left behind them the steps, impressions, and monuments of their
tyranny? Manasseh made the streets of Jerusalem only run with the blood of
the Saints: but there is never a corner in all Europe, which these Idolaters
have not washed with streams of the blood of Martyrs, as History shows. If
we consider the multitudes of men, women, and children, on whom this cruelty
has fed, it will appear to be most merciless. I will not say how true that
is of some, who say there is not a day in the year which might not be
dedicated to an hundredth several Martyrs, whose blood the Romanists have shed:
But true it is, that with the cup of death, Babylon has served thousands and
ten thousands at once, and yet her insatiable thirst has not been satisfied.

Ex Hermanno Mutio. Innocentius 3. anno. 1212. See this story at large in the
book of Martyrs, page 868. Out of which book I have picked some choice
examples, that our common people having the book by them, may see I belie them
not in the things which seem most incredible, Foeminea in pugna victoria nulla
est.
One of their Innocent Popes with his Bishops made but one Bonfire of an
hundredth Nobles and others in the Country of Alsatia in one day. That
merciless Minerius one of the Popes Captains, dispatched with his bloody
designs against the innocent Merindolians, carried himself in the execution
more like a devil, feeding on the bowels of men, than a man that had any
bowels in him: Who destroying a number of Towns before him, to the number of
two and twenty, slew and murdered with all the cruelty that could be devised,
the Inhabitants, whether they resisted, or not. The women and maidens were
ravished; the women with child, and Infants borne and to be borne were
lamentably destroyed: the paps of many women which gave suck, were cut off,
and the children looking for suck at their mothers breasts, dead before, died
also for hunger. And as a monster that had never come of a woman, he waged
war against that seely sex that could least resist him. For when the men of
Merindoll fled from his Army, and thought it best to leave behind them (for
their better expedition and safety) their tender wives and children, hoping
that the enemy would show mercy to such a multitude of destitute and
helpless women and children; this enemy of mankind euertaking this seely
prey, practiced such villainy and cruelty upon five hundred women, at once,
besides the children, as has been unheard of.

In another of those Towns named Cabriers, which upon composition, and
condition, that he would lay down his armor, and use no violence against
them, was yielded into his hands, he no sooner entered but falsifying his
promise he raged (as Master Fox says) like a beast* He picked out thirty
choice men presently, and carried them into a meddow, and caused them to be
hewn in pieces by his soldiers: He took forty seely women, (some of them
with child) and put them into a Barn full of straw and hay, and caused it to
be set on fire at the four corners; whose lamentable outcry when a soldier
heard, he in pity opened a door to let them out; but as they were coming
out, the Tyrant caused them to be slain and cut in pieces, opening their
bellies, that their children fell out, whom they troad under their feet. And,
lest he should be unlike to Dioclesian (who set a Church on fire, and burnt in
it many thousand Christians:) he sent also a band of Ruffians, not with fire
(as in the former instance) but with the sword into the Church, wherein as in
a Sanctuary were hid a great number of women, children, and young Infants,
who without all respect of place or persons, slew all they found. In this
one Town were thus mercilesly murdered above a thousand Protestants.

In the year 1560. under Pope Pius (or, Acts and Mon. page 859.
Impius rather) the fourth, were two Towns in the parts of Calabria taken, and
condemned at one time, to the number of a thousand and six hundred
Protestants: Of them in one day were executed fourscore and eight in this
manner: They being all thrust into one house together, as into a sheepe-fold,
the executioner comes in and takes one, and blinde-foldeth him with a
muffler about his eyes, and so leads him into a larger place hard by; and
commanding him to kneel down, he cutteth his throat, and leaving him
halfe-dead, and taking his Butchers knife and muffler all of a gore-blood, he
comes again to the rest, and so leading one after another, he dispatcheth
them all. A direful and lamentable spectacle to see, insomuch that a Romanist
professed in a letter to his friend at Rome, that he could not write it without
weeping: Another Preacher, one Simon Florellus writing to an Italian Doctor of
Physic in the University of Basil, tells us what became of the rest. These
two Towns (says he) are utterly destroyed, and eight hundred of the
Inhabitants, or (as some write from Rome) no less then a full thousand. And
this year were the residue of that godly fellowship martired.

But if we read over the whole Turkish History, and all the Records of the
Heathen Emperors themselves, we shall not be able to match, no not in the Lion
Nero, nor Decius, 2. Tim. 4.17. Gathered out of Ianus August Thuanus President
of the Parliament of Paris.
nor Dioclesianus, that most wicked fury and rage which ever the sun saw
committed by the Papists in the Massacre of France, wherein in the space of
three days were ten thousand Protestants not more cruelly then perfidiously
slain and murdered: and in the space of thirty days to the number of thirty
thousand. The furies of hell were never more furious than these blood-sucking
Romanists. What rejoicing was there at Rome for this Massacre, what solemn
Processions and Masses were by the Pope and his Cardinals, (for so notable a
stratagem) celebrated, what general joy in Rome, appeared in the publishing of
a Iubile presently, in shoo^ing off great Ordinance in way of triumph, in
gratuit^es and large gifts to those that brought the news of it? insomuch as
the History reports, that the Cardinal of Loraine gave him a thousand
crowns that first brought him the tidings of it.

And as these barbarous Butcheries were committed by secret fraud and
conspiracy, so have they by open hostility and professed war made waste of
Gods people, pouring out the blood of Protestants as waters on the earth; and
that with such fierce assaults, as they have slain in one battle an hundred
thousand, and made their glory of it. How many fewer had tasted of the same cup
in England, if their invincible navy in 88. had not been broken by God? and
in England, Scotland, and Ireland, how many above that number, if their
fireworks had prevailed in 1605. That 5. of November should have been Englands
dismal, and doomes day, a fearful and terrible day like the day of the Lord,
which shall burn like an Oven, Mal. 4.1.
wherein our very Sun should have been turned into blood, and the whole land
should have been drunk with the blood of the Inhabitants.

I would pass this point of their insatiable thirst after blood, but that I
cannot omit to add a word or two of that infinite effusion of blood, which the
Popish Spaniards have made among the poor Indians, under pretense of
converting them to the faith: and that confirmed by their own Metellus
Sequanus. Bartholomaeus Casas, a Bishop that lived in that Country. This book
written in Latin is well worth translating: but these with a number more
ins^ances of their hellish cruelty are o^^racted by M. White in his way to the
Church, the 50. digression, where the Reader may further acquaint himself with
the Spanish conversion or rather utter subversion of the Indies.
writers, who report, that never since the beginning of the world was there
made such an hauock of people as the Spaniards have made there: That of two
thousand thousand persons inhabiting one country Hispaniola, in the year 1580.
are not left above 500. or an hundred and fifty: That more then ten Realms
greater then all Spain, with Arragon and Portugal, and those swarming with
multitudes of people, as Emme^s on an Emmet hill, are all turned to a
Wilderness: That within the space of forty years seven and twenty millions
of people are destroyed; in Hispaniola three millions, in another Country five
millions in fifteen years, in another five millions, in Perne four millions,
in five small Isles five hundred thousand. They have thrown down from the top
of a steep mountain 700 men together, and dashed them all to pieces. In three
months they famished 7000. children. At one time they massacred 2000.
Gentlemen that were the slower of all the Nobility of that Country. And all
this with such cruelties as were neu^r heard of before: Which to avoid, the
poor men would hang themselves with their wives and children, the women did
destroy their conceptions, and in grief and despair dash their own childrens
brains against the stones, lest they should come into the Spaniards hands. The
Prince of the I Will Cuba so answered the Friar that came to shrine him at the
slake.
Some of them professed, that if the Spaniards went to heaven when they were
dead, they would never come there: that they did carry themselves neither like
Christians nor men, but like devils: and, that it had been better the Indies
had been given to the devils of hell, than to the Spaniards. All which are the
words of their own Writers, and confirms the point in hand, that the Romish
Woolues are never satisfied with blood, nor can be; seeing they must be
nourished of that whereof they are engendered.

Secondly, their cruelty is not only evident in such direful and tragical
outrages in all Countries, nor only in that (like rough Esaus) their hand is
against every man; but also in their cruel and barbarous manner and mind in
effecting their bloody proiects. Farnesius, he voweth to ride his horse to the
saddle in the blood of the Lutheranes. Satia te sanguine quem sit isti, and
cuius semper insacrabilis fuisti. Thomyris de Cyri capite in v^re sang.
Here nothing but a sea of blood can quench his blood-thirstinesse. Minerius
being entreated for some poor Merindolians, who had left him their City,
houses, and goods, and had escaped only in their shirts to cover their
nakedness, sternly answered that he knew what he had to do, and that not one
of them should escape his hands, Minerius the devils Proctor, or Factor.
but he would send them to hell to dwell among the devils. Here was a more
eager thirst, not only for the blood of their bodies, but of their souls too;
the death of these poor Christians was a small thing in his eyes, unless it
be accompanied with their damnation.

Add hereunto the exquisiteness of the torments, and the unnaturalness of
the tortures, Acts and Mon. page 869. See another history of like cruelty, p.
805.^.
by which they held men in death so long as possibly they could: arguing, that
if they could inflict a thousand deaths on them, or could hold them in dying a
thousand years, they would. Hence comes their burning by piece-meale, and
that not with fire only, but with fat, Brimstone, Pitch and Tar also
dropping on their heads: And thus was that meek and innocent Martyr George
Marsh burned, with a barrel of Pitch and Tar dropping upon his head: neither
when he was thus tormented and dead, was it thought sufficient; unless the
Bishop should solemnly in a Sermon affirm, that he was now a firebrand in
hell.

Johannes de Roma a Monk (his name tells us what house he was of) got a
Commission to examine the Lutherans; Page ^60.
and before any conviction he used this torment to force them to accuse
themselves: He used to fill Boots with boiling grease, and put them on the
legs of whom he suspected or listed; and tying them backward to a Form,
with their legs hanging down over a soft fire, so he examined them.

In the History of the Andrognians we read of one Odul G^met, a man of 60.
years of age, See the exquisite torments devised, and suffered by Bertrand, p.
817. and by Rich. Atkins, p. 1948.
for whom they devised a strange kind of death and torment, after this manner:
When they had taken and fitly bound him, they took a kind of vermin which
breeds in horsedung, and put them upon his navel, covering them there with a
dish, which within short space pierced into his belly, and killed him.

But what had these men done? Had they killed their Kings, or blown up whole
Parliament houses? Surely either their facts were heinous, or the fury of
their adversaries ridiculous. As cruelty never wanted cause of putting forth it
self, so here were no small causes pretended. The most horrible torments that
any Protestant suffered among them, was for casting down an Idol, not able to
defend it self, as in the examples of Betrand and Atkins: others put to most
cruel death for not acknowledging more Christ's then one, which was the first
of those six bloody Articles, whereby it was capital not to profess, that
either there were not so many Christ's, or that one Christ should not be
according to his body in so many places, as there were several hoasts
distributed through the world. Marriage punished among Papists, whoredom
escapes.
Others were murdered for marrying a wife according to the examples of the
Apostles: many for reading the Scriptures: sundry for having them, or some
small parts of them in the English tongue, as Robert Silkeb, and one Mistress
Smith at Couentry, Page 887.
only because they had the Lords prayer, the Creed and ten Commandments
found about them. Some put to death for selling books of Scriptures, Page 863.
although it was a branch of their calling: as a godly booke-seller in Auinion
was burned with two Bibles about his neck, only for selling some Bibles; when
at the same time a lewd Ballad-seller was graced in the selling of filthy and
ribald Songs and Ballads.

Add hereunto that lamentable merriment of a rich Merchant in Paris, who for a
jest which he brake upon the Friars of S. Francis, lost his life; he in
merriment told them, that they were a rope about their bodies, because S.
Francis should once have been hanged, ^ag. 831.
but was redeemed by the Pope, on this condition, that all his life after he
should wear a rope. But they in earnest got judgment against him, that he
should be hanged for it. And when he to save his life recanted his speech,
they commended him for it, and made have to hang him while he was in that good
mind. Oh merciless men, to whom judgment without mercy belongs! Iam. 2.13.
Are these the principal causes of such savage and pitiless proceedings? Or
if they be not, tell us of some greater, whereby poor Christians are chased
with such seas of sorrows out of the world.

Thirdly, the cruelty of these idolatrous Papists bewrays it self to be most
inhumane, in that it spares nor, respects not, nor pittieth any degree,
order, sex, age, or condition of men, whom they take to be their enemies; but
as rough Ismaels, their hands are against every man, that is, every sort of
men. Duke Medina professes, that his sword knows no difference between
Heretics and Catholics: What no? will you not know your own? no not
Catholics? We read in the history of the Germane Martyrs, Acts and Mon. page
814.
how Alphonsus Diazius came from Rome to Neoberge, to kill his own brother
John Diazius, because he was a Protestant: which most barbarous fact he with
another cutthroat so cruelly performed, as has scarce been heard of since
Cain killed his brother Abel for Religion. With what despightfull cruelty have
the poor Protestants been compelled to carry Faggots, to burn their
faithful and painful Pastors? as two women of S. Germain^ were forced to do
by Iacomell the Inquisitor, and other his Monks. Page 874.
How unnaturally have they forced (by their adiuration) the Protestants to
detect and bring into the danger of their lives, their parents, their children,
their brethren and sisters, yea their dear wives and companions who have laid
in their own bosoms? Page 751.
All which in that one examination of Robert Bartlet, plainly appears.

I will add hereunto that, to which no parts of unnatural cruelty can be
added: that they have compelled the children to set fire to the burning of
their own fathers, against all laws of God and nature it self; as appears
in the example of William Tilesworth, to the burning of whom his own daughter
Ioane Clerk was forced to set fire: as also of John Scriuener, Page 710.
whose own children were forced to set fire to their natural father. Page 766.
And, as if this were but a small thing, yet Popish cruelty can afford us
examples without example among the most savage heathens and barbarism it
self: This one I cannot omit, testified by Thuanus, and out of his History
transcribed by D. Bulkley in his addition to the book of Martyrs: that in the
Town of Nonne a certain woman being drawn out of a privy place, where she
was fled from the rage of Popish Soldiers, was in the sight of her husband
shamefully defiled, and then commanded to draw a sword, A woman forced to kill
her husband by Papists. Acts and Mon. page 1951.
was forced by others who ordered her hand, to give her husband a deadly wound,
whereof he died. Oh unnatural tyrants of mankind, in whom natural affection
is so dried up, as not one drop of it must be retained in those who are knit in
the straytest bonds, but, whom God and nature have made one, even these by
Popish cruelty must be the executioners one of another.

Our own vipers, who like so many Nero's wrought hard night and day in the
bowels of the earth, to eat out the bowels of their own mother country,
spared neither King, nor Queen, nor Prince, nor Nobles, nor Senate, nor
Gentry, nor young nor old, no not their own friends and favorites, whom they
would have sent to heaven with one iumpe for the love they bore them.

No plea sufficient against the cruelty of Romanists.
Add hereunto, that in the madness of their rage and fury they chased away
all pity and respect of seely persons, who in respect either of their
impotencie of mind, or tender age, might by all laws of nature and nations
have laid claim to mercy, if the Ocean of Heathenish (I mean, Popish) cruelty
had not broken all banks and bounds. To clear this point, we might be large
to set out the unnaturalness of their cruelty against the living and dead,
which could not hurt them any way. Most lamentable was that spectacle of the
child which sprung out of the womb of a woman burnt at Garnsey, which being
saved out of the fire was by the bloody executioners cast in again, Acts and
Mon. page 1864. Fel^yes child. Dauies Boy under 12. years condemned for the
6. articles, p. 1879.
because it was a young heretic, and so baptized in the mothers flames and it
own blood. What hurt could that Boy of eight years old do unto them or
their religion, which was scourged to death in Bonners house for religion? What
madness was it to apprehend a mad man, as Collins, who seeing the Priest
holding his host over his head, and showing it to the people, held up a little
dog by the legs over his head; for which he was taken, and immediately
condemned to be burned with his dog as Heretics: A woeful mean to bring a
mad man into his wits. With how little reason could they demand a reason of one
Cowbridge a mad man of his faith, and make the words of a mad man without
understanding to be heresy, for which he was burned at Oxford? But ala^! Page
1035.
where fury and rage has made men mad, no excuse will serve to move to p^tie.

How unnatural is that wrath that sticks not neither to bury the quick, as
Marion at Burges was condemned to be buried alive; nor to vnbury, Page 816.
and violate the graves of the dead? In our own Country, and days of our
fathers, how M. Bucer and Phagius were cited out of their graves to appear, or
any that would for them, and that at Cambridge, four years after their
burial, is manifest: which when the seely ashes could not do, they were dug
out and burned on the market-hill. How Wickliffe was condemned after his death,
Page 1780.
and his bones burnt 41. years after his burial, appears in the History of
Master Fox. Richard Hun, who was first apparently hanged and murdered in prison
by their wicked hands, Page 739.
was burnt also after his death. Peter Martyrs wife the Divinity Reader at
Oxford, Page 1785.
was two years after her death dug out of her grave. John Glouer was not
only excommunicate, Page 1556.
but struck with the great sentence of Maranatha, after his death. John Tooly
was cited by Bonner after he was dead and buried, to appear before him by such
a day, and the time of citation limited being expired, and he not appearing, he
was excommunicate, and strait charge given, that no man should eat or drink
with him, or if any met him he should not bid him God-speede, and if he came
to Church in divine service he must be thrust out ^ After this excommunication
he was condemned and committed to the secular power to be burnt for an
Heretic, and so by the Sheriffs the poor dead man was the second time
executed.

Now out of all this I conclude, that the spirit of N^buchadnezz^r is quickened
or revived in these Romanists, and, that they are of the number of those whose
mercies are cruel. Prou. 12.10. Gal. 5.22. Math. 11.29.
Certainly they are not led by the Spirit of God: for the fruits of the Spirit
are meekness, gentleness, peace; neither by the spirit of Christ; for he was
meek and lowly of spirit. He and his Apostles put none to death. Object. You
put Catholics to death, and not for any thing but for maintaining the ancient
religion of their fathers. Answer. This is a cunning wile of Satan, to put this
imputation from his dear Antichrist upon others: for it cannot be showed, that
ever any Romanist suffered death amongst us for his religion, but for
rebellion, and denying his allegiance: there being no law in England to put a
Papist to death for his conscience. Yet yield that which can never be granted,
(without betraying our innocence:) and compare which of our religions be more
unmerciful, it must needs fall upon their pate: for M. Fox in the five years
of Queen Mary has reckoned up toward three hundred, and so the truth is, as
eyewitnesses will testify: whereas a Writer of theirs has raked up in fifty
years under two hundred, namely 193. Compare the odds.

I hasten to things that remain; wherein I will be more brief.

Note here how far the Lord suffers the wicked to bring their purposes, Man's
extremity, Gods opportunity.
even to the point of execution: for, here was the rage of the King unplacable,
till the furnace was prepared, and his servants put in, whom the Lord would not
deliver till they were in the furnace; and, not in some corner of it, where the
fire came not, but in the midst of the flames. This the Lord does, 1. In
respect of the wicked, to glorify himself through them, both in his long
patience toward them, forbearing them till there be no remedy, as also in his
justice, when they make all cock-sure, and glory in their ungodly purposes,
then to confound them, and dissipate their counsels, recompencing his leaden
feet with brazen hands, 2. In respect of the godly, either to try their
patience, and faith, and love of himself, or else to declare his mighty power
in their delivery, when all other means are hopeless.

This may stir us up to the greater thankfulness for the great mercy of
this present day: Use 1.
for the same was the Lords dealing in that ungodly and devilish plot, as here
for the three children: It was brought even to the birth, as the Scripture
speaks. Oftentimes the wicked conceive wickedness, and travel to bring forth
iniquity: and here the mischief had been conceived the full months, and
they (no doubt) gloried in their hopeful birth: but yet our watchful and
gracious God caused their Sun to fall at noonday, and stretched out his
own right hand to save, when all means failed; that all the glory and praise
of it might return to himself.

Let us learn hereby ever to wait for the Lords deliverance, though he seem
to delay: Use 2.
if it be not sudden, yet it shall be seasonable; how glorious will it be, if
it be in the very flames, even the night before the danger, as was Peter's
deliverance, Act. 12. and ours also the very night before the intended
execution?

Note further, how the providence of God guides all events, Man purposes, God
disposes.
and ouer-rules all designements of all his creatures. Nebuchadnezzar purposed
to burn the bodies of the Saints: but the Lord disposed, that the wicked
should be burnt in their stead. He cannot burn whom he will: He cannot save
whom he would. He may command the furnace to be made, and to be made seven
times hotter than ordinary; yet can he not command it to burn whom he would,
he cannot forbid it to consume whom he would not. This ouer-ruling power of God
makes fire and water, which (we say) have no pity, more merciful and
pitiful then tyrants and wicked men: as flames of fire here more favorable
than Nebuchadnezzar, as the sea it self more calm than Pharaoh. Nay more,
this providence makes the ungodly meditate a vain thing, Psalm. 2*1.2.
especially in banding themselves against the Church. Nay more yet, their
counsels are not only turned unto folly, the Lord disappointing them, but even
to a quite contrary end, for a mischief to themselves, as here, the same fire
that they kindle against the children of God, lickes up themselves; the same
destruction that Pharaoh intended against Israel, overthrew only himself and
all his host. Hence David observing this truth, is bold to say, that the
wicked digges a pit for others, Psalm. 7.15.
but falls into it himself: he lays snares for others, but himself is
taken; he whetteth his sword against the innocent, but it shall pierce his own
heart. The wicked devise of Haman against the Jews, was turned upon his own
head; Hest. 9.25.
both he and his were hanged on the Gallows which he had set up for Mordecay.
And the enemies of Daniel are cast into the same den that they prepared for him.

The self same thing we see experience of in the Popes and Percies barbarous
devise against the Church: they could make their furnace, but could not kindle
the fire: nay some of the actors were marked with their powder, but none
against whom it was laid: though they carried it a long time in their
resolutions and plots, yet did not they meditate a vain thing? yea did not the
Artizans of death perish in their own Art? yes most justly. And so of D.
Stories iron Cage, which was turned into an hurdle and halter against himself.

Let us all therefore (to the praise of God) acknowledge, Use.
both what a bootlesse thing and dangerous it is to be an instrument of malice
against the Church. The Pope and holy league (or rather, impure faction) have a
long time leagued themselves against the Churches reformed: but has not the
Lord still dissolved their most furious practices, and made the end shameful
unto themselves? Have they not lost more by their cruel Inquisition at home,
then they have gotten? He that has knowledge of the state of the Low
Countries, shall easily see it had been good for them never to have known it.
Have not the same persons by horrible stratagems and blood-sheds sought utterly
to waste the Church? Sanguis Martyrum* semen ecclesi^e.
but is not the blood of Martyrs the seed of the Church? have not we reaped
the holy doctrine of Christ, Foecundi sunt Martyrum ci^eres.
which was sown in the blood and ashes of our Fathers? Was not that most
hellish massacre in France a means utterly to have abolisht the mention of
religion for ever? but have we not great hope, that the Lord will give them to
reap in joy for such sorrowful sowing? and in sight, France was never so
furnished with Protestants as at this day. Against our own Country did not they
brag and bear themselves upon their Invincible Navy of 88. to destroy young
and old, Religion and Justice on a day? Yet what was the end but this, the
Lord brake their ships, and so weakened their strength, as they have halted
ever since, never able to gather such forces together again? And of what
attempt almost ever so wicked could they blush at, save this most execrable
devise, Hest. 9.26.
for which these days of Purim are instituted as a memorial? for indeed, as
never any unfinished was so near the accomplishment, so never any did cast
more just reproach upon them, both for the accursed mischief and carriage of
it, as also for the sudden shame and confusion wherewith the actors were
clothed.

And, as it is bootlesse, so is it a dangerous thing to be an instrument
against any good man, Have nothing to do^ against that just man.
come with what humane authority he can come. These servants of
Nebuchadnezzar might think they had warrant enough for their fact, by the
Kings commandment; but yet the fire licked them in suddenly and
irrecouerably. The Prophet Zachary calls the Church (and so the members of it,)
an heaui stone: never man lifted at it, but was torn in pieces. The th^eatning
is passed, Zach. 12.3.
they shall be covered with shame which war with Sion. A woeful thing it is
for any man to hatch mischief against the Church: he carries his own coals,
and a sentence of condemnation with him, although he go in with Haman to the
Kings banquet. See Esa. 33.1. and 41.14.15. and Obad. 18.

So much for the enemies: Now in the persons delivered, the Text affords
three notable points, 1. The manner, it was miraculous: 2. The means, a Son
of God walking with them: 3. The effect, namely the acknowledgement of the true
God by Nebuchadnezzar and all his Nobles. Of all these very briefly.

I. For the manner: they were cast in bound, and the fire only loosed their
bonds, consumed them, and set their bodies free, yea their garments did not so
much as savor or smell of the fire. Gods children, and the children of the
Church, Gods people, g^yners by fiery trials.
by fiery trials get more liberty, and walk more enlarged; they have their
chains of sin consumed, and so walk more gloriously in persecutions than
ever before, and themselves like gold come out more purified. 1. Pet. 1.7.
Never were these three more glorious than in the flames.

We must learn by the Papists furnace to take good, as we have taken no harm:
Use.
and labor, that our bonds of sin may be more and more loosed, and our
selves walk at more liberty in the ways of Gods commandments. Thus wise men
take more benefit of foes than of friends.

II. For the means of their deliverance. Some ascribe it to virginity, as
Damascene; some to fasting, as Basil: but the word of God ascribes it to
faith in the Son of God; Heb. 11.34. By faith they quenched the violence of
the fire. And so in this place: Nebuchadnezzar saw a fourth like the Son of
God; speaking indeed like an Heathen, whose Gods were begotten one of another:
not understanding the Son of the eternal Father, but an Angel, verse. 18.
Yet hence we may note many good things, as

First, that the Lord Jesus the Son of God, and the protection of his people,
by whose only power a true miracle can be wrought, then affords his most
gracious presence, when his members are in extremest dangers: as the head most
bestirres it self in the exigence of the least member. He took not the
quality of fire from this fire, (which did burn wood, and fuel, and the
enemies bodies, and the bolts of Daniels fellows:) but only restrained and
repressed it from these subjects. And hence it is, that the Martyrs never find
such a cheerful presence of Gods Spirit with them, as in the midst of flames:
whose consolations swallow up all their fears, and all the horror of those
flames. Of this truth if our selves had not had experience in their hellish
conspiracy, we had not been here at this time.

Secondly, let us ascribe that salvation unto the Son of God, who walked with
us in that Furnace. The wicked tyrant could epsy a fourth like the Son of
God in the furnace: much more let us, and acknowledge, that it was no
foresight, wisdom, merit, or humane means whereby we were preserved, but
only the Son of God, who by themselves revealed it. And for time to come let
us hide our selves under his wing, which if we do, fire shall cease to burn,
and water to drown, rather than we shall perish.

Thirdly, as this tyrant by this sight of this Son of God in the furnace did
acknowledge, that he neither ought to have commanded such an unjust command,
nor his Ministers obayed it; so we wish the Romish N^buchadnezzar would at
length come (by such events as have befall ^n him) to acknowledge the Son of
God with us, protecting and defending his own religion among us: and that the
tyrant would but come to ask that Jewish question, Who is this whom the winds
and seas obey, as in 88. and what is that fourth, Math. 8 ^7.
who would not suffer the fire to burn those, for whom it was prepared, as in
1605? and conclude at last, that it is hard to kick against such pricks. Acts
9.5.


III. For the effect or event of all: It is the acknowledgement and praise of
the true God, even among his enemies: much more should this be among us, who
profess our selves friends, and had the sweet of the mercy. Note David's
practice on the like occasion, Psalm. 7.16.17. His mischief shall return upon
his own head, and his cruelty, shall fall upon his own pate: I will praise
the Lord according to his righteousness, and will sing praise to the name of
the Lord m^st high. Let us also praise the justice of God in defending the
good, and revenging the wicked: As he hides not his righteousness, but draws
it out for our safety, so let us not hide his salvation, but draw it out for
his glory: Let fathers tell their children, and so let it be in everlasting
memory, that the Lords grace and the Papists wickedness may never be put out.
And let us not only speak of it as a wicked intent, and so force one another
to malice them, but drive our selves forward to such duties, of faith, love,
obedience, as beseem those who look for such salvation. Psalm. 33.1.
Thus it becomes the just to be thankful. To this blessed Son of God, who
is always present with his Church in the hottest flames, together with the
Father of mercies, and Spirit of all consolation, be all honor and glory, now
and evermore. Amen. Amen.

The end of the first Sermon.
ROMISH EDOM.
Amos 1.11, 12. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Edom, and for
four, I will not turn to it, because he did pursue his brother with the
sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger spoiled him evermore, and his
wrath watched him always.

Therefore will I send a fire upon Teman, and it shall devour the palaces of
Bozrah.


IN these verses is contained the fourth example of Gods severe judgment
against the neighbor nations of his people Israel: namely upon the Edomites,
which dwelt in Arabia, and confined upon the South coast of Judea. Wherein we
will observe three general points.

1 A threatening: For three transgressions of Edom, Division of the text.
and for four, I will not turn to it.

2 The equity of it: Because he pursued his brother, etc.

3. The execution of judgment, verse. 12. Therefore will I send a fire, etc.

I. First of the threatening: Exposition.
For three transgressions of Edom, and for four:] Here is a certain number
put for an uncertain: and it may be considered either jointly, and so three
and four make seven, Numerus septenarius iuxta aliquos est numerus ^^rf^ctus.
and then by this number is understood, first, the multitude and magnitude of
their wickednesses, being in ripeness and perfection: secondly, the greatness
and heaviness of their punishment, as Leuit. 26.21. I will punish you seven
times more for your sins. Or severally: and then this is the sense: If after
once or twice their provoking of me they had returned, I was ready to return
and give them pardon: but now the fourth time provoking me, that is, going on
in sin still, and adding obstinacy and impenitencie to their sin, I will
bear them no longer.

Here note by the way, that the Lord is not suddenly moved to punish even his
enemies. He speaks to a man (says Job) twice and thrice. Job. 33.14.
But after men a long time have persisted with obstinacy in diverse and
grievous sins, then at length he reckons for many together: thereby
manifesting both his patience in forbearing, and his justice in smiting.

I will not turn to it.] First, I will not turn my self any more in my love,
nor by my Spirit, unto them: I will not offer my self in patience to expect
them any more. Secondly, I will not turn them to my self by repentance, but
leave them to themselves, to enjoy their sins so many and so enormious, till
my swift and severe judgment overtake them.

Note here, that of all judgments the most severe is to be left and forsaken
of God; when he is so far provoked as he will not return. This one threat (I
will not turn to it) is an epitome of all misery.

II. Now of the equity. These Idumeans were stubbornly wicked, and heaped up
sin upon sin. But especially they are here threatened because of their
cruelty and fierceness against the Church of God, set down in four
particulars: 1. In respect of the persons: He pursued his brother. Esau was the
natural brother to Jacob, yea a twinne of the same womb at the same time; so
as the Edomites and Israelites were cousin-germans, of two brethren, Esau and
Jacob: yet as Esau hated his brother extremely, with deadly hatred plotting his
death, ever after he got the blessing from him: so was this imbred hatred
derived into his posterity against the posterity of Jacob, forgetting they
were brethren, and of brethren. Therefore it is said, he cast off all pity,
and put off all humanity, natural affection and all bowels were laid aside:
so is the word, violating even the law of nature. N^. ham^n.
2. In respect of the extent of his wrath: it turned to fierceness and
cruelty, no spark of compassion left; called fury and rage, Psalm. 137.3.
while they cried, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground. 3. In
respect of the effects: which in the text are two: first, sword and slaughter:
secondly, spoil and robbery: They spared neither life, nor goods, but as
thieves both slew and rifled them. 4. In respect of the time: His anger was
evermore, and his wrath always; as a cruel beast having taken his prey will
never let it go: so Edom never let Israel go free, no time wasted his wrath,
which continued, perpetual, and irreconciliable. Object. There was often truce
and peace between them. Answ. No: in war he spoiled, in peace he watched
him, says the text. Gal. 4.29.
Thus he that is after the flesh persecutes him that is after the spirit with
an endless hatred; the wicked, the elect; the Edomites, the Israelites.

III. The third general is the execution of judgment: Therefore I will send a
fire] God will send. God reuengeth his. Fire in Scripture is usually put for a
most grievous plague, by sword, or famine, or pestilence. (...).
Or we may take it in the letter, fire, that is, extreme slaughter and
desolation, eating up the country as fire does stubble. For fire is a name of
efficacy as well as of nature: as Number. 21.28. A fire is gone out of Hesbon,
and a flame out of Sihon, that is, the enemy wasting the fields and country,
as an outrageous fire. Upon Teman] The Metropolis of Idumea, so called of Teman
the son of Eliph^s, the son of Esau, Genesis 36. Palaces of Bozrah.] A city
in the borders between Moab and Idumea: sometime ascribed to one people, and
sometime to the other, for their vicinitie. This notes the extent of the
judgment, which shall reach to the uttermost border of Edom, no part shall
escape. This judgment is at large described, Obad. 10.11. Thy strong men, O
Teman, shall be afraid, because every one of mount Esau shall be cut off by
slaughter: for thy cruelty against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee,
and thou shall be cut off for ever.

So much for the sense of the words: Now to the application.

Edom is a special type of the kingdom of Antichrist, above all other the
enemies here threatened, Antichrist resembled by Edom.
who were all more open, less hurtful and hateful. The Hebrews think, that
the Romans came of the Idumeans: how true that is, I will not dispute: Sure I
am, if they be not of the natural descent, they are of the spiritual (or
unnatural) and so like as by the one we may see the express picture of the
other: that look as it is said in Genesis 36.8. This Esau is Edom, so we may as
truly say, This Romish and Antichristian Esau is Edom. The similitude between
them we will consider, 1. In their persons: 2. In their sins: 3. In their
judgment.

First, for their persons they are as like as like may be; in four respects:
Antichrist and Edom like in their persons, four ways.
1. Esau strove with Jacob in the womb: whereof when Rebecca asked the Lords
counsel, the answer was, Two manner of people shall be divided out of thy
Noting a continual fight in the womb of the Church. Genesis 25.23.
No marvel, if the Esau of Rome strive now against the Church, seeing even in
the womb, before he was borne into the light, he strove to hinder the birth
of the Church in the days of the Apostles: for Antichrist works already, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. although the Roman Empire held him then by the heel, and hindered
his birth: but not long after he was borne into the world, and the verse. 8. 2.
Esau was red, and therefore called Edom, betokening his bloody dis^osition: And
the Romish Edom is figured by a woman in skarlet, and a purple whore, whose
garments are died in the blood of the Saints; wherewith she also her self is
drunken, (...). 17.6. 3. Esau was rough, hairie as a beast; which betokened
Verse 30. Lagnat.
feed me (says he) or let me swallow at once thy pottage: so the word
signifies: as Camels are fed by casting gobbets into their mouths. The Romish
Edom and kingdom of Antichrist is described (Revel. 13.1.) by an hideous and
monstrous beast, which was like a Leopard, most cruel, untamed, and most
hurtful to mankind, which (as Basil reports) will most furiously tear in
pieces men, yea a paper that has but the image of a man. This beast of Rome is
likest unto the devil, who prosecutes with most deadly hatred the image of God
in man. The feet of this beast are like Bears feet, for roughness, and
cruelty, and tearing: and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion, for ravening and
devouring of Christian men: which the lamentation of the whole Christian world
can better express than my words, or all Rhetoric in the world. This was
prophesied of Esau in his fathers blessing, Genesis 27.40. Thou shall live by the
sword: so did the Idumeans, a savage and cruel people. So do the Romish
Idumeans only support themselves by fire and sword, the surest arguments when
all other means fail. Intimated also by the ten horns. 4. Esau was a
cauiller at Jacobs name, and a liar, in that he said he had taken away the
blessing and birthright, both worship the God of our fathers, Acts 24.14.
heresy. He has passed away his right to the blessing, by being the head of
Apostasy, and complains that we challenge it. He is false and perfidious, no
way to be held to any promise, by oaths or vows, but he has ever a secret
trick or reservation, N^n obstante.
to play fast or loose at his pleasure. Hence the beast is said to have seven
h^ads, that is, fullness of fraud and subtlety, to ouer-reach and abuse the
Church of Christ: and, to recover his power again, will plot the death of so
many Kings and Kingdoms as stand in his way.

Thus are they like in respect of their persons.

^^tichrist and Edom like in their sins.
Secondly, they are as like in respect of their sins: that the Lord may say,
For three transgressions of the Romish Edom* and for four, I will never
return to it in mercy, 1. Profaneness.
but will send a fire and utter desolation. One transgression is profaneness,
as Esau preferring the present profits and pleasures of this world, yea their
belly before true religion: Quid non regina pecuma donat?
and now all sins are set to sale; any thing lawful for money; they can
pardon for money that which God will never pardon, yea and sins before they
be committed. 2. Idolatry.
Another transgression of Romish Edom is idolatry, as base idolatry as ever
was in Edoms posterity; which has quite cut them off from God, who for their
spiritual whoredom will never return to them any more. 3. Merits.
A third transgression, for which God will never return to it, is vain
confidence in their own merits, which cuts them from Christ, and quite casts
them out of Gods favor: 4. Cruelty.
Gal. 5.4. The fourth, and last transgression is deadly and endless cruelty
against the people of God, and the Church of Christ: as the Lord would not
return to Edom especially for his extreme cruelty against his brother, in
word and deed, never dated, by sword and spoil evermore.

Now that this is a sin in these Romish Edomites, for which God will never
return unto them, let us see in our own glass, and compare Edoms cruelty in
the text with our own Champions of Antichrist, and Dukes of the Romish Edom:
and we shall see the face, favor, affection of the one in the other: nay we
shall see old Edom red, but our late Edomites in skarlet, of a far deeper dye
in blood than they.

They are like one another in that: Cruelty of our Edomites and old Edomites
compared.
1. Old Edom pursued his brother, to whom all natural bonds did bind him, and
to whom he owed homage: New Edom pursued nearer brethren than they. Judea was
but a neighbor to Idumea (near neighbors indeed, but forty subdued by
David, 1. Chron. 18.13. yet against all laws of God, na^u^e, and nations they
cry, Down with it, etc. 2. Edoms chief spite was not against any ignoble
place, or village, but against Jerusalem the city of for pleasure a paradise,
for spatiousnesse six miles about, Josephus.
for multitude of people fifteen hundred thousand inhabitants, for beauty the
eye of the world. Add hereunto the Temple, the Sanctuary, Aarons Rod, Vrim,
sacrifices, praises and worship, whereby it became Gods delight. Yet old Edom
cries, Down with it, down with it even to the ground. The same was the voice
and practice of our late Edomites, against our Jerusalem the eye of the world,
against our Temple, Church, State, and Land; they struck at the heart, and
sought to let out the lifeblood. 3. Old Edom, when strangers cast lots upon
Jerusalem, was as one of them, Obad. 11. that is, when Babel made sure of Thou
should not have stood in the cross ways to cut off them that should
escape. Obad. 14.
Our late Edomites, when the Spaniards or any enemy should cast lots upon
England, were as they: and, that nothing but blood would serve them, appeared
not only in the bloody terrible blow, but also by standing in the cross ways,
ready prepared to the slaughter when the blow should be given. 4. Old Edom
spared none, he showed no pity to but was altogether without natural
affection: And these unnatural Edomites were pitilesse, not only to such as
they made their enemies, but even to their friends, allies, kindred, both in
the flesh and in their faith. For one asking the question what should become of
the Catholics in the House, etc. Answer was made, they would send them all to
heaven in a fiery chariot, and so provide for their ease.

Young Edomites with us far surpass the old in cruelty: five arguments.
But will you see wherein old Edom was far inferior in cruelty to the late
Edomites? All Arts (they say) are grown to perfection of late days: and so is
the art of Iesuitical rebellion and treason. These Jesuits or Esauites go
beyond all their predecessors in their art. As for example. Spanish
Inquisition, the Massacre in France, the butcherie of the Merindolians, all by
Papists. But this was so matchless a cruelty, as no name can fit it: a chaos
of confusion, a mass of evil, The powder plot a villainy without name.
a sink, a root of mischief, a contempt of all laws, divine and humane; it
was every thing that has any wickedness in it, perfidiousnes, robbery,
sacrilege, homicide, parricide, fratricide, regicide, idolatry, paganism;
the whole train of iniquity, and diuellishnes it self in the Abstract; a
Catholic cruelty, a crying, a roaring, yea a thundering sin of fire and
brimstone, as his Majesty calls it, in his speech, 1605. 2. Edoms indeed was
an Catesby, Faux, Percy, and their fellows were but petty traitors, nimble and
active as mischief uses to be; but the Priests and Jesuits were the great
wheels, which not seeming to move, moved them. But what should move these?
Answ. That ponderous and weighty plummet and Lead, the Popes Breue. The Popes
leadden Bull sets all mischief on work.
For the primus m^tor of all these treasons is the Pope and Popery it self.
Faux in his confession said it was merely and only for religion, and for his
conscience sake, denying the King to be his Sovereign, as being an heretic:
and, for relief of the Catholic cause: and, he had heard Mass and received
the Sacrament, for acting the matter and for secrecy. 3. Edom exercised his
cruelty by open Edom joined with Babylonians, men whose designs might have
been prevented: Late Edom joined himself with furies and hellish ghosts in
the caves of darkness, digging a new hell of sulphurious fire, with wide mouth
to open it self, and devour three Kingdoms at once. Old Edom cried of
Jerusalem, Down with it, down with to the ground: young Edom would raise it
from under ground. 4. Old Edom, although they showed no pity to their
brethren, yet they spared Zedekiah the King, and the Prophet Jeremiah, and many
Nobles lives whom they carried into Babel. Our young Edomites spared neither
King, who had never drawn blood of them for their religion, nor Queen, nor
Prince, nor Nobles, nor Counsel, nor Judges, nor Bishops, nor Gentry, nor
young, nor old, no not their own; the stroke of the blow had been like the
blow of Duke Medina his sword, of which he professed, his sword knew no
difference between Catholics and heretics. 5. Old Edom raised but the
material walls of the City and Temple: these dig to blow up the foundation
not only of stately Palaces, but of all Churches, and of the whole
Commonwealth: especially that foundation laid in Syon, of Gods pure worship:
And, rather than this true religion shall stand on the foundation, his Majesty
defending it, his Nobles guarding it, his Laws strengthening it, the
Ministry preaching it, and his Subjects professing it, all shall by one
unexpected and terrible blow be utterly and pittilesly destroyed: and, when
they had done this, they would like honest men lay it all on the Pu^itanes,
whose throats must be all cut for it.

Use. 1 That religion good, which Antichrist persecutes.
This speaks for our religion, that certainly it is Christ's, seeing Antichrist
and his limbs do so rage against it. It was Gods Israel, his son, his Lot,
his hallowed thing, which Edom was so cruel against. Therefore we say of
Romish Edom as Tertullian said of Nero, That religion must needs be good which
Nero so persecuteth, which the Pope so persecuteth.

Use 2. Bloody religion, wicked religion.
To detect and detest so wicked and bloody a religion, set up by subtilty, held
up by violence and cruelty: for it is not from the bad constitution of their
persons, but of their doctrine, and refined religion by the fiery wits of late
Jesuits and Priests; as I can clear in an hundred several positions of
theirs, if there were any doubt. Christ would not have his Disciples call for
^i^e from heaven against that City which received him not, Luke 9.54.55.
as Elias did: Much less may they bring a spark from hell, to blow up three
Kingdoms at once.

Use 3.
To bless our God for delivering us from that intended cruelty, and never
forget his wonderful mercy. Oh happy 5. of November, wherein our Sun should
have been turned into blood; wherein our name should have been ch^nged into
Ichabod; wherein had been set up again the abomination of desolation. 1.
Sam. 4.21.
A day when the great City should have been a Beacon to all the land, and all
the (...) to the whole world. A day which should have burnt (...) an Oven, Mal.
4.1. What had a Bonfire of 200. in one day been to this? The Massacre of
France, in which thirty thousand were murdered in one month, had been but a
play unto it. Farnesius might now have had his mind fulfilled, and have ridden
his horse to the saddle in English blood. But God for his own Name sake turned
it into an honorable and glorious day, a day of joy and gladness to all
true-hearted Englishmen.

When Esau came with 400. men toward his brother Jacob, minding no doubt to
perform his long-intended malice, God so ordered the matter, that he was not
able to give him an ill word. Why? what was the reason? Jacob had all night
before wrasted with the Angel, and prevailed, and got a blessing from him,
which was, Thou have prevailed with God, thou shall also prevail with men.
Genesis 32.28.
The cause why Romish Esau being appointed and all prepared, could not hurt an
hair of our heads, was, that some wrastled with God by prayer, and left him
not till he had given us the blessed deliverance. The Catholics were devout
and earnest to set it forward, so many as they durst trust, and the rest
implicit* not knowing their meaning: But their prayers are like their
religion, and their religion like that of the devout women, who raised
Tragedies against Paul. Well, when Iezabell proclaims a Fast, Acts 13.50.
let Naboth look to his Vineyard. When Catholics are devout, and busy at
their Beads, let us look to our selves; We need not fear those weapons, but
other that are a preparing. It is the wisdom of a prudent Captain that
fears an undermining, to undermine and prevent the mischief by a cross
train: and so was famous Vi^nna preserved against the Turks. If Papists lay
secret undermining trains, to overthrow us, prayer and repentance will be a
cross train, that undermines the underminers. If we can prevail with God, we
shall be sure to prevail with men.

Thus far of Edoms sin: Now of Edoms punishment, and the similitude of it
with our Edomites.

Edoms punishment is set down in the Text, 1. By the certainty, Antichrist and
Edom like in their punishment.
2. By the severity of it: It is certain; For, 1. God will do it, 2. He will
not return. And it is severe; 1. He will send a fire, 2. A devouring fire,
irresistable, 3. Upon Teman, the Metropolis or mother City, 4. On the Palaces
of Bozrah: a fire wasting the whole land.

In all these we have a lively pourtrayture of Gods just judgment upon the
Roman Edomites, which shall not be less certain than severe.

1. For certainty.
The certainty of the destruction of the Kingdom of Antichrist is manifest:

I. In that the Lord will do it: for he has spoken it, Revel. 17.17. The
words of God must be fulfilled concerning the destruction of Babylon. Now by
Babylon in that Chapter and Prophecy, is not to be understood the Babel of
Chaldea, neither do the threats befit that Babel, which was fallen and
destroyed before: but the mystical Babel of Rome, which succeeds and
exceeds that in cruelty. This I will not stand to prove, because we have it
plainly confessed both by Bellarmine and Ribera, the learned of the Romish
Church, that Rome present, is mystical Babel. John (says Bellarmine) every
where in the Apocalypse calls Rome Babylon; because (says he) only Rome in
John's time had the rule over the Kings of the earth, and secondly, was the
City set on seven hills, which agrees to no other City. What therefore I am
to speak of Babylon in the Revelation, I shall aptly and properly speak of
Rome, by the learned of the Papists own confession. And the reason, why the
Spirit of God by allusion does call it Babylon, Rome termed Babylon, why?
is by way of similitude; Because as that Eastern and Chaldean Babylon did a
long time oppress the Church of the Jews, so this Western and Italian Babylon
has kept, under most horrible oppression and thraldom the Church of the
Christians.

This Babylon must be so certainly destroyed as if it were done already:
Revel. 14.8. It is fallen, it is fallen, says the Angel. True indeed, it is
already accomplished in part: it is fallen, 1. In the purity of doctrine, 2. In
the estimation which once it had. 3. In authority: but this prophecy notes the
certainety of her fall by an outward overthrow. And this Babylon must be
certainly destroyed, because God the great Judge of the world has passed
sentence against her, which only waits the execution; Revel. 18.20. Rejoice ye
heavens over her, for God has given your judgment on her. Again, if any
means can bring her destruction, she shall be destroyed: If death, sorrow,
famine or fire can destroy her, these shall come on one day; and if all these
were unable, the strength of God is able to pull her down, Revel. 18.8. for
strong is the Lord, which will condemn her: Now if God set against a man who
can rescue him? Job. 33.13.14.

II. The judgment is certain, because, as the Lord would not return to Edom,
so neither will he return to Romish Edom: for, 1. He is too far provoked: the
sentence is past and therefore irreuokable. 2. This leopard, as she is called,
Revel. 13.2. cannot change her spots. 3. Edoms tears found no repentance, Heb.
12.16.17. no more shall these, nor by any means will God call back his anger.

The severity of Gods wrath against the Kingdom of Romish Edom is not
unproportionable to the judgment of the Syrian Idumea. 1. In the kind, a
fire; 2. For severity
by which is signified an utter desolation: 2. A devouring fire, which
signifies the incurablenesse of her estate, she shall never rise from under the
judgment. 3. The chief subject is Teman, the Metropolis, signifying the utter
ruin of Rome it self: 4. It shall reach to the Palaces of Bozrah, noting the
generality of the judgment through all the Kingdom of Antichrist. Most
probable that Rom^ shall be destroyed with material fire, for five reasons.


First, the destruction of Rome shall be by terrible fire, even in the letter
it is most likely; though some of great note think not so: for, 1. It is said,
Revel. 17.16. the ten horns which thou saw, shall hate the whore, and make
her desolate, and naked, and burn her with fire: and chapter 18.8. she shall
be burnt with fire. By which oracle of the holy Ghost it plainly appears,
that the Christian Princes, which have been in such league with Rome, shall at
length make war against the very city of Rome, take it captive, spoil it,
famish it, and at last burn it with fire. Judah and Thamar, Genesis 38.24. But
Babylon is the mother of whordoms and abominations of the earth, Revel. 17.5.
yea the great whore, with whom the Kings of the earth have committed
fornication, Ashur has a long time been the rod of Gods wrath, by which the
Church has been scourged, and corrected for many ages: and now must be cast
into the fire, broken and burnt. We would have cured Babell, but she would not
be cured therefore she shall never be purged, Ierem. 51.9.
but all her As thou have done, it shall be done to the, Obadi. 15.
thy reward shall return upon thine own head; and of the Roman. Wi^ked
Papists make the furnace seven times hotter than Nebuchadnezzars but here is a
furnace heated by God himself for themselves. They devise an unnatural fire
and furnace under the Parliament, to consume the innocents of three Kingdoms:
but give her double (says the Spirit) to that she has done: first, Revel.
18.6.
ten Kings shall set upon her and burn her with fire, and after this, God
himself shall cast her in to an hellish and supernatural si^e, for all the
cruel and blasing fires which she has kindled in all countries, pitil^sly to
consume the bodies of God^ Saints The preludiu^ here of was seen in our Edomite
Captines; they lay fire and powder for others, but the fired powder flies in
their own face.

Object. Antichrist must be destroyed with the sword of the Spirit, and the
breath of the Lords mouth, not by carnal weapons.

Answ. 2 Thessalonians. 2.^.
The clear shining of the Gospel shall detect the mystery, wherein
Antichrist works, and lay him naked, and discover his frauds, by which he
gulls the world: the truth shall war, and prevail against his heresies. But
this hinders not, Antichrist to be overthrown with the sword temporal as well
as spiritual.
but that the Princes of Europe (seeing the infinite wrongs sustained by him)
shall join to set the seat of Antichrist on fire: considering the Scripture
affirms it so manifestly, as even the Papists themselves subscribe to the
general truth of it: for these be the words of Ribera: Romam non solum ob
pristinam impi^tatem, sed and propter ea quae postremis temporibus commissura
est, magno incendio perflagraturam, adeo perspicuum est and manifestum, vt ne
stultissimus quidem id negare possit. And the text is plain, that the Kings,
Mariners, and Merchants shall stand and see the smoke of her burning, Revel.
18.9.

Object. But this seems impossible: for we see Kings and Princes stick fast
to support her, as Spain, France, and many Kings of Europe.

Answ. God can and will do it, Even by Kings that are or were his friends.
who has horses and chariots of fire to besiege her withal, if means should
fail. But God will do it by them, Revel. 17.17. For he has put into their
hearts, to fulfill his will. And by many means God can effect it: 1. He can
soon convert them from their Antichristian and Papisticall superstitions to
the truth, as sundry of them are already. 2. It may be, that sundry of them
which yet retain Romish idolatry, may for some other causes turn against the
Pope and waste Rome, as for his unjust claims, his horrible pride and
tyranny, his treasonable practices against them, pardons to kill them, etc.
and thus by Charles the 8. and Lewis the 12. Kings of France, was Rome sacked
and spoiled, and the Pope opposed: as also by Charles the 5. his army. And is
this unlikely, when not only the Popes Agents and Priests shall give the
Sacrament and absolution to gunpowder-traytors? but Jesuits teach it lawful,
yea meritorious to kill Christian princes, nay Popes themselves so proclaim
it, as Sixtus Quintus of the villain that murdered Henry the 3. of France.

Object. But then this prophecy may seem to be in part fulfilled.

Overthrow of Rome not partial, but total.
Answ. No, this fire of Edom must be a devouring fire (which is the other part
of the similitude) that must quite consume Teman the Metropolis: so this first
against Rome must be as a forerunner of the fire of hell, it must be
unquenchable, and agreeing with that fire of the Syrian Edom: Obad. 18. A fire
shall be kindled in Edom, and devour them, and there shall be no remnant of
the house of Esau: for the Lord has spoken it. This ruin of Rome shall be
like the ruin of Jericho, which can never be re-edified: and is notably
shadowed in Revel. 18.21. by the casting of a millstone into the sea: noting
both the swiftness and irrecouerablenesse of their estate, no more to be
raised again than a millstone can rise out of the bottom of the sea and float
again. Yea the eternal desolation of Rome is noted by denying such things to
be ever any more in her, which a city cannot be without, viz. A millstone shall
not be heard in her, nor the light of a candle seen, nor any crafts-man, nor
any voice of joy, nor any bridegroom, or marriage, or procreation. A poor
city it is, or none at all, where none of these are.

Object. But the state of Rome is the strongest state in the world,
Magnificence of Rome no whit secureth it.
for wisdom, wealth, strength, and many of our great ones go back to them:
so as you speak unlikely things.

Answ. 1. God will honor himself by eff^cting his will in unexpected and
inconceivable means: He is wise of heart to lay unknown pipes and means for
his purposes. Zach. 4.2.
And herein it shall be like Edom, Obad. 8.9. In that day I will destroy the
wise men out of Edom, and understanding from the mount of Esau, and thy strong
men O Teman shall be afraid: neither is there wisdom or strength that shall
help against the Lord. 2. God by themselves, if others be sla^ke, can hasten
their destruction; as it was with Edom, Obad. 7. The men of thy confederacy,
and they that were at peace with thee, deceived thee. So our late Edomites were
detected by themselves, even by their own confederacy. 3. What if some go to
the^, and give them a little lightning before their death? See we not such
infamy cast upon them all by their daily practices and plots, as all the water
in the sea can never wash away? Yes, we see with our eyes, that they gain not,
but fall, notwithstanding all their supplies of succors.

To comfort the poor Church of God, in that, Use. 1 Comfort for the Church of
God.
when the enemy marches furiously like Iehu, God sets in, and prouides for
his safety. Revel. 10.10. John having before prophesied of many mischiefs to
befall the Church, by Antichrist and the Turks, both conspiring against it, in
this Chapter brings Christ in a vision for the comfort of the Church, thus
described: An Angel, namely of the Covenant, our great Mediator; coming from
heaven, to make himself better known, and nearer to his Church; clothed with
a cloud, not only in our humane nature clouding and vailing his Deity, but
still obscured by the world; with a rainbow on his head, a sign of
reconciliation, an assurance that he will remember his covenant, as Genesis
9.15. and a token, that although storms and tempests be upon the Church, yet
Christ at length will drive them away, and reduce the calm of it, and a fair
season; his face as the Sun, shining as in his transfiguration, to his
Church; his feet as pillars, for strength, of fire, because of his efficacy
and force to overcome all difficulties. He is a constant stander as a pillar,
and fierce, for his Churches good. A sweet meditation against all fiery,
furious, and sulphurious plots of the enemies of the Church. He has the
Rainbow on his head, his feet are pillars of fire, and further, he sets his
foot on the sea and earth, to note the subjection of the sea, and earth, and
all the creatures, and all the world unto him.

Vs^ 2. Terror for the Church of Rome.
The justice of God shall one day magnify it self against that bloody seat,
city, and kingdom of Antichrist: for, 1. He that is the unmerciful
maintainer of all treasons, and supreme head of all heretics, must needs be
fearfully destroyed. 2. He that is concluded to be more merciful than Christ,
because Christ delivered none out of Purgatory; and more powerful than God,
because God makes but creatures, he makes ye Creator, shall dearly buy that
and other such blasphemies. 3. Pride (we say) must have a fall, and, the
higher the pride, the lower the fall. He that has fought against the Kings of
the earth, Revel. 19.16.
yea against Christ the King of Kings, the ten horns shall fight against
him. He that out of his horrible ambition has made mighty Princes hold his
stirrup, lead his horse, become his footmen and footstool, shall one day be
paid for all. He that has taken from them, Imperial Crowns, Purple,
Scepters, Kingdoms, shall by them (ere long, I doubt not) be left desolate and
naked. He that has long ouerborne them with the brag of his primacie, and
set himself above all that is called God, shall by them be made to drink of
the cup of their Supremacy. They that have given the Saints blood to drink,
shall have blood to drink, herein like to old Edom, Obad. 16. Edom drunk upon
mine holy mountain: and the heathen must drink them up, and swallow them, and
they shall be as though they had not been. Pharaoh drowned the Israelites
children, and was drowned himself. The same fire lickt in the enemies, which
they made so hot for the three children of God. Humans gallows caught
himself. Catesby, Rockwood, Grant, deuisers of the powder plot, by their own
powder were almost blown up, yea made unable for their own defense: and the
same day Catesby the first deviser, and P^rcy the chief actor were killed with
one bullet shot with powder. Judge. 17.
As I have done (said great Adoni-bezek) so God has done to me.

From all this it follows, Use 3. All devices of Papists insufficient to
sustain their bloody monarchy.
that all the balm in Gilead cannot heal them: not the ten horns or Kings,
not the seven heads, not his power and bloody war^es, his Spanish Inquisition,
his Massacres, his two traiterous Colleges, his Bulls and Excommunications, his
Council of Trent, his Order of Jesuits; not his blacking of the lives and
practices of his adversaries, not his iugling with Images, his false miracles
and legends, his lies and equivocations, his falsifying of all authority, and
the like, can still uphold his tottering state, down he must for all his props,
he must dye in the midst of his Physicians; we must expect it, pray for it, and
rejoice in it.

Come out of her, my people, come out of her: Use. 4 Separate from them
spiritually and corporally.
for it is a people ordained to destruction: Revel. 18.4. Be not partakers of
her sins, lest ye partake in her plagues. Come out in affection, in action,
and in habitation, both by spiritual and bodily departure. God is careful of
his people: he would not have Lot destroyed with Sodom, nor Israel in Babylon,
Iere. 51.45. nor the Jews in Jerusalem at the destruction thereof: A voice was
heard (says Josephus) to leave the city, which many believed, and sled into
Pella, and they that would not, were al miserably destroyed. Little Mice (they
say) presaging the ruin of an house, do fly out before hand. Let us by
divine instinct be so wise for our own safety: fly communion and company
with Papists. Revel. 18.2.
For Rome is called an habitation of devils: if a man would dwell among devils,
let him dwell among Romanists. And it is no schism, but Gods commandment.
Never hear such whisperings, as speak of a reconciliation of our religions,
for that cannot be. Yet hate not their persons, but their sins; and pray for
the men. It is dangerous to travel among them, much more to intertaine near
and intimate acquaintance with them. Therefore fear to make or meddle with
them: leave them to Gods judgment, which must needs be executed.

The end of the second Sermon.
THE ROMISH FOWLER.
Psalm. 124.7. Our soul is escaped even as a bird out of the snare of the
fowlers: the snare is broken, and we are delivered.


THE matter of this Psalm is gratulatory: the occasion, some great deliverance
of the Church, from some deadly plot, and imminent danger: Or (as some think)
David recounteth and collecteth all those special deliverances, which God had
wrought for Israel, since their coming forth of Egypt, till this time: which
being many and great, he compiles this Psalm, and gives the Lord the glory of
them all.

In the words of my Text are two things considerable: Division of the Text.
1. A danger, the extremity whereof is set down by a similitude. 2. A
deliverance: in it 1. The means: the snare is broken. 2. The end: we are
delivered.



The danger is set out by comparison of a Fowler, who has laid his nets, and
has caught a silly bird within the meashes of it, of which himself and every
man else thinks he has it sure enough. Where the danger is amplified, 1. By
the Authors of it, Fowlers: 2. Their instruments, nets and snares: 3. The
crafty laying of them, so as they have compassed the seely bird within the
snare.

I. The Scriptures compare the enemies of the Church (the seely Dove of Christ)
to Fowlers, Fishers, Hunters: Enemies of the Church compared to Fowlers, in 4.
respects.
1. In respect of their purpose, which is to take and catch that they hunt for:
they intend to kill and destroy ere they return. This was Cains purpose
against Abel, if he Pharaohs against Israel; Nero, Dioclesian, and the other
Emperors against the Primitive Church. 2. The Fowler makes but a sport of
taking his prey: as also the Hunter: So the enemies of the Church feed on Gods
people as on bread, Psalm. 14 4. 3. Fowlers are so cruel, that they spare none,
young nor old, male nor female; all go together they cannot sleep, till they
have done evil; Prou. 4.16.
their sleep departs from them, that is, nothing else troubles them but to be
disappointed. Such great Fowlers of the Church in the old Testament were the
enemies on every side: On the East: Ammonites, Moabites, Chaldeans, Assyrians:
on the West: the Philistims: on the North: the Syrians: on the South:
Egyptians, Arabians, and Idumeans: and the Church of God as a little bird in
the midst of them all. Haman has ten thousand talents for the Kings treasury,
(...) 9.
i^ all the Jews may be utterly rooted out. Such great Fowlers of the Church
in the new Testament have been the vassals of Antichrist, Romish Nimrod a
mighty Hunter of the Lords flock.
and especially that great Nimrod of Rome, who with his Popish Kings, Tyrants,
and persecuting Bishops, has eaten up the poor Saints of Christ in all
Countries; as did their Predecessors the ancient Tyrants, Psalm. 83.4. Come, let
us cut them off from being a nation, and let the name of Israel be no more in
remembrance. Our own book of Martyrs records, that one of our Popish Bishops
was so violent a fowler to furnish his Masters dishes, Bonner, a Bonfire.
that himself in five years space took and roasted 300. seely Martyrs, most
of them in his own walk and dioces. Such were our Fauxes and Fawkners, who
made sure account of such a prey as was never before laid* for, namely for
three whole Kingdoms at once: which would have filled all their nets. For God
and man concurred to punish the iniquity of this time, Great labor and cost
for the powder treason.
said the Letter to L. Mounteagle: for the obtaining whereof they despised all
danger, and all labor is thought little in digging half a year together
through hard foundations; they will bestow any cost whatsoever, of their own
and other men's; Digby promised 1500. pounds, Tressam 2000. Percy all that he
could get of the Earl of Northumberlands rents, besides ten galloping
Horses. And nothing troubled Faux, Four thousand pounds.

Practices of the wicked termed snares, 1. for secrecy, 2. suddenness.


but that he was disappointed.

II. The Scripture both here and else where compares their means and
instruments, to snares, nets, and ginnes, which are set in the ways of Gods
Saints to take them And that for two causes.

1. It notes the secrecy of the danger, which makes it far more dangerous
and inevitable: for nets and snares use to be laid in secret, and out of sight.
In vain were the net laid before the eyes of all that has wings, Prou. 1.17.
As therefore the fowlers or fishers go about their matters craftily and
subtly, they will stand privily behind a tree, they dissemble all, they will
lay meat as though they intended to feed the seely bird, which they mean to
feed upon; they have a Lure or Call, as if they were friends and birds
themselves; but the end is to kill and destroy: So do the Fowlers of Gods
Church, Psalm. 83.3. They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and
have consulted against thy secret ones. So ever have done the Romish
Antichristian Fowlers, who have been taught by their great Nim^od, leoninae
pelli assuere vulpinam, Always to match together the Lion and the Fox. Cum
Petri nihil efficiant ad praelia claues, Auxilio Pauli forsitan ensis erit.
Julius the 2. can turn him either way, to Peter's keys or Paul's sword. What
they cannot do by open force, they can do by secret fraud, wherein oftentimes
there lies more strength than in the former.

The Syrian Antiochus Epiphanes was a lively type of the Romish Antiochus: of
whom it is said, Dan. 8.24.25. His power shall be mighty, but not in his
strength: he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practice, and
shall destroy the mighty and the holy people, and by his policy shall cause
craft to prosper in his hand. A lively description of the Romish Antiochus or
Antichrist, that beast arising out of the sea, having as well the horns of the
Lamb as the speech of the Dragon. Revel. 13.1.11.
He intrudes himself as the head and husband of the Church, while he robs and
wastes it. He professes himself a servant of servants, True only in No^hs
sense of Cham. Genesis 9.25.
while he sets himself above all Kings and Commanders: as Boniface the 8. in
the year of Christ 1300. before a great concourse in a solemn Iubilee, one
day showed himself in his Priestly Pontificals, with the cross carried before
him: the next day in an Emperors roabes, with a naked sword before him, and
this title proclaimed, Ego sum Pontifex and Imperator: terrestre ac coeleste
imperium habeo: Luke 4.6.
All this is mine, and to whomsoever I will I give it.

What is the whole religion of Rome but a mystery of iniquity* a bundle of
policy, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
which by secret conueyances and t^^ines both brought and held all the
Kingdoms and Countries in Europe, within the snare and bondage of a silly
Friar, by sembled sanctity, lying miracles, false donations, forged writings,
and the like: and thus has ensnared men's bodies, goods, lives, and
consciences. Never saw the world so cunning a fowler.

Are his emissaries and such as he sends out, of better disposition than
himself? No, witness Gregory the great: As Christ sent out simple and seely
plain men to raise up his Kingdom, so shall Antichrist make choice of crafty,
and double, Astuti et duplices.
and deceitful persons for his business. How subtly did these two friars,
Clement and his Associate lay their snares, when they flew the French King,
Henry the 3. pretending great good business for the Church and State?

When the Papists in France could not by open force oppress the Prince of
Condy, and Casper Colignius the Admiral of France: they could by fraud and
cunning, as by a lure, pretending peace and nuptial solemnity, raise a sudden
Massacre, by which thirty thousand Protestants fell into their snare, who most
perfidiously were slain, against all laws of God, nature, and nations, not
much without the space of one month.

What Potentate ever laid the foundation of obedience in conscience, Srange
fetches of the Pope to uphold his throne.
or could overcome his enemies without war, by a parchment Bull, or maintain
himself and his pomp at all men's costs and devotions, or conquer opposite
Princes by their own subjects, or stabl^sh himself by dispensing with
unlawful marriages and lawful oaths, or mainetaine so many Intelligences by
Confession, or pleasure all men in their humors, by wealth, poverty,
austerity, voluptousnesse? What a notable combination of knaueries is there in
that religion, wherein all these things and many more, are most eminent, most
usual?

To come to our own Country: what did those traiterous bandits and emissaries,
All^n, Harding, Sanders, Parsons, Campion, and others, but by writing and
speaking pretend singular love, Instruction, and care over their Countrymen,
whose religion they left? yet indeed what intended they but destruction of
Prince and State, being trumpets to rebellion, raising up arms, some out of
Spain, some out of Ireland, some desperate cut-throts at home, to take away
the life of that blessed Lady Elizabeth of eternal happy memory? What a number
have they snared under the pretext of peace, truce, and friendship, as Duke
Alba in the Low Countries? and as the King of Spain in 88. while he was
providing that invincible navy against our Prince and Country, he sent the Duke
of Parma to entreat of peace; as if it were honesty in Catholics, whom they
cannot kill by war, to delude and spoil them under the name of peace, not
without villainy and per^ury.

How secretly did our late foolish fowlers lay their nets and trains? with
what fair pretenses? Papists bound in conscience to kill Gods Anointed.
It was merely and only for religion, said Faux: and he was bound inconscience
to do it, because the King was an heriticke: he was sent by the name of John
Ionson to Percy, to confer for relief of the Catholic cause. All of them
took an oath for secrecy, yea heard Masses, and took the Sacrament never to
reveal any thing. Now to the laying of snares as deep as hell: 36, barrels of
gunpouder are provided, and numbers of iron bars, to blow up with one deadly
blow, in time of peace, in time of Parliament^al England, Scotland, and
Ireland, in their King and posterity, in their laws and governments, in their
Church and Religion, in their Common welths and Justice, in their tenures and
records, yea in their whole State and policy: that he that could carry his
heart into the survey of the consequents, might clearly see a fearful
doomesday of all these three goodly kingdoms. And, as before it was done it
was cloked under the title of some famous exployt for the deliverance of
persecuted Catholics: So afterward, to turn the odiousness of so foul a
fact as might have turned the sun into darkness, and the moon into blood,
they had prepared their Proclamations, to lay it upon Puritans, under which
title they would have revenged it by the Massacre of all the godly in the Land,
within their reach. Here be cunning Fauxes and Foxes indeed, in whom we may see
the true picture and pourtraiture of every sound Catholic: who by the
principles of Popery are taught to be as true to their Sovereign as Judas to
our Savior.

Use.
What great need have we then to get us into that secret, which their secrets
cannot come into? namely under the secret of the Almighty: under the shadow of
his wing. Palm. 91.1.3.
For the promise to such a one is, Surely he will deliver thee from the snare
^f the hunter. The poor bird is safe no where abroad, but in the nest: and the
Church is no where safe in earth, but only in heaven, while it says with the
Prophet David, Thou art my secret place, Psalm 32.7.

So much for the secrecy of fowlers.

2. Their instruments of mischief are compared to snares and nets, in respect
of the suddenness of that destruction, which they intend to Gods people. A
snare or a net winds in a bird suddenly, thinking on no such thing: Nay
sometime, while the poor bird is playing or singing, as if it were without all
danger, the net or grin wraps it in on all sides. So the enemies of the Church,
knowing, that sudden and unexpected evils can hardlyest be prevented, and
wound the deepest, commonly effect most deadly stratagems when Gods people
least expect them. This is the guise of Antichristian enemies to the Church of
God: which while it is not suspicious, but sometimes too charitable and
credulous, they lay their snares where no man can possible suspect. Would any
man think the Pope would instigate to kill Christian Princes at the very Mass?
yet by the counsel of Pope Sixtus the 4. the two Princes of Medices were hurt
and slain even at Mass; and the lifting up of the host was made a sign of
the murder by the Popes Legate: Henry the 6. Emperor, by Bernard a Monk, under
Pope Clement the 5.
as their own Volateran writes. Would a Prince think to be poisoned (of
purpose) in receiving the Sacrament, by these charitable Catholics? yet one
was by the powder of diamonds tempered with the wine of the Sacrament. Would a
Catholic King, most devoted to Romish religion, and a champion for it, expect
to be slain by Catholics, and men of peace, before excommunication? yet this
was just (says Reinolds) and the charitable Pope Sixtus the 5. said, A true
Friar had slain a countefeit Friar. Could any man have expected that sudden
terrible blow, and an universal destruction from under the Parliament house,
from which the honor, justice, happiness, life and soul of our Country (under
God) has been so long maintained and preserved?

This shows us, that Papists are not to be trusted, though never so fawning,
never so flattering. Use.
For indeed they are most cruel, both in their positions, and in their
dispositions. Their positions are these, and such like: 1. The Oath of
Allegiance is against Catholic faith, and the health of souls, says the
Popes Breue. 2. Princes excommunicate by the Pope, may be deposed and killed by
their subjects. 3. No faith is to be kept with heretics: and all are
heretics that are not of their religion. Arctissimo conscientiae vinculo.
4. All men are bound to resist heretical Kings, in the straitest bond of
conscience. 5. Even a secret heretic is ipso iure deposed, and all his
leaprous posterity, says Symancha. 6. It is a just and honorable war for
the Nobles to rise up in Arms against Queen Elizabeth, says Cardinal Allan.
Such also are their dispositions: and such are their practices.

We have seen the Fowlers, and their nets: now let us proceed.

III. The crafty laying of these snares is such, as they have compassed the
bird, Dangerous and mischievous plots may prosper for a while.
and it seems impossible any way to escape. For the danger was, as if the
Prophet had said: We were on every side included in the nets of the fowlers,
that what way so ever we could turn us, we were hemd in; the danger met us on
every hand, and death every way laid hold upon us. Thus David (Psalm. 18.4.5.)
confesses, that the snares of death compassed him: he was even as a man bound
and piniond to execution, so as he saw nothing but death before him. And the
snares or cords of the grave beset him: so hopeless was his estate, as if he
were laid forth already, and wrapped in the bands and clothes of death to the
burial, both in his enemies conceit, and his own.

The same was our condition in that Gunpowder treason: the enemies made sure of
their prey: they saw their expectation even in their hands: and brought their
wicked conception to the very birth: the Crown and Kingdom was theirs: they
had disposed of the chief Offices, the chief holds, and revenue of the Land:
only one terrible blow was to be given, and the hand of wickedness lifted up on
high, reaching fire to the fuel, which should have turned three Kingdoms
into one Bonfire.

There is an hour of darkness for the wicked to work in, four reasons.
Quest. Why does the Lord suffer the enemies thus to ensnare his people, that
the Case seems desperate, the deliverance impossible?

Answer. 1. That we may see our own simplicity, who cannot observe or prevent
their snares, the crafty there is no power or policy against the Lord. 4. That
the greater the dangers be, Psalm. 9.9.
who is a very present refuge in the troubles of his Church; as our selves
found in this our danger.

Now we come to the second general part of the Text, namely the deliverance of
the Church, Our soul^ is escaped.] that is, our lives were hunted, our heads
even on the block, and the stroke a giving, and death fetching his blow: but
yet we are delivered, we have escaped with our lives.

Herein consider, 1. the manner, 2. the means of the deliverance.

The manner, as a bird escaped out of the net: The means, the net is broken.

For the manner: 1. Beyond and above the expectation of the Church, when all
things seemed desperate, when all counsel and means failed among men, and no
hope was left, even then came deliverance. How can a poor bird, wound in the
nets of the Fowler, expect but to be taken? And this is matter of more joy and
gladness, than if the danger had bin less. 2. Beyond and beside the
expectation of the fowlers themselves, to their greater disappointment and
confusion. How will the fowler rage and storm, when a silly bird is gotten
away out of his net? so do the enemies of the Church, who have been at great
cost, and charge, and pains, and beaten all their wits to lay their nets, to
be disappointed even then when they have their expectation between their
hands; as the case of these Conspirators was.

For the means: the net is broken.] God alone has broken in pieces their
crafty counsels and devises: God has frustrated all their purposes: when they
had hemd in the people of God, as a bird in a net, on every side, God himself
makes a way out; as when the net is broken asunder, the bird escapes.

Doctr. The Lord in his season powerfully delivers his Church, by breaking the
nets of the enemy. God still finds a time to rescue his Church from the
snares of the wicked.
Psalm. 33.10. The Lord breaks the counsel of the Heathen, and brings to
naught the devises of the people.

Reasons. 1. Because GOD is ever present with his Church, in the midst of it,
to help it at the greatest pinches. Esa. 8 9.10. Gather together on heaps, ye
people, and ye shall be broken in pieces, etc. for God is with us, namely as
our shield and protection: and, if God be with us, Romans 8.31.
who can be against us? Zeph. 3.14. Rejoice O daughter of Syon, be joyful O
Israel, rejoice with all thy heart O daughter Jerusalem: the Lord has taken
away thy judgment, and cast out thine en^mies: the King of Israel, even the
Lord is in the midst of thee; thou shall see no more evil. The Lord is every
where present, but not every where as in his Church: he is the King, and the
shelter of it by a special providence.

2. The Church is Gods darling and delight: his people is dear unto him: he
that touches them, touches the apple of his eye, Zach. 2.8. In all their
troubles he is troubled, and takes wrong done to them as done to himself: and
therefore must needs revenge upon the enemies one time or other. See Nahum.
1.2.9. because the Lord is jealous over his people, he reserues wrath for
their enemies: he shall come unto them as unto thorns. The cause also is his:
they hate the godly for his sake: and therefore he takes their part.

3. As God is willing to save his people, so also he is every way most able. 1.
He is more watchful for his Church, than all his enemies can be against it:
He that keeps Israel, Psalm. 121.4.
does neither slumber nor sleep: in which he out-matcheth the enemies, who,
though they often break their sleep through greediness of the prey, yet
sometime they must sleep. He is a more watchful guard than Saul's, when David
came and took away his spear and pot from his head. 1. Sam. 26.
The phrase is taken from watchmen, who stand on walls in time of war, to
foresee the approach of enemies, and give warning: they may be treacherous, or
sleepy, as when the Capital in Rome had been taken by the Frenchmen, if the
Geese had not been more waking than the watchmen of the walls. But the Lord
is a faithful and watchful keeper: let never so many watch the mischief of
the Church, he is sufficient against them all, has seven eyes, Zach. 4.10. 2.
He is wiser than all his enemies, and herein ouer-matcheth them, that he knows
all their counsels, they know none of his: which advantage the King of Israel
had of the King of Syria by reason of Gods Prophet. 2. King 6.12.
He knows their whole plot and proiects, and suffers them to carry them a
long time, but knows when to prevent them, and how to dispose them to the good
of his Church: for there is neither counsel nor wisdom against the Lord. 3.
He is stronger than all the enemies: Ioh. 10.29. My father is stronger than
all: no one, no nor all together can resist his power. And therefore when great
men have banded and bended all their forces against Christ and his Church, they
imagine but a vain thing, Psalm. 2.1.

4. God has ways enough to deliver his Church, even when things seem very
desperate. He has seven pipes to his seven lamps, Zach. 4 2.
and these oftentimes laid very secret and out of sight. He can make a way in
the sea, and the waters a wall for his people: which cannot be expected by man:
yea he can suspend and stay the course of nature; he can suffer his children to
be cast into the fire, then qualify and cool the furnace.

5. The Lord commonly delights in such a deliverance of his Church, The
righteous shall dip his foot in the blood of his enemies.
as is joined with the confusion of his enemies: as in the red sea, the same
way and waters, which were the preservation of the one, were the destruction of
the other. Esai. 33.11.12. Ye shall conceive chafe, and bring forth stubble:
the fire of your breath shall devour you. And the people shall be as the
burning of li^e: and as the tho^nes cut up, shall they be burnt in the fire.

And hereby the Lord manifests his power and justice. 1. That the wicked,
while they take crafty counsel together, should be pauing a way to their own
destruction. He takes the wise in their craftiness, 1. Cor. 3.19.
that they lay a net in which themselves fall. When they make covenants with
death, and dig to hell to make Gods children so sure as none should escape
them, then their own destruction shall be the Churches deliverance. What a
broad net had Haman laid for the Jews? None could be fairer for the game than
he that had the Kings edict, ring, posts, and all he desired. But in due
season his net took himself and his family: his gallows caught himself and
his sons: in whose destruction God laid the preservation of his Church at
that time. The same in the powder plot: what device was ever fairer, or nearer?
or when was there a more universal net laid for Gods Church these thousand
years? yet the Lord in the very full season joined our deliverance with their
detection and destruction.

2 Thessalonians. 1.6.
2. It is just with God, that wicked men, while they devise mischief, should
only make rods for their own backs: though their pretenses be never so fair
and specious. As for example: Dan. 6.7. the Courtiers of Darius, (as they can
easily lay their plots, to sway Princes to evil counsels) come to the King,
whose power they would abuse, and none wish him so well as they, O King, live
for ever: none so obseruant of the Kings edicts as they, All the rulers of the
kingdom, officers, governors, counselors and Dukes have made a decree
concerning the worship of thee O King, that none shall ask any thing for
thirty days, save only of thee. This Daniel, one of the children of the
captivity, regards not thee nor thy decree. They proclaim him seditious,
rebellious, and a traitor that has no respect either of King or law, but
despises authority and edicts, well and wisely devised and published. These
are ordinary nets laid against godly men by ungodly. Then must the law of the
Medes and Persians, sealed with the Kings signet, be executed upon him. He is
cast into the den. They have him in their net. But they cannot hold him: Nor
can he be delivered but with the destruction of them all by the lions. Here, by
plausible speeches what did they but make their own rods? And so was it in our
own instance, in whom Gods justice shined most eminently: All the while, they
dug a pit for themselves, and fell into the pit they had dug for others:
according to that of the Psalmist, He has dug a pit, and is fallen into the
pit he has made: his mischief shall return upon his head, Psalm. 7.15.
and his cruelty upon his own pate. As their heads and pates upon stakes are
still eyewitnesses.

3. Gods justice is herein manifest, ^aro antecedentem scelestum, D^seruit pede
poena claudo.
that for the delivery of his Church he not only breaks their nets, but
makes them break their own nets and necks: And this is the greater
confusion, when the authors of sin are made the authors of their own
punishment. For example: Such is their thirst after the overthrow of the Church
and godly, that they still call in more company, and take in more partners,
that if one miss, another may hit, and all may be sure not to fail. But Gods
hand now ouerruleth the matter, and makes their own carnal counsel their
confusion: that whereas one could keep counsel, company shall reveal it: As
in the many conspirators about the powder plot, in which one of them furthered
the punishment of another, but not the performance.

This shows unto us, Use. 1 Church of God invincible.
that the Church is altogether invincible: no net shall long hold it, but it
shall break through all nets. It may be pressed, not oppressed: oppugned, not
expugned. It is an heavy stone to heave against, Zach. 12.3. For, 1. The
enemies cannot work wisely enough to prevail, but, as the more the Egyptians
oppressed Israel, the more they incresed; so is it here. 2. Though the godly be
in themselves fewer, weaker, Exodus 1.12.
more simple, more shiftlesse, yet are they strangely and strongly preserved,
and may say with the Prophet, there be more with them than against them. 2.
King. 6.16.
3. The Church stands upon two sure pillars, like Boaz and Iachin: first, Gods
promise, which is, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against her.
Secondly, her foundation is on a rock, against which if the floods beat, and
the winds blow, it shall surely stand, Matthew. 7.25. Why then do the Pope, and
Papists, and that Antichristian league, still travel with wickedness, and
conceive mischief, to bring forth a lie? What do ye imagaine against the
Lord? Nahum. 1.9.

This is a ground of comfort for us, when we see enemies leaguing themselves
against Gods people, that they make no spare of destroying either by secret
means, or open. Gods help and deliverance will show it self in due season:
he is a present help in trouble. Is he a God a far off, and not at hand? on
the mountains, and not in the valleys? Does he hear his people before he
call, and not when they call? Esa. 65.24.
No, the Church is never so near some great deliverance, as when her enemies
are at the top of their pride and rage. For when they will root out the name
of Israel, and destroy the law, then is it high time for the Lord to put to his
hand. Psalm. 119.126.
When they have power in their hand, and no arm of flesh to repress them:
when none will offer himself in the cause of God, then the Lords own arm
shall save it, Esa. 59.16.
but so as we be found in the way of deliverance, carrying our selves in this
affliction, as children when they see the father has taken up the rod, run
unto our father, confess our sins, bewail them, beg mercy, and sue for it
as for life and death. This is the way to stay our fathers blow, to obtain
compassion, and cause him to throw his rod into the fire: as the Prophet brings
him in relenting for his people, Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee up, O
Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, O Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah?
how shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me: my repentings
are rolled together. For this is the condition, 2. Chron. 7.14. If my people,
among whom my Name is called upon, do humble themselves, and pray, and seek
my presence, and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear out of
heaven, and be merciful to their sin, and will heal their land.

When we have received such a seasonable deliverance, it becomes us to break
out into the praise of God, Use. 3. Praise is comely for the upright.
and perpetuate the memory of it, and provoke our selves unto thankfulness. So
does our holy Prophet in this Psalm: he sings out the praise of God to all
posterity, for so great a deliverance in so present a danger. Motives
heereunto: 1. How many monuments has the Lord himself erected from time to
time, to preserve in memory special mercies bestowed on his people? 2. Has he
not taken order to write them in his book of mercies and monuments? Psalm.
102.18. This shall be written for the generations to come and the people which
shall be created, shall praise the Lord. 3. Has he not established and
appointed special days for the memory of special mercies, most worthy to be
had in everlasting remembrance?

And surely (my brethren) if Moses and Israel had cause to compile a song for
their so strange a deliverance, and the overthrow of their enemies; as Exodus
15.1. -- If Deborah had cause to praise the Lord with voices and instruments,
for the overthrow of the Canaanites, and victory over Sisera; as Judge. 5.1. --.
If the good women came with Timbrels and dances to praise the Lord, when the
Lord brought an horrible slaughter upon the Philistians, and their chief
Champion Goliath, who defied the host of Israel, and railed upon the God of
Israel, and so saved Israel that day; as 1. Sam. 18.6.7. If that day were a day
of joy and gladness, of light and rejoicing, wherein the Jews prevailed
against their enemies, and saw the ruin of their chief adversary Haman that
cursed Amalekite; as Hest. 9.17. Then surely have we just cause to sing out,
and declare abroad, and rejoice both in Gods house, and in our own houses, for
the great things that the Lord has done for us in our admirable deliverance
out of a more admirable red sea, not of water, but of fire and brimstone, and
from the hands of those furious Champions of Antichrist, those Romish Siseraes,
Goliahs, that defied the host of British Israel, and those cursed Amalekites,
against whom the sentence is passed, that the name of Amalek shall be put out
from under heaven. Exodus 17.14.16
But never let the fact of this Amalek, nor this day of Purim be put out of the
Calendar: to the perpetual infamy of the Popish generation, so long as the
Sun courseth about the earth.

Look we often in this glass, which God holds this day before our eyes; O
come and behold the works of the Lord, Psalm. 46.8.
the great works that he has wrought for this English nation; a people whom
God has now redeemed from a second hell, which was indeed to be a lake of
fire and brimstone, a very spark out of hell* brought by furies and devils
rather than men. Consider we seriously, how our souls ^are delivered from the
nether most hell. As in the first and great redemption from the lowest hell,
God of his mercy redeemed us by the blood of his own only Son: so of his
mercy has he extinguished the flames of this intended hell, by no other means
than by the blood of those sons of Beliall. And, as for that greater
redemption we must magnify the grace of God, Luke 1.74.75.
being redeemed from the hands of our enemies to serve him in righteousness
and holiness all the days of our life: so in this lesser redemption, we must
stir up our selves to the cherefull praise of God, not in word and tongue,
but in heart and life. Let us call upon our selves every one apart, as David,
Psalm. 9.1.2.3. I will praise the Lord with all my heart, etc. for that mine
enemies are turned back: and Psalm. 116.12. what shall I render to the Lord for
all his loving kindness toward me? and let us call upon one another, as he
does, Psalm. 34.3. Praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify the Lord
together. He has filled our hearts with gladness, our mouths with laughter,
our tongues with matter of triumph: when we were as a bird in the net of these
fowlers, he brake the net, and we are escaped.

Verse 8. Our help stands in the Name of the Lord, who has made heaven and
earth. THese words are the conclusion of the whole Psalm, wherein the whole
benefit of all the deliverance of the Church, both for time past and future, is
ascribed to the Lord of heaven and earth. He had said before, the snare is
broken but had not told us by whom, now he expresses him, Our help is in
the Name etc.

Quest. why says he not in the Lord, but, in the Name of the Lord? Exposition.


Answ. By the Name of God is meant that by which he reuealeth himself to his
Church, as a man is known by his name. And in this argument the Name of God
signifies the aid, the power, the strength, and the goodness of God: so it is
used, Psalm. 44.5. in thy Name we shall tread down our enemies, that is, in
thy strength and power. Our help consists in that power and strength which the
Lord puts forth for us.

Who has made heaven and earth.] Qust. Why is this added? Answ. 1. To advance
the Lord in his Attribute of Omnipotency. 2. To strengthen our faith when
means fail us: for this power is not tied to means. Therefore these are set
the first words of the Creed, I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of
heaven and earth. 3. To show us to what end the world, the heavens and the
earth were made, namely that it might be a Theater and glass of the divine
power and glory of God. 4. To intimate how easy it is for God in most
desperate cases to help his children: much mor easy than to make heaven and
earth. 5. To show, that he can dispose all things both in heaven and earth for
their safety.

I. Note hence the nature and work of faith in every believer: which is, Faith
in dangers lifts up the hearts to Gods promises and Atributes.
to eleuate the mind to God in perils and dangers which is the time wherein
faith most bestirres it self, and to apply Gods promise of aid, his presence
and deliverance in all our troubles: not only believing his Omnipotency and
goodness, but that he is so unto us and all his chosen. For this is a speech
of faith, which looks beyond all external means, and fixes the eye of the
soul only upon God, in whose hand help is. And farther, the nature of faith
is, to search into all the Atributes of God, whereby it may fortify it self
and become inexpugnable. It looks to the Name of the Lord. It considers him
as Iehoua, one that is willing to accomplish all his promises to his Church;
else he could not be Iehoua, by which Name he would be known to his people.
It beholds his power and omnipotency at the same time: and then what shall
hinder the Churches safety, if God be both able and willing? It sees also all
his power exercised for her safety. It beholds at once both the pillars of the
Temple, 1. Kings 7.12.
Boaz, with him is strength; but what are we the better, if we apply it not?
and Iachin, that is, the Lord will establish.

Use. Hab. 2.4.
Let us live by faith at all times, especial in dangers, still looking beyond
the means: and give glory to God with Abraham, Romans 4.20. who was strong in
faith, and fully persuaded, that he who promised was able also and willing to
perform. Object. What then? must we reject means? Faith and the use of means
how they stand together.
Answ. No, for God gives means for our good: But 1. No means can help us
without God, as God can without means. 2. Means must be used, but not trusted
in: Psalm. 20.7. Some trust in chariots, and some in horses, but we will
remember the Name of the Lord our God. Here he condemns not the use of
chariots and horses, but trust and confidence in them. 3. Never let us stand in
the means as our helpers, but in the Name of God, who affords both them and
success in them. Hence it is, that God sometimes, yea for the most part
works his greatest works by weakest means, Meannesse of instruments
commends the virtue of the Agent.
that the means might be as a glass through which we might behold the
brightness of his own Majesty and grace. Dan. 11.34. They that understand and
instruct many shall fall, and when they shall fall they shall be helped with a
little help. Why a little? Because through weak means we may see Gods
greater strength. So in the year 88. there was a little help for England: but
the victory was Gods. So in the Gunpowder treason, a little help and means by
his Majesty's singular care: but this was, that through it we might easier see
that Omnipotent help of him, who made heaven and earth.

Church of God helpless in it self.
II. Note that the Churches help is not in it self: and the dangers of it, and
harms threatening it, are far greater than it is able, without better help
than it own, to withstand. So was it with the Church at the red sea: so with
the three children of God in the fire; what help had they of themselves being
bound? So it was in Hamans device, and so in Per^ies.

Reason. 1. That the members of the Church may herein acknowledge the sleights
of Satan and wicked men, who are mad against soundness of grace, and yet most
witty to combine their malice and madness against Gods people. 2. To try
them to the uttermost, and prove their soundness, in faith and patience. Fire
that must try gold, must be quick and piercing, and seem utterly to burn
and consume it. 3. That the Lord may herein have occasion, both to uphold his
chosen in the affliction with strong inward consolation; and also to put forth
this his omnipotent power in some strong and glorious deliverance. 4. That his
children being driven out of all other expectations may be vehement in prayer,
and fetch help from heaven, which they want in themselves. That extremity of
the Israelites at the sea, made Moses to cry unto the Lord with vehemency,
Exodus 14.15. and when Iehosaphat knew not what to do, his eyes were to the
Lord, 2. Chron. 20.12.

Mistake not the estate of the Church, Use.
when it seems to be oppressed, nor yet of the members. God for these ends
suffers Satan and his instruments so cunningly to carry their malice and
matters, as oftentimes Gods dear children are in the eyes of the world
helpless. But, did Christ cease to be the Son of God, because the Jews
said, Let God help him now, if he will have him? or the Saints of old, who
received no corporal deliverance, Matthew. 27.43.
but a better resurrection? or our own Martyrs, who seemed helpless in their
hands and flames? No, Heb. 11.35.
the Lord was their help, and he will not suffer the souls of the righteous
to perish: which we shall further see in the next observation.

III. Note that the Church and people of God are never so helpless, Church at
weakest is made strong enough to hold out.
but that they have an omnipotent power with them, and for the^, even his Name
who made heaven and earth. This is their privilege and sanctuary. The name of
God is a strong tower, the righteous sly unto it and are exalted* Prou. 18.10.
Psalm. 33.17. An horse is a vain^ thing in battle and shall not deliver any by
his strength: Why, what shall help them? The eye of the Lord is on them that
fear him, and upon them that trust in his mercy, to deliver their souls from
death, and preserve them in the time of famine. 2. Tim. 4.16. At my first
appearing no man assisted me: (small help indeed:) Notwithstanding the Lord
assisted me, and strengthened me, etc.

Reason. 1. This comes to pass by Gods promise of his constant presence with
his people, to be with them in six troubles, and in seven, in fire, and water,
and extremest perils. Job. 5.19. Esai. 43.2.
All which promises, although they run with exception of the cross, yet are
never frustrate, but made good one time or other, one way or other. This
promise is their safe conduct. And it is equal, seeing they labor in his
service, and cast themselves upon his hand. 2. What else is it that keeps the
Church as an Arc upon the waters from drowning and perishing among so many
tyrants, enemies, and persecutors as thick as waves, but this most helpful
hand and power of God the Pilot of it? The Church has mighty power against
it, all the help of the wicked, and the gates of hell. But his eye and wing is
nearer the^ than the hens to preserve her silly chickens, Psalm. 91.2. 3. As it
was with the Son of God our head, so is it with the members, who faithfully
follow his steps in patient laboring and enduring. What his estate was, see
Ioh. 16.32. Behold, the hour comes, and is now already, that ye shall be
scattered every man to his own house, and shall leave me alone: but I am not
alone, for the Father is with me. Christ was very helpless, when his followers
fled for fear, and his Disciples durst not tarry with him, but left him
alone: yet then he had this presence and power of his Father: And so have the
godly, both Pastors and people. 4. They can never be so helpless as they shall
not be able to cry for help, and bemoane their case to God. Neither want they
friends to solicit their cause at the highest Court, but have all the godly,
petitioners for them.

The faith of the doctrine is a chief part of worship and honor given to God:
Use. 1
when the Saints refer the whole work of their salvation and safety to the
Lord: as Psalm. 3.8. Salvation belongs unto the Lord, and thy blessing is upon
thy people. And when they can commend their whole safety, for the continuance
and preservation of it, unto the Name of the Lord wherein all help lies.

It is a most firm prop to stay and lean upon in all trials, Use 2.
able to sustain the heart continually with strong comfort: when we can oppose
this help of God against all the threats and boisterous proceedings of Gods
enemies. As subjects have no way but to fly to the King for refuge and help
against the oppressor: so Gods people have a way of help, by which they lie
safe in the midst of danger, and shall have the better end of the staff
against their adversaries, because they may say as David against Goliath, 1.
Sam. 17.45. I come to thee in the Name of the Lord. A godly heart grounded in
the truth of this doctrine, may securely contemn whatsoever Satan or his
instruments do machinate against it. Look at any thing in heaven or earth, it
has in it matter of strength and comfort. He that made them, has power to
command all things in them for thy safety and good. Here is a faithful
helper, a very sure refuge in trouble: men may promise help, and fail, or
help on the trouble of the Saints; God is a faithful, and powerful, and
constant helper.
but God will not. Here is a powerful helper: men would help oftentimes, but
are weak and cannot, where the enemy has fortified himself with advantages
and resolutions; but the Lords Name is a strong helper: if Nebuchadnezzar shall
say, Who shall, Dan. 3.15.17.
or who is able to deliver you out of my hands, we may say with the three
children, Our God is able: He can say to the raging sea, Thus far shall thou
come, and here shall thy proud waves stay. Prou. 8.29.
He can dry up Ieroboams arm, stretched out against the Prophet. Finally,
here is a constant helper: men are unconstant and light: one speech or
suspicion may drive away many from following Christ himself, and many in days
of trial slip away, and are helpless: but the Lord helps constantly: our
help is ever in the Name of the Lord: he is unchangeable in his goodness
toward the Church, never weary of well-doing as men be. And without this
ground in the heart, men must needs shake like trees in the forest with every
wind, Esai. 7.2.
and fear where no fear i^: but those shall not need to fear any evil
tidings, whose heart is fixed on the Lord. Psalm. 112 7.


Use. 3.
Labor to be a member of the Church: stand in the way and station, in which God
has set thee: Go on in thy holy course: keep the way of uprightness. For in
this way God has promised help and protection, and thou may expect it. Arm
thy self, and address thee to bear b^unts and blows as a soldier: but
fear not victory, so long as God is near thee, and thou near him and his
help. Put on patience to wait without haste-making: though he delay help
awhile, he denies it not. Never seek to prevent troubles by laying aside
integrity and good conscience. It is no way of safety to provoke God, nor a
means of defense to lay aside the armor. This is the condition of divine
protection, 1. Pet. 3. verse. 13. No man shall hurt you, while you follow the
thing that is good. Jonas would feign avoid trouble by flying from God: but God
fetches him back again with a witness.

Here by the way note a special difference between the wicked and the godly
in their troubles. Difference between the help of the godly and wicked.
One has his help from heaven, others from hell, or not higher than from the
earth. One from the Name of God, others against the Name of God. The wicked
expect help one from another, and combine against the righteous, and can help
themselves by lying, slandering, violence, and turning themselves into all
fashions and forms for advantage: but the godly, expecting help from the name
of God, keep themselves in Gods right ways, and will meet with help only
thence. Hos. 14.9.


Let us trust our selves with God in troubles as well as in peace, Use 4.
expecting the accomplishment of that gracious promise, Psalm. 34.19. Great are
the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of all. If we
take Gods Name with us for our help, the number of crosses shall not foil us,
nor the power of persecutors daunt us, nor the continuance of trials break us.
For nothing can hinder his helping hand from his servants. Nothing but sin
separates between God and us: be humbled for sin, meet God in repentance,
keep not silence, be instant in prayer, and all shall be well. Christ is our
ship: if we be never so tossed, we shall not be drowned; come to him, awaken
him as his Disciples, Master save us, Matthew. 8.25.
Master of the great ship of thy Church help us, we perish: and he will in due
time stir up himself, and speak to the wind, and the sea, and there shall
be a great calm.

The end of the third Sermon.
THE ROMISH CONCEPTION.
Psalm. 7.14.15.16. The Kings Majesty in his Speech on the gunpowder treason
applies this text to that occasion.
Behold, he shall travel with wickedness: for he has conceived mischief, but
he shall bring forth a lie.

He has made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the pit that he made.

His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his cruelty shall fall upon
his own pate.


THe occasion of the Psalm is in the inscription, concerning the words of
Cushi, one of Saul's Courtiers, and David's accusers to Saul, as if he had been
a Rebel, and sought Saul's life. The parts of it are three.

1 A prayer for deliverance from his enemies, and that God would clear his
innocence, to the 12. verse.

2 A Prophetical prediction of the destruction of the wicked, to the 17. verse.

3 A vow of thankfulness for deliverance, in the last verse.

These three verses of my Text, being part of the se^ond general, having in
them two particulars: First, that all the labor of wicked men against the
Church is ^ut labor in vain, in respect of their own intent and expectation,
verse. 14. Secondly, that the labor of wicked men is turned clean contrary to
their own intent and expectation, verse. 15.16. And these things are set down
two ways: 1. In Metaphor and similitude. 2. In simple and express speech.

The former, Plots of the wicked aptly comp^red to a woman's travail.
that all their labor is in vain against the Church, is expressed by a
Metaphore frequent in Scripture, taken from the travel of a woman. The mind
of a wicked man is compared to a womb or belly. The conception is hurtful and
mischievous thoughts and enterprises. The cunning contriuing, carrying, and
watching of fit opportunities, is the nourishing, perfecting, and preparing to
the birth, while they carry it the just months: in the mean time swelling
with their own presumptions, and glorying in the certain expectation of their
conceived hopes. The attempting of their enterprises is the parturition and
travel, which costs them no small pain and labor. The birth or fruit is
some misshapen monster, some mischievous impe, some treacherous Massacre, some
invincible army or powder plot, borne (as Onuphrius writes of Pope Alexander
the 6. for the destruction of all Italy, so) for the destruction of all
England, Scotland, and Ireland. But this monstrous shape is called a lie,
because mentiri is contra mentem ire (as some allude.) When they look upon
their own child, and see the ugly face and shape of it, in all the deformed
members: it is not to their mind, they are ashamed and confounded, and would
feign seek some father abroad, either the Hugonot; in France, or the Puritans
in England, but that it is so like the fire as none can mistake the father of
such a monster.

The latter, that all the labor of the wicked is turned quite contrary to
their own expectation, is set down by another similitude, taken from Hunters,
who as they lay snares, and ginnes, and pitfalls, to take the silly creatures;
even so wicked men dig pits, and delue deep, and lay their trains to wind
in the godly into the destruction by them prepared: In which sense it is said
of Io^sh and I^hoiakim, Ezekiel. 19.4.8. that the nations laid their nets for
them, and they were both taken in their pit.

But himself falls into his own pit which he made: that is, whatso^uer
mischief the cruel Adversaries devise against the godly, it catches
themselves, whereof David had good experience: Sa^l lays his train, and digs
a pit against David.

1 Samuel 18.21. I will give David Micoll, that she may be a snare to him, and the
hand of the Philistims may be upon him: and verse. 25. the King desires no
dowry, but only an hundred foreskins of the Philistims, to be avenged of his
enemies, for Saul (says the Text) thought to make David fall by the hand of
the Philstims: but Saul fell into his own pit, himself fell by the hand of
the Philistims, Chap. 31. The Philistims pressed so fore upon him, that they
slew his three sons, wounded himself sore, and his own hand also was against
himself.

In the last verse of my Text, all this is set out in simple and express
words, His mischief shall return upon his own head, his cruelty upon his
own pate, according to that in Prou. 5.22. His own iniquities shall take the
wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his own sin.

Devises against the Church vain, and pe^nicious to her enemies.
Doct. The wicked counsels and enterprises of the enemies of the Church, are
not only vain in respect of others but mischievous against themselves. Esa.
33.11. ye shall conceive chafe, and bring forth stubble: the fire of your
breath shall devour you, In which place the holy Ghost holds the same
comparison as here: comparing wicked men to women that have conceived, who
carry and nourish the child in their womb, and at last bring forth. But what
child bring they forth with so much travail? Surely that which is a shame to
the Parents: chafe and stubble, vain and unprofitable conceits, that come to
nothing. But that is not all. They bring forth a dangerous and pernicious i^pe,
which for the most part is the death of the mother. It is a fire, which as
easily consumes them, as a mighty and ragi^g fire does chafe or stubble. Their
own fire deuoures them. Pro. 6.17.
For, can a man carry fire in his bosom, and not be burnt? Esa. 59.5. The
wicked conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity: they hatch the cockatice
eggs. The cockatrice or basiliske is no sooner hatched, but it kills him with
the very sight that lights upon it, and ordinarily it eats out the belly of
the dam in coming forth. Such are the issues and fruits of cruel and
mischievous men against the Lord and his people. Psalm 9.15. The heathen are
sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net that they hid is their own
foot taken.

Reason. 1 This is so because God scatters the devises of the crafty, so as
they cannot accomplish what they enterprise. Job 5.12. he will not always let
the success be to their expectation. They consult not with God, but against
him, and therefore must not prosper. Come (says Pharaoh) let us work wisely
to keep under the Israelites. Exodus 1.10.
But he could not work wisely enough: the more they oppressed, the more the
other increased, verse. 12. They might drown many male children, but
themselves must save Moses the Deliverer. 2. Gods love to his Church makes all
the counsels of the enemies pernicious to themselves: for he takes all that is
done against the godly, as done against himself: he that touches you,
touches the apple of mine eye, Zach. 2.8. God has undertaken the care and
charge of his people, and will never neglect the safety of his charge, nor to
relieve his people that commit themselves to him; but especially when they call
upon him to turn the counsels of wicked Achitophels into folly. All the
contempt and cruelty is against God himself: therefore mischief against the
Church must needs be like an arrow shot bolt-vpright* which falls upon the
head of the shooter. 3. The devise of wicked men against the just must needs
miscary, because they set their plots upon a slippery foundation, which will
bring down the house upon their own heads: namely upon lies and falsehood.
Psalm. 62.3.4. How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be all
slain, ye shall be as a shaken wall: their delight is in lies. And the whole
frame leanes upon the arm flesh, or the arm of man, which they make their
hope, and so lie under the curse of them that make flesh their arm, Ier. 17.5.
and withdraw their hearts from the Lord. Esa. 59.4. they trust in vanity,
conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity. 4. It is most just with God to
render tribulation to them that trouble his servants: 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.
that the most righteous law of retaliation might be returned on them. Psalm.
62.11. God spoke it once, yea twice I heard it, that power belongs to God,
and mercy: (...).
for thou rewardest every one according to his deed. How just is it, that the
Artizan of death should perish in his own net? and, that he who breweth
mischief, should drink it?

This is that just retaliation which our Savior threatens, Mat. 7.2. with what
measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again. If the Egyptians make a
wicked decree to drown the Israelitish children, and will needs follow them
into the sea to drown them: it is just that themselves be drowned with a
memorable destruction. You have heard how Daniel was appointed for the Lions
food, but the next day all his accusers and their families were cast in in his
stead, and torn in pieces ere they came to ground. You have heard also how the
same furnace which was prepared for Sadrach and his fellows, licked up and
burnt (in stead of them) the accusers. Yea the Lord in this just retaliating of
evil men, has often smitten their own consciences, and opened their own
mouths, to clear his righteous judgment: as we see in Adoni-bezek, Judge. 1.7.
seventy kings under my table with their thumbs cut off gathered bread under my
table; As I have done, so has God rewarded me.

2 Thessalonians. 1.2. Histor. Eccles. lib. 9. cap. 9
Eusebius records of the cruel tyrant Maxentius, that coming with an army
against Constantine the Great: to dec^iue Constantine and his army: he caused
his soldiers to make a great bridge over Tiber where Constantine should pass,
and cunningly lay plankes on the ships, that when the army came upon the
plankes, the ships should sink, and so drown the enemy: but Maxentius
hearing of Constantines approaching: in his rage rushed out of the gates of
Rome, Pontibus his deuolutus est, ruos ad religiosi Principis parauerat exitium.
and commanded his followers to attend him: and through fury forgetting his
own work, led a few over his bridge: and the ships sinking, himself and his
followers, were all drowned. And Eusebius fitteth our very text unto him, Lacum
ap^ruit, et effodit cum, et incidi^ in soueam quam operatus est, He made a pit
and dug it, and fell into the pit that he made.

This sets forth unto us the misery of the wicked enemies of the Church:
Enemies of the Church, subject to 4. great miseries.
which we shall more clearly see in four particulars.

1 Misery: That all their pain and labor is for their own destruction. Sin
in Hebrew is called gnamal, and in Greek poneria: both which words signify
labor and travel: to note the great labor, that wicked men take in
committing sin; they are even as women in travel. Ier. 9.5. they take great
pains to do wickedly. Sin is a work of the flesh, and sinners are
workmen, Esa. 59.5. weauers and spinners: but weaue an ill web, and spin a
thread of their own destruction, even an halter for their own heads; as Haman
was at charges to set up his own gallows. Our text shows, that they will be at
pains and travel for their designs, as a woman that carries and brings forth
a child; but the birth killes themselves, and themselves must feel the smart
of their subtle devises.

2 Misery: That they live in perpetual peril of destruction. There is not a
moment, wherein they can free or secure themselves from the stroke of God: They
cannot say at any time, Now we are in safety: because they are always in arms
against God. If they would hide their counsels from him, behold, he sees in
the darkness as well as in the day, to ouerturne them all, and make wicked
counsel worst to the counselor. Ps^lm. 139.12. Malum consilium, consultori
pess^^um
If they would combine themselves in holy leagues and confederacyes, hear what
the wise man says, Prou. 11.21. though hand join in hand, yet shall not the
wicked escape unpunished. All of them united are as easily overcome in hi^
hand, as one man. Esa. 8.9. gather ye together on h^^pes, and ye shall be
broken to pieces: gird your selves, and ye shall be broken to pieces. Psalm.
14.4.
If they would by rage and furye make quick dispatch, and swallow up at once
the people of God, and eat them as bread: behold, themselves are never nearer
destruction than when they are most violent. The Egyptians were not more
ready to kill and slay, than the waters were to drown them.

3 Misery: That inexpected destruction comes, when they expect the sweet fruit
of all their labor: when they look for light, behold darkness. Here this
birth of wicked men is unlike the travel of women. When the child is borne,
the woman's danger and pains are gone, and joy comes in the stead* John 16.21.
because a child is borne into the world, and this mak^s her forget her sorrow.
But in this birth, and afterward ^s the greatest danger and peril, and but a
beginning of sorows. When they cry peace, peace, then comes a sudden
destruction. Balthazar was seized on even in his cups, where there was nothing
but carowsing and iolity: and Amnon in his brothers house, at a feast, when his
heart was most merry, was slain by his brother: which was the issue of his
incest. Little thought he, that that reckoning awaited him.

4 Misery: That the mischief plotted against their greatest enemies recoyles
upon themselves; as a piece ouercharged, and recoyling, strikes down the
shooter, not the party aimed at. Prou. 11.8. The just escapes out of trouble,
and the wicked comes in his stead: and, the wicked shall be a ransom for the
just. Wicked men catching the godly at advantage are merciless: no pity may be
used, no ransom will be taken for their deliu^rance: therefore God takes the
matter in hand, Wicked to be pitied rather than ^na^ed.
to pay a ransom for them, body for body, skin for skin, life for life and the
right owners of mischief shall enjoy it.

Use 2.
There is little cause, why Gods people should envy the prosperity of their
enemies, or study for revenge: but rather pity them, and pray for them so many
as are curable, for their last dish will mar all the feast: little do they
know what they are doing. They are twisting a cord, to hang themselves. They
are digging a pit, but the earth falls on them, and pashes themselves to
pieces. The bread of affl^ction prepared for others, themselves m^st eat. They
(poor men) are in travel of a viper, which must needs kill the parent:
V^pera, ^. d. (...).
and seeing they cannot be stopped from sin, they cannot be stopped from the
punishment.

As little cause have the enemies to glory in their conception. Stay a while,
and behold the lineame^ts of the birth from top to toe, and see a shameful and
ougly vi^sage.

I come now to the application hereof to our present occasion.

This day is this text fulfilled in your ears. Wherein give me leave a little
to show you, Con^eption of pow^er traitors (...)* yet p^^nicious to them.
how our own sowers of wind have reaped the whirlewinde, and how those who
traveled with wickedness, have brought forth not only a lie, but an
untimely and mischievous birth, which no sooner saw the light, but most justly
it deprived the parents of it.

This misshapen monster was the Gunpowder-treason, a mother of treasons, an
unmatchable store-^ouse of villainies, wherein grex cum reg^, arae cum focis,
Piety and Justice, Peace and Plenty, Religion and Honesty, should all have
been buried in one grave, and all consumed in one bonfire.

This conception pleased them well: for it was meet, that whence they received
all their mischief (namely, the Parliament) that very place should be designed
for their punishment, said Catesby to Winter, who wondered at the fi^e conceit.

They bear not their conception without much labor, and pains, and care, and
cost: Great care of secrecy, that none be admitted into the Council, Much
ado in th^s conception.
but by oath and the sacrament. Great labou^ in many painful iourneys, both
beyond seas, and on this side, in digging the pit and the mine, night and day,
many months together, etc. And as great cost: Digby has 1500. pounds: Tressam
2000. Percy would bring 4000, and ten galloping horses, though he robbed the
Earl of Northumberland for it, out of the rents of several houses. The charge
of 36. barrels of powder, wood, coal, iron in abundance, and of victuals for
so many laborers and diggers. No less care in contriuing, and forming this
misshapen monster in the womb, and carrying it the due months. And all this
while they swell with conceit, and dream of nothing but disposing the kingdom,
and every man's estate. Every thing both at home and abroad is so cunningly
contrived: they make themselves sure of all. Why? the Letter says, God and man
has concurred to punish the wickedness of these times. And to the Lord,
Retire your self into the country, where you may expect the event with
safety: for though there be no appearance of any stir, yet I say they shall
receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and the danger is past so soon as you
have burnt the letter. And in the country, the night before the day designed
to be our doomes-day, they boldly entered into a stable, and took away great
horses, which they made account of, as their own by their own Law, now the
Laws were blown up. And Sir Nimrod Digby appoynts his hunting match that day,
to surprise the Lady. They have their Proclamations ready, and all cocksure.
Thus have they conceived mischief, and these Digbyes and diggers have dug a
pit with a mouth as wide as hell, to swallow up three great kingdoms at one
morsel; and have carried the conception the full months.

Much ado to little purpose.
Now to the Birth. For, what (says Percy) shall we always talk (Gentlemen)
and never do any thing? But what do they? They bring forth a lie: a vain
work they have in hand: God scatters their device. They plot destruction
against all the godly in the land; they cannot hurt one of their hairs. Nay
worse than so: the pit they have dug falls on themselves. These hunters hunt
the lives of others, themselves are hunted and taken. The powder they lay for
others, blows up themselves. And this is worth the observing, that Catesby
first deuiseth the powder plot, and his own powder first burns himself;
Saepe in magistro^ scelera redierunt suos.
he first smarted, and was maimed, and after killed together with Percy by one
bullet shot with powder. Others consenting were many slain with shot and
powder, yea even those whose lives were desired to be spared for further use:
yet Gods justice brought their own de^i^e on their heads. One of them (as
Faux) was sorry he could not blow up himself: he would have thought it a
benefit, if it had been no worse with him than he had intended to others.
Another (as Winter) seeing the ugliness of this monster, was so confounded* as
he professed, that his fault (for the temporal part) was greater than could be
forgiven: and confessed he saw too late, that such courses please not
almighty God. All of them, in case it had been done, purposed to disauow it
for the foulness of it, till they had power enough to make their party good:
and counted it an action worthy to be laid upon their greatest enemies, whom
they termed Puritans. Yea God opens their own mouths against themselves.
Winter professes before hand, that if it should not take effect, the scandal
would be so great, which the Catholic Religion should sustain by it, as not
only our enemies, but our friends also (says he) would with good reason
condemn us.

Thus we see the truth of God, and his justice: for he has said, Woe to thee
that spoylest: shall thou not be spoiled? Esai. 33.1.
Ye see how justly he that takes the sword, Matthew. 26 ^2.
perish th^^by by the sword. Here is just, Agags case, 1. Sam. 15 33.
Thy sword made many childlesse, and Gods sword shall make thy mother
childl^sse.

See also what little cause we have to trust Papists, who da^e attempt such
devices for the relief of the Catholic cause, as all of them confessed this
was. Must you^ Religion be thus relieved? It has ever so been: and so never
was from the Lord. Object. Why do you impute this to our Religion, being the
error of a few unfortunate Gentlemen? Treason not accidental, but essential
to Romish religion.
Answ. If it were only the error of their nature, (to use the Kings Majesty's
distinction) it were the more tolerable: but it is the error of their Religion:
And most truly has his Majesty showed, that no other Sect of Heretics (not
excepting Turks, Jews, Pagans, or they of Calicute) did ever by the grounds
of Religion maintain, that it is lawful or meritorious to murder Princes or
people for the quarrel of Religion; but only Romish Catholics.

This doctrine they would as impudently deny as they do other. The light makes
them ashamed, and so they deny their own doctrines. They will deny, that the
Pope properly pardons sins, or that they teach it. They will as impudently
deny, that ever Pope had a bastard: that ever a woman was Pope, and an
hundredth such, which their own chief writers a^ow. But let us know, that
religion, which is set upon lies, and held up by lies, by conceiving mischief,
and bringing forth lies, to be fitter for Antichrist, than for Jesus Christ,
or Christians professing his name.

And now, seeing the wicked are fallen into the pit they made, and the powder
they laid for us, has blown up themselves; let us conclude with the next
words of this Psalm, We will praise the Lord according to his righteousness,
and sing praise to the name of the Lord most high. We will set forth his
righteousness and faithfulness, in keeping his promises, and in saving the
lives of thousands of his Saints, destinated to death, as sheep to the
slaughter.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
THE ENGLISH GRATVLATION.
Psalm. 126.3. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice.


THis Verse is the marrow of the whole Psalm. occasioned by the return of Gods
people out of Babels Captivity into their own Country: who never received
less favors than this, without thanksgiving. Unto which duty of praise the
better to provoke themselves, they amplify the benefit, verse. 1. and make it
great in their eyes and hearts, as it was in it self; so great and incredible,
as when God brought it to pass, they were as men in a dream, thinking it
rather a dream, and a vain imagination, than a real truth or action. 1.
Because it was so great a deliverance, from so great and lasting a bondage, it
seemed too good to be true. 2. It was sudden, and inexpected, when they little
thought or hoped for it. Thus the sudden, and inexpected news of Joseph's life
made Jacobs heart fail him, Genesis 45.26
that he could not believe the relation of his sons to be true. 3. All things
seemed desperate, nothing more unlikely, or impossible rather: for indeed, the
godly themselves, sticking so much to sense cannot so well weigh the great
works of God in the sco^les, or with the weights of God, as they should. 4.
The manner was so admirable (without the counsel, help, or strength of man:
nay, it was beyond and against all humane means;) that they doubt whether
these things be not somnia vigilantium, (...). Plato.
the dreams of men that are awake. For so we read in Act. 12. that Peter being
in prison, the next day to be brought forth to death, slept between two
soldiers; and the Keepers before the door: but was led out by an Angel, and
with him passed sundry gates and streets; verse 9. yet Peter knew not, that it
was true which was done, but thought it had been a dream, and that he had
seen a vision. It was so incredible, so inexpected, so sudden, so immediate
a deliverance, that he could not believe it.

But as Peter being come to himself, said, Now I know for a truth that the
Lord has delivered me, verse. 11. so this people of God knew it was more than a
dream, even a real deliverance, and could not but express their joy, as men
do when they laugh. But as the cause was abundant, so they say they were
filled with laughter, verse 2. Nay, the Gentiles themselves observed the
benefit, and preached it, even the enemies could observe a special work of
Gods power and favor for them, verse 3. And should they be behind the
Heathen, and not with full heart and mouth celebrate the benefit? Should God
lose his glory by his own people, whom the benefit concerned, and find it
among the Heathen, who were but lookers on? No: and therefore they proclaim it
in these words, The Lord has done great things for us, etc.

Wherein we may consider these four particulars.

1. The Author or Agent, the Lord. 2. The Work or Act, has done great things.
3. The Persons for whom, for us, his Church. 4. The Effect, whereof we
rejoice. Of these in their order.
I. The Agent is the Lord: verse 1. the Lord brought back the captivity of
Syon. It was a divine work, passing not humane power only, but humane
apprehension: for it was not very easy to conceive, much less to effect.

Obseru. All safety of the Church from God.
All deliverances of the Church are the works of God. What means so ever he
uses, himself is the principal Agent: and of it, it must be said, Digitus
Dei est hic, This is the finger of God. For 1. the help of man is vain, 2.
God only has promised deliverance, and will be depended on, 3. the glory of
deliverance belongs to no other, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me.

II. The work, great things. The Lord is a great God, and great things beseem
him: Psalm. 135.5. I know the Lord is great; and he does great things. 1. To
manifest the greatness of his power, above all creatures. 2. That there may
never want some great occasions of praising and glorifying his Name. 3. That
our eyes may be lifted up above humane counsels, and not fixed on inferior
things, when we see events which could be welded by nothing but an Omnipotent
and Divine hand.

III. The Persons for whom these great works are done (for us:) Great are the
works of God, Gods greatest works are done for the Church.
seen in the Creation and Government of the world. But the greatest works of
all he does for his Church. 1. Election.
1. He has chosen them to be his people, and selected them from all nations
of the earth, to be a peculiar inheritance, and his own possession of all the
earth. 2. Habitation.
2. He has made his residence and aboade with her, as he has with no other
society of men in the world. 3. Ministration.
3. He has made unto her all his gracious promises, and given the custody of
his word to her, and to no other people of the earth. He has not dealt so with
every nation, neither have they known his laws* Psalm. 147.20. 4. Tuition.
4. He has taken upon him the defense of his Church, as of no other people,
to be as a shield, or as a loving and careful Husband of his dear and
faithful Spouse. 5. Sweet sensible experience.
5. He has given her such experience of his providence and protection in many
marvelous deliverances, both for soul and body, as no people ever had the
like; to the perpetual overthrow of all her adversaries.

Namely for the Church of the Jews.
These and the like great works in general, the Lord has done for his Church.

Look now upon Israel, who vtters the words of our Text: what great things God
has done for them, both in general, and in this special.

For the general: 1, Israel was Gods elect, his son, Exodus 4.22. his first
borne, more loved, more privileged than any; his treasure, his portion, Deuteronomy.
32.8.9. To him belonged the adoption. Romans 9.4. and he was not numbered among
the nations. He is select and chosen out of all the world. He must have the
promises; Of him are the Fathers; and of him is Christ, God blessed for ever.
2. God dwelt in Israel. Of Benjamin it is said, that the Lord dwelt between
his shoulders, Deuteronomy. 33.12. With him was the Arc, and the glory, Romans 9.4. and
when that was taken, the glory departed from Israel. 1. Sam. 4.21.
He dwelt at Salem, and his Tabernacle was at Syon, Psalm. 76.2. God is present
every where, but dwells only in his Church. Of Syon it was said, There will I
dwell. 3. Their Laws and ordinances were merely from God: theirs was the
Covenant, Romans 9.4. The Tables of the Covenant, written with Gods own hand,
and delivered to them. And the giving of the Law, that is, their Statute-lawes
and Judicials were not enacted by men, but came from heaven: In which respect
no nation was so honored, Deuteronomy. 4.7.12. Was there ever any nation, to whom God
came so near, and spoke out of the fire, The instances of Gods great care in
preserving the Jews.
etc.? 4. Their preservation and protection was a great work of God: as we
shall see in some instances.

1. Great was his care to send them into Egypt, by reason of the famine, that
they might increase in a fat land: but he sent a man before, even Joseph, to
provide for them the fattest of the land, Psalm. 105.17. 2. Great was his work
of preservation in Egypt under that extreme tyranny of Pharaoh and the
Taske-maisters, who could not work wisely enough to keep them under, Exodus
1.10.
but, the more they oppressed them, to diminish them, Verse. 12.
the more they increased, so as of seauenty souls in 220. years the increase
was 600000. men, besides women and children. Moller.
Psalm. 105.24. He increased his people greatly, and made them stronger than
their enemies. 3. Great was his work in drawing them out of Egypt: to which
purpose he sent Moses his servant, (miraculously drawn out of the water) and
Aaron whom he had chosen, verse. 26. By whom he wrought those mighty signs and
wonders, verse. 27. of darkness, blood, frogs, lyce, hail, caterpillars, the
death of their first borne, etc. Insomuch as the enemies loaded them with rich
jewels and eare-rings, and hastened them out of the Country. God would not have
his servants go without their wages for so hard labor, which the Egyptians
had not considered. Besides, he will have them to have somewhat away, to
bestow and confer for the use of the Temple. And when Pharaoh pursued them,
so as they saw no way to escape him, God gave them a great deliverance through
the sea, Exodus 14.31.
and him a great and miraculous overthrow. Such a work God never wrought for
any people. 4. Great was his providence and protection of them in the
wilderness, where he led them forty years: first, guiding them by a strange
pillar of a cloud by day, and of fire by night in all their iourneyes:
secondly, feeding them with Mannah from heaven (in which were a number of
miracles) and refreshing them with water out of a rock: thirdly, covering
their bodies with the same clothes forty years together, which did not tear
by wearing, not so much as their shoes: fourthly, fighting their battles for
them, suffering no man to do them harm, but rebuking even Kings for their
sakes: fifthly, when he had his people alone, he prescribes his whole worship,
concerning holy things, holy persons, places, and times; reareth up a stately
Tabernacle for his own presence; in it places a glorious Arc, whence he
immediately gave answers and directions by Vrim and Thummim, and accepted
sacrifices, by fire immediately from heaven: all testimonies of his immediate
presence.

5. As great was his care and providence in bringing them into the land of
Canaan, casting out all their enemies before them, raising up Joshua to lead
them in, and after him Judges and Kings, Sampson, Deborah, David, Solomon, and
their successors even till their Captivity in B^bilon. He gave them a goodly
land and fat, flowing with milk and honey. In it were vineyards which they
planted not, and houses which they builded not. He gave them a city which was
on earth as the sun in heaven, the eye of the world, an earthly paradise, the
seat of their Princes, and Metropolitan of Judea, containing an hundred and
fifty thousand men, the inhabitants. In it was a Temple, the bewtye of the
whole world, and the glory of the earth: Thither the tribes went up twice in a
year, to worship the Lord, Psalm. 122.4. In it were the Colleges of Priests, at
whose mouth they were to require the Law, Mal. 2.7. In it the thrones of
justice were erected, Psalm. 122.5. In a word: Great and glorious things are
to be spoken of this City of God Psalm. 87.3.

Thus the Church in Israel might well say, The Lord has done great things for
us. But, she need not cast her eyes so far back. Here is one great work in
steed of many great things, as which indeed has many great things in it: on
which, while she fixes her eyes, she count^ she has matter enough of
rejoicing.

IV. For God having now revenged the impiety of the Priests and Princes, (who
had not only profaned his Land, Temple, and worship, with Idols, but had filled
all the corners of the land with innocent blood by Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babel, called the scourge of God, for the space of seventy years;) It pleases
him now to return in mercy to his miserable people. For he never strikes but
withal prouides a remedy, always in judgment remembering mercy.

And in this the^ Return there was great cause of joy being so great a work of
Gods mercy. For 1. God seemed now to forget the causes of their Captivity:
Return out of Babilonish Captivity, great matter of rejoicing in 5. respects.
1. Sins pardoned. 2. Misery expounded.
their idolatry, their contempt of his Ministers, with other heinous and foul
sins, which brake out so far that there was no remedy. 2. Cron. 36.15. But
now he graciously returns: therefore certainly those sins are forgiven them.

2. They had now a long time been exposed to all the enemies wrath, who had
unmercifully oppressed and slain them, and cruelly dashed their infants brains
against the stones, carried them far from house and home, among heathens, and
strangers to them and to the Covenant: and strangely used them, not suffering
them any house or harbor, but let them spend their time in weeping by the
waters side, Psalm. 137.1.
exposed to all injury of wind and wether, of men and beasts. But now, as
health is sweet after a long disease, so is liberty after a long bondage. Here
is great cause to rejoice for temporal freedom from corporal misery.

3. Their shame and reproach in captivity was infinite: 3. Ignominy chased.
verse. 3.
the Adversaries on one hand insult and call for their Hebrew songs; on the
other hand, their City Babel whither they we^e carried, being the Metropolitan
and head of the Monarchy at that time, all the people of the known world
resorted thither, and carried into all Countries the Jews reproach. But now the
Lord has removed their shame, and published from thence to all the world,
their glorious deliverance.

4. In Captivity they were but ciues mundi, 4. Inheritance restored.
men of the world, but now they are ciu^s ecclesiae, members of the Church:
that Country being a testimony to the godly, that they belonged to Gods
Covenant, and to that heavenly Canaan, of which that was a type. Now their
Captivity was an abdication from the family of God: and being spoiled of these
good things, how could they think, but that they were cast out from God, from
the Covenant, from heavenly Canaan as well as earthly? But now they are received
again into the family, and people, and Country of God; their title to heavenly
Canaan is renewed; and for this they rejoice.

5. Whereas the Babylonians had robbed the City, but especially had defaced
and burned the Temple, 5 Religion advanced.
profaned both it and all holy things, and set up the abomination of desolation
in stead thereof; (that now, where God was worshipped of his own people
according to his will, the devil was worshipped by Heathens and Infidels:) Now
the Lord having raised Syon out of the dust, he has reared his Temple, and
his Worship again: he has cast out the filth and pollution, by which they
defiled his Temple: he has set up again the shining lights in the Temple,
standing up in golden Candlestickes: he has set the sweetbread on his Table:
the book of the Law is restored again: and the holiness of the Lord shines
again in all his ordinances. God enioyes his worship and glory. They enjoy
their land and peace, and sit safe under his protection, as in times past. And
these are the great things, whereof they now rejoice.

Now to the application.

This day are these things performed in our ears, who may truly say with the
Church of Israel, The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice.

We will not go so far backward (as if time would give leave, As great
things done for Britans as for Israelites, if not greater.
we might:) to compare the Lords general mercies to us with theirs, wherein we
are not inferior; giving us a land as rich, more large; peace more stable;
Kings and Princes, as Saviors and Judges, leading us along to Canaan; the
covenant of grace as peculiar, more sure to us than to them. What Oracles had
they which we have not? yet we have what they had not. Had they worship in
shadows? we have it in substance. Had they good things in promise and
expectation? we in the very thing, and full accomplishment. Christ was to come
of them: but he is come unto us. I will only speak of our deliverance from
Babylon, of which the Church here speaks.

That Rome is Babylon, Rome termed Babylon in 6. resemblances.
the learned Jesuits themselves confess. And if they did not, we could easily
show, that one egg is not liker another, than Rome is to Babylon. As in this
Collation. 1. Babel was the great City, that must rule over all nations, Genesis
10.10. Roma tuum no men terris fatale regendis. Episcopus Occumenicus.
And Rome is the great City, that must rule over all Cities and Churches: her
Bishop must be Head and Monarch of the Church, and set himself above all that
is called God. 2. At Babel was the first confusion of tongues, Genesis 11.7. In
and from Rome is the confusion of tongues, and of errors, one not understanding
another in the word, or sacraments, or other their services: All is in a
strange language to them. 3. At Babel was horrible superstition and
wickedness, in Priests and people, and thence it spread all abroad. Rome is a
sink of superstition and filthiness, and all nations have drunk of her cup,
and been made drunk with her horrible enchantments and wickedness. 4. Babel
held the Church in slavery seauenty years: so the Church of Christ has been
oppressed a long time under the tyranny of the Romish Church. 5. Babel robbed
and spoiled the Church of her treasures, and the Temple of God, and horribly
polluted it. Rome has robbed the Christian world of infinite treasures by
fraud and deceit, Palls, Agnus ^ei's, Indulgences, etc.
selling for millions that which was not worth the dust of men's feet. And the
Church by her has been robbed of the word, the Sacraments, the offices of
Christ, and most comfortable doctrines, the chief dowry and reuenew that
Christ her Head gave her. 6. Babel most miserably entreated the Church: Psalm.
137.1. Her eyes did nothing but drop down tears day and night. And she
provided a furnace, to cast such in as would not worship the image, Dan. 3.6.
All books and writings of the Church are full of the bloody cruelty, by all
instruments of cruelty, and all plots of cruelty, in the Roman Church, both
the head and the members. Deliverance from Rome as great as that from Babylon:
5. instances.


Now that our deliverance from Romish power and plots is as great a work to
rejoice in, as this of Israel from their captivity, is easily proved.

1. God has broke the yoke of the King of Babel, the Romish Nebuchadnezzar,
from off our necks, when we lay among the pots, by that great Cyrus, King
Henry the 8. who thrust out the Pope and Papal power, cut the sinews of their
strength, cast out the Canaanites that were in the land, pulled down the dens
of thieves and robbers, and set his people to build an house for the Lord God
of Israel. As great a work as ever the people of this nation saw either
attempted or executed. All the Kings before him durst not meddle; well they
might mourn under their bondage, and murmr at the Oppressor; but did
nothing, because they durst not.

2. When Cyrus had begun the work, Darius commanded it to be finished and
performed, Ezra. 6.1. Even so what King Henry had begun, young Da^ius Edward
the 6. (as another Josiah) finished to good purpose. For as Darius made a
decree for the house of God in Jerusalem, both for the building of it, and for
the rendering of the vessels of the house of God, of gold and silver, which
Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the house of God, verse. 3.5. So this Edward of
blessed memory (imitating Darius) in the first year of his reign proclaimed
the advancement and building up of the worship of the true God in a true
manner, King Edward the 6. another Cyrus, or Darius.
and brought in the vessels of gold and silver, which Romish Nebuchadnezzar had
taken away. He set the lights in the Temple again, in many shining
candlestickes. The Sweetbread was set again on the Table of the Lord, and the
Cup of Christ his precious blood, which had been stolen away by those thieves,
was now found, and comfortably restored to the owners. The book of the Law was
found, and restored again into a known tongue, as in Iosiahs time by Hilkiah
the Priest. The sweet silver sounding Trumpets sound continually in our ears,
in daily preaching the blessed word of God. The holy Arc a sign of Gods
presence dwells again among us, and Dagon is fallen before it; the house of
Baal and his vestrie destroyed; his groves cut down and grubbed up. Are not
these great works, which the Lord has done for us, wherein we must rejoice?

3. After this, for the unthankfulness of this land, as the building of the
Temple was hindered for a while by Sanballat and Tobiah, so in the days of
Queen Mary this great work of God was interrupted: in which time, what the
Babylonians could not conquer by Scripture, they could subdue by torture: and
now fire and sword was the Catholic and invincible argument: that the new
Romanists might not degenerate from the old bloody Romans their forefathers,
whose measure they filled to the full. For in less than five years, three
hundred of the faithful servants of Christ, without respect of Nobility,
degree, learning, gravity, sex, age, or natural humanity, were in our
Country burned to ashes. But God had no delight in that bloody Religion: It is
as great a work of mercy as any of the former, that he made it as short as
bloody. For if violent things and times should continue, the world could not.

And behold a greater work which the Lord has done for us, whereof we
rejoice: Queen Elizabeth Englands Deborah.
in raising us up our ancient Deborah of England, neuer-dying Elizabeth, the
wonder of the world, and mirror of nations: who quickly quenched those hot and
furious fires, and her self being brought from a prisoner to a mighty Prince,
opened the prison-doores, and delivered them that were appointed to death. Now
were the castles of their superstitions and hopes, cast down again, and made
even with the ground. What great works God did for her, and us in her time,
were too long to recite: how she out-stood the curses and Bulls of the Romish
Nebuchadnezzar, and saw in her time seven of themselves tumbled out of their
pretended chair of S. Peter: Seven Popes died in the reign of Q Elizabeth.
how wonderful her many deliverances were, from many hellish treasons, devised
by the army of Priests, sent from the King of pride, and attempted by the
Romish Captains of that great Nebuchadnezzar. How the Lord went out before our
Armies, and as in the days of Isreal's Deborah, so of Englands Deborah, he
m^de the sea and winds fight for us, and by his own right hand got us the
victory: Christ in all that (...) showed (...), said the Turk.
that memorable year and overthrow of 88, shall be a perpetual witness so
long as the world stands, how God himself fights against that Religion,
which so furiously fights against him. How she judged and ruled in peace,
honor, and happiness five and forty years, to the honor of God and his
Gospel, and terror of all enemies: and in the same peace and happiness
exchanged her earthly with an heavenly and everlasting crown of glory.

4. A great work of God it was for us to rejoice in, David; He is the light of
Israel: and of Josiah; the breath of our nostrils: who by his power and pen
has showed himself a Defender of the true Faith.

5. To come to the great works of this day. That kingdom of darkness to
prevail.

Among other devises, that shame of Popish Religion, that hideous
gunpowder-treason, shall never be put out from under heaven. In which were many
great works of God for us Englishmen: whether we consider the greatness of
the danger, or the greatness of the deliverance.

First, consider the greatness of the plot: the greatest mischief that ever
was, wanting a fit name to express it, unless you will call it a Catholic
villainy: a plot of greatest and universal danger to us, of greatest triumph
to the Adversary. Here the head and tail, branch and root, one and other,
Prince and people, Nobles and Gentry, old and young, Papists and Protestants,
should have been destroyed together. For as Duke Medina said, his sword knew no
difference between Catholics and Heretics, no more should this hellish or
hellfire, which it was a spark of.

Besides the secret carriage and contriuing of it made it most dangerous, more
dangerous than the Babylonish captivity: for the Babylonians dealt aperto
mart, there was some hope of safety either by prayer, or power, or truce, or
preparing against them, there a man knew his adversary: but here is a cruelty
dug out of the depth of darkness, all of them sworn to secrecy, yea the
Sacrament was a seal of their wickedness, sworn brethren in evil, at league
among themselves, Ce^es. 45.5.
but no more league for us to be expected than from hell it self.

Here we might say as Hanniball sometime said of two Roman Captains, one
working by power, the other by policy; Magis se a non pugnante Fabio quam a
pugnante Marcello sibi metuere: We are more afraid of sly and quiet Papists,
than of boisterous armed Turks.

How these plotters would have triumphed in ye fact, as the Babylonians over
Israel, Psalm. 137.2.
Sing us now one of the songs of Syon, we may well perceive by their glorying
in the hopes of it; God and man (says the Letter) have concurred to punish the
iniquity of the time, and, The danger is past so soon as you have burnt the
letter, and They shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament. Happy were we,
that they reckoned without their host, and so came to another reckoning: else
had the Funerals of England been their sports and merriments. How should this
Act have been canonized and registered in the Popes Calender, amongst the most
Heroical facts that ever were attempted! For, if treason against the person of
one King was so extolled, how would this have been advanced, being against the
King, Prince, State, and three whole famous Kingdoms! Guignard the Jesuit
terms the act of James Clement in murdering Henry the 3. of France with a
poisoned knife, which he thrust into his belly, an Heroical act. The Jesuits
of France term it a gift of the holy Ghost: Nay Pope Sixtus the 5. in a
solemn oration made in the Consistory of Cardinals, (December. 11.1589.)
compared the treason of that cursed Dominick with the act of Eleazar or Judith;
Factum mirabile, etc. Rex Francorum occisus per manus monachi.
yea a far greater work, a rare, a notable and a memorable act, that a
Monk, a religious man, had slain the unhappy French King, in the midst of his
host: An act not done without the providence of God, and the assistance of his
holy Spirit.

Oh hellish blasphemies of unerring Popes, not justifying only, but abetting
and extolling most heinous treasons, against ye highest powers on earth! oh
blasphemous beasts teaching men that God is a murderer of Kings and Princes!
How then should this fact have been eternized if it had succeeded! And, if
there were such rejoicing at Rome by public professions, bonfires, shooting of
ordinance, and present publishing of a Iubilee, by the Pope and his Cardinals,
hearing tidings of that persidious and bloody Massacre at Paris, anno. 1572. in
so much as the Cardinal of Lorraine gave him a thousand Crowns that brought
the first news of it: What public joy in Rome, what Masses, processions,
triumphs, and gifts would there have been, if this stratageme had had success.

Bellarmine shall not deceive us, who tells us in his Letter to the
Archpriest, Bellarm, in his letter to George Blackwel Archpriest of the
English.
that it was never heard of from the Churches infancy vn^il this day, that ever
any Pope did command, that a Princ^ (though an heretic, or ethnic, or
persecutor) should be murdered; or did approve the fact when it was done by
another. This is a lewd and unconscionable untruth: unless we conceive he
means, that it was never heard by those who were de^fe and could not hear: As
by a Jesuitical Aequiuocation it may well be construed.

I conclude this point with the speech of Agis to an evil man, asking him who
was the best Spartan: his answer was, Qui tui dissimillimus, He that is most
unlike thee. So is this to be a good Catholic, nay he is the best Catholic,
who is most unlike these Catholics.

We see our danger, and how great it was.

Now secondly, let us see, how the work of God is as great in our deliverance,
both for the Matter and for the Manner of it.

I. For the Matter; we were delivered from great evils, to great good things.

First, we were delivered from a terrible blow: A deadly blow to King, Queen,
Prince, Nobles, Judges, Bishops, Counsel, Gentry, Commons, all. A deadly blow
to all Laws and Law makers, to justice, peace, titles, tenures, records, and
the whole Commonwealth. These Babylonians had sacked and spoiled all the Land.
A terrible deadly blow to religion, piety, the Gospel, the Word, the
Sacraments. These Babylonians would have rased down the Temple to the very
foundations of it, and carried away all the vessels and rich ornaments of it.
The ways of Sion should have mourned, because none could come to her solemn
feasts. Lament. 1.4.
Lastly a terrible and deadly blow to all Lovers and Professors of religion
within the whole Land, which (as the traitors) should have been drunk with
the innocent blood of the Inhabitants.

Secondly, we were delivered from a terrible day, like the day of the Lord
which shall burn like an oven, Mal. 4.1. A terrible day, wherein the frame of
the world should have seemed dissolved, the sun should have been turned into
blood, the earth should have opened her mouth and swallowed the inhabitants,
the air should have been darkened through the blackness and lamentation of
that day. A dismal doomesday of England, a day of fire and brimstone had that
fifth of November been, if the fire-workes of these firebrarnds had prevailed.

Thirdly, we were delivered from a terrible tyranny and yoke, to which that
of Babel was altogether incomparable. 1. Spiritual: our glory had been gone,
and we might well have been called I^habod: In stead of our Arc we should
have had the abomination of desolation set up, the horrible idol of the Mass,
ignorance worshipped as a god and mother of devotion; Preaching hindered;
Preachers martyrd, and al worship in an unknown tongue: an ignotant and
rascal sort of greasy filthy Priests; and a doctrine, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
which is a very mystery of iniquity. 2. Temporal: Answerable to their
tyrannous doctrine is their tyrannical practice. Eius auaritiae totus non
sufficit orbis: Eius luxuriae meretrix non sufficit omnis.
The whole world satisfies not their covetousness, nor all the harlots in the
world their filthiness. Look where that religion is stable if it have not
swallowed even the fat of the Land. And what Nobleman dares meddle with a base
hedge-Priest? And for their practice is not behind their positions, and in
both, Turks and Canibals are behind their cruelty. One of themselves writes,
It had bin better the poor Indyes had bin given to the devils in hell, than
unto them: and themselves professed they would never come in heaven, if the
Spaniards came there. Well has his Majesty observed, that not the Turks,
Tartars, or they of Calicute who worship the devil, do lay such principles of
cruelty in their Doctrine as Papists do.

We see the greatness of our deliverance, privately: now see it positiuely.

In one word: The good things we are restored unto, are, the fruition of God
and his Christ, in his holy ordinances, with the Gospel of peace: to the peace
of our Country, under our peaceable Governor; new leases of our liberties,
lands, callings, lives, and all that heart can desire.

II. The Ma^nor or means of our deliverance was altogether wonderful. 1. It
was easily brought about, not by millions of gold and silver, not by the power
or wit of man. 2. It was done mightily, not by the devil (as Faux
blasphemously spoke) but by the immediate work of God: though, as Cyrus had
some glory of the Babylonish delivery, so our Cyrus, our gracious King had
worthily some glory of his princely care and watchfulness in this discovery.
3. It was done seasonably, in the very due time, when all was ready, and the
conception was even in the birth. 4. It was done to their own confusion:
detected by themselves; their hands that should have acted it, detected it by
writing. Discovered against themselves: mischief returned on the heads that
devised it: they fell into the pit that they dug for others: death intended
against their brethren, caught themselves, and that by their own powder. All
this to the utter confusion of their Religion, as we have heard Winter himself
foretelling.

Therefore let us rejoice in this great work of God, as his ancient people in
this place. For why? The greatest rage of the enemy is turned to his greatest
praise: Psalm. 76.10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: both in his
glory and his Churches deliverance. And what is the end of all Gods great
deliverances, but to praise his name, and glory in his praise? Psalm. 106.47.
Is not ours the benefit? Have not wicked men seen and felt, that God having
chosen our land to dwell in, will not eas^y be cast out of his lodging? and
will not this cool their blood, and daunt their spirits from the like
enterprises for time to come? Does not this hazard thus happily diuerted make
addition to our strength and peace? Oh blessed be God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who for his own sake, by his own hand, has heaped up our
happiness. He that is mighty, has done great things for us, and holy is his
Name. Oh praise we the Lord; for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever.
Holy Father, knit our hearts unto thee, that we may fear thy great and
dreadful Name. Teach us to be truly and unfeignedly thankful to thy holy
Majesty, for this days mercies, and all heretofore: that so we may receive
the continuance of thy favors to our everlasting comfort, and evermore rejoice
in thy great salvation. Blessed be God.

FINIS.

