Tailors Pastoral: BEING BOTH HISTORICAL AND SATYRICALL: Or the Noble
Antiquity of Shepherds, with the profitable use of Sheep: With a small touch
of a scabbed Sheep, and a caveat against that infection.



Printed at London by G. P. for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold at Edward
Wrights shop near Christ's Church Gate. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL JUDICIOUS AND TRVLY GENErous, my well approved good
friend Mr. THOMAS DOVE, Archdeacon of Northampton, the accomplishment of his
worthy desires Temporal and Eternal.
Right Worshipful Sir,
Books without Patrons, are like Babes without Parents, (for except the one be
pleasing and plausible to humor, the various dispositions of men, and the
other left with warm portions or legacies in the tuition of faithful
Executors or Guardians) both Books and Babes are happy if they die in their
birth, that the first minute of their misery may be the first moment of their
felicities: these considerations have humbly emboldened me to lay this poor
Infant of my laborious Brain, at the door or gate of your patronage and
protection, not doubting but your innated charity, good disposition, and
unfeigned affectation of al Lawdable endeavors, will give it both free and
hospitable entertainment. The function I treat of being venerable and
honorable, as of Shepherds, the profit commendable, lawful, necessary,
ample, and universal, as of Sheep. The writing or method of it historical,
mystical, tropicall, typical, literal, and Satyricall; which has encouraged
me to dedicate my poor Shepheardly invention, and their harmless flocks to
your Worships good acceptance, whose reverend function is truly Pastoral;
acknowledging that my many imperfections in writing, and unworthiness in
handling so worthy a subject, has made me doubtful to use the protection of
your Name; yet on the other side, considering your good inclination, and mine
own humble innocence, both my self and my best endeauours I here consecrate
to be employed ever in your Worships service.

He whose meaning, writing, and speaking, are one: JOHN TAILOR.

All those that will not read this plain Epistle, Lay down the Book, on Gods
Name, and go whistle.
HOnest men's Sons (if I give you a wrong name, I ask your Fathers pardon)
although every one that eats Mutton, may truly be suspected for a
sheepe-biter, yet I hope my Sheep shall find no such dogged dealing amongst
you. There are indeed three sorts of Creatures, two of which are so much
repugnant to a Sheep, that I think there will never be an union betwixt them,
which are a Wolf and a Dog: the third is a Goat, which although they may
graze or pasture one with another, as Christians and Infidels are wouen
together in the linsey woolsey web of the world, yet I did never know any kind
of familiarity between them. And be thou in nature, a Wolf, a Dog, or a
Goat, that readst this, I pass not, but I rather pity thy accursed
inclination, then stand in any fear of thy Butting or Biting: the
honest-minded Reader shall find my Subject or Theme both laudable and
Honorable: and those who hold the name of Shepherd in contempt or derision,
may here find truly proved, that the whole world does not now contain, nor
ever will retain any men, who for goodness, honor, true worth, worthiness
and respect, that can or dare make comparison with the Shepherds of former
ages. And though Virgill, Ovid, Mantuan, and many of our learned English and
Scottish Poets, have made their inventions travel up the top of the forked
Mountain of Parnassus; yet I would have the Reader know, that if they, each of
them had Argos eyes, to suruay and observe, and as many hands as Briareus, to
write, yet for all their pains, diligent search and collections, my weak
capacity can find matter enough to make an honest Pamphlet out of what they
have ouerseene, neglected, or made slight account of. Four things, I have,
do, and ever will observe in my Writings; which are, not to write profane,
obsceane, palpable, and odious Lies, or scandalous Libels. In keeping which
Decorum, I hope I shall keep my self within the limits or bounds of good men's
Respect. And this Advertisement more I give the Reader, that there are many
things Imprinted under the name of two Letters, I. T. for some of which I have
been taxed to be the Author: I assure the world that I had never any thing
imprinted of my writing, that I was either afraid or ashamed to set my name at
large to it; and therefore if you see any Authors name I. T. I utterly
disclaim it: for I am as I have bin, both I. and T. which with addition of
Letters, is yours to be commanded in any laudable endeavors,

JOHN TAILOR.

Tailors Pastoral, being both Historical and Satyricall.
APollo (father of the Sisters nine,
I crave thy aid t'inspire this Muse of mine,
Thou that thy golden Glory did lay by
(As Ovid does relate most wittily)
And in a Shepherds shape, did deigne to keep
Thy Loves beloved Sire, Admetus sheep.
And rural Pan, thy help I do entreat,
That (to the life) the praise I may repeat
Of the contented life, and mighty stocks
Of happy Shepherds, and their harmless flocks.
But better thoughts my Errors do control
For an offense, most negligent and foul,
In thus inuoking, like a heathen man,
Help, helpless, from Apollo, or from Pan:
When as the subject, which I have in hand,
Is almost infinite, as stars, or sand,
Graced with Antiquity, upon Record
In the Eternal, neuer-failing Word.
There it is engraven true and manifest,
That Sheep and Shepherds, were both best and blessed.
I therefore invoke the gracious aid
Of Thee, whose mighty Word has all things made,
I Isreal's great Shepherd humbly crave
That his assured assistance I may have:
That my unlearned Muse no verse compile,
Which may be impious, profane or vile,
And though through Ignorance, or negligence,
My poor invention fall into offense,
I do implore that boundless Grace of his,
Not strictly to regard what is amiss:
But unto me belongs all the blame,
And all the Glory be unto his Name.
Yet as this Book is verse, so men must know,
I must some Fictions and Allusions show,
Some shreds, sow remnants, relics, or some scraps,
The Muses may inspire me with perhaps,
Which taken literally, as lies may seem,
And so misunderstanding may misdeeme.
Of Sheep therefore, before to work I fall,
I Will show the Shepherds first original:
Those that the best Records will read and mark,
Shall find just Abel was a Patriarch, Abel, a Prince, a Patriarch, a figure
of the true Church, a type of Christ, and a Shepherd. Abraham a Prince, a
Patriarch, entitled with the Glorious title of father of the faithful, a
Shepherd.

Our father Adams second son, a Prince,
(As great as any man begotten since)
Yet in his function he a Shepherd was:
And so his mortal pilgrimage did pass.
And in the sacred Text it is compilde,
That he that is father of the faithful stilde,
Did as a Shepherd, live upon th'encrease
Of Sheep, until his days on earth did cease.
And in those times it was apparent then
Abel and Abram both were noble men:
The one obtained the title righteously
For his unfeigned serving the most HIGH,
He first did offer Sheep, which (on Record)
Was sacrifice accepted of the Lord.
He was (before the infant world was ripe)
The Churches figure, and his Saviors type.
A murdered Martyr, who for serving God,
Did first of all feel persecutions rod.
And Abraham was in account so great,
Abimelech his friendship did entreat.
Faiths pattern, and Obedience sample, he
Like stars, or sand, was in posterity:
In him the Nations of the earth were blessed, Isack.

And now his bosom figures heavenly REST.
His Sheep almost past numbering multiplide,
And when (as he thought) Isaac should have did,
Then by The Almighty's Mercies, Love, and Grace
A Sheep from out a Bush supplide the place. Let a Shepherd.

Lot was a Shepherd, ( Abrams brothers son)
And such great favor from his God he won,
That Sodom could not be consumed with fire,
Till he and his did out of it retire,
They felt no vengeance for their foul offense,
Till righteous Let was quite departed thence.
And Jacob, as the holy Ghost does tell, Jacob.

Who afterward was called Israel,
Who wrastled with his God, and (to his fame)
Obtained a Name, and Blessing for the same,
He (under Laban) was a Shepherd long,
And suffered from him much ungrateful wrong,
For Rachel and for Leah, he did bear
The yoke of servitude full twenty year,
He was a Patriarch, a Prince of might,
Whose wealth in sheep, was almost infinite,
His twice six sons (as holy writ describes,
Who were the famous fathers, of twelve tribes)
Were for the most part Shepherds, and such men
Whose like the world shall never contain again.
Young Joseph, Joseph.
amongst the rest, especially,
A constant mirror of true Chastity:
Who was in his affliction, of behavior
A mortal Type of his immortal Savior:
And Truth his mother Rachel does express
To be her father Labans Shepherdess. Rachel.

Meek Moses, Moses.
whom the Lord of hosts did call
To lead his people out of Egypts thrall,
Whose power was such, as no man's was before,
Nor since his time has any man's been more,
Yet in the sacred text it plain appears,
That he was Iethroes Shepherd forty years.
Heroicke David, David.
Ishayes youngest son,
Whose acts immortal memory has won:
Whose valiant vigor did in pieces tear
A furious Lion and a ravenous Bear:
Who (armed with faith and fortitude alone)
Slew great Goliath, with a sling and stone,
Whose victories the people sung most plain,
Saul has a thousand, He ten thousand slain.
He from the sheepfold came to be a King,
Whose fame for ever through the world shall ring:
He was another Type of that blessed HE
That was, and is, and evermore shall be.
His virtuous Acts are writ for imitation,
His holy Hymns and Psalms for consolation,
For Reprehension and for Contemplation,
And finally to show us our salvation,
The Prophet Amos, Amos.
unto whom the Lord
Reueald the sacred secrets of his Word:
God raisd him from the sheepfold, to foretell
What plagues should fall on sinful Israel.
True Patience pattern, Prince of his affections, Job.

Most mighty tamer of his imperfections,
Whose guard was God, whose guide the holy Ghost.
Blessed in his wealth, of which Sheep was the most.
Just Jobs lost riches doubled was again, Seth and Noah, were shepherds and
feeders of cattle.

Who lived beloved of God, admired of men.
The first of happy tidings on the earth,
Of our all only Saviors blessed birth,
The glorious Angels to the Shepherds told,
As Luke th'Euangelist does well unfold. Luke 2.8.

And should my verse a little but decline
To humane stories, and leave divine:
There are some mighty Princes I can name,
Whose breeding (at the first) from Shepherds came.
Romes founder (Romulus) was bred and fed, Romulus.

Among Shepherds, where his youthful days he led. Valerius Maximus and
Aurelianus were raisd from being heardmen to the Imperial dignity.
Tamberlaine. Psalm. 80.1.

The Persian Monarch (Cyrus) he did pass
His youth with Shepherds, and a Shepherd was,
The Terror of the world, that famous man
Who conquered Kings, and kingdoms ouer-ran
His style was, (as some stories do repeat)
The Scythian Shepherd, Tamberlaine the great.
It Is such a title of preeminence,
Of reverence, and such high magnificence,
That David, (who so well his words did frame)
Did call our great Creator by that name.
Our blessed Redeemer ( Gods eternal Son)
Whose only merits our salvation won.
He did the harmless name of Shepherd take
For our protection, and his mercies sake. Ioh. 10.11, 12.

Those that will read the sacred Text, and look
With diligence, throughout that heavenly Book,
Shall find the Ministers have Epethites,
And named Angels, Stewards, Watchmen, Lights,
Salt, Builders, Husbandmen, and Stars that shine,
(Inflamed with the Light which is Divine)
And with these names, within that Book compilde,
They with the Style of Shepherds are instilde.
Thus God the Sire, and Son, the Scriptures call
Both Shepherds, mystical and litterall,
And by similitudes comparing to,
All Kings and Churchmen bear that title do.
A. E. I. O. V. two Anagrams of the five vowels, the one serves for the
glorious name of God, and the other in the Spanish tongue is a Sheep, which
name the Prophet Esaias does figuratively or mystically call our Creator IEOVA,
or JEHOVAH, OVEIA, is a Sheep.
Wherein may be perceived, that there is no word, name or action, in or under
Heaven, but has one or more of the five vowels, and that no word or Name has
them all without other Letters, but IEOVA, and OVEIA. Which does admonish us in
the fear and reverence of the Almighty, because in all our thoughts, words
and actions, some part of his wonderful Name is infinitely included. And
withal that OVEIA or a Sheep is a most significant Emblem, or sign of our
God and Saviors innocence and patient sufferings.
WIse and Inscrutable, Omniscient,
Eternal, Gracious, and Omnipotent,
In Love, in Justice, Mercy and in Might,
In Honor, Power and Glory infinite,
In works, in words, in every Attribute
Almighty, All-commanding, Absolute;
For who so notes the Letters of the name
JEHOVAH, shall perceive within the same,
The Vowels of all Tongues included be:
So has no name that e're was named but He.
And I have heard some Scholars make Relation,
That H, is but a breathing Aspiration;
A letter that may be left out and spared,
Whereby is clearly to our sight declared,
That Great IEOVA may be written true
With only Vowels, A, E, I, O, V.:
And that there is no word or name but this,
That has them all Alone, but only His.
So that the Heavens with all the mighty Host
Of Creatures there, Earth, Sea, or any Coast,
Or Climate, any Fish, or Foul, or Beast,
Or any of His works, the most and least,
Or thoughts, or words, or writing with the pen,
Or deeds that are accomplished by men,
But have some of these Letters in them all,
And God alone has all in General.
By which we see, according to his will,
He is in all things, and does all things fill,
And all things said or done, he has ordained,
Some part of his great Name's therein contained;
All future, present, and all past things seeing,
In whom we live, and move, and have our being.
A Almighty, All in All, and every where,
E Eternal, in whom change cannot appear,
I Immortal, who made all things mortal else,
O Omnipotent, whose Power all Power excels,
V United, Three in one, and one in three,
IEOVA: Unto whom All Glory be.
Besides the learned Poets of all times,
Have chanted out the praise, in pleasant rimes,
The harmless lives of rural shepherds Swains,
And beauteous shepheardesses on the plains, All the famous Poets and
Poetesses of altongs and nations, have written upon this worthy subject.

In Odes, in Roundelaies, and Madrigals,
In Sonnets, and in well-pen'd Pastorals:
They have recorded, most delightfully,
Their loves, their fortunes, and felicity,
And sure, if in this low terrestrial Round
Plain honest happiness is to be found;
It with the Shepherds is remaining still,
Because they have least power to do ill:
And whilst they on their feeding flocks attend,
They have the least occasions to offend.
Ambition, Pomp, and hell-begotten Pride,
And damned Adulation, they deride:
The complementall flattry of Kings Courts,
Is never intermixed amidst their sports;
They seldom envy at each others state,
Their love and fear is Gods, the deuil's their hate.
In weighty business they nor mar or make,
And cursed bribes they neither give or take.
They are not guilty (as some great men are)
T'vndoe their Mercer and Embroiderer,
Their Tailer, Butcher, Brewer, Baker, Powlter,
(For which there is some have well deserved a halter)
Their Shoemaker and Silkeman I forgot,
Though breaking, or else begg'ry be their lot,
Nor is it a shepherds trade, by night or day
To swear themselves in debt, and never pay.
He Is no state-plotting Machiuilian,
Or Proiect-monger Monopolitan:
He has no tricks or wiles to circumuent,
Nor fears he when there comes a Parliament.
He never wears his cap, or bends his knee
To feed contention with a Lawyers fee:
He wants the art to Cogge, Cheat, Swear and Lie,
Nor fears the Gallows, or the Pillorie.
Nor cares he if great men be fools or wise,
If honor fall, and base dishonor rise,
Let fortunes mounted minions sink or swim,
He never breaks his brains, all is one to him.
He Is free from fear full curses of the poor,
And liu's and dies content, Great te^perance in Shepherd.
with less, or more.
He does not waste the time, as many use,
His good Creators creatures to abuse,
In drinking sick ungodly healths to some,
The veriest Cankerwormes of Christendom:
My Lord Ambition, and my Lady Pride,
Shall with his quaffing, not be magnifide:
Nor for their sakes will he carowse and feast,
Until (from man) he be turned worse then beast.
Whereby he scapes vain oaths, and blasphemy,
And surfets, (fruits of drunken gluttony.)
He scapes occasion unto lusts pretense,
And so escapes the Pox, by consequence.
Thus does he escape the Parrator and Proctor,
Th'Apothecarie, Surgeon, and Doctor;
Whereby he this prerogative may have,
To hold the laying in, These are great privileges though few men seek or
care for them.
into his grave,
Whilst many, that his betters far have bin,
Will very hardly hold the laying in.
Thus Shepherds live, and thus they end their lives,
Adorned and graced with these prerogatives:
And when he dies, he leaves no wrangling heirs
To law till all be spent, and nothing theirs,
Hook, Tar-box, Bottle, Bag, Pipe, Dog, and all
Shall breed no iarres in Westminsters great hall:
Peace and tranquillity was all his life,
And (dead) his goods shall be no cause of strife.
Thus Shepherds have no places, means, or times,
To fall into those hell-deseruing crimes,
Which Courtiers, Lawyers, Tradesmen, men of Arms
Commit, unto their souls and bodies harms.
And from the Shepherds now I Will turn my style
To sundry sorts of Sheep another while.
The Lambs that in the Jews Passoeuer di'd,
Were figures of the Lamb that is crucified. Esa. 53.7. 1. Ioh 1.29 and Reave.
5.8.9.13.

And Esaias does compare our heavenly food
T'a Sheep, which dumb before the shearer stood:
Whose death, and merits, did this title win,
The Lamb of God, which freed the world from sin.
LAMB Anagram's BLAME.
LAMB Anagram's BALM.
The Anagram's of Lamb is Blame and Balm,
And Christ, the Lamb, upon him took our Blame,
His precious Blood, (Gods heavy wrath did calm)
'T was the only Balm for Sin to cure the same:
All power, and praise, and glory, be therefore
Ascribed to the Lamb for evermore.
And in the threescore nineteenth Psalm we read,
That like a Sheep our God does Joseph lead.
Again, of us he such account does keep,
That of his Pasture we are called Sheep.
And every day we do confess (almost)
That we have erred and straid like Sheep that is lost.
Our Savior, (that has bought our souls so dear)
Has said, his Sheep his voice will only hear:
And thrice did Christ unto Saint Peter call,
(In which he spoke to his Disciples all)
If you do love me, Ioh. 21.15, 16, 17.
feed my Sheep (quoth he)
And feed my Lambs well, if you do love me.
Moreover, in the final Judgment day,
There is the right hand, and the left hand way,
Whereas the sheep he to himself does gather,
With saying, Come, ye blessed of my Father, etc.
And to the Goats, in his consuming ire,
He bids, Depart into eternal fire.
Thus our Redeemer, and his whole elect,
The name of Sheep held ever in respect,
And the comparison holds reference
To profit, and to harmless innocence.
For of all beasts that ever were, or are,
None can (for goodness) with a Sheep compare:
Indeed, for bone and burden I must grant,
He Is much inferior to the Elephant,
The Dromedarie, Camel, Horse, and Ass,
For load and carriage does a Sheep surpass:
Strong Taurus, An Ox is the Eunuch son of a Bull.
Eunuch son, the laboring Ox,
The stately Stagge, the bobtaild crafty Fox,
These, and all ravenous beasts of prey, must yield
Unto the Sheep, the honor of the field.
I could recount the names of many more,
The Lion, Unicorn, the Bear and Bore:
The Wolf, the Tiger, the Rhinoscerot,
The Leopard, and a number more I wot:
But all these greedy beasts, great Ovid, pen
Does say are metamorphosde into men,
For beast to beast afford more conscience can,
And much less cruelty, than man to man.
I Will therefore let such beasts be as they be,
For fear they kick, and snap, and snarle at me.
Unto the Sheep again my Muse does fly,
For honest safety, and commodity.
He with his flesh and fleece, does feed and clad
All languages and nations, good and bad:
What can it more, but die, that we may live,
And every year to us a liuerie give?
It Is such a bounty, and the charge so deep,
That nothing can afford the like, but Sheep.
For should the world want Sheep, but five whole year,
Ten thousand millions would want clothes to wear:
And wert't not for the flesh of this kind beast,
The world: might fast, when it does often feast.
There Is nothing does unto a Sheep pertain,
But it is for man's commodity and gain:
For men to men so much untrusty are,
To lie, to cosen, to forswear and swear:
That oaths, and passing words, and joining hands,
Is like assurance written in the sands,
To make men keep their words, and mend all this, Parchme^t made of Sheepskin

The silly Sheepe-skin turned to Parchment is.
There Is many a wealthy man, whose whole estate
Lies more in Parchment, then in coin or plate,
Indentures, Leases, Evidences, Wills,
Bonds, Contracts, Records, Obligations, Bills,
With these (although the Sheepe-skin is but weak)
It binds men strongly that they dare not break.
But if a man eats Spiders now and then,
The oil of Parchment cures him often again.
And what rare stuffes which in the world are framed,
Can be in value, like to parchment named;
The richest cloth of gold that can be found,
A yard of it was never worth fifty pound:
And I have seen two foot of Sheepeskin dressed,
Which has been worth ten thousand pounds at least.
A piece of parchment well with Ink laced over,
Helps many a gallant to a Satin cover:
Into the Mercer it some Faith does strike,
It gives the Silkeman Hope of no dislike: If the Tailors Bill be out of
measure to the Gentleman then he can make a fit measure for him with his own
bond.

The Tailor it with Charity assailes,
It thrusts him last betwixt his Bill and Vailes:
And by these means, a piece of parchment can
Patch up, and make a Gull a Gentleman.
The nature of it very strange I find,
It Is much like physic, it can loose and bind:
It Is one man's freedom, and another noose,
And like the Pope it does both bind and loose.
And as the Ram and Ewe do fructify,
And every year a Lamb does multiply:
So does a sheepe-skin Bond make money breed
And procreate, as seed does spring from seed.
An hundred pound's the Ewe, A Bond is the Ewe, the borrower and lender are
both Rams and the Interest is the Lamb.
which every year
Does breed a ten pound Lamb, (all charges clear.)
Thus is a sheepe-skin proou'd the only Tie
And stay, whereon a world of men rely,
Which holds a crew of Earthwormes in more awe,
Then both the Tables of the sacred Law.
Past number, I could many functions name
Who (as it is parchment) live upon the same:
But it is sufficient, this small homely touch:
Should all be writ, my Book would swell too much.
Now of the Ram, the Ewe, the Lamb, and Weather,
I Will touch their skins as they are turned to Leather,
And made in Purses, Powches, Laces, Strings,
Gloves, Points, Booke-Couers, and ten thousand things,
And many tradesmen live and thrive thereby,
Which if I would, I more could amplify.
Their Guts serve Instruments which sweetly sound,
Their Dung is best to make most fruitful ground:
Their Hoofes burnt, will most venomed serpents kill,
Their grated Horns are good against poison still:
Their Milk makes Cheese, man's hunger to prevent,
As I have seen in Sussex and in Kent:
Their Trotters, for the healthy or the sick,
(Dressed as they should be) are good meat to pick.
The Cooks and Butchers with the ioints do gain,
And poor folks eat the Gather, Head, and Brain;
And though all wise men's judgment will allow
A Sheep to be much lesser then a Cow.
Yet in a Leg of Mutton I can see
More meat then in a Leg of Beef can be.
A live Sheep has one Neck, yet I perceive
Sheep being dead, two Necks of Mutton have.
Four legs each living Sheep has, but once slain,
(Although he lose none, yet) he has but twain.
Now, for the honor of the valiant Ram,
If I were learned more treble then I am,
Yet could I not sufficiently express
His wondrous worth, and worthiness.
For by Astronomers it is verifide
How that the Ram in heaven is stellifide, Aries.

And (of the twelve) is placed head sign of all,
Where Sol keeps first his Equinoctial.
For, Taurus. Gemini. Cancer. Leo. Virgo. Lybra. Scorpio. Sagitarius
Capricornus. Aquarius. Pisces.
having at the Bull drunk Aprils showers,
And with the Twins, May decked the earth with flowers:
And scorched the Crab in June with burning beams,
Made Iulies Lion chafe with fiery gleames:
In August solace to the Virgin given
With Balance in September made Time even,
Octobers Scorpion with declining course,
And passing by Decembers Archers force,
Then having past Nouembers frozen Goat,
He next to Ianus Waterie Sign does floate:
He to the Lenten Sign in February,
And so bright Phoebus ends his years vagarie.
Then, to the Ram, in March, in his careere,
He mounts, on which this Sonnet's written here.
Sonnet.
DIurnall Titans all-reuiuing Carre,
Throughout the heavens his progress 'gins to take:
And now his glistring Rays he does vnbarre,
What absence marred, his presence now does make:
Now he begins Earths mourning face to dry
With Eols breath, and his bright heavenly heat.
March dust (like clouds) through air does march and fly:
Dead-seeming Trees and Plants new life does get.
Thus when the Worlds eye dazler takes his Inn
At the celestial Ram, then Winter's done:
And then dame Nature does her liuerie spinne
Of flowers and fruits, which all the Earth puts on.
Thus when Apollo does to Aries come,
The Earth is freed from Winters martyrdom.
Thus have I proved the Ram a luckie sign,
Wherein Heaven, Earth, and Sun and Air combine,
To have their universal comforts hurld
Upon the face of the decaying world.
With twelve signs each man's body's governed,
And Aries, or the Ram, does rule the head, To be called Ramhead, is a title of
honor and a name proper to all men.

Then are their judgments foolish, fond, and base,
That take the name of Ramhead in disgrace;
It Is honor for the head to have the name
Derived from the Ram that rules the same:
And that the Ram does rule the head, I know,
For every Almanacke the same does show.
He that sells wood, is called a Woodmonger;
He that sells fish, is called a Fishmonger;
He that does brew, is called a Brewer; and
He Is called a Landlord that takes rent for land;
He that bakes Bread, scorns not the name of Baker; The stare will have it so.

He that makes Cuckolds, is a Cuckold-maker.
So as the Ram does rule the head, I see,
By Constellation, all men Ramheads be.
And as the twelve Celestial signs bear sway,
And with their motions pass man's life away:
The Ram, the head, the Bull, the neck and throat,
Twins, shoulders, Crab does rule the breast, I note, A comfort for Cuckolds,
that though a man has a Rame head, yet he has a Lions heart.

But it is the Lions portion, and his part,
To be the valiant ruler of the heart.
From whence such men may gather this relief,
That though a Ramhead may be cause of grief,
Yet Nature has this remedy found out,
They should have Lions hearts, to bear it stout,
And to defend and keep the head from harm,
The Anagram of Ram, I find, is Arm.
Thus is a Ramhead armed against all fear,
He needs no helmet, or no headpiece wear.
To speak more, in the plural number, Rams,
It yields signifique war like Anagrams,
For Rams is Mars, Mars is the god of war,
And Rams is Arms, Arms wars munitions are;
And from the fierce encounters which they make, Strange mysteries in the words
Ram or Rams: the Rams the first runners at tilt and first teachers of warlike
battle. Josephus Bella. lib. 3. cap. 9. Rams horns the first trumpets.

Our Tilts and Tourneys did beginnings take:
For as the Rams retire, and meet with rage,
So men do in their warre-like equipage.
And long e're powder, (from hells damned den)
Was monstrously produced, to murder men,
The Ram, an Engine called a Ram, did teach,
To batter down a wall, or make a breach.
And now some places of defense, against shot,
Have (from the Ram) the name of Rampires got.
First warlike Trumpets that I e're heard named,
At Jericho, were all of Rams horns framed:
For at the Ramshorne Trumpets fearful blast,
Their cursed walls were suddenly down cast.
Thus is the Ram with many virtues stored,
And was in Egypt for a god adored:
And like a Captain he the flock does lead,
As fits their General, their Prince or head.
Thus have I proved a Sheep, a beast of price,
Clean, and reputed fit for sacrifice:
And sleeping, waking, early, or else late,
It still does chew the cud and ruminate.
Of all beasts in the worlds circumference,
For meekness, profit, and for innocence,
I have approved a sheep most excellent,
That with least cost, does give man most content.
There Is such instinct of Nature in the Lamb
By bleating, It, among thousands knows the dam; Agnus. Great knowledge in
the Lamb.

For which the name of Agnoscendo, knowing,
Is given to a Lamb, it is knowledge showing.
But to consider more seriously, the wonderful blessing that the whole world
has had, and has by sheep at this present, I think it not amiss to use the
words of an ingenious and well affected Poet of our time, Master T. M. where he
truly says,

No Ram no Lamb, no Lamb no Sheep, no Sheep no Wool, no Wool no Woolman,
no Woolman no Spinner, no Spinner no Weauer, no Weauer no Cloth, no Cloth no
Clothier, no Clothier no Clothworker, Fuller, Tucker, Shearman, Draper, or
scarcely a rich Dier.

And what infinite numbers of people rich and poor have lived, and do live,
having their whole dependence from the poor sheep back, all men of
judgment will acknowledge; besides, I think it not amiss to set down the
names of many worthy men, who have been free of London, of such trades and
mysteries whereof the sheep is the original under God. And first, to begin
with the Right Worshipful Company of Drapers, with the names of such as have
borne the honorable Office and Dignity of Lord Mayor of London, with their
pious deeds, and diverse other persons of the said Company, their names, and
memorable charities, with the like remembrance of the Worshipful Company of
Clothworkers. And first, I begin with the first.

Anno 1189. In the beginning of the reign of King Richard the first, Sir
Henry Fitz Allen Draper, was the first Lord Mayor of London, who continued in
that dignity twenty four years together, till the fourteenth year of King
John 1212. when he died, he was a worthy Benefactor to his Company, and gave
houses to the use of the poor, in the parish of Saint Marie Bothaw in
Walbrooke ward.

Anno 1252. John Talason Draper, Mayor.

1253. Richard Hardell Draper, six years Mayor.

1330. Sir John Pultney Draper, two years Mayor.

1332. John Preston Draper, Mayor.

1333. Sir John Pultney, Mayor.

1336. Many of these men did good and charitable deeds, but they did them
secretly in their lives time.
Sir John Pultney the fourth time Lord Mayor, he built a Chapel in Paul's,
where he lies buried: he also built Saint Laurence Pultney Church, and the
Church of little Alhalowes, and the Church called the Friars in Couentrie: he
gave to the poor of Saint Giles in the fields, to the poor prisoners in the
Fleet and Newgate, ten shillings to each yearly for ever, besides many other
deeds of charity which he did.

Anno 1363. Stephen Candish Draper Mayor.

1367. James Andrew Draper Mayor.

1381. John Northampton Draper two years Mayor.

1391. John Hind Draper Mayor.

Anno 1402. John Walcot Draper Mayor.

1404. John Hind the second time Mayor, he newly built the Church of Saint
Swithin near London stone.

1413. Sir William Cromer Draper Mayor.

1415. Sir Nicholas Wotton Draper Mayor.

1423. William Cromer Draper Mayor.

1427. John Gedney Draper Mayor.

1430. Nicholas Wotton Draper Mayor.

1433. John Brockle Draper Mayor.

1441. Robert Clopton Draper Mayor.

1445. Sir Simon Air Draper Mayor, he built Leaden Hall for a Garnerie for the
City, and gave five thousand Marks to charitable uses.

1447. Sir John Gedney Draper Mayor.

1453. Sir John Norman Draper Mayor.

1458. Sir Thomas Scot Draper Mayor.

1462. Sir Thomas Cook Draper Mayor.

1464. Sir Ralph Ioslin Draper Mayor.

1474. Sir Robert Drope Draper, Mayor; he lies buried in Saint Michaels Church
in Cornhill London: he gave toward poor maids marriages of that parish
twenty pound, and to the poor of that ward ten pound, and three hundred
shirts and smockes, and a hundred gowns of Broadcloth.

1476. Sir Ralph Ioslin Draper, the second time Mayor.

1479. Sir Bartholomew James Draper Mayor.

1481. Sir William Harriot Draper Mayor.

1484. Sir William Stocker Draper Mayor.

1489. Sir William White Draper Mayor.

1503. Sir William Capell Draper Mayor.

1507. Laurence Aylmer Draper Mayor.

1509. Sir William Capell the second time Mayor.

1511. Sir Roger Achley Draper Mayor.

1514. Sir George Monox Draper Mayor, he repaired the ruinated Church at
Walthamstow in Essex, and erected a Free School there, and thirteen
Almeshouses for aged people, also he built a long Timber Cawsway over the
Marshes from Walthamstow to Lock Bridge.

1520. Sir John Bruges Draper Mayor.

1521. Sir John Milbourne Draper Mayor, he built 14. Almeshouses for 14. aged
poor people, near the Lord Lumleys house in the crossed or crooched Friars,
allowing to each, two shillings four pence monthly for ever.

1524. Sir William Bailie Draper Mayor.

1528. Sir John Rudston Draper Mayor.

1533. Sir Christopher Askew Draper Mayor, he paid largely to the building of
eight Almeshouses in Beechlane London, for eight poor Widows of his company.

1540. Sir William Roch Draper Mayor.

1560. Sir William Chester Draper Mayor.

1565. Sir Richard Champion Draper Mayor, a good Benefactor to the poor of
Saint Dunstans in the East, and to the poor in Saint Edmunds in Lumbard street
he gave fifty four shillings yearly in bread for ever, besides other gifts.

1578. Sir Richard Pipe Draper Mayor.

1580. Sir John Branch Draper Mayor.

1584. Sir Thomas Pullison Draper Mayor.

1588. Sir Martin Calthrop Draper Mayor.

1614. Sir Thomas Hayes Draper Mayor.

1615. Sir John Iolls Draper Mayor.

1621. Sir Edward Barkham Draper Mayor.

1623. Martin Lumley Draper Mayor.

These good deeds following were done by others of the said Company, who were
not Lord Majors.
John Holmes Draper, gave his house to the poor in Saint Sepulchers parish for
ever, the yearly rent of it being thirty two pound.

John Russell Draper, gave eighty pound to Schools, and to other pious uses.

John Quarles Draper, gave six pound a year for ever to be given to the poor
in bread.

William Dummer Draper, gave to the poor thirteen pound eighteen shillings
four pence, yearly for ever.

Owen Clun Draper, gave to the poor five and twenty pound yearly for ever.

William Parker Draper, toward the maintenance of Preachers at Saint Antlins
six pounds yearly for ever.

John Skeet Draper, gave to the Hospitals at London three hundred pound, and to
four poor scholars at Oxford five pound a piece, and the like to four poor
scholars at Cambridge.

Henry Butler Draper, gave to Saint Thomas Hospital ten pound, to Christ
Church, Saint Bartholomewes, and Bridewell, five pounds to each.

Peter Hall Draper, gave to Christ's Hospital ten pound, to Saint Bartholomewes
and Saint Thomas Hospital three pound to each.

Thomas Church Draper, gave to Christ's Hospital and to Bridewell, to each ten
pound, and to the Hospitals of Saint Thomas and Saint Bartholomew, to either
five pound.

Humphrey Fox Draper, gave to Christ's Church Hospital fifty pound.

Edmund Hill Draper, gave to the poor of Saint Andrew Under shaft fifty two
pound, anno 1609.

William Gilborne Draper, gave four marks the year for ever to the poor of
Saint Katherine Christ Church near Aldegate, and twenty pound he gave to
build a Gallery in the same Church.

John Quarles Draper, gave to the poor of Saint Peter's in the poor in
Bredstreet ward, fifty pound to be bestowed yearly in bread for ever.

Sir Richard Goddard Draper, and Alderman, gave to the Hospital of Bridewell
two hundred pound.

Master Benedict Barnham Draper, gave for the relief of poor prisoners, in
the several prisons of London, 50. l.

Sir James Deane, Draper and Alderman, gave to the several Hospitals in
London, a hundred and thirty pound, and to sundry prisons seventy pound.

Lady Bainham, sometimes an Aldermans wife of the Drapers Company, gave to the
poor of the said Company ten pound yearly for ever.

Lancelot Thomson Draper, gave to the parish of Saint Peter's in Cornhill,
twenty pound for five Sermons, and a hundred pound to the poor of the Drapers
Company, and five pound yearly to be bestowed by them in fire and bread on the
poor of that parish.

Richard Shore Draper, gave fifteen pound to build a Church porch at Saint
Mildreds in the Powltrie.

John Calthrop Draper, built the Brick wall betwixt the Hospitals of Christ's
Church and Saint Bartholomew.

John Chertsey Draper, gave to the Hospitals twenty pound, and to other
charitable uses a hundred pound.

Master Henry Woolaston Draper, gave to Saint Thomas Hospital forty pound,
with other charitable beneuolences.

These memorable and pious works, (with many more then my weak capacity can
collect and reckon) have been done by the Drapers or Clothsellers, which does
approve the sheep to be a thriuing, happy, and a most profitable beast. Now to
speak somewhat of the Right Worshipful Company of Clothworkers.

Anno Domini 1559. Sir William Hewet Clothworker, Lord Mayor.

1570. Sir Rowland Heyward Clothworker, Lord Mayor.

1574. Sir James Hawes Clothworker Lord Mayor.

1583. Sir Edward Osborne Clothworker Lord Mayor.

1594. Sir John Spencer Clothworker Lord Mayor. K. James (our most gracious
Soueraign was made a free brother of the Worshipful Company of Clothworkers,
Sir John Wats being the^ Lord Mayor, who feasted his Majesty, Sir William
Stone Knight being then Master of the Company, as which time the King gave a
gift of a. brace of Bucks to the said Company yearly for ever, to be spent at
their feast in their Hall.


1596. Sir Thomas Skinner Clothworker L. Mayor, gave to the Hospitals in London
and the Suburbs 120. l.

1599. Sir Nicholas Mosley Clothworker L. Mayor.

1606. Sir John Wats Clothworker Lord Mayor, gave to Christ Church Hospital
ten pound, and to the Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwarke twenty pound.

Richard Farringdon Clothworker and Alderman, gave to the several Hospitals in
London and the Suburbs 66. pound, 13. shillings four pence.

Sir William Stone Clothworker, gave to the several prisons in London 50.
pound.

Lady Barbara Stone, wife to the forenamed Sir William Stone, gave to the
Hospital of Christ's Church one hundred pounds.

Lady Spencer, wife to Sir John Spencer Clothworker, gave to the several
Hospitals seventy pound.

William Lamb Esquire, free of the company of Clothworkers, and one of the
Gentlemen of the Chapel to king Henry the eight, built a free Grammar School
at Sutton Valence in Kent, (where he was borne) allowing yearly for ever to
the Master of the said Scchoole twenty pound, and to the Usher ten pound: also
he built 6. Almeshouses there, with gardens and orchyards, and 10. l. yearly to
each of them for ever. Besides, he gave to the free school at Maidstone in
Kent 10. pound yearly for ever, which he appointed to be bestowed only upon
poor children, who were destitute of friends and succourlesse. Also he
bestowed three hundred pound for the use of decayed Clothiers in the County of
Suffolk, and in the towns of Bridgenorth and Ludlow. Moreover, he built two
Conduits in London, one at Holbourne Bridge, and the other on the Hill toward
Newgate, both of which cost 1500. pounds; at which time he gave 120. new
Pailes to so many poor women, to bear water withal: Moreover, he gave
thirty pound a year to his Company for ever, and 4. pounds yearly to a
Minister for four Sermons, and thirty pound yearly for ever to be bestowed on
twelve poor men, and twelve poor women; each of them to have a Freeze Gown,
one Lockrom shirt or smock, one pair of winter shoes; which Gift is yearly
distributed on the first of October; he also gave to the Poor of Saint Giles
Parish without Cripplegate, fifteen pound: To the Poor of the Company of
Stationers, he gave six pounds, thirteen shillings, four pence yearly for
ever, to be bestowed every Fry day in the Parish of S. Faiths, on twelve poor
people, twelve pence in bread, and twelve pence in money. He gave to Christ's
Hospital six pounds yearly for ever and 100. pounds in ready money present;
He gave to S. Thomas Hospital 4. pounds yearly for ever: and to poor Maids
marriages he gave 20. pounds: besides Newgate, Ludgate, the two Comptors, in
London, the Marshalsea, the King's Bench, and the White Lion, had all most
loving tastes of his Charitable liberality: and in conclusion, he gave 108.
Gowns to poor aged people at his Funeral.

This was a Lamb, whose like was never any:
Whose love and pity sed and clothed so many:
And it is no doubt, but these good deeds of his,
Did help to lift his Soul to endless Bliss.
Master John Berriman of Bishops Taunton in the County of Deuon-shire,
Clothier, and free Draper of London, gave to the Hospital of Christ-Church,
100. pounds: to S. Bartholomewes, 5. pounds: to S. Thomas Hospital, 6. pounds,
to Bridewell 40. Shillings: and to the Hospital of Bethlem, 50. pounds.

Peter Blundell, Clothier, gave to Christ-Church Hospital, 500 pounds: to
Saint Bartholomewes Hospital, 250. pounds: to Saint Thomas Hospital 250.
pounds: to Bridewell, 8. pounds yearly forever: to the Reparation of the
Church at Tiuerton (where he was borne) 50. pounds: toward the mending of
Highways, 100. pounds: to the twelve Companies in London, to every of them
150. pound: to poor Maids marriages in Tiuerton, 400. pound: to the poor at
Exester, he gave 900. pound: to build a Grammer-schoole at Tiuerton, 2400.
pounds: and after laid out by his Executors, 1000. pound: to the Schoolmasters
50. pounds yearly for ever: to the Usher 13. pound 6. shillings 8. pence
yearly: to the Clarke 40. shillings yearly: to place four poor boys
yearly Aprentises, 20. pounds per annum: to keep three Scholars at Oxford,
and three at Cambridge, 2000. l.

Robert Chilcot, Servant to the aforesaid M. Blundell, gave to Christ's
Hospital 100. pound toward a meaner School, to have Children taught, to be
apt for his Masters Grammer-Schoole: he gave 400. pound to maintain it: he
gave 90. pound, allowing the Schoolmasters yearly 20. pound, the Clarke 3.
pound, and toward Reparations, 40. shillings per annum: to fifteen poor men
he gave 16. pounds, 10. shillings a year for ever: to fifteen poor laboring
men 15. pound: to fifteen poor people weekly, six pence each, for ever: to
mend the Church at Tiuerton, 19. pound, 10. shillings: to mend Highways, 10.
pounds: and to other charitable uses, more then is mentioned.

Thus has it pleased God, that these men (whose trades and livings were
derived from the poor Sheep back) have not only grown to great wealth,
and places of Honor, but have bin also great Instruments of the Almighties
mercy, in relieuing the needy and impotent members of Christ: and should I
reckon up the particulars of profits that arise from this Beast, to Graziers,
Butchers Skinners, Glouers, Felmongers, Leathersellers, Feltmongers, Tailors,
and an infinite number of other Trades and Functions, who could not live, or
else live very hardly without this Commodity. I say, should I write of these
things in particular, my work would never be done in general.

Wool has been formerly in such esteem in England, that in a Parliament
holden the 36. of Edward the third, the King had his Subjects paid him in
wool; and before that, in the 11. year of his Reign, is was forbidden to be
transported out of this Kingdom; and then did Strangers come over hither, from
diverse parts beyond the Seas, who were Fullers, Weauers, and Clothworkers, whom
the King entertained, and bare all their charges out of his Exchequer: at which
time, the Staples, or places of merchandise for Woolls, were kept at diverse
places of this Land at once; as at Newcastle, York, Lincoln, Canterbury,
Norwich, Westminster, Chichester, Winchester, Exester, Bristoll, and
Carmarthen: by which may be perceived what a great commodity wool was in those
days. But in the 6. year of King Edward the fourth, the King sent certain
Ships out of Cotswold in Gloucester shire, into Spain, the increase of which so
enriched the Spaniards with our wool, that ever since, it has bin in the
less request in England: never thelesse, as it is, it is the means of life
and maintenance for many hundred thousands.

ANd now from solid Prose I will abstain
To pleasant Poetry, and mirth again. Here follows a touch of paltry
Scabbed infectious kind of Sheep, which I think fit to place by themselves in
the lagge end of my Book, as far as I can from the clean, sound, and
profitable Sheep before mentioned, for fear the bad should infect the good.

The Fable of the Golden Fleece began,
'Cause Sheep did yield such store of Gold to Man:
For he that has great store of woolly fleeces,
May (when he please) have store of golden pieces.
Thus many a poor man dying, has left a Son,
That has transsorm'd the Fleece to Gold, like Jason:
And here is a mystery profound and deep,
There Is sundry sorts of Mutton, are no Sheep:
Laced Mutton, which let out themselves to hire,
Like Hackneys, who will be fired, before they tire.
The man or men which for such Mutton hungers,
Are (by their Corporation) Mutton-mongers:
Which is a brotherhood so large and great,
That if they had a Hall, I would entreat
To be their Clarke, or keeper of accounts,
To show them unto what their charge amounts;
My brains in numbering then wound grow so quick,
I should be master of Arithmeticke:
All States, Degrees, and Trades, both bad and good,
Afford some members of this Brotherhood:
Great therefore needs must be their multitude,
When every man may to the Trade intrude:
It it no free dome, yet these men are free,
Not sauers, but most liberal spenders be:
For this is one thing that does them bewitch,
That by their trading they wax seldom rich:
The value of this Mutton to set forth,
The flesh does cost more than the broth is worth:
They all are Ewes, yet are exceeding Ramish,
And will be dainty fed, whose 'euer famish.
Nor are they marked for any man, or no man,
As mine, or thine, but every man's in common,
Fine heads, and necks, and breasts, they yield some storee,
But scarcely one good liver in nine score:
The livers being bad, it is understood,
The veins are filled with putrified blood,
Which makes them subject to the scab, and then
They prove most dang rous diet unto men.
And then the proverb proves no lie or mock,
One scabbed sheepe's enough to spoil a flock.
But yet for all this, there is many a Gull,
Loves Mutton well, and dips his bread in the wool.
And were a man put to his choice to keep,
It Is said, a Shrew is better then a Sheep.
But if a man be yoked with such an Ewe,
She may be both a scabbed Sheep and Shrew.
And he that is so matched, his life may well
Compared be unto an earthly hell.
But to my Theme which I wrote of before,
I at this Mutton must have one cut more.
These kind of Sheep have all the world over grown,
And seldom do wear fleeces of their own:
For they from sundry men their pelts can pull,
Whereby they keep themselves as warm as wool.
Besides, in colors, and in shape, they vary
Quite from all profitable sheep contrary:
White, Black, Green, Tawny, Purple, Red, and Blue,
Beyond the Rainbow for their change of hue:
Camelion like in alteration,
But, that bare Air they cannot live upon.
The Moons mutation's, not more manifold,
Silk, Velvet, Tissue, Cloth, and cloth of God:
These are the Sheep that Golden fleeces wear, They are as soft as
Silke-wormes.

Who robe themselves with others wool or hair:
And it may be, 'twas such a Beast and Fleece,
Which Jason brought from Cholcos, into Greece.
Were it no more but so, I dare be bold
To think this Land does many Iasons hold:
Who never durst to pass a dangerous wave,
Yet may (with ease) such Golden fleeces have.
Too much of one thing's good for naught (they say)
I Will therefore take this needless dish away:
For should I too much, of Laced Mutton write,
I may over come my Readers stomach quite.
Once more unto the good Sheep I Will retire,
And so my Book shall to it is end expire:
Although it be not found in Ancient writers,
I find all Muttone-aters are sheepe-biters.
And in some places I have heard and seen,
That currish sheepe-biters have hanged been,
If any kind of Tike should snarle or whine,
Or bite, or woorry this poor Sheep of mine,
Why let them bark and bite, and spend their breath,
I Will never wish them a sheepe-biters death.
My Sheep will have them know, her Innocence
Shall live, in spite of their maleuolence:
I wish them keep themselves and me from pain,
And bite such Sheep as cannot bite again.
For if they snap at mine, I have a pen,
That (like a trusty Dog) shall bite again.
And in Conclusion, this I humbly crave,
That every one the honesty may have,
That when our frail mortality is past,
We may be the good Shepherds sheep at last.
FINIS.

