Circumspect WALKING: Describing the several Rules, as so many several Steps
in the way of Wisdom.

Gathered into this short manuell, by THO. TAILOR, Preacher of Gods word at
Aldermanbury Church in London.

GAL. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon them,
and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

LONDON, Printed for James Boler, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of
the Marigold. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and learned Knight, Sir ROBERT NANTON, one of the
principal Secretaries unto his Excellent Majesty, and of his Majesty's
Honorable Privy Counsel; All the blessings of this life, and a better.
SIR,
THat which Solomon teaches in that one Aphorism often repeated; wanted not
apparent weight and moments of reason: saying, that in the prosperity of the
righteous, Pro. 11. 10. and 29. 2.
the City rejoices: for God being in covenant with them, for their sakes does
good to such, as are joined in the same society with them: for one Joseph all
Potiphers house was blessed; and for one Paul, all that are in the ship with
him are saved: yea, good and virtuous men by their presence, as Lot in Sodom;
by their prayers, as Moses in the breach; and by their prudent Counsel, as
that poor wise man, Eccl. 9. 15.
withstand the judgments of God, and save the City: for had there been found
one good man, all Jerusalem had been spared for his sake. Again, virtuous men
advanced, will confer all their honor and grace to the public good: they
live not to themselves and theirs, but take in the Church and Commonwealth,
(...).
as fellow-Commoners of all their goodness. Mordecaies authority wrought
public deliverance to the whole Church, and Joseph's advancement sustained the
whole land, by opening the garners in time of famine. The honor of one good
man shall be the grace of all good men; his power the strength of many; his
greatness the raising of many: as when one Mordecai is raised, Esse^ 8. 6
light, and joy, and gladness, and honor, came to all the Jews. Further,
good men honored by God, will honor God again, and withstand his dishonor:
they will (to their power) provide that Gods worship be erected, that his
Sabbaths be sanctified, that true religion be maintained, that falsehood and
errors be suppressed, that public peace be not disturbed, that common justice
be not perverted, least Gods favor be discontinued, and his judgments let in.
Whence they are to be esteemed the strongest towers, Sine pi^s ce^tu^lex murus
rebus seruandis par^^ est
the thickest walls, the most impregnable forts, the surest muniments, and the
stoutest horsemen and Chariots of their Country: yea, the Wise man in one word
says much more, Pro. 10. 25. Iustus fundamentum mundi.
that the Righteous is a sure foundation, upholding the whole world.

But why write I this, or to your Honor? surely as one who ever reverenced
your worthy parts. I could not but crave leave to express my self one of the
City, rejoicing and praising God in your honors prosperity and advancement:
and the rather, because my self was an eyewitness how God led you through
some of your younger years, which were so studiously and commendably passed, as
this your latter time fitly answers that expectation which was then conceived
of you.

You were then dear to our common mother that famous University of Cambridge;
which for your eloquence and grace of speech and persuasion, appointed you her
Orator: for your wisdom and gravity in government, chose you her Procter: for
your soundness in all kind of fruitful and commendable litterature, tendered
you all her honors and degrees: and for your sober, studious, and virtuous
conversation worthily held now her great Ornament. And now as riper for greater
emploiments, the same God (whose privilege it is to dispense promotions, for
he pulls down one and sets up another) has moved his Majesty not only
to set your seat among the honouroble, but to admit you (as it were) into his
breast, and betrust you with the secrets of this great state and Kingdom: an
office not more ancient then honorable, befitting only men of rarest wisdom,
fidelity, and fitness to stand before so great, so wise a King. This was a
most honorable office among the most ancient Kings of Israel: for King David
had his two principal Secretaries, 2 Samuel 8. 17
Seraiah and Iehonatham, 2 Chro. 27. 32.
whom the text commends for a man of counsel and understanding: and King
Solomon his son had other two, Elihoreph and Ahiah, 1 King. 4. 3
who were in chief place near the King. We read also of Shebna, 2 Kin. 18. 1^
principal Secretary to King Hezekiah, of whom Iunius says; he was fecundus a
rege. Now your place being a service of such honor under his Majesty, cannot
be without an answerable weight and charge. Your Honor easily conceiueth that
the Lord charge you with a chief care of honoring him, who has honored
you: that you stand charged to his Majesty with great trust and fidelity: that
the Church expects that by your authority, you should promote her causes, and
stand in the maintenance of pure religion: that the Commonwealth claims her
part in you, for the preservation of peace within her walls, and prosperity
within her palaces: that the University looks you should advance her just
causes, promote learning, and encourage her students, by helping them into the
rooms of the ignorant and unlearned Ministers: in a word, Pro. 11. 11.
that the whole City hops to be exalted by the prosperity of the righteous.

And now if your Honors thankful heart shall call upon you, and say, Quid
retribuam domino? you will easily fall into frequent thoughts and desires, Tota
vita Christiani ^anctum desiderium est. Aug. in Ioh. tract 4.
of discharging all this expectation. This shall be happily done, if you shall
choose about you the wisest Counselors, for the happy and prudent carriage of
your great affairs, imitating herein that peerless pattern of wisdom,
Solomon himself, who notwithstanding his extraordinary measure of wisdom,
chose unto himself, selectissimum sena^um, a bench of most wise and grave
Couns^llours, whose counsel Rehoboam after despised. The best counselor is
that great Counselor, Esa. 9.
who is daily to be consulted by fervent prayer. The next is the word of God,
which as it gives no less certain direction in difficult cases, than the
Oracle did unto Israel, or then did the pillar of the cloud, and of fire by day
and night for their motion or station, while they passed through the
wilderness: so the daily consulling with Gods statutes, by reading and
meditation (as with so many learned counselors) made holy David wiser than
the aged, Psa. 119. 98 99, 100.
than the learned, than the Princes, than his adversaries. Josh. 1. 8.
And if Ioshuah would prosper and have good success in his high enterprises,
(...).
he must keep him to the Book of the Law, and not depart from it. The fear
of God is wisdom, and the next wisdom to that, is to converse and consult
with such as do fear God, Pro. 10. 32.
whose lips speak just and good things: whereby a man shall become both wiser
and better. This is the high way to attain and retain grace and reputation
with God and good men; for this is an inheritance not gotten with greatness,
but with goodness: the former cannot force or compel affections, the latter
sweetly draws and allures them: the former may procure flattery and applause,
the latter only yields true honor and sound comfort.

Might I add but one grain to your godly care, by this olittle direction, with
which If ^^fer my most inward affections, I have my expeation. I know well your
Honors sufficiency, even in this kind, above many of my profession, to furnish
your self with divine directions, if your leisure or weighty affairs would
permit you to set them down: yet I assure my self, your Honor will not
refuse the help of such, as are at more leisure to gather them, and humbly
offer them unto your hand. I was also more presumptuous to offer these lines
unto your view, because I conceived that the rules of Christian prudence and
circumspection, could not be more sitly directed, nor be better welcome, than
to so prudent and circumspect a parsonage. In which assurance I rest,
commending your Honors further happiness and prosperity to him, who is an
exceeding great reward, abundantly able to fill your heart with grace, to
crown your days with blessing, and finish them with comfort, life and
immortality. (...).

Your Honors, to be commanded, THO. TAILOR.

EPHESIANS. 5. 15. Take heed therefore that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools,
but as wise.
CHAP. I.
The ground of the ensuing Treatise.

THE APOSTLE in the former words, had under a comparison of light and
darkness, excited the Ephesians to holy conversation, and to hate such
obscene and filthy courses, as were found with the workers of darkness. Now he
speaks in plain terms, that which before he infolded in comparisons: Seeing
ye are light, and in the light, wherein all things are manifest, see ye walk
circumspectly, etc. In which words are,

First, a duty propounded, Circumspect walking, which in the first word (...),
is straightly charged upon every Christian.

Secondly, the expounding of that duty, not as fools, but as wise.

And the words run, as if the holy Apostle had in other terms said thus; You
that are believers, sons of the light, ought as by your light, to check and
^ontroule, yea, and disco^er other men's sins and ^orruptions: so also to be
^s unblameable, yea, and ^ightsome in your selves, ^s possibly may be: Strict
and accurate walking, not wartanted only, but necessarily enforced in the
Scriptures*
and ^herfore take heed of your ^wne walking, and see it be ^ircumspect.
Briefly thus;

Every Christian man must walk warily, and circumspectly: or, The course of
Christianity must be a circumspect walking. For so the word (...) signifies, an
accurate, and a strict walking; or an exquisite course. So it is used, Luke 1.
3. It seemed good to me, when I had accurately searched all things: and, Mat.
2. 8. Herod charged the wise men thus, (...) search exquisitiuely and most
diligently of the babe: and, Act. 22. v. 3. Paul professes he was brought up,
(...), according to the exact manner of the Law.

CHAP. II.
What circumspect walking is, and wherein it consists.

OVt of which so substantial a ground, it shall be worth our labor to enquire
what this circumspect walking is: Christian circumspection what it is not.
for we may not conceive it as any carnal craft and policy, by which a man is
wary to save his goods, and outward estate: as many crafty heads and worldlings
^ast about, and continualy contriue with all wari^esse to save themselves, and
their profits: and he ^ust rise early that can get he better of them in any
^argaine. Neither is this ^^rcumspection any such po^cie and wariness in
matters of religion, as relin^uisheth any good duty to which it has calling; or
a^y practice of holiness, or outward profits and ^ommodity; or to preserve
^utward peace and plea^ures; as many crafty and ^eceitfull Protestants, that
^re so circumspect, as they will profess a religion which shall cost them
nothing. Neither is this circumspection in any thing ^ contrary, or cross to
tha^ done-like simplicity, and Christian innocence ^ which is the ornament o^
holy profession. But is ^ careful and exact proceeding in the ways of God,
What it is
according to the rules of God: even a^ a worke-man most exactly fitteth his
work by the l^uell and rule, and depart not from it.

Now to this circumspection, And in what.
are four things required:

1. A knowledge of the right way, To circumspect walking four things required.
which is as the light, guiding him to set every and without a guide, he can
never walk securely and safe. The word is the lantern: and, the Commandment
is the light. And, when wisdom enters into the heart, and knowledge delights
the soul, then shall counsel preserve thee, and understanding shall keep
thee, and deliver thee from the evil way, Prou. 2. 11, 12.

2. A diligent watch and care to keep from all extremities, to turn neither to
the right hand, nor to the left. For it is hard to keep a mean, we being
very propense to extremes. Satan cares not so he can conquer us, whether it be
by curiosity, or by carelessness: whether he can keep us out of the Church, or
cast us out by our own conceits: whether he can keep us so cold, as no good
thing greatly affects us, or whether he can make us boil over with unbridled
zeal, that because we cannot have all the good we would, we will refuse a
great deal of good we might have. A circumspect Christian will distinguish
good from evil, and not refuse good for evil; for that is an extremity.

jealousy and suspicion, lest the heart be deceived through the
deceitfulness of sin. The most simple-hearted Christian is a most wary man,
that is, of his own hearts slipperinesse, suspecting himself in all things,
fearing in all things lest he may not offend God. He knows sin lies in
ambush, and suspects the insinuations of it. As he that is very circumspect
for the world, is most suspicious of others, lest they ouer-reach and beguile
him: so one that is most circumspect for heaven, does more suspect himself
than any other.

4. A provident walking, Solomon speaks of the circumspect and prudent
Christian, that he foresees the plague and hides himself: and learnes of the
emmet to provide in summer for winter. This property of circumspection we see
in the wise Virgins, that prepared oil in time. All these are inseparable
properties of a provident and circumspect walking.

Which is enjoined us in sundry other places of Scripture: as, Prove. 4. 26.
Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be ordered aright. Matthew.
10. 16. Be wise as serpents. This serpentine wisdom is nothing else but
Christian circumspection. Heb. 12. 13. Make right steps unto your feet, as good
runners, who not only speed themselves in the way, but are wary to keep the
right way, which they know is the shortest, and so carefully observe every step
and every advantage.

CHAP. III.
Of the next words of the Apostle, further explaining circumspect walking. Not
as unwise, but as wise.]

THe Apostle here expounds what he means by circumspect walking; namely, a
wise ordring of a man's self according to the rules of Christian prudence. For
wisdom is twofold; either worldly and carnal, or else heavenly and spiritual.

This distinction is the holy Ghosts own, in Iam. 3. 15. 17. where both of
them are at large described. Our text speaks of spiritual and heavenly
wisdom: which is such a gift of God, as both directs and effects, True
wisdom, what it is.
or causes a man to do that which is acceptable and pleasing unto God. Wherein
it is much distinguished from humane wisdom, which is merely contemplative
knowledge; but this is an active knowledge, giving rules and guidance in
practice and action: Eccl. 10. 10. The excellency to direct a thing is wisdom.
As a Coachman in a coach, so spiritual wisdom in the heart, orders the whole
motion of a Christian in all his ways.

The connection implies, that Those be the wisest men, They are wisest men that
walk most strictly.
that walk most exactly. Prou. 14. 8. The wisdom of the prudent is to
understand his way. Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Keep them, and do them: for this is your
wisdom, and your understanding in the sight of the people: -- Only this is a
wise people, and understanding. Pro. 23. 19. O thou my son, hear and be
wise, and guide thy heart in the way.

CHAP. IIII.
Proving strict walking to be the wisest walking.

square and stable of good judgment, (...) Arist.
and sound resolution in the things he is about. He is the wisest man that
follows the wisest guide: But what man is he that fears the Lord? that is,
walks exactly: Him will the Lord teach the way that he shall choose, Psalm.
25. 12. Whereas it is a just punishment of carelessness, to wander as vagrants
and unsettled persons in the way of religion, and grounds of Christianity; and
to be tossed and tumbled every way with the waves of inconstancy, and
doubtfulnesse in every thing, for want of sound information and judgment in
the ways of God: and needs must such be as wavering in their practice, as in
their judgment.

2. He is the wisest man, that being to iourny takes the safest, shortest,
cleanest, and most lightsome way: But so does he that walks most strictly, and
circumspectly; he only walks safely, because he walks sincerely; whereas in
declining Gods ways but a little, there can be nothing but fears without,
and terrors within, and danger on every side, which nothing but uprightness
can fence out. So who can deny but God himself has described the rightest,
and so the shortest way to heaven, which is the way over which he holds his
own light? And howsoever many aspersions and foul things be cast upon it, yet
this is the only clean way of holiness and innocence, that leads to the
Holy of Holies, into which no unclean person or thing can enter.

3. He is the wisest man, whose words and actions being scanned most narrowly
will abide the trial: But thus must needs his words and actions be found,
that is most exact, and stands most strictly the word. So David says, Then
shall ^not be confounded when I have respect to all thy Commandments, Psalm.
119. 6. and Job 31. 35. the Almighty will witness for me, though mine enemies
write a book against me. Let the enemies of grace, slander, reproach, and
traduce for a time the ways of Gods righteous servants, he will make their
righteousness break out as the light, Psalm. 37. 5.
and time shall show they were not so ouershot as the world deemed. For,
standing straightly to the word, they may truly say with Jeremy, Lord, if I be
deceived, thou and thy Word has deceived me.

Ease slays the foolish: Prou. 1. 32.
But this man uses it warily, without pride or insolency; he is taught to use
the world weanedly, 1 Cor. 7. 31
as not using it. If he be in adversity, which sinkes the sinner, this man
bears it without impatience or murmuring, yea, he makes himself a great
gainer by it. Gods word fits him for every estate: he can want, Phil. 4. 12.
and abound; he is for peace or war, for sickness or health, for life or
death: no evil tidings can make him afraid. As a wise man he has rule and
power over his affections, and is free from unruly passions.

5. He is the wisest man that takes the best course for his own preferme^t:
But so does he that walks most exactly: 1 Timothy 6. 6.
Godliness is the greatest gain. This man is ever in the way of preferment,
he stands still in the presence of God, lives continually in his eye; by
constant honoring of him, he is coming into place of great honor, and great
honor is coming upon him. He has wealth and riches, and is still storing up
as one covetous for heaven, is ever increasing in grace and glory.

ways of God? If experienced counsel be the best, who so fit as he, who has
tasted how good God is: 1 Pet. 2. 3.
Who so able as he, whom God has stored with wisdom, such as has winded him
out of many troubles, such as brought into his hands so rich a stock, and
revenue of grace, and made him a pattern and example of piety and virtue to
many other?

Which if it be so, Such as charge strict walking of silliness and folly, do^
it with greater folly.
then we might take occasion to reprove such as charge Gods people with
simplicity and foolishness, and condemn them of much madness, in that they
go in a way unknown, uncouth, and contrary to the world. They cannot walk in
the dirty path of sinful pleasures, nor by the crooked rule of carnal
policy, nor make the fashion of the world the measure of their conformity: but
are content to walk in the straight way unto eternal life; Luke 1^. 34
which the foolish world counts foolishness, and a simple silliness: but with
greater folly: For God and his word approve them as the wisest men in the
world, and so denominateth them, wise Virgins, wise servants, wise merchants,
etc. And our text calls them fools that walk not circumspectly.

CHAP. V.
Describing some means to attain this wisdom.

NOw before we pass this point, it shall not be amiss to direct the Reader
by the way to some means to attain this wisdom, Means of spiritual
wisdom.
to walk exactly: as,

1. A diligent and frequent use and acquaintance in the word of God, 1.
Acquaintance with the Scriptures.
as men become wise Politicians by often using the book of statutes. This law
of God, has Gods wisdom contained in it, and makes us truly wise for the
matter and measure, as God would have us. Hence the holy Ghost every where calls
foolish men, to give ear to understanding, and to hear the words of wisdom,
Prou. 8. 5, 6. and v. 33. Hear instruction, and be wise. Neither must we hear
till we get a smattering knowledge of some general grounds of religion, in
which most rest themselves; but to understand the whole will of God, which is
our rule: and not only to understand it, but to apply it to our several
occasions, that it may not only be light in it self, but a lantern to our
feet, Ps. 119. 115
and that in all our steps. This is the high privilege of the Scripture above
all writings, that these alone are able to make men wise to salvation, 2 Timothy
3. 15. Most men read humane histories, men's sayings and writings, politic
essays, and observations of prudent men: and this furnishes them with some
model of humane and earthly wisdom: But only the wisdom of Gods word, can
make us truly wise to salvation; without which all the wisest Gentiles,
professing wisdom, and abounding mortalities, (...).
proved stark fools, Romans 1. 22. Cast Gods book of wisdom aside, thou shall
prove a fool in the end.

2. Meditation 2. Meditation.
of that a man hears and reads: for, to be wise, we must not only receive
the ingrahted word, Iam. 1. 21. but keep it, Luke 11. 28. Blessed are they
that hear the word of God, and keep it. Now an especial way to keep the
word, is meditation, which digests it into the several parts. Mary heard the
sayings of Christ, and pondered them in her heart. And David used this means
to become wise: yea, by constant meditation in the testimonies of God, he
professes how he became wiser than the prudent, than his teachers, than his
ancients, than his enemies, Psalm. 119. 97, 98, 99, 100. And the reason why many
hear a long time, and are never the wiser, is because they never care to
fasten it by meditation, and make it their own: but wise men will lay up
knowledge, Prou. 10. 14.

3. 3. Embracing of admonition.
A loving and thankful embracing of admonition and rebuke. Prou. 9. 8, 9.
Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee: Give admonion to the wise, and he
will be the wiser: Teach a righteous man, and he will increase in learning:
but rebuke a scorner, and he will hate thee: and, fools scorn admonition.
And therefore we are commanded not to speak in the ears of a fool: for he
despises the wisdom of our words, Pro. 23. 9. The way for a man to grow wise,
is, daily to discover his own folly, and make use of their words, who would
help him in this business. Thus David grew sensibly wiser by the reproof of
Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.
when he made him confess he had done very foolishly. This is Christian
teachablenesse, when a man is apt to receive a reproof.

4. 4. Company of the wise.
Frequent the company of godly and wise men: for he that walks with the wise,
(...). Theorg.
shall be wise, Prou. 13. 20. and 9. 6. Forsake the foolish, and walk in the
way of wisdom. In the company of the wise a man may be sure to do good, or
take good: the lips of the righteous feed many: he will speak out of a good
storehouse; he will deal faithfully with his brother, to help his soul out
of sin; his name from infamy, his person from scandal. Besides, he shall be
resolved in doubts, encouraged in well-doing, and directed by such both by good
instruction and good example.

5. Be fervent in prayer: It is a spiritual wisdom, and a gift of the
Spirit; therefore if any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, Iam, 1. 5.
It is wisdom from above, Iam. 3. 17. This wisdom is not the birth and issue
of great wits, and quick conceits, ^ut is seated in the heart that is humble,
and in sanctified souls, that are familiar with God, and frequent in prayer.
For as Moses when he was long in the mount with God, his face shined when he
came down: so those that continue in the mount of divine meditations and
petitions, shall shine in wisdom and knowledge. How or whence got Solomon all
that measure of wisdom (in which he was an eminent type of Jesus Christ, in
whom were hid treasures of wisdom) but because he asked it of God as his
chief choice? And David in the 119. Psalm, makes no end of begging wisdom,
understanding, good judgment from God; because he knew there was the
fountain.

These are the means that are set apart by God, for the attaining of wisdom.
If we fail in them, let us blame our selves, if folly eat us up.

CHAP. VI.
Leading into the particular rules of Christian wisdom, with the general
distribution of them.

BEcause this wisdom is not a contemplative, but an active knowledge, we
must acquaint our selves with the precepts of it, to guide us to this exact
walking, that the whole man may be led by the rules of Christian prudence in
all things. This is that which the Apostle prays for the Colossians, cap. 1.
v. 9. that they might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will, and all
wisdom in all things, to walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all
things. And because knowledge is of generals, and wisdom of particulars,
therefore for our better direction, let us here consider some particular rules
of spiritual wisdom grounded in Gods word; which he must be careful of, that
would walk not as unwise, but as wise; according to this Apostolical counsel.

Rules of wisdom, concern 1 God, and the things of God. Man himself; in his
Inner man; 1 Mind. 2 Thoughts. 3 Will. 4 Conscience. 5 Affections.
Outward man, in his 1 Calling. 2 Estate, of Prosperity. Adversity.
3 Speeches. 4 Actions, in General, for Trial. Undertaking.
Special, of 1 Mercy. Justice. Necessity.
2 Indiffere^cy, in General. Special, for Meat^. Sports. Apparel.





Others in 1 General, toward all. 2 Special; (...) 1 Good men. 2 Euillmen* in,
1 General. 2 Specia^l 1 Scorners. 2 Haters of our selves.







CHAP. VII.
RVles of wisdom concerning God, Rules of wisdom concerning things of God.
and the things of God, are four.

1. That God is to be loved above all, and that for himself, 1. Love God as
the chiefest good.
being the chief good. This is the scope of the whole first table, the first
and the great commandment, Mark. 12. 33. To love God witb all the heart, all
the understanding, all the soul, and all the strength, is more than all burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as the Scribe confessed; whereupon the text inferres
he answered ((...), cordate,) discreetly, wisely, and that in Christ's
judgment. This is wisdom, to give God the first place, first thoughts, first
service, chief praise and precedence: Romans 11. 36.
for, of him, and through him, and from him are all things.

2. 2. Purchase Christ above all gain.
Another chief point of spiritual wisdom in the things of God, is, to
purchase Christ and remission of sins above all things in the world. The
sound Christian is that wise merchant, that sels all to buy the pearl, that
is, Christ and his righteousness: that wise builder, that lays Christ a sure
foundation in his heart: He is of the number of those wise Virgins, that will
be sure (what ever they lack) to furnish themselves of oil in their lamps to
meet their bridegroom. Wisdom will procure the best commodities, Phil. 1. 21.
and chief gain, which is Christ both in life and death. Paul was a wise
merchant, who esteemed all things dross and dung in comparison of Christ. So
were the Disciples, saying, Master we have lest all and followed thee. (...)
So were the Martyrs, whom the world accounted simple fools, in following
Christ with the loss of life and all. Happy is that soul, and filled with
found and saving wisdom, that comes to Christ with this resolution, Master,
thou have the words of eternal life, and whither shall I go?

3. 3. Choose best things first.
Let us prefer in our election and choice things of higher nature, before
things of inferior: for wisdom keeps a method, by which it ever subordinateth
lower things to higher. This rule our Savior prescribes, Mat. 6. 33. First
seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and then the things of this
life* first provide for heaven, and then for earth. By which rule of wisdom,
1. all profits and pleasures must give place to piety: for all is but pidling
gain to godliness. 2. By this rule of wisdom, the special calling and
trade of life must give place to the general calling, which is the trade of
Christianity. 3. By this rule a Christian must choose to be rich in God and
good works, rather than in the world: which because the rich man in the
Gospel neglected, Luke 12. 20
he is called fool for his labor. 4. By this rule we must with David, more
affect one glimpse of Gods favor and countenance, Psalm. 4.
than all corn, wine, and oil, that is, the most necessary and delightful
profits in the world. 5. By this rule we must make more account of pardon of
sins locked up in our breasts, than of the whole treasury of a Kingdom in
our chests. 6. By this rule we must esteem a grain of grace above a million
of gold: and 7. a poor godly man above a wicked Prince: Eccles. 4. 13. Better
is a wise child than an old foolish King; which will not be admonished.

4. 4* Fear Go^ and keep his Commandments.
Fear ^od, and keep his Commandments: for this is the whole man, Eccles. 12.
13. This is to apply our hearts to wisdom, to set our hearts to keep Gods
Commandments, and do them: this is our wisdom, Deuteronomy. 4. 5. Who is a wise man
among you, endued with knowledge? let him by good conversation show his works
in meekness of wisdom, Iam. 5. 13. A wise man will attend the mouth of the
King, and will fear the danger of the law: so a wise Christian will walk in
the law of the Lord, Psa. 119. 1. and will be sure to keep him to this rule
and warrant contained in the word of God, Gal. 6. 16. And as a wise man is
careful to keep his assurances and evidences for the certainty of his lands
and earthly liuelihoods, and is loath to forfeit any of them by failing in any
of the conditions: So it is the wisdom of a godly man to keep the Word
safely in his heart, which assures him of his estate in heaven, and which he
is loath to forfeit by failing in the conditions and clauses of it

CHAP. VIII.
Containing rules of wisdom concerning the innner man; and first of the
mind, thoughts, and will.

BEing to entreat of the rules of wisdom concerning man and the things of man,
good order requires that we begin with such as concern 1. ones self, and 2.
others. They which concern a man's self, respect either the inner man, or the
outward. The inner man in five particulars: 1. in his mind, 2. thoughts, 3.
will, 4. conscience, and 5. affections.

For the mind, Rules for the mind.
these rules of wisdom are necessary to be remembered.

1. 1. To enlighten it.
To furnish it with necessary, profitable, and humble knoledge: The man's eyes
are in his head, Ecl. 2. 13. This is a wisdom to sobriety, Romans 12. 13. where
also the Apostle condemns curiosity and conceitednesse, which wastes out
time, and brings infinite idle questions, wherein men presume above that which
is meet. The Prophet David professed he meddled not with things too high for
him. Psa 131. 1.
And the Apostle Paul desired after his conversion to know nothing but Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 2.
and him crucified. As for humbleness in knowledge, Solomon says, The way of
a fool is right in his own eyes, Pro. 12. 15. and, A wise man in his own
conceit is more hopeless than a fool, Pro. 26. 12. 16. Our rule therefore must
be to grow up in wisdom, and as we grow in knowledge, so to grow in humility:
for the more sound knowledge a man attains, the more shall he see in himself
to humble him.

2. 2. To dec^ it.
To deck and adorn the mind with humility, holiness, modesty,
shamefastness, etc. 1 Pet. 3. 4, 5. and, Col. 3. 12. As the elect of God, put
on tender mercy, kindness, humbleness, and meekness* but above all things
put on love, v. 14.

The second sort of rules concerns a man's thoughts. Rules for the thoughts.
The general is in Pro. 4. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for it is
slippery and deceitful; more than necessary to watch and suspect it, and to
set time apart to check and reclaim it. But for the better keeping of thy
thoughts in order, think on these particulars: 1. Give God the first thoughts
1. Give God thy first thoughts, that he may hold the chief part in thy heart:
and this will sweetly relish the heart, and by estranging it from worldly
impediments, fit it, and keep it in preparedness for all good occasions* Psa.
108. 1, 2, 3. David prepares his heart, and will awake early to praise the
Lord: the way to walk safely and comfortably all the day, is first to reform
that which is within.

2. Examine 2. Examine them whence they come and whither they go.
thy thoughts whence they come, and whither they go, and what they do in thee:
By which means thou shall banish a number of idle and wandeing thoughts, which
like roauing vagrants, being worth nothing, come ever to steal something,
either time or grace: and so shall thou make and keep room for better. And
do this betime, because the first motions of sinful thoughts defile a man.
This rule is in 2 Cor. 10. 5. to draw weapons against every strong imagination,
that is exalted against the knowledge of Christ.

3. 3. Pull them from the world.
If thy thoughts concern the world, pull them back, keep them from the
world, save as much as needs must for the moderate maintaining of thy self and
thine, lest heavenly thoughts be drowned and hindered, 1 Timothy 6. 9. The reason
is, because our hearts being earthly, do presently conceive a sweetness in
earthly things, and are presently distracted from the love of the Creator, to
the love of the creature. Now spiritual wisdom requires, that we diminish
the love of the creature, that we may in crease our love of the Creator. But,
if they will run upon the world, then turn the course of them a little, to
consider the va^ity and misery of this evil world, the painted vizor of the
pleasures of it, the uncertainty of life, the deceitfulness of riches, how
they be not ours, what evils and encumbrances we have received from the world,
what fools they have made us in treasuring on earth, whose home and expectation
is in heaven.

4. If they concern thy self or others, see they be humble.
If thy thoughts concern thy self, or others thy brethren, labor to think
better of others than thy self: for thou see no such thing in them as in thy
self: Phil. 2. 3. Let every one esteem better of another than of himself.
Yea, the more thou seem to excel others in gifts, the more humble labor to
be. An hard rule, and difficult to be practiced: and therefore it is often
commended to us, as Romans 12. 16. Make your selves equal to them of the lower
sort* and elsewhere. For this purpose, conceive not only what thou have
received, but what thou want, and what good things thou art without: and
then with Paul, say thou have not yet attained to perfection. Phil. 3. 12.


5. If thy thoughts concern any sin, 5. If they concern sin. be sure it be
to hate it
be sure it be to hate and reno^nce, to bewail and mourn for it, in thy self
or others. For there is a slynesse and subtilty in sin, which while we think
of, it easily gains some tickling and consent, which at least hinders that
through-hatred that we ought to maintain against it.

The third rule for the inner man concerns the will, Rules for the will.
namely, Concurrence of our will with Gods will.
that our care must be, there be but one will between God and us: for so has
the Lord taught us to pray, Thy will be done. 1. Wherein soever God has
revealed his will to us, 1. revealing.
in that we must rest. 2. Whatsoever his will determines of us, 2. determining.
that we we must account holy and just, whether with us or against us. 3.
Whatsoever his will prescribes to us, 3. prescribing.
whether obedience to the law, or faith of the Gospel, we must hold our selves
fast bound in conscience unto it, let it seem never so cross to us, or
contrary to his law, as Abraham did in offering his son. 4. Whatsoever his
will disposes to us, 4 disposing.
prosperity or adversity, sickness or health, life or death, or whatsoever
else; all is from a most wise hand, disposing every thing for the good and
salvation of his elect, and so should be entertained. Thus Eli said, 1 Samuel 3.
18.
It is the Lord, let him do what is good in his eyes: Esa. 39. 8.
and Hezekiah, The word of the Lord is good, even when it threatened the
overthrow of his house and Kingdom. So David, Psa. 39. 9. I held my tongue,
and said nothing, because thou Lord did it: Chapter 1. v. 21
and Job, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed be the name of the Lord.

CHAP. IX.
Rules for the conscience.

THe fourth sort of rules for the inner man, concerns the conscience. Rules for
the conscience.
1. Beware of doing any thing with a blind conscience. 1. Beware of a blind
conscience
A blind man swallows many a gnat, and a blind conscience swalloweth any sin.
This is a wicked conscience, to which no sin so great shall come, but a man
shall think he does God good service in it, Ioh. 16. 2.
as Christ speaks of them that would s^ay his Disciples. Why do heathens
persecute Christians, and Papists pursue Protestants even to death, but out of
blind zeal and conscience, that they root out a false religion? And
whatsoever a man does by an erroneous and seduced conscience, is sin: the
rule of conscience to heathens being the law of nature, and to the Church the
law written, even the whole word of God as a pillar of cloud and fire to direct
it in all the way to heaven. Therefore let the word of God dwell plenteously in
you, in all wisdom, Col. 3. 16.

2. Do nothing with a doubtful conscience: 2. Do nothing with a doubting
conscience.
for whatsoever is done with a scrupulous conscience, is sin, and is not
only an offense of God, but of the conscience too, Conscientia nos animae.
Tertul.
which is as a little God within us: for it is not of faith, nor obedience to
the known will of God. Romans 14. vlt. He that doubts, is condemned: because
his action is not of faith. 3. Get a good conscience ab^ue all things.
Therefore verse. 5. he says, Let every man be fully persuaded in his mind.

3. Labor to get a good conscience above all things. Act. 23. 1. I have
endeavored in all good conscience till this day. A pure conscience by nature
has no man, but made pure by the blood of Christ sprinkled upon it by faith,
in that he has obtained full remission of sin, and by his blood also merited
the Spirit of Sanctification, by which the conscience of the believer is daily
cleansed.

4. 4. Aim at a pure conscience.
Labor to get a pure conscience in all things. A man by observing many things,
may get himself good credit, but a good conscience must be in all the things
of God. Ioh. 18. 28.
The Pharisees might not go into Pilates judgment hall, lest they should be
polluted; and yet at the same time, they could dispense with their conscience,
to crucify the Son of God, a sin defiling heaven and earth, whiles the
Sun was ashamed, and the earth trembled at it. The Papists may not eat flesh
in Lent, their consciences will not suffer them; but to kill Kings, and blow up
Parliament-houses, their consciences give them good leave. Many Protestants
will not steal, kill, commit the act of adultery: but their conscience can
dispense with covetousness, unbridled anger wantonness, filthy speeches, etc.
But if Gods word be the same, so must the conscience: and he that serves God
as Paul did in pure conscience, 2 Timothy* 1. 3. will do so at all times, in all
places and things, and will avoid sin in his closet as much as in mos^
public meetings, yea, small sins as well as great.

5. 5. Keep diligently the goodness and purity of conscien^e by 2. things.
It is as great wisdom to keep things well, as to purchase them: therefore we
must (if we would wall^ wisely) be as careful to keep good conscience a^ to
obtain them: and thereunto observe two things* displease all men than thine
own conscience, thy friends, thy family, thy rulers, nay, thy own self
before thy conscience. So did Daniel and his fellows. So did Cyprian (as
Augustine relates it) when the Emperor in the way to his execution said, Now I
give thee space to consider whether thou will obey me in casting a grain into
the fire, or be thus miserably slain: Nay (says he) In re tam sancta
deliberatio non habet locum: there needs no deliberation in this case. The like
we read in the hystory of France: In the year 1572. presently after that
tragical and perfidious slaughter and massacre of so many thousands of Gods
Saints by treacherous Papists, Charles the ninth King of France, called the
Prince of Conde, and proposed to him this choice; Either to go to Mass, or to
die presently, or to suffer perpetual imprisonment. His noble answer was, that
by Gods help he would never choose the first, and for either of the two latter,
he left to the Kings pleasure and Gods providence. Thus a good conscience
makes a good choice for it self, choosing any thing rather than to offend God.

CHAP. X.
Rules of wisdom concerning the affections.

THe fifth sort of rules for the inner man concerns the affections, Rules
concerning the affections.
and has these particulars:

1. 1. Give God the chief affections.
Delight thy self in the Lord, and make him thy chief joy. Psalm. 37. 4. For
the object of our joy must not be carnal, but the Lord himself, apprehending
him as Genesis 17. 1. el shaddi, almighty to save, all-sufficient to supply, and a
large portion, our Sun, our shield, grace, and glory, Psalm. 84. Solomon
having tried his heart with all other delights, came at last to a recantation:
and so do all Gods children, and say, Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us, Psalm. 4.

2. 2. Affect all other things in God, and for God.
Labor to affect all other things in God, and for God, nothing like him, much
less above him, or against him: Psalm. 34. 8. Taste and see how good God is;
that is, in all things labor to find the sweetness of God in all his
creatures, and all his actions. A wise man will not insist in the gift, but
look to the giver, whose love he prizeth more than the token of it. If any
affection make us unfit to pray, or any way thrust us from God, it is carnal.

3. 3. Fix them more upon heavenly things, than earthly.
Let us labor to get our affections more to heaven than earth: Col. 3. 2. Set
your affections on things which are above, and not on things which are on
earth: where we see plainly, that these two cannot both have the affections set
on them, no more than two Masters served at once: Mat. 6. 24
as also that it is not enough to affect heavenly things, but also with chief
affection and care, ver. 33.
in the first place. Hence is that ordinary rule, that spiritual things must
be affected and asked simply, being simply good, but temporal with limitation,
as being but conditionally good.

4. Fear the evil of sin more than the evil of punishment, 4. Fear evil of
sin, more than of suffering.
because the evil of sin is more evil. Sin is simply evil, and so is
nothing else, no not the punishment of it. A wise man should rather choose hell
than Gods offense: for there is nothing but sin which God hates, and we
ought to hate nothing so much: sin directly resists Gods glory, but
punishment makes for it in the manifestation of his justice.

5. 5. Commiserate the afflicted estate of our brethren.
Be affectionate one in the case and condition of another. In case of
spiritual misery, sin, weakness, humane frailty: Be tender hearted one to
another, even as God for Christ's sake forgave you, Ephesians. 4. 32. so Col. 3. 12.
Now beloved, as the elect of God put on tender mercy, kindness, etc. one to
another. And in the temporal miseries of our brethren, put on bowels of
compassion, be not without natural affection, forget not Joseph's affliction;
Amos 6. 6.
but lend, give, clothe, feed, protect from violence, and turn not thine eyes
from thine own slesh. The phrase (bowels of mercy) shows that all our mercy
must be from within, even from the tender compassions of the estate of our
brother: and the same in Isa. 58. 10. that we power out our souls to the
needy: that is, our souls must first be merciful, and then our mercies will
be plentiful, which is noted in the word pouring.

CHAP. XI.
Rules of wisdom for the outward man, and first concerning his calling.

NOw we come to such rules of wisdom, as whereby the outward man is to be
ordered, that we may walk (both toward our selves, and others) not as
unwise,* but as wise, and that by the wisdom which is from above. And these
rules concern, 1. his calling, 2. his estate, 3. his words, 4. his actions.

Directions to walk wisely in his course and calling are these: Rules for the
speci^l calling.


1. 1. Live in a lawful calling.
Seeing the calling is a part of Christian obedience, and duty to God, a
Christian may neither live out of a calling, nor in any calling not warranted
by Gods word. For if God set us in our callings, he promises both to be with
us in them, and to give us good success, and to help us against the
tediousness of them, Ios. 1. 8. Therefore sanctify thy calling, and every part
thereof, 1 Timothy 4 5.
by the word and prayer.

2. In the whole exercise of our calling* 1. Show al^ good fait^nesse in (...)
we must show all good ^aithfulnesse. 1. To God, 1 To God.
by depending on him, who has made our calling a chief means of our
maintenance, and not sacrificing to our own nets. Hab. 116.
For it is the Lord that gives power to get substance. Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
2. To our selves, 2. To ^ur selves.
by walking diligently, and abiding in our calling, that we may eat our own
bread, and provide for our selves and ours, and give to him that needs, Ephesians.
4. 28. For by idle and inordinate living, through the neglect of the vocation
by Gods just judgment men fall into the depth of sin, drunkenness, gaming,
whoredom, theeuing, and nothing comes amiss to an idle person. Besides,
discredit, bad report, and poverty, Prou 6. 11.
come as an armed man upon such a one. 3. To others, 3. To others.
whether we be Masters or servants, as knowing that in our calling we are to
practice most Christian duties, as love to our brethren, patience, truth,
fidelity, uprightness, as being ever under Gods eye.

3. Another point of wisdom in our callings, 3. Be not busy in other men's
callings.
is, not to meddle with other men's business, but follow our own close. 1 The.
4. 11. Study to be quiet and to do your own business. And every where the
Apostle reproues busybodies, who going beyond their own bounds, thrust their
sickle into every man's harvest, and being out of their own places and
business, intermeddle with that which no way concerns them. And these are
disturbers of peace and civil tranquillity, kindling and blowing up contentions
for lack of other work. The same rule is for women also, that they be not
gadders, Tit. 2. 5.
but housekeepers.

4. In all earthly business, 4 In earthly business carry an heauenly^minde*
study to carry an heavenly mind. A Christian while he conuerseth in earth,
Phil. 3. 30.
must have his conversation in heaven, and know, that in all the ways of this
present life, he ought never to step out of the way to eternal life. Neither
shall a man be a loser by this course, seeing we have an express promise,
that if we seek Gods kingdom first and principally, these outward things
should (so far as they are needful for us) without such carking care be
cast upon us.

5. 5. Intend most the most necessary duties of them.
As all duties of the calling must be profitable in themselves, and for the
public good, so the most profitable must be most intended, and specially
performed. A Minister must read the Word, but must apply himself more to
Preaching, as being more necessary. A Magistrate must execute justice upon
transgressors of men's laws, but especially against open transgressors of Gods
Law. Masters of Families must provide for the bodies and health of their
Family, but especially for the good and salvation of their souls.

CHAP. XII.
Rules of wisdom concerning a man's estate, and first for adversity.

THe rules of wisdom concerning a Christian man's estate, One general rule for
all estates, is to think the present estate best for thee.
are these: first, general; secondly, special.

The general rule for all estates, is this: Be prepared for any estate,
contented in every estate, and assure thy self the present estate (whatsoever
it is) is best for thee, though not ever in thy sense, yet in Gods gracious and
wise ordering of it. This lesson the Apostle Paul had well learned, Phil. 4.
11, 12. I can want, and abound; I can be full, and hungry: I have learned in
all estates to be contented.

The special rules are either for prosperity, or for adversity. Rule for
affliction.
Concerning adversity and afflictions, these are the rules of Christian
wisdom: 1. God may be as well inioyed in adversity as prosperity.


1. Consider thou art not placed here in the world by God to enjoy the
pleasures of the world, but to enjoy God, which thou may do as well in
affliction as in prosperity, and to cleave to him in his service, looking for
nothing but afflictions, as a pilgrim going to thy Country, the way whereunto,
lies through afflictions. This ground not laid; men count troubles a strange
thing, 1 Pet. 4. 11. and start at the mention of them, as the Apostles, Ioh.
11. 8. when they heard Christ speaking of going into Jury, where the Jews had
lately sought to stone him. And note it to be a corruption of the heart, to be
more grieved for thine own troubles than the troubles of the Church, for
private than public evils.

2. La^ up strength and comforts aforehand: 2 Lay up strength and comfort
aforehand.
as 1. Humility, to ouer-master and tame the pride and rebellion of our hearts,
and to bring in contentedness to sweeten our troubles; and our labor will be
well spent: for if we can relish the hardest part of our life, our whole life
else will assuredly be more sweet and joyful. 2. Grow up in the knowledge of
God, which will make thee rise up in much comfort, and will bring in comfort
against that confused heaviness, distrust, and dangerous affections and
passions, which else in trouble might beat us down, and off him. 3. Get
assurance of faith, which will sweetly warm the heart in the sense of Gods
love in Jesus Christ: The fruit of which will be, First, to enable us to trust
our selves with God in any estate, and be assured the Lord is with us in fire
and water, in the midst of the valley of the shadow of death. Psalm. 23* 4.
Secondly, to depend on him for strength: for howsoever Satan would make us
bel^eue our affliction is greater than it is, or we are for it; yet we shall
assure our hearts that the Lord has measured it out for our strength, and not
above. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
Thirdly, to wait upon him for a good issue and seasonable deliverance, who
has promised to turn it to the best. Romans 8. 28.
This shall keep us from fainting, distrust, and despair.

3. In all evils of punishment take occasion to set upon the evil of sin, 3.
In evils of punishment to set upon evil of sin.
and revenge upon that: complain of it to God and men, murmr and grudge at
nothing else. If affliction be sharper then ordinary, it is sure some sin or
lust adds a sting unto it. But this rule mortifies sin and unruly passions,
and will weaken the heart, and make a man say with the Church, Mic. 7. 9.
I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned.

4. Make them no heavier then God makes them, 4. Make them no heavier than God
has made them.
by impatience, frowardness, and looseness of heart. God sometimes lays on a
little finger, and the froward heart lays on the whole hand and loins, to
make the burden heavier with faithless heaviness and distrust, which is but
an addition of new and worse troubles then the former. How inconsiderately do
many men load themselves with troubles too too light in themse^us, and on the
shoulders of wise men, who can make a virtue of necessity, and st^p over a
number of rubbes, which others stoop to remove and infinitely toil
themselves? How do many in smaller troubles, as discurtesie of neighbors,
unruliness of children, unfaithfulness of servants, smaller losses and
crosses in family-matters, give place to unquietness, impatience, and passion,
till their folly have (by seeking to ease their burden) increased it from a
dram to a talent? And now how unmeet are they for the service of God? how
unprofitable in any Christian society? how sour and heavy in countenance,
disguised in speech, and impotent in their behavior? All which testify the
frowardness of the heart, wherein had there been a dram of Christian wisdom
and moderation, ^cuius fit patientia. Quicquid corgere est nefas.
the passion had not swelled to the cause, much less so far exceeded it. Horat.


5. Make not haste from under any affliction. 5 Make not too much haste from
under them.
He that believes, makes not haste. But labor for a right use of it rather
than the remouall: Isa. 18. 16.
attain once a right use, and doubt not of a good issue. Gold is not presently
pulled out of the fire so soon as it is cast in, but must stay a while till it
be purged. A Musician strains up a string, and lets it not down, lest the
harmony and music be spoiled: So the Lord deals with his children, but never
forgets mercy nor measure; nay, it is mercy so to measure them, Esa. 27. 9.
as they may be purged by them.

6. Observe and mark thy troubles, 6. Observe both the trials and the fruits.
and thy disposition in them: first, to grow up in wisdom and experience by
them: thus thy sufferings will become wholesome instructions. (...)
Observe where thou wast most pinched, (...)*
and wherein thou tookest the greatest comfort: secondly, to grow up in an
infallible hope of Gods goodness, and a good issue for time to come. For this,
observe Gods seasonable hearing of thy prayers, and the proofs of Gods help
in most needful times; which shall be a strong means to keep thee from
fainting, fears and despaires from time to come. So did David in the case of
the Lion and Bear, 1 Samuel 17. 37.
and through all the 23. Psalm. Thus the Apostle from observations of times
past, gathers assurance for the time present, and to come, 2 Cor. 1. 10. -- who
delivered us from so great death and does deliver us, and in whom we trust,
that he will yet hereafter deliver us. Thirdly, to be able to comfort others
with such comforts as our selves were vpheld with in our troubles, 2 Cor. 1. 4.
which comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them
which are in affliction, by the comfort where. with our selves are comforted of
God. Thus to the godly arises light out of darkness, sweet comes out of
sour, and out of the eater meat.

CHAP. XIII.
Rules of wisdom for prosperity.

IN prosperity take these directions. Rules for prosperity.


1. If riches increase, set not thine heart upon them, Psalm. 62. 10. For why
should thou, considering the danger 1. Consider the danger of it.
how easy it is to wax wanton? how hard for a rich man to be saved? how few
by outward things are drawn to the love of heavenly? how many are ensnared and
choked with them? how flitting and uncertain they be? how certainly we must
leave them, or they us, and come to account for them.

2. In the carriage of thy prosperity be suspicious of thy self, 2. Be
suspicious of thy self.
thankful to God, and return the glory of it to him of whom thou receiuest
it. David, while he had liberty, easily strayed, Psa. 119. 67. Thankfulness is
Gods tribute, which being denied him, he reenters on his own, Deuteronomy. 28. 47.
Because thou seruedst not the Lord with ioyfulnesse, and a good heart, Has
aeterna sa^^^s consequitur d^pes.
in the abundance of all things, thou shall serve thine enemies in hunger, in
thirst, Has aeterna sit^s. -- Sen.
and in need of all things. So do many Prodigals.

3. Fear the cross before it come, 3. In thy calm provide f^r a storm.
and provide for it. The thing that I feared is come upon me, Job 3. 25. and,
he waited for his changes. It was an addition to the great plague of Babylon,
Isa. 46. 11. that evil should come on her, and she not know the morning
thereof: Destruction shall come upon thee suddenly ere thou be aware. Luke 14.
28.
Therefore cast the costs of religion and well-doing beforehand.

4. Never account thy self prosperous if it be not well with Gods Church: 4
Think not thy self prosperous, if the Church of God be not.
Good Vriah would not rest as long as the Ark of the Lord was abroad, and his
Lord Ioab in the field: as a good child being in health mournes and droupes for
the mothers sickness. 2 Samuel 7. 2.
David thought it not fit to dwell in seiled houses, and the Ark of God lie in
tents: for the neglect whereof, the Jews are reproved, Hag. 1. 4. Nehemiah,
even before the King, was of a sad countenance, and sorrowful at heart, when
he received evil tidings of Jerusalem, chap. 2. verse. 2. Hester and Mordecai
ioyed not in the greatest aduancements, so long as the sentence against the
Jews was vnreuersed. And Moses might have lived well, and at pleasure, in
Pharaohs Court: but he chose rather to suffer affliction with Gods people, Heb.
11. 25.
than to enjoy such pleasures.

5. In thy prosperity consider the affliction and adversity of others. 5. In
thy prosperity cast eye on others afflictions.
The contrary hereof was the sin of the Princes of Israel living in
prosperity: Amos 6. 6. They lie on beds of iuory, and stretch themselves on
beds, drink wine in boles, and anoint themselves with oil, but none
remembered the affliction of Joseph. The like of Dives his inhumanity toward
Lazarus. Yea, sometime it shall be wisdom to go into the house of mourning,
Eccles. 7. 2.
which will strike a deeper impression; and to visit others in adversity, and
mark their speeches, who embraced these outward pleasures with greatest and
sharpest appetite, and thou shall find the affliction far more bitter, and
their sorrow in the loss so much the sharper, as the love was eager in
inioying their peace: and perhaps they will tell thee, they were never such
gainers by all their prosperity, as they were losers by it, or gainers by that
present affliction.

CHAP. XIIII.
Rules to carry our speeches wisely, as those that aim at the Apostolical
rule of Christian circumspection.

1. COncerning the ground of them: Rules for speeches. 1. Let word^ issue from
a good fountain.
Labor to get a good heart, for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
will speak. Mat. 5. ^8.
The heart of the wise guides his mouth wisely, Prou. 16. 23. And, if the
heart indite a good matter, the tongue will be the pen of a ready writer, Psalm.
45. 1. Such as the heart is, such will be the speech: and therefore he that
has no care of his heart, cannot be a good and careful speaker. The Apostle
requires gracious speech, Col. 4. 6. but that must come from a gracious heart:
as Psalm. 37. 30, 31. the mouth of the righteous will speak of wisdom, and
his tongue will talk of judgment. For the Law of his God is in his heart, and
his steps shall not slide. and Pro. 31. 26. She opens her mouth with wisdom,
and the Law of grace is in her tongue. On the contrary, a graceless heart
cannot speak well: Prou. 10. 20, 21. The heart of the wicked is little worth:
the lips of the righteous do feed many; but fools shall die for want of
wisdom. The true reason, why many mend not their bad speeches, is, because
first they mend not their heart.

2. Concerning the matter of speech: Let the matter be choice.
1. Because all must be wholesome so much as we may, therefore choose the best
matters to talk of, matters of religion, faith, hope, and the way to
salvation: for wisdom always chooses the best. 2. If it be chosen or offered,
it concerns either God, or our neighbors, or our selves. 1. If it concern
God, what.
I. If it concern God, or any part of his name, attributes, word or works,
we must speak most reverently, as those who are not worthy to take his name
into our mouths. The precept is, Leuit. 19. 12. Thou shall not defile the name
of the Lord, but fear his glorious name, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. And they defile his
name, who in common talk, lightly and carelessly use his name, of God, or Lord,
or any other of his titles in ordinary speech: and they, who are ordinary or
idle swearers and cursers: and iesters in Scripture-phrases, who are far from
trembling at his word, Isa. 66. 3. and those that mock at sin and Gods
judgments, and abuse or are unthankful for any of his mercies. II. If the
matter of thy speech concern thy brothers person, 2. If our neighbor*
the rule is, to speak of the good thou know by him, behind his back: but
of evil, not without calling, nor without grief; and before him, or to him.
Tit. 3. 2. Warn them that they speak evil of no man, but be soft, and
showing all meekness to all men. Contrary whereunto is scoffing, deriding,
cursing, railing, bitter and slanderous speeches, tending to the offense of any
man: yea, if men's speeches may justly offend us, we must be soft and calm,
showing all meekness, not rendering rebuke for rebuke, but passing by his
sin, epsy in his person the image of God worthy to be reverenced and loved.
If thou spea^e of his sayings o^ actions, if they be evil, speak as little of
them as may be, if they be doubtful, construe them in the best part: for love
is not suspicious, but hops all things. 1 Cor. 13. 7*
Praise God for his good actions: and as for sins in him, deal plainly and
truly with him: Leu. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother, but shall plainly
rebuke him, and not suffer his sin upon him. We must not lie, dissemble,
flatter, or sooth up any in their sins, which is a most ordinary sin against
this rule of wisdom. III. If the matter of thy speech concern thy self, 3.
If our selves.
speak modestly without vanity or boasting: Prou. 27. 2. Let another man
praise thee, and not thine own lips. Nay, we should rather extenuate and
lessen the good in us, if we must needs speak of it, 1 Cor. 15. 9*
as Paul, I am the least of the Apostles* and in an others person, I know a
man, etc. 2 Cor. 12. 2.

3. Concerning the manner of our speech. 3. The manner.
First, because every man's speech by nature is corrupt, 1. Sauory.
therefore strive to make it gracious, and powdered with salt, Col. 4. 6. that
is, well seasoned and sauoury, not sauouring of the flesh and corruption, but
we must drive out or dry up the corruption of them, with the salt of grace.
Against many, who powder their speech with oaths, and curses, and filthy
rottenness, or fondidle speeches, sauouring of the filthy sincke and puddle
within. Secondly, it must be just and sincere, 2. Sincere.
the truth of our heart, Psalm. 15. 2. without dissimulation or lies, seeing God
made the tongue to express the heart. A fearful thing it is, that most men's
speeches are turned into mere complement. 3. Most earnest in things heavenly.
Thirdly, it must be more earnest, joyful, and comfortable when thou speak
of heavenly things, than of earthly: not jesting, or foolish talking, but
rather giving of thanks, Ephesians. 5. 4.

4. Concerning the end of our speech: 4. The end of our speech, edification.
It must tend to edification* Ephesians. 4. 29. to feed many, Prou. 10. 21. and
minister grace to the hearers. It must bend it self still for God, the defense
of good men and actions, and the disgrace of sin. Better no speech, than to
no good end. And yet many in their light, and idle speeches say, why, I hope I
do no harm. Yea, but what good does it? Shame will not let thee say, thou
intendest edification. Therefore look well unto it.

5* Concerning the measure of our speech: 5. The measure.
First, we must not speak too little, 1. Not too little.
and omit gracious speeches when occasion is offered, as many dry and barren
hearts and mouths, have not a word for God and goodness, that have words
enough, and more then enough in any other argument; like idols in good things,
that have mouths, Psalm. 115. 5.
and speak not; or as if they were possessed with dumb spirits, and not
suffered to speak any good. Tell such a one of a good farm, or bargain, or
natural things, and they savor and relish them well enough: whereas a good
motion strikes them dumb, and makes them as fishes out of their element.
Neither, 2. Not too much.
secondly, must our words be too many: for in many words are many sins. (...).
The fool multiplieth words, Eccles. 10, 14. and Prou. 29. 11. A fool powers
out all his mind. But he that has knowledge, spares his words, Pro. 17. 27.
and he that refraines his lips, is wise, cha. 10. 19. It is folly to lay on
more words then the mat^er requires, and argues impotency of mind, and
car^ies a show or demonstration of passion, and excess of affection, or pride
in speaking.

6. Concerning the season of our speech. 6. The season.
All our words must be seasonable, as well as seasoned, that is, fitted to
circumstances, times, places, and persons. Wisdom will seek a season for good
words: for there is a season wherein the prudent will keep silence. Amos 5. 13
* And how good is a good word in due season? Pro. 15. 23. It is like apples of
gold, and pictures of silver. Husband men observe seasons in sowing, and so
must he that looks for an harvest of his speeches. Abigail would not speak
to her husband Nabal in his drunkenness, but when he had slept out his wine.
Every man is not capable of every good speech, nor no man at all times alike.
There is an unadvised opennes, against which our Savior by his example arms
us, Ioh. 2. vlt. He would not commit himself to some, who are said to believe
in him, because he knew what was in man. Silence is best where no good can be
done, as Christ was silent before the high Priest: and Rabsecai must not be
answered. To meet a man in the heat of his passion with good words, is to meet
a Bear robbed of her whelps: but let the passion be calm, and then tell him
how disguised and uncovered he was, he will perhaps believe it.

CHAP. XV.
Motives to look to our tongue.

1. BEcause a good man Motives to govern the tongue
if the speech be naught, the religion is vain, Iam. 1. 29. Lying and accusing
is the devils work. 2. Watching of good David's resolution, Psalm. 39. 1. I
thought I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will
keep my mouth bridled, while the wicked is in my sight. And this is necessary,
because the tongue is an unruly member, as fire, and by this means shall
become our glory, Iam. 1. 6. 8.
and our brothers shield. 3. God has a time to call to reckoning the words
that are thought but wind, Psalm. 50. 20, 21. even every idle word, Matthew. 12.
36.

CHAP. XVI.
Rules of wisdom concerning our actions, that in all of them we may show
forth Christian prudence and circums^ection: and first in general.

FIrst, every Christian is to examine the work he is to do, Rules for our
actions in general. 1. Examine what thou art doing.
whether he be about a good work, whereof he may expect comfort, Gal. 6* 3 Let
every man prove his own work, and so he shall have comfort in himself. And
good reason: for his work must be tried afterward, and therefore it is
wisdom to try it beforehand. And the same rule of examining it, is now, and
shall be hereafter. This trial stands' in 4. things. 1. Whether good in the
matter
This trial stands in four things: 1. Whether it be good in it self, and in
the matter of it: if it be lawful, if it be commanded, The rule for the
goodness of any action is the word of God: What I command thee, Deu. 12. 32
that do only. Or else it will be asked, Esa 1. 12.
Who required those things at your hands? And for the matter of our actions, we
have a special rule, Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are true, honest, just,
pure; whatsoever things pertain to love, and are of good report; if there be
any virtue or praise, think on these things. And Romans 12. 17. and 1 Cor. 8.
21. Provide things that are honest, not only before the Lord, but also before
men. 2. Examine whether it be good in the doer, 2. If good in the manner.
undertaken by virtue of a special calling, and answerable to that duty which
himself owes to God or man. God vpholdeth the societies of men by order;
which is, when every man keeps his own standing, and every one moves (as the
several stars) but every one in his own sphere, not troubling the motion
of another. So public men should attend the public office; and private men
reform in private, but let the public alone. For Christ reproved Peter's
curiosity, in asking what John should do, Ioh. 21. 21. And the sons of Sceua
wanted calling for an action that was good in it self, Act. 19. 15, 16.
and therefore were torn and wounded of the Devil. 3. Examine whether it be
good in the circumstances, 3. If good in circumstances.
seasonable and convenient, or whether the season serve not for some better
action then that. For wisdom will intend of necessaries the most necessary,
and of profits the most profitable. 4. Examine whether the action now to be
done be good in the ends of it, 4. If good in the ends
which especially are two, 1. Gods glory, 1 Cor. 10. 3. Let all be done to the
glory of God. 2. The good and edification of our brethen, 1 Cor. 14. 26. Let
all be done to edifying: yea, seeking their profit in some cases above our
own. 2. Finding the action good, spoil it not ^y (...) handling.
Then,

Secondly, if by examination we find the actions good in themselves, in us,
in circumstances, and ends, we must be careful we spoil not good actions
by ill handling, but endeavor to do good actions well, and to good matter add
a good manner of doing. Now the right manner of doing a good action well, The
right manner of doing a good action in three things.
stands in three things: To undertake them holily: To do them sincerely: And
to finish them humbly. The first is, when we and great, we are to take
counsel at Gods mouth; so we are to beg leave and blessing at least
secretly to our selves, without which nothing is sanctified Abimilech, Genesis 20.
5. With an upright heart did I this thing: and whatsoever may befall him for
well-doing, he may appeal to God with Hezekiah, Esa. 38 3.
and say, Lord remember that I have walked uprightly before thee. The third is,
best actions we labor to see our defects and wants, and mourn that we
neither do that we should do, nor in the manner we should. Whereof there will
be three notable fruits: 1. This will breed and nourish humility. 2. It will
drive us out to Christ to get a covering. 3. It will make us ascribe all the
glory of our actions to God, of whom we have not only all the power, but even
the will and purpose: Phil. 2. 13. For it is God that works in you both the
will and the deed according to his good pleasure.

CHAP. XVII.
Rules to carry works of mercy wisely.

IF our actions concern others, Rules for works of mercy.
then they be works either of mercy, or of justice:

For works of mercy much wisdom is required, 1. Mercy must proceed from
faith and l^ue.
and that is showed in these particulars: 1. See thy charity come from a good
ground, namely, from a heart qualified with two graces: 1. Faith: for
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14. 23. Thou must first give thy
self to the Lord, and then to his Saints, 2 Cor. 8. 5. Thy mercy must issue
from the sense of Gods mercy in Christ to thine own soul, apprehended by
faith in Jesus Christ. Bring forth fruit in this vine. Ioh. 15. 1.
2. It must proceed from love. Works of mercy must come from the fountain of a
merciful heart, Romans 12. 8. He that distributeth, let him do it of
simplicity, that is, out of mere compassion, not out of any by and sinister
respects. For if I feed the poor with all my goods, and want love, it
profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13. The reason is, because the Lord looks more at
the affection than the action. Whence many, not giving out of a tender heart,
sympathizing and fellow-feeling their brethrens misery, lose both their gift
and reward. What comfort or help is in that work of mercy, which is wrung out
by importunity, or by strength of law, or for shame lest a man should be noted,
or by terror of conscience, when a man would heal the gripes of a galling and
accusing conscience, by giving away at his death a little ill-gotten goods to
the poor, which were none of his to give but to the right owners: or when out
of desire of praise, or out of superfluity, when a man knows not else what to
do with his wealth, but some must have it? if out of any of these respects,
all is lost.

2. Concerning the right subject of works of mercy: 2. The subject of mercy.
1. In general, all.
Do good unto all, but especially to the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10. To
all, viz. the poor that are not able to recompense us; not looking for
recompense of man, Eccl 11. 1.
but casting our bread upon the waters, where there is no likelihood of ever
reaping it again. And to all, even our enemies who stand in need of us, and
such as usually do and will recompense our good with evil, Romans 12. 14. Mat.
5. 44. And good reason: For four reasons.
for first, all have our flesh, Isa. 58. 7. from which we must not hide our
face.

But especially to the household of faith: 2. In special the faithful.
because here is Gods image renewed, here is one of the blood and kindred of
Christ: and if the good Samaritan was commended for mercy showed to a stranger,
how much more will the Lord Jesus accept that which is done to one of those
little ones that believe in him, Mat. 25. 45.
as done to himself?

3. Concerning the matter of mercy: 3. The matter o^ mercy.
The greatest mercy we can show to any, 1. To the soul.
is toward their souls, which stands in instructing the ignorant, in
counselling the weak, in forgiving offenders, in admonishing or correcting him
that erreth, comforting distressed consciences, and confirming them that are in
good ways. This therefore must be observed, in all corporal mercy to join
spiritual, laboring in all the other the good of this: and especially to pray
for such mercies from God for them, as neither we nor other men can minister
unto them. And though that be to be done, yet the other also must not be left
undone, 2. To the body.
but we must be merciful to the outward man of our brother, in giving,
lending freely, clothing, feeding, visiting, protecting from violence, etc. For
this is mercy actual and acceptable, fitted to that rule, 1 Ioh. 3. 18. that
we show mercy not in word and tongue, but in deed, and in truth. This age
abounds with mouthmercy, which is good cheap, but a little hand-full were
better than a great many such mouth-f^ls.

4. Concerning the measure of our mercy: 4. The measure of it, to our a^ility.
We must be merciful in the highest degree that we can get our hearts unto,
and be as like our heavenly Father in mercifulness as may be. This rule is, 1
Cor. 16. 2. that every man lay up and distribute as God has prospered him,
that is, according to his ability: for he that sowes sparingly, Gal. 6. 7,
shall reap sparingly. Doubtless men would not be so niggardly and sparing,
if they knew, that what is mercifully bestowed is safest kept: Manus pau^^ris,
Christi gazophy* lacium.
the bosoms, bellies, and mouths of the poor, is the best treasury to lay
our goods in: and if we expected to reap after the measure of mercy at the
last day, we would more liberally sow, Hos. 10. 12. Yea, a poor man may be
bountiful in a little, which was the commendation of the poor widow for her
two mites, Luke 20.

5. 5. The manner of showing mercy.
Concerning the manner of showing mercy: First, it must be done seasonably and
speedily when need is: 1. Seasonably.
Prou. 3* 28. Say not unto thy neighbor, Go, and come to morrow, if now thou
have it with thee: for thou may be cut off from the opportunity, or that from
thee; besides that thou omittest a present duty which is enjoined, Gal. 6. 10.
While we have time, let us do good. And life is very uncertain. Secondly, 2.
Cheerfully.
it must be done cheerfully: 2 Cor. 9. 7.
God loves a cheerful giver: not groningly, or grudgingly, as if every penny
were too much, as many pinch* pennies, who have pounds enough for any lust or
pleasure, do part with pence to the poor Saints as from their joints or eyes.
3. Wisely.
Thirdly, it must be done wisely: true mercy is dispensed by judgment. It
spares not where God will punish, as as Saul's cruel mercy: A glass for
Magistrates, whose remissness can swallow any thing, and punish nothing,
neither drunkenness, nor profanation of the Sabbath, nor swearing, nor
inordinate walking. It is no mercy (out of extreme necessity) to relieve strong
rogues, wandering beggars, and able idle persons, but rather to punish and
redress them: nor to keep hospitality for drunkards, gamesters, and riotous
persons, but a good man is merciful, and measures his affairs by judgment,
Psalm. 112. 5. Fourthly, mercy must be showed constantly, 4. Constantly.
according to the precept, Gal. 6. 9.
Be not weary of well doing: let not the springs of our compassion be ever
dried up: as we would never have God weary of doing us good. Fifthly, 5.
Humbly.
we must not rest or rejoice in any work of mercy as meritorious, but in the
acceptance and covering of it, saying when we have done all we can, We are
unprofitable servants.

CHAP. XVIII.
Rules for works and actions of justice: in 1. the ground: 2. moderation.

IN all our civil conversation with men, Rules for works of justice.
see that our external righteousness flow from inward piety. 1. Concerning the
ground.
God in the moral Law has coupled the two tables as the vpholders one of
another, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and thy neighbor as thy self. We
must love man in God, and for God. Christ aimed at both in the work of our
redemption, that we should serve him in righteousness as well as in holiness
all our days, Luke 1. 75. Civil righteousness, abstracted from piety, is
Pharisaic^ll and unfruitful. Give to Caesar Caesar's, and to God Gods.

Concerning moderation of justice: 2. Concerning moderation of justice.
Never stand so upon strict justice, but that sometimes for peace we must
depart from our right, according to the precept, Phil. 4. ver. 5. Let your
equal mind be known unto all men: and the practice of our Savior Christ,
Matthew. 17. 27. who needed not, nor could have been compelled to pay toll; but
to cut off occasion of offense and contention, he departs from his right, and
pays it: he might have said, It is my right and I will stand upon it, and
will not lose my freedom; and men think they say well, if they demand but
their right: But our Lord, for our example, departed from his right, and
accounted the preservation of peace better than his own right. This rule is
grounded upon the common law of nature, which seeks the common good, and is as
careful of the neighbors good as his own. Contrary whereunto is that
deuillish and carnal speech, Every man for himself, and God for us all: and
yet it is come into common practice, against all rules of nature and Scripture.

CHAP. XIX.
Rules of wisdom for justice, 1. Commutatiue, 2. Distributive, 3. Promissiue,
4. Retributiue.

COncerning justice co^mutatiue, 1. Iust^ce commutatiue.
in contracts and bargains, some rules concern the seller, and some the buyer.

The seller must not abuse or wrong the buyer, neither in the kind, nor
quantity, nor quality of his commodity, concealing the defect, with that
profane protestation, Caveat emptor: nay, the caveat is for the seller, who
would not be deceived in his bargains with oaths, lies, tricks; and so is
bound to do to others: 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. Let no man oppress defraud his brother
in any matter: Here the holy Apostle condemns fraud by two reasons; 1. From
the near conjunction we have one with another, he is our brother, in flesh,
and in faith: 2. From the certainty of Gods wrath, For the Lord is the auenger
of all such things^ Leu. 19. 11. Ye shall not steal, nor deal falsely, nor
lie one to another. And in Ezekiel. 22. 12, 13. a fearful destruction is
threatened against Jerusalem, for bribes, usury, fraud, and oppression. Where by
the way, Usurers may do well to consider amongst whom the Lord there ranks
them.

The buyer also must not enrerta^ne the seller with words of dissimulation,
vilifying the thing, to buy it beneath the worth, Prou. 20. 14. nor detain the
price beyond the agreed time, as many do whose care is to get into debt, and
take up more commodity in one year, than they mean to pay in twenty; and when
all is done, pay pou^ds scarce with crowns: A little more safe theeuery than
that by the highway, never a whit more honest or just.

In justice distributive, 2. Justice distributive.
never forget that golden rule, to do as we would be done unto: Mat^. 7. 12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, that do ye unto them: for
this is the Law and the Prophets: the royal law, Iam. 2. 8. that is, the Kings
law, and the chief of all laws which concern our neighbors. Object. But
here the Usurer has a text for himself, saying, I would willingly pay ten in
the hundred if I had need, and therefore I may take so. Ans. 1. This must be
ordered by grace, and the word of God, not by men's blind and depraved
judgment. 2. This general rule must guide us where we want a special word,
which we have in the case of Usury. 3. It is false that thou say; thou
would not pay use if thou could borrow freely; therefore if in thy need
thou would borrow freely, lend freely. Others having ouer-reacht their
neighbors, say, They may and must make the most of their own, and they forced
not their wares on them: But tell me, would thou be ouer-reached or
deceived? or would thou have another to make advantage of thy necessity or
simplicity? I know thou would not: Luke 10. 37
Go thou, and do the like.

Concerning promissiue justice, 2. Justice promissiue
in promises and covenants, the rule is this, That all lawful promises must be
kept, suppose they were made never so rashly, to persons never so bad, though
to the very great hinderance of the party making them. I explain it thus:
First, I say, a lawful promise, not such as Herod made to Herodias, Iuramentum
non sit vinculum iniquitatis.
to give her John Baptists head in a platter: for of such it is well said,
Reseinde fidem, In turpi voto muta decretum, Break thy word, and change thy
determination so did David in Nabals case. 1 Samuel 25.
But if it be lawful, thou must not be perfidious or slippery, as many like
Eeles can slip out of most fair and cautelous contracts for their own
advantage. Object. What if I have done it rashly? Answ. Repent of thy
rashness, but perform thy promise. Object. What to a lewd fellow, or an
heretic? Con. Consta^. fiues non seruanda cum haeretic.
Ans. Papists say, no. A position that has covered and colored more horrible
treachery and perfidiousnesse, then ever was found among the heathens. But
Joshua when he was circumuented, and drawn in by lies and deceit, to make a
rash covenant with the Gibeonites, strangers to the Covenant of grace, did
faithfully keep it: and when Saul many hundred years after did break that
contract, he was plagued with sore famine, which could never be assuaged but by
the death of his sons, 2 Samuel 21. 6. 14. So in the Turkish history: The story
of Ladislaus, suddenly breaking the truce made for ten years, with Amurathes
the great Turk, by the counsel of Pope Eugenius, shows in the event, the
wickedness of that position and practice, by the effusion of much Christian
blood, and the confusion of as many as had hand in that treacherous counsel.
Object. But I shall be greatly hindered. Ans. Acknowledge thy cross, make a
good use of it, but perform thy promises: Who shall dwell on Gods holy
Mountain? He that swears to his own hindrance, and changes not, Psalm. 15.
4. Take heed of forfeiting heaven for a little earth.

Concerning justice retributiue, 4. Justice retributiu^
in borrowing and lending, Romans 13. 8. Owe nothing to any man save love. Does
not nature teach us to give every man his due? and does not grace teach us to
deal justly, a maine point of which justice is to pay debts? But our rule
aims at two things: First, to keep out of debt as much as may be^ Owe
nothing. and that is by avoiding the means of debt: as, 1. to live above ones
degree and ability, to neglect frugality and moderation: 2. drinking, gluttony,
wine tobacco: 3. building, purchasing, wardrobe: 4. suretiship, and rash
undertaking of others payments: 5. gaming, dicing, whoring: 6. usury. All
which directly make against this rule of justice.

Secondly, to get out of debt being in, and make due and timely satisfaction,
and not as many, who force their Creditors to recover by law, what was in love
sent them. What is the general voice of men in their trades, but complaints of
men's unfaithfulness, whiles many make no conscience of paying debts, others
can pay some to keep their credit, or all to be trusted again, but few pay
any of conscience, because of the Commandment? Object. But I am not able to
pay my debts. Answ. Then Go and humble thy self to thy Creditor, Pro. 6. 3.
purpose and promise to pay all when thou art able. Object. So I shall utterly
impouerish my self. Answ. 1. Is not a little with righteousness, and peace
with God and thy conscience, better than a great deal with iniquity? 2.
Consider how God blessed a little to that poor widow, that sold all to pay
her debts, 2 King. 4. 7. her oil was increased till she had enough for her
Creditor, and her self.

CHAP. XX.
Rules of wisdom for our own necessary actions, in respect of their 1. order,
2. subject.

THe fourth sort of rules for actions, respects such as concern our selves,
Rules for necessary actions.
and these are either necessary or indifferent actions.

We were sent into this world to do some necessary business, 1* Ground.
Thou wast sent into this world for necessary business.
which we must intend, and not waste our time in impertinent things. The
Master that sent his servants into the vineyard, sent them in to work. Do we
think that God sent man into the world to play and sport, for his recreation
sake or idleness, yea, or to eat and drink, and only to get what to maintain
himself by? No, but for some thing beyond all these: else his end were not
beyond the bruit beasts. Or can we think that God has given men gifts of
reason, understanding, judgment, and means of nature and grace, for the
culture of all these, only to enjoy outward things, to feed their pleasure and
appetite, which they might fully enjoy without all these gifts? No, but the
Master gave his servants talents to traffic withal, to make their Lord and
themselves gainers. We must therefore acknowledge some thing to be absolutely
necessary, unto which all other things are necessary but respectively, and
carry our selves unto every thing accordingly. If we would know what that is,
which is absolutely necessary, our Savior tells us, One thing is necessary,
Luke 10. 42.
namely, to know how a man may come into Gods savor and be saved; and all
earthly things are respectively necessary, so far as they conduce to this. To
know the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection, is absolutely necessary; all
things are to be counted but dross and dung unto this, Phil. 3. 10.

But in all necessary actions, 2. For the order; The most necessary things must
be done first.
the rule of wisdom requires that the most necessary action be done first and
most: Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand shall find to do, do it with all
thy might. Nothing in the world is so necessary, as to repent us of sin past,
and the reason for it is the present time, to day. Nothing so necessary as
amendment of life for time to come: therefore do it now: Delays in all things
are dangerous; in this, often deadly. And this most necessary business must be
done most. Deficit in necessarijs, qui redundat in superfluis. August.
Well said Augustine, He must needs fail in necessaries, who ouer-flowes in
superfluities. How then can men answer the wasting of their lives and time in
pleasures, recreation, eating, drinking, buying, selling, and sieldome find in
their hands the business which tends unto eternal life? A good rule therefore
it is, often to examine our selves thus? What am I doing? and whether in all
inferior things do I aim at the chief? In eating I must not forget the
bread of life. In recreation and pleasure, I must chiefly affect the pleasures
of Gods house. In buying and selling, I must specially help forward my
purchase of eternal life. In my earthly calling I must express the calling of
Christianity. This is the way to do the one necessary thing most of all.

3. Most necessary actions in evil men are evil: 3. For the subject: The most
necessary actions of evil men are evil.
the best actions of the unregenerate are sins: and therefore it is most
necessary to be a good man. The truth hereof appears, because a man may do
what God commands, and omit and forbear a work prohibited, and yet sin in
both: for example, Aristides practiced justice most strictly; yet herein he
sinned, because it was no work of faith. Alexander conquering Darius violated
not the chastity of Darius his wife and daughters, but forbear this prohibited
and sinful action; yet therein he sinned, because he forbear not of good
conscience. But we must know, that this sin lies not in the substance or
matter of the work, which is materially good, but in the vice of the doer, and
manner or end of doing: neither are these sins in themselves but only by
accident.

CHAP. XXI.
Rules for necessary actions, in respect of the means, and the order of the
two Tables.

NO action is so necessary, 4. For the means.
as it must be thrust on by evil means. The best action may not be trust on
by euilmeans Romans 3* 8.
We must not do the least evil for the greatest good, which was Lots sin,
to procure good by evil; neither yield to a less evil to prevent a greater,
in evils of sin. In civil things, it is a most necessary thing to preserve
life; but not with a lie, usury, Sabbath-breaking, or going to witches: Life is
not so necessary as without separation to cleave to that which is good. In
spiritual things, to preach the word is so necessary, as Paul cries woe unto
himself if if he do not, 1 Cor. 9. 16*
because the flock of God depends upon him: But if I may not preach, unless I
wound my conscience, by compounding with heretics, and blending truth with
error; I must never preach but leave the care of the Church to God, who
without my lie, will provide for the good of it. Thus Elijah fled and left his
ministry, because he could not exercise it, unless he would have received Baals
ceremonies, and flattered with the Baalites: and if he had not thus forsaken
his place, he had forsaken the Church. Great Athanasius chused rather to leave
his Church, then to yield any thing to the Arrians. Saint Paul knew, that after
he went from Ephesus, Act. 20. 29.
grievous Wolves would come in not sparing the flock: and yet because he could
not stay to preach, unless he would have restored some Pharisaicall
observations; and unless for peace sake he would have yielded to the rites
and image of Diana, he left the place, because he must not do the greatest
good by any evil means. Never let any think to thrive, by means which God
has accursed, and upon which himself cannot pray for a blessing.

All necessary actions must be done according to the order of the Tables, 5.
For the order of the two tables.
ever esteeming the duties of the first Table, Duties of the first table must
be done first.
more necessary then they of the second. This is Christ's own rule, Mat. 22.
38. This is the first and great commandment, and the second is like to this,
both in respect of the necessary binding, and of the end: for even these are a
worship of God, if they be performed in faith, and for his commandment sake.
Wherefore* else did the Lord deliver two Tables, whereas he might have put all
into one, but that he would prefer and claim the first place to duties that
immediately concern his worship? From whence Divines gather that rule of
Antinomy and truth, That when the two Tables are opposed, and both call for
necessary duties, which both cannot be done at the same time, the second Table
must give place to the first: as Act. 5. 25. It is meet to obey God rather then
man. Magistrates must be obeyed; but the first Table derogates from the second,
when both cannot be observed. So in the New Testament, Parents and friends are
to be loved; but if they be not hated for Christ, when both cannot be loved
together, one cannot be Christ's disciple.

But here be three caueats: Three caueats.
1. That a special Commandment is more necessary, and dispenses If God
command not otherwise. Thou shall not kill, nor steal, unless God command
Abraham to kill his son, and the Israelites to rob the Egyptians. Thou shall
make no graven image, unless God command Moses to make a brazen serpent. Thus
observations of immediate commandments give all Sovereignty to God, who is to
be simply obeyed and acknowledged Mat. 12. 7.
I will have mercy and not sacrifice, because mercy is moral, and sacrifice
ceremonial. So Abimelech gave David the Shewbread which was not lawful but in
the case of necessary mercy. And it was superstition in the Jews, that they
would rather suffer their City to be taken, than fight upon the Sabbath day in
their own defense. God allows an ox to be pulled out of a ditch, Man. 12.
11.
and led to water, and allows a necessary provision for the body, Exo. 12. 16
unto which even Sabbath-duties must give place. 3. Necessity from it all
reason of sinning: As for example; It is not lawful to marry ones sister, but
in the beginning of the world extreme necessity altered this fact, and gave
dispensation. So it is not lawful to take away that which is another, but
extreme necessity makes it lawful, because it is not another any longer,
seeing the law of nature it self makes some things common in such extreme
necessity. On the Sabbath we must hold our selves strictly to Gods worship, but
if an house be on fire, we may leave it without sin. Note the equity of that
law, Deuteronomy. 23. 24, 25.

CHAP. XXII.
Rules of wisdom for necessary actions in respect of the scope and binding of
them.

ALL necessary actions, as they must begin with Gods will, 1. Scope. God must
be the end of all our actions.
so they must end with his glory. The end and scope of all our actions must be
God: 1. Because he made all alpha and omega, the indifferent things, as
eating, drinking, etc. 1 Cor. 10. 31. and Romans 14. 6. He that eats, eats
to the Lord, or ought-so to do.

In the necessary duties of religion, 2. Binding. Necessary duties must be
^one, what ever follow.
or our calling, we must hold our selves bound to do them whatsoever follow.
Two things commonly hinder us herein, which we must arm our selves against:
The first is fear of men's judgments, faces, offense, and censures; but we
must tread this under foot, if we have a commandment and calling to do any
thing, as Paul did, 1 Cor. 4. 3. I pass little to be judged of any man:
neither feared he any persecution or trouble, so he might finish his course
with joy. Jeremy must make his browe of brass, to speak the word of the Lord,
chap. 1. verse. 17. A Christian must prepare to pass through good report, and
bad report, and to count neither liberty nor life dear unto him. Dan. 6. 10.
Daniel would open his window, and pray as he was wont, even when his life was
sought after. Secondly, events of actions do often and much trouble us: for
remedy whereof observe two rules: 1. That of the Wiseman, Eccles. 11. 4. He
that observes the wind, shall not sow: it is a foolish husbandman, who for
sight of a cloud either his seed time or harvest: So for sowing works of
mercy, he that sticks in doubts, and says, I may be poor, or old, long
diseased, full of children, or persecuted for the Gospel, and must provide for
one, neglects his seed time by looking at winds and clouds. So many a carnal
Gospeller says, If I should go so often to Church as some, and be so forward
in religion, I should lose much profit, and incur much rebukes and reproaches.
Therefore, 2. we must learn to leave events and successes to God: for it is not
in man to direct his steps, God disposes as he pleases. The Saints of God are
often frustrate of their godly purposes, as David in purposing and preparing to
build an house for the Lord: but 1. they lose nothing if they do their duty:
2. Gods Ouer-ruling hand will dispose all to the best: therefore there let them
rest.

CHAP. XXIII.
Rules for actions indifferent: 1. in general.

A Great part of man's life is spent in the doing of natural and indifferent
actions, which in themselves are neither good nor evil, but as they are used:
and being so common and ordinary, many sins creep into them, because we take
our selves free and loose to do as we list in them: which conceit grows out
of ignorance of Gods wisdom, who by his word has tied us as strait in the
use of them as in things most necessarily enjoined. For there is no action in
which we must depart from God. Object. They are therefore indifferent, because
they are neither commanded nor forbidden, and therefore as they be free, so be
we also in them. Answ. Although there be no word commanding or forbidding, yet
there is a word directing and ordering in them, as we shall see in some
general rules concerning them all, and in special rules applied to some
particulars.

The general rules concerning them all, General rules concerning all
indifferents.
as meat, drink, apparel, recreation, houses, marriage, and the like, are
these:

1. The most indifferent 1. The most indifferent (...) be by Go^s 1. warrant*
^. l^aue.
warrant is from the word, leave is by prayer; and thus must every creature of
God be sanctified by the word and prayer, 1. Tim. 4. 5. Our meat, our
apparel, our houses, our recreations must all be undertaken and used, Former
by the word.
First, by the warrant of the word: for else it cannot be done in faith, Romans
14. 23. and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. The word must direct me in
this particular meat, apparel, recreation, that it is lawful in it self and
to me, or else I sin in it. Secondly, Latter by prayer.
by prayer: for we must lift up our hearts at least in the use of them all: 1.
In invocation for an holy use, suspecting all our ways, and our inclinations
to corrupt our selves in euerything. Reas.
2. In thanksgiving for our liberty in all the creatures, that were justly
forfeited, and Gods blessing in them. This neglected, 1. We may have have no
title recovered in any of them, but they all remain unclean, as was signified
in all the unclean beasts, as all other had been, but that they were
permitted by special leave, without which we are but

2. The most indifferent 2. The most in (...) must be done for God.
that is, to the glory and honor of God; whatsoever we eat or drink, etc. 1
Cor. 10. 31. For while we take our part in the comforts of the creatures, God
will not lose his part of them, that is, his glory by them. Does my eating and
drinking make me heavy and unfit for the service of God, to perform it with
cheerfulness? Here I have sinned in a lawful thing: for God looks to be
served with cheerfulness and a good heart, in the abundance of all things,
Deuteronomy. 28. verse. 47. Does my apparel tend to pride up and advance my self?
This is a sinful use of a lawful thing, wherein I should glorify God. Do my
recreations and sports not only iustle out my duties of Christianity, of
reading, and meditating, and private prayer; but ingrosse my time, so that I
neglect my special calling? Herein I use my liberty unlawfully, and turn it
into a wicked licentiousnes: Recreation was never ordained by God to be an
occupation, but only an help unto it.

3. The most indifferent must be used in love
as well as in faith, to edification, as well as in sanctification. This
general rule is in 1 Cor. 14. 26. Let all things be done to edifying. Romans 14.
21. It is evil to eat with offense: and it is good, neither to eat flesh, nor
to drink wine, nor to do any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, 1. Not
offending others.
or is offended, or made weak: and Paul would never eat, rather then offend a
weak brother. In case of offense, in different things loose their
indifferency, and become sins, and must not be done, be they never so small,
never so profitable, never so powerfully enjoined by authority, because an
higher authority of God, bids us not offend our brother; the conscience of our
brother must be more tender unto us, than our own peace and preferment. Dan.
1. 8.
Daniel and his fellows refusing the Kings meat, might seem very unwise, and
too strict, for so small a thing to lose the Kings favor, and their own
advancement: but it was not frowardness in them, nor disobedience to the King,
but conscience and obedience to Gods commandment in a case offensive to
themselves and others: so they would not do the least evil for the greatest
good. So, is this garment lawful to me, and offensive to other of Gods
children? Then have I no liberty in it. Is this eating, or drinking, or
tobacco-taking lawful to me, and may it offend in circumstances? I must avoid
occasion of offense. Is this sport and recreation lawful in it self and to
others, but is it offensive in me a puulike man, a professor, a Preacher?
Wisdom teaches to refrain it. So the Apostle says, All things (that is,
indifferent, of which he there speaks) are lawful, but all things are not
expedient.

Now as we must be far from offending any, so our endeavor must be to build
up our brethren and our selves in the use of every indifferent action. 2. But
building them up.
Quest. How may that be? Answ. When in the civil use of them we add some
spiritual meditation, as Christ when he spoke of bread, stirred the people to
meditate on and labor for the food that abides to eternal life: so in eating
and drinking we should sometime think of feeding on Christ, the true bread and
water of life; in putting on our clothes, of putting on Christ as a garment: in
putting them off, of putting off the old man and the lusts thereof: in
marriage, of the contract between Christ and the faithful soul: in our
iournies abroad, and returns home, meditate with the Apostle Paul of our being
from home, and at home with the Lord, etc. Thus shall we cherish

4. The most indifferent things must be used in sobriety and moderation; 4* The
most indifferent must be used in sobriety.
and this is, 1. When we Take heed that your hearts be not oppressed with
surfeiting or drunkenness, or the cares of this life, that that day come
unawares. 2. When we exceed not in them our Nabal, like the feast of a King,
and brings soft apparel out of Kings houses into very cottages, to the great
confusion of all degrees, so as every man is out of order; the servant more
gallant than his Master or Mistress, Scholars arrayed in unseemly sort like
Soldiers, the Gentleman like a Nobleman, and the Carter like a Courtier, and
every Degree many degrees beyond it self. 3. When we hold them indifferent
not in our judgment only, but also in affection, keeping the command of
these, and be sure they command not us: 1 Cor. 6 12. All things are lawful
for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any thing: and, 2 Cor. 7.
30. We must rejoice in the creature as not rejoicing; use it as not using;
buy, sell, and have a wife as not having. This is to affect indifferent things
indifferently. Contrary whereunto is that excessive desire and use of any
creature, which makes our servants our masters, and puts us out of possession
of them, that we may be possessed by them, as when riches have our hearts, and
we have not power to command them to any good use; the heathen disclaimed this
slavery, My riches are mine (said Seneca) not I my riches: Diuitiae meae sunt,
non ego diuitiarum. Senec.
would God Christians would say so much, to whom grace offers better things. So
when a man or woman have enslaued themselves to any creature, and made it a
tyrant and commander, as insatiable drunkards, who can no more be without
strong drink or wine, than the fish without water, or themselves without air:
The Mule (they say) must have the bag hang by his mouth, and these must have
the bottle or pot at their elbow continually. Others that so addict themselves
to that bewitching weed Tobacco, above all reason, set more thoughts upon it
than they bestow upon God, bestow more time on it by ten parts in one day
than upon Gods service, yea, than upon any profitable calling; bestow more
charge upon it then upon all pious and charitable uses, through the year; yea
serve it as their God night and day, and all to turn their bodies into
chimnies, their blood into foot, their best and radical humor into smoke.
This is an intemperate and sinful use of a creature, in it self good, if
physically used: for we condemn not drink, when we condemn drunkenness, but
the drunken use of it. Neither can these dry drunkards more justify their
sin then the moist, nay far less, seeing the one is ordained for common
use, so is not the other. But without comparing them together, it is a great
sin to be a slave either to a pot or to a pipe.

5. For no indifferents forgo better things the^ they: as, 1. Time.
as we do not for them loose any thing, better then they; such as are, 1.
Time: men must not cast away much time in them. We should eat out as little
time with our meat as we may, much less play away our time. Women must be
conscionable to spend as little time as may be in arraying and trimming
themselves; for time is better then apparel. Neither for wealth must we
exchange our time, but that we reserve special times for better ends: for all
the wealth on earth will not buy an hour of time. 2. Good name.
2. Our good name is better then any indifferent thing, and ought to be more
precious then the sweetest ointment: we must not eat and drink to be counted
gluttons and drunkards; nor play in excess, to be counted dicers and
gamesters, which are infamous names, and such persons were banished out of the
heathens Commonwealth: nor so apparel our selves as to be accounted proud,
garish, and wanton; nor build to be accounted vain and prodigal: but prefer
our good names before the use of these. 3. 3. Estate.
Our goods and portion of wealth which God has given us, are better then the
excessive use of any of these, and we must not waste our goods more then is
fit for our estate. Men have no warrant to venture great sums of money upon a
few casts at dice, or bowls, or other sports. We are not Lords of our goods
but stewards, and must be drawn to an account for them. Religion will teach a
man good husbandry, and though it allow not only a necessary and convenient
expense, but also for honest delight and pleasure, in meat, drink, apparel,
recreation, building, etc. yet it allows no prodigality, except in the case of
godly and charitable vs^s, to the poor members of Christ. Oh how rich should
some mean men be in good works, if they had given that to the poor which
they have lost in play? and who can say but one is far better, far more
comfortable then the other? 4. Virtues.
4. Our virtues and graces are far better then any indifferent thing, and
therefore we must not loose these for the other. Against which rule they sin
who in meats and drinks loose moderation, sobriety, and tem^^rance; and they
who in apparel loose their humility and lowliness; and they who in recreation
loose their patience, meekness, love and peace; and they who in marriage loose
their chastity and holiness, etc.

By all which rules we see, how godliness takes not away the use of Gods
creatures, (for it only gives liberty in them:) but orders the use thereof,
that they may be used in the just measure of their goodness, and give place to
better; and restraines us no further then so, as the calling be not exceeded,
nor the rules of moderation violated.

CHAP. XXIV.
Special rules for meat and drink.

NOW for the special rules of things indifferent, because I must not suffer
this discourse to grow so large as it would; omitting all other things
indifferent, there be three things, as most common, so more specially to be
treated of; 1. Meat and drink: 2. Recreation: 3. Apparel: for all which the
word of God is plentiful in the rules of Christian wisdom, and direction.

1. Rules for eating and drinking. Rules for eating and drinkings.


First, for the lawfulness of it: 1. Necessity.
1. It is necessary, to nourish and strengthen us in our duties, and repair
strength decayed. 2. It may also serve for delight: for God has given us leave
liberally to use the creatures, not only bread to strengthen the heart, but
oil to make his face glad. 3. God has affoorded us leave to feast together,
and inuit one another, for the maintaining and cherishing of Christian love,
and mutual fellowship, as we see in Jobs children, which was not unlawful:
and the Primitive Churches had their agapa's and loue-feasts, of which the
Scripture makes mention, Acts 2. 46.

Secondly, 2. Propriety.
for the propriety; we must eat and drink our own, the sweat of our own
brows, not other men's. Many cut large pieces in other men's loaves, I mean
that which they know is not theirs, but other men's, if all debts were paid.
This is an high kind of injustice, 2 These. 3. 12. not to eat our own bread.

Thirdly, 3. Measure
for the measure: we must eat and drink according to the call of nature, or
honest and moderate delight, to make us and keep us in a fitness to godly
duties of hearing, reading, praying, etc. All that eating and drinking whereby
men make themselves heavy, sleepy, unwieldy, and unfit for good duties, is
sinful; for this is not a refection or refreshing, but a destruction or
oppression of nature.

Fourthly, 4. Affection.
for our affection; we must eat and drink with moderation of affection, not to
sit at it as though we had nothing else to do, as many who bring themselves
under the power of the creature, such as cannot be without the pot at their
mouth, or without the pipe at their nose; men of whom the Apostle speaks, that
corrupt themselves with the creatures, losing sobriety, modesty, chastity,
health, and reason it self. Here is an utter perverting of Gods ordinance; who
has given us his creatures to refresh and help our selves by them, but men
instead thereof, hurt and destroy themselves by them.

Fifthly, 5. Time.
for the time; we must not so eat and drink, as we eat up also too much
time: for so we hinder our selves in our callings, which we ought specially to
further, redeeming the time, Ephesians. 5. 16. Numbers set down to eat and drink,
and in feasting and feeding their bodies, never feel the passage of three or
four hours; whereas to sit out a Sermon of one hour long is very tedious; so
little care have most men of feeding their souls.

Sixthly, 6. Sweetness.
in eating, desire to taste the goodness and sweetness of God himself in his
creatures; else have we no better use of them than the bruit creatures. Say to
thy self, O Lord, how sweet and good art thou in thy self, who can put such
sweetness in thy creature?

Seventhly, 7. Communication.
we should use good and sauoury speech, as salt to our meat, to acknowledge
Gods bounty and goodness, to praise him and to edify others. Our empty and
barren hearts cannot tell how to wear out the time of feasting, but either in
trifles, or inuiting of others to eat and drink, who need rather bridles, than
spurs. Quest. What, no other speech but of Scripture? how then should we be
merry? Answ. It is true, that commonly all other speech but earnall, is
unsavory: but a Christian must consider, 1. That he eats and drinks before the
Lord, and his speeches must become the presence of God, who hears and
expects that all the speech of Christians be better than silence. 2. All the
speeches of Christians ought to savor of sobriety and wisdom, and the grace
of the heart: for, whom call we to our tables but Gods children by profession,
who must be like themselves every where? 3. God has given us leave to be
merry, but with this only restraint, Be merry in the Lord; not against him;
nor setting him out of sight, as those who never think themselves merry, but
in rude and ungodly behauiours and speeches unbeseeming Christians. Plato and
Zenophon thought it fit and profitable, that men's speeches at meals should be
written: And if Christians should so do, what kind of books would they be?

Eighthly, 8. Meditation of 4. things.
in our eating and drinking we must be careful to season our hearts with these
and the like meditations: 1. How prone we are to know immoderate joy, and
provoke God in our feasts: Job was suspicious of his sons, sent to them to
sanctify themselves, and afterward himself sacrificed for them. 2. That we
shall not want incitements or prouocations of such as are invited with us, or
otherwise to forget our selves, which incitements we must watch against, and
arm our selves aforehand. I remember the story of Antigonus, who being invited
to a place where a notable harlot was to be present, asked counsel of
Menedemus what he should do: he bade him only remember that he was a Kings
son. Good men may be invited where none of the best may meet them; the best
counsel is, to keep in mind that they be Kings sons, Gods children; and a
base thing it were to be allured from their profession, by Joseph had his tomb
in his garden, to season his delight with* meditation of his end. Alas, this
feeding and feasting is but a little repair of a ruinous house which must go
down. The Egyptians had a skeleton or carcass brought into their feasts to
the same purpose: So do thou, set thine own carcass before the eye of thy
mind, and it will moderate thee in the pampering of it. 4. Consider drink wine
in boles, and eat the fat, and to forget the affliction of Joseph, Amos 6. 6.
Therefore, Neh. 8. 10. Eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send part to them
for whom nothing is prepared. Say with thyselfe, Who am I to be so full, when
many are hungry? That I should abound when so many want? How am I indebted unto
God to be thankful; and shall I requite his love with such unkindness, as to
grow wanton, idle, and forgetful of him, when he is most mindful of me?
Must I eat and drink to rise up to play? No, I must bestirre me in such
duties, wherein I may express much love for much love.

CHAP. XXV.
Rules for the right ordering of our selves in our sports.

THese concern, 1. the matter and kind of our sports and plays: 2. the
manner of using them aright: 3. the right ends.

First, the matter of our sports must be in things which our consciences tell
us are lawful or indifferent. Rules for sports. ^
Therefore, 1. Holy things, 1. Matter of them: not, 1. holy things.
as phrases of Scripture, must not be played with: Thou shall fear the holy
name of God: not delight thy self in swearing. 2. Sinful things are not to be
matter of our sport: 2. Nor unholy.
as, 1. To make a man drunk, or swear, or to laugh at David's eyes gushed out
with rivers of tears, to see such spectacles, 2. Unlawful flames. Heathen
Law-giuers have banished such out of their Countries. 3. Mixed dancing of men
Nemo nisi a^t ebrius a^t insanu^ tripudiat.
None but either a drunkard or a mad man danceth. It were too long to infer
the sentences of the heathen. The general consent of Fathers, and the
determinations of Councels make against this wicked and lascivious practice.
Basil in a Sermon of his concerning drunkenness, says, God made our knees not
to caper like Goats, but to bow to the worship of God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ. And Viret on the 7. Commandment, Chorea in circulo, centrum diabolus,
circumferentia eius Angeli. Therefore let the Sons of light detest such an
unfruitful work of darkness: for what is there here but lust of the flesh,
and lust of the eyes? what is here else, but carrying fire in the bosom, and
walking upon coals; and how can a man avoid burning? This practice agrees
neither with the gravity of the man, nor the shamefastness of the woman: nay,
the very sight of it in a woman, is known more to ouerwhelme a man than strong
drink, as we may see in Herod, Mar. 6. 22.

good report in it, no praise, no virtue, Phil. 4. 8. and then it cannot be
indifferent. And the like may be said of all those plays, the ground of which
is lot, seeing a lot is an oracle and declaration of Gods will, a part of his
Name, more solemn than any oath, and must not be vainly used, or for
recreation. Object. It is no lot, we use it for no such end. Ans. That is no
matter; the Jews cast lots for our Saviors garments, the nature of lots
remained, though the good end was neglected. Object. Gods providence ouer-rules
all other games. Answ. In other lawful games that depend upon wit, strength,
or skill, our own infirmity, or want of skill, may be blamed in all
imperfection: but here, because the ground is a lot, wherein we have no cunning,
(unless by cogging and cheating, which very roysters condemn) nothing can be
accused but Gods immediate direction: let men consider whom they dishonor,
when they say, What luck, what chance is this?

Lyranus in his praeceptorium, by nine reasons proves the unlawfulness of
playing with dice. The heathens themselves condemned it even in their Princes;
as Suet^nius in the life of Augustus reports, that it was his greatest blemish,
that he was at leisure to play at dice. Chilo being sent from the
Lacedaemonians to Corinth, upon an Embassage, and finding the Senators of that
City at cards and dice, would perform no part of his message, saying, he would
not so much dishonor the Lacedaemonians, as that they should either make or
meddle with such persons. Were such games infamous among lieathens? how
unworthy then are they among Christians.

Secondly, as sports and

1. The persons must must be pure: for to the pure all things are pure, and to
none else: 2. The manner.
secondly, they must be weary, and need refreshing: for God allows not the
most lawful sports, till the body and mind stand in need; till then we must
be busy in better things.



3. All sports must be Rejoice with trembling, which suffers not a man to
power out himself to pleasure.

4. All must be joined lover of pleasure, set upon sport, as some, who are
given over to sport, never weary, all the week long is too little. The
Apostle commands, to rejoice, as not rejoicing: that is, to be so moderate and
retired, as not to ouer-value sports, nor to set our affections on them, as
those who have other things to do. So observe due circumstances: Some at cards
and dice turn night into day, and sit up all night and day, longer than they
could for ten times more money be bound to any good business. Some wickedly
encroach on time allotted to Gods service, some part of the Sabbath day, and
other times: some keep from Church, and some run from Church with their
games in their mouths: others bestow upon them too much time which should be
employed in the calling, either general or particular, and so much indammage
themselves thereby. The mowers rifle is good to be set to his sithe, when it
is blunt; but if he does nothing but whet still, he spoils his sithe, and
hinders his work. Therefore let us moderate our selves in our sports,
according to the most sober of our age, degree, condition, and sort of life,
and use them with such as are both godly and wise, who may rather watch over us
that we offend not, rather than draw and provoke us so to do.

5. We must not exchange any virtue or good must not by sports hinder our
callings, but fit our selves to them: 2. We may not clogge our selves with
them, because they ought to speed our way in our spiritual course and race.
Take heed they become not the devils bird-lime, in which while we wallow, we
are disabled to mount aloft in heavenly meditations. 3. We may not lose our
patience, our meekness, our love, as they that scorn, quarrel, storm, and
rage like heathens, against luck, chance, or fortune; yea, swear and curse,
if never so little crossed, as they that never heard of religion. 4. We may not
lose our goods, or waste our substances, or play away more than without any
doubt or scruple of conscience we may bestow upon honest delight, the necessary
maintenance of other things, and necessary contribution to the Ministry, and
the poor first liberally provided for. 5. We may not lose our good name,
which is a precious thing, as to be counted gamesters, dicers, common bowlers,
or idle persons, or a companion of them, or by obscene, scurrilous; or uncomely
words or actions, carry the brand of a rude and disordered mate. 6. We may not
lose our mastery over our sports, to let them have us at command: for, he that
thus loves pastime shall be a poor man, Prou. 21. 17.

3. The right ends of sports.
if we would not sin.

1. The end of sports must not be to pass the time, 1. Negative.
which we ought to redeem, and not let pass without gaining something by it
better than it self. Nor to maintain idleness, as men that cannot else tell
what to do with themselves; for this is as ill as idleness: for idleness is
not only not working, but a doing of trifles, and that which we dare not bring
into our account to God. A pitiful thing, that Christians having so much to
do, and so much means, and so many calls to their business, should find
nothing so fit as cards and dice.

2. The end of our sports must not be to purchase our neighbors money, or to
help our selves by his hinderance. And I would know, by what right of Gods
word I can hold my neighbors money, which comes into my hand without labor,
love, gift, or just contract. If it be not mine by justice distributive or
commutatiue, it cannot be mine by God: But no law of God or man, has ranked
wagers in either: nay, the civil law compels none to pay that which is lost;
or if he have paid, he may recover it within fifty hours.

But the right ends of sports are these: 2. Affirmative.
1. Gods in whatsoever we do, 1 Cor. 10. 31. And therefore such sports as do
not enable us to cheerfulness in the duties of religion and Christianity,
fail in this to be contemned. Our chief joy must ever be placed in the
Lord, and our chief affections must be reserved for that fullness of joy
which is at Gods right hand. First seek the kingdom of God, even in these,
and above these: how does he so, who spends more time in these than in that;
yea, more by a thousand degrees, if we would measure the time of his sports,
by the time of godly desires, and religious duties? 3. The preservation
diseases upon themselves, and oftentimes untimely death. In this use alone can
all recreations become good and comfortable unto us, although our corrupt
nature is loath to be so confined.

Object. If only these recreations, in this manner, and these ends be
lawful, you leave us none. Answ. Only these, in this manner and ends are
lawful; and yet we disallow nothing which Gods word allows, which ought to
govern all his people. Gods word allows for the exercise of the body, the
use of the bow, 2 Samuel 1. 18. of music, Neh. 7. 67. of hunting, hawking,
birding, and such sports, without swearing, disorder, and needless tormenting
of the silly creatures. And for the exercise of wit, he allows honest
riddles, Judge. 14. and such games as the ground of which is wit or skill, as
chesse, draughts, etc. Besides, an heart that is sanctified, would inure it
self to heavenly joys, and prefer them above carnal, and little affect
these which loose persons so much dote upon.

And to those who will be ready to object the use and custom of the world, and
the practice of so many fore-running ages, I answer and conclude with the
Apostles words, Romans 12. 2. Fashion not your selves according to this world,
but prove what is the will of God. Or if you will not walk by Gods rules, your
sin shall destroy your own souls: look you to your duties, I have
endeavored to do mine in discovering the same unto you.

CHAP. XXVI.
Rules of wisdom concerning our apparel.

Having thus finished the rules of wisdom, Rules for apparel.
concerning meat, and drink, and recreations, we come to such rules as
concern apparel: and they are four:

1. 1. For the matter.
The matter of our apparel must not be stately and costly; which must be
measured partly by the ability our selves have, partly the condition of life we
are in, and partly by the example of such as are sober, grave, and wise in our
rank. Yea, even in the matter of our apparel, our sobriety and modesty must
appear; yea, our humility; when God made Adam garments, he made them of skins,
Primavestis data est propter vsum, non propter luxum*
homely and base, that he might read therein his mortality, and that by his
sin he was become like the beasts whose skins covered him.

2. 2. The fashion.
For the manner of our apparel, it must not be strange, garish affecting new
fashions, which argues leuity and new fanglednesse, but such as becomes
holiness, Tit. 2. 3. and according to the sober custom of our Country and
rank. Zeph. 1. 8. I will visit Kings Children, and those that wear strange
apparel; that is, such as in the form or fashion is wanton, curious, odd,
sauouring of pride, lightness, and singularity. A fearful threat, under
which our whole land lies, which is a receptacle of all the fashion of all
Countries, besides our own daily inventions of new fashions of monstrous
apparel, that were men and women's bodies as monstrous as their apparel, they
would be cast out of the company and account of men: and how soever their
bodies be, surely their minds be monstrous, and filled with vanity: and how
just were it with God, seeing such persons will not fashion their clothes to
their bodies, to fashion them to their clothes? The Apostle wishes us not to
fashion our selves according to the world; which precept is so far out of
date and use, that almost the fashions of all the world, and the vanity of all
Countries, may seem to be arrived and landed in this land of ours, England
the worlds ape.
that a man may read in capital letters upon men's garments the lightness and
lewdness that is within.

3. 3 For measure.
For the measure of it: beware of excess in apparel, which is a great sin,
and carries with it, 1. Expense of wealth, Excess in apparel a great sin.
Reason.
or covering the poor and naked Saints. All excess is commonly maintained
with covetousness, injustice, or unmercifulness. or glory in his brand, or
mark of felony: for apparel is the cover of our shame. 3. Waste of time,
upon their backs. But M. Latimer, in his time a man of much observation, noted
one commodity in his leather coat, which he wore at the Court; when the
Gallants mocked him, he told them his was paid for, and so were not many of
their Veluets and Sattins.

4. 4. The kinds of apparel.
Consider the ends and use of apparel, and that is, 1. spiritual, 2. civil.
1. Spiritual.
Spiritual, many ways: 1. When by putting clothes on, we see our misery,
and in the nakedness of our bodies the nakedness of our souls. 2. When we
labor to put on Christ Jesus as a garment, to cover us form the storms and
tempests which our sins have raised against us. I counsel thee to buy of me
the white garments of innocence, Re. 3. 3. When by girding our apparel to us,
we labor to girt up our loins, and look for our Lord Jesus. 4. When by
putting off our old garments, we daily put off some relic of the old man. 5.
When in adorning the body, we study to adorn the mind with humility,
holiness, modesty, meekness, etc. Not make any superstitious use, or put
religion in garments.

Civil, 2. Civil: thre^fold.
and that is threefold: 1. for health, 2. for honesty, 1. Health*
3. for ornament.

1. For health and necessity, to defend us from the injury of weather, and to
keep us warm: to this end God clothed Adam; and it is a curse to put on
clothes, and not be warm, Hag 1. 6.

2. For honesty, 2. Honesty: in
in two branches: 1. Decency. 2. Distinction.

First, Decency.
decency: for nakedness in the state of innocence was a glorious ornament,
but presently after the fall, shame and deformity came in; and therefore
presently Adam sewed leaves together, and God made coats to hide and cover
that nakedness. Now decency requires seemly and clenly apparel, not fordid,
base, and slouenly: and conde^neth that affected nakedness of men and women,
especially, who wear their clothes, so as they discover the nakedness of
many parts of their body; whereas sin has cast shame on every part, and
calls for a cover over all but for necessity.

Secondly, Distinction.
distinction of persons, sexes, ages, and callings. The man may not wear the
woman's apparel, nor the woman the man's, Deuteronomy. 22. 5. Against which law of
nature and common honesty, how manly do women attire themselves, and how
effeminately do men imitate women, as though both were willing to change
sexes? How indecent is it to see an old man in a youthful habit, to see a
Minister in his ruffians hair, pickadillies, and fashion like some soldier?
to see a peasant clothed like a Prince? as all sorts of men almost are
confused in apparel. Joseph when he was set over all the land of Egypt, was
distinguished from inferior Princes by his fine linen, and golden chain. In
times past soft garments were in Kings houses, but now that is no distinction
of Courtiers.

CHAP. XXVII.
Concerning ornament in apparel: wherein three questions are resolved.

THE third and last civil use of Garments is ornament: 3. Ornament.
where consider two or three questions.

Quest. 1. Whether be ornaments lawful to be used, seeing the Apostle commands
women, that their apparel be not outward, with broydered hair, and gold, nor
pearls; nor costly apparel, which he opposes to comely apparel? 1 Peter 3.
3. 1 Timothy 2. 9. Answ. They are: for the Apostle simply condemns not the
things themselves, which are the good creatures of God; nor all use of them in
ornament, which Rebecca and Joseph being advanced, and all the Israelitish
women, ware in earerings and bracelets, Deuteronomy. 32.
which was not their sin. But he condemns in them, 1. The ouer-common and
unseasonable use: for ornaments are not sit for all persons and times, but must
be used sparingly, not commonly, having respect to times and solemnity. They
be for great, not for common men, neither for those every day: the rich man in
the Gospel is condemned, for going in fine purple every day. 2. He condemns
the affected and excessive use of them; for they more affected the adorning of
the body, than of the mind, to which the Apostle in both places calls them:
whereas a Christian must chiefly provide for the adorning of the mind
inwardly. 3. He condemns their offensive use of them, who did not use them as
the sober and grave matrons of their years and age; but being newly converted
from the heathens, still retained the heathenish ornaments, and would not,
being Christians, be put down by the heathens, but retained the former manner
of adorning themselves. 4. He condemns their end in wearing these things,
which was to set forth their bodies, and pride up themselves with their
ornaments; whereas all ornaments must be used to Gods glory, while we adorn
his Temple, and not to draw men's eyes upon us.

Quest. 2. May not a man wear long hair for ornament.

Answ. Against looks and long hair in men.
The ornament of a man's head is short hair: long hair is an effeminate
ornament. 1 Cor. 11. 14. Does not nature it self teach, that if a man have
long hair, it is a shame for him? but if a woman have long hair, it is a
praise to her. Object. We may use other things for ornament, and why not our
hair? Answ. In ornament we must look we be without offense, and that is when
we frame our selves to the example of the grave and sober, who amongst us
count the fashion of flaring locks, effeminate and ruffian-like. Again, in
ornament, as in every thing else, we must express godliness, modesty, and
sobriety: whereas this fashion of men is received as a badge of a light mind,
and an intemperate person. Object. The Nazarits did nourish their hair. Answ.
That was by the special law of their profession which profession, and law, and
all, is now ceased. If thou will be a Nazarite, thou must drink no wine, nor
strong beer; a hard law to many of our locksters. That of Absalom does not
necessarily conclude against it, that his hair became his halter: yet it is
not to be passed lightly: Compare his pride with his fall, and we may observe
that God does ordinarily punish us in that wherein we sin.

Quest. 3. May not a woman paint her face, Against painting of faces and
complexions.
and mend her complexion? Answ. No, every one ought to be content with their
own feature and complexion: and to devise artificial forms and favors to set
upon their bodies or faces, is a most abominable practice. For, 1. They are
abstain from the appearance of evil? Iezabel, 2 King. 9. 30.
an arrant strumpet, and called the mother of fornications. How much more
unseemly was it in that Vicar of Christ Pope Paul the second, as Platina tells
us, Mat. 5. that we cannot make one hair white or black, that is, we have
not power of our hair to make it, no not to color it: and yet these will make
as many white and black as they list. 6. If thou be ashamed of that face which
God has made thee, he will one day be ashamed of that face thou have made
thy self. And dare a Christian carry a face in his life time, which neither
God made at first, nor he dares appear withal in the resurrection? Object.
But I must please my husband, and hold his heart to me. Answ. Will it not
please him to behold the face that God made? or can thou please him in
bringing a strange beauty to cousen him withal, that he knows is not thine
own? or if he take thee for beautiful when thou art deformed, would thou
be thus deceived in a husband, for a fair man to marry a painted husband.

Object. But I may cover a deformity in my body. Answ. Yes, but not by setting
a new form upon thy face, nor by dissembling.

Object. Does not the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 12. We put couers upon the members
that are least honest? Answ. 1. The Apostle speaks of not contemning the
poorest Christian, under that similitude. 2. We cover uncomely parts, but with
what? with clothes to hide them, not with painting, stibium, white lead,
purpurisse, or check varnish. 3. If thy external form be not so beautiful,
beautify it with grace, humility, the fear of God, and other Christian
virtues. The Churches beauty is within, which God and his Angels, and good men
respect in the person that is most deformed and contemptible.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Rules for our carriage toward all men* in general.

THe second sort of rules concerning man and the things of men, respects our
carriage toward other men; and that, 1. In general* toward all: 2. In
special, toward good, or bad.

The general rules are these: General rules to carry our selves toward all
men.


1. Wisely to distinguish between men, and not promiscuously respect all
alike. 1. Respect not all alike.
1. This is a point of wisdom, 1 Cor. 6. 6. and 2. commanded us, Iud. 22.
have compassion on some, putting difference, others save with fear. Again, 3.
Many precepts can never be observed without it: as, first in things respecting
God, Cast not holy things to dogs, Matthew. 7. 6. that is, such as are known
to be wilful repellers of the truth, lest they profane them, and tear you:
secondly, in things of men, Do good to all, but especially to the household of
faith: thirdly, concerning our selves, He that hates will counterfeit, though
he speak favorably, believe him not, etc. Prou. 26. 24, 25. Therefore labor
to discern one from another. 4. There is great difference between an
Israelite and an Egyptian, between a Jew and a Samaritan; and we must observe
the difference; wherein the Lord goes before us, who though he be patient and
good unto all, yet he is specially good unto Israel, even the upright of
heart. Object. This is to anticipate Gods judgment and censure. Answ. No,
because our judgment reaches not to a man's final estate, but to the present
only; for we may not judge beyond our eyes, nor yet against them: It is alike
folly and wickedness to iusti^ie the ungodly, as to condemn the innocent.
Against this rule ^aile those general men, whom all fashions and companies
please well enough, no matter whether Protestants or Papists, religious or
profane, drunkards or sober, swearers or fearers of an oath; as the Jews,
they put no difference between Christ* and the thieves, who were crucified with
him, but only that Christ was the worst. Others put difference between the
godly and others, such as between Jews and Samaritans, they will not meddle
with a man truly fearing God for a dish of water. But a fearful sign it is
when grace is not acknowledged.

2. Although we must make account to live amongst all, 2. Must live by all,
but sort with the best.
yet our care must be to sort with the best: that is, we must embrace
friendship with all so far as is possible, Romans 12. 18. and so as we war
not with God; but familiarity only with good men, who are but a few.
Lightness of familiarity is indiscretion. Here the rule holds well, to try
before we trust: yea, a wise Christian must not commit himself to every one
that seems good by the example of Christ, Ioh. 2. 24. For, 1. Much hypocrisy
lies at the root of men's hearts: 2. Satan has taught many to transform
themselves, and make religion and good words a cloak for their own ends: 3.
Never did the devil more hurt to Christianity than by false brethren, who were
sent in to spy their liberty. For even thy brethren, and the house of thy
father, even they have dealt unfaithfully with thee, -- believe them not though
they speak fair to thee, Ier. 12. 6. He that eats bread with me (says
David) and he that dips his finger in the platter with me, even he lift up his
heel against me: and Christ says, A man's enemies are they of his own
household. 4. Solomon says, An unfaithful man is as a broken tooth, and a
sliding foot, Prou. 25. 19. 5. Christ would not commit himself to some that
are said to believe in his name, because he knew what was in man. Many friends
are like deep ponds, clear on the top, and all muddy at the bottom. And
therefore a Christian must be well advised before he inwardly converse with
another. Now if a man must be careful even in entertaining good company, how
careless are men of themselves, when they thrust themselves into evil
company, which is more contagious then any sickness, more infectious then any
pestilence? no age so catching of any disease, as every age is of deadly
diseases of the mind in such poisoned air. Let no Christian that will be
ruled by Gods wisdom, presume to converse in any such company, further then
the limit of his particular calling, or other just occasion and dealing is
offered.

all men, we must keep a determination either to do good unto others, In all
companies do good or take good.
or receive good from others, helping one another to life as occasion shall be
offered, Heb. 10. 24. Let us consider one another, to provoke to love and good
works: Jude 20. Edify one another in your holy faith. Motives so to do:
Reas. 1.
1. How profitable should we be, if our lips were ever feeding others, Pro.
10. 20. and if our diligence were to draw understanding from others, Prou. 2.
5. How should we abound in wisdom, and make our whole life fruitful? This
would keep us in good trading and return of goodlinesse. 2. This is the right
end and improuement of our gifts, for the good of the whole body, Romans 12. 6.
3. Here is bond of perfection, which ties persons and virtues together, By
conversation actually confute all wickedness.
his care must be that his life and conversation be a visible confutation of
all ungodliness. Daniels piety confuted idolatry, and Lot was a real reproof
of Sodom. A Christians light must always shine, even in the darkness of the
world, and against it. Should the life of a Christian be like the life of
unbelievers, covetous, contentious, conceited, unjust, etc? or should not the
life of a wise Christian, vary from the multitude and common people, in
judgment and practice? Did not Christ and his followers so? This rule is
opposite to that worldly wisdom, to swim with the stream, and to do as the
most do, to avoid the note of singularity. But here, as in all the course of
godliness, 1. We must become fools, that we may be wise: 2. We must not
avoid men's evil speaking, by running with them into the same excess of riot:
3. We must not take the example of many and great ones, but of Christ, the
greatest and wisest of all: and Phil. 3. 17. Be ye followers of me, and look
on them that walk so. These examples suite to our rule.

5. Christianity enioynes love unto all, Love every man's person, no man's sin,
even the worst: whose vices we must hate, their persons we must love; by
which virtue all men have place in our prayers, in our mercy and compassion as
occasion requires. This grace couers a multitude of sins in all, it bears
with infirmity, it forgiues offenses in all: Col. 3. 13. forbearing and
forgiving one another. And therefore the Apostle wishes us, above al things to
put on love. And to consider that motive, Col. 4. 7. Every one is one of us,
even the worst in the natural and civil bond; one of us, if not in faith, yet
in flesh; one of our neighbors, or congregation, or at least by the common
bond of a Christian.

6. Religion requires courtesy as well as piety, Join with good conscience,
good manners.
good manners together with good conscience; and therefore we must be courteous
to all, 1 Pet. 2. 17. and 3, 8. Honor all men. And Romans 12. 10. In giving
honor go one before another. Which honor is a good opinion conceived
inwardly, and expressed outwardly by reverent words and deeds. Christianity
will make us have a low opinion of our selves, and better of others then of our
selus. Ob. Some are so bad, or so base, as no honor or respect belongs unto
them. Answ. None is so bad but has some honor on him, he is Gods creature, he
is a man, a Christian, and he may be a good man, a member of Christ, and
certain reverence belongs to all this. Ob. But how can superiors, in higher
place, honor their inferiors? Answ. Many ways: 1. In action, by testifying
their good opinion of them in words, gestures, or deeds, not the least
contempt: and so Job behaved himself, self, 31. 13. 2. In affection,
especially, when superiors whom God has by their place made receivers of
honor, could out of an humble affection be well pleased either to want it, or
return it upon their inferiors if they might do it without offense, or might
it stand with good order which God has set in the Church and Commonwealth.

CHAP. XXIX.
Rules of walking wisely toward good men.

THE first of these rules is in respect of our affection, 1. Rule brotherly
affection.
to love the godly with brotherly love. Heb. 13. 1.
It is true indeed, all men must be loved, but here is required a more special
love, as between brethren, of which Saint Peter says, 2. 1. 7. Join with
godliness brotherly kindness, because they are of the same father and family
of God. The reason of this rule is this: the nearer any man comes to God, or
expresses him, the more right he has into our affections for Gods image sake:
and here is a straiter bond then that of nature. The Apostle makes this a mark
of Gods child, to love the brethren, 1 Ioh. 3. 10. and David professes, that
all his delight was in the Saints, Psalm. 16. 2.
the excellent on earth: and Rom 2. 10. Be affectioned one to another with
brotherly love. Many things in Gods child^e^ might draw our eyes unto them.
And because this cannot be, except men see more in Gods pople then ordinary,
therefore labor to see, 1. Their high birth and true nobility, Ioh. 1. 13 Not
of blood, nor of the will of flesh, but of God. 3. Their not ashamed to call
them brebrethre^, Heb. 2. 11. 3. Their Kings and Priests unto God, long white
robes of righteousness and holiness; such as Kings anciently were
distinguished by, wherein they appear most lovely and graceful to God,
Angels, and good men: nothing is wanting to their perfection of beauty, seeing
they are complete in Christ the head of all election, effectual calling,
justification. And their future expectation is the City of God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, which God has prepared for them, Heb. 11. 16.

Now were it a wise course for a man to disaffect the chief favorite of his
King? and are not Gods children Gods chief favorites? Were it a safe thing to
hate the people of God, to disaffect them, to lowre upon them, seeing the Lord
observes what looks are cast down upon his children, as in Cain? How was
Balaam slain by the Lord for desiring evil to Israel, though himself could
do them none but by his wicked counsel? These are the last times in which men
are lovers of themselves, and of men only for their own advantage, 2 Timothy 3.
2. they love them for their wealth, ease, and pomp, not for God and his graces.

2. We must not only affect their persons, 2. Rule. Faithful communion.
but also embrace a fruitful fellowship and society with them in the Gospel.
This is the Apostles rule, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Love brotherly fellowship: and how
glad was he for the fellowship of the Philippians in the Gospel, Phil. 1. 5.

Now the means of fruitful conuersing with the godly, Means of fruitful
ronuerse.
are these:

First, to consider one Exhort one another daily, least ye be hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin. Think what a fearful thing it is to fall from
the grace of God, yea or the degrees of it; and would we suffer a brother to
run into this danger?

Secondly, choose fit matter to confer of in company, either by calling to
mind things heard, or by stirring up to profitable hearing, diligent
proceeding, in offensive walking, watchful speaking, and the like: or if need
be, of admonition, exhortation, or reproof, show thy love therein; full clouds
will distill rain, light will shine abroad, and charitable knowledge is
communicatiue.

Thirdly, be sure to perform these private Christian duties in good, and
holy, and unrebukable manner: as, 1. orderly, those beginning which are
fittest in gifts and place, as Elihu spoke in his turn: 2. humbly, none
seeking to speak beyond his skill and reach: 3. wisely, watching the fittest
time, and best occasion: 4. meekly and lovingly, without reasonings and
murmuring, Phil. 2. 15. none crossing others, but through love one forbearing
another, aduising in the spirit of meekness, and with offering to submit
themselves in other cases to receive words of exhortation and admonition: 5.
Conscionably, so as in all such meetings and conference, every one be an helper
to the truth, 3 John 8. to find it out, not to obscure or weaken it. By these
means we shall have cause to rejoice in our Christian fellowship, as Jonathan
and David, 1 Samuel 23. 14.

Fourthly, observe the graces 1 These. 1. 7. for our own provocation and
imitation: Yea, spy and encourage the graces of God in the weakest and meanest
Christian, so framing our selves to that mark of a good man, who honors all
that fear the Lord, Ps. 15. 4. Neither let the strongest scorn to ree^iue
help from the weakest: Moses was content to be advised by Iethro, and David by
Abigail: and note Paul's humility, Romans 1. 12. he hoped to come and be comforted
by their faith, as well as to help theirs.

Fifthly, in the use of good company, beware of giving any occasion of scandal,
or offense to any, Matthew. 18. 7, 8. leave no ill smell behind thee: avoid the
note of pride, conceit, forwardness in speaking, frowardness, or stiffenesse
in thine own sense, 1 John 2. 10. He that loves his brother, there is no
occasion of stumbling or scandal in him.

Motives to provoke us wisely to carry our selves in good company. Motives thus
to carry our selves in good company.


1. Consider how in our company we are especially to watch, seeing in no part
seeing we do nothing without witness, and should do nothing which we would
not have exe^plary.

2. As Satan lays snares the time; so as some who intended more good to
themselves and others, carry away hearts smiting them, for not better employing
that opportunity.

3. There is apparent when there was reaped so good fruit one of another in
their presence?



3. Rule. 3. Apology
In our speeches, let us be proctors and sollicitors for the Saints, speak
wisely and willingly of the good we know in our brethren, and maintain the
cause, person, and name of good men to our power. The sincerity of love
between David and Jonathan was manifest; in that Jonathan defended David's
innocence to Saul his father, not only to the loss of his Kingdom, but the
danger of his own life. Ebed-melech the blackemoore spoke a good word for
Jeremy, and was saved from destruction, when his master Zedekiah was slain.
Nicodemus even in the beginning of grace spoke for Christ, when the whole
Council was against him. And how dangerous is it to devise and invent words
against Cods children, as David's enemies; to belie, or reproach them, to raise
or receive slanders against them? If such as stand not for grace, shall fall,
then much more they that stand against it. How needful is this Apology for
them, against the reproaches and scorns of this age? How earnestly would
children speak for their parents, brethren, or kindred? Even so should it be
here. It is nothing to speak for a man when others speak for him.

4. Rule. 4. Rule. Helpfulnesse.
Concerning our actions toward good men, we should every way bestirre our
selves to procure their good and welfare: we must to our hearts and affections
join our hands and help to do them good, yea, be ready to lay our hands
under the feet of the Saints. Gal. 6. 10. Do good to all, but especially to
the household of faith.

Now in special, Means of it.
1. We must prevent from them all the evil we can, hinder it as may be, vaunt
not thy self over him, but consider thy self, and by all good means cure it if
it lie in thy power. Christ was sent to speak a word of comfort to the weary,
and every Christian has received of his anointing. When David was in deep
distress, his faithful friend Jonathan comforted him in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 23. 16. 4. If thou know a good Saints, communicating willingly and
freely to their necessity, 1 Pet. 3. 8. Love one another as brethren, be
pitiful. 1 Ioh. 3. 17. He that has this worlds good, and sees his brothers
need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him.

To stir us up hereunto, Mot^ues to the former duty.
consider these motives: 1. Say with thy self, especially do good to the
household of faith. 2. What shall I gain, if good and godly men? Cannot Cain
cast down his looks, but God looks on it? Cannot Ismael laugh at Isaac, but
the Lord arraigns and condemns him of high persecution? Surely then cannot I
carry the like Merioz accursed, because she came not out to help the people of
God, though she had no hand against them? Judge. 5. 23. Surely I must nor only
not have a hand against good men, but I must set my hand to help them, else is
not my heart so right as it should. Pilats wife wished her hsuband to have
nothing to do against that just man: but happy had Pilate been (who was not
violent against Christ) to have been earnest and resolute for his deliverance;
the defect whereof was his overthrow. And so it shall be heavy enough in the
day of judgment, that wicked men's hands have not helped the godly, seeing the
sentence shall not run because they had hurt them, but because they helped them
not.

CHAP. XXX.
Rules how to walk wisely toward evil men: 1. in general. Rules of wise
walking toward evil men.


THe general rule is in Col. 4. 5. Walk wisely toward them that are without,
that is, the Gentiles who were not converted, without the border of the Church:
for even in the Church some are of Gods domestickes, some without as strangers
that want faith as yet. And godly men must walk so much the more warily, not
only because they have Gods eye, and godly men's eyes on them, but even eyes of
men yet unconverted, who must not be cast back, or confirmed in their error,
or hardened against the truth, but by all wise walking (if it be possible) won
to the love and liking of it.

Now toward all unbelievers, and unconverted men in general, these parculars
are worthy observation: 1. Avoid al just causes of scandal.
1. That every Christian avoid all known evils and offenses, by which evil men
might be occasioned to abide out of the Church. The law is, Thou shall put no
stumbling block before the blind: for this is a fea^^full judgment of God on
men unconverted, they would willingly be blinded, and hardened in their
natural estate. Now our rule is, being our selves pulled out of danger, to
help others out also; nay, our light must reprove their darkness, their
covetousness by liberality, their pride by humility, their impatience by
patience, etc.

2. All unconverted men hate the light, and are prone to blaspheme the Gospel,
2. Stop mouths of evil men.
and to reproach the holy profession of it. Wise Christians therefore must cut
off occasions from them, and take heed of defiling their own neast: 1 Timothy 5
14. Give no occasion to the adversary to speak evil: and David prays, that
none might be ashamed because of him. Ezec. 36. 20. the Lord complains, that
the Israelites among the heathen polluted his name, and made them say, These
are the people of the Lord, and are gone out of his land. A lewd child (says
Solomon) dishonors the whole house. Nay on the contrary, the meanest
Christian in his place, by his wise and Christian walking, must adorn the
profession of Christ; so the Apostle to Titus 2. 10. Servants must be no
pickers, but show all good faithfulness, to adorn the Gospel of the Lord
Jesus. An holy course of life will make the Gentiles say, as they in Esaias 61.
9. They are the seed of the blessed of the Lord.

3. All unconverted men esteem of doctrine by the life, 3. Seek to win them.
and the profession by the practice of professors; for they have no taste of
the doctrine in it self: and therefore in the carriage of our profession, we
must apply our selves if it be possible to win them. So the Apostle (1. Pet. 2.
12.) wishes the Jews, to have their conversation honest among the Gentiles,
that they might glorify God in the day of their visitation. And women are
commanded, so to watch their whole behavior, as their husbands might be won
by their godly conversation. Private men must convert others by their private
conversation.

Motives so to do, Motives.
are these:

2. They have a light with By weldoing to silence the ignorance of foolish men,
1 Pet. 2. 15. 5. What a glory him: 1 Samuel 26. 25.
wicked men shall say as Saul said to David. Thou art more righteous then I,
etc.

CHAP. XXXI.
Rules how to walk wisely toward evil men, in special: and first for
scorners.

NOw we come to special rules concerning special sorts of evil men, of whom
some are exceeding evil in themselves, some are evil also to good men. Of the
former rank are scornful persons: of the latter hurtful.

For scorners, observe these rules.

1. If we know men to be so far naught, Rules how to carry our selves toward
scorners.
as they scorn goodness, good men, and good things, we must avoid their
company so much as we may. 1. Avoid them.
For what comfort can a godly man take in such company, where all good and
godly communication must either be banished or derided? There is no hope of
doing good, there is danger of taking harm.

2. If we be by occasion beset, 2. If cast into their company, observe 5. rules.
or cast into the company of profane, brutish and scornful persons, then
observe these rules. First, Woe is me, that I remain in Meshec, and dwell in
the tents Secondly, be sure though thou see no place or opportunity of good,
that thou have no fellowship with them in any of the unfruitful works of
darkness. If they will be no cleaner by thy company, be not thou defiled by
theirs. If they will not consent to thee in good, consent not thou to them in
any sin. Thirdly, please Object. Why, may we not by yielding a little to
them, draw them to us? Answ. No, but the way to win them, is a pure
conversation with fear, 1 Pet. 3. 12. much less may we flatter them in any
evil. Micaiah would not flatter with the King, the four hundred false
Prophets did. Fourthly, acknowledge thy self a child of wisdom, which is
justified of all her children: suffer not Gods glory to be trodden down by thy
silence; wisely break off fooleries, by sauoury riddles or questions, as
Sampson: and in a wise and peaceable manner, change the matter: holding it a
settled ground of religion, not to relinquish piety, to keep peace with wicked
men: Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace, and holiness. No corruption of man must drive
us from our station. Fifthly, so soon as we may, depart from them: Prou, 14.
7. Depart from the foolish man, when thou perceiuest not in him the lips of
knowledge. And beware of falling into the like company again. Joseph wisely
declined the company of his Mistress, when she daily spoke unto him, Gen 39.
10. and David would not return with Saul, when he perceived his wilfulness
against him, 1 Samuel 26. 25.

CHAP. XXXII.
Rules to carry our selves wisely toward evil men, euilly affected to us.

IF men be not only evil in themselves, but also to us, then it is either in
evil purposes, or in evil practices against us.

If they purpose evil, Rules how to carry our selves to our enemies.
then our Saviors rule is, Beware of men, Mat. 10. 17. for they will deliver
you up to the Councels. By men, our Savior means those whom in the former
words he calls woolues, that desire to make a prey and spoil of the sheep
of Christ, and in his caveat advises, 1. Wisely to prevent the plots 1. Wisely
prevent their plots
and trains of ungodly men, discreetly to prevent our own trouble so near as
we can. How wisely did Iaacob prevent the fury of his brother Esau? And as they
watch to traduce us, so must we watch to cut off occasions of entrapping; Luke
6. 7. the Scribes and Pharisees watched whether Christ would heal on the
Sabbath day or no, to find accusation against him; our Savior for all this
omitted not to do good, but in doing it by his question unto them cut off so
far as he could, the matter of their malice by clearing the lawfulness of
it. So must we: And yet prepare stoutly to bear whatsoever the Lord measures
out by them.

2. Our Savior would have us wisely decline their fury, 2. Decline their fury.
not without cause provoking them: It is no wisdom to provoke an evil man:
It is no good discretion to stir up a Lion, to take a Bear by the tooth, or
a dog by the ears. For they desire nothing more, than matter to stir up
their corruption by: So H^zekiah commanded his servants not to answer Rabseca
one word. 3. Ioyn with serpentine wisdom, 3. Ioin with serpentine wisdom,
innocence of Doves.
innocence of doves, Mat. 10. 16. Nothing more vexes and vanquisheth an
adversary than innocence: no better brestplate than righteousness. But if a
man had the innocence of Christ himself, the adversary will watch advantages,
and play upon a man's simplicity: therefore join serpentine wisdom, as Paul
did, Act. 23. 6. he testified his innocence, and that with all good conscience
he served God till that day* but what tell you Ananias of doves innocence? he
commands to strike him on the mouth: the more innocent, the less endured; he
fared the worse for that: and therefore he ioynes in season serpentine
wisdom; for, perceiving his greatest enemies to be Pharisees and Sadduces, he
professes himself a Pharisie, and the son of a Pharisie, and that he was
brought in danger for the hope of the resurrection which the Sadduces denied;
and so casting a bone between them, and setting them by the ears, he escaped
between them.

4. Out of their malice we should draw our own good, 4. Out of their evil
draw some good.
so warily to carry our selves toward them, as that we may find that of the
heathen true, An enemy often hurts less, and profits more than many
friends. We must both in their absence, and presence especially, take heed we
do not disadvantage our selves. It was some disadvantage to Paul, when in the
Council (although he was provoked, and unjustly smitten) he called the high
Priest whited wall: he was glad to excuse it by his ignorance. We may not be to
bold, or too forward to speak in a good matter.

Having received wrong from them do three things.
our rule is, 1. In respect of them, to pity, pardon, and pray for them. and
show meekness and moderation, and say as David in Shimei his railing, It may
be the Lord will do me good for his cursing of me this day. 3. In respect of
our duty, still to show

Thus far of the rules of Christian wisdom: of which I may say with Moses,
Deuteronomy. 4. 5. 6. These are the rules and ordinances: keep them, and do them:
for this is your wisdom.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Containing motives for circumspect walking.

But because this accurate and circumspect walking is grown out of request,
and men generally are too well contented to walk at adventure, and (as men
that shoot at rouers,) secure themselves in a loose and neglected course, and
go on carelessly, as if there were no danger in wandering from God, and
declining from the good way, we will use some Motives to provoke every
Christian that tenders either Gods glory or his own salvation, Motives to the
former rules.
to undertake this Christian course.

1. In regard of God: Whose commandment that all our ways be ordered aright,
Prou. 4. 26. and that the Saints walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in
all things, Col. 1. 10. 2. Whose word must be our rule, to which we must Word
our continual Counselor, to bind it to us, not to let it depart, but to
meditate in it night and day. And what is it less than blasphemy, to charge
the Saints with folly, singularity, and a Saintish purity, in that wherein they
were most acceptable to God? as, David set the Lord before him continually: and
when he professes his great love to the law* says, that all the day long his
meditation is in it? Psalm. 119. 79. Read we not, that the twelve tribes served
God instantly, night and day? Act. 26. 7. and the Apostles were assured, they
had a good concience in all things, Heb. 13. 18. Was this care (so incessant)
commendable in them, and is the same godly care now grown a vice, an hateful
practice, or heresy? 3. Who being a God of pure eyes, David, I will look to my
ways? Psalm. 39. 1.
4. Who

hammer it out on the anuils of our hard hearts, like cunning workmen. Whence
it cannot be avoided, but that without our daily watch, sin must multiply and
grow upon us, even over our heads, to a numberless number.

3. In respect of the wicked Gath and Askelon, these uncircumcised Philistimes,
triumph and glory in the falls of any of Gods Worthies? Hence was the ground of
our Sauiors exhortation to his Disciples, Behold, I send you as sheep among
wolves, and therefore be wise as serpents, Mat. 10. 16. Nay, we must not only
by our circumspect ways stop their mouths, but convince themselves, and
win them to the same holy profession with us: 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2.

name of God is blasphemed because of us that profess it, as the Apostle
speaks of hypocritical Jews, Romans 2. 24. Hence are those many exhortations,
Col. 4. 5. Walk wisely toward them that are without, least you give them any
just occasion of exception or stumbling: and 1 Cor. 10. 32. Give no offense,
neither to the Jews nor Grecians, nor to the Church of God. And how
circumspect had he need to be, that must walk inoffensiuely between the Jew
and Gentile, seeing what was given to the one, seemed detracted from the other?
Yet so much is required to walk, even between the godly and profane, whose
ways are diametrally contrary.

a narrow way, and on high: all which makes it more perilous to decline from.
How circumspect had he need be, that walks upon a narrow high rock, a thousand
faddom from ground, especially where a little slip or error tumbles him down,
to dash him all to pieces?

6. Is there any time afforded Peter did, in going into the high Priests hall,
Matthew. 26. 71. Or can we do so, and not be caught by the deceitfulnes of
sin? Stand we against such enemies as will not take advantages, who do
nothing but seek them, especially when fear is set aside, which is the souls
watchman? And if men will take liberty, and be at their own hand, have they
not full leave to fall often, lie long, rise hardly, and being up again walk
weakly, and not recover their cheerfulness many a day, if ever? and must they
fear nothing so much, as least they keep their watches, and preserve
themselves from falls? Lastly, a man may pull down more in one day, than he
can build in many: and experience shows, that a man is more weakened by one
days surfeit and negligence, than in an hundred, wherein he preserues the care
of his health: even so it is in the soul, the health whereof is kept in
strictness of diet, and observation of Gods rules.

7. Who knows not Solomon? It needs therefore be hedged and fenced with the
fear of God, and kept with all diligence. Pro. 23. 17.

8. This alone is the is to walk safely: Pro. 10. 9. He that walks uprightly,
walks safely: and what other means has the Wiseman appointed to preserve
from falling, than to take hold of instruction, and not leave her? This alone
is the way to get peace peculiar to the Israel of God, to walk by rule, Gal.
6. 16. neither can a course not attended, stand with this Apostolical
iniunction of Christian circumspection.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Answering objections against circumspect walking.

ANd whereas our age abounds with men of profane minds and mouths, who
would turn all this our glory into shame, and censure this speech of the holy
Ghost, which prescribes a strict, precise, and accurate walking: (why? say
they: what need men be so strict? and, shall no man come to heaven, but such as
are so strict and curious?) and the whole world, almost, thinks it a most idle
and needless course: we will therefore answer some objections that are made
against it.

Object. 1. A great many have lived honestly and well, that were never so
foolish and strict. I hope to serve God, and do no man harm, and what need
more?

Answ. 1. We must walk by rule, not by example, except it be of the best, not
of the most.

Pharisees led a civil life, were outwardly very just to the tything of Mint
and Anise, and very devout in their worship: and yet if our righteousness
exceed not theirs, we can never enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5. 20.

in spirit and truth; it cuts off not only outward acts of murder,
uncleanness, theft etc. but inward motions of hatred, wantonness,
covetousness: it strikes at roots and branches, and hates the least and
secretest evil, which civil righteousness makes no bones of.

Object. 2. But this circumspect and strict walking is taken up but by a few,
and those of the meanest: some men of great wisdom, place, and learning
favor it not, but scorn and oppose it.

Answ. 1. Christianity black, Cant. 1. 5.
because the sun looks on her, but comely to God and his Angels; and this
makes few enter that way. Not many mighty, not many noble, not many wise: Zeph.
3. 12.
but God has chosen a few poor people, and they shall call upon his Name: And
why not many of those? Because they cannot so easily deny themselves and this
evil world, which they must do that us in strict and circumspect walking. The
holy Patriarks; Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob; godly and zealous Kings, David,
Solomon, Josiah; the holy Apostles, who endeavored always to have a clear
conscience before God and all men, Acts 24. 16. yea, the most wise, noble, and
learned that ever was, the Son of God, whose conversation was such as none
could accuse him of sin. These are the cloud of witnesses, which we must follow
in running the race set before us, Heb. 12. 1.

Object. 3. But what an impossible commandment is this, and who can bear it?
Can we be Saints in this world, thus to order our selves in every thing? We
are sinners, and must be sinners, and cannot be thus strict as you require. We
hope we generally mean well, and God (we hope) will supply the rest.

Answ. 1. The scope of this plea is, to give ouerall, because they cannot
attain all: which is but a false fire, by which the devil discourageth many
from the narrow way, and the narrow looking to their own way. For true it is,
that we call with the Scripture for a keeping of all Gods commandments,
always, and to live with God, and walk with him: but with Evangelical
interpretation, which accepts the will, desire, and endeavor to walk with
God in every thing; which cannot but in some measure be found in a true
believer, and cannot but in Christ be accepted, where it is true and hearty.
Thus the Scriptures interpret themselves: 1 Chr. 28. 7. If Solomon shall
endeavor to keep my commandments, etc. Hos. 6. 3. We shall endeavor to know
the Lord. What can God accept less, or a good heart tender less than hearty
wishes, where strength is wanting to please God in all things? 2* Let us by see
our impotency, and confess our failings, but not therefore allow our selves in
any evil, or venture on any sin which we might by this circumspection avoid,
or remit our endeavor in the respect of all Gods Commandments. but in every
particular to avoid deceit and suspicion of it. And as it is with a traveler
in an unknown way, who will not go at random, nor count it a sufficient
direction to be set Eastward or Westward, but he will ask every man of every
Town, and take good heed of every mark, to pass him from one place to
another: so in this our passage to heaven, we must keep our special
directions, and walk with God in every thing, if we will happily pass unto
heaven.

Object. 4. But what need such daily and continual troubling of our selves?
What was the Sabbath made for, but for Gods service? and we keep our Church
as well as any: but for the weeke-dayes, we have callings to follow, and
cannot intend such things: and it were better if some of these nice fellows
were more diligent in their calling, as we be.

Answ. 1. Seeing the rule by which we must walk, is to serve God in holiness
and righteousness all our days, Luke 1. 75.
we have no liberty to part the week between God and us. Neither must we put
on holiness as an holy day garment, to put it off at night: neither may we be
less holy on other days than on the Sabbath: howsoever we must exercise our
holiness in the public worship of God on that day, and in the private
worship, and in the personal callings on the other days. 2. He is a good
Psalm. 101. 2.
in the midst of a man's house; and not at Church, where the Pharisie is often
above the Publican. 3. Thou have a calling on the weeke-day, 1 Cor. 7. 3^
Use the world as not using it, as not affecting it: and acknowledge thy
special and personal calling to be subordinate to the general: for in the
whole exercise of thy special calling, thou must show forth thy knowledge, and
religious keeping of a good conscience: once divorce these two, and never look
for success on thy labors.

Object. 5. But this is fitter for Ministers and cloistered persons, who have
given themselves to continual devotion, than for ordinary and common men, who
are not acquainted with such novelties.

Answ. 1. If all Christians be alike subject to sin, al have need to be
continually alike fenced against it. If all have the same enemies, all had need
stand upon their ground. If one man's heart be as wicked as another, every man
had need set a watch round about himself. And if any have more need than
other, it is unlearned and simple persons, who want such means of helping
themselves, as learned Preachers have. 2. As for the nouelty of circumspect
course, we must needs say it is so to such as are of Festus his suit, who
thinks Paul learned even to madness, to call him to such strictness: or
Gallio his Disciples, Act. 18. who being of no religion, cannot be at leisure
to give it hearing. But we have seen it to be no nouelty to the Spirit of God,
every where charging it upon us: nor to the godly guided by his Spirit, who can
neither be idle nor unfruitful in the work of the Lord.

Object. 6. I like such as can be so strict, and I could wish so to be; but
then I must part from the pleasure and joy of my life: for this continual
watch and circumspection is full of melancholy, and uncomfortable: it hinders
neighbors from sports and merriments, breaks of good company, and makes the
husband and wise often look heavily one upon another: and besides, I should
lose some profits and customers, and wrong my estate by neglecting it.

Ans. 1. This is a clean Her ways are the ways of pleasures. Gods wisdom,
ordering the ways of man, brings true joy and pleasure. For, is there no joy
in God, in his word, which was wont to be as sweet, Psalm. 19.
as the hony-combe, nor in the Spirit of God, which is called the Comforter?
Ioh. 16.
Is it such a thing of heaviness to live with God? Alas! what is such an heart
made of! 2. What delights do we call men from, but such as are carnal,
foolish, perishing, and unlawful; stolen waters so sweet and sauoury to
corrupt flesh, the forbidden fruit which a Christian should neither touch nor
taste, and happy he were if he never saw it? Gods servants, is, that they
cannot be more godly. Lay this for a ground, that God is thy chief delight,
and no man may be so moderately joyful God, union with Jesus Christ, the
inseparable presence of Gods blessed Spirit, the attendance of the Angels, the
Communion of the Saints, the benefit of their prayers, conference, comfort, and
example. This is a pleasant thing for brethren in the faith to live together in
unity. Psalm. 123. 1
And what true joy is there in the company of gamesters, drinkers, swearers,
riotous or idle persons, who are never merry unless they be mad, and never
glad but when they have driven away the remembrance of God? 5. As for the loss
of In her right hand is length of days, and in her left hand, riches and
glory. Never did true piety weaken any man's estate: but godliness has been
the true and constant gain: this makes a small portion sweet and precious, and
entailes a blessing upon it, when it passes into the hands of our posterity
after us.

CHAP. XXXV.
Marks of a man walking circumspectly.

ANd seeing most men beguile themselves with the goodness of their present
course, Marks of a circumspect walker.
and esteem a civil life and external honesty, not only unblameable enough,
but justifiable and sufficiently commendable; Be it known to them that if they
examine not the goodness of their course by this doctrine, they are far from
Gods approbation, whatsoever they may conceive of themselves. In which
examination I will help them with a few notes and signs of a circumspect
Person, by whose ways as by a right line they may both see the crookedness,
and at length begin to straiten the obliquity of their own.

1. A circumspect man well-doing, being offered, but will seek them. How might
every moment of our lives make us more stored with grace then other, if we
would seek occasions of good to our selves? What a rich stock of grace might
we have attained? How rich in good works? How should we have furthered our
reckoning?

seeing every Christian duty is enjoined him, he has respect to all Gods
Commandments. Duties of piety shall not iustle out civil duties, nor civil
duties eat out duties of piety; but as one hand helps another, so one table
shall further the other, one calling forward another: yea, he looks to the
thriuing of all his graces. He will walk very humbly before God, but so as
he maintain his joy in God. His moderation shall not damp his zeal, his zeal
shall not out-runne his knowledge. His providence shall not lessen his faith,
nor his faith destroy his providence. His love with men's persons brings him not
into love with their sins, and his hatred of their sins, impeacheth not his
love of their persons. His righteousness to men hinders not his mercy,
neither does cruel mercy withstand or thrust down needful justice. Thus he is
busy in maintaining all his graces, all of them being of great use, and all of
them flowing from the same Spirit.

for Gods glory, for good men, and good causes. He will be sure to profit
himself and others with gracious and religious speeches, Gal. 4. 6.
and be silent where fruitful speech will not be heard. Exercise to good
speeches brings a dexterity and readiness of wellspeaking, to which every
Christian is exhorted, Col. 4. 6. Let your speeches be gracious always* and
powdered with salt, that ye may know how to answer every man.

4. As a wary and circumspect his estate of grace by every thing, and thinks
himself then truly rich, when he thriues in the best commodities. He
conceiues himself rich, not when he has things about him to leave to his
heirs, but when he has his wealth personally in himself, and for himself,
such wealth as he carries to heaven with him. A circumspect Christian will not
win the whole world with the loss of his own soul, which is nothing but to
make his heirs happy in his own eternal misery. A circumspect Christian is
not so careful to heap up gold, as good works in abundance, and by works of
mercy and love, he makes himself bags that wax not old, a treasure in heaven
that can never fail, where the thief comes not, nor the moth corrupts,
Luke 12. 33. A circumspect Christian is not so careful for the soyling,
tilling, and sowing of his ground, the mounding of his pasture, the weeding of
his field, the pruning of his trees, the feeding of his cattle; as in fencing
the heart against temptation, in sowing the seed of Gods word, in weeding of
sin by the roots out of his soul; in feeding and fostering of grace. Here is
a good husband for himself: he has that within himself that is better then
all without him, and requires more tendance then they all.

How improuident then are we in our general callings, whiles we take not
opportunities of good in public or private, but slip many lessons, Sermons,
and comforts on the Sabbath, and on weeke-dayes? and whiles we will not offer
a sacrifice of alms, when God sets up an Altar before us? How do our special
callings eat out our care of the general, and are all in ciuilities, whiles
for the thrift of grace, we are altogether idle and unprofitable? How many
vain and vile speeches, unfruitful, unsavory, and hurtful, do our corrupt
hearts send out, according to their own fullness, by swearing, slandering,
lying, cursing, and the like? How bad husbands are men for their souls, whiles
they have not a horse, a pig, a sheep, yea, scarce a dog about their house,
but is more tended, and better provided for than their souls? whiles they will
scarce let any dunghill lie about their house, so nasty as their souls? nor
any patch of ground so neglected as their own hearts, that they grow like
nettles and brambles, to be cut up and cast into the fire?

FINIS.

