Archaioplutos. OR THE RICHES OF Elder ages. Proouing by many good and learned
Authors, that the ancient Emperors and Kings, were more rich and magnificent,
then such as live in these days.

Heereto is annexed, the honors of the brave Roman Soldiers; With the
seven Wonders of the World.

Written in French by Guil. Thelin, Lord of Gutmont and Morillonuilliers: and
truly translated into English.

Patere aut Abstine.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. C. for Richard Smith, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the West door of Paul's. 1592.

To the Right Honorable and virtuous Lord, Gilbert, Lord Talbot, the
honorable Earl of Shrewesburie, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter.
etc. The fullness of content in all his heroycall desires.
I Offer to your Honor, the pains of a Noble Frenchman, how unskillfully by me
turned into English, I leave to your wonted honorable consideration: who
being enriched with so many singular perfections, will not frown on the good
endeavors of an humble well-willer. I have no mean whereby to excuse my
boldness, but only this, a reverend and unfeigned affection to your honor,
with forward zeal in duty to do any thing you shall command me: if this
may excuse me, it is as much as I desire, and which hereafter I will better
employ my self to deserve.

Your honors humble affectionate, An: Monday. One of the Messengers of her
Majesty's Chamber.

To the courteous Reader.
IF this harshe and unpleasant translation, (courteous Gentlemen) may pass
with your wonted kind acceptance: expect a work from the Press very shortly,
more aunswerable to your humors, namely, the sweet conceited History of
Orlando Amoroso. Though far inferior to that already extant of Orlando
Furioso, done by so rare a Scholar of the Muses: yet what wants in cunning,
good will shall supply, to complete Orlandos whole History together.

A. M.

A brief extract of certain Histories, wherein is declared, that the Emperors
and Kings of elder times, were more rich and magnificent, then such as live at
this day; taken from the Volumes of sundry good Authors.
The triumph of Salomons Temple, and what the making thereof valued.
WE read in the first Book of the Chronicles, the twenty two chapter, that
David said to Solomon. My Son, comfort thy self, pluck up thy heart and be
strong, dread not, neither be discouraged. For according to my poverty have I
prepared for the house of the Lord, such dispense as shall be needful to make
up the same: to wit, an hundred thousand Talents of Gold, and a thousand
thousand Talents of Silver, which is one Million, with three thousand Talents
of Gold of Ophir, of the best choice.

This sum is infinite and not to be numbered. An hundred thousand Talents of
gold, do value threescore thousand Millions of Crowns. The Million of
Talents of silver, valueth six hundred Millions of Crowns, according to the
estimate of Budaeus in his Book of Coins. Where speaking of the tryumphes of
Caesar, he says, that he caused to be brought into the public Treasury,
threescore and five thousand Talents of silver, which valued nine and thirty
Millions of Crowns. He makes also the like mention, where he speaks of
Cyrus King of Persia, who took Craesus and his treasure, amounting to five
hundred thousand Talents of silver, which value three hundred Millions of Gold.

It is written in the second Chapter of the third book of Kings, that in the
time of Solomon, he had so much silver out of Judea, as there was not any
account made thereof.

The shyps belonging to Solomon and king Hyram, went by three and three yearly
to Tharsus, whence they brought great quantity of Gold and silver; in so much
that (as the Text says) there was such store of gold and silver in Jerusalem,
as the King esteemed thereof no otherwise then of stones: the Vessels and all
the vtencelles together of the house of Lybanon, was of fine Gold.

Josephus in his seventh book of Antiquities, witnesses, that David when he
deceassed left greater riches, then any other King, were he Hebrewe or Gentile,
which was hydden within his Sepulcher, as also in the Coffer or Vessel
monumentarie, wherein the bones and ashes of the Kings were wont to be kept, so
that his treasure was very hard to be found.

Likewise in the ninth Book of the Evangelical preparation, he says, that
he has read in Eupolemus an ancient Historian, that the King of Tire and of
Phoenicia, with many other beside, were tributaries to King David: from whom
he conquered these Treasures by force of Arms, and by the Divine
fore-pointment, the place was shown him where the Temple should be builded.
But because he had soyled his hands with bloodshed in war, it was told him
that he should not build the fore-saide Temple. Wherefore he prepared so great
abundance as he could, of gold, silver, brass, stones, Timber of Cipres and
Cedar, and sent it into the I Will which he called Urpha, situate in the Red Sea,
which was wonderfully stored with Mines of Gold, and from whence was brought an
innumerable quantity.

After his deceasse, Solomon wrote Letters to the King of Egypt named Uafres,
after this manner. Solomon King of Judea, to Vafres his friend King of Egypt,
perpetual health. Know, that by the grace of God, and from King David my
Father, this kingdom is descended unto me: he in his life time gave me in
charge, that I should build a Temple to the Creator of heaven and earth: for
which cause I have written to thee, that thou would give me comfort and
assistance in this business. Therefore I require thee to send me Masters of
Masons, Stone-cutters, Carpenters, and workmen, who may erect for me the said
Temple.

These Letters received by the King of Egypt, were in this manner answered. I
send thee eight score thousand men, such as are expert and chief in erecting
of buildings, even such as thou have required of me. Like Letters wrote
Solomon, to Suron King of Tire, receiving like answer, and like number of
Masters in works and buildings.

This History written by Eupolemus an Historian Gentile, agrees in every part
with the holy Scripture, as in the fifth Chapter of the third book of the
Kings: and there is no other difference, but only that concerning Tire, where
he calls the king of Tire Suron, the Scripture names him Hyram.

Josephus in the eight Book of his Antiquities, says, that these two Epistles
or Letters of King Solomon and King Hyram, were in his time entirely sound and
perfect, both in Tire and in Judea.

Eupolemus passes further, and says, that all the gold which was employed
about the Temple, the Colloms and Vessels of Gold, amounted to four Millions,
and six hundred thousand Crowns: The silver for the nails and other things,
valued twelve hundred and thirty two Talents.

After the workmen were contented, and they of Egypt sent home into their
Country, as also the men of Tire, the sum that was given to each one for his
pains, was ten Talents of Gold.

The dispense of the Temple, according to Budaeus, amounted to twenty seven
Millions, nine hundred thousand Crowns of the Sun, and twelve hundred
thirtie-two Talents of silver: which come to seven hundred, thirty seven
thousand Crowns of the Crown.

Yet is not comprised in this sum, what was given to threescore and ten
thousand Laborers, of who^ mention is made in the 5. chapter of the 1. Book
of the Kings: nor of 3000. and three hundred Masters, that ruled and ouer-sawe
the work: nor the charges offraights and carriages: nor how much the brass
and iron cost: nor what reward was given to eight (...) thousand men more,
sent him for handy-crafts men by the King of Egypt. Wherefore we may well
imagine, that Salomons Temple was a work of wonder, and the cost thereon
bestowed inestimable.

It is written in the second book of the Chronicles, the fourth Chapter, That
all the Vessels, Basins, Candlesticks, Censors, Lamps, Organes, and other
musical instruments of the Temple, the Alsar, the Ports, the Tables, and
Hindges were of pure gold.

We read likewise in the first Book of the Chronicles, the nine and twentieth
chapter, that the Princes and Fathers of the lineage of Israel, also the
Captains of thousands and hundreds, offered willingly, and gave for the
service of the house of God, five thousands Talents, and ten thousand pieces of
Gold, ten thousand Talents of silver, eighteen thousand Talents of Brass,
and one hundred thousand Talents of iron. And they with whom precious stones
were found, gave them to the Treasure of the house of the Lord.

Solomon caused to be made three hundred Shieldes of fine Gold, that is to
say, covered with Gold, framed in fashion of Plates, accounting each Plate
worth six hundred sicles: which value two thousand and four hundred Crowns
of the Sun.

Three hundred Targets, which are little light Shieldes, of the purest purified
Gold, and placed them in the house of Lybanon.

Eupolemus adioynes heereto a thousand Shieldes of Gold.

It is written in the tenth Chapter of the third Book of the Kings, that
Solomon made a great seat royal of Iuorie, and covered it with the best Gold.
And the seat had six steps, and the top of the seat was round behind, and
there were Pommels on either side of the seat. And there stood twelve Lions
on the steps, six on a side: there was never like work seen in any
Kingdom.

Solomon sacrificed at one time to God, two and twenty thousand Oxen, and an
hundred and twenty thousand Sheep. His ordinary expense day by day, was
thirty quarters of fine Manchet flower, and threescore quarters of other
meal: ten stalled Oxen, and twenty out of the Pastures, an hundred sheep,
besides Hearts, Buckes, Wilde-goates, and Capons.

And Solomon had forty thousand stalles of Horses for Chariots, and as many
Herds of Horses, he had likewise twelve thousand Horsemen: according as it
is written in the third Book of the Kings, the fourth Chapter.

The riches of Darius.
QUintus Curtius, Plutarch, Strabo, and other Historians, have supposed and
written, that Alexander the great, after his conquest of Darius king of Persia,
found in the Treasury of his conquered enemy, twenty-nine thousand talents:
which valued an hundred and eight Millions of Crowns of the Crown.

So choysely and dearly did Darius account ofhis pleasure in the night, as he
lodged in a Chamber between two great Hals, his bed being spread forth very
sumptuously, and covered with a Vine of Gold, in manner of an Arbor, enriched
with Grapes hanging thereon, which were most curious and costly precious
stones. The richnes of the very pillow of his bed, was worth fifty thousand
Talents, which do amount to thirty Millions of Crowns.

When Alexander gained the battle against him in Cilicia, he was then but
five and twenty years old, and sent his Lieuetenant Parme^o to the City of
Damas, where Darius had with-drawne a gre^ part of the aforementioned Treasure,
there he found four hundred and twenty-nine Ladies his Concubines, well skild
in Music, which he brought with him into his Host for his delight and
pastime, with six and forty workmen, that wrought upon flowers, making curious
Trammels and Chaplets for Ladies most odoriferous: two hundred, threescore and
seauenteene Cooks: twenty Potters, that made Pots and other necessaries of
earth, for the daily use of the Kitchine: nine chief Masters of the Paistrie:
threescore and ten sluggerds of one sort, and seauenteene of an other, whose
labor was to mixte the Aromatique wines, to blende and temper the sweet
delicious licquors, and most arteficiall drinks, through bags and such like
fit for the purpose: and forty other workmen, that made sweet odours and
savors, both dry and licquid.

If then the King of Persia had so much store of delights in war, when he was
prepared to a fight so full of hazard and danger: what may we imagine he had at
other times, and in what abundance of pleasures he lived, when he held his
assured quiet in Babylon? a City exceeding in all superfluities and vices, yet
flourishing and abounding plentifully in wondrous wealth.

Herodotus in the third book of his History, divided the Realm of Persia
into twenty Gouernements or Provinces: the principal was the Kingdom of Lydia,
whereof the rich Craesus was King, that afterward was vanquished by Cyrus, and
brought into captivity.

Pliny, speaking of the estate of the Persians in his time, says, that the
Empire of the Persians, which as then was translated to the Parthians,
contained eyghteene Kingdoms.

Herodotus in the Book before named, shows by iourneyes and lodgings, that
from Sardis being in Lydia, to Susa, which was the chief seat and abode of
the Kings, was full three Months journey.

Quintus Curtius says, that in two Cities of Persia, to wit Susa and
Persepolis, Alexander found an hundred, threescore, and ten thousand Talents
of silver, in one heap, which himself termed a sum innumerable: an hundred
thousand Talents, valued threescore Millions of Crowns.

The said Darius had one of the fairest women in the world to his Wife, who was
likewise taken with her two daughters: ten thousand Talents he would have
given for to have them again, and one half of his Country, which would not
be granted, yet Alexander entreated them very honorably, and without any
reproach.

He never afterward saw his wife and daughters, but once: and in short while
after, himself was traitorously slain by Bessus, who had the principal charge
under him.

The liberality of Alexander the great, to his men of war.
ALexander the great, after his conquest and return out of Asia, being
advertised that his Soldiers and men of war were indebted by his service:
caused their debts to be paid, and bringing money into the midst of his Camp,
according to the affirmation of each one how much he owed, so much in ready pay
was delivered them: the sum amou^ted to six Millions of Crowns.

He was studious and of great knowledge, having euer-more under the pillowe of
his bed, the poesy of Homer.

He wrote a Greek Epistle to Aristotle, which is reported by Plutarch in his
life, the form thereof being thus. Alexander unto Aristotle greeting. Thou
have not done rightly or well, in putting forth the books of the
Acroamaticall sciences: for wherein shall I excel any other hereafter, if the
science wherein I was instructed by thee, be taught and made common to every
one. As for my self, I would thou should know, that I make more account,
and had rather go beyond all men in excellency of of learning and knowledge,
then in greatness of power, or deeds of Arms.

He commanded Aristotle to write fifty books of the nature of beasts:
gyuing him for his pains, as says Atheneus a Greek Author, eight hundred
Talents, which value four hundred and foure-score thousand Crowns. A
president how learning was esteemed in elder times, where now, Scholars
pains are neither rewarded nor regarded.

He sent likewise, fifty Talents to Xenocrates, which he refused, saying, he
had no need of so much money to maintain his poor estate. Whereat Alexander
was offended, saying, he was uncivil to refuse his gift: though he needed it
not himself, yet he might take it and bestow it among his friends.

The same Atheneus, in his fourth book of the banquet of the Sages, following
the advice of the Persian Histories, says, that in what soever place Alexander
was, he would customably sit at the Table at supper, (after his conquest of
Asia) and eat among his Friends in a common Hall, having always with him the
number of threescore and ten at the least. To maintain this custom, he
appointed for the ordinary dispense thereof, an hundred Attique Mynaes, which
value a thousand Crowns.

But King David (says he) who was conquered by him, had a custom diverse
times, to make public banquets apparantlie in his Court, which always was in
the open Halles, where were present to the number of fifteen thousand. And
for every such banquet as we now speak of, the estate ordained and appointed
for the dispense of the Table, two hundred and forty Myriades, which amount to
two Millions, and four hundred thousand Crowns: for every Myriade valueth ten
thousand, whereof an hundred Myriades make a Million, and forty Myriades, four
hundred thousand Crowns.

The riches of Mydas and Cyrus.
Pliny in his three and thirty book, says, that Mydas king of Phrigia, and
Craesus King of Lydia, which at this day is called Natolia, a Province in
Turkey: were enriched with Gold, beyond number or measure.

Cyrus also King of Persia, who took Craesus and his treasures, had infinite
wealth, for he spoiled all Asia: so that by his victories he gained five
hundred thousand Talents of silver: to wit, talents of Egypt, which value (as
he says) each Talent, foure-score pound weight of silver. And this sum is
reported according to the great Jack or Tankarde belonging to Semiramis, which
weighed fifteen Talents.

This sum or quantity of silver, is the very greatest that Budaeus
remembers to be gathered in money at one time together, which amounts to
three hundred Millions of Crowns: and rating them after the Talents of Egypt,
as says Pliny, there shall be sixteen parts over and above, which com to
fifty Millions.

Nor is it to be meruailed that he gathethered so much, for he had under his
power the ancient Treasures of Assiria, which was translated from the Medes,
and many other Countries beside: so that here among he had the old riches of
David and Solomon.

He reports moreover, that there was an ancient King of Cholchos, named
Esubopes, that first of all made opening of the Mines, and found the richnes
of the earth, where-out he drew innumerable store of Gold and Silver.

He likewise had victory against Sosestres King of Egypt, who wonderfully
abounded in wealth: so that this King of Cholchos had in his house, the
pyllers, roofes, doors and vaultes of pure Gold. On the wonderful riches
that was in this Country, was invented the fable of the Golden Fleece.

The riches of Sardanapalus.
SArdanapalus, who lived two hundred years after Solomon, and by his deceasse
brought an end to the Kingdom of the Assirians, according as Atheneus the
Greek writer records: being seated in his Palace and house royal by
Arbaces his Lieuetenant of the Medes, there burned himself and his Concubines.

Ctesias recites, that when the said king Sardanapalus lived, having no means
left to with-stand the siedge, and that all kind of victuales wexed scant: he
caused to be made in a separate place from other resort in his Palace, a
frame of Carpenters work, containing the height of four hundred foot, in
manner and fashion of a Pyramides, in the midst whereof, he commanded to be
placed an hundred and fifty Couches of Gold, which served to make most
sumptuous and magnificent banquets upon, agreeing with the custom of old. By
the sides of them, or else upon them, was devised as many Tables of Gold: this
done, here would he entertain his Wife, his Concubines and Ladies of his
Court, such as he best affected, they not knowing or doubting what he intended
to do: after them he followed, making fast the door, without any hope to
return back again.

But before he thus locked up himself among the^, he caused to be brought
thither (as says the History) a thousand Myriades of Gold, and a Myriade of
Myriades of silver, with a great number of habillements for men and women of
purple, with sundry other very sumptuous accoustrements.

When he was enclosed, by his commandment his Eunuchs and Grooms of his
Chamber, put fire to the huge frame of Carpenters work, which endured burning
the space of fifteen days: such as beheld this wondrous flaming fire,
supposed that he was sacrifycing to the Gods.

Thus ended Sardanapalus his licentious life, and all the rest that were with
him, consuming there likewise a thousand Myriades of Gold, which value an
hundred Millions; For-beare we then to estimate the Myriade of Myriades of
Silver, the Couches of gold, the Tables of gold, and other costly habillements.
As also three thousand Talents of gold, which value eyghteene hundred thousand
Crowns, which he sent from his seat royal to King Nynus, to whom he had
given his Children in keeping.

The riches of the Emperor Anthony the Triumuire, and the magnificence of his
Queen Cleopatra.
PLutarch says, that the Emperor Anthony the Triumuire, spente in one year,
two hundred thousand Talents, which value six-score Millions of gold: that the
estates of Asia had yielded him, for the offense they committed against him, in
maintaining and bearing favor to his enemies Cassius and Brutus, in the
Country of Macedon: in such an amercement were they taxed for two years,
albeit the fine was determined for nine years.

This sum was employed in payment of a largess and gift, promised to his
Soldiers, which was (as Plutarch reports) five thousand Drachmes for each
one, which come to twenty thousand Sestertiaes, esteemed five hundred Crowns.
His Army was eight and twenty thousand Legionaries, and ten thousand men,
beside the Horsemen.

The estimation of Anthonies gift to his men of war, amounted for an hundred
thousand men, fifty Millions of Crowns, which value five thousand times five
hundred.

And for seauenty-thousand that rested from the aforementioned number, remained
thirty five Millions, which are in sum, four-score and five Millions. Without
counting an ouer-plus for the Centurions, that had double wages, the Horsemen
that had treble, and the Trybunes great sums, as we may read in the
Histories that make mention of such largesses.

Anthony leueying money upon Asia, Hybraeas the Orator being Deputed by the
Country, thus spoke to him. My Lord, if it be so, that you have both force and
fear in your hand, whereby to execute your will and pleasure, easily may you
sit down and exact two imposts for one year. But if ye will do so, it is
reason that you should likewise make us to have two Summers, two Autumnes, and
two Haruests in one year: to the end we may twice a year gather the fruits
and revenues of the earth. Asia has paid the two hundred thousand Talents, if
this sum of money be come into your Coffers, and is all imployd about your
affairs: then understand we well there is no remedy, but force will compel
us to find another pay, and this to do, we must scrape together what is left
amongst us. But if you find, that all has been well paid on our behalf, and
yet notwithstanding is not come to you: we think it necessary, that first and
foremost you should call an account of your Treasurers, and rather address
your selves to them that have managed these affairs, th^n to us that once
already have truly made our payment.

Anthony having understood the great thefts and robberies of his Officers,
thus vnder-trust committed against himself: appointed for them very severe
punishments.

Cicero in his Phillippides which he wrote against Anthony, says, that he
took and carried away from the Temple of Ops, seven thousand times, seven
hundred thousand Sestertiaes, which Julius Caesar had placed there for more
assurance. The sum amounts to seauenteene Millions, and five hundred
thousand Crowns.

Plutarch says, that he sent to command Cleopatra to appear personally
before him, because she had given succor to his enemies. And she came, not
fearful, trembling or in mean estate, but along the River Cydnus in a
Gallion, the Poope whereof was of gold, the Oars of silver, the sails of
purple: her self lay under a Pauillion of Gold, accompanied with sweet
singers, and most excellent Musitions, all the attendants of her house being
attired in very sumptuous Liveries.

When Anthony sent to inuit her to sup with him, she sent to command him to
come and sup with her, so much did she stand upon the privilege of her
beauty, behavior and quaintness in speech: which she delivered with such
majesty, and had so delicate a pronounciation, as her tongue seemed like a
curious instrument of many stringes.

She could alter her speech to what language she pleased, or as occasion
served: she spoke to the Arabians, Sirians, Hebrews, Medes, Parthians,
Ethiopians, and Troglodites, without any Interpreter.

Then was Anthony so ravished with the grace which she had in devise and
vrbanitie, her heavenly words, gesture and most exquisite demeanor, as also
the royalty and magnificence of her feasts: as being confounded with
marvel and astonishment, he said and confessed, that the estate of his
house, and the manner of his assemblies, was but rusticall in comparison of
Cleopatraes.

After which time, they lived together in such pleasures, abundance and
delights, as it is impossible to be expressed: such as beheld their
extraordinary vanity, even the very chief of their favorers and
wel-wyllers, said that they led a most hateful and contemptible kind of life.

Cleopatra made him one banquet, which was esteemed to have cost, two hundred
and and fifty thousand Crowns: by reason of a Pearl which she dissolved in
a cup of Wine, that weighed (as Pliny records) half an ounce.

Plutarch says, she gave to Anthony, to make war against Octauius, twenty
thousand Talents of gold, which are twelve Millions of Crowns: and besides
furnished him with two hundred shyps for war, and victuales for his Army.
Notwithstanding, he was afterward vanquished, and in despair slew himself
in Alexandria.

The tryumphes of Caesar.
APpian, in his second book of the civil wars, says, that in the tryumphes
of Caesar, after all his great victories, for the space of forty days
together: was brought into the public Treasury, threescore and five thousand
Talents of silver, and eight hundred Crowns of gold, which weighed twenty
thousand pounds of Gold. The Talents of silver valued nine and thirty
Millions of Crowns, and the Crowns of gold two Millions.

With this money Caesar paid thoroughly what he had promised to his ancient
bands of men, and to the Common people of Rome: that is to say, to each
Legionarie five thousand Drachmes, which value five hundred Crowns of the
Crown: to the Centeniers a double sum: to the Knights double of the
Centeniers: and to each Roman three hundred Sestertiaes, which he had
promised at the beginning of the Civil wars.

Because he had not paid them so soon as he would, he gave an hundred over
and above, as interest (as it were) for the forbearaunce, which was for each
man ten crowns. He gave more-ouer to each one ten Tun of Corn, which are ten
bushels according to them of Paris, and ten pounds of Oil, he made three
feasts for the people, beside other liberalities.

The sum that he gave to his soldiers, amounted to ten millions of crowns.
All this sum, or the most part thereof, was brought from the Gauls as we may
read in the Hystories, and specially in Suetonius.

He made five tryumphes, which he brought pompeously into the city of Rome.
The first and most excellent, was the triumph of Gallia: the second of
Alexandria: the third of Pontus: the two other were of Africa and Spain.

In the first, amongst other things of magnificence, he had forty Elephants,
on the right hand and left of his Chariot triumphant, that carried Torches and
Lanthorns.

Plutarch says, that this abundance of riches and treasure, Caesar brought
from the spoils of his wars in Gaul.

He gave to Curio Tribune of the people, twelve hundred and fifty thousand
Sestertiaes, which value fifteen hundred thousand Crowns.

The lyberalitie of the Emperor Augustus.
SUetonius speaking of the testament of the Emperor Augustus, says, that he
left by his will to the people of Rome, eight hundred, and fifty thousand
Sestertiaes, which amounts to a Million of Gold. To the Tribunes he left
threescore hundred and fifty thousand Sestertiaes. To the men of war that
made aboade in Rome, to each one five hundred Sestertiaes. To them that were of
his Guard, commonly called Pretorians, to each one a thousand Sestertiaes. To
them that were of his Legions in the Provinces, to each one three hundred
Sestertiaes, whom he would have paid without making any account. And yet he
left (notwithstanding all these sums) to his inheritours, three Millions,
seven hundred and fifty thousand Crowns.

He gave at one time to the Temple of the Capitol, sixteen thousand pounds
of gold, with a great number of precious stones and pearls, estimated worth
ten hundred and fifty thousand Sesterriaes: which sums amount to three
Millions of gold. And Budaeus says, that Augustus employed in the beautifying
of the City of Rome, the Empire, and things for public profit, beside
building of Temples, Theaters, Palaces, and buildings of magnificent
construction, four-teene thousand times, four-teene hundred thousand
Sestertiaes, which value thirty five Millions of Crowns.

In his time, a Burgess of Rome named Lentulus Augurius, was so high in his
grace and favor, as Seneca says, that he commanded to be given him at one
time, four thousand times Sestertiaes, which value ten Millions: who seeing
himself so forward in authority, would oftentimes say to the Emperor (in
reproach as it were) that in respect of his service, he had left the pleasure
and delight of studying good Letters, which he prized and esteemed more then
all the pomp of inordinate riches. This ingratitude was well punished afterward
by Tyberius, as writes Suetonius.

Tarius Ruffus, a man of base condition, by good fortune and great industry,
got in the service of Augustus, a thousand times Sestertiaes: which amount to
two Millions, and five hundred thousand Crowns.

Pliny says, that Augustus, to increase the good and honor of such as he
knew to be well minded people, sent them as Governors into his Provinces,
giving them very honest means whereby to make them great.

Eusebius in his Chronicles, says, that after the triumph at Actium, Augustus
made the goodly number before the Censors: and there were found four Millions,
an hundred and sixty thousand Citizens of Rome.

And after the nativity of our Savior Jesus Christ, having adopted Tyberius,
and they two being Censors, the number was made: when was sound nine
Millions, three hundred and seauentie thousand Citizens, within the City and
Subbarbes.

In this time, as Iuuenall witnesses in his ninth Satyr, this order was held
in Rome, that when the children of the Citizens were borne, within three days
after, one should go to the Temple of Saturn, where the Treasure of the
Consines was kept, and there in the Register Court, before the Masters and
Keepers of the riches, the infants name was enrolled.

Hereby they knew the age of every one, and what number of infants the
Citizens had: nor was he to be reputed or thought a man, until he came to the
age of 17. years.

The triumph of Pompey.
PLutarch speaking of Pompeyes triumph, which was decreed for him, by reason
of the victory he had against the two kings Tygranes and Mithridates, the one
king of Armenia, the other of Pontus: says, that by the goodly Wagons and
Chariots, wherein was drawn along through the City the treasure of his
spoils, as also the semblances and portratures of the Kings and Countries
conquered: appeared publicly to every one, of what Nations subjected this
triumph was ordained.

In every Chariot were titles written of great fair Letters, whereby they were
signified and manifested. The Nations over whom he tryumphed were these that
follow: the kingdoms of Pontus and Armenia: the Country of Paphlagonia, of
Cholchos, Spain, Albania, Syria, Cilicia, Mesopotamia, Phaenicia, Palestine,
Judea, and Arabia: yet not co^prising his victories on the Sea, where he
prevailed often and very far of.

He adjoined to the Roman Empire a thousand strong places, and about nine
hundred Cities, and took eight hundred ships from Pirates.

Pliny in the thirty-seauenth book of his natural history, recites the
order and magnificence of this Triumph, which he says is reported in the
Registers of the Capital. To wit, on the day of his nativity was his triumph,
when ryding through the City, he brought to the public Treasury, a Checker
or table-boorde to play on, made of two precious stones: being four soote
long, and three soote broad, was never found like stones of such greatness.

He had in the order of his tryumphe, in one Chariot a goodly book, of mighty
and huge volume* he had three beds of gold serving to make banquets on, each
one lying after the ancient fashion: vessel of gold and precious stones, to
serve nine cupboordes: three statues of Gold, of Mars, Pallas and Juno.

After followed a Mountain of Gold, four square, whereon was Hearts, Lions,
and fruits of all sorts, garnished and environed round with a Vine of Gold,
and a Chapel in the midst, dedicated to the Muses, which was made all of
Peavles, and on the top thereof was a very sumptuous Horologe. In another
Chariot was an Image of Pompey, which likewise was made of pearls.

Plutarch says, that this triumph was divided into two days: and yet the time
would not suffice to make declaration of every part thereof.

Pompey brought to the Treasure in gold, silver, and vessel, all which came by
his spoils, twenty thousand Talents, which value twelve Millions, beside
that which he gave to his men of war, of whom he that had least, had a
thousand and five hundred Drachmes Attique, which value an hundred and fifty
Crowns.

The Roman subsidies after the triumph of Pompey, valued four-score and five
Millions of Drachmes, which make eight Millions and five hundred thousand
crowns.

Pompey in the Plays which he made for the people, after his second
Consulship, amongst other strange things, brought into the place called the
great circle, by the Latins Circus maximus, six hundred Lions, whereof he had
three hundred and fifteen all the Jubilee.

Therefore not without cause said Cicero in his Officiis, that these were the
most magnificent plays, that ever were before him. And when he brought these
beasts to be seen, it was to make them kill one another, or to make them fight
against men, that were condemned to this punishment.

Sylla was the first that showed this manner of fight to the people, being of
an hundred together, yet Pompey brought into the Theater beside these Lions,
four hundred and ten Panthers at one time.

Augustus showed four hundred and twenty, and Caesar four hundred Lions.
Afterward by the Emperors and Princes, this kind of pastime was very much
used, and was called the chasing of wild beasts, for the peoples pleasure.

The charges that Ptolome was at for the aid of Pompey.
BUdaeus writes, that one named Ptolome, succored Pompey in the conquest of
Judea, who at his own proper cost, gave pay to eight thousand Horsemen: and
made a feast, whereat was present a thousand men set at the Table, every one
having his Cup of gold, and each one changed at every mess that was served,
a Cup of gold of a new and contrary fashion.

This riches comes somewhat near to that of Pytheus of Bithinia, who gave
to King Darius of Persia, a Plane tree of gold, with the Vine of gold, whereof
is still reserved such fame and memory. Afterward he received Xerxes son to
Darius, into his houses, with his Army of Soldiers, consisting of eight
hundred thousand men when he descended into Greece.

Herodotus in his seventh book, says, that after he had feasted them, he
gave the^ munificent gyfts: and offered the King to stipend his men during this
war, as also to furnish them with Corn.

Then Xerxes abashed heereat, demanded who was the man that could make his
vaunt of so great a matter. He was answered, that it was Pytheus the rich, who
gave his Father the Vine and Plane tree of Gold, when he passed that way, and
was the very richest man in all Asia next the King.

Heere-vpon Xerxes demanded what sum of money he could have so great, as
he should think sufficient to wadge his Host: whereto Pytheus thus replied.

Sir, when I understood that you would descend into Greece, to make it
tributarie under your power: I regarded well what sum I have made count of.
Before, I was determined to give you all, therewith to disfray your charges. In
the end of my account, I found that I had two thousand Talents of silver, and
in gold four hundred Myriades of Stat^r Dari^ks, wanting seven thousand
pieces. All this Sir, I give you franckly: as for my self, and to maintain my
estate, I only reserve the industry of my servants and slaves, with the
revenue of my labor, which is sufficient enough for me.

When Xerxes had considered the liberal mind of Pytheus, in bravery and iolitie
of heart, he returned him this answer.

My friend, I give thee all again, and beside, will furnish thee with the
seven thousand Daricks, which wants in thy number, to make up the sum and
account even. And nothing else will I demand of thee, but only to continue my
good and faithful subject.

This sum amounts to six and thirty Millions of Crowns of the Crown.

Budaeus says, that Xerxes ordinarily used for the payment of his Army, every
Month two Millions, and four hundred thousand Crowns of the Sun: giving
three Crowns to each one, as well the foote-men as the Horsemen.

Albeit this Pytheus was so rich, yet notwithstanding Pliny is of the opinion,
that he was not to compare with Craesus king of Lydia, who had such store of
Gold, as the value was not to be numbered.

The Triumph that Lucullus made in Rome.
LUcullus in his Triumph that he made in Rome, among other things, brought to
the Treasury a statue of gold, lively figuring Mithridates, whom he had
conquered: it was six foot long, having a a shield embellished and adorned
with many precious stones. Moreover, twenty Coffers full of silver vessel,
carried on men's shoulders, and thirty-two other Coffers, full of Vessel and
Armours of gold, and golden money. Then followed eight Mules drawing Coaches
of gold, and fifty six Mules laden with silver, and an hundred and seven
Mules laden with money ready stamped: which amounts to two hundred,
threescore and ten Myriades, according as the Greek note of Plutarch makes
mention, which are two Millions and seven hundred thousand Crowns.

He gave abundance of treasure to his Captains and men of war.

After he had made many banquets to the Citizens of Rome, and to the
neighboring Villages about it: he withdrew himself, to lead the rest of his
life in his study.

He made one of the very fairest and costliest Lybraries that ever was.

Plutarch says, that one day Pompey and Cicero being together, found Lucullus
set in the public place of Rome, where he was musing, and they coming to
him: after he had saluted them, he invited them to sup with him. But because
they knew how abundant and lavish he was in expense, they protested that they
would not go with him, except he would first promise them, not to send any
person home to his House, to make ready any thing more then ordinary.

When Lucullus perceived their intent, he said to them, I will fulfill your
request, yet suffer me only to ask in what Hall we shall sup: and then cried
aloud to one of his servant, that he should spread the Table in Apollos Hall.

The estate of his house was ordained according to the expenses he made, and
he had several Halles, distinguished for the receiving and feasting of his
guestes, wherein he had composed their names.

This Supper cost twelve hundred and fifty Crowns.

Of the Emperor Nero, and of Seneca.
WE read in the 13. Book of Cornelius Tacitus, that Seneca, Schoole-maister
to the Emperor Nero, was in great authority, managing all the asfayres of the
estate for a certain time: during which while, he gathered great wealth, which
did beget him many enemies, and amongst all, one Suyllius, who was highly in
the Princes favor, and therefore spoke to the said Seneca in the presence of
Nero, these words.

By what wisdom, by what instructions and doctrine of Philosophy, wherein
thou make thy self studious, have thou within less then the space of four
years, while the King has borne thee favor, and shown thee signs of love,
gotten together, three thousand times Sestertiaes, which value seven Millions
and five hundred thousand Crowns?

Notwithstanding, Seneca for that time escaped the conspiracy and accusation
of his enemies, but four years after, seeing the authority he had, taken from
him, and his former favors diminished, advertised likewise what charges and
crimes were laid against him, and that the King easily lent his ear to his
enemies, and all things went very contrary on his behalf: of his own accord
he came to Nero, and spoke to him by way of Oration, to save his life, and to
prevent the Kings cruelty.

It is four^teene years or there-about (O King) since I came to ye, and eight
years of this time have you been Emperor, in which space by you I have
gained such goods and honors: as there remains nothing for me more happy and
full of felicity, then by moderation and wisdom to know how to escape too
much.

After he had declared, wherein consisted riches and the abundance of goods:
he began to accuse himself, that he had not kept the statutes of written
knowledge, and lived only in Phylosophie, which would have taught him to be
contented with a little, or enough: he thus proceeded.

Notwithstanding (my Lord) heerin I can allege some color, or rather
deliver a lawful excuse: in that I could not well or honestlye withstand your
liberality, or gaine-saie so high a will, proceeding only by nobility of
heart.

But now the matter is come to this pass, as both the respects have fulfilled
their measure: for so much as a Prince could give to a man being great in his
grace, have you given to me, and strained forth your self even to the
uttermost: I likewise have received such advancement by you, as any man
what-soeuer could receive of his Prince, continuing in such esteem with him.

But no we there remains one thing, for I can-not endure any further without
your aid and comfort, nor can I sustain the burden of swaying and governing
the great revenues I have, not having the safety and assurance of such mighty
and opulent treasure.

Wherefore in this age I am weakened: and when no longer I can bear the weight
of care and good husbandry, I stand in greatest need of your aid and
succor.

Let it then be your pleasure to take from me this charge, and command your
Officers to make seasure on all, and deliver it into your hand, to whom it
appertains: otherwise, I shall fall down under this burthenous and
oppressing load, For I see the time is come, when I ought recall to me my
senses, and the nearest parts of my understanding is not to be troubled with
any contrary thoughts.

These words spoke Seneca, only to escape death, yet Nero caused him be put
to death, as of long time he had practiced and sought the occasion to do it.

Pallas a servant to Nero, in little while after he was at liberty: knew
himself to be worth three thousand times Sestertiaes, as says Cornelius
Tacitus, which value seven Millions, and five hundred thousand crowns.

Suetonius, speaking of the great prodigality of Nero, says, that the King
Tyridates of Armenia, came to see him in the City of Rome, to whom Nero gave
ordinarily day by day for maintenance of his estate, eight hundred thousand
Sestertiaes, which amount to twenty thousand Crowns of the Crown: and gave
him at his departure thence, two Millions, and five hundred thousand Crowns.

Cornelius Tacitus in the seventeenth Book of his Histories, says, that
during the fourteen years while Nero was Emperor, he spent in unreasonable
gyfts and liberalities, two and twenty thousand times Sestertiaes, which
amount to five and fifty Millions of Crowns.

Galba the Emperor that succeeded him, would have made recall from such, to
whom Nero so prodigally had given the goods of the Empire, and so have left
the^ the te^thes: but he found that they had spent all, and followed their
Master in (...).

The prodigality of Tyberius.
SUetonius recites, that Tyberius the successor of Augustus, guyded by
violent avarice and tyranny, gathered in twenty three years, while he was in
the Empire, seven and twenty thousand times Sestertiaes: which sum was
asterward spent in one year by Calligula his next succeeder. The aforesaid
sum amounts to threescore and seven Millions, and five hundred thousand
Crowns of the Crown.

Seneca in his Book of Consolation, speaking of the Emperor Calligula, and of
his prodigality, says: that at one feast or banquet, he caused to be spent,
and hundred times Sestertiaes, which value two hundred and fifty thousand
Crowns of the Crown.

Of a Lady called Lollia Paulina.
Pliny in the ninth Book of his natural History, says, that he saw in
Rome at a mean banquet, a Lady named Lollia Paulina, who sometimes was wife to
the Emperor Calligula: that had her head, her neck, her breast, and her hands
covered with Pearls and Emeraldes, knit and curiously laced together. The
least value hereof was judged worth four hundred times Sestertiaes, which is
a Million of Crowns of the Crown.

Of the houses that Calligula and Nero caused to be built about the City of
Rome.
Pliny in his six and thirty book says. We have seen the City of Rome to
be environed, and (as it were) walled about with houses, by the two Emperors,
Calligula and Nero.

But albeit their houses were full of cost and great expense: yet the Theater
of Scaurus a Roman Citizen, surmounted the excess of their prodigality,
and yet it was made but for one Month only, no longer then the time as the
Plays endured.

This piece of workmanship defaced the magnificence and memory, not only of
the aforementioned houses, but beside, it was found to be more sumptuous, as also
of far greater statelines, pomp, and cost, then any building whereof memory
is left.

The Scene of the Theater consifted of three Stages, whereon were three hundred
and threescore Marble pyllers of Africa. They that were underneath, were also
of one piece, being eight and thirty foot in height: the Scence was
crosse-parted with Marble, and the Stage in the midst all of Glass: never
was any thing so much talked of and wondered at.

The plain place where the people were appointed, was able to contain
foure-score thousand persons: three thousand Images of Copper, did beautify
and adorn the place for Plays.

For the rest, such was the wonderful riches of apparel, Tapistries of Gold,
Tables and ancient renowned Pictures: as the true report thereof would seem
incredible.

Suetonius and Pliny, speaking of the golden house of Nero, which commonly
was called the house of Gold: says, that there were within the Galleries
three Stages, being each of them a thousand paces long.

Also there was a Ponde so great, as it seemed to be a Sea environed with
buildings: resembling in every point a goodly City.

Of the Treasure found^ in Tolosa.
IN the City of Tolosa, (as Strabo says) was found fifteen thousand
Talents, in gold and silver, beside the vessels: which amount to nine Millions
of Crowns. So likewise recites Posidonius, and there were found the hallowed
Nets, wherewith never any man fished, to prevent that the rich Pyllers should
not be discovered.

The Romans sold the fish of these Nets after they had subjected the
Country, notwithstanding they were dedicated to the Gods: the Merchants by
this occasion found the Gold, which therein had been cast in a mighty mass or
heap.

Cicero in his third Book of the nature of the Gods, says, that it was
decreed by the Senate, that punishment should be inflicted on such as had taken
away the treasure from the Tolosians.

Justin in his two and thirty Book, says, that it was Cepio a Consul of Rome,
who had committed this sacrilege: and that all they of his company, which
shared or had portion in this Gold, dyed very miserably.

He says more-ouer, that among this Treasure was found beside, an hundred and
ten thousand pounds of Gold, and fifteen hundred thousand pounds of silver:
which is (as it were) a treble sum to that before named.

Aulus Gellius, in the third book of his Uigillia Attica, says, that when any
one fell into some notorious or detestable misfortune, or dyed an evil death,
they would presently say unto him: He took part of the booty in Tolosa.

Of the condemnation of Gabinius.
CIcero says in one of his Orations, that Gabinius a Citizen of Rome, was
condemned in ten thousand Talents, to the Commonwealth: which do amount to
the sum of six Millions of Crowns.

Of the Emperor Adrian.
ADrian the Emperor, gave to to his Legionaries, three thousand times
Sestertiaes: which are seven Millions, and five hundred thousand Crowns.

Budaeus says, that in the life of Adrian, is made mention, how he gave unto
them ten Millions of Gold.

The revenue of Crassus.
CRassus a Citizen of Rome, had as his revenue year by year, according to the
description of Pliny, two hundred and fifty thousand Crowns.

The revenue of the Kingdom of Egypt.
STrabo a Greek Author, in the seventeenth book of his Cosmographie and
description of the world, declares, that the revenue of the Kingdom of
Egypt, which afterward was brought into a Province by Augustus: valued in the
time of Ptolome, surnamed the Fluter, twelve thousand and five hundred
Talents, which are seven Millions and five hundred thousand Crowns.

He was chased out of Egypt for his dissolute life: afterward, re-established
by Pompey, and not long after slain by his Son.

Of Cato.
IT is affirmed, that Cato brought with him, from the Country of Egypt, to the
Treasury of Rome, four Millions and two thousand Crowns: by way of a
confiscation, because Ptolome of Cyprus, had conspired against Claudius the
Roman Tribune.

Of Lucrius.
THE aforementioned Greek Author Strabo says, that Lucrius of the Country of
Auuergue, was so rich, as to make estimation and show of his wealth, diverse
times he would mount into a Chariot, and cause himself to be drawn along the
fields, where he would spread or scatter money, both gold and silver, by means
whereof, he was continually followed with a great multitude of people.

His Father named Bytius, with his Army of two hundred thousand men of war,
fought in a maine battle against two Roman Consulles.

Of the Emperor Vespasian.
VEspasian the Emperor, (as Budaeus says) leueyed such Subsidies and Taxes on
the Empire, as the sum amounted to forty thousand times Sestertiaes, which
come to an hundred Millions of Crowns.

He says, that this was to reform the public estate, which his
predecessors Calligula and Vitellius, two dissolute Princes, had ruined, and
waste-fully destroyed the goods of the Empire, treading under foot the dignity
thereof.

Of the Hierd of Syria.
EXceeding great, (says Strabo) was the Hierde of Beasts which they had in
Syria: wherein were thirty thousand Mares, and three hundred light Stallions:
these were the first people that tamed Horses, and therefore had wages of the
Kings.

Of Seuerus.
ONE Spartianus an ancient Hystorian, says, that Seuerus at his decesse, left
to the state public, a Canon of Corn for seven years: the manner thereof
was, to furnish for each day, threescore and fifteen thousand Vessels
called Tons, with Corn.

The Roman and Attique Tun, resembles very near the measure or bushel of
Paris, wherewith a man may maintain himself eight days: whereby we may
easily gather, that threescore and sisteene thousand such Tunn^s of Corn,
will (...) day by day to nourish six hundred thousand men.

This Canon of Corn was first instituted by the Emperor Tra^, and then
re-established by Seuerus, according to the opinion of Lampridius, set down
in the lise of Heltogabalus.

This Canon of Corn was such an excellent thing, as thereby was furnished
every day a like quantity of Corn, to serve openly the Market, and
distribute to the people: beside the revenue of each one, and what else was
brought in by the Country into the public Market.

And thus they took up in Alexandria, Africa, Sicilia, and diverse other
places, great abundance of Corn: which was thus ordained against the lack of
Corn, because in Italic the dearth thereof many times happened: by reason of
the wars and troubles, which hindered men's labors in tylling the earth, so
that the whole Country lay long time together fallowe and unmanured.

Of Spain abounding in Mines of Gold, and of that which Haniball had.
Both Pliny and Strabo do record, that Spain has abounded in rich Mines of
Gold and Silver: especially, Granado and Andalozia, which Strabo calls by
the name of Betica.

Polibius says, that in his time near to Carthage the ninth, coasting the
Leuant Sea, toward Africa, and from thence to the floode of Hyberia: there was
a Mine of silver, which yielded daily to the Romans, twenty hundred thousand
Drachmes, which are five and twenty thousand Crowns.

Pliny says, that Haniball had a Mine of Silver, named Bebetus, which yielded
to him day by day, three hundred pound weight of silver, which comes to three
Millions of Crowns: and that in Asturia, Gallicia, and Portugal, he gathered
yearly twenty thousand pounds of Gold.

This sum amounts to thirty thousand Marks of Gold: whereby we may
plainly perceive, that gold and silver was more plentiful and abundant in
elder times, then they are at this present.

These two Mettalles are diminished by succession of time: for continually it
perishes by use, workmanship, shyp-wracks, by hyding and burying treasure in
the ground, and otherwife. Also the Mines are robbed, spoiled, lost and come to
nothing, as every day it is witnessed before our own eyes.

Of the Crowns, recompenses and other rewards which the Romans gave to their
Soldiers: and the punishment of the offenders. Comprehending therein an
excellent good order for war, as also the government of the Commonwealth.
YE may read in diverse Authors, that the Romans ever used, not only to
gratify and reward their Captains with ordinary wages: but likewise in
doing them infinite other graces, by gifts and presents. They would honor
them in diverse and sundry manners, as with Crowns and Jewels, holding them in
particular esteem and reputation, according to the desert of their deeds of
Arms, so were they wont to respect and regard them.

When a Captain had gotten victory in any notable battle, were it upon the
Sea or on the Land, or that by force he had taken any City, or done any
other singular enterprise: they had a custom immediately after, to make
dilligent inquiry of the prowesses of the particular Bands and Squadrons. Then
mounting up into the Theater, where after they had given thanks to the Gods for
the victory obtained: in general they would make commendation of their whole
Army, and specially, they would praise and extol those Bands or Squadrons,
which in fight had most valiantly behaved themselves.

Then naming the particular men of that Company by their names, publicly
they would commend their virtue and valor, according to their deserts,
calling the^ friends to their Country, and saying that the Commonwealth was
very much bound to them. This done, they bestowed gifts on them, of Gold,
silver, of Crowns, Girdles, Bracelets, Jewels, Armours, and very excellent
Horses, with other things of most exquisite workmanship: beside, with such
prohibitions and defenses, as it was permitted that no person should enjoy the
like except he had deserved to have them in this manner.

The Histories are plentifully enriched with these matters, and namely Titus
Liuius, lib. 10. and 30.
Titus Liuius, speaking of the Consul Paperius Censor, that gave Bracelets of
gold to fourteen Centurions, and to one Squadron he gave I know not what
ornaments: the like is said of Scipio, when he was in Spain and other places.
The Crowns they gave, had diverse significant names, according to the degrees
of their deserts: they had Corona Obsidionalis, Corona Tryumphalis, Corona
Oualis, Corona Ci^ica, Corona Muralis, Corona Naualis, and Corona Castrensis.

Pliny lib. 16. et 22. Aul. Gel. 5.
Plinis and Pliny lib. 16. et 22. Aul. Gel. 5.
Aulus Gellius say, that the most esteemed and excellent of all, was the
Crown Obsidionall, which came from the circle or seat of the Camp, and was
given only for having delivered an Host of me^ besiedged in a close City, or
in a Camp very strictly environed: so that by such deeds of Arms, that
part or men of war, reputed themselves delivered from prison or from death:
for no other cause what-soeuer it were, could any man receive this prize of
honor.

This Crown was made of green herbs, they not esteeming or respecting to
make it of Gold or other Metal: but only of the herbs of the field, from
whence the enemy had been chased. With this Crown was crowned the great
Quintus Fabius, because when Haniball stood against Rome, he both defended and
delivered it from the siedge. Aemilius Scipio was so crowned likewise in
Africa, for having delivered the Consul Manlius, with certain Bands of men.
Calfurnius obtained the like in Scicilie: and likewise the valiant Roman L.
Cincinatus Dentatus, with diverse other.

Corona Ciuica, or the Citizen Crown, was a Garland made of the leaves of an
Oaken bough, with the fruit upon it: and this was given to him, that in
extreme peril saved a Citizen, killing his enemy, and defending still
manfully the place where the occasion happened. This Crown or Garlande was so
much esteemed, as readily a man should be found that had saved a Roman
Citizen, who at his deliverance had slain two of his enemies: but because he
could not maintain and defend the place, according as it was appointed, they
doubted whether they had deserved this Citizen Crown or no. Notwithstanding
it was concluded, that such a one should be dispensed withal, and it was
granted him, seeing he had delivered the Citizen and slain two ofhis enemies
in a place so dangerous: that (beyond his power) he should not stand to defend
the same, albeit the point of the Law consisted therein.

And although one had delivered a King, or a Captain of the Confederats and
friends, yet might not this Garlande be given him, without he had delivered a
Roman. I find that Pliny says, that the self same Crown was given to
him, who slew the first enemy that mounted on the walls of any City or
Fortress defended by the Romans.

Then was this Citizen Crown the most excellent, next after the Obsidionall,
and it might be worn at all times, and in all places. And if he that had
deserved this Crown, were of such esteem, that in feasts or Theaters he
always had his place nearest to the Senate, and when he entered, the Senate
would rise on foot to do him honor: he was also exempt and free from any
office or charge what-soeuer, unless himself pleased to accept thereof: and
by reason of his exemption, so was his Father and Grandfather, if they lived.

Many Romans obtained this Crown, and especially the most valiant Cincinatus
Dentatus heere-to-fore named: he won fourteen of them. The younger
Capitolinus had six: and to Cicero (by particular dispense) was granted one,
because he defended Rome from the conspiracy of Catalme. These Crowns whereof
we have spoken, although they were but of herbs and leaves, which more
properly may be termed Garlandes, or (according to the French) Chaplets of
flowers: yet nevertheless they were more esteemed then they that were of gold.

As for the Crown Murall, that was of gold, and it was given to him, who at
the assault of the wall of a City or Castle: mounted first on the Ladder and
freed the wall, standing there still like a Bulwark for defense thereof. The
first (according to Pliny) that obtained this Crown, was Manlius Capitolinus.
Scipio also gave it to Quintus Trebelius, and Sextus Digitus, because they two
together before any other, wun first the walls against the enemy.

Corona Castrensis, was given to him that in the fight entered first within the
enemies bar: this Crown was likewise of Gold, made like to the Rampires or
Bulwarks in the field of war.

Of self same Metal was the Crown Nauall, which was given to the first that
(in fight on the Sea) boorded the enemies vessel: and it was made in form of
a prow or point of a Ship. Marcus Varro did not disdain this Crown, when it
was offered him by Pompey the great, in the wars of Corsica. Octauius
presented the like to Marcus Agrippa, and to Sylla, beside diverse other which
here I name not. And when any Romame Soldier, were he noble or vn-noble had
made any other proof of his body, either by course of the Lance, or in
single Combat: the Roman Captains, (as testify Pliny and Suetonius) were
wont to give him Collers of gold and silver, or Bracelets, or Gyrdles, as I
have before said, with other privileges and preheminences.

These or such like prizes, they might give to their friends that had aided
them in war: but as for the Crowns, they were reserved only for the
Romans, of all which things we find notable examples in the Roman Histories.

Suetonius writes, that Octauius permitted Marcus Agrippa to bear a banner of
Azure, because of a victory he obtained on the Sea against Sextus Pompeyus. And
if I should say, this was he which devised the Collers, the rich coats of
Maile, and other gyfts, which were particularly appointed for these affairs:
it would require too large a discourse to declare the whole matter and manner
thereof. Nevertheless it is to be noted, that the Romans were so valiant,
as every one gained the honor of these things, or at the least the greater
part: for Pliny and Solinus naming diverse, among others affirm, that Marcus
Sergius attained the greater part; And in the battle of Thrasimen and Treuia,
where the Romans were vanquished by Hanniball, he won Corona Ciuica, and
likewise in the ouer-throwe at Carinas. This man was so valiant, that having
lost his right hand in the battle, he behaved himself so well with the left,
as also with a hand of iron, which he caused to be made in sted of that he
had lost: as in one day he defied four men in the field of battle, one
after another, and vanquished the^ all: in which Combats and other fights, he
received only on the forepart of his body, three and twenty wounds.

Yet not this Marcus Sergius, or any one beside, won or deserved so much, as
Lucius Cincinatus Dentatus, Tribune of the people, of whom we spoke before: of
him writ Pliny, Solinus, Ualerius the great, and Aulus Gellius, who say, that
in Jewels and presents of prize, some greater then other, he won by brave deeds
of Arms, three hundred twenty and more: that he entered with nine Captains,
in making their tryumphes, and whom he had aided in their victories. He had a
great number of broken Lances, or Trunchions of Spears, and Pykes without
yrons, whereby he won great honor: he had eyghteene Collers of gold,
foure-score and three of silver, of harness and accoustrements for Horses,
heereto particulerly deputed, five and twenty, an hundred and forty bracelets,
fourteen Crowns Citizen, eight Castrensis, three Murall, one Obsidionall,
and I know not how many Nauall.

He was wounded in these battles with forty five wounds, all on the forepart
of his body, and but one behind, he had thirty four times disarmed and
despoyled his enemy, and had been in six and twenty foughten Battles: he
was so valiant and fortunate in Arms, as he was named the Roman Achilles:
and albeit these deeds of his may seem incredible, yet the number and
conformity of Histories do plainly justify them.

The Romans for these great exployts of Arms, granted them yet other
honors and preheminences: as the power of public judgment, seating them in
the yuorie Chair called Curialis, which was the seat of the Ediles and
Pretors, as it was permitted to Scipio: and oftentimes they yielded to
soldiers the greatest authorities, according as it was lawful for the people
to do it, being a degree of estate subject to the liberty of the Fathers
conscript, and of the people. It was lawful for the Captains to erect
tryumphal statues, and to clothe or deck them as if they had been Consuls.

The Senate permitted by manner of reward and congratulation, that they might
bring to the Temples, the Arms and spoils of the enemies vanquished by them
in Battle: and these things were named Manubiae, that is to say, the booties
gotten from the enemies. The Romans had another laudable custom, which was,
to give to the children of such as had been slain in war, like wages as they
gave their Fathers when they lived: and to the old Soldiers, which had long
time followed service, they would give so much good and substantial land, as
they might very well live thereon: suffering them to dwell in Cities and
Provinces that had been conquered, even as themselves pleased to like or choose.

In this sort the City of Civil was made by Caesar a Roman Colonie: from
which term we may easily derive our french saying, of a new habitation or
transmigration of people. Cordo^ was also made a Colonie by this mean, and
infinite other in diverse Provinces.

In breese, the Romans never left any good turn unrewarded, and without
great privilege: for which cause was found amongst them the most valiant men,
that ever have been in any Nation, because each one strove to attain these
degrees only by virtue.

I leave many other sorts of rewards, which the Romans used in case of Arms,
in that I imagine I have spoken sufficiently: notwithstanding, it is a thing
certain, that if they have gone beyond all other Nations, in reknowledging and
remunerating such good actions: it cannot likewise be denied, but in learning
and punishment of disorders, they have done much more. For if any one were not
acquainted with honor and virtue, yet shame and fear of punishment,
with-helde him from doing any vile deed, were it through necessity or in hope
of gain: because the pains were so great and rigorous against such as did
badly.

For if they lost any honor whereto they had been called, or that they had been
whipped even to the blood: they were thrust into yrons as they had been
slaves, and if they had fled, leaving their Captains in the battle, they
were either thrust upon a spyt, or otherwise extremely handled, and so
according to their offense was the punishment inflicted.

Titus Liuius writes, that a Squadron of Appius Claudius, to whom he had in
charge the keeping of a certain place, forsook it and lost it: which he being
desirous to punish, yet notwithstanding mercifully, it was granted him to
sunder them in ten to a company, afterward Lots were cast, and they to whom
the chance happened, were punished with death for safety of the other. Julius
Frontinus says, that Marcus Antonius did the like to a Band of his, which had
not defended his Rampires, but suffered the enemies to set them on fire.

They used sundry other punishments to to their disobedient Soldiers,
whereof would ask a long time to speak: wherefore only I say, that as in those
times there was no default in honoring and rewarding goodness, so likewise was
there no defect in punishing wickedness.

Of the seven Wonders or Meruailes of the World.
SVch as have read the ancient Historians, Orators, and Poets, have found
mention made in sundry of their writings, of seaue^ Meruailes or Wonders of
the World, which were in diverse and contrary places. All they that have
written, do agree on six, but about the seventh they hold variable opinions,
and likewise there is difference in placing one before another.
Notwithstanding, I intend first to speak of the walls of Babylon, which are
placed in number of these Meruailes, and that for good cause: because the
greatness of the place, and compass of ground does seem incredible.

Let us leave to speak of the diversity of tongues, which was there where
Nemrod builded the Tower of Babell, whereby the City first took name. The
walls we now speak of, according to the most soundest opinion, as of Trogus
Pompeus, and Justin in the first Book of his abridged Hystories: was founded
by the famous Queen Semiramis, Mother to Ninus. Diodorus Scicilianus, in his
third book, Amianus Marcellus in his 23. book, Paulus Orosius in his second
book, maintains the same, with the greatest part of the Authors among the
Gentiles: yet notwithstanding, S. Austine in his first book of the City of
GOD, and Josephus in the sixth book of his Antiquities, say, that they were
builded by Nemrod, being ay ded by his proud and mighty Giants: but were it
the foundation or reparation which Semiramis did, it suffiseth that she was
greatly ennobled thereby.

The plot of this City was a plain on the one side, the other passed by the
River of Euphrates: the draught or figure of this City, was in a Quadrangle,
the walls maruailous high, and wrought with very cunning workmanship: the thing
it self was of stone, joined with white lyme and Mortar, which grew in the
Quarries of the Country, especially in the great Lake of Judea: where sometime
stood Sodom and Gomorha, named Asphaltida or Mare mortuum, which casts
forth earth like Pitch or Glewe, the very strongest that can be found. The
Historians do disagree about the height and largenes of the compass of the
walls: which might easily happen, by reason of the diverse measures they made.

Pliny says, the circuit of the walls, was threescore thousand paces, so
that one of the squares was fifteen miles-long: he says likewise, that they
were two hundred foot in height, one of which feet exceeds by three singers
the measure of the Roman foot: in thickness they were fifty foot of the
same measure, which in truth is a thing very admirable.

Diodorus the Scicilian, says in his third book, that the walls of this
City, had in compass, three hundred and threescore Stades, every Stade
containing in length, sixe-score and five paces: and that they were so broad
or large, as six Chariots might pass thereon along together, without the one
hindering the other. The bridges, rocks, Towers and Gardens Semiramis caused to
be made, were to very wonderful astonishment: and it is found written, that
she had in daily pay to this work, three hundred thousand men, of all the
Kingdoms that were subject to her.

Quintus Curtius adioyneth heereto eight Stades more in length, and an hundred
cubits more in height: but Paulus Orosius faith in his second book, that they
were foure-hundred and foure-score Stades long, which amount (taking sixe-score
and five paces to every Stade) to threescore miles, agreeing with Pliny.

Strabo in his sixteen book affirms, that they contained in length three
hundred, eighty five Stades, and so large as so many Chariots might pass
over them, as we have already named, without hindering each others way. Beside,
these Authors declare a marvelous thing, that the Gardens were upon the
Arches and Towers, having Trees in them of wonderful height: Julius Solinus
confirms the same, with Pliny and other Authors.

Some of these Writers record, that without, they were enclosed with Ditches
full of water, being so broad and deep as an indifferent River.

In this City were an hundred Gates of Metal very strange, and for
conclusion, what-soeuer is written concerning the height and largenes of these
walls, is to be credited: because in truth it was the proudest City in the
world, and long time held the universal Monarchy, which is no mean argument
of the greatness, declared by Aristotle in the third Book of his
Pollitiques, saying, that if any one were taken at one side by the enemy, they
which dwelt on the other side, could not hear thereof in three days space.

The second Wonder of the World.
NExt, in the second place, and for the second Wonder of the World, I point
out the huge Colossus of the Sun, which was in Rhodes: being the statue or
figure of a Man, offered by the Gentiles to the Sun, some say to Jupiter. It
was made of Metal, the greatness incredible, and the height as if it were a
wondrous Tower: so that it was to be admired, how it was there framed and
erected.

Pliny who discourses on all things, says, that it was seauentie cubits
high, and albeit for the making there were many good workmen busied about it:
yet was it twelve years in perfecting, and cost in value three hundred
Talents: he that undertook this work, was Cares the Indian, the scholar of
Lysippus.

This statue was so unreasonable great, as it seemed the earth could not long
time uphold it: because, according to Pliny and Paulus Orosius, it stood but
six and fifty years, at the end of which time it fell, by reason of a great
trembling of the earth. After the fall, and the time named by Pliny, many went
to see this marvelous thing, and few men were found (says he) that could
fadome or embrace the great fingers of this statue: so that the very least of
the fingers, were bigger the^ any other statue it self.

Yet speaks he of an hundred other Colosses of less quantity, which
likewise were in Rhodes, but they are nothing to our purpose: unless some one
perhaps will say, because of the one great and the other lesser, the Rhodians
should be named the Colossenses or Colossians. Yet that opinion is not approved
by Erasmus, for he says that the Colossians to whom S. Paul wrote, were
people of a City in Phrigia, named Colossas.

Return we then to this marvelous Colossus, I say that it remained there
ruined on the earth a long time, even until Pope Martin the first: which was in
the year six hundred, when the Infidels and the Soldane of Egypt their
Captain, came upon the Rhodians, and according as Platina writes in the life
of Pope Martin, and Anthony Sabellicus in the third part of his book: they
report, that he found the Relics of this Colossus, and that nine hundred
Camels were laden away with the Metal thereof.

The other Colosses that were in Rhodes, and other places, not so great, we
will not speak of them: because in this discourse, we must only entreat on
seven Wonders of the World.

The third wonder of the world.
FOR the third, I think meet to set down the Piramides of Egypt: which in
truth, if that which so many learned Historians have written, may be termed
truth, was a thing very admirable. These Piramides were certain buildings,
which began in form of a Quadrangle, or four square, and ascended so up to
the highest in large proportion, according to the manner of a poynted Diamond:
yet were they of such greatness and height, containing such and so many stones,
and in such perfection, as it is very hard to be set down, but more hard to
cause each one give credit thereto: notwithstanding, they are so authorized by
Authors both Christians and Gentiles, and them that are the best approved, as
none can deny what they have written.

These Piramides then are like high Towers, finishing at the top spire and
sharp, the Etimologie of the name, comes of Pyr in Greek, which is to say,
fire: because it seems that the highest of these building do flash out
flames of fire.

Amongst all other Piramides, the Historians make particular mention of three
that were in Egypt, near the City of Memphis, which at this day is the
Caire, and the I Will that foundeth Nilus, named Delta: one of which three, is
placed in rank among the seven Meruailes of the world, for it is said, that
at the making thereof, continually and daily labored, three hundred and
threescore thousand men, for the space of twenty years together.

Many do affirm this, and particulerlie Pliny, speaking amply thereof, in
his thirty six book and twelfth Chapter, and for his assurance, alleges
twelve sound Authors; Beside, Diodorus in his first Book, Strabo in his last
book, Pomponius Mela in his first book, Herodotus in his second book,
Amianus in his second book, and many other. Some say, that the plot and
foundation of this Piramides, spread forth and covered eight days journey of
ground: let me leave to your imagination, what space that may be. Some other
say, seven days journey, but the least yields to six, and as much or
rather more in height.

Pliny says, that each square contained eight hundred, foure-score and three
foot, the stones were of Marble, brought out of Arabia, and Pomponius Mela
says, that the most part of the^ were three foot large. Hereby may we easily
gather, that so many thousand men might be employed: some to carry stones, some
to hew and cut them, and others to place them, beside the multitude that
wrought in the iron works, and about other necessary occasions.

Of the other Piramides it is thus said, the least of the two was made by the
vanity of the Kings of Egypt, which were the richest in all the world: as well
by the fertility of the earth, as also that in this Country no person
possessed any thing in proper, but the King only. And this was since the time,
that Joseph the son of Iaacob councelled Pharao, to preserve the Corn for 7.
years abundance, regarding the time of famine: during which space, by the
means of this Corn, he had all the Countries his Vassailes. Think then
whether these Kings were rich or no, when they made their Subjects attend on
them like servant.

And the Historians say, that the Kings in this respect caused these Piramides
to be builded, because they would give to eat to their people that labored:
as also least they should leave their riches to their successors, for they had
rather thus spend it among their people, then any of their heirs should be
aduantaged by their death, inheriting their goods and money.

It is found also written, that these Piramides served for Sepulchers to the
Kings: and who so will consider the multitude of the Hebrew people that served
in Egypt, by whom the Kings caused to be builded Cities and Fortresses: they
will not be abashed heereat, seeing it is a thing very certain, that six
hundred thousand men, beside great multitude of women and young children,
endured the servitude, all which were employed and served in these meruaylous
works.

So then it is no matter of marvel, how these buildings should be made, for
it is said, that in Turnops, Garlike and Scallions, to maintain this number of
workmen, were spent eighteen hundred Talents, which valued the price of each
days work, a Million and four-score thousand Crowns.

Diodorus says, that all the compass thereof and very far about, there was
not so much as one little stone, nor appearance that any person had been there,
nor sign of any foundation, but the Gravel very small and fine as any salt:
so that it seemed this Piramides was there set by the hand of God, and that it
was naturally created, the top thereof resembling as if it touched heaven.

If we set aside the old ancient Books, yet shall we find witnesses in our
own later times, for Peter Martyr of Millaine, a man learned, that was
Ambassador for the Princes Catholic, Don Ferdinand and Dame Isabell, to the
Soldane of Egypt, in the year one thousand, five hundred and one, made a
book of what he had seen and done in his Embassade: therein he recites, as
if it were by word of mouth, that he saw these Piramides, and agrees with
what the ancient Authors have written. And particulerly he speaks of two
which he had seen, that were of incredible height: he says, he measured the
squares of one, and found each to be three hundred and fifteen paces, and
about thirteen hundred in compass: that on every side, there were such huge
great stones, as each one seemed a building of it self.

He says moreover, that certain of his company got up on one of them by great
labor, and (though in long time) they reached the top: saying, that on the
very highest of all was one only stone, so great and broad, as thirty men
might easily stand upon it. And when they were below, they said they supposed
themselves to have been in a Cloud, they were so high: and they seemed to have
lost the light, their brains wheeling about and turning downe-warde. Whereby
he says, that the number of people is not to be doubted, nor yet the expense
which is said to be consumed about these things.

The fourth wonder of the world.
THE fourth Miracle, was that of Mausolus, made by Artemisia, wife to the said
Mausolus king of Caria, a Province of Asia the great.

This Queen, according to Aulus Gellius, in the tenth book of his Ati. Nox:
and diverse other Historians, so dearly loved her husband, as every one set
her down for a notable example both of love and chastity.

The King dying, for his death she used tears and extreme complaints, other
then the custom of women now is: and she would make him a Sepulcher,
conformable to the great love she bare him, and such a one it was, as it is
placed among the seven Wonders of the world.

The stone of all this building was of an excellent Marble, which had the
compass and circuit of four hundred and eleven foot, and twenty five cubits
in height: it had about it six and twenty pillars of stone, cut with
wonderful cunning. It was open on all sides, having Arches of seauenty-three
foot wide: and it was made by the hands of the most exquisite workmen that
could be found. The part toward the East, was made and graven by Scopas: the
North-side, by Briax: the South part, by Timotheus: and the West by Leochares.

The perfection of this work was such, and the building so fair and
sumptuous, as is was called Mausolus, after the King for whom it was made: so
that all other Sepulchers, that until this day have been builded, for the
excellent workmanship of this one, are likewise called Mausolaea. Heerof made
mention Pliny in his thirty-fiue book and fifth Chapter, Pomponius Mela in
his first book, Herodotus and Strabo in his seventh book, Aulus Gellius
likewise heerof keeps memory, and many other Historians beside. It is
recorded, that Artemisia after the death of her husband, lived continually in
tears and pensiuenes, and that she dyed before her work was finished, having
drunken in powder the bones of her husband, which she caused to be burned for
this purpose, and so made him a Sepulcher of her own body.

The fifth Wonder of the World.
LIttle contention needs about the fifth of these Meruailes, for that was the
Temple of Diana, whom the Gentiles through folly adored for a Goddess: and
builded this Temple in the City of Ephesus in Asia, in the Province of Ionia.
Pliny in his sixteen book and thirty four Chapter, writing of this Temple,
says, that it contained four hundred and twenty five foot in length, and
two hundred and twenty in breadth. The work was of such marvelous cunning,
as it was two hundred and twenty years in perfecting: and it was builded in a
Lake, to prevent the danger of the earth-quaking, on the foundation being
laid hard powder of coals, and there-vpon wool, to keep the place moist
and marshie.

It had an hundred and twenty seven Colloms of excellent Marble, they being
each one threescore and ten foot in height, and every Collome was caused to
be made by a several King of Asia, thirty seven of them was graven with
marvelous cunning skyll, they all being of most choice Marble.

The principal Master of this work, according to Pinie, was Dresiphon, and
after Strabo in his four-teene book, Archiphron: notwith-standing, this
diversity of opinion is to be borne withal, considering how long time was
required about it, and therefore it had more then one Master, especially for
the trymming by diverse, and in sundry times.

Solinus in his fourteen Chapter, and Pomponius Mela in his first book, say,
that the Amazones builded and dedicated this Temple. Moreover Solinus says,
that when the puissant King Xerxes went to the conquest of Greece, and that he
burned all the Temples, yet he reserved this only.

All Historians do agree, that the Pyllers of this Temple held up the
plauncher of wood, so arteficially wrought as was possible to be done: and
that it was covered with Cedar, according to Pliny in his sixth book, and 49.
chapter, the Gates and seelings being of Cipres. Afterward, a villain seeing
this sumptuous and admirable building, he was desirous to burn it, and so he
did: when being taken for this offense, he confessed he did it for no other
intent, but to leave a renown of himself to the world.

But Ualerius the great, and Aulus Gellius in his second book say, that to
spoil this villains desire of renown, it was forbidden under great and
grievous pain, that none should write his name; to the end he might fail of
the fame and glory he expected. But this served to small purpose, for Solinus
and Strabo say, that he was named Erostratus, and of him came the Proverb:
that when any one would be famous for a vicious act, they would say, This is
the renown of Erostratus.

Again, it may be spoken for a notable thing, that the same day the Temple
was burnt, Alexander the great was borne, who conquered all Asia: Hereof are
Authors, Plutarch in the life of Alexander, and Cicero in his second Book of
the nature of the Gods, there it is reported in many places, and likewise in
the book of Divination* and it is said, that while the Temple burned, the
Sages prognosticated the destruction of all Asia, as afterward it happened by
Alexander.

Some say the Temple was re-edified again, far more great and excellent then
it was before, and that the Master of the work was named Democrates.

The sixth Wonder of the World.
COncerning the sixth marvel, it was the Idol or Image of Jupiter Olimpus,
which was in his Temple in Achaia, between the Cities of Elis and Pisa, the
place being named Olimpia: and likewise the Temple, because of Jupiter Olimpus,
of whom Strabo in his eight book, and Pomponius Mela in his second book,
say, that this statue or Image which was in the Temple, was renowned, as well
for the perfection and admirable workmanship, as also for the greatness
thereof.

It was made of Porphire, some say Iuory, by the hand of Phidias, the most
excellent Engrauer and Image-maker that ever was.

Pliny in his thirty five and thirty six books, makes mention of it, so do
many other beside.

Strabo says, the excellency thereof was in the greatness: and that which
makes it more admirable, is, that it was of Porphiry, cut in an infinite number
of pieces.

It is said, that Phidias was touched with one only imperfection, which was,
that he had not well compassed the proportion of the Image with the Temple,
because it was in such sort placed, and so huge, as when one considered what
might be the height thereof, ifhe were underneath upon his feet, he would
imagine nothing more could be contained within the Temple. Notwithstanding, the
renown of this Image was highly advanced, and made the Temple more known then
otherwise it would have been: because in that place was the sports and Games
called Olimpia, and hence it came, that they accounted the years by
Olimpiades, whereof they made five years in five years. The games were first
instituted by Hercules, afterward when they had left them off, they were
restored and re-established by Emonies, after some Authors, by Sphyron, four
or five years after the destruction of Troy, according to Eusebius, and there
begins the year of the s^st Olimpiade.

The seventh Wonder of the World.
LAstly, for the seventh wonder, some say that it was the Tower in the I Will of
Pharos, near to the City of Alexandria in Egypt. Pharos was a little I Will
long and strait, seated on the coast of Egypt, and directly against the mouth
of Nylus, which in times past, as says Pomponius Mela in his second book, and
Pliny in his fifth, was altogether enclosed with firm Land: and afterward,
to the times of the self same Authors, it was embraced with the main Sea,
save only a bridge, whereby they passed from the one I Will to the other.

In this firm Land is the great City of Alexandria, builded by Alexander the
great, which City was afterward a Colonie to Julius Caesar.

In this I Will called Pharos, after the name of a great Pilot to Menelaus, who
was there buried: the Kings of Egypt caused to be builded a Tower of Marble,
marvelous in height and work-manship, upon a Mountain environed with water.
The labor thereon bestowed was such, as it cost eight hundred Talents, which
value four hundred and four-score thousand Crowns, according to the
computation of Budaeus: and it was builded for no other purpose, then to alight
a fire in the night on the top thereof, for guide and direction to the ships
that came to take port there.

This Tower, according to the most great opinion, was builded by Ptolomeus
Philodelphus, King of Egypt, and the chief Archetect that made it, was named
Sistrates, as we are certified by Pliny in his five and thirty Book.

Caesar in his Comentaries, greatly commends the height and work of this
Tower, and says it was called Pharos, taking name of the I Will: so says Amianus
Marcellinus in his first book, treating of the History of this Tower, and
Solinus in his Polyhistor, in the end of the thirty four Chapter, that al
Towers which were made afterward, were named Pharos, after this one: as was the
Pharos of Messina, and else where. Again I think, that the fires which are
ordinarily carried in Ships, to guide them in the night from others, by this
occasion, are named Pharos.

Thus this Tower is the last of these seven Wonders, albeit that by many it
is not placed among the number of them: but in sted thereof is named the high
grounded Gardens of Babylon, whereof already we have spoken.

Lactantius Firmianus, holds so, and says that these Gardens were upon the
Arches and Towers, admirable in greatness, with a number of Fountains: the
form of which building is amply set down by Diodorus the Scicilian.

Caelio the Rhodian, discoursing on the seven Wonders, agrees not that this
seventh is the Tower of Pharos, or the high hanging Gardens: but the Obelisque
of Semiramis, which was made after the same fashion and structure of the
Piramides, for it began so in a Quadrangle, and finished in a sharp point: nor
was there any difference between the Obelisque and the Piramides, but that the
Obelisque was only of one piece, and therefore could be nothing so high as the
Piramides. It is found written, that certain of them were so great as Towers,
and of a very fair stone: there is one at this day in Rome, named Caesar's
Needle, which was brought out of Egypt, and is a very marvelous thing to
behold, as well for the greatness and to consider the manner how it was
brought thither.

Of the Obelisque of Semiramis, which Caelio (as I have said) numbreth amongst
the seven Meruailes, it is justified in writing, that it was an hundred and
fifty foot high, as also four and twenty foot broad in a quadrangle, so that
the whole compass thereof was ninety foot. And this stone so being whole and
sound, was taken from the Mountains in Armenia, and by the commandment of
Semiramis brought into Babylon Caldea: but in truth when we consider how it
was drawn, carried and lifted up, it seems altogether a matter incredible,
if the times of antiquity had not like things or more strange, whereof we are
truly certified by Authors worthy of credit, and other very great
Obelisques, which the Kings of Egypt cause to be made. Pliny in his sixth
book, eight and ninth chapters, shows the manner of drawing these stones forth
of the Quarries and Mines of stone. Of these Piramides, Obelisques, Statues and
Colosses, makes mention the learned Polyphius, in the beginning of his
Hypne-rotomachia.

Of the great Treasure found in Pouilla.
IN the time of Robert Gu^scardo, in Pouilla was found a statue of Marble,
which had about the head in manner of a Garlande, a circle of brass, wherein
was engraven these Latin words.

Calendis Maii, orient Sole, aurum caput habebo.

Which is to say, In the Calends of May, at the rising of the Sun, I shall
have a head of gold. Robert searched long to know the signification of these
words, yet could he not find any one to instruct him in the true
understanding: until at last there was a Sara^en, well skilled in the Magique
Art, being prisoner to Robert, having ^st demanded his liberty in recompense
of the interpretation, he offered todisclose the words written on the statue.
His deliverance being granted by the Duke Guyscardo, he declared them in this
manner, to wit. On the day of the Calendes of May, at the rising of the Sun, he
observed and marked the place where the shadow of the statues head finished on
the ground, and there he commanded the^ to dig very deep, by which means
should be understood the meaning of the word.

Robert caused a deep digging to be made in the appointed place, where in
little while was discovered and found a mighty mass of Treasure, which gave
him good and principal aid in his marvelous enterprises. And for the
Saracen, beside other reco^pences he received of Robert: the recovery of his
liberty was the most joyful thing, which in all the world could happen to him.

These three last discourses, were translated out of the diverse Lessons of
Pierre Messie, and Antonie du Verdier Sieur de Vaupriuaz.

An advertisement to the Reader.
A Man can hardly have knowledge of the estate of the Roman Empire, nor
likewise of the Kingdoms, Signories and principalities that are in Greece and
Asia: unless he understand their moneys, manners and behavior in speech,
which has bred heer-to-fore a general error and confusion. For they that have
written an hundred times Sestertiaes, meant and signified an hundred times an
hundred thousand Sestertiaes: the which custom and kind of speech, has
brought the Interpreters and Translatours of good Authors, since within a
thousand years, into great doubt and error.

There were some that imagined and thought them to be the same indeed, and
therefore spoke thereof indifferently: others there were that either understood
them not, or else could not comprehend the^, and so by reason of their weakness
and doubting, there has ensued very great disference and alteration.

But the very truth is, that this manner of speech came in use, by
abbreuiation of the language: for when they would signify a great sum, to cut
short the word, they would say an hundred times Sestertiaes: in sted of saying,
an hundred times an hundred thousand Sestertiaes. And four hundred times
Sestertiaes, in sted of four hundred times an hundred thousand: twelve times
Sestertiaes, meaning twelve thousand Sestertiaes. etc.

To know summarily the declaration and meaning of the sums contained in the
Histories: I have according to the account of Budaeus, gathered the notes, and
abridged them as follows, to be known after our own English money, or after
the value of the French Crowns.
THE As, valueth four small French Deniers, not so much as an English farthing.

This As, is the very least piece of coin or current Money that is.

In signification according to the Latin, it is taken for a pound weight,
consisting of twelve ounces.

In division of solid things, as of Land or inheritance, it is likewise taken
for the whole part or portion.

There is required six Sextans to make or value an As.

A Sextan is a coin less then that which is called a Quadran by the third
part.

It likewise is a certain poyse or weight, being two ounces, after some called
Obolus, after other, the sixth part of a pound.

It is the sixth part of any measure, sum or quantity, that is divided into
12. parts.

It is sometime likewise taken for 2. inches. Also the sixth part of Iugerum,
which is so much ground as one yoke of Oxen will ear in a day. It contains
in length, two hundred and forty foot, and in breadth one hundred and twenty
foot, which multiplied, rises to 28800.

It may be used for our English Acre of ground, which nevertheless
contains more, etc. or for a furlong.

Obolus is also a small piece of Coin, but variable, according to the Country:
in France it is a little brass piece, the sixth part of a Souse: with us in
England it is a halfpenny. Yet Iunius takes it for a penny and farthing of
our money.

It is also a weight containing three Carrets, that is, half a Scruple.

It is sometime used as Obolus terrae: five foot in breadth and ten in
length, which contains siftie foot square.

A Quadran, in coin is a brazen piece called Triunx or Teruntius, the
fourteenth part of Denarius, or as we in England count, the fourth part of a
penny, which is our farthing.

It is the fourth part of an As, that is three ounces, and a quarter.

Also the fourth part of any number or measure: or three inches.

It is used diverse ways, as Quadrans operae Col, the fourth part of a days
work.

Ex quadrante haeredem facere. Ulpian, to make heir of the fourth part.

Quadrans vini. Cells. six ounces of Wine, after Budaeus. After Physicians
four ounces and a half.

Four Quadrans or Quadrins, value an As.

The Libella or little book, as it is termed, is a coin likewise valuing one
As.

Of this coin there were two sorts, one the tenth part of Sestertius, another
the tenth part of Denarius.

Of English money it is no more the^ three farthings.

It is taken some time for a pound weight. Sesquiobolus valueth not half a
Souse french.

It is diversely taken in other Countries: but in England it is likewise no
more then three farthings.

Also it is a poyse containing three parts of a Scruple.

The little Sestertius valueth ten Deniers and a half.

This coin was among the Romans, whereof Denarius contained four, and is so
called, quasi Semitertius: for it contained two and a half of the brazen coin
called As, and is marked with this figure H. S.

Of English money it is estimated worth two pence, I mean the little
Sestertius.

The Dram valueth three french Souses or Sols, whereof there be threescore
in a French Crown.

It is otherwise called three Shillings and six pence, of this piece there is
mention made in the Gospel of S. Matthew.

This Dram is a coin figured with a Bullock, counterpoysing an old
sterling Groate of eight pence to the ounce.

It was diversely taken by the name of Solidus amongst the Romans: sometimes
for a coin of brass containing twelve ounces, a shylling: sometime for
Dram in silver.

Aureus solidus in Alexanders time, was two Drammes of gold, afterward, in the
time of Justinian, six of them made an ounce: they being of the weight of our
old English Nobles.

After Aiginea Iun. a shilling. Attica Iun. seven pence. Auri twelve silver
Drammes, that is, an ounce and a half of silver.

The Sicle valueth two Drachmaes.

It is a coin in value about four English Groates, when eight went to an
ounce.

Siclus Hebraicus, vel argenteus, according to Iun, was two shillings four
pence.

It is also a weight being half an ounce in poyse.

The Didrachma, valueth two of the former Drachmaes.

The Denier valueth four Sestertiaes, which according to some, are worth
three shyllings six pence.

It was a days wages for a Labourer, as it is said in the twenty Chapter of
Saint Matthew.

After the Latin, Denarius is an old penny, worth ten pieces of silver, or
ten Asses.

According to some other Countries, it is reckoned worth eight pence.

The word interpreted after our English, is used for a penny of our common
coin.

Iunius says, it is a coin as much as eight pence of our coin.

The Roman penny likewise, was worth four Sestertiaes, and it went in pay
for ten Asses.

Of it were three sorts: one, the sixth part of an ounce, which was more by the
third part then the Greek Dram.

Another was, the seventh part of an ounce, weighing a Dram, and the
seventh part thereof, and twenty and four went to a pound.

The third was the eight part of an ounce, equal to the Greek Dram: in
value a sterling Groate, when 8* went to an ounce.

The Sportula valueth an hundred Quadrans or Quadrines.

After the Romans, they termed it ten Sestertiaes, which they used to bestow
in a small drinking or banquet, on such as came to salute them.

After our English account, by our farthing: it is worth two shyllings and a
penny.

The Mina valueth an hundred Drachmaes.

These hundred Drachmaes are of our old sterling money, three and thirty
shyllinges and four pence.

After others account, which take Denarius Rom^nus, which is all one with the
Dram: whereby they reckon it to be worth fifty eight shillings and four
pence.

It is also taken for a poyse of weight, weighing twelve ounces and a half, so
that it is more then the Roman pound by 4. Drachmaes.

It is likewise a measure of ground, containing one hundred and twenty two
foot in length, and as many in breadth.

Ten thousand Sestertiaes, or ten great Sestertiaes, amount to two hundred
and fifty Crowns of the Crown, the best French Crown next the Sun Crown.

A thousand Sestertiaes make twenty five Crowns French, which is five pound
sterling of our English money, whereby the rest may easily be valued.

The Myriade valueth 10000. Crowns.

Twenty thousand Sestertiaes, come to five hundred Crowns.

Forty thousand Sestertiaes, amount to a thousand Crowns.

A hundred Sestertiaes, that is to say, an hundred thousand, do value two
thousand five hundred French Crowns.

Two hundred Sestertiaes, are five thousand Crowns.

Eight hundred Sestertiaes, come to twenty thousand Crowns.

A thousand great Sestertiaes, make five and twenty thousand Crowns.

Twelve times Sestertiaes, are thirty thousand Crowns.

Forty times Sestertiaes, make an hundred thousand Crowns.

A hundred times Sestertiaes, value two hundred and fifty thousand Crowns.

A thousand times Sestertiaes, amount to two Millions, and 500. thousand
Crowns. Ten thousand times Sestertiaes, are five and twenty Millions.

Twenty thousand times Sestertiaes, come to fifty Millions.

A Talent of Gold, valueth six hundred Crowns.

Ten Talents, are two hundred and forty thousand Sestertiaes, which come to
six thousand Crowns.

Twenty Talents, are four hundred and foure-score thousand Sestertiaes, which
amount to twelve thousand Crowns.

Fifty Talents, are twelve times Sestertiaes, that is to say, twelve hundred
thousand, which value thirty thousand Crowns.

An hundred Talents, are sour and twenty times Sestertiaes, being
threescore thousand Crowns.

Five hundred Talents, are six-score times Sestertiaes, being three hundred
thousand Crowns.

A thousand Talents, are tweluescore times Sestertiaes, which come to six
hundred thousand Crowns.

Four thousand Talents, are nine hundred and sixty times Sestertiaes, which
make two Millions and four thousand Crowns.

Ten thousand Talents, are two thousand and four hundred times
Sestertiaes, which amounts to six Millions.

Fifty thousand Talents, are twelve thousand times Sestertiaes, which come to
thirty Millions.

An hundred thousand Talents, are four and twenty thousand times (...), which
amount to threescore Millions. etc.

To make a brief account of our English money, from the small penny, to the
pound of twenty shillings, I thought it necessary, for help in the former
great sums.
A Penny is the least coin among us, save the half penny, now used.

Four pence make a Groate.
Three Groates make a Shilling.
Five Shillings, a Crown English, or an ounce Troy.

Six Shillings eight pence, a Noble.
Thirteen Shillings four pence, a Mark.
Twenty Shillings, a pound tale, etc.
And by these names all sums of money are commonly reckoned with us.

We used to call our Silver coin sterling: because in one quarter it had the
picture of the bird, which we call a Stare or Starling.

The Gold coins, may without any great error be valued after the rate of our
Angels, except where any notable difference is. The Roman Silver coined till
Uespasians reign, is justly valued at five shillinges, three pence half penny
the ounce Troy: but for the speedier supputation, I allot unto it sixteen
Groates, making no great account of the halfe-penny, which is otherwise
somewhat supplied.

Other silver coins may be valued at the same rate, saving that the latter
Roman coin is a little baser then the rest.

Of Measures for Corn and other things.
THE Mina measure, contains six Bushelles.

The Medimnum, after Budaeus, contains two Amphoras, which is almost two
Bushels of our measure English.

The Amphora, contains eight Congios, and forty eight Sextaries, which is as
much as nine Gallons of our English measure.

Amphora Atticus contains thirty Gallons and a half.

The Congius contains six Sextaries, which is of our English measure a
Gallon and a Pynte.

The Sextarius is a measure, whereby (according to Budaeus) all other Measures
may be made, and certain trial by weight and measure.

The Roman Sextane, contains of wine or Wheat two pound Roman, that is
four and twenty ounces: a pound and a half of Haber du poise weight, less
then the Paris pynt by eight ounces.

Ye may try it following Glareans rule, by making a measure four inches long,
by squire three inches deep, and as many broad, which is the true Sextarius.

According to this account, it is just our pynt English, and a half: for in
our Wine pint is but sixteen ounces.

Physicians assign but eyghteene ounces, or at the uttermost twenty to
Sextarius: and then it is but two or four ounces more then our pynt.

Sextarius (after George Agricola,) contains two Heminae, one pound measure
and eight ounces, that is, twenty ounces or inch measures.

Sextarius is in weight of Oil, sixteen ounces, five drammes, and one
scruple: of Wine fifteen ounces and an half, two Siliquaes, and two third
parts of a grain.

The Hemina contains nine ounces and two Quartarios, that is, three quarters
of a pint.

Quartarius is the fourth part of Sextarius, containing two Acebatula, a
quarter of a pound.

Siliqua, is the Scruple, whereof three make a Dram, and is now called a
Coract, used of finers of Gold and silver.

The Greek Tun and Roman, agrees with the Vessel of Paris.

A pynte is the least measure that has a peculier name with us in England.

Two of them make a Quart.
Two Quarts a pottle.
Two Pottles a Gallon.
Of these are the greatest Measures, which for Ale, Beer and Wine be
indifferent.

The Firkin of Ale holds eight Gallons.
Of Beer nine gallons.
The Kilderkin of Ale sixteen gallons.
Of Beer eyghteene gallons.
The Barrel of Ale thirty two gallons.
Of Beer thirtie-sixe.
Of Wine but thirty one and a half.
The Wine Tierse holds forty two Gallons.
The Hogshead sixtie-three.
The Tertian eyghty-foure.
The Pype or Malmesie Butte, one hundred and twenty six.

The Tun two hundred and 56. gallons.
In the measure for Grain, two Gallons make a pecke.

Four Pecks, a Bushel or Strike.
Four Bushels, a Cowmbe or Cowme, a Cornock, a Rasor.

Two Cowmes make a quarter.
And for the playner declaration of smaller measures, I suppose three quarters
of a pint to be a pound in measure, divided into 12. ounces, every ounce
according to the Goldsmithes assise: which pound contains of pure Oil a
pound. etc.

FINIS. A. M.

