True loving Sorrow, attired in a Robe of unfeigned Grief, presented upon
occasion of the much bewailed Funeral of that Gracious and Illustrious Prince
Lewis Steward Duke of Richmond and Linox, Eearle of Newcastle and Darnely, Lord
of Torbolton and Methuen, Baron of Settrington, Knight of the noble order of
the Garter, Lord high Admiral, and great Chamberlain of Scotland, Lord high
Steward to the Kings most excellent Majesty's most Honorable Household,
Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council for England and Scotland; Who departed this life at
White Hall on Thursday the 12. of February, whose Obsequies were solemnly and
Princely Celebrated, on Monday the 19. of April, described in form as
f^lloweth. Dedicated generally to all his worthy Friends, and loving Servants;
and particularly to that trusty and well-beloued Servant of his Arthur
Neassmith.
ANd first my Muse finds, that his Graces name
Significantly makes an Annagram.
LEWIS STEWARD, Annagram VERTV IS WELL EASED.
His Virtues such continual pains did take
For King and Country, Church and peoples sake:
That for Earths courtly toil, to him 'twas given
His UERTU IS WELL EASED in the Court of Heaven.
GReat God, that to thyselfe wilt take thine own
By sundry ways, and means to Man unknown,
Whose Eye of providence does still perceive
When, where, why, who to take, or else to leave,
Whose mercy, and whose Justice equal are,
Both Infinite, to punish or to spare,
All men do know, that men to dye are borne,
And from the Eearth, must to the Earth return.
But Time and Circumstance conjecture may,
For some great cause thou took'st this Duke away.
Amongst us lurkes so many a foul offense,
Which gives thee cause to take good men from hence:
And that this Prince was Good as well as Great,
His life and timelesse loss does well repeat.
Devout and zealous to his God above:
True to his King, as did his service prove:
Discreet in Counsel, Noble in his mind,
Most Charitably, Honorably kind.
So Affable, so Hopeful unto all,
And so Repleat with virtues general,
That we may say, this Land in losing Him:
Has lost a gracious Peer, a prop, a limb.
It must be true, that well he spends his days,
Whose actions do attain all peoples praise:
And surely I suppose he does not live,
Who of this Duke a bad report can give.
So full endu'd he was of all good parts,
With noble Courtesy he wan all hearts,
To love and honor his admired mind
So well adicted, and so well enclinde,
That as a Diamond in Gold transfixt
His virtues with his Greatness was so mixed,
That he as one of an immortal Race
Made Virtue virtuous, and gave Grace to grace.
Then since his goodness, was so general,
The loss of him is General unto all:
This being true, let us recollect our spirits
And weigh his worth, with our unworthy merits;
And then our frailties truly will confess
God took him hence for our unworthiness:
Death was in Message from The Almighty sent
To summon him to Heavens high Parliament,
He changed his Gracious Title transitory,
And (by the grace of God) attained true Glory;
And as his King had his integrity;
So did the Commons share his Clemency,
Which was so pleasing to his Makers sight,
That Bounteously he did his life requite
That Lambe-like, mildely hence he took him sleeping,
To his Eternal euer-blessed keeping.
Thus as his name includes, so God is pleased
(From worldly sorrows) VERTV IS WELL EASED.
No sickness or no physic made him languish,
He lay not long in heart-tormenting anguish,
But as Gods fear was planted in his breast,
So at his Rest, God took him to his Rest.
When like a good Tree, laden full of fruit,
Of Grace, of Virtue, Honor, and Repute:
Even in his best estate, too good for Earth,
Then did his soul put on a second Birth.
And though his part of frail mortality,
In Monumentall Marble here does lie:
Yet thousands weeping souls, with deep laments,
As his most woeful mourning Monuments,
I daily see, whose visages do show
That He Is interred within their hearts below;
Whose faces seems an Epitaph to bear,
That men may Read who is intombed there.
Epitaph.
GOod, Gracious, Great, Richmond and Linox Duke,
God, King, and Countries servant here does lie;
Whose living Merits merit no rebuke,
For whose lives less lamenting Memory,
Our hearts are groaning Graves of grieses and cares,
Which when we die, we will leave unto our heirs.
Me thinks the Sable Mourners did appear,
As if in form they numbering Figures were;
As 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
Whilst all that viewed, like Ciphers did combine
Their mourning with the Mourners to unite,
Which made their Lamentations infinite.
And Infinite are now his Joys Above
With the Eternal God of peace and love:
Where for a mortal Dukedom he has won,
(Through boundless merits of The Almighty's Son)
A Kingdom that is immortal, where he sings
Perpetual praise unto the King of Kings.
Thus what the Earth surrendered, Heaven has seaz'd
Most blessed LEWIS STEWARD, UERTU IS WELL EASED.
The manner of the Funeral.
Eight Conductors with black staves, and poor Gowns, 100.

Servants to Gentlemen and Esquires in Cloakes 50.

Servants to Knights, 46.

Servants to Baronets, 10.

Three Trumpeters.

Then came the Standard borne by Sir Gerrard Samms Knight, accompanied with an
Officer of Arms.

The first Horse covered with black cloth garnished with Scutchions, Shaffron
and Plumes led by a groom.

Here went Servants to Barons youngor Sons, and some others of like quality in
number 15.

The servants to Knights of the privy Council, 30.

Servants to Earls younger sons, 24.

Servants to Viscounts eldest Sons, 6.

Then the Scholars of Westminster in Gowns and Surplises, their Masters
following in mourning Gowns.

Three Trumpeters.

The Guidon borne by Sir Andrew Boyd Knight, accompanied with an Officer of
Arms.

The second Horse led by a Groom, and furnished as the former.

Barons servants 60.

Bishops Servants 10.

Earls eldest Sons servants, 15.

Viscounts Servants, 10.

Marquesses eldest Sons servants.

3. Trumpers.

The Banner of the augmentation borne by a Knight, accompanied with an Officer
of Arms.

The third Horse led by onother Groom of his Graces Stable furnished as the
others. Earls servants: Marquesses and Dukes servants, The Lord Priuie-Seales
servants.

President of the Council, Servants. Lord Thresurors, Lord Keepers, And Lord
Archbishops,

3. Trumpets. The, Banner of Steward, borne by Sir John Steward accompanied
with an Officer of Arms.

The 4. Horse led by a Yeomen of his Graces Stable furnished as the other.

Servants to his Grace in Cloakes: Officers to his Grace in Gowns.

3. Trumpeters.

The Banner of Steward and the augmentation quartered with it borne by a
Baronet accompanied with a Herald of Arms.

The fist Horse led by a Yeoman of his Graces Stable furnished as the former.

Serieants of several Offices in his Majesty's House, and other Esquires, his
Majesty's Servants of good quality. The Gentlemen of his Majesty's Chapel in
Surplices and rich Copes, the Sergeant of the Vestry accompaning them.
Chaplains. Doctors of Physic. Doctors of Divinity. Knights. Gentlemen of the
Privy Chamber. Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to the Prince. Baronets. Barons
younger Sons. Knights of the Privy Council. Viscounts eldest Sons. A
velvet Cushen carried by an Esquire, The Comptroller, Treasurer, Steward, and
Chamberlain to his Grace, bearing white Staves. Barons of Ireland, Scotland,
and England. Bishops. Earls eldest Sons Viscounts. Earls of Scotland, and
England. The Duke of Lennox eldest Son. The Archbishop of Canterbury. The
Mace, The Purse, The Lord Keeper Preacher. Sergeant Trumpetter, and four
Trumpets. The Great Banner borne by an Earls Son, accompanied with an
Herald. The chief Mourning Horse covered with black Velvet, and garnished
with Eschochens of Taffata, with Shaffron and Plumes led by Mr. Hatton Clauell.
His Graces Hatchiuements borne as follows. The Gauntlets and Spurs, the
Helm and Crest, and the Sword borne by three Heralds. The Targe and Coat of
Arms, borne by two Kings of Arms. Then the lively Effigies or represention of
his Grace, drawn in a Chariot by six goodly Horses garnished as the former,
covered with a Canopie of black Velvet, the Pall supported by two Earls
Sons, and two Marquises Sons. The Footmen going on each side the Chariot
and likewise to small Banners, carried by to Knights, 5. of Scotland, and 5. of
England round about the Chariot, two principal Gent. riding at his head and
feet in the said Chariot. Then followed Garter principal King of Arms
accompanied with a Gent. Usher who went bare headed. The Duke of Lennox chief
Mourners. The L. Treasurer, and L. President of the Council, his supporters.
10. Other assistants. The L. Privy Seal, and D. of Buckingham. The Marquis
Hamilton, and Earl Marshall. The L. Chamberlain of his May. House, and the
E. of Sussex. The E. of Southampton, and E. of Essex. The E. of Salisbury, and
E. of Exceter. The Mr. of the Horse to his Grace in close mourning, leading the
Horse of Honor, most richly furnished. Thus past, this sad Show from his Graces
House in Holborne to Westminster, where the Funeral Rites being solemnly
ended, his Graces lively Effiges, was left in the Abbey of St. Peter under a
Rich Hearse.

John Tailor.
Printed for Henry Gosson. 1624.


