To the most mighty Monarch of Montzago, the model of Magnanimity, the map of
man-darring Monster-quellers, the thrice three times trebble triple renowned
Alphebo, ornamented honorable Knight of Standsalio, Treldedo, Maroua, Fregero,
Andalowsia, and the sky-scaling mountain of Mulletto. Illustrious Pheander,
victorious and valarous Champion to Don Phoebus, great Duke of Delphos, and the
Oracle of Apollo; Marquess of Muzetta, and the lake Asse-Phaltites: Earl of
Vtopia; Lord and Dominator of the Promontory of Polipratemost: The unconquered
all-conquering Maiden Knight, by revelation, by creation, by procreation, and
contentation: the unmatched Phoenix, and fourfold commander of the Enchanted
Islands, by nomination, by Banner, by warlike atchieuements, by nativity, by
descent and process, matchless and vnparelleld Sir Thomas Parsons, Knight of
the Sun, great cousin Vermin to the seldom seen Queen of Fayries, and
hopeful heir apparent to her invisible Kingdom.

Unmatchable Cheualiere, I am bold to commit a poor Goose to your impregnable
protection and patronage, I know there will be as much to do in the keeping of
her, and with as much danger, as was the conquest of the Golden Fleece, the
Apples of the Hesperides, or the saving of Andromeda by Perseus: and but that
your valiant atchieuements are known and approved, I would never have put my
Goose to your invincible Guard, the enemies that will assault you, or attempt
to take her from you, are many, whom in duteous courtesy I will describe unto
you: First, the Powlters will assail you with a terrible battry of rotten
Eg-shot, to surrender the innocent Goose, that they may murder, embowell, pull,
pluck, and prostitute her to the sale of who gives most. Secondly, the
Vpholsters will come upon you with a fresh Alarm for her feathers, to stuff
the empty paunches of their Bolsters, Pillowes, and hungry Bed-tikes. Thirdly,
the Crokes in squadrons, armed with Dripping-pannes and Spits in stead of
Spears, before they will loose their Fees, (and the luking of their fingers to
boot) will fight hotly for the Goose till all smoke again. Fourthly, the
Apothecaries (rather then they will want the sweetness of the pinguidity or
fecundious fat of the Gooses auxungia (vulgarly called grease) they will so
pelt you with pills in stead of pellets, that they will make all stink again.
Fifthly, the Kitchin-mayde will throw scalding water at you, but she will have
one of her wings to sweep down Cobwebs, and dispossess Spiders of the
habitations they have built out of their own bowels. Sixthly, the Fletchers,
and Archers, swear they will pinke your skin sull of Ilot-holes, but they
will have her pynions to make them fly swifter dead then the Goose could
living. Seauenthly, the Poets for her Quils will call another penny-lesse
threed-bare Parliament, and ordain Satiricall Statutes, and Tragical Acts
against you, and with their scattered imaginations they will scale the skies as
high as sullen Saturnes Altitude, and rake into the lowest profundity of
Barrathrum, forraging through the earth, air and seas; but they will
stigmatize, cauterize, Epigramatize, and Annagramatize you, till you make a
surrender. Eighthly, the Lawyers will firke and firret you, tossing you betwixt
hard fortune and ill luck, that you will be almost mad, or be in great danger
to have very little wit left. Ninthly, the Scriueners, public Notaries, or
notorious Publicans, will not only join with the Lawyers and the Poets
against you: but they will never procure you any money when you need, without
excessive brokage, great eredit, or good security. Tenthly, Shopkeepers (if
you hold the Gooses Quils from them) have sworn that they will ever keep you
cut of their books. And lastly, Schoole-boyes will throw whole voleyes of
stones at you, where ever they see you, if you allow them not Pens, though it
be but to scrible or make Jews letters.

Thus having laid open to your Herculean view, the labors and dangers that
you are like to suffer in protecting the Goose, Now I think it fit (under
correction) to closevp my Dedication with some dutiful counsel, that though
your enemies are mighty and many, and that they do prevail against you, and
with their multitude take from you both the flesh and feathers of the Goose,
(which indeed belongs not to you, nor do I dedicate them to you) yet here is
your true honor, and that which makes all men admire you, that her better
part, her genious, her intellectual understanding, her capacity; and reverend
gravity, her wisdom, and her very spirit; neither man, devil or Dragon, is
able to bereave you of, as long as you have a sword to defend it. I have
dedicated a Book of a Beggar at this time to Archy, but most noble Sir, only
to you my Goose, so leaving you. Not doubting of your acceptance, and
protection: I wish you such increase of honor as is suitable to your Heroic
endeavors, and inimitable wisdom.

He that truly neither wonders or admires at your worthiness, John Tailor.


TAILORS GOOSE.
When restless Phoebus* seemed himself to rest
His flaming Carre, descending to the West,
And Hesperus obscured her twinkling light:
Then in a sable mantle, (Madame Night)
Took of the world the sole command, and keep
Charming the eyes of Mortals sound a sleep:
She sent dull Morpheus forth, and Somnus both,
(The Leaden Potentates of Sleep and Sloth)
Who unto every one good Rest imparts
Save Lovers, guilty minds, and careful hearts.
The stealing hours, creep'd on with sleeping pace,
When masqued Midnight showed her Ebon face;
When Hagges and Furies, Witches, Fairies, Elues,
Ghosts, Sprites and Goblins do disport themselves:
When fond imaginary dreams do reign
In formeleste forms, in man's molested brain:
On such a time, I sleeping in my bed,
An vnaccustom'd dream came in my head,
Me thought as near unto a Rivers side,
Within a pleasant Grove I did abide,
That all the feathered birds that swims or flies,
Or lives betwixt the breeding earth and skies,
One at the least of every several sort,
Did for their recreation there resort.
There was such strange variety of notes
Such warbling, and such whistling from their throats:
The Base, the Tenor, Trebble, and the Mean,
All acting various Actions in one Scene:
The sober Goose (not thinking ought amiss)
Amongst the rest did (harshly) keake and hiss:
At which the Peacocke, and the pyde-coate Iay,
Said, take the foolish gaggling Goose away.
The Goose (though angry) with a modest look,
Seemed as she gently this affront would brook.
When all the Fowls in general out did break,
Commanding her she should not dare to speak.
Away the melancholy Goose returned,
And in a bank of Reed she sat and mourned,
Complaining against the hateful multitude,
And justly taxing with Ingratitude
The Race of all mortality; and then
Is none (quoth she) suruiuing amongst men,
That will my true worth search and understand,
And in my quarrel take a Pen in hand,
And in a stately high Heroic style,
My Predecessors noble Acts compile,
From age to age descending unto me,
That my succeeding Issue all may see
The admirable deeds that I have done,
And run that worthy course that I have run.
O impious age when there is no defense
For Virtue and for hated Innocence:
When Flatt'rers, Fools, and Fiddlers are rewarded,
When I must live vnpittied unregarded.
Me thought these last words ended with a keake
Of such great force, as if her heart would break;
At which I starting wakned from my dream,
And made the Gooses wrong, my Muses theme;
I'arose, put on my clothes, sat down, and than
I took my Pen in hand, and thus began.
From dark Obliuions den I here let loose
The Imprisoned honor of the famous Goose:
In her creation and original,
And after in the law Leuiticall,
And at all times before and since the Flood,
A Goose has justly gained the name of good.
To value her with any other Bird,
Comparisons are weak and mere absurd:
First for her flesh, she is man's daily fare;
She Is good, she is cheap, she is plenty, and she is rare:
Bake her, or roast her, use her as you will,
And Cook her as she should be, A good Goose.
she is good still:
But as great sums are made with little driblets,
So put the Hares head against the Gooses giblets;
And men may piece a dinner up (perhaps)
Which otherwise would rise with hungry chaps:
For the old Proverb, I must here apply,
Good meat men may pick from a Gooses eye.
She is good fresh, but better two days salted,
For then she will try if Ale or Beer be Malted;
Her grease is excellent (probatum est)
For such as numnesse in their joints molest:
For the Sciatica, the Crampe, or Gowte
It either cures or eases, out of doubt.
Mixed with Stauesacre, and Argentum viue,
It will not leave a man a Lowse alive.
Her lungs and liver into powder dride,
And fasting in an Asses milk applide,
Is an experienced Cordial for the Spleen,
As oftentimes it has approved been.
Her brains, with Salt and Pepper, if you blend
And eat, they will the understanding mend.
Her Gall, if one be but with drink oppressed,
Or meat, or fruit, and cannot well digest:
But swallow't down, and take the 'tother Cup,
And presently 'twill fetch the rest all up.
And thus a Goose, for medicine and for food,
I have Annatomiz'd exceeding good.
As for her qualities, whilst she does live,
She does example and instruction give:
Her modesty and affability
Shows she is descended from Gentility,
For if they be a hundred in a troop,
To a Barn door in courtesy thei'le stoop.
How neat and comely they themselves will pick,
That no one feather out of order stick:
How gravely they from place to place will waggle,
And how (like Gossips) freely they will gaggle,
That sure I think, the fashion of their prate,
Our wives at Gossippings do imitate.
In Books which I never read.
Pliny and in Gesner I do find,
That Geese are of strange sundry sorts and kind.
In Scotland there are Geese which grow on Trees,
(Which much from humane reason disagrees)
Bred by the Air and Suns all-quickning fire
That never was Egg, not e're had Dam or Sire.
Then there is a Soleand Goose, which they so call,
Because the female has but one in all,
Sole is as much to say, as be alone,
And never Soleand Goose did hatch but one.
Or else the name of them may well proceed
From the Dams soote-sole, These Soland Geese do breed in a little Island in
Scotland 2. mile within the Sea, called the Basse, between 25. and 30. miles
beyond Barwick, where they are in such abundance that the Lord (or owner) of
the Ila^d does yearly receive for these Geese 200. li. sterling.
whence they all do breed,
Which in her Clawe she holds until it hatch
The Gander fetches food, the Goose does watch.
The Winchester Goose.
THen there is a Goose that breeds at Winchester,
And of all Geese, my mind is least to her:
For three or four weeks after she is Roast,
She keeps her heat more hotter then a tossed.
She Is seldom got or hatched with honesty,
From Fornication and Adultery,
From reaking Lust, foul Incest, beastly Rape,
She has her birth, her breeding, and her shape.
Besides Whoremongers, Panders, Bawdes and Pimpes,
Whores, Harlots, Curtezans, and such base Impes,
Luxurious, leacherous Goats, that hunt in Flocks,
To catch the Glangore, Grinkums, or the Pockes.
Thus is she got with pleasure, bred with pain,
And scarce ere comes where honest men remain.
This Goose is worst of all, yet is most dear,
And may be had (or heard of) any where.
A Pander is the Cater, to the Feast,
A Bawd the Kitchen Clerk, to see her dressed.
A Whore the Cook, that in a pockey heat,
Can dress a dish fit for the Devil to eat.
The hot whore-hunter for the Goose does serve,
The whilst the Surgeon, and Physician carue.
The Apothecary gives attendance still,
For why the sauce lies only in his Bill.
There has a Turkey at Newmarket bin,
Which to this Goose was somewhat near a kin:
And some report, that both these Fowls have seen
Their like; that is but a pair of sheeres between.
And one of them (to set them truly forth)
Costs more the dressing then they both are worth.
This Goose is no way to be tolerated,
But of good men to be dispisde and hated,
For one of these, if it be let alone,
Will eat the owner to the very bone,
Moreover, it from Nature is contrary,
And from all other Creatures quite does vary:
For of all breeding things that I could hear,
The Males do still beget, and Females bear.
But this has ever a Dam masculine
Engendered by a Father Feminine.
Quite kim kam, wiw waw, differing from all other,
The Sire's a Female, and a Male the Mother.
But cease my Muse soil not thy purer strain,
With such contagious mud, rowze rowze again
From this polluted puddle, and once more,
Take the same Theme in hand thou had before.
The Taylers Goose.
But yet a little mirth does make me stay:
A Tailors Goose comes wadling in my way*
A thing I cannot give the Epithet
Of Male or Female, or Hermophrodite.
Of Vulcans brood it is, whose Dam and Sire,
Was windy bellows, smoke, and flaming Fire.
By Nature it should much delight to lie,
For in a Forge it had Nativity:
Yet it with lying does no hurt commit,
Stealing is more adicted unto it;
And yet to Steel it is so near a kin,
That to be true it does opinion win.
It Is mettle to the hard back, I am sure,
And it is a dish will ten men's lives endure.
Be it of Age a hundred winters long,
It is as tender as 'twas when 'twas young.
A Cook from it can get but slender fees,
It has no Giblets, like to other Geese.
It neither breeds nor feeds, yet does this good,
It does help others to get clothes and food.
And of all Geese she is tamest, she will not roame,
This Goose a man may always have at home*
It Is diet only for an Estrich tooth,
It cannot cog, yet very much does smooth.
It puts down all the Fowls that ere man saw,
It Is often Roasted, yet it is ever Raw,
It is a bird that any Slut may dress,
It knows no Wars, yet every day does Press.
And to conclude it is a mess of meat,
Which who so can digest it, let him eat.
The praise of the Gray Goose wing.
THe Winchester and Taylers Goose I see,
Are both too heavy, and too hot for me:
I will return the honor to Emblaze,
Of the Gray Goose that on the Green does graze.
To speak of wandering Wild-geese in this place,
Were (like a Goose) to run the wildgoose Chase:
The Egiptians did observe their wonted guise,
How in the Sky they flew triangle wise,
Which with one Corner forward, is their drift,
Thus figured to cut the Air more swift.
For me the wilde-Goose is too high a game,
My mind is only to the Goose that is tame,
I in her Fleshes praise have wrote before,
But yet her Feathers does deserve much more.
They are of far more estimate and price
Then th'Estrich, or the bird of Paradise,
The Raven, the Crow, the Daw in mourning dight,
The prating Pie attyr'd in black and white,
The Buzzard, Redshanke, Kite, Owl, Gull and Rooke,
The fabled Phoenix that breeds where (go look,)
The Pheasant, Partridge, Turtle, Plouer, Pidgeon,
The Woodcock, Woodquist, Woodpecker, and Widgeon,
The Iay, the Snipe, the Teale, the Cock, the Hen,
The Chogh, the Lark, the Lapwing, and the Wren,
The Falkon, the Gerfaulkon, Hobby, Marlin,
The Sparrowhauke, the Goshauke, Tassell, Starlin,
The Haggard, Keistrell, Lanneret, Cormorant,
The Caperkelly, and the Termagant,
The Bunting, Heathcocke, Crane and Pelican,
The Turkey, Mallard, Ducke, the Storke, the Swan,
The Pewet, Parrot, and the Popingay,
The Eagle, and the Cassawaraway,
The Sheldrake, Bittour, Blackbird, Nightingale,
The Cuckoo that is always in one tale,
The Sparrow of the hedge, or of the house,
The Ringdoue, Redbrest, and the Tittimouse,
The Bulfinch, Goldfinch, Ringtaile, Wagtaile, and
The Hearne that lives by water and by land:
The Swallow, Martin, Lennet, and the Thrush,
The Mauis that sings sweetly in the bush;
The Morecoote, the Kingfisher, and the Quail;
The Peacock, with his proud vainglorious tail.
These sorts of Birds that I have named before,
If they thrice redoubled three times more.
And let men value them but as they are,
They cannot with the Goose (for worth) compare.
Many of these do feed on Carrion still,
And still are Carrion, ever being ill,
Neither in flesh or feathers they afford
To do man service at his bed or board.
And some of them yield Plumes, and ornaments
for Ladies, and for Knightly Tournaments:
But let these toys be weighed but just and right,
And thei'le be found as vain as they are light.
Others there are, as Parrots, Stares, Pyes, Dawes,
Are mightily accounted of, because
They can speak perfect none-sence, prate and chatter,
Feeding the ear: these fowls make fools the farter.
Then there are others great, and small in sise,
But great all for the greatness of their price,
Most pleasantly their flesh men do devour,
The sauce lies in the reckoning, sharp and sour.
Some are to sing continually in Cages,
And get but bread and water for their wages.
And others, with great pains men do procure
With cost of Manning, Diet, Hood, Bells, Lure;
The pleasure's little, and the gain is small,
A Goose for profit does surpass them all.
When with her flesh man's stomach she has fed,
She gives him ease and comfort in his bed:
She yields no whim-whams wavering on his crest,
But she relieues him with repose and rest.
And though the world be hard, she lays him soft,
She bears the burden, and he lies aloft:
Let him be drunk, or weary, sick, or lame,
She Is semper idem, always one the same.
Thus to supply our wants, and serve our needs,
Good meat and lodging from a Goose proceeds.
Besides she loves not far abroad to gad,
But at all times she is easy to be had;
As if (to satisfy man's hungry gut,)
She waited still that he her throat should cut.
Men need not be at charge for Hawks and Dogs,
And ride, and run over hedge, ditch, mires, and bogs:
She Is quickly caught, and drestwell, eats as pleasant
As (far fetched dear bought) Partridge or a Pheasant.
Throughout the world the Trump of Fame loud rings,
Temblaze the glory of the Gooses wings:
The Roman Eagle never had spread so far,
But that the gray Goose was the Conqueror.
Sesostris King of Egypt with her feather,
Rained storms and showers of Arrows, like foul weather,
And overcame the Jews, th'Affirians,
Th'Arabians, Scithians, Germans, Thracians.
The Huns, the Goths, the Vandals, and the Galls,
With Arrows made great Rome their several thralls:
The Philistines were mighty Bow-men all,
With which they got the conquest of King Saull.
Cyrus with thousands of his Persians
With Shafts were slain by the Messagetans,
Turks, Tartars, Troyans, and the Parthians,
Danes, Saxons, Sweuians, and Pollonians;
Yea, all the Nations the whole world around,
The gray-Goose-wing has honored and renound.
But why should I roame far and wide aloof,
When our own Kingdom yields sufficient proof,
But search the Chronicles, it is most plain,
That the Goose wing brave Conquests did obtain.
Remember valiant Edwards name (the third)
How with the wing of this deserving Bird,
When to small purpose served his Shield or Lance:
At Cressie he ore-top'd the power of France.
And after that, remember but again
That Thunderbolt of war, that Mars of men,
The black Prince Edward, his victorious son,
How he at Poyctures a brave battle won,
Where the French King and many Pieres were taken,
Their Nobles, and their Gentles most part slain,
And thirty thousand of their Commons more*
Lay in the field all weltring in their gore.
Henry the fifth (that memorable King)
All France did unto his subjection bring,
When forty thousand of the French men lay
At Agincourt, slain in that bloody fray.
And though true valor did that conquest win,
But for the Gooses wing it had not bin.
In these things, and much more then I can say,
The Gooses feather bore the prize away.
If I should write all in particular,
What this rare feather has atchieu'd in war,
Into a sea of matter I should run,
And so begin a work will never be done.
And thus from time to time it has appeared,
How the gray Goose has bravely domineered:
With swiftly cutting through the empty sky,
Triumphantly transporting victory
From land to land, offending and defending
The Conquest on the Arrows still depending.
Our English Yeomen, in the days of old,
Their names and fames have worthily extold,
Witness that Leash, that stout admired three,
Brave Adam Bell, Clim Clough, Will Clowdeslee.
I could capitulate, and write upon
Our English Robin Hood, and little John,
How with this feather they have wone renown,
That evermore their memories shall crown.
And e're the Devil these damned Gunnes devised,
Or hellish powder here was exercised,
With the Goose wing we did more honor get,
More nobly gained, then Gunnes could ever get.
And how has Vice our worthy land infected,
Since Archery has been too much neglected? Something in praise of the
exercise of shooting.

The time that men in shooting spent before,
Is now (perhaps) perverted to a Whore,
Or bowling, swearing, drink, or damned Dice,
Is now most Gentleman-like exercise.
But for these few that in those days remain,
Who are adicted to this shooting vein:
Let men but note their worthy disposition,
And we shall see they are of best condition,
Free honest spirits, such as men may trust,
In all their actions, constant, true and just.
It is a thing I have observed long,
An Archers mind is clear from doing For the most part this is general.
wrong:
It is a note worthy respect, and mark,
An Archer is no base defamed Sharke,
Not given to pride, to covetousness, or
To swearing, which all good men do abhor,
Nor does he exercise, or take delight,
To cheat, to cogge, to lie, and to backbite,
But with most loving friendly conversation,
He practices this manly recreation.
There was a Statute in the eighth Henry's reign, K. Henry 8. did with the
consent of the 3. estates in the Parliament, enact a Statute, for shooting:
which Statute is still of force, though not in use.

Which Statute yet does in full force remain,
And as it stands in force, so does my Muse
Wish that it were observed, and kept in use.
Within these few years (I to mind do call)
The Yeomen of the Guard were Archers all,
A hundred at a time I often have seen,
With Bows and Arrows ride before the Queen, Q. Elizabeth.

Their Bows in hand, their Quiuers on their shoulders,
Was a most stately show to the beholders:
And herein, if men rightly do observe,
The Arrows did for two good uses serve:
First, for a show of great magnificence,
And trusty weapons for to guard their Prince.
Prince Charles (our hope of Britains happiness)
Does his affection oftentimes express:
With many Noble men of worthy race,
Do with their best performance, shooting grace: The Highland men or Redshanks
in Scotland, are exceeding good Archers. 2. Sam 1. 18.

And long may these superior Worthies live,
Example to the inferior sort to give,
That though this exercise be much declined,
May some supporters and defenders find.
King Saul's brave son (true hearted Jonathan)
David's true friend, a Prince, a valiant man,
Did in this noble quality excel*
As the true story of his life does tell.
King David made a Law, and did command,
That shooting should be taught within this land.
Thus from true Histories we plainly see,
That shooting is of great antiquity:
And that the glory of the Gooses wings
Has been advanced by Princes, Lords and Kings,
And that yet Princes, Pieres and Potentates,
And best of all conditions and estates,
Do give to Archery the praise and prise
Of the best, manly, honest exercise.
The praise of the Gooses Quill.
ANd thus for Shooters having showed my skill,
I Will now say somewhat for the Gooses Quill.
Great Mars his Train of Millitary men
I leave, and turn the Shaft into a Pen:
The Gooses feathers acts sundry parts,
And is an Instrument both of Arms and Arts.
Many divine and heavenly mysteries,
And many memorable Histories
Had with blind Ignorance been ouer-growne,
And (were it not for the Pen) had never been known.
The Muses might in Pernass hill have staide,
Their fames had never been through the world displaide,
But that the Gooses Quill with full consent,
Was found to be the fittest Instrument
To be their Nuntius, and to disperse
Their glory through the spacious Universe.
Grammar (that of all Science is the ground)
Without it, in forgetfulness were drowned,
And Rethorick (the sweet rule of eloquence)
Through the Goose Quill distills it is Quintessence:
Logic with difinitions (I am sure)
Were nothing, or else very much obscure:
Astronomy would lie, or lie forgot
And scarce remembered, or regarded not;
Arithmetic would err exceedingly,
Forgetting to divide and multiply:
Geometry would lose the Altitude,
The crassie Longitude and Latitude:
And Music in poor case would be o're-throwne,
But that the Goose Quill pricks the Lessons down.
Thus all the liberal Sciences are still
In general beholding to the Quill.
Embassages to far remoted Princes,
Bonds, Obligations, Bills and Evidences,
Letters 'twixt foe and foe, or friend and friend,
To gratulate, instruct, or reprehend,
Assurances, where faith and troath is scant,
To make the faithless to keep covenant;
The Potent weapon of the reverend Law,
That can give life or death, save, hang or draw,
That with a royal, or a noble dash,
Can from the Kings Exchequer fetch the Cash.
To most Shopkeepers it a reckoning makes,
What Is got or lost, what he lays out, or takes:
Without the Goose a Scriuener were a fool,
Her Quill is all his only working tool:
And sure a Goose is of a wondrous nature,
Contrary to each other living creature,
Things that in water, earth, or air, has growth,
And feed and live, bite only with the mouth:
But the Goose with sophisticated skill,
Does bite most dangerously with her quill,
Yet is she free from prodigality,
And most of all bites partiality:
She often with biting makes a Knight a detter,
And rankle to a beggar, A shrewd biting beast
little better.
She often has bit a Gallant from his land
With quick conueyance, and by slight of hand
Sometimes her biting is as durable
As is a Gangren, most incureable,
And many that into her fangs do fall,
Do take the Counters for their Hospital;
A Forger, or a Villain that forsweares,
Or a false Witness, she bites off their ears:
On me her power she many times has shown,
And made me pay more debts then were mine own.
Thus does her Quill bite more then does her chaps,
To teach fools to beware of after-claps.
They say in Latin that a Gooses name
Is ANSER, which made in an Annagram,
Is SNARE, Hereupon began the Proverb, of good Goose bite not.
in English, which does plain declare,
That she to fools and knaves will be a snare.
Indeed she often has been a snare to me,
My self was in the fault, alas not she.
The memorable honor of the Goose for saving the Capital at Rome.
But now to show her never dying name,
And how at Rome she wan deserving fame:
When barbarous Brennus, cruel King of Galls,
Had wasted Italy, and razed Romes walls:
When deuastation did depopulate,
With sword and furious fire the Roman state.
When many a throat was tyrannously cut,
And all the City to the sack was put:
When many of the Citizens did fly
Into the Capital to live and dye,
Whereas the Image of great Jupiter,
(The rip rap, thwick thwack thumping thunderer)
Was of refined gold, adorned, adored,
Where helpless fools, poor helpless help implored.
The Capital a goodly building was,
And did (for strength) by Art and Nature pass,
So that the people that were there within,
Thought it impregnable, that none could win:
But slender watch upon the walls they kept,
And (thinking all secure) secure they slept,
They thought Jove's Statue, and his Temple there,
Was a sure guard, that foes they need not fear:
But Jove these dangers did not understand,
Or else he had some other work in hand:
Perhaps poor Io like a Cow in shape,
He like a Bull then wronged with beastly rape,
Or like a Swan for Leada, he thought fit,
In that fowls form, that foul fault to commit:
Perchance that time fair Danae to entrap,
He rained bewitching gold into her lap;
He then (perhaps) did to Alcmena go,
And made a Cuckold of Amphitrio,
Or else to Semele that time he came,
And burnt his burning love with lightnings flame,
Perhaps with Hele he the Ram did play,
Or with Europa toy'd the time away,
Mnemosine he could not let alone,
Or he to Hebe at that time was gone,
It may be to Antiopa he went,
Or to Astery, for his more content:
Or it may be he lay within his bed,
And played, and fooled with wanton Ganimede:
But whither Jupiter Jupiter either could not or would not help to defend the
Capital, or or else like many brave whoremaisters, he had more mind of his
leacherie then his honor: so that had it not bin for the Goose, his golden
Image had bin taken prisoner by the enemy.
that time was got,
He to defend the Capitol was not,
Unless he were transformed wondrous strange,
And to a Gooses shape his Godhead change:
For all the Guard were sleeping at that time,
When as the armed Galls the walls did clime.
Then when the Watch did to destruction sleep,
The careful Goose true sentinel did keep,
She spide the foe, and keak'd out an Alarm,
At which the Sleepers waked, and cried, Arm Arm:
Then they their Enemies in fury slew,
Which down the battlements in heaps they threw.
And thus a Goose the honor did obtain,
To save the Romans, which had else been slain:
And to preserve the famous Capital,
And set Rome free from the insulting Gall.
The Roman General that time, as then
Was manly Manlius, a stout man of men.
The Senate gratefully did raise anon,
An Altar with a golden Goose thereon,
And for the Gooses service had been such,
They alowd almes-Oates from the common Hutch,
For old and sick decayed Geese to feed,
In memory of that brave Gooses deed.
Why should the Eagle be the Bird of Jove,
When as the Goose deserves so much love?
It Is plain and evident the Goose was cause,
That all Rome escaped from speedy Martial laws.
Yet did the Romans (like ungrateful Nags)
Advance an Eagles portait in their Flags, Cornelius Agrippa, in his vanity of
Sciences. page 137. Cap. 81.

When as Cornelius Agrippa says,
The Goose deserved it more by many ways.
Now having done the Capitol Goose right,
I Will try some other ways to breed delight.
Goostoft in Lincolnshire.
IN Lincolnshire an ancient Town does stand,
Called Goostoft, that has neither fallow'd Land,
Or Woods, or any fertile pasture Ground,
But is with watery Fens incompast round.
The people there have neither Horse or Cow,
Nor Sheep, nor Ox, or Ass, nor Pig, or Sow:
Nor Cream, Curds, Whig, Whay, Buttermilke or Cheese,
Nor any other living thing but Geese.
The Parson of the Parish takes great pains,
And tyth Geese only, are his labors gains:
If any Charges there must be defrayed,
Or Impositions on the Town is laid,
As Subsidies, or Fifteenes for the King,
Or to mend Bridges, Churches any thing.
Then those that have of Geese the greatest store,
Must to these Taxes pay so much the more.
Nor can a man be raisde to Dignity,
But as his Geese increase and multiply.
And as men's Geese wax more and more, and breed,
From Office unto office they proceed.
A man that has but with twelve Geese began,
In time has come to be a Tythingman:
And with great Credit past that Office thorough
(His Geese increasing) he has bin Headborough.
Then (as his Flock in number are accounted)
Unto a Constable, he has bin mounted.
And so from place to place he does aspire,
And as his Geese grow more he is raised higher.
It Is only Geese there that do men prefer,
And it is a Rule, no Goose, no Officer.
At Hunnibourne, a Town in Warwickshire,
What Gogmagog Gargantua Geese are there,
For take a Goose that from that place has bin,
That Is lean, and nough but feathers, bones and skin,
And bring her thither, and with little cost
She Will be as fat as any Bawd, almost.
For take four Geese, and with a like expense,
Feed one there, and the others two miles thence,
And she that feeds at Hunnibourne shall be
More worth in weight and price, then the other three.
She shall with Flesh unable be to go,
I cannot yield the Reason, but it is so A woman's Reason*
.
Goose Fair at Stratford Bow, the Thursday after Whitsontide.
AT Bow the Thursday after Penticost,
There is a Fair of Green Geese, ready Roast,
Whereas a Goose is very dogcheape there, The Description of Greene-goose Fair

The Sauce is only somewhat sharp and dear,
There (e're they scarce have feathers on their back)
By hundreds and by heaps they go to wrack,
There is such Baking, rosting, broyling, boiling,
Such swearing, drabbing, dancing, dicing toyling,
Such shifting, sharking, Cheating, smoking, stinking,
Such Gormondizing, Cramming, Guzling, Drinking:
As if the world did run on wheels away,
Or all the Devils in hell kept Holiday.
And as Herbs, Flowers and Weeds together grow,
So people are that day at Stratford Bow.
There sits a Cheater with a simple Gull,
And there an Honest woman, there a Trull,
Yonder a Fiddler daubed with grease and Ale,
And there an Ass telling an Idle tale.
There Is one a Rosting, yonder is one a Stewing,
And yon's one drinks until he fall a spewing:
There Is a kind Cuckold with his Wife does wander,
To exercise the office of a Pander,
His Pimship with his Punke despite the horn,
Eat Gosling giblets in a fort of Corn.
There is ran tan Tom Tinker and his Tib,
And there is a Iugler with his fingers glib.
There throngs a Cutpurse, with his working tool
And there is a gallant Coxcombe, there is a Fool.
There Is four or five together by the ears,
And tumble in the Dirt like Dogs and Bears.
One staggering there has got the Drunken yox,
And there is one swaggering's fast within the Stocks.
Thus with these Galleymaufry humors still,
These Linsey wolsey posteres, Good and Ill,
These mingle mangle, motly toys they spend
The time, till night does make them homeward wend.
Then they return as wise as Geese away,
For whom so many Geese were slain that day.
They brought both wit and money with them thither,
But with the Geese it is all devoured together.
And if they were but taught as well as fed,
More Coin were saved, and man a wiser head.
Thus (as my Muse is able) I have told
How that a Gooses use is manifold.
How many several sorts of Geese there are,
Some wild, some tame, some to near, some to far*
How from her Flesh and entrails, it is plain,
Good food and Physic daily we obtain: Food, Physic, Lodging, Arts,
Arms, and good Society, all from a Goose.

How freely she does play the true vpholster,
And fill with Feathers, pillowes, bed and bolster.
And how in many an honorable War,
The Gray Goose wing has bin the vanquisher.
The necessary uses of her Quill,
How to the good it is good, Ill to the ill.
And Shooting here (according to my love)
To be a noble Exercise I prove.
And how the Goose Romes Capitol did faue,
(As says the Story) I described have.
And now let men examine well and try
If any Bird in water, earth or Sky,
Or all in general together are,
With the good Goose (forworth) to make Compare.
Many absurdly, Idle, foolish, base,
Will call a man a Goose in foul disgrace:
When if men rightly understood the same,
A man is honored with a Gooses name.
For though the Eagle be of Birds the King,
Yet it is a Ravenous, greedy hurtful thing.
And he that with that title me should call,
I had as leiue he called me Thief withal.
She while she lives does yield relief to many,
And alive or dead, beholding not to any.
She has maintained ten thousand men,
With food, and Physic, Lodging, Shafts and Pen,
And lastly (not to charge them any ways)
Her own Quill here, writes her own worthy praise.
Because a Goose is Common, and not Dear,
She amongst fools is small esteemed here.
So Blackberryes, that grow on every bryer,
Because they are plenty few men do desire:
Spanish Potatoes are accounted dainty,
And English Persneps are course meat though plenty.
But if those Berryes or those Roots were scant,
They would be thought as rare, through little want,
That we should eat them, and a price allow
As much as Strawberryes, and Potatoes now.
Why Bread is common, having still our fill
We think not on, because we have it still:
But if we want Bread then we do remember,
We want the Groundworke of our belly timber.
The Light is common, which few think upon,
Till Night does put her blindfold mufler on,
And all attyr'd in mourning black as pitch,
Then men misselight, and tumble in the Ditch.
So should we want a Gooses Flesh and Feather,
The quantity of five years but together:
We then should all confess with one consent,
How that a Goose were superexcellent.
Many good blessings we too much forget,
Cause they are near and Cheap, not far to fet.
Me thinks I hear some Cuckoo, or some Iay,
Some Daw, some Pie, some Gull, or Buzzard say,
That I have given the Goose her worthy style,
But have forgot the Gander all this while.
I Will give them Answer (though they merit none)
I do Include both sexes under one,
It Is knowue to every perfect understander,
A Goose is much superior to a Gander.
For though a man, a Mare or Gelding stride,
We briefly say, he does on Horseback ride:
And though a Gelding be the beast that bare
We called a Horse, that is neither Horse or Mare.
So Ganders under name of Geese do go,
The Gooses worthynes deserves it so.
Once I remember, Riding on my way
In Barkshire, near unto a Town called Bray,
I on my Journey as I past along,
Rode by a Goose, a Gander, and their young.
(I neither minding them nor yet their Crew)
The Gander in my face with fury flew,
Who in his fierce encounter was more hot,
Then if he had bin Spanish Don Quixot.
But sure himself so bravely he did bear,
Because his Love and Lady Goose was there:
And 'twas a spur his Chiualry unto,
To have his sweet heart see what he did do,
My Horse he started, to the ground I went,
Dismounted in that (Ganderous) tournament.
I should say Dangerous, but sure I am
That GANDEROVS is a DANGEROUS Anagram.
The Gander was mine enemy, what tho,
I Will honor worthy Valor in my foe.
He Tilted bravely, and in Liewe of it
The Gooses Quill, the Ganders praise has writ.
Thus for the Goose I having done my best,
My toyled Muse retires unto her Rest:
I Will shut my Inckhorne, and put up my Pen,
So take my Goose amongst you Gentlemen.
FINIS.

