Temporis Filia Veritas. A merry devise called the Troublsome travel of Time,
and the dangerous delivery of her Daughter Truth.

Equity is gone aside, and Righteousness stands far of, the Truth is fallen
down in the streets, and the thing that is plain, may not be showed: The
Truth is laid in prison, and he that refrayneth himself from evil, must be
spoiled. Esa. 59. a.

Therefore thus says the Truth, those mine Enemies (which would not that I
shoud Raygne over them) bring them hither, and slay them before my face. Luc.
19. c.

Geve no sentence before thou have heard the cause, but first let men tell out
there Tales. Eccles. 11.

If a man love me he will keep my sayings, (says Christ) and my Father will
love him, yea, we will come unto him and dwell with him. Joan. 14. b.

Interlocutours, BENNION the Button-maker: and BALTHESAR the Barber.

Anno 1589.

BENION. WEll overtaken (neighbor BALTHAZAR) where have you bin this long
time? for I have not seen you in your shop these 3. or 4. days.


BALTHAZAR. I have bin washing, shauing, and triming; in the Country.


Ben. Then I trust you can tell us of some good news? for men say all news
are to be heard of at a Smyths Forge, a Barbers shopp, or at a mill.


Balt. Verily I can hear of little or no good news in the Contry to be had,
wherefore I pray you neighbor Benion, tell me in sadness, what do you hear?


Ben. Suerly (neighbor) I can tell you of very good news, whereat (I trust to
God) we all shall rejoice, and this is the matter: I came no sooner into the
City, and had gotten a Chapman for my buttons, (but in coming by a Smiths
Forge) I heard say: there was a worthy Parliament appointed and a gracious day
set, wherein (every man, conserning his religion) should be permitted freely to
speak without any let, or interruption: and also heard without any
perceality, And then whosoever has the best on his side, in the Truth; it was
concluded that his religion should take place, he preferred of the King: and
the Truth set up above all.


Balt. But (tell me) is that possible?


Ben. Yea truly, but what would you say if I were there present, and heard
all the same parley, even from the beginning to the end.


Balt. Suerly I would say then that this Realm should be most happy of all
nations under the Son, yea and moreover that the Lord would bless and
prosper such magistrates in all things that they took in hand: Now therefore I
pray thee tell me more of this matter, but wast thou in deed from the beginning
to the end of this parley?


Ben. I heard all that was there spoken and concluded amongst them.


Balt. What were the company there assembled, can thou tell?


Ben. Yea: For there was none that sat in Judgment, unless they were of great
dignity, honor, or worship: Videlicet.

1. The King which executes true judgment without percealety: and he sat
uppermost in his royal seat:

2. The Counsel (which are good aduouching always thereunto) and they sat
next unto him.

3. The Lords Spiritual (who are zealous for the trueths cause) and were placed
next them.

4. The Lords Temperall who are ready to defend the Truth) and they were placed
next them.

5. And lastly the commons; who are ready to live therein: (every one of these
aforesaid, so much as they may attain grace thereto of the Lord) and they sat
in the nethermost room.


Balt. This was doubtless a joyful sight To^ behold: the Lord bless them
all, and give them of his grace to have all men speak whithout perseality: to
judge uprightly: and also to establish those things that may redounde to Gods
glory Amen: but what speaker was appointed to the same parliament?


Ben. Such a one as in like manner feared the Lord, and is desyerous that all
things might be done for the best according to Gods will.


Balt. Then (first of all) I pray thee let me hear what the speaker said: and
what matters were their chiefly handled by him conserning the effect o^
principal causes of their assembly for it should seem (by this thy saying
that there were matters handled of great importance?


Ben These or the like so far as my memory would serve me were the words of
the speaker.

SPEAKER.
For as much as I at this time (although unmeet thereunto) am appointed to
speak before the Kings highness, as also before you all Right, high Honorable,
an^ worshipful here assembled, in matters appertayning to a commonwealth,
sowell for soul as body. Therefore must I first of all in most humble wise
crave perdon of his Majesty, and also of all you Honorable, and worshipful in
this audience that if any thing chance (for the want of skill audacitie, or
wisdom) to escape my mouth, it may be taken to the best according to my good
meaning. Thus it is o most renoumed Prince, and you Honorable Lords Spiritual
and temperall, together whith you worshipful, and commons of this present
Parliament here assembled and also be it known unto you all: That the chief and
principal thing wherethrough all Nations, Kingdoms, Princes, People, and
commonwelths are vphoulden, kept, and preserved from harms and destruction is
God, which God therefore, ought (of all Nations, Kingdoms, and People) most
chiefly and above all other things to be feared, loved, obeyed, honored and
served. And seeing that your calling is chiefly to that end: also that all your
cares and Industryes is now graciously bent thereunto, in so much as this
honorable assembly is come together there about: I beseech you therefore (in
the name of the same living God) to hear me For as-much as it is not unknown
unto the Kings highness, as also to the honorable, and worshipful here
assembled, that although the scriptures have bin (to the same effect aforsayd:
most plentifully read unto the People these many years according to the Kings
appointment and good intention yet not-withstandinge we see that the lives of
the People (for the most part) are become worse and worse, (sowell among the
learned, as among the layhood) and the cause is for that the Preachers
themselves, do not desyer to become such as they would frame their hearers to
be* And not that alone but also by thAt means) and for the want of obedience;
there are spr^ng up, sundry sect; and sorts of religions here among us at this
day so thatt every one (being notwithstanding contrary minded one toward an
other) will have his own for the best yea although they must all needs grant,
that there is but one only truth [it would be to long to resyte how many have
bin deceived and are yet, through superstition and Idolatry, likewise how many
(in these) have taken to their selves A freedom and liberty of life in
comitting wickednes] out of their misco^rstuing of holy scriptures. And more
over how many have bin expulced the universities for their dissobedience*
forsaken heir benefice and exhibition gathered together their conventikles,
Pr^ached false and sedicious doctrine, run here and there ^here ^hey might be
heard, an^^atinge the People against obedience, due to the goo^, manly, (...).
2.
and po^e^ke laws and ordinances of their Prin^es and governors: A^ ^ik^^ise
wh^t ^^^s^^g up of tumults: wh^t murdering and ^on^um^ng one of an other is
come to ^^^e daily (in other lands) therabout: videlicet about religion and
the True^h, it would be, I say, too long to re^vie for s^eedy reformation
whereof, and that the like inconvenience in al^ (which God forbid) come not to
pass^ with in this Land, but rather may in time (through your good providen^e
and Noble wisdoms in the Lord) before seen and peruented. May it therefore
please the Kings Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temperall together with the
worshipful and commons here assemb^ed, to let proclamation go forth into all
coasts of the Land, and that it be permitted and granted, of every Religion
one (at the least) to come into the pe^lament house, there to speak freely his
mind conserning ye Truth, and the effect or ground of his religion. And when
eueryone has said his mind, and your princely wisdom advisedly and deeply)
considered thereof, as which of them all shall go nearest the Truth: So may you
then do your best in ye Lord that the Truth only may take place for as-much
as God (who alone is worthy of all honor) is a spirit, and will none otherwise
be honored save in spirit and Truth. And thus, to thend all envy, contencion
and disobedience, might once seace amongst us (that now boast so much of
^hristianity) and that all godly love obedience, unity, peace and concord, in
the Truth, might come in place, whereby God might rightly be honored, Jesus
Christ might faithfully be believed, the King and you all that bear authority;
dutifully obayed* the People that are under you become blessed: and the commonwealth always flourish to your everlasting fame:] I make an end. Referring all
thing here spoken to the Lord, and your wisdoms to consider of, and so I
committ you to God and to his good tuicion, who is well able to endow you with
his heavenly wisdom or holy spirit for to do in all, his will Amen. And so he
ended.


Balt. This was no doubt a marvelous good way for to bring all to one
uniformity of Religion, as also for to find out the Truth: [if so be the King
and majestrates, when they have hard all spe^ke; ca^ discern the Truth and
true religion from all others] which thing they may easily do when as the Lord
shall see it good, for as much as the Truth is plain, and seeks no corners,
and they also Gods Ministers appointed to that end, but yet thou have not told
me what was said to this matter, nor what ensued thereupon.


Ben. Then said the King this man's consell is very good: let therefore
proclamation go forth and let them come before us [to wit] of every Religion
one: and then shall every one say his mind freely conserning his Religion, and
conserning the Truth: And (for my part after I have heard every one speak, and
advisedly co^sydered thereof according unto the Truth of the Scriptures, I will
by the grace of God give true Judgment without perceality because that God
(whose minister I am) might rightly be honored in Spirit and in Truth.

Then spoke the Counsel, all at once, and said, God save thee (o King) for
ever: For ^e likewise are good advouching thereunto, and therefore wish (with
all our haertes) that it might euen-so come to pass.

After that spoke the Lords Spiritual and said, God bless the King in his
determination, for we also are zealous for the Trueths cause, and therefore
would gladly that it were manifested.

And then spoke the Lords Temperall and said, God preserve the King, and grant
him good suckcesse in all that he takes in hand: for we are ready, to the
uttermost of our power, to defend the Truth, were it once made known.

Then last of all spoke the commons and said, God prosper the King in his good
purpose, for we stand also ready to live therein, might we once know
certaynlie which were the Truth.


Balt The God of all Truth bless them with his everlasting blessing: make
manifest his Truth unto them, and then geve them and us all grace to live in
the same. But what followed I pray you tell me.


Ben. Upon this the proclamation went forth into all quarters, and thereupon
came into the Parliament house 4. men diversely Apareled: also of sundry minds
or Religions, Videlict A Catholic [comonly called a Papist.] A Protestant,
[c^monly called a Liber^in.] A Puritan [comonly called a Rebel.] And a plain
Plowm^n whose religion was unknown, [comonly called an Heretic.]


Balt Now of Fellowship let me heat more of this matter, for there is like
alwaeys to i^sue some good sport, where so many Players do resort.


Ben After such time as they all (kneeling upon their knees) had craved perdon,
and lisence every man to speak freely his mind, without any interruption, for
the proof of his Religion, and the manifesting of the Truth, and that free
liberty was granted them. Then was it concluded also, that the Catholic
should speak first, next after him the Protestant, 3. the Puritan, and last
of all the plain Plowman.


Balt. Suerly this was excellent well, now then (as thou love me) let me
hear what good stuff the Catholic could bring for his old rusty Religion.


Ben Then the Catholic after his humble submission made to the K. and to the
Honorable and worshipful there assembled) he said.

Most Noble Prince, and you all most Honorable and worshipful audience: In as
much as you have most graciously granted me to speak for my Religion and the
Truth, so I most humbly beseech you all to hear me: Be it known unto you all
that the Catholic general Religion, had her first foundation, as it is
thought, near upon 1^. hundred years past, and has remained in force [and no
other general Religion, among the Christians with in Europe, known or
frequented] until about 80. years past, that one Matin Luther (some^ymes a
ffryer) took upon him, upon a displeasure taken aganst ye Pope, to write
dispitefully there against: and this our Religion was instituted acc^rding to
the holy scriptures by a general council of holy Fathers: For after such time
as they, out of a great zeal toward the Truth beheeld the increase of all
Iniquity amongst the People, in so much as Christ and his doctrine was almost
forgotten: yea and more over fearing least, in process of time, the Natiuety,
Death, and Passion of Christ, together with his doctrine, life and miracles,
as also the doctrine, life and miracles of the Prophets, Apostles, Euangilests,
and holy fathers, should likewise be altogether forgotten, especially n^w in
these last lisencious days, vvherin they understood, in the Spirit, that all
iniquity would abound, like as it is come to pass at this day: Then they
thought it good to call a general Council at the which counsel they
ordained, not without the holy Ghost, the festival days throughout the year,
like as they yet remain in ye Church at this day) some in commemoration of
Christ's Natiuety, some of his circumsicion: some of his Death: some of his
Resurrection, and some of his Assention into heaven, etc. Likewise they
ordained other Festival days in commemoration of the deaths and martirdomes
of holy saints, videlicet. Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists Martirs, and
confessors, etc. They have also ordained holy sacraments and ceremonies,
together with an uniformity of God-service, to be used in the Church only to
houlde in memory before the People (in their right significations) those holy
things which the gospel of Jesus Christ requires in the Deed) of all men: and
yet notwithstanding were then (almost of all People) forgotten: Moreover they
ordained and established, that the Gospells and Epistles, etc. should be (as a
New Testament) coadioyned to the old: and read daily in the Churches for holy
scripture, and so to be taken for ever: they also ordained and built many
Churches for holy use, Fastings, prayers, Almesdeeds, confession of sins,
with contricion and satisfaction to be made for the same, with many other good
things more which were too long to resyte: And now (right noble and
honorable audience) in what Fear, obedience, and reasonablenes the People
were houlden (even until this our last Age) under Catholic Religion, and her
sacraments and cerem^nyes, I need not much to speak of, but will rather leave
it to the Iudgmen^ and consideration of all those that be wise and of ancient
years among you, and knew their conversation: And therefore (to be short) I
hold my Catholic Religion to be of most antiquety, ordained by ye consent of
the holy Ghost, and grounded upon the Truth And thus I conclude, who so
houldeth upon the Catholiq Religion (In his Right Institucion he houldeth upon
the True Religion: And who so houldeth upon the Catholic Church houldeth
upon the true Church: And thus he ended.


Balt. Now surely (neighbor Benion) if this were his talk, and if this be
true which he has said: then this is the Catholic Religion (as I think)
laid on such a ground or foundation, bringing also with it such antiquety; that
I know not presently to the contrary, but he is like to bear a ray the best
game, yet would I gladly hear how the protestant could answer this matter.


Ben. Then the Protestant (after humble submission etc.) said: O most excellent
Prince together with all you Honorable and worshipful, let me freely speak
before you: It is not unknown unto you all at this present that this Popish
Religion [although I grant she might happily have had some reasonable ground
in her first Institution] has b^n (since that time) diversely and sundry wis^,
altered and patched, in so much as sundry Popes have added sundry seremonyes,
Videlicet. some holy water, some holy bread, some other have set up (as books
fot the unlearned to look upon certain Images, and some have granted that
oblations should be made unto them, some other that sight should be set before
them other some have allowed (for the unlearned) beads for to number their
prayers withal: And some have likewise (for monyes cause) granted out perdon
for sins, some in one manner some in an other: yea and their service* wherein
they meant to serve God, was in a language that the People understood not [what
should I speaka of Masses, Trentalts, and Dirges to be sung for the Dead
Hallowing of Palms, of Crosses, Churches and Churchyeards, likewise of
Christning and hallowing of Bells etc.] And this superstition continued (like
as he said therein right well) till Mr. Doctor Martin Luther, that famous
Clarke, who has disclosed all their superstition, Idolatry, Couitousnes, and
whordome etc. which time we God be thancked) have had for the most part this
our protestant Religion, vvherin the Gospel or Truth is sincearely Preached:
all superstition, Idolatry and abomination altogether put down, and god
service in the mother tongue, so that now every Carter and Cobbler can whistle
and sing psalms, and every man can reason and talk of the scriptures in every
place freely where they come: yea moreover every Bishop and Minister may have
his wife etc. And now (right honorable Audience.) what fruits and freedom this
our liberty of the gospel has brought with it, since we began to preach, I
need not to resyte: but will refer that and all that I have said, unto your
wisdoms to consider of: Thus I conclude [Right Noble and vvorshipfull] that my
Religion (set out and allowed by the King and his Counsel) has his ground
and foundation from Christ and his Apostles, and therefore of greater
antiquity then the Catholic Religion by an hundred years and more* and is
therefore the best, and the gospel which we preach (say I:) that is the
Truth. And therewith he made an end.


Balt Lord have mercy on us, what shall we say that are unlearned, in this
troublesome time of so many Religions and Opinions? or whom shall we believe?
For now (if this were his tale, and this be true which he has said:
doubtless he has so firmly and groundly said his plat form (that in mine
opinion) no man living can remove it* or go beyond him. And therefore I see
not to the contrary, but that he must needs go away with the victory,
otherwise I am much deceived: yet I pray thee let me hear what the other
could say?


Ben. Then stood up the Puritan, and (after submission done) he said, most high
and renoumed Prince together with you all that be Honorable and worshipful,
like as ye have heard these 2. men tell their tales concerning the ground of
their Religions, and the Truth: even so I beseech you hear me: It is well
known unto you all that I have bin, even for the Lord my God his cause,
zealous this 30 years and more, in so much as I have bin expulced the
Vniversityes: deprived of my livings: run here and there, even for my
Conscience cause, etc and therefore have matter so well against thee O King and
thy Laws, as also against them both and their Religions that have here spoken:
As f^r thee thou set up superstitious laws which are not correspondent to
Gods laws, and therefore I will not obey them: And now to answer the
Catholic and his Antichristian Religion; I need not, for as much as the
Protestant has sufficiently answered him. But as conserning the Protestant and
his Religion (which he so extolleth above all other) I am right well able to
reprove him, almost in an 100. places which he has altogether taken out of
the Romish sincke, or stinking Popish puddle: like as you may easily smell
from wence they came; if you do but a little hold up your heads and behold
the situation of your Churches, how they yet stand East and West your steeples
also full of Bells your Quiers and Alters, together with Coaps, vestments and
cornerd caps: Tippets, Rotchets, Sirplusses, processions singings, organs etc.
[what should I speak of their superstitious names, Videlicet. my Lord of
Canterburyes grace, my Lord Yorcks grace my Lord Bishop, Mr. Deane, Mr.
Subdeane, Mr. Archdeacon, Mr. Commosary: Dr. such-a-on: Mr. Sovereign, Mr.
Parson, Mr. Vicker, etc. and (to be short) vvat soever the protestant uses
(so well in his service, as in his ministration of Sacraments, and Ceremonies)
they are all counterfeyted out of Papistry: and are therefore no better to be
termed then rotten Rags of the Romish Church. For that cause (right Honorable
audience) I beseech you in the bowels of Jesus Christ, that you vvoulde once
overthrow and clean root out for ever all such Antichristan memorials
aforesaid of that Babilonish hoore, so that nothing remain upon the Earth in
any remembrance of her: And then may you reform Religion (as we shall Instruct
you) after the manner of the best reformed Churches in all Europe. And until
that time we will neither obey you nor your laws, and Institutions: [for in
such case say we; it is better to obey God then men.] And thus I conclude Right
Noble and worshipful: forasmuch as our zeyle stands more toward God and his
laws then toward the laws and ordinances of men; Therefore we (who are
above, in our ministration, men or Angels do hold our Religion to be the
best, because we seek the reformation of the Church in all things that are
amiss: and moreover we have our foundation from Ezechia, Iosia, Judas
Machabeus, etc. and for that cause of greater antiquity then them both And our
ministration (which we use and teach among our Colleges in our exercises, and
nightly conventikles) is the Truth. And here I end: comitting all things
herein touched, to your wisdoms to consider of. And so departed.


Balt. O Lord! what shall I say? or upon what Religion shall I now stay me,
whereby I might now find out the Truth? then has he so unfolded it in such
sort, also laid his ground so sure that all men which hears him (as I
conjecture) must needs think that he (which is so zealous for Gods cause:
fears not to reprove the King to his face: seeks the reformation of the
Church: and also brings with him the greatest antiquity) is like to
prevail, and also win the best game. Yet would I feign hear what the 4^.
could say to all these profound and groundly reasons. but alas, what should a
plain Plowman say among such high learned Prelates? Notwithstanding of
fellowship let me hear what the foolish fellow could say, or what answer he
could make that I might laugh a little.


Ben. Last of all stood up this plain Plowman [whose Religion was unknown:
although he had bin so long time* by all these 3 aforsayd suspected and bruted
for an Heretique] And (falling down upon his knees) he said: O most puissant
Prince together with all your Honorable and worshipful in this present
Parliament assembled. Are you desyerous (in this contentious and troublesome
time, wherein all Iniquity does abound and wherein also so many Religions,
sects, and opinions, are out of flesh and blood, entered or taken on among the
Children of men) to understand the best Religion, as also the Truth, and what
thing the Truth is, to thend that God might be honored therein? Then I
beseech you of your clemency hear me speak.

You have heard of these 3. (one being contrary to an other:) speak the very
best that in them was for the aduouching of their Religion and the Truth: And
now as touching the first [namely the Catholike] he has out of a good zeal
brought in, so nere as he could conjecture, the first ground of the Catholic
Religion, and the long continuance thereof: declaring also that the sacraments,
Joan. 14 a. b c 1. Joan. 3.4. a.b.c.
signs, ceremonies, and services of the same Church, were ordained only to
keep in memory things passed etc. [euen like as the services and sacraments
ceremonial of ye old law were in ye beginning ordained to keep in memory
things that the^ were to come etc. Notwithstanding the good life whereupon all
sacraments, signs, ceremonies, or shadows figurative in the Catholic church
did point upon, and which also the holy scripture do require, and whereout
the dutiful obedience toward God and Governors does proceed, (was of this
Catholic now in these last days) altogether forsaken, rejected and
forgotten: (even like as it went also in times before with the disobedient and
unbelieving jews,) and so has he forsaken the Truth, vvhereupon he says his
Religion was grounded: And therefore the Lord has now no pleasure in this
Apostated Catholic nor yet in his absurd Religion, whereupon it is now come to
pass that the 2. (namely this Protestant) beholding the many-maner abuses and
disorderlynesse of life which has bin now in these latter days, found in this
Cotholique and his Religion: and for the which no doubt he has received
great chastisment of the Lord, and his Ministers has declared forth (to his
great reproach) many of the same abuses before you all very rightly as they
were, and moreover (out of a great zeal) has commended his own Religion for
the best which thou (O king) have now appointed and set up among us: Videlicet,
the declaring forth of the gospel and holy scriptures among us. The service
used and read in ye mother tongue, to thend all might hear and understand
what is said, and then follow the same which is good: as likewise the
sacraments and ceremonies ministered in the same tongue, to thend all subjects
might be holden under godly and manly obedience, and hue according to the
scriptures in one uniformity of Religion according to the kings good meaning
therein. Psalm. 1. and. 15.24. Math. 25. d. ^
All these [say I] were it accomplished in the deed and in the Truth is a very
good Religion, also were very well said of him as out of a singular good
zeal.

Notwithstanding the while this Protestant (which can readily reprove an
other by the scripture) walks forth still in all malitiousnes of life
(although he boaste never so much of Light, Life, Liberty, Psa. 15. Joan. 12.
g. Romans 8. b. Math. 7. d. 1. Cor. 6. b. Collo. 3. a. 2. Tim. 3. a.
and Freedom by Christ) he remains notwithstanding in darkness and is the
servant of sin, or bondslaue of Satan: (what should I say of the
couitousnes, that worshipping of Images, Envy, Pride, Extortion, Symony,
Vsery, Whoredom together with all manner of Iniquity that now does abound in
this Protestant, so well among the Clergy as the Layetie.

Thus may we see that he likewise in rejecting the good life, Joan. 14 a. 12.
g. Gal. 2. d. Math. 5. 2. Joan. 4. b.
(which all the holy scriptures, do requier and witness: and were upon also all
the holy scriptures as also al sacraments, ceremonies, figures or shadows that
good are) do signify, figure forth, and point upon, has rejected the Truth.
And now behold I pray you what fruits have insued since this liberty of life
has bin taken on? For the longer this Protestant has preached unto the
people, the worse the lives of the same people are become: Joan. 8 a 13 a ^.
Esd. 16 ^ Math. 3.4.
experience has taught us: and no marvel, for he [in forsaking the good life]
has there withal forsaken the Truth: and for that cause only, the Lord
has no pleasure in this licencious Protestant, nor yet in his absurd Religion.

And as touching the 3. [namely the Puritan] for as much as he will not live
as a subject under all good laws and ordinances of Kings and Magistrates, Rom
13. 1. Pet. 2. 2. Pet. 2. Tit. 3 a. 2. Tim. 3. a. b. 1. Joan. 3. a. 4. b. Joan.
14. 1. Joan. 4. b.
and therefore has (out of envious persumption, and rebellious heart) forsaken
the obedience and godly life, due to God, and governors [notwithstanding it is
required of us all in holy scripture] so has he in like manner there with all
forsaken the Truth [it were too much to name how many honest hearted and
true faithful subjects, to their Prince have bin, by this Puritan, belyed
slaundered, persecuted, and imprisoned, for that they held them to obedience
and the good life, like as they were taught: Mala 3.4. Psa. 50. ^. Joan. 13. ^.
and would never consent to his rebellyous doctrine, nor come to his nightly
conuentikles:] and therefore (although he, out of his great zeal, sought the
reformation of the Church, and yet he himself not reformed unto obedience and
godliness of life) God has no more pleasure in this disobedient Puritan nor yet
in his absurd Religion. 4. Esd. 16. c.
Thus you may see Right Noble, 1. Cor. 3. d. Joan. 8. d. Mar. 8. d. Joan. 15.
a. Joan. 14. a. Joan. 8. d. Luc. 8. b. Mar. 4. b. Matthew. 13. b. Esa 6. c. Joan.
12. f. g.
Honorable and worshipful, how every one, in his way, seeks religiously
after the Truth, if he might any way find it. And again you may see also
that the Truth is nevertheless, hid from them all. And why? for (if we
consider of the Scriptures) unto all those that walk without the true life,
and godly obedience (which is required in gods holy word) all things chance
in similitudes, parables, and closed books: because that men should not see
with their earthly eyes or minds, nor hear with their earthly ears or
thoughts, nor yet comprehend in their dark stony hearts, the secret works of
the Holy Spirit of Christ.

Joan. 14. b.c. 1. Pet. 2. Romans 13. a. 2. T^^. 3. a
For that cause all People that are zealous for Religion, and for the Trueths
sake, [be they what they be, or dwell they where they shall: so they love God,
and desyer to live under obedience to the King and his good laws* or, at the
leastwise, lives quietly and harmelesly among the People, bearing a true and
faithful heart to the Prince of the Land] are to be borne withal in their
ignorant zeal for Conscience sake, in as much as all good gifts proceed from
God, yea and moreover* Math. 13.
for that the time of harvest is at hand, in the which the Lord will send out
his Angels, to gather together the good wheat into his barnes and to burn the
weeds with unquenchable fire. Joan. 1. a. b. 14. a. Joan. 5. c. 6. e. f. Joan.
17. 2. Joan. 4. b.
For doubtless the Truth it self (wherabout men so strive) is an other manner of
thing then flesh and blood was ever able to find out, for it is the lovely
life, or being of God, or of his holy word, which life is the thing (as I said
before) that all sacrifices, signs, or shadows in the whole law, as also the
Sacraments and ceremonies of the new Testament ordained in the Christian
Catholic Church together with all that the holy scriptures, Joan. 3. a b. c.
d. etc. Joan. 16. d. e. f 17. c. ^1. c. Genesis 2. b. 3. a. Prove. 3. c. Apo. 2. b.
^ Cor. 15. c. Genesis 3. 2 Cor. 1. d. 3. a. b. c. Deuteronomy. 1^ a. b 1. Tit. 3. a. 1.
Pet 2. ^. Cor. 13. Matthew. 7. b. Joan. 13. d. 14 15. Gal. 2. d. e. Joan ^.^.
Genesis 2 b. ^. a. d (...) 1^ a. b c.
do ^oynt upon: signify and requier at all our Hands, I say, once again, the
lovely life of God, or of his holy word is the very Truth [namely Jesus
Christ] It is also the Tree of life that was planted in the beginning in the
midst of the Paradise, or Lust-garden of the Lord [which tree of life, even
like as the first, through the disobedience in the knowledge, has lost the
same: even so the second man through the obedience in the life, wins the
same agayne] it is very true: And therefore to live in Obedience to God and his
holy word, also in obedience to the King, and his good laws and ordinances,
and to love mine neighbor as mine own self, also to deal lovingly and
uprightly with all men like as I would be dealt with all. is the effect of my
religion, grounded upon the Truth, which obedience had his original from
Adam, Abell, Seth, Noah, Abraham, etc and is also confirmed by Christ and his
Apostles, etc. and therefore shall continue for ever.

Joan. 13 c. 14 a 15. a. b. c 1. Cor. 13. 2. Joan. 3. a.b. c. 4, a.b.
Thus I conclude that my Religion, in the good life, goes beyond them all, so
far as the Heavens from the Earth, or the Light from Darkness, also that all
manner of Religious people (boast they never so much of their Religions,
Preachings, Services, Sacraments Seremonyes, Freedoms by Christ, or elswhat)
that are found without this obedience to God and Governors, Joan 8. a. (...)
8 d. ^oan. 14 a b. 1. Cor. 13. Ephesians 4 a.b. c. 6. b c. Joan (...) Colo. 1. c. 2.
b.
and without this goodlyfe aforesaid (or at the least have not any earnest
inclination thereto, so much as they may in the Lord) the Religion, their God
service, and all else that they boast upon, is nothing worth in the Lords sight:
and the cause is they have forsaken the Truth, which is the flower and beauty
of all good Religions ye^, and is all in all.

Now have I showed you [Right High and Honorable:] the inconfutable ground of
my Religion [which God of his gracious goodness has made known unto me, 1 Cor.
13. 2. c. 13. Joan 13. c. 14. a. b.
and for the which I have bin long suspected] together with the infallible
Truth, vvherout all right obedience unto God and Governors proseedeth and
vvherout also the right repentance appears, Gal 2. d. 3. a. b d Joan. 14 a b.
Gal. ^. ^. Colo 1 c. Joan. 8. d. 15. a.
and the true and living faith is always working by love, so well toward God
and Christ, also toward my neighbor: and whereunto I mean [by the grace of
God] to endeavor my self night and day* by prayer and supplication, to thend I
might once attain to the same Truth, without the which there is, for me,
no Salvation.

Therefore consider hereof advisedly, I most humbly beseech you) so many as
have rejected obedience, they have rejected the true Religion: Ephesians 4. d. Joan.
^^. c Joan. 14 a.b. Hab. 1. a. Gal. 2. d.
And so many as have rejected the holy and godly life, have rejected and
forsaken the Truth, [namely Jesus Christ:] Therefore am I boulde to say (as
under correction and submission) that this ^y Religion, and this Truth,
whereof I have spoken, being once fast grounded in our minds and spirits, is
the principal good wherein the Lord has set his whole delight, and vvherout
he vvil only be honored and served: Also vverunto all Christian and Catholic
Religions, Kings, Princes, Magistrates and people ought of right, for evermore
to give place, as one flock under one shepherd: For it is an Everlasting
life, in the which, and through which, we (being united soul and spirit with
God the Father shall rise again (in this same flesh,) and live with Christ
our Savior, in joys everlastingly: It is very True.

And now as I have here acknowledged (right High and Honorable, etc before you
all) one only true Christian Catholic Religion: so let no man from hence forth
charge me to be of no Religion, neither yet to be of all Religions, but rather
such a one as would good unto all, [to vvit] that all religions, in most loving
wise* might be gathered together (now in these last days) according to the
promises, through the gospel of Jesus Christ, unto this only true Religion
aforesaid, of faithful obedience to God and Governors, and Truth toward all
men. For then whosoever is a right Catholic Protestant or Puritan, and
lives in the said obedience and Truth, I can in no wise disalowe of him, in
so much as I my self endeavor me daily (by the grace of God) to accomplish or
attain unto, with them, that most holy religion of obedience and Truth:
because there might be no more, in thend, save one God, one Christ and
savior, one Holy Ghost, one Faith, one Baptism, one obedience, one Truth,
one Flock, one shepherd, even such is my mind, and so would I be conceived
of, and no other wise,

Great is the King, great and mighty is his power* yea great is ye knowle^dge
that the sons of men have found out upon the Earth. Also great and many manner
are the Religions, services, and ceremonies which men have devised to serve the
Lord w^^h^ll: yet notwithstanding much greater is obedien^e in the Truth [That
lovely life of ^od, or of h^s holy vvord] for it is, as I said before Christ
jesus, the way, wherein (...) ought to wa^ke, the Truth, vvherin all men ought
to be^^e^e: And the life, wherein all m^n ough^ to live. Therefore great is O^e
lun^^ in the Truth, and of worthynes part goes beyond them all. And so after
reverence done he ended.


Balt. O most m^rcyfull God: what shall become of all such Igno^ant s^ules as I
am? which are ready to run, now after this Religion, then after that? [alas
neighbor alas*] i^ ^eemeth no^ by these his speeches (which doubtless are very
true, Joan. 8 d Mar. 1. b. 6. b. Joan. 15. a.b.
that all People on Earth which have chosen to them selves a Religion wherein
they supposed to have obtained their freedom, Justification, and salvation by
Christ* and yet never attained to true repentance, much less to Obedien^e, in
the godly life (which he call^th the Truth, or Christ himself) are clean set
beside the sa^dle. For I now perceive right well, the O^edience in the good
life is a most precious treasure proseeding from God, and wherewith God, the
King, and a man's neighbor is served Moreover, by the life men may know the
works of God from the works of men always: As for example, let us look upon
all the Creatures that the Lord has made (yea wh^tsoeuer thing the eye of man
can behold) and see, it has or it has had, a kind of life in it. Likewise,
let us look upon all the works of man seem they never so bewtifully and lo
they have no life in them: So that although one man may fashion an other man*
^. Cor. 13. Joan. 14 a.b. Joan. 3. a. Gala. 6. c.
through smoth words and deep knowledges to an outward show of holiness yet is
he no better [before such time as God works, through his grace, and the
ministration of his holy word, the new birth, or true godly life in the man]
then a dead Image, or painted Sepulcher which the man had made with his own
hands, And now therefore it comes red^ly to my remembrance how it stands
written in the Scriptures to the same effect: 2. Cor. 13. Romans 8. Gala 4. Ephesians
3 2. Cor. 4. c.
Videlicet, Except Christ be in you [sayth Paul to the Christian Congregations]
you are cast awa^es, also if a man have not the spirit of God, the same is none
of his, and moreover I travel in birth till Christ be fashioned in you again
a new (with a number of such like savings in scriptuer more which were too
long to resite* Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2. Joan. 14.15. a. b. c. d.
So that now I perceive his mind right well which is this, he that obayeth the
word, obayeth the King, and leads a godly life, and he that leads a godly
life has Christ dw^lling in him. And herefore Christ says: without me ye can
do nothing, Joan 8 d. Gal. 2. d. 1. Cor. 13. Romans 8. a. Ephesians. 5. a. ^. Joan 4.
b. c.
for I am the W^y. the Truth, and the Life: So then when any good work is
wrought, it is Christ only that does the good-work^ that are acceptable with
God, and not the man: and therefore where he so extolleth the Truth or good
life above all he means Jesus Christ which ought to dwell in the man, whose
spirit, at that time, will lead the man into all right obedience and Truth,
which life doubtless I see now, being well considered of, is the principal
good, whereunto all People (with their high knowledges, Religions, Services,
Sacraments, and Ceremonies, ought for evermore, to geve place. And now
therefore (in mine opinion) if any man shall henceforth resist or deny this
same plain Plo^mans Religion, or he T^ueth aforesaid, which is now so
manyfestly expressed and a^proue^ by the holy scriptures, (his conscience
b^^^^^g him record that it is even so then doubtless he is ey^h^r an ^gnorant
and supersticious Papist, who (being digressed from the right ground of the
Cath lique Religion) esteems more of the Sacraments, Misteryes Ceremonies or
shadows, then of the very thing which hey signify, or have hidden in them: Or
else he is a lisencious Protestant (vho contrary to the word ^f God, as also
contra^y to the good meaning of the King) abuse^h that goo^ Rel^g^on which his
Majeste has appointed to be frequented amongst us and lives after his own
filthy lusts and desyers, Either also he is a disobedient and rebellious
Puritan, who being altogether inclyned to Envy, Pride, and presumption shameth
not to resist the good laws of the King, 1. Pet. 2.
and in steed the^^^f to set up his own Imaginations, meaning thereby to
alluer ^he hearts ^f the People from their dutiful obedience to God and
governors, whos^ Conscience shall in the end testify against him (and if he
repent not in time) to his own condemnation. But now I would gladly know, how
all things were taken in the end: And whose Religion was best accepted of the
King, and the rest there assembled.


Ben. After great advise and deliberation taken among them all: The King said,
this Plowman has, last of all, manifested unto us (in plain speech) the right
Rel gion and the very Truth (which may not in any wise be denied) Therefore
great is Obedience and great is ye Truth: Mar. 12. a.
I see well now that it was not for naught that it stands written: I am the
God of braham, 1. Cor. 13. 1. Pet. 2. Romans 13. Iaco. 2. c. d.
the God of Isack and the God of Jacob [a God of the Living but not of the
Dead] Let Proclamation the efore go forth into all parts of the Land: and let
it also be made known from us the King (to all men's preservation) that he
which will become a Christyan, and would be saved by Jesus Christ, must (after
true repentance) shewforth the fruits of faith, in his obedience and Christian
life.

Then last of all sp^ke the Counsel, the Lords Spiritual and Temperall
together with the Commons (all at o^ce) and said l^^de honor and thanksgeuing
be to that God for ever more which h^^h gev^n us such a w^se King to reign
over us, that can so righ^ly discern the best Religion and the Truth from all
others and thereupon g^u^n true Judgment without parceal^ty, And now if we
should not henceforth avouch publish for ^h, maintain, and allow^, as also
live according to the same (so farre-forth as God shall give us gr^^e then
were we very much to blame because that we see that Obedience is the thing
that the Lord has commanded all men to live in: yea and more, it is whereby
we his Ministers Rule and govern under him in peace and quietness: Also that
Jesus Christ (once dwelling in us) is the Truth or good life it self, so fast
coupled unto Faith, as is the Son unto brightness, or fire unto heat: and
therefore brings with it everlasting life and felicity. And so the Parliament
brake up, and I came away.


GOD SAVE THE KING Amen.
Behold even through such a great Trouble and travel aforesaid, will gentle
Lady Time, bring forth her most bewtifull Daughter Truth: now in these last
dangerous days, to the glory of God, the preservation of Princes, and to an
everlasting peace among all People.
Amen. Amen.
TO THE READER.
After such time as I had considered the many-maner of Religions, Sects, and
Opinions, (gentle Reader) that are now risen up out of men's high knowledge and
goodthinking* and whereout (for the most part) proseedeth also all contention,
Envy, Disobedience, Rebellion, Lying, Ba^kbyting, Slaundering, Imprisoning,
Killing, and Murdering, etc, together with all liberty of life in committing
wickedness, which is now frequented (without fear or shame) among the children
of men. I took this devise in hand for six special causes.

The first was for that the Magistrates (who are Gods ministers on earth) might
the better remember their office and calling, and how that they are appointed
of the Lord to suppress evil, Disobedience, Falsehood, and wickedness: and to
maintain Gods obedience, Truth, or godlynes of life.

The second was for that all simple and ignorant people, might see how easily
men may be seduced [now in these dangerous dayes] through fair speeches, and
outward shows of holiness: yet nevertheless I am not against the right
Cath^lique, the true Protestant, or the perfect Praecisian, so long as they
hold them to Obedience in the holy life aforesaid.

The third was for that my hope stands in ye Lord, there are many good
willing hearts to the righteousness yet remaining upon the earth, 2. Cor. 5.
c.d. 6. c. Romans 8. a. c.
who once knowing the Truth, (and what everlasting felicity it brings with
it) will not (by any sinister means of the disobedient and rebellious route)
be drawn away therefrom (whether it be then by their smothe speeches, cruel
threats, fear of Persecution, Blasphemies, Tyranous handling, Imprysonments,
2. Cor. 10. a. b. c. 1. Pet. 2.
Injustice, or most cruel death that they can devise (but will rather endeavor
them still to live under Obedience to God and governors and so exercise them
daily in the godly life (that right Religion, fast grounded on the vnconfutable
Truth) wherein the Lord had always, still has, and for evermore shall have
his pleasure and delight.

The fourth cause was this, 2. Cor. 5. b.
for that all men [if it were possible] might see or understand that the good
life is not so slight a thing as many men make account of. For the Lord
looks not so much upon the outward oblations, Sacrifices, Services, or
Ceremonies, which the man offers or uses for to serve him withal, as he
does upon the single heart of the man, Psalm. 51. d. Ioh. 4. c. Mar. 12. c.
in his Obedience and good life [for the Lord will be honored only (of his)
in spirit and Trueth] therefore the Oblations, Services and Ceremonies, are
respected of the Lord for the good hearts cause and nor the evil hearted
respected for the Oblations, Services, or ceremonies cause: Example by Cain and
Abell, Gen 4. a.
they both offered sacrifice to the Lord: The one (for the bloudynes of his
heart) his Oblation was refused. And the other (for the singlenes of his heart)
his Oblation was accepted. etc.

The fifth cause was for to answer and satisfy all such as praesently stand
(at the gaze as it were afarre-of) wayghting what will come of this my
Religion, or else doubting of the goodness and contynuance thereof. etc.

2. Cor. 4. c.
And the sixth or last cause is this, for that I (who have bin these many years
most Injuriously slaundered and defamed: most cruelly persecuted, and
Imprisoned, as also most dispitefully spoiled and Impouerished to my utter
discredit and undoing: Like as some that be honorable (if they remember it)
can partly tell) am still ready (during life) to answer boldly for my felfe:
belief, and Religion in the Truth: And therefore (for the clearing of my
self) and for the recovering of my good name [which I esteem above gold and
syluer] I am bold to dedicate this my devise to her Majesty, and to make
known (there through) my Religion openly: And moreover I mean hereafter [by
Gods grace] and under correction and submission of my Prince, to persuade all
my friends, and acquaintance, whether they be then Catholics, Protestants,
Puritans, or what other Religions soever [so much as I may in the Lorde] to
inclyne their hearts wholely to live under such obedience and godlynes of life,
as is aforesaid: Also to pray for the Queens Majesty and all the honorable of
his privy Counsel, for that they might so maintain the gospel of Jesus
Christ, whereby the Truth might get the victory in all our hearts: To the
end all might become one in Christ, And Christ one in all. AMEN.


