TAILOR on Them Isis* OR THE DESCRIPTION OF THE TWO FAmous Rivers of Them and
Isis* who being conjoined or combined together, are called Thamisis, or Thames.

With all the Flats, Shoares, Shelues, San^^, Wears, Stops,, Rivers, Brooks,
^ournes Streams, Rills, Riuolets, Streamelets, Cree^^ and whatsoever helps the
said Rivers have, from their springs, or heads, to their falls into the Ocean.

As also a discovery of the hindrances which (...)e impeach the passage of
Boats and Barges betwixt the famous University of Oxford, and City of London.

LONDON, P(...)d by John Haui(...). 163^

TO The Right Honorable Lords, THOMAS Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Earl
Marshall of England: EDWARD Lord Viscount Wimbleton: Henry Lord Viscount
Fawlkland: and Sir Thomas Edmonds, Knight, Treasurer of the Kings Household:
Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Commissioners for
the Navigations and fishing of the famous Rivers of Thames and Medway.
RIght Noble Lords, with sorrow I beheld,
That which to write my duty has compelled,
And (from my pen) the Thames flowed to the press,
From thence it ebbes to you to find redress.
My Honorable Lord of Dorchester,
He truly noted in particular,
Dame Isis wrongs, and Thames great injuries,
For they were sad perspectiues to his eyes,
And had his Lordship lived his meaning was
To make the River passable, to pass.
For then with noble care and deligence
He view'dthe helps, and the impediments,
Which aid, or hinder passage up and down,
Twixt Oxford City, and brave Winds^r town;
Yet as I sometimes rowed and sometimes st^r'd,
I viewed wh^e well, where ill the way appeard;
And here I have des^rib'd the way we went,
Commixing truth with honest merriment,
My th^ed-bare wit a mad wool gathering goes,
To show the things in verse I saw in prose;
And (Honorable Pe^res) I humbly crave,
My artless^ lines may your acceptance have,
Wis^ing each fault removed (which st^nds vnfi^)
As soon as you can read what I have writ,
Desiring God to give y^u high content
Here, and here f^er glory permanent.
Humbly devoted with his best endeuouts to all your Honorable personag^s,

JOHN TAILOR.

TO The memory of the truly Noble deceased DVDLEY CARLETON, Lord Viscount
Dorchester, principal Secretary of State to his Majesty of GREAT BRITAIN.
IF He be blessed that is of Noble blood,
And being made great, is both great and good,
Who is a Christian every way complete,
Who holds it better to be good than great,
Whose life was guided with good Conscience,
Whose end was saving faith and penitence,
These blessings Noble Dorchester were thine,
And these have made thee 'Immortall and divine.
To any Body.
I That never tasted the Castalian fount,
Or came in ken of the Thessalian Mount;
I that could never attain to wet my lips,
With Tempes liquour, or sweet Aga^pps,
Who never yet have so much favor won,
To purchase one carrowse from Helicon,
Who with good Poets dare compare no way
But one, which is in being poor as they;
And having never seen the Muses hill,
Am plentifully stored with want of skill,
Then Fount, or Mount, nor sacred trebl^ trine,
Are no assistants in this work of mine:
But ancient Isis current crystal spring
Inspires my brain, and I her praises sing,
And Tame with Isis joins his pearely streams,
Whose combination are my ampletheames;
Though (for the most part) in the tracts I tread,
Of learned Camden, Speed, and Hollinshead,
And Draytons painful Polyolbyon,
Whose fame shall live, despite oblivion,
These are the guides I follow, with pretense
T'abbreuiate and extract their Quint-essence;
Nor can it be to them disparagement,
That I come after in the ways they went,
For they of former writers followers be,
I follow them, and some may follow me;
And man to man a President is made
In Art or Science, mystery or Trade,
As they before these Rivers bounds did show,
Here I come after with my Pen and row.
TAILOR ON THEM ISIS.
Our patron Phoebus, whose sweet influence,
Does quicken all our reason, life and sense,
It Is he makes grass to grow, and Rivers sprin^
He makes both my songs, subject, and me sin^
His beams the waters do extenuate
To vapors, and those vapors eleuate
Into the middle Region, where they tumble,
And melt, and then descend and are made humble,
Moystning the face of many a spacious hill,
Where soaking deep the hollow vaults they fill,
Where into Rivers they again break out,
So nature in a circle runs about.
Large Downs do treasure up great store of rain,
Whose bowels vent it in the vales again:
No place in England could a treasure keep,
Thames to maintain, but Coteswould (queen of sheep
In Glostershire (my dearest motherearth)
From whose fair City I derive my birth,
Are Coteswould hills, and in the farthest cliffe
Of all those hills of Isis head is chief:
Scholars from Gloucester that to Oxford ride
The truth of my assertion often have tried;
On their right hand near Cubberley they pass,
Two Wells as sweet as milk, as clear as glass,
Whence Isis first does pedigree derive,
Those two are able there two mills to drive.
At Burton on the water, south from Stow Corruptly called Stow the old.

Upon the Would, great veins of waters flow
To Burford, and to Witney, and along
Till they make meadows large, and Isis strong.
The famous River Isis has her spring
Near Tetbury, and down along does bring
As handmaids) to attend her progress, Churne,
Colne, Windrush, Yenload, Leech, whose windings turn,
And Meads, and Pastures trims, bedecks, and dresses,
Like an invaluable chain of ESSES.
After relief of many a Ducke and Goose,
At Saint John's bridge they make their rendeuous,
And there like robbers crossing London way,
Bid many a barefoot Welshman wade or stay.
Close under Oxford one of Englands eyes,
Chief of the chiefest Universities,
From Banbury desirous to add knowledge
To zeal, and to be taught in Magdalen College,
The River Charwell does to Isis run,
And bears her company to Abington,
Whilst very near that town on Barkshire side,
The River Ock does into Isis glide;
These fountains and fish-breeding Riuolets,
(The Countries nurses, nourishers, and teats,)
Attend Dame Isis down to Dorchester,
Near which her lovely Tame does meet with her,
There Tame his Isis does embrace and kiss,
Both joined in one, called Tame or Tame Isis,
Isis like Salmacis becomes with Tame
Hermaphrodite in nature and in name.
Tame does derive his Spring or Pedigree
Near Mesworth in the vale of Aylsbury,
From whence he many miles with strange meanders,
To find his lovely Isis slowly wanders,
Through fertile lands a quiet course he keeps,
Till Southward under Whately bridge he creepes,
And (like a Pilgrim) travels all alone,
No Brook or River waiting him upon,
Only three namelesse Riuolets and two springs,
Which very privately their tribute brings,
Bewailing Isis absence, and his fate,
Poor Tame all heavy and disconsolate,
^nnauigable, scorned, despised, disgraced,
^auing in vain so many paces paced;
^espairing and quite desperate with these harms,
^e hurles himself unawares in Isis arms;
^or closer can the bark be to the tree,
^han their infoldings and embracings be;
^hey rise and fall together, and they are
^n want and plenty to have equal share;
^d Tame with Isis will be both one river,
^ill in the Oc^n they their names deliver.
^t Wallingford and Pangbourne, two small ri^s,
their homages to Thamisis instills.
^he more the river runs, the more it is spreading,
^ill in it is course it falls as low as Reading,
^here Kennet kindly comes with force and source,
^o aid and help Thamisis in their course.
^he head of Kennet is near Ramsbury,
^assing to Hungerford by Newbury.
^he ^iner Anborne out of Hampshire ^ies,
^o Kennet with some namelesse small supplies
^f pe^ic rills, which passing here and there,
^ho to repeat, teadious and needless were.
^o Sunning and by Bisham Thames descends
^o Marlow (called great) from whence it wends;
^hereas a little rill from Wickham town,
^o wait upon the Thames comes gliding down;
Then pleasantly the river takes free way
To Topley hills, by Maidenhead and Bray,
Till it to Windsor and to Stanes does win,
And there the river Colne comes gliding in:
Colne has its head or spring in Hartfordshire,
At Abbots Langley, or else very near,
With some small petty rils and riuolets,
By Colbrooke unto Stanes and Thames it gets,
The river Wey, with diverse namelesse springs
Near Chertsey, unto Thames their service brings.
Wey (beyond Guilford) helped with creeks and crooks,
At last at Oatlands toward Sunbury looks,
And there a little rill, (scarce worth a line)
In Middlesex does with the Thames combine.
Near Reygate town the river Mole is found,
Bearing its course, runs (Mole-like) under ground;
But rising up by Notbury again,
At Molsey it the Thames does entertain.
From Ewell town the river Brent makes haste,
Who by the Thames is lovingly embraced:
Next which is Chiswicke town, and Hammersmith,
It entertaines a rill, or little frith,
And after that below, near Wandsworth mill,
Comes in another ^rooke or namelesse rill;
Thus I the river bring; and it brings me
From their first springs to London bridge you see.
Now from the bridge below descend I must,
Till Thames it self does in the Ocean thrust,
And if my pains to good men prove a pleasure,
My gaine's beyond my merit, beyond measure,
Of Watermen, men scarce can find a Slower,
Yet hey, to Grauesend hoe and somewhat lower.
Brave London Bridge claims right pre-eminence
For strength, and Architects magnificence,
To be true Nonesuch, for no eye beheld
A bridge which it each way has paralleld.
The arches (Tame and Isis) shadie bowres,
Through which both East and West in twice twelve hours
Twice Neptune greets it flowing from the Maine,
And twice the river sends it back again,
And as the floods or ebbes increase or falls,
They through the arches murmr Madrigals,
Whilst the Eddies diverse ways does turn and trace,
Tame does with Isis dance the wild goose chase,
From this rare matchless piece of workmanship,
I with the tide of Ebb must quickly slip,
And down into the River Lea I hie,
That parts Midsaxon from East Saxony.
Which river falls from Ware to Walthamstow,
And down by Layton unto Stratford Bow,
Some call it Lea, but Camden calls it Stowre,
And near Blackwall it in the Thames does power,
Next Rodeing is (a Brook or river small)
Which Foord from Berking into Thames does fall.
From Hauering, Burntwood and from Ockingdon,
Three little Rils into the Thames do run,
They Are namelesse, or scarce worth the nomination.
And so on Essex side I end my station.
And now I Will cross into the County Kent
To note what rivers from her bound are sent,
To wait upon the mighty bigswolne Thames,
Who now is grown the Prince of Britains streams.
By Bromley glides the river Rauensburne
To Deptford down with many a wandering turn,
The river Darrent is the next and last,
Which down by Dartford into Thames is cast.
And thus from Gloucester shire near Tetbury
And Buckingham shire close by Aylsbury,
I have brought Isis and her partner Tame
With twenty seven helps losing each their name,
Who spend themselves to make the Thames grow great,
Till (below Lee) it lose both name and seat,
Through many Countries as these waters pass,
They make the Pastures fructify in grass:
Cattle grow fat, and cheese and butter Cheap,
Hey in abundance, Corn by stricke and heap,
Beasts breed, and Fish increase, fowls multiply,
It brings wood, Cole, and Timber plenteously:
It bears the lame and weak, makes fat the lean,
And keeps whole towns and countries sweet and clean;
Were not for Thames (as heavens high hand does bless it)
We neither could have fish, or fire to dress it,
The very Brewers would be at a fault,
And buy their water dearer than their malt,
And had they malt and water at desire,
What shift (a Gods name) would they make for fire?
There Is many a Seaman, many a Nauigator,
Watermen, fishers, bargemen on this water,
Themselves and families beyond compare,
In number more than hundred thousands are,
Who do their Prince and Country often serve,
And were not for this river might go sterue;
And for the good to England it has done,
Shall it to spoil and ruin be let run?
Shall p^iuate persons for their gainful use,
Ingrosse the water and the land abuse,
Shall that which God and nature gives us free,
For use and profit in community,
Be barred from men, and damb'd up as in Thames,
(A shameless avarice surpassing shames;)
I speak not of the rivers bounds below,
Whereas the tides perpetual ebb and flow,
Nor is the r^er wanting much repair,
Within the bounds of Londons honored Mayor,
Which limits all are clear from stakes and piles,
Beyond Stanes bridge (that's more than forty miles)
But I (from Oxford) down to Stanes will slide,
And tell the rivers wrongs which I espide,
Not doubting but good minds their powers will lend,
TO endeavor these abuses to amend:
Therefore I pray the Readers to dispense,
And pardon my abrupt intelligence.
From Oxford two miles Ifley distant is,
And there a new turn pike does stand amiss,
Another stands at Stanford, below that,
Weeds, shelues, and shoales all waterlesse and flat;
At Newnham lock there is placed a fishing wear,
A gra^ell hill too high, scarce water there;
At Abington the shoales are worse and worse,
That Swift ditch seems to be the better course,
Below which town near Sutton there are left
Piles that almost our Barges bottom cleft;
Then Sutton locks are great impediments,
The waters fall with such great violence,
Thence down to Cullom, stream runs quick and quick
Yet we rubbed twice a ground for want of liquor.
The Wear of Carpenter's sans fault I think,
But yet near Witnum town a tree did sink,
Whereas by fortune we our Barge did hit,
And by misfortune there a board was split;
At Clif on there are rocks, and sands, and flats,
Which made us wade, and wet like drowned rats,
^he passage bare, the water often gone,
and rocks smooth worn, do paue it like free stone.
from Clifton down to Wallingford we fleet,
Where (for annoyance) piles are placed unmeet;
from thence our Oars did down the river draw,
^ntill we came unto a mungrill Spaw,
(...) Bath, a Spring, a Fountain, or a Rill,
^ha^ issues from the bowels of a hill,
(...) hill it may be termed, or demie mountain,
from out whose entralls springs this newfound fountain,
Whose water (clear as Crystal, sweet as honey,)
Cures all diseases (except want of money,)
(...) helps the Palsy, Cramp, or Apoplexy,
^cab scurfe, or scald, or dropsy if it vex ye,
^he Plurisie, the Lethargy, Strangury,
^t cures the Cataracke, and the Stone assure ye;
^he headache, Megrim, Canker, or the Mumps,
Mange, Murrians, Meazles, Melancholy dumps,
^t is of virtue, vigor, and of force
^o drive all malladies from man or horse;
Helped of a Tertian ague I saw one,
Weak, and not worth the ground he went upon)
Who drank the water mingled with the clay,
And presently the Ague ran away;
It cures an old sore, or a bruised blow;
It made the deaf to hear, the lame to go;
One dumb came thither, and straightway disputed,
And on the trees are crutches executed;
To heal green wounds it has such Sovereign power,
It cured a broken pate in half an hour,
Which sconce was cracked on purpose to the intent,
To try the virtue of the Element.
If any man imagine I do lie,
Let him go thither, break his pate and try.
Some say cracked maidenheads are there new sodered,
I Am sure the hill with beggars is embroidered,
And all those beggars are with little cost,
With lice and scabs embroidered and embost;
And as it were the Well of Aristotle,
The water is far fetched in many a bottle,
The clay mixed with the liquour kills the Corns,
Ah could it cure some Cuckolds of their horns,
It would have patients out of every climat,
More than my patience could endure to rhyme at,
And had it but the virtue to surcease
Some clamorous tongues, and make them hold their pea^
Thousands of husbands would their wives send thither;
That they might be recovered all together.
Apothecaries I lament your lots,
Your medcines now will mould in Gallipots,
^ur drugges with barbarous names unbought will lie,
^d waste and languish in obscurity,
^ill beggar all the Quacksaluers outright,
(...) all our Mountebanks are undone quite,
(...) what is become of me? can any tell?
^od Reader help me out of this strange well;
^with my pen its praise did mean to touch,
and it (I fear) has made me write too much,
which if I have, let your constructions be,
^ame the strange working waters and not me:
^ut he that says that I do ouer-doe,
^et him go thither and he will do so to;
(...) farewell, Well, well fare thou, still excel,
^crease in operation, Well farewell.
(...) eath the fountain, next is Cleave locks fall,
^d near to that a lock men Goring call,
^ut having past the lock at Gorings there,
^t Master Coltons house we had good cheer,
^ith hearty welcome, but 'twas for his sake
that d^d this hopeful business undertake,
^et with our hearty thanks we thank them all,
that dined us like a solemn festival.
from thence to Hearts lock downward we descended,
^d next to Whitchurch lock which must be mended,
because the waters turn so swift and various,
(...) against our wills to dangerous courses carry us:
Next there is a Wear, that if it had its right,
Should be well lib'd, or else removed quite;
Below that Maple Ducham lock appears,
Where stands three faulty and untoward Wears;
Then near the bridge of Cauersham there is
One Welbecks Wear, fit to be moved I wis;
As past the lock at Cauersham we row,
We found the river very foul below,
With weeds and hills of mud and gravel choked.
That with our Oars and staves we thrust and poak'd.
Next Breaches Wear near Sunning naught does lie,
And Sunning lock the groundsill is too high,
Besides two Gin-holes that are very bad
And Sunning bridge much need of mending had;
Haules Wear does almost cross the river all,
Making the passage straight and very small,
How can that man be counted a good liver
That for his private use will stop a river?
Shiplocke, or Cottrels lock stand very near,
Not from that far is Elmes his fishing wear,
Whereas the rivers case is altered well,
For Master Ployden near that place does dwell;
Marsh lock is placed a little above Henly,
And there the Thames is kept indifferent cleanly,
And here at Henley once in fifteen years,
A River stranger in the street appears,
Whose cesterne in the Woods his wealth does gather,
^n that long space, and cannot get it rather,
B^t gotten out of high-way-flouds, and leaves,
A^ Dutchmen keep the drops of their house-eues.
The cesterne fills and then the walls break down,
And send their stowage unto Henley town,
Another fifteen years the walls repair,
And fill the place with rain or thawed air,
And being so replenisht in that space,
It runs (rub rub) close by the bowling place.
Near Henley (some three quarters of a mile)
A little I Will digress and change my style.
Should I forget the good Judge Whitlocks love,
Vnmanner'd and ungrateful I should prove,
It was about the time (as I remember)
In August, some five days before September)
We landed near the noble Judges harbor,
(With stomachs sharp as razour of a Barber)
The time was short, we neither toyd nor trifled,
The Kitchen, Pantry, Pastry strait we rifled;
The Celler and the Buttery both we forrag'd,
By which brave booty we were much encouraged,
S^ke and good Claret drawn from Tierce and Punchion,
(...) one whole day, and two euenings Nunchion;
Ou^ b^ead as good as ever baker sifted,
Ou^ wine (rare wine) as ere to mouth was lifted,
And in our business (though we all were hasty)
We did surprise an excellent Venson pasty,
We there did save the labor of inuiters;
Whole joints of mutton proved us good sheepe-biters,
Our beer was bravely boiled and strongly malted,
Our Pidgeon Pie was peppered well and salted,
Most tender Chickins, Pullet, and a Capon,
We (in our fury) did commit a rape on;
A mighty scarlet Lobster last we seized,
And so with these Acchats our minds were eased,
But that which made our viands taste the better,
Was welcome, which made each of us a debtor;
And long may he and his survive and flourish,
That did poor travelers so kindly nourish,
These lines are writ in duty to express
Our love, our duty, and our thankfulness.
From thence we hi'd us with the stream and wind,
And in the Barge at noone we bravely dined,
And as our meat our grateful minds did move,
We drank Judge Whitlocks health to show our love.
Then came we to a lock called Hambleton,
Whereas the stream a handsome course does run;
Next Mednam Wear does speedy mending lack,
It puts the Thames, and Thames puts it to wrack,
And near Frogge-mill two paltry stops there are,
That in the River take too great a share;
(...) at Harley, and a Wear below,
^lmost a stop, (fit to be cleared I know;)
^hen Temple lock, 'bouc Bisham Church there is,
^eneath which is a Wear somewhat amiss,
^hen Marlow lock is worst I must confess,
^he water is so pinched with shallowness,
^eneath which is a Wear should be defaced,
and Cottrels Wear of Cookham be displaced.
(...) Wear does to one Holdernesse belong,
which does the river most in^ious wrong,
^eare which a Spring runs from the chalkie hills,
^he which (not long ago) did drive two mills,
(...) stop against Toplow Warren much does spread
^ext Bolters lock, (a mile from Maydenhead.)
^hus have I past the locks, now wears and stops,
from thence as far as Stanes mine Inkhorne drops.
^oue Maidenhead bridge a stop and one beneath,
which both to be amended I bequeath;
against Bray church, and Bray mill, stand three more,
^different bad as any were before;
(...) stop at Water Oakley naught does lie,
^t Rudles poole the gravel hills too high,
^he water turns so short, and runs so quick,
that often the Barges there a ground do stricke;
^eare Boueney Church a dangerous stop is found,
^n which five passengers were lately drowned;
Below the bridge at Windsor (passing thus)
Some need less p^les stand very perilous:
Near Eaton College is a stop and wear,
Whose absence well the river may forbear;
A stop, a wear, a dangerous s^nke tree,
No^ far from (...) Ferry are all three;
A graue^l bed, two stops and stakes beside,
Against and near old Windsor Church we spide,
With (...) stops more we saw near Ankerwike,
And near my Lord Majors stone we saw the like,
Besides an (...) or Island there we found,
Hedged far (...) into the stream to gain more ground:
From Stanes we past to Lallum guls, most shallow,
Whereas ^iue Barges fast aground did wallow;
And such a trowling current there did set,
That we were vildly puzzled by to get;
Tumbling 'twixt Middlesex and Surrey land,
We came where Chertseyes crooked bridge does stand,
Which s^re was made all by left handed men,
The like of it was never in my ken;
Wiw waw to Oakam ward, kim kam, kiwwaw,
That through i^ men can hardly set or row,
That Is the last fault I found that merits note,
And down from thence we merrily did ^lote.
Thus have I showed Thames wrongs in general,
And wish they may be moved, or mended all;
And who can but with pity here behold
These multitudes of mischiefs manifold?
Shall Thames be barred its course with stops and locks,
With Mils, and hills, with gravel beds, and rocks:
With wears, and weeds, and forced Islands made,
To spoil a public for a private Trade?
Shame fall the doers, and Almighties blessing
Be heaped upon their heads that seek redressing.
Were such a business to be done in Flanders
Or Holland among the industrious Netherlanders,
They to deep passages would turn our hills,
To Windmils they would change our watermils.
All helps unto this river they would aid,
And all impediments should be destroyed:
Our vagabonds (the wandering brood of Caine,)
They would enforce those runnagates take pain,
Whereby much profit quickly would accrue,
(For labor robs the hangman of his due.)
In common reason, all men must agree
That if the river were made clean and free,
One Barge, with eight poor men's industrious pains,
Would carry more than forty carts or waines.
And every waine to draw them horses five,
And each two men or boys to guide or drive,
Charge of an hundred horse and 80. men
With eight men's labor would be served then,
Thus men would be employed, and horse preserved,
And all the Country at cheap rates be served.
It Is said the Dutchmen taught us drink and swill,
I Am sure we go beyond them in that skill,
I wish (as we exceed them in what is bad,)
That we some portion of their goodness had:
Then should this worthy work be soon begun,
And with successful expedition done:
Which I despair not of, but humbly plead,
That God his blessings will increase and spread
On them that love this work, and on their heirs,
Their goods and chattels, and on all that is theirs:
I wish them blessed external, and internal,
And in the end with happiness eternal.
FINIS.
I Have almost finished another small book which I will name, ALL WATERS,
wherein I have treated of the strange diversities of waters, and also I have
described and explained the various dispositions of watermen, their lawful
uses, and their unlawful abuses, neither flattering, sparing, or wronging any
good or ill, which I know either by them or my self, not omitting any thing
that may tend in the praise of their honest trade and conditions, nor inserting
any thing to cover their causlesse injuries, which many of them have done to me
and others; for they have lately cast out scandalous libels, and defaming
speeches against me, and I must make them know, that I am not of that tame
patience to forbear them, who are knowin^ to be nothing but rumor and rabble;
therefore upon such I must right my self in print.


