The Map of Moses: OR, A GVIDE FOR GOVERNOVRS.

Two Sermons lately Preached before the Judges of Assize, and Magistrates of
the Town of Reding, at two several assemblies there held for the County of
Berk.

By THEOPHILUS TAILOR, Master of Arts, and Pastor of the Parish of S. Laurence
in Reding.

PROVERBS 20.6. Many men will boast every one of his own goodness; but who
can find a faithful man? LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER. 1629.

TO THE HONORABLE Knight, Sir John Mounson, Knight of the Bathe, Son and
Heir to the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Mounson of Burton in Lincolnshire,
Knight and Baronet: the Author wishes increase of grace here, and glory
hereafter.
WOrthy Sir: Sithence the smallest tractates in this age pass not without
their Dedicatories; I would not seem singular in denying this little Book that
ordinary privilege; which being but newly hatched, does (with the Philosophers
bird, which flew into his bosom) seek shelter under your Worships couerture;
whose name I durst not prefixe before so weak a work, but that I have some
encouragements: as first, the inward familiarity which once I had with you for
diverse years together in your tender age. Again, your love to learning, and
that affection you have always showed toward them that lean that way:
moreover, that religious respect which you have always testified to the
doctrine of truth, one maine branch whereof is briefly laid down in this
Treatise; and lastly, those employments whereunto you are sometimes called, by
reason of your place of Iustice-ship; unto the faithful discharge whereof,
this little (Map of Moses) will afford you some direction. I dare not (for
fear of flattery) blaze the least part of that commendation which a worthy
Gentleman of your acquaintance has given you in his Book dedicated unto you,
M. Tho. Ganifford I squire p^^nt d^^^ the (...) 1^16.
and entitled, The Secretaries Stud^: ^et I may boldly affirm that that
generous towardness, which he with others at that time discerned in you, was
but as a dram in comparison of that weight of worth which is now found in you:
which as it is no little comfort unto your godly and worthy Parents, whose
earnest desire always was to give you their Lemuel, a truly religious and
generous education: so it has much rejoiced me to hear the relation both of
your religious love toward God, as also of the affection of your Country
toward you, testified sufficiently in their late nomination and election of
you for one of their Knights in the Parliament. Now Sir, as for this poor
tractate, I humbly entreat your Worship to accept^^, as a certain testimony of
my thankful mind, qui, si non potui maxima; parua dedi: such as I have I
present unto you; a few blotted leaves, wherein you shall not meet with any
flourishing words, or curious lines; yet with Gods truth evidently laid down
in the plainest dialect; in acceptance whereof, I shall not be wanting in my
prayers, for Gods blessing upon your self, and your virtuous Lady, that your
house and honor may continue unblemished.

-- donec fluctus formica marinos
Ebibat, and totum testudo perambulet orbem;
That God may direct you in all your proceedings, increase in you his saving
graces; bless you and all yours with long life, and much happiness, to his
glory, the public good, your own comfort here, and eternal glory hereafter;
in hope and full persuasion whereof, I humbly take my leave, and rest,

Your Worships in all observance, THEOPHILUS TAILOR.

HEBREWS III. VERSE V. (...)
Wherein The dependence, wherein Christ is set forth 1. Positiuely, in the 1.
and 2. chapter, page 1. 2. Comparatively, in 3. chapter, 2. v page 2. 3.
Transcendently, 3. chap. 3. v. page 3.
The Substance, wherein two parts 1. Subject (Moses) wherein three things, 1.
Exposition, wherein is described what Moses was, 4. 1. By his country and
nation, 4. 2. By his descent. 3. By his parentage. 4. By his visage. 5. By his
function and office threefold 1. Prophetical, 4. 2. Sac^rdotic^ll, 4. 3.
Judicial, 5.

2. Observation, viz. Secular jurisdiction is of Gods ordination, 5. Reasons
are two in regard of 1. general reformation, 6. 2. general conservation, 7

3. Application, twofold, of 1. Confutation of Anabaptists, 8. 2. Instruction
teaching us 1. to repair unto them, 12. 2. to honor them, 15.


2. Predicate, (faithful) wherein four things, 1. Exposition, 1. In what
sense he was faithful, 19. 2. In whose house he was faithful, 20.
2. Illustration, It appears that he was faithful, by his Adaptation being
fitted thereunto two ways, 1. By his science: both in things 1. humane, 21. 2.
divine, 2.
2. By his conscience, 24.
Execution of his office being faithful 1. Deo, to God, appearing by his 25 1.
faith in God, 95. 3. pi ty toward God, 25. 3. zeal for God, 26.
2. Sacerdoti, to the Priest in three things 1. deprecando, in begging pardon
for them, 27. 2. dirigendo, directing him what to do, 27. 3. amplexando, in
embracing him, 28.
3. Populo, to the people, and that in 3. things 1. diligentia, by his
diligence for them, 29. 2. dilectione, by his love toward them, 31. 3.
iustitia, by doing of justice among them which must be 1. complete, 39. 2.
general, 41. 3. voluntary, 42. 4. deliberate, 42. 5. stable, 43.



3. Observation, viz. All that are in Moses place must be faithful as he was,
43. Reasons are two, being drawn 1. A pari, 43. 2. A periculo, 44.

4. Application, wherein two things 1. The persons to whom it is applied 45 1.
Judges. 2. Counselors. 3. Ministers. 4. Jurors. 5. Officers. 6. Witnesses. 7.
All men.
2. The motives by which it is enforced, are four 1. Gods presidence, 48. 2.
Gods observance, 49. 3. Gods indulgence, 49. 4. Gods recompense, 50.






Place this Table after the Epistle, before Page 1.

THE MAP OF MOSES.
HEBR. Chap. 3. Verse. 5. And Moses verily was faithful.
ALl Scripture is written for our learning by holy men divinely inspired for
that purpose, whereof as Moses mentioned in my Text was the first writer; in
the opinion of Eusebius. lib. c. 21 de praeparat. Evangel. Primus apud H^^raeos
ex^mius ille Theologus Moses, scripta reliquit.
Eusebius, who says, Moses was the first H^brew P^n-man of Scripture, (and
therefore much more ancient than any Greek Writer whomsoever) witness both
Sanct. Justin. in admon. ad gent. M yses suam historiam Hebraice scripsit cum
Graecerum literae nondu^ essent inventae.
Sanctus Justinius; whose words are these: The History of Moses was perfected
ere any Greek letter was invented: and Phil. Iud. de vita Morsit. Moses p^i^r
suit and an iqutor, non tantum omnibus G^aeciae sapientibus, sed etiam omnibus
qui apud Graecos aliquid scripserunt.
Philo Iudaeus, who says Moses writ his Hebrew History, ere Greece harbored
any famous Philosopher, or any other learned Author So he was the la^gest, as
appears both by that great volume of the Pentatouch, by the Book of Job, and
that of the Fabricius in 90. Psalm. liber Psalmorum Davidi inscribitur non
quidem quod ille omnium sit author: sed quod plurimorum. 106. Psalm. Paraeus
in loc. Su^^t architectus permissimus primo fundamenta ponit postea parietes
imponit and d^mum construit, ita Apostolus. Hebrews 1.3. Hebr. 2.16. Hebr. 3.1.
Psalms, of some whereof he was the Author.

Now as in this man's writings many useful documents are propounded unto us for
our instruction, declaring what things ^re to be believed, what things are to
be practiced, and what to be hoped for: so many things are also recorded of
him, both by the Prophets before Christ (as David) by Christ himself who
followed the Prophets, and by the Apostles who followed Christ; especially
Saint Paul in this Chapter, who being desirous to magnify Christ to the
highest elevation, (not unlike a skillful Architector) who first lays the
foundation, then reareth the walls, and afterward covers the roof of the
house: So our Apostle in exalting of Christ, he declares what he is:

1 Positiuely, (so laying the foundation) in the first and second chapter,
describing him partly by his person, and partly by his office.

1 By his Person: 1 God, that he is the brightness of glory. 2 Man, that he
took not the Angelical nature, but the seed of Abraham.


2 By his office in the first verse of this Chapter, where Christ is called the
Apostle and high Priest of our profession.

2 Comparatively, (so rearing the walls) comparing him with Moses, a man much
respected and honored among the Hebrews, John 9.28. (...).
to whom S. Paul writ this Epistle, as they do intimate in their speech unto
the blind man restored to his sight: We are the Disciples of Moses.

Christ is compared unto Moses in many things: each of them,

1 Irefully alike persecuted; both Exodus 1. Math. 2.
1 About the same time, when both of them were infants and in swaddling clouts. 2
By instruments of the like rank and quality; Moses by Pharaoh King of Egypt,
and Christ by Herod King of the Jews


Exodus 2.9.
2 Miraculously alike preserved: Moses by her whose son he was called, namely
Thermutis the daughter of Pharaoh: who said to his own mother: take this
child away and nurse him for me, and I will reward thee: and Christ by Joseph
whose son he was called, Math 2.14. (...). Numb. 12. 1. Math. 11.29: (...)
though only so supposed: he took the Babe and went into Egypt.

3 Affably alike disposed: Moses was a very meek man above all them that were
on the earth; and so Christ, I am meek and lowly in heart.

4 Lovingly alike affianced and espoused: Exodus 2.19.21.
Moses married Zipporah the daughter of Iethro the Ethiopian, and therefore
black, yet fruitful, for she bare unto Moses two sons, Exodus 18.3.4.
Gershon and Eleaser: so Christ has affianced himself to the Church; who if
she want external formosity, Nigra at fructuosa.
yet not fecundity, for she brings forth many children unto God.

5 Faithfully alike employed in office and function: Moses was a Steward or
Governor over the ancient Israelites, who were called Gods people and
household; Math. 28.18.
so Christ he has the government of the Church, unto whom as all power is
given unto him in heaven, so also in earth.

3 Transcendently, (so covering the roof) he makes Christ to excel Moses:
Hebr. 1.4.
and indeed seeing that Saint Paul prefers Christ before the Angels, who
are creatures not corruptible, for they dye not, nor culpable, for they sin
not, as does every man; it is then no marvel that comparing him with Moses, a
man both mortal and sinful, Paraeus in locum.

Domus profamilia in domo. 1 Potestate.


he give Christ pre-eminence over Moses, as he does, and that in two things.

1 In authority and power, 3. and 4. verses, he that is the owner and builder
of the house, has greater honor then the house: that is (by a Synecdoche)
then the household, or any therein: so Christ our Savior, the builder and owner
of the Church, has more honor and power then Moses, who though a Steward in,
yet but a member of the house.

2 In Fidelity, Moses was faithful in many things, 2 Fidelitate. Ioh. 4.26.
(...) Moysos fuit fidelis ut famulus, at Christus ut filius. Substance.
but yet in some things failing (as you shall here hereafter) but Christ was
faithful in his offices without any deficiency whatsoever, which of you can
accuse me of sin: again, Moses was faithful as a Servant, but Christ was
faithful as a son: And thus much for the dependence.

The substance of the words comprehends two parts, 1 the subject, Moses; 2
the predicate, Faithful.
1 Subject, Moses, wherein three things are to be handled, 1 Exposition, 2
Observation, 3 Application.

1 Exposition, who this Moses was, who is described in Scripture diversely.

Exodus 2.6. Exodus 2.1. Numb. 16.29. Hebr. 11.23. Josephus erat hic infans tam
speci^^s, ut asp^cientium oculos in se raperet.

Theop^^^. dicit ^unc pucrum blande ar^^si^e and ob id se^^atum suisse, in Heb.
11.

Phil. Huiasmodi f^^t vita ob^tusque Moysis regis, legis latoris, vatis and
pontificis. 1 Prophetical. Numb. 2.6.

Greg Quanto mundus ad e^tremitatem ducitur, ^^nto nobis aeternae scentiae a
litus largins ^^^tu^.

Deuteronomy. 34.10. Aqu^n. 2^.2^. qu^st. 174. a^t. 4. Quantum ad visionum
^^^ab^^tatem, and miraculorum ^perationem.

2 Sacerdoticall. Psalm. 99.23. 1 O atio. P al 99.6. ^r^m. and Iun. nisi
constitusset Moses in c^^ptione (1) ^^^ifi^^^erce^^^^^. Psalm. 1^6.22. Vn^^io.


1 By his Country or Nation (an Hebrew.)

2 By descent or lineage: of the house of Leui:

3 By his parentage, his Fathers name was Amram, his Mothers Iochebed.

4 By his visage he was fair: Theophilact says, that when as he should have
been murdered with the rest of the Hebrew children, such was his extraordinary
beauty and comeliness, and with so sweet and smiling countenance he beheld
the tormentors, as that they were enforced to spare him, though they had a
strait mandate to the contrary.

5 And lastly, by his office and function: Moses lived 120. years: of which
time he lived

1 A Courtier in Pharaohs Court 40. years.

2 A shepherd in Midian other forty years.

3 A Governor in the desert the last 40 years, in which quadragenary he did
execute a threefold office.

1 Prophetical, 2 Sacerdoticall, 3 Judicial.

1 Prophetical, Moses was a Prophet^ unto Moses that Prophet I will speak
mouth to mouth: and again, there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto
Moses: Saint Gregory observes that of later times there have been men of as
great, if not of greater note, then Moses: as David, who was wiser than his
ancients, or then his teachers; and Solomon, who was wiser than any man: and
withal, he gives this reason: By how much the world is nearer to the
expiration, so much the more is his gift of illumination: yet (as Aquinas
notes) if we consider Moses in his admirable visions, for to whom did God
speak face to face? or in his extraordinary miracles; few Prophets can be
compared unto him.

2 Sacerdoticall; Moses was a Priest, who was both numbered among them, as also
did perform the offices of them. There were three special actions enjoined
the Priests.

1 Supplication, they were to pray for the people; so Moses, when God was
minded to destroy Israel. Moses did stand up in the gap, deprecating against
their punishment.

2 Unction, they were to anoint with oil: so Moses ^auing anointed the
Tabernacle, the Altar, and the Instruments: he poured the annoynting oil upon
Aaron, Leuit. 8.11.
and anointed him.

3 Oblation; they were to sacrifice for the people; 3 Sacrificatio. Hebr 11.28.
(...). Quest. Sol.
so did Moses: he prepared the Passover.

Quest. Why does Moses meddle with the Priests office, whereunto his elder
brother was called?

Resol. Moses in his Sacerdoticall actions did much differ from Aaron: For,

1 Aaron was by Gods appointment anointed unto his Priesthood: Moses not at
all anointed. Dion Carth. in quaest. in Leuit. In Moyse videtur fuisse
plenitudo spiritualis potestatis and saecularis secundum exigentiam status
plebis illius.


2 Aaron was an ordinary Priest, but Moses was extraordinary: Moses fuit
sacerdos secundum speciale priuilegium.

3 Aaron had many successors in his order of Priesthood, but Moses had none to
succeed him.

Wherefore (most likely it is) that Moses would not have interested himself in
this office, but that he received some special direction for the undertaking
thereof, and withal perceived, that the necessity of those times did require
the same, and most evident it is, that Moses did not execute this office after
the time of Aarons consecration: but when Aaron was admitted, Moses is
discharged.

3 Judicial: he was a Ruler, Judge, and Lawgiuer: 3 Judicial.
which title and office, (though some of the Hebrews denied him) who made thee
a man of authority, and a Judge over us? Exodus 2.14. Tolet annot. in 12. Luc.
Moses cum haec ageret nondum erat princeps neque, iudex.
the interrogation being a plain negation; for that at this time he had no
place of Judicature or government, which may safely be concluded from his
flight into the land of Midian; which long and wearisome journey he might have
avoided, if he had been absolutely authorized: yet afterward he was called
to the office of a Ruler, and did sit and judge the people: and of Moses set up
by Almighty God in this office, we are to speak, and from thence proceed to
the second general thing propounded, viz. the Observation.

Observation, viz. Observation.
Secular Jurisdiction is of Gods ordination^
Saint Paul says that the powers that be, Romans 13.1.
are ordained of God. Hic est egregius Reip. ordo ut alij imperent, alij
obtemperent. Deuteronomy. 16.18. Judices and moderatores constituito tibi in singu^^
portis tuis. Pet. Mart. lib. Ind. c. 1. p. 1. S^^tus Iudaeorum fuit melior sub.
Iudicibus quam sub Regibus. 1 Reason. Philem. 11. Adolescentes magis me^^ quam
ratione revocantur a vitijs. Ambr. Job. 19.16.
The Lord will not suffer the Jews at any time to be without some kind of
gouernou s; at the first he governed them by a Patriarchicall government, till
the time of Moses; then by a Judicial government of Judges until Saul, under
which kind of government the Jews had, much peace and happiness; afterward
by a Regal power of Kings, which continuated till the captivity.

Reasons declaring the necessity thereof are two.
1 In regard of general reformation: if no government, then no punishment; if
no punishment, then man (whose imaginations are only evil) would become
impetuous, violent, turbulent: if no magistracy, you should see a general
ataxy and disorder in all estates.

1 In your families, your servants riotous, as sometimes Onesimus, contemptuous
as they whom Job entertained, whom when he called they did scorn to answer;
your children prove Ben-onies, such as through their audacity and luxury would
in short time bring your gray heads with sorrow to the grave, which Saint
Ambrose well observed when he said, that terror is more preualent to draw
youth from vice then favor.

2 In the Church such abuses as would cause you to abhor the service of the
Lord; 1 Kings 12.31.
viz. the basest and unworthiest of men serving at the Altar, as in the days
of Jeroboam, and the most loathsome dogs and swine without reverence or
repentance sat at the Altar eating and drinking their own damnation. 1 Cor
11.29.


3 In the common wealth such a racket as would vex your righteous souls; the
hand of maleuolent Ismael lifted up against his neighbor; the sword of bloody
Cain sheathed in the bowels of his brother; the hedges and high ways like unto
the rode betwixt Jericho and Jerusalem, Cassiod. Iura publica certissima sunt
humanae vitae solatia, infirmorum auxilia, impiorum fraena.
a hiue and harbor for the vagabond thief and robber; the open street a
stage and theater for the obscene (and unseen) adulterer; (in a word) the
whole common wealth out of order, and the whole earth groaning under the
burden of the sinful offender.

2 In regard of the conservation of the whole politic body; what the head is
unto the body natural, 2 Reason. Regnum sine rege est corpus sine capi^e.
De^ost. Quemadmodum examine corpu^ c^^^ui^, sic ^^^^l^ge civitas.
that is a ruler to the body political: a body without a head is near
corruption and fit only for the grave, and the common wealth without a
Governor is as near unto ruin and destruction: on the other side, a good
Governor conserueth the common wealth in a pious peaceable and commodious
condition.

1 In a pious condition: 1 Timoth. 2.2. (...).
Pray for Kings and for all that are in authority that we may lead our lives
in all godliness While Joshua lived, all Israel served the Lord, but he and
the godly elders being once buried, 2 Judges. ^.11.
they did wickedly in the sight of the Lord: so that a maine cause of Isreal's
godly deportment was godly government.

2 In a peaceable condition: Acts 24.3.
Rulers are set over a people that they may lead a peaceable life. Tertullus
acknowledges that by the government of Foelix the whole Province had enjoyed
great peace, for which he gives him great thanks.

3 In a commodious condition: Romans 13.4. (...).
the Ruler is the minister of God for our good; some understand (good) in that
sense as it is used in the book of the Proverbs: Proverb. 31.12.
a virtuous wife does her husband good all the days of her life, and what good
he means is expressed in the same place; viz. she does preserve his temporal
estate.

Solomon gained great respect, and received much honor in his government:
whereof a maine cause was, because his Subjects lived under him both
religiously, peaceably, Senec Qui^ plus quam alij exer^^ntse ^^ ^^^erand^^^
obe^iendo.

Judges 21 25. Pet. Mar. in li. Iudic. Nihil i^ caetu h^^ i^^^r pe^niciosius,
quam ut quisq, volanta^^ su^^^ seq^a^^r.


and richly: which point Seneca well considered, when being asked why the
Spartans did live more richly then other people, answered: they are better
governed then other people.

Thus you see the necessity of government, without which no man can live
happily: when there was no ruler in Israel, every man did that which was good
in his own eyes: the meaning whereof Peter Martyr declares, viz, they fell
from evil to worse, committing sin with greediness: no wonder if all things
were cut of joint, where no godly Magistrate was either to prescribe a Law, nor
faithful officers to execute the law prescribed: whereupon says Saint
Chrysostom, Chrisost.
Take away the Pilot from the ship thou sinkest the vessel; the Captain from
the Army, thou endangerest the whole company; the Ruler from the Commonwealth,
thou bereauest it of its felicity, animating the godless rout to bite and
devour one another as Canibals; the greater to consume the lesser, the
stronger to eat up the weaker, and the rich to oppress the poorer.

1 Use.
3 Application useful for 1 Confutation. 2 Instruction.


Aug. ad Bonifa. Molestus est medicus furenti phrenetico, and pater
indisciplinato silio.
1 Confutation of that false position of the Anabaptists, viz. Rulers are
neither lawful nor useful, either in the Church or in the Commonwealth; who
therefore would have them cast out as unsavory salt, lopt off as superfluous
branches, pulled up by the roots as hurtful weeds, trod under foot as
stinking dung: and that they are men deserving as little honor and respect as
Satan who is made man's tormentor. How earnest and painful these men are in
vntwisting and pulling asunder the Common wealth from the governor whom God
has joined together, will plainly appear by the surueigh of those many
arguments which they use against this ordination: as though it were a doctrine
against nature, 1 Against nature.

Alsted. Theol. didact. In primaeva illa integritate potestas locum habitura
fuisset.

Call. inst. lib. 4. c. 20.

S^biectio est secundum naturam quanquum miseria subiectionis comes non sit
secundum naturam.

Politicae non minor est necessitas and usita inter homines, quam panis, aquae,
solis and acris.


reason, and Scripture.

1 Against nature: because Rulers had no existence in the state of innocence:
unto which allegation, this reply will be sufficient; that though there was no
need or use of rule and dominion before the fall, there being at that time two
persons only in the world, who as they both were but one family, so but one
flesh: yet if that estate had longer continued, power and government had never
the less been established, though no way troublesome, as now it is: the which
Calvin has most learnedly observed, who says: Subjection of one man unto
another, is agreeable unto nature, though the misery which since the fall
accompanies it, be distasted of nature: and adds further, that now there is
no less use or need of government, than of Bread, Water, the Sun, the Air,
which as they preserve men in being and breathing, so the other continues as
in a happy kind of well being. Natural therefore it is, that the inferior
obey the superior, the lesser the greater; without which subjection, the state
of humane society cannot subsist: neither indeed is there any thing in the
world excellent, which is not ruled and supported by government, as we plainly
discern in bodies; first, celestial, Est deiure naturali quod inferior suo
superiori obediat and minor maiori: sine qua rerum humanarum status conservari
non potest.
the Sun ruling the Moon by night; secondly, terrestrial the Beasts being
subject to the Lion, the Birds to the Eagle; thirdly, artificial; in a clock,
the great wheels guide the less, and the helm, the whole ship; fourthly,
political, in military discipline, the General commands the Coronell, he
the Captain, he the Lieuetenant, he the Sergeant, he the Corporal, and he the
common Soldier; every of which faith to his inferior, go and he goes, come
and he comes, Math. 8.9. (...).
do this and he does it: all which being well considered, how can we conclude
any thing against this ordinance?

2 Against reason, 2 Against reason.
it being granted (say they) that Christians being sanctified persons, they are
a law to themselves, and need no other Governor, Law nor Ruler, the law being
not given to a righteous man, but to the disobedient, 1 Timothy 1.9. (...).
to the ungodly, and sinners; whereas we cannot conclude from thence, our
exemption from the commandment, but our freedom from punishment: we are
exempted from the vengeance of the Law, from which unbelievers are not freed,
but not from our obedience thereunto. Calvin says, Calvin Nulla gens vnquam
sic ab humanitate abhorruit ut non se intra leges aliquas contineret. James
3.8. (...).
no people has ever as yet been so unreasonable, inhumane, and barbarous, as
that they will not be confined and bound to some laws: besides, what little
power the man most sanctified has to govern and regulate himself; we may
perceive by that which Saint James speaks of the tongue: who ever lived so to
govern this little member, as that thereby he has not often given offense
both to God, and to his neighbor? the tongue can no man tame: from whence I
thus infer, if man has not power to rule a lesser member, then not a
greater; if not one, then not many; if not many, then not all; and if not all,
then not himself; and does it seem unreasonable that he should have a Ruler
over him, who cannot rule himself?

3 Against the Scriptures.
3 Against the Scriptures; especially against these four pl^ces.

The first place of Scripture alleged against this ordinance, Genesis ^^.^^
is to Genesis, Let them rule over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of
the heaven, and over the beasts: where GOD g ues Adam power over all creatures
which are unreasonable, but not over man who is a reasonable creature: unto
which allegation two things are replied.

1 That these words were spoken unto Adam at that time when as there were no
other to govern, but unreasonable creatures; but when as mankind was
multiplied, the law of nature written in their hearts, ere it was written in
the tables of stone, did dictate unto their consciences this truth: viz. that
every superior should be acknowledged and obeyed by his inferior.

2 That dominion granted unto man one way does not exempt from subjection every
way. A bondslaue has dominion and command over all the creatures, yet
nevertheless is not exempted from his masters command; the wife has authority
over her children and servants which nullifieth not her husbands authority over
her. Satan the god of this world, who rules in the hearts of the disobedient,
he guides them at his pleasure, yet hereby is he not freed from Gods power,
who limiteth and confineth him within his tether: so that though the superiors
power over inferiors is not plainly expressed for the reasons alleged, yet
therein thus much is included, that subjection is a necessary ordination

The second place of Scripture alleged against this ordinance is in the second
Psalm, Psalm. 1.11.
where David calls upon Kings and Superiors to kiss the Son, (...)
Kiss the Son lest he be angry; wherein he charge them to lay aside their
power and authority being once converted unto Christ: unto which objection that
learned man M^. Calvin answers well: Calvin instit. lib. p. 727. N^n i^bet
imperio d^posito ad privatam vitam concedere: sed potestatem qua sunt instructi
Christo subiscere ut unus inter omnes omincat.
viz. though Princes are invited to ador^ Christ Jesus, they are not therefore
prohibited to exercise their magisteriall power and betake themselves to a
private life, but they are admonished only to subject their power to the power
Christ, and to employ it for the advancement of his honor: Kings and Princes
ought to kiss that is to honor Christ which is (signum internae reverentie) a
sign of inward reverence, yet are not bound to break or cast away the Scepter
which is (Symbolum externae potentiae) the ensign of external power granted
them fro God. 1 Kings 10.
The Queen of Sheba, though she honoure^ King Solomon as the greater light, yet
she loses not her own light, but returns back again with all the honor
she brought. That thrice worthy Emperor Theodosius, Zozom. histor. cecl. lib.
7. c. 24. Theodostus abiecta purpura, relictis imperij insignibus tanquam unus
ex plebe coram Deo sacrificavit.
when as he was once converted unto Christ, he kissed Christ the son of God,
when putting off his purple robe, and laying aside his Imperial Crown and
Scepter, he went into the Temple, and there bowed down and worshipped Christ
together with the common multitude, which being finished, he left not his
authority or principality, but still held his Empire, and kept his souerainty.

The third place of Scripture alleged against this ordinance, is in the
prophecy of Isaiah, Isaiah 49.23. Calvinus in loc. Non abdicat cos honor, sed
patronos constituit pijs hominibus.
where he predicteth that Kings shall be nursing fathers, and Queens nursing
mothers unto the Church: and are thereby called to the exercise only of
charity, not of authority: the answer is, that though they are compared to
nurses, and are bound to foster the Church, they are not therefore bound to
leave their authority in the Church: a nurse who has both a tender heart to
affectionate and also full breasts to seed and consolate her tender babe, does
not throw away her rod which serves both to doctrinate and castigate: in a
word, as a man having wealth is not therefore to abdicate it because he has
got acquaintance with Christ, but to honor God with it: so a man having power
must not relinquish it, but exercise it to the honor of God to whom all
absolute and independent power belongs, and from whom all regal power and
subordinate authority is derived.

The fourth place of Scripture alleged against this ordinance, is in Saint
Paul's Epistle to the Galatians; Galath 3.28. (...).
where the Apostle says that in Christ there is neither bond nor free, none so
bound as to be a subject, none so free as to be a Magistrate. For the answer
whereof we must consider the Church in a double respect.

1 In a spiritual respect, wherein thou art not respected for thy country
whether Jew or Gentile, nor for thy condition whether bond or free, nor for
thy sex whether male or female; Act. 20.35.
but in every Nation he that works righteousness is accepted of God: if thou
be evil the goodness of thy country, Episcop. Sarisb. exposit in Colos. Si
Iud^us sis at careas renovatione, canis es non filius, si gentilis sis eamque
habeas fillus es non amplius canis.
pedigree, authority, cannot dignifie thee; and if godly, the baseness of thy
birth, and meannesse of thy condition cannot vilify thee: so says a learned
Bishop in our Church, if thou were a lewe yet want sanctification thou art
but a dog, not a child, and though thou art a Gentile yet have holiness, thou
art not a dog but a son.

2 In a civil respect, wherein the distinction of bond and free, of ruler and
subject is not taken away, but shall continue so long as there shall be
distinction and difference of sex and of countries; as appears in the place
last alleged.

2 Use of instruction.
2. Of instruction; wherein we are taught a twofold duty.
1 Seeing God has ordained Rulers, we ought in all our differences to repair
unto them for sentence and determination, 1 repair to them. Exodus 18 16. Venit
quisq, ad me ut Iudicem. Numb 27.2.
which is a maine end of their ordination: thus the people of Israel when they
had any matter of controversy they came unto Moses and he did determine the
cause, and gave sentence: when as the daughters of Zelophehad conceived that
they had wrong done unto them by those who took away their fathers lands,
Haereditas inter Hebraeos erat immobilis and perpetua Cornel. a Lapid. in loc.
Psalm 133.
they did repair unto Moses for redress, and why did they so? because they
knew that he was the public Magistrate, set up and ordained of God for that
purpose. It were a most happy thing for all men to be so fast linked and knit
together in unity and amity as that they might live without controversy; but
there is great impossibility on earth to find such felicity; because,

Quot homines, tot senten^iae.
1 All men are not of the same judgment.

2 All men are not of a peaceable disposition: there is a generation of men so
froward that like the raging sea they will continually be casting up the mire
and dirt of contention, to whom if you speak of peace they will make
themselves ready to battle.

3 All men are not of a contented mind, in no wise satisfied with that estate
which God has allotted them: who having all things serving for necessity; yea,
wallowing in superfluity, but not therewith content, they covet their
neighbors Vineyard, or Ass; and hence arise so many controversies, according
to that old proverb, Haec duo pronomina meum and tuum pepererunt omne bellum.
(were it not for coveting, there would be no contending) and therefore till
such time as all different opinions be reconciled, all covetous desires
satisfied, all unquiet dispositions appeased, Math. 18.7. (...).
(which will never be so long as this world has a being) there will be daily
differences, and offenses will come: for the redress whereof we must repair
unto the Governor: Iethro advises Moses to make choice of subordinate Rulers,
Exodus 18 22.
who might hear the smaller matters as well as the weightier: from whence it
is evident that all matters of difference betwixt man and man, whether great or
small, are to be brought before the Ruler, and by him to be determined. The
two Harlots being at ods about their Infants, 1 Kings 3.16.
they both repair unto King Solomon for sentence, whose the living child
should be, neither of them being a competent judge in her own cause: the which
condemns the practice of those men who will end all differences and
controversies at the sharp: Aug. in Mat. 26. Qui nulla legitima potestate in
sanguinem alientus armatur peri^it aut gladio humano aut gladio vindictae
divinae. Acts 19.38.
thu^ did cursed Cain end the quarrel betwixt him and his brother, who ought
to have complained unto his father, (if he had been injured) who was then the
Magistrate, but he contemning his fathers authority, takes the sword into his
own hand, and kills his brother. The town Clarke of Ephesus gave the
tumultuous rout of that City good counsel, when they went about to lay violent
hands on Paul: if Demetrius or any other man has any thing to say against
Paul, if he has done any wrong, the bar is open, and there be them that will
impleade whatsoever can be produced; Christ allows not combating causeless
and personal in the field, as appears by that his speech to Peter: Math.
26.52.
he that takes the sword, shall perish by the sword: he shall fall either by
the sword of his adversary, or if he escape, by the sword of authority.

Quest. Is a man bound in every difference and grieuance to repair unto the
Governor?

Answ. We must propound some cases ere we can resolve the question: for it
comes to pass,

First, sometimes, that the peccant party upon deliberation, Secundae
cogitationes sunt meliores.
is contented to give the full satisfaction both equivalent to thy damage, and
suitable to thine own desire and expectation: in this case and for this cause
Lot stayed and ended his controversy with Abraham, he offering unto Lot a
fairer end than he either desired or deserved.

Secondly, sometimes, that some good neighbor has stepped betwixt thee and thy
adversary as arbitrator, who has made thee and thy adversary friends: such
peacemakers be as scarce to be found among us, as they were among the
Corinths, 1 Cor. 6.5.
where there was no man so charitable, as to stay them in their contentious
suits, but suffered one brother to go to law with another. One reason that
there are so few undertakers in this kind is, because for the most part it is
both a burdensome and thankelesse office: Aug. Mallem per singalos dies
aliquid manibus operari: quam tumultuosissimas causarum perplexitates pati.
(...). Math. 5 9.
for which cause Saint Augustine protests, that he had rather undertake the
most toilesome handy labor, than to be an arbitrator; yet such as are
peacemakers, have great encouragement to continue their godly course, because
Christ has promised a singular blessing to such.

Thirdly, sometimes, that thou who have suffered an injury, art persuaded by
the spirit of God freely to forgive it; and that Paul his exhortation has
prevailed with thee, who says thus; forgive one another, if any man have a
quarrel to an other, Coloss. 3.13.
even as Christ forgave you: now if the holy Spirit of God does forcibly move
thee to reconciliation, it will not be good for thee to quench that motion, but
to end the contention.

Now in these cases as when the cause is arbitrated, satisfaction tendered, and
the spirit of God has prevailed, you need not trouble the Governor; but in
other cases of difference ye may repair unto him for assistance: for the same
God who gives the commandment to go to the Minister for the preservation of
thy soul, to the Physician for the preservation of thy health and life, gives
thee good leave to go to the Governor for the recovery of thy personal
estate; for to this end and purpose has God ordained magistracy and authority.

The second use of instruction: 2 Use of instruction: to honor them. Rom
13.1.7.
seeing that Governors are of Gods ordination, and by him set up above others,
therefore we ought to honor them. Saint Paul shows that they ought to be
honored, because they are of GOD ordained: when Pharaoh had made Joseph a
Governor, Genesis 41.40.43.
he caused him to be honored of all the people: so Magistrates being deputed
by God to rule in any part of this his lower house upon earth: Daniel 3.7.
he will have them to be honored and highly respected. We read that
Nebuchadnezzar did set up a liuelesse Image which he will have honored of all
the people, because it was of his devising, and by him erected and set up. God
the chief Governor on earth, Etsi sunt homines ante deum, at dij ante homines.

Musc. in Psalm. 82. Dij propter imperandi iudicandique potestatem. 1 Objection.
1 Pet. 2.17.


he sets up the Magistrate, who is his lively image resembling him in power,
(and therefore called Gods) though not ((...)) by reason of their nature, yet
((...)) by reason of their office and employment; and he will severely torture
in the fiery furnace of hell, all such as will not yield honor to these living
images which he has set up, either in superior or inferior place.

1 Object. Honor is not a privilege only belonging unto the Governor, for
as much as he that says (...) honor the King, says also in the same verse,
(...) honor all men.

Solut. We ought both to honor the King, Solut. Gorran. in loc. Omnes. debemus
honorare interius: at regem and magistratum exterius. Romans 12.10. 2. Objection.
who is the superior, as also every equal and inferior; but with great
difference: we must honor all godly men with the honor of courtesy, as the
Apostle commands, (in giving honor, go one before another) but we must
honor the King with the honor of loyalty.

2 Objection: the Governor being of a meaner pedigree and descent, am I bound
to honor him?

Answer It is an ordinary thing with GOD to promote Sol.
men of mean degree unto the office of Magistracy: 1 Samuel 2.8.
he lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, and sets him with Princes,
says Hannah: Psalm. 75.6. He^t custos pecudum, hodie hominum.
thus God dealt with David, he took him from following of the Ewes with
lamb, and set him with the Princes of his people: therefore we must not
murmr or repine at the work of the Lord promoting men of mean rank above
us, 1 Samuel 17.28.
as did David's brethren when they saw him in the camp, and the Jews who would
not honor Christ, Math. 13.^5.
because he was but a Carpenters son; but let us be always willing and
ready to give all respect and reverence to such as God has honored with
authority; all which must be given even to the meanest whomsoever the King of
heaven will honor.

Therefore let us resolve to honor them cord, ore, opere.

1 Cord. Eccl. 10.20.
1 Cord, in heart: curse not the King, no not in thy thought, for a bird of the
air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall utter the matter:

Lor. Act. 26 25. Non propter acceptam iniuriam voluit denegare honoris
ordinarium titulum. (...). 2 Ore.
2 Ore, in words, and that three ways:

1 Tribuendo illis titulos reuerentiae: by giving them titles of honor and
reverence, as Saint Paul does unto Festus when he pleaded before him for his
life, the title he gave him was (most noble Festus) upon which words Lorinus
says thus; though Festus had injured him in words, calling him a mad and
frantic fellow; yet he gives unto Festus that ord^nary and honorable title
which did belong unto him.

2 Samuel ^6.9. Aegardus. Nihil aegetus seras quam numen magistratus rodi and
deformart.
2 Defendendo contra detractores and obtrectatores, by defending them against
all detractors and calumniators: Abisha would not with any patience endure the
railing calumniation of Shemei against his Sovereign: we may not conniue at
others who do it; much less may we take liberty to do it our selves, Exodus
22.28.
it being flatly prohibited by Moses: thou shall not rail upon the Judge, 1 Timothy 2.1. Call. in loc. Mihi videtur Paulus consul^o tres voces in eundem sinem
simul coniung^re; ut precandi studium and assiduitatem magis commendet ac
vehementius urgeat. 3 Opere.

Evangelium non tollit praecepta nat^rae sed perficit.

John 1.29. Non venu Christus ut toll^ret tura, sed peccata mandi. Chrysostom. 3
Orect. Sol.


neither speak evil of the Ruler of thy people.

3 Orando, by praying earnestly unto God for a blessing upon them as we are
enjoined by Saint Paul: I exhort that supplications, prayers, and
intercessions, be made for Kings, and all that are in authority. Master Calvin
gives a reason why the Apostle uses all these three words; Supplications,
Prayers, intercessions, viz. that he might the better commend unto us the
assiduity of prayer for such as are in authority.

3 Opere in obeying their laws, mandates, and injunctions; for though we live
in the time of the Gospel, yet the Gospel does not overthrow or nullisie
natures law or Gods law, but does rather ratify and confirm them: Christ the
Lamb of God (says one) came not into the world to take away and abolish the
wholesome laws and constitutions, but the sin and transgressions thereof.

3 Objection: The Ruler being a wicked man, am I bound to honor and obey him?

Replicat. God oftentimes has suffered wicked men to have authority and power,
as is evident in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah, and that
for two reasons:

1 For the probation of his servants integrity; Prou. 28.1^. Anselm. Si bonus
nutritor tuus, si malus tentator tuus.
when the wicked come up, the man is tried: wicked Governors are like unto so
many hot furnaces wherein the godly are tried: Nebuchadnezzar was Daniels
furnace, Herod was John Baptists, Nero was Saint Paul's, wherein and whereby
they were thoroughly tried, and out whence they came purer then the finest gold.

2 For their own speedy destruction: wicked Rulers are like ships full fraught
with iniquity, wherein Authority is the top sail, which being violently driven
with the breath of the devils mouth, hurrieth them speedily into the dead sea
of destruction.

Now suppose that a wicked man is set over thee, then which evil in this life,
none can be greater, unless that which withal David wished to gods enemy:
Psalm. 109.6.
Set thou the wicked over him, and let Satan stand at his right hand; (...)
yet to such a one thou must be subject, such a one thou must honor, not
denying thine obedience in those things wherein thou art not compelled to
break the law of God; for if thou be commanded to do things expressly
unlawful, thou must call to mind the speech of that godly martyr to the
Emperor; I dare not fulfill thy pleasure; Da v^ ^am o impe^ator, tu carcorem,
ille geb^naam minatur.
I do ^eare and reverence thee who have power to imprison and kill my body,
but I do much more fear to disobey his command who has power to cast both my
body and soul into the eternal pains of hell fire: Aug. Bonis in malo
scienter non obedias, nec malis in bono contradicas.
Saint Augustine gives a most excellent rule in this case, who says, As we
must not obey godly Rulers in their unjust commands, so must we not disobey
wicked Rulers in their just injunctions.

And for the conclusion of this first part of the text, let this be remembered;
ever to banish from our hearts and thoughts that papal and poysonfull doctrine
of the Church of Rome which tolerateth, yea animateth subjects to take arms
against their sovereign Princes, commanding only something to them unpleasing;
though never so lawful in it self, 2 Kings 11.16. Regula. A facto
extraordinario non debet inferri generalis conclusio de re extraordinaria.
Scharpius.
and well pleasing unto God; strongly enforcing the doctrine of rebellion from
some particular instances in the Scriptures as Athaliah and the like examples,
wresting such places to their own ends and purposes, which being rightly
understood, do no way justify their practices: this doctrine was neither
believed nor practiced by the holy martyrs, no not in the scorching hottest
times of persecution: in the time when Tertullian lived, there was a hot fire
kindled and prepared by bloody minded Princes, for the torture of poor
Christians: at which time he thus advises them: we might revenge our selves to
the full upon our persecuting Governors, having every day sufficient advantage
against them; Tertull. Absit ut igne humano vindicetur secta divina.
but far be it from us, that we should blemish our most glorious profession
with cruel trucidation: we must choose rather to suffer an undeserved death as
inferiors, then to put to death our superiors: prayers and tears these are
weapons well beseeming the lambs and doves of Christ. Apud nostram disciplinam
mori licet magis quam occidere. Ibidem.
Let us carry in the one hand the buckler of innocence, and in the other the
shield of patience; rather these to bear off a blow, then a sword to give a
blow, recompensing no man evil for evil, but committing thy cause unto him
who will judge righteously.

And so much of the first general part viz. Subject:

The second Sermon.
THe second general is the Predicate, Faithful; wherein four things are to
be handled.

1 Exposition, 2 Illustration, 3 Observation, 4 Application.

1 Exposition, wherein two things are unfolded.

1 In what sense he was faithful;

Such are called faithful in Scripture, as are

1 Steadfast believers of Gods Word and promises; Ephesians. 1.1. (...).
many of which sort there were, some in Ephesus, when the Apostle writ his
Epistle unto them, which he directed to the faithful in Christ there: to this
kind of faithfulness our Savior exhorts Thomas, (...): John 20.27. (...).
2 Cor. 6.15.
be not faithless, but faithful: this is that faithfulness which is opposed
to infidelity, as appears by Saint Paul's speech; what part has the Believer
with the Infidel?

2 Sincere professors of godliness, such as worship God in sincerity; for s^^^
a man King Solomon sought, but could scarce find him, Proverb. 20.6.
many men will boast of their own righteousness, but who can find a
faithful man? Many there are who have a good outside, with the Pharisee, but
few that have Nathaniels inward sincerity: this is faithfulness opposed to
hypocrisy.

3 Conscionable dischargers of that office and place wherewith God has
betrusted them: Math. 25.^0.
he in the parable to whom the Master of the family gave five talents, with
which he gained other five, is approved and commended for faithfulness, in
these words; well done thou good and faithful servant: where he is called
faithful, because he did conscionably discharge the charge he undertook: on
the contrary, God complains, because Israel wanted this faithfulness; Israel
was not faithful in his covenant: Psalm. 78.37.
the people made many covenants with the Lord, and many promises to him, but no
conscience to pay what they had vowed, or to discharge what they had
couenanted; this is the faithfulness opposed to foedifragie.

In all which respects, Moses was faithful, he was a faithful believer of
Gods word and promises, Hebr. 11.14.
as Saint Paul does testify; he was sincere without hypocrisy, as the Greek
particle ((...)) does intimate; (...).
verily he was faithful (that is) in verity: and also he was faithful in the
discharge of his office, as is evident throughout the history.

The second thing to be unfolded is, in whose house he was faithful; in his
house: the word ((...)) has reference to the last word of the former verse,
which is God; so that the sense is this: he was faithful in Gods house.

God has three houses wherein it pleases him to reside,

Revel. 3.20. Heb. 3 6. (...). Io. 14 2. (...). 1 Timothy 3.15. 2 Timothy 2.20.
Aretius in locum Haec domus erat populus Iudaorum.
1 An inner house, which is (iusti virianima) the heart and soul of the godly
man: he that hears my voice, I will come in unto him. Whose house year.

2 An upper house which is (coelestis patria) the kingdom of heaven which is
called our fathers house.

3 An outer house which is (militans ecclesia) and called (...) a great house;
and in this house was Moses faithful as Aretius notes. This house was the
people of the Jews, whose Governor was Moses, the which house though it was
very great in the time of Moses, yet since the coming of Christ it is much
enlarged.

This people of Israel in the time of Moses, did much resemble a household.

1 Propter obedientiam.
1 Propter populi obedientiam oeconomo and ministro; in every household there is
a Master or Governor, to whom all in the family do yield obedience; which is
according unto Ahashuerus his proclamation, Hester 1.22.
who did enact and proclaim this law; that every man should bear rule in his
own house; so this household of Israel, they were both obedient to God the owner
of the house, and to Moses the steward of the house, Joshua. 1.17.
as is plainly evident by their speech unto Joshua; as we obeyed Moses in all
things, so will we thee, if God be with thee, as he was with Moses.

2 Propter paucitatem.
2 Propter paucitatem: the government of a family is the least regiment: the
government of Empires and Kingdoms that is the highest, next thereunto of
Provinces, then of Cities, then of Towns, then of Villages, and last of all,
which is least of all, of Households. The people of Israel compared with the
Egyptians and other their enemies, Numerus minor, at melior.
were but as a household; that is, but as a handful, a very few, a small
number.

3 Propter familiae vnitatem: families are, 3 Propter unitatem.
or ought to be united, not divided: our Savior says, that a house divided
against it self, cannot stand. All the while that Moses governed Israel, they
were closely combined together, except some few irregular persons, whose
division Moses labors to reform; why smitest thou thy fellow? Exodus 2 13.
though afterward some tribes falling off, they were ruinated and scattered.

And thus you see how he was faithful, and in whose house.

The second general in the Praedicate is the Illustration. Illustration.

Wherein you may take a full view of Moses his faithfulness:

His faithfulness is illustrated partly by 1 His Adaptation to his office. 2
His Execution of that office.


1 Adaptatione, by his fitness for the office: 1 Adaptation.
he was fitted for the faithful execution of his office two ways: 1
Scientia, by his knowledge. 2 Conscientia, by his conscience.


1 Science, Scientia.
it is an undoubted truth that that man cannot be faithful in his office, who
therein is not skillful. Moses was so skillful both in humane and divine
knowledge as that he was admired by the most learned of his time, Scientia
humana.

Act. 7.22. (...). Mercatura bonarum artium. Justinius quaest. 25. ad Orthodoxos.

Barrad. Itinerar. lib. ^. Quemadmodum oculi lucem indigent ut videant, sic
principes and duces apientiae splendore opus habeant, ut rempub. recte
ad^inistrent.

Diodorus Siculus Vt urbanitatem, e^^gantiam, liberalitatem, al^asque v^t^te^
regias, quasi rector populi suturus, add secret, and i^ haberet. Scientia
divino.


and such as have lived since.

1 For humane knowledge he was eminent, as S. Steven avouches, he was learned
in all the learning of the Egyptians; where was kept the common mart of all
learned Sciences: Justinius says that there he was taught the art of Geometry,
Arithmetic, Music and Astronomy together with other grounds of Polity. It
has been always held convenient, Governors should have some knowledge of
foreign and national laws; they are the eyes of the common wealth, as the
eyes stand in need of light that they may see and discern; so Rulers of
wisdom in humane things, that they may rightly govern. Wherefore (says
Diodorus Siculus) God would have Moses to be brought up in Pharaohs Court; even
for this cause, that he might there learn ciuility, elegancy, magnanimity,
liberality; together with all other virtues which might beseem a Governor.

2 For divine knowledge, he was excellent as appears by those large volumes,
of Genesis, which declares the creation of the world, and the governing of it
for the space of one thousand three hundred sixty and eight years, of Exodus,
wherein is declared the departure of Israel out of Egypt, and what was done
from the death of Joseph, until the year wherein God commanded the Tabernacle
to be built: of Leuiticus, wherein is described the office of the Leuiticall
P^iesthood, and those many ceremonies, all which did aim at Christ: of
Numbers, wherein is set down the actions of the Israelites in the desert,
until the time that they took possession of Canaan, with their demeanor and
condition for thirty eight years together: and of Deuteronomy, wherein Moses
did repeat the Law to the Israelites, and iterate Gods benefits in their
audience, to draw them unto obedience: all which being considered, we cannot
otherwise conclude then that Moses was very skillful in the Law of God.

We read of none either renowned for, or faithful in government, but such as
have been prudent and intelligent, well doctrinated both in humane and divine
knowledge.

Joseph. Genesis 41.48.
Joseph whom Pharaoh set,

1 Super horrea totius Aegypti, and made him Puru^iour f r his Corn, and
Warden of his Granaries.

Genesis 41.40.
2 Super domum and aulam eius; and made him the Lord Controller of his Court;
thou shall be over mine house.

Genesis 41.40.
3 Super milites; he was the Lord Lieuetenant over his Armies in the time of
war; at thy word shall all my people be armed.

Genesis 41.41.
4 Super totum populum, he was Lord President over all his subjects.

Genesis 41.^9.
And the History tells us why he had all these honorable offices conferred
upon him; because there was no man like unto him for wisdom and understanding.

David was made a Ruler in Israel, David.
because of his excellent wisdom, both in matters (litigious) which Ioab
acknowledged; 2 Samuel 14.20.
my Lord is wise according to the wisdom of an Angel of God, to understand
all things that are in the earth; Ps. 119.99.100.
and in matters religious, wherein he was wiser then his Ancients, then his
Teachers.

Solomon, because he was so greatly learned, Solomon. 1 Kings 3.28.
therefore was his government so much admired, both of his own Subjects, who
saw the wisdom of God in him to do justice, as also among strangers
renowned: 1 Kings 4.34.
All people came from all parts of the earth to hear his wisdom.

Moses requires wisdom in all those whom he shall approve of for
government, Duet. 1.13.
bring men of wisdom and understanding, and I will make them Rulers over you,

Nebuchadnezzar, though but a heathen man, Dan. 1.4.
yet would have such as he intended to promote to any office or dignity, to be
brought up in learning and understanding, and able to utter knowledge; who when
himself was deprived of understanding, (as a man unworthy to govern) did
relinquish the society of men, and lived among beasts.

So that it is very needful for a Governor to get the knowledge of humane
laws; Basil. Hom. 12. Iustitiam cognoscere, facit, ut rem recte iudicare
possimus: impossible namque est, non versatum et inexercitatum in iusti
cognitione, rem dubiam, and in controversia positam, been ac ordine dirigere.

Aurelius Victor Domi sanctitatem: foris fortitudinem: utrobique prudentiam.
Deuteronomy. 17.19.


whereof Saint Basil speaks thus; by knowing what justice is rightly, a man
is enabled to judge exactly; and verily it seems a thing impossible, that he
who has no knowledge of the law, should rightly determine according to the
law: for the which cause Aurelius Victor was wont to say, three things there
are which the people may expect in and from their Governor: first, sanctity
in the time of peace: secondly, fortitude in the time of war: thirdly, sapiency
and wisdom in them both. But chiefly and above all, his care must be to
acquaint himself thoroughly with the law of God. This is that law which must
often be sounded in the ears of such, laid before the eyes of such; he that is
thy King and governor, the law shall be with him, and he shall read therein
all the days of his life; and fluent in the mouths of such, as David, I will
speak of thy commandments, even before Kings: these are those laws whereupon
his heart did muse and meditate, Psalm 45.1. Affirmo multo chariores mihi esse
sacras scripturas quam regnum; and si alterutro m hi carendum fit aequanimius
n^^ d^ademati, quam scripturis cariurum. Conscientia.
and on which his tongue did talk; valuing them as highly as that Sicilian
King, who said, he had rather lose all his regal honor, then the company of
the Scripture; as knowing that he should be unfit for government, unless he
had direction from thence.

2 Conscientia; he was fitted unto faithfulness by the uprightness of his
conscience.
Moses had not been fit for government, had not his conscien^e been as good
as his science. Little comfort or b^^n^ fit shall men rea^e from their
Governors, though singularly skillful, and able, unless they be conscionable.
That government is very irksome and peccant, where the Rulers conscience is
exorbitant; viz when it is either too

Romans 1. last.
1 Spacious, taking liberty to do all things unlawful himself, with Ahab, who
sold himself to do wickedly, and to commit iniquity with greednesse and
delight; or giving like liberty to others

August. de Haeresib. Manichaei ne^ voluerunt he^bas evellere, nec poma
dece^pere.
2 Scrupulous denying themselves that liberty which God has given them; as the
Maniches, who would not kill cattle to eat, least they should break the sixth
Commandment, no, not so much they durst as to pluck an herb or pull an apple
from the tree, lest they should destroy the life of these vegetables.

Math. 23.24.
3 Preposterous, as the Pharisees, who did starine at Gnats, but swallow Camels;
Philo. Iudaeus Q^ales trat oration, ta^is erat vita, cum wh^ discreparet haud
a^iter quam in inst^^mento musico.

2 Samuel 15.4. Pandulphus (...). Math. 13.3. Philo Mentem factis exprimens facta
dictis accommodans. Executione.


punishing lesser offenses most severely, and letting greater pass carelessly.

As for Moses he had a good conscience, as Philo declares: such as his
language was, so was his life, harmonizing sweetly together as in a musical
instrument; far unlike unto Absolon, who was sufficiently witty and eloquent,
which his speech unto the people does witness: let thy matter be good, and
come unto me, and I will do thee justice; yet had no conscience, like to
Pandulphus his scholars, who had learned to speak well, yet never would do
well; and to the Pharisees, who said, but did not: but Moses his heart and
tongue did move together: what his appearance was, that he was in substance:
expressing his mind by his actions, and applying his actions according to his
communications. And thus much of his Adaptation to faithfulness in his office.

2 Executione, he was faithful in the execution of his office, and this will
appear in three several objects.

Moses was faithful 1 Deo. 2 Sacerdoti. 3 Populo.


1 Deo, to God who ordained him a Governor, Deo.
and this faithfulness he testified to God three ways.

1 Fide, by his faith in God. 2 Pietate, by his piety toward God. 3 Zelo, by
his zeal for God.
1 Fide, by his faith in God, Saint Paul testifies of Moses, 1 Fide. Heb. 11
23.24.27. (...), etc.
that he was a true believer: by says he refused to be called the son of
Pharaohs daughter, by faith he forsook Egypt, by says he ordained the
Passover, and passed through the red Sea, as on dry land; concluding against
all carnal reason and sense, that the Egyptians whom now they beheld, should
never any more be seen of them: he believed whatsoever God had predicted,
notwithstanding that it seemed impossible to be effected. 2 Pietate. Exodus 3.5.
Theodoret. in questionibus in Exodus Vt religiosiorem hac ratione Mosen redderet.

Gregor 2a. part. pastorum Moses crebro tabernaculum intrat, and exit: exemplum
praebens rectoribus, ut cum aliquid ambigunt, dominum per orationem consulant.
Iam 5 ^6. Exodus 17.11.




2 Pietate, by his piety toward God, when God called him to the office of
Magistracy, he commanded him to put off his shoes, thereby admonishing him (as
Theodoret notes) to put off all carnal and sinful affections, and to become
steadfastly religious. Saint Gregory says, that Moses did go very frequently
into the Tabernacle, therein giving a godly example unto Governors, that when
they doubt what is to be done, they should in a devout manner ask counsel of
God. No question but Moses was such a one himself, as he made choice of for
Governors: that is, one fearing God. Had not Moses been a man of
extraordinary piety, he could not have been of that preualency with God, as to
turn away his wrath: it being not the prayer of every man, but only of the
godly man which prevails much: exceeding much did Moses prevail with God in
the behalf of Israel, whose hands (when he prayed) were strengthened against
their enemies: the which care of godliness we may see both in Joshua, Joshua
24.15.
who was Moses his successor, whose resolution was, that he and his house would
serve the Lord; and in Solomon, who being as great a Builder, as his father was
a Warrior; he erecting a dwelling house for his own safety; building a throne
to judge causes, for the upholding of equity; 1 Kings 6.14.
so also he built a stately Temple unto God for the supportance of Gods
worship and piety: remembering well the counsel of his deceased father, thou
shall bear rule in the fear of the Lord: the which advise all Governors must
remember, 2 Samuel 23.3. 3 Zeal. Deuteronomy. 9.17. Ambr. 56. epist. Fractae sunt pri^a
ut repararantur secundae. Jsidor Hae tabulae imaginem demonsirabant priscae
legis, quae fracta est and abr^gata.

Manet and manebit Decalogus, manebunt libri ^eteris testamenti, quia spiritus
sanctus non minus est in ^^teri quam in novo. Hic. on. ad Romulum. Moses zelo
dei permotus, tabulas f^^git in detestationem idololatriae. Deuteronomy. 34 6.

Sozomen. l. 7. c. 15. Qudam ^^nt in Arabia qui adorant Mosi^ imaginem. Ambr.
Opinor Mosen non esse mortuum, sed tantum dici mortuum and translatum esse
tantum ins^^r Eliae. Deuteronomy. 34.6.


together with the saying of Constantine, viz. he that is ungodly and
unfaithful toward God, will never be faithful unto men.

3 Zelo, by his zeal for God: we read in the Scripture that he brake the
Tables of stone; why he did so, there are sundry reasons given by several
Writers.

Saint Ambrose says, that by this action, was shadowed out the abolishing of
the old Law, and the establishing of the Gospel: and of the same judgment is
Isidore, these Tables did represent the old law which is abrogated and broken:
whereas the Decalogue together with other books of the old Testament, shall
abide and remain in the world to the very end of the world, as well as the
new; because the Spirit of God is the speaker in the old, as well as in the
new.

Saint Jerome says, that the cause of Moses his action, was his zealous
affection, because they had provoked God by their idolatry; in detestation
whereof he brake the Tables; and the history relates unto us other passages of
Moses his zeal: ^e knowing that the Jews did extraordinarily respect him,
therefore he would not let the place of his burial be known; his zealous
heart fearing lest after his death, the superstitious Jews should worship his
dead body: no man knows of his Sepulcher unto this day. It is reported, that
in Arabia at this day some do worship and adore the image of Moses. O how many
more Idolaters would there be, had they the true body of Moses?

We must not hold in opinion with Ambrose, who thought that Moses dyed not,
but is only said so to be: whereas God decrees that Moses shall dye in the
same manner that Aaron did; and in the book of Deuteronomie, the land where he
was buried is mentioned, namely the land of Moab, and that in some valley in
that land, but whether in the valley of Phogor, as some affirm, or in what
other, it is unknown: but he earnestly desired of God, as some think, that it
might not be known, Chrysostom. Hom 1. in Matthaeum. Ne Hebraei corpus cius
utpote ducis and legislatoris, velut numen quiddam colerent.

August. de mirab. script. lib. 1. c. 35. Virg^m qua signa multa fecerat, ne
adoraretur, secum abstulerat. Sacerdoti.


lest (as Saint Chrysostom speaks) idolaters might adore his body being
dead, whom they so highly honored being living. O behold now his exceeding
zeal for Gods glory, who would rather be deprived of an honorable interm^nt,
then that thereby Gods honor should receive any detriment: and as much we
might speak of his like zeal in hiding of his rod, the reason whereof Saint
Augustine gives, viz. lest God thereby might be dishonored.

2 Sacerdoti.
2 He was faithful to Aaron his elder brother, who was Gods Priest, as will
appear in these three particulars, 1 Deprecando. 2 Dirigendo. 3 Amplexando.


1 Deprecando, Deprecando.
entreating and begging pardon for Aarons foul fact: the text says that the
Lord was very angry with Aaron, even to destroy him: Deuteronomy. 9.10.
and at that time Moses prays for Aaron; not unlike unto Jonathan, who when
as Saul was angry with David, he intercedeth for him unto the King, 1 Samuel
15.7.
and gets him into favor again.

2 Dirigendo, directing what he ought to do: Dirigendo. Exodus 4.15.16.
this was Gods command unto Moses, that he should speak unto Aaron, and put
words in his mouth, and then he should be as his mouth. Bucholcerus Isag Eius
balbutus erat naturalis.

Psalm. 103 7. Notas fecit via^ suas Mosi. Phila. Moses ord^na^^t quae agend^
sunt, tanquam intellectus concipiens: Aaron ca lem lequitur, tanquam o^exequtus.

Amplexando. Aldedius. Magistratus contentus est externa obedientia, at
ministerium versatur circa conscientias.


Philo says that Moses did stammer in his speech, and that Aaron was eloquent;
wherefore Aaron must be the speaker but Moses must be his director, instructing
him both what he shall speak, and what he shall do. God mad^ his ways known
unto Moses, and Moses made them known unto Aaron: which kind of government
much differs from that which now is, wherein though the Magistrate governs
the Minister by the power of the sword, yet the Minister directs the
Governor by the light of Gods word.

3 Amplexando, familiarly embracing him as his assistant in government. Moses
and Aaron did differ in some things, as do all other Magistrates and
Ministers: as namely,

1 Obiectis, in the object of their government; the Magistrate his care is the
regularizing of the outward man; the Ministers special care is the conformity
of the inward man. When I say the object of the Magistrate is the outward man,
I would not be mistaken, as if it were enough to render to the Magistrate a
formal and internal obedience, (my meaning is) that the Magistrate cannot
discern the transgressions of the heart, and by consequence, not punish them.

Vnus per gladium corpora^em, alter per legis and disciplinae fulmen. Numb. 3
38. Cornel. a Lapid. Simul hic degere iubentur Moses and Aaron pontifex.
2 Poena, the Magistrate punishes offenders by corporal castigation; the
Minister punishes delinquents by ecclesiastical excommunication.

Now though these two persons were thus differenced in their several offices
of Magistracy and Ministry; yet straightly were they combined together in loving
affection. Moses giving unto Aaron the right hand of fellowship. When the
Tabernacle was built (many are of opinion) that as at the West side thereof the
Gershonites pitched their Tents, and there inhabited; Rupertus. Quia regum
gladijs eget sacerdotalis potestas, and sicut nihil tutiu^s cum sibi
convenient, sic mihi pernitiosius cum dissentiunt. Exodus 4.14. Exodus 4.27. Ag^.
Incognitus in Psalm.

Diversae erant illorum functiones, utraeque necessarae populo. Musc.


and as at the North side the Merarites, at the South the Kohathites: so at the
East, Moses and Aaron pitched both their Tents. Rupertus gives the reason why
these two were appointed to dwell so near together, viz. to show that the
public ministry stands in need of Magisteriall authority, both whom when
agreeing together, nothing is more auspicious; so when they ^ar and differ,
nothing is more dangerous. A happy meeting of these two men it was, if Moses
was so glad of Aarons company, as Aaron was of Moses his society and
familiarity: who when he met Moses in Horeb, he kissed him, and was glad
thereof in his heart, as the Lord told Moses. The speech of Solomon is most
true in government, that these two together, are better than to be severed
asunder: their offices indeed were diverse, but their affections alike; neither
of them disdain the other, but each of them did support the other; Musculus in
77. Psalm. Ambo servi manebant, neuter dominium usurpabat.
for which combination and blessed union of Magistrate and Minister, we are
daily to beg of God who is the God of peace and order.

3 Populo.
He was faithful to the people of God as appears by these three things: 3
Populo.
1 Diligentia, by his diligence for them. 2 Dilectione, by his love toward
them. 3 Iustitia, by his doing of justice among them.


1 His diligence for them in hearing and determining of their causes: he slept
up to the beach in the morning, Diligenti^. Exodus 18.14.
and came not down till the evening, Exodus 18.18. Extra vires tuas est
negotium. Romans 12.14. Picrius Hieroglyp. l 1. c. 4. Tam magnos habet oculos,
and palpelras adeo parvas, ut non poss^^t oculos penit^ obtegere.
all which time he spent in desciding of their controversies: so diligent, as
that Iethro his father in law did advise him to slack his diligence, and
favor himself with more indulgence: this diligence is a duty which is
required in Governors; he that rules, let him do it with diligence. The
Lion, says Pierius, is the hieroglyphicall figure of a Magistrate, which
creature (some think) does never take a sound sleep, both because in his
deepest sleep, he always moves his tail, and for that his eyes are always
open and never shut: which is the true portraiture of a good Governor, whose
head is filled with cares, while others sleep: Maximinus.
which Maximinus well considering, confirmed by his short motto, (quo mayor,
hoc laboriosior) the same we find in Homer, who says, that public
Governors ought not to sleep all the night, much less, Homerus Iliad 2.
Epaminondas Vigilo ut cives mei dormire possint.

Seneca. Omnium domos illius vigilia defendit, omnium otium illius labor; ommum
delitias illius industria, omnium vacationem illius occupatio.


idle out all their days without some diligent employment.

(...)
(...).
Which thing Epaminondas well considered, who being asked why he watched in the
night time, answered, that the citizens may sleep. Seneca says of a diligent
Governor, that his watchfulness preserves men in their houses, while they
are asleep; his labor their case, his pains their delight, his careful
observation, their exemption from care: whose care how great it is we may see
in the example of Charles the fifth, who resigning up the government of Belgia
to his son Philip, O sili, magnum tibi on^^ imp^no, ego enim to^o tempore
principatus mei n^n ^uam quadrantem horae magnis curis and anxietatibus vacuum
h^b^i.
spoke with tears, trickling down his cheeks in this manner. O my dear
son, I have now imposed a great burden upon thee, in that I have enjoined
thee to govern this people, the weight of which burden, I have often felt;
who during the whole time of my government thereof, could not enjoy one quarter
of an hour, wherein I was wholly free from care: the Prophet Jeremy
denounces a heavy curse against all them who do the work s of the Lord
negligently, of which number this of g uernment is one of the chiefest, which
no man must neglect as Gallio did, if he respect the favor of God. But we are
to know that all diligent employment is not good: there is triplex negotium 1
Vitiosum. 2 Odiosum. 3 Virtuosum.
a vicious, odious, and virtuous employment.

Math 2.7.
1 Negotium vitiosum, a vicious employment, wherein men are diligent to do
mischief, as Herod who was diligent in searching for Christ, that he might
destroy him; this diligence is sinful.

2 Negotium odiosum, when men busy themselves in those things which fall
without the bounds and compass of their calling. Let such men know that he
who is busy in other men's matters, neglecting or omitting their own affairs,
God will give him as little thanks for his diligence, as David did Absolon, 2 Samuel 15.2. 1 Pet 4^^. (...)
who off^ed to undertake a needless and thankelesse pains in his fathers
office, who was severely punished of God as a busy body: this diligence is
hateful.

3 Negotium virtuosum, a virtuous employment, when men are diligent in their
functions whereunto God has called them; the Minister in Preaching Gods word
in season and out of season; the Ruler in hearing complaints, reforming abuses,
determining of controversies; this diligence is lawful and useful, and thus
was Moses diligent.

Job. 29.16.
Job is commended for this kind of diligence in his office; he sought out the
cause diligently: Seneca. ad Lucil. epist. 118. Non tam benignum and liberale
natura nobis tempus dedit, ut aliquid ex illo vacet perdere.

Arist. in Occon. experg^scidecet prius dominum quam servum and cubitum ire
pasterius.

Facilius esse Davidi pastoralem vitam egisse quam regalem. Aguanus in Ps. Luke
18.4.

Domitian. Tantae fuit desidiae ut in cubiculo solus, acuto stilo muscas
configeret. Prou. 24.31.


let every Ruler therefore resolve upon a painefu^l and diligent course no way
fostering idleness, he that has the least employment in the world (says
Seneca) has no time left to spend in an idle manner, because nature has not
bestowed on us so much as whereof we can be prodigal. The Magistrates
business is more than ordinary, and therefore it is expedient that he be an
extraordinary good husband of time: that which Aristotle requires in a Master
of a family, is no less requisite in a Ruler in the Commonwealth; that is, he
must be the first up in the morning and the last man in the evening; not
presuming that his pre-eminence can excuse his diligence. David was first a
shepherd, and afterward a Ruler; and his first kind of life was less
laborious, the second more industrious and tedious: godly industry in this
office, will remove the shame and infamy of that judge in the Gospel; who
because he would not be troubled, is therefore branded with injustice; as also
of that Roman Emperor Domitian, who would all the day long sit in his chamber
and kill flies with sharp needles. Where there is a sluggish Husbandman
(says Solomon) the field will be ouergrowne with thorns; so where a sluggish
Governor, all things will be amiss and out of order: he that is not fit to
take pains in government, is not fit for government; as the poor woman to
Adrian the Emperor (who denied to take her petition, because then he had no
leisure to hear her) replied, noli ergo imperare, Dionys. Cassius. Bernard. de
ordine vitae.

Moses in silentio loquebatur, and in otio operabatur. Ierom epist ad rusticum
monachum: Facito semper aliquid operis, ut te diabolus inveniat occupatum.
Dilectione. Exodus 32 32. Greg dele me 1. Toll me de hoc officio, ne sim
legislator populi.


if you have no leisure, leave your Empire: let therefore all Governors be
exhorted to imitate Moses in his diligence: whereof Saint Bernard speaks
thus, Moses even in his silence was a speaker, and in his relaxation, he was a
diligent labourer: and to remember the counsel of Saint Jerome, never be thou
idle, but always diligent in some good business, suitable to thy calling, that
Satan may never find thee but well employed.

2 Dilectione, by his affectionate love toward them: when the people offended
God, he prayed unto God for them in this manner: either pardon their sin, or
else raze my name out of the book of life: by which book whether we
understand,

1 Liber legislaturae, as Saint Ambrose: blot me out of the book of
Law-giuers and Rulers, dismiss me from the office of judicature.

Dimitte me de hac vita Vbi electi ad futuram gloriam conscribuntur.
2 Liber viuentium in hac vita: that is, blot me out of the book and catalogue
of them who have their being, living, and moving in this life: or,

3 Liber vitae aeternae: that is; raze my name out of that book wherein the
names of the elect are written.

In what sense soever we take it, we cannot but discern great love in Moses
toward Gods people: wherein Moses resembles a child, who seeing his father
about to turn out of doors one of his servants whom he dearly affects, in
the ^eat of his love toward that servant, he thus says to his father: Pater
noli hunc ^ijce ^, aut si cum eijcis, me queque eijcito.
Father, I humbly beseech you cast not out this your servant whom I so heartily
affect, as that I cannot lie comfortably, if I be deprived of his society and
company, rather then so, turn me out of doors in his stead, or cast me out
with him: Bernardus in Cont. sermon. 12. Si dives quispiam mulieri pauperculae
dicat, etc.
or otherwise (as Saint Bernard says) he resembles a poor woman, who coming
very hungry to a rich man's door, with her tender infant in her arms which she
dear^ly loves; the householder inuit th her to come into the house and refresh
her self, but withal forbids her to bring in her child with her, lest it
make a noise and trouble the house: which mother refuses all the kindness
that is offered unto her, because her child cannot partake thereof; she had
rather fast and continue in hu ger, rather then that her child should be
neglected and endangered. In like manner Israel was as a froward child, Numb.
11 12. Exporta hunc populam in sinu tuo, quemadindum portat nu^icius lactentem.

Praestat ut unus p^reat quam u^^tas Bernard in sesto Mariae Magdal. Pene
oblitus sim Mosen sacriliquoris huius rore persusum. Exodus 2.


carried in the bosom of Moses a tender nurse, who had rather himself be
deprived of comfort then they, had rather perish b^ing but one man, then all
they being so many: this was an infallible symptom of his extraordinary love.
Saint Bernard speaking of the Saints who were anointed with the oil of
charity, as of Paul, who wished himself anathematized for his brethren the
Jews: of Job, who was (coeco oculus, and claudo pes) an eye to the blind, and
a foot to the lam^: of Samuel, who lamented for Saul all the days of his
life: of Joseph, who forg^tting his brethrens injuries, lovingly embraces
them: at the last he speaks of Moses thus: I had almost forgot Moses, who was
thoroughly bewetted with the d^we of charity toward Gods people, and that both
before he was in office when he took part with the Hebrew against the
Egyptian, as also after that he was settled therein: Bernar. in Cant. sermon 30.
p. 658. Ille renuit, quare? ob nimiam profecto dilectionem, qua illi populo
devinctus tenebatur; and quontam non requirebat quod sibi utile soret, sed quod
multis. Exodus 18 16. Deuteronomy. 16.18. Heathens. Nec hesperus nec lucifer ita lucet
sicut iustitia. Seneca. omnes virtutum species uno iustitiae nomine continentur.

Seneca de ludo. Pietate and iustitia principes dij fiunt.

Idem de benificijs. Qui dat veneficia deos imitatur, qui repellit
foeneratores. Reiverius Pantheolog.

Liberalitas ordinatur tantum ad bonum particulare, at iustitia ad bonum
commune.

1 Kings 2.2. Fertitudo praesertim in bello utilis, at iustitia and in bello
and in pace.


wishing that by his smart and suffering, they might receive ease and comfort:
and the same Father upon the Canticles, demanding the reason why Moses so
little respected his wealth and honor, as to leave Pharaohs Court; answers,
he refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, because of his great
love wher^with he loved the people of Israel, not seeking what might be
profitable to himself, but what might be comfortable unto them.

3 Iustitia, by doing of justice among them.
Moses was faithful in this part of his office by his own confession; the
people come unto me when they have any matter, and I judge between one and
another, according to the laws and ordinances of God; one whereof is this,
Judges shall thou make in all thy Cities, and they shall judge the people with
righteous judgment.

This virtue of justice is most highly commended.

1 By heathen Writers; no star to the heavens is so great an ornament, as
justice to a Magistrate.

Hesiod. Hac vnareges olim sunt sine creati, Dicere ius laesis, iniustaque
tollere facta.


Seneca says that all kind of virtues are comprehended within this of
justice, and that in a Commander it is a more needful quality than any other
whatsoever.

Liberality i^ a princely quality, and thereby (says Seneca) a man becomes
like the Gods; yet justice is better, because whereas liberality extends
only to a particular good toward some few persons, yet equity to a common
good: and bonum quo communius comelius.

Fortitude, another virtue beseeming a Ruler, the which David commends to
Solomon his son; be strong and show thy self a man: a man; first, in years
no child; secondly, in wisdom no fool; thirdly, in courage no coward: yet
justice exceeds it; for though fortitude is of absolute necessity in the time
of war, yet justice is most necessary both in the time of war and peace.

Fathers. August. lib. 2. de civitate dei. c. 4. Remota iustitia, quid sunt
regna nisi magna latrocinia.

Gregor. ad duos Franciae reges. Epistol. 7. Prophets. Isaiah. 1.17. Micah 6.8.


2 By the ancient fathers, Saint Augustine; take away justice from a Kingdom,
what is it but a harbor for all kind of villainies; and Saint Gregory says,
(Summum in regibus bonum est iustitiam colere, and subiectis non sinere quod
potestatis est, fieri, sed quod aequum est custodire:) that is, it is the
excellency of Rulers to exercise justice, and not to suffer men to do what
they desire to do, but compel them to that which they ought to do.

3 By the holy Prophets of God, as Isaiah: Seek judgment, and Micah: I will
show thee O man what the Lord requires of thee, surely to do justice.

There are four sorts of Governors who are in great peril to swerue from
justice, and so transgress Gods commandment herein.

Men 1 Fearfully minded. 2 Voluptuously disposed. 3 Ambitiously qualified. 4
Couetously affected.


Timorous. Pilatus pluris faciebat imperatoris Romani, quam dei gratiam.

Heb. 11.27. (...). Timiditas iudicu calamitas innocentis.

Moses agnus and leo, agnus in dei populum, leo in Pharaonem. Volup^uous. Heb.
11.25. Philo. Non ventri quicquam dabat praeter tributum naturae necessarium.


1 Fearfully minded; Pilate was drawn into that foul and injurious act of
condemning the Son of God, who did no sin, for fear of the Jews; had he
not been timorous, he had not been so unjust, so injurious: but Moses was
free from this exorbitant fear: he feared neither the whole multitude of
Israel, before whose eyes he brake to pieces that costly Idol which they had
reared and lately worshipped; nor yet the fury of Pharaoh that potent King: (he
feared not the fierceness of the King) but with boldness and courage,
threatened Gods severity against his cruelty; therefore we need not doubt but
that he dealt justly with every man, who feared no man.

2 Voluptuously disposed, those in place of authority, who do love pleasures
more then godliness, that they may maintain their delights, will forget
uprightness. But this Ruler Moses did alienate himself from pleasures,
preferring a pensive before a pleasant life; chosing rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of Pharaohs
profane Court. Philo says, he did not pamper nature deliciously, but only
gave it that allowance which was necessary: as sometimes he fasted
miraculously, Barrad. Itinerar. Mira res sane suit magis elegisse affl^gi cum
populo Hebraeo, quam summa dignitatis i^cunditate oblectari.

Ambitious. Exodus 4.13.


so he was abstinent ordinarily: how can we but conceive him just and a lover
of equity, who did divert his mind from the love of pleasure and vanity.

3 Ambitiously qualified; how far from ambition Moses was the history
testifies, who when as God called him to the office of government, he
requested the Lord to think upon some other man, saying, Send O Lord I pray
thee by him whom thou should send; whom this was whom Moses wished God to
send in stead of himself, there are different opinions.

1 Some do think that Moses would have Aaron his elder brother sent, as
Lyranus; Lyranus. Quia senior erat and eloquentior.
because he was both more ancient and more eloquent.

2 Others do think that the man whom Moses desired to be sent was the M
ssias: Tertullianus. Cyprianus. Rupertus. Recusavit Moses ut eo recusante,
mitteretur Messiah.
as Tertullian Cyprian and Rupertus, who says thus; Moses refused the
government of Israel, with a desire that the Messiah himself might govern.

We will not scan that question too far, f^r whosoever it was whom he would
have sent, it is m^st apparent that ambitiously he did not affect the place
himself: Gregor. moral. lib. 35. cap. 13. Quia apud semente humilis, ^blatam
protinus tanti ^egm inis gloriam negavit.

August. de civit. det cap. 19. Locus superior s^ne quo populus rigi non potest
et^ administretia vt decet, tamen indecenter app^tita^. 2 S^^. 15.4. 2 S^^. ^^
2.


Saint Gregory gives the reason why he was loath to take the place, because he
was a most humble man, not desirous of preeminency or vain glory; whose
backwardness though it be not altogether justifiable, yet the inference
thence is warrantable; viz. that we ought not auidiously and too greedily
thirst after promotion: which lesson Saint Austin teaches, Authority though it
may be received, yet it must not be too eagerly pursued: because it is commonly
seen, that those who have most desired government, have least deserved it:
witness Absolon would God I were Judge; yet see how well he deserves it: the
history relates that he was first, an hypocrite, though no blemish or speck
upon him outwardly, yet most filthy within: secondly, an incestuous adulterer
even with his own fathers concubines: thirdly, a thief and robber, who stole
away the hearts of his fathers subjects, who thereby was more injurious then if
he had taken treasures; fourthly, 2 Samuel 15.31. Philo. 39 7. de vita Mosis.

Assumpto principata non hoc egit, sicut nonnulli solent ut augerent samiliant
suam: unicum habebat propositum necessarium invare subditos, and dictis
factisque eorum utilitati consulere.

Covetous. Heb. 11.26. Philo. Non aurum non argentum in thesauros condidit.

Barrad. Itinerar. in terram sanctim


a traitor, conspiring with Achitophel, against his own anointed Father: thus
you see his fitness, and withal his earnestness for government. I could
wish that men would less desire their own elevation, so should we hear
less complaint of injustice and oppression; the sum is this, Moses was not
ambitious of his office, and therefore not injurious therein, as Philo notes.
He took the government (not as some do) only for the raising of their name
and fame, but with this intent, viz. that he might be a helper to the
oppressed, and that he might advise them for their own good.

4 Couetously affected, we read that covetousness is the root of all evil,
in a special manner of injustice: of which crime Moses was not guilty; for he
esteemed the rebuke of Christ, greater riches then the treasures of Egypt.
Philo shows that Moses was not auidous of gold or silu^r: who when as he had
been nourished by Thermutis the daughter of Pharaoh; she presenting him unto
the King her father, requesting him to respect the child; the King being
willing to gratify her (diadema suum capiti eius imposuit) he put a diadem
upon his head, the which Moses pulled off again, cast it upon the ground, and
trod it under foot: which Pharaoh observing, demanded of an Enchanter what
this act of the child did portend; he replied, that hereby was signified how
that this Hebrew child should overcome Egypt, subdue it, and tread it under,
and should contemn and despise all worldly wealth: how contented a man Moses
was with a little, Exodus 4.20.
appears in his return out of the land of Midian into Egypt, in which he
took nothing with him of all that which he had gotten in Midian by his
painful industry, Quod possessionem rerum caducarum parum curabat.
but left it all behind him, carrying only with him his wife, his sons, and
the rod of God in his hand, all which did signify that he little cared for
riches: and therefore he which so much neglected the riches which he had, he
would not be unjust to get such riches as he had not.

So that Moses being neither timorous, voluptuous, ambitious nor covetous, it
is not likely that his dealing was either unjust or unrighteous.

Against this justice of Moses two things are objected, 1 Obiectio. Oecumenius
in epist lud.

Satanas dixit, Mosen non esse dignum sepultura. eo quod unjust occidisset
Aegyptium, cumque non in sepulchro sed in sabulo sepelivisset. Solut.

Aquinas 2a. 2ae. quaest. 60. art. ult. Videtur Moses occidisse Aegyptiu^,
tanquam ex inspiratione divina, auth ritatem adeptus.

Ly^an. in Exodus Moses ex divina electione ad liberandos Hebraeos habebat
a^th^ritatem vinduandi iniurias, and hoc sciebat per revela^^^nem divinam. Act.
7.15.

2 O'nectio Numb. 11.15. Sol.

Pelargus in locum.

Haec clausula notat excessum imp^tientiae, viro quantumlibet summo.

Greg in pastoral. Z^gedin. loc. com. p. 43. Etsi fratrum salus nobis quaerenda
est; non tamen cum animarum nostrarum iactura, ipsam desiderare debemus.

Numb. 12.22. Musculus. Moses haesitando peccavit.

Numb. 20.12 Psalm 106.33. Musculus Motus quosdam dubitationis and dissidentiae
in deum ostendit.

Pelargus in loc. Dubitanter petram percutit, quasi impossible esset ex petra
aquam prodire, pro tam incredulis.

Stando non cadendo.

Propter terram vilem au^um pretiosum non contemnitur, sed a^^rum eligitur, and
terra relinquitur.

Bos^quer. monemachi^. melsuge, aculcum fuge.

Apes flores dulces sugunt, herhas amaras relinquunt. Senec. Ambros. Patres
instruunt, non modo cum docent, sed etiam cum errant.


1 That he d^alt unjustly with others. 2 That he dealt unjustly with himself.


1 Object. Unjust to others, he slew the Egyptian, having no authority:
Oecumenius says, that in the disputation betwixt Michael and the devil, about
the body of Moses, Satan's argument was this; Moses most unjustly slew a man,
and when he had slain him, did not put him decently in a sepulcher, therefore
his body was not worthy of burial.

Answ. This fact of Moses is sufficiently cleared from injustice by that of
Aquinas, who says that he had warrant to do it by divine direction and
inspiration; God revealing unto him, that he should be the Israelites
deliverer, the which he thought that they had all known as he, viz. (that God
had determined by his hand to give that people deliverance) whereof this Hebrew
was one: in which consideration this fact is freed from injustice.

2 Object. He dealt unjustly with himself, in entreating God to kill him that
he might not behold his misery: I pray thee kill me, that I may not behold my
misery.

Answ. I find none of the ancient writers to justify this wish of his.
Pelargus says, this speech imports that Moses was excessiuely unpatient,
though otherwise a good man. Gregory speaking of this wish, says, in
deumingratitudo summa est, malle non esse quam miserum esse: great was Moses h
s ingratitude, who desires rather not to be at all, then to be miserable. We
ought says Zegedin, to seek our brethrens good and safety, but not with the
hazard of our own souls: we must not do this evil to our selu s, though
thereby we are sure, that great good would redound unto our brethren. We are to
know therefore, that as Moses failed in other things, viz. first in doubting of
Gods promises, when he said that he would give them sufficient food, (can all
the fish of the sea be gathered together to suffice them) which David calls
an unadvised speech: he spoke unadvisedly with his lips: secondly, in not
believing God, promising him water out of the rock: wherein (as says
Musculus) he bewrays by many signs his ^ouoting and diffidence: as,

1 In that he smote the rock twice, whereas once had been sufficient, and as
much as God commanded.

2 In that he did it, when the people requested it, not immediately when God
commanded it.

3 In that he did not smite that rock whereunto God directed him, but some
other, as some think.

4 In that he spoke not to the rock, as God commanded him, but to the people.

5 In that he spoke both doubtfully and faintingly, as Musculus observes.

So that he failing in this speech, as in some other before, we must learn to
imitate him and other the Saints in their standings, not in their failings: the
most godly men, who have their most golden affections, have also some drossie
and earthly cogitations; abhor thou their drossie earthlinesse; but affect
their golden godliness. The best sanctified man is like unto the Be, which
has both honey and sting; the sting of naughtiness, as well as the honey of
godliness; lick thou the honey, but shun the sting: wherefore it will be thy
wisdom to imitate the Bees, which do suck the sweet flowers, but leave the
bitter herbs. It is a good speech of Saint Ambrose, the Saints do instruct us
not only when by a pious conversation they keep the law, but also they
admonish us when by abberration they transgress the law. Let Rulers learn
from Moses to be just to others, yet not unjust to themselves.

And now because this virtue, Justice, for which Moses is commended, has been
so highly advanced by the Heathens, ancient Fathers, Prophets; practiced by
this so great a Judge in Israel, notwithstanding the objections to the
contrary: and forasmuch as nothing is well done, which is not done in a good
manner, let us consider how and in what manner justice must be exercised.

To the exercise of justice, five things are requisite: for the manner, it must
be,

First, Complete; secondly, General; thirdly, Voluntary; fourthly, Deliberate;
fifthly, Stable.

Complete.
1 Complete, justice is that which has these two compounds, 1 Mercy. Cyprian
Oporte: i^dicem cum iustitiae aculco mel clementiae habere commixtum. Mercy.

Prou. 10.18. Numb. 12.3. Deus vindictae gladium olco misericordiae acu^t.


2 Severity.


1 Mercy: Solomon declares the necessity of mercy in a man of authority; mercy
and truth do preserve the King, and his throne shall be established with
mercy: in the book of Numbers we read that Moses was a very meek man, above
all the men that were upon the earth. Let all godly Governors learn mercy
from Moses, yea from God himself, who always sleeps the sword of his
severity, in the oil of his mercy. Learn you to be merciful, as your
heavenly father is merciful.

2 Severity, Severity.
which is as necessary as the former; for which purpose God has put a sword
into his hand, that he may exercise severity: in which act three things are
considerable.

1 Object, upon whom it must be exercised. Object.
2 Time, when it must be exercised. 3 Causes, wherefore it must be exercised.
1 The Object of Severity, are offenders; who because they are not all alike,
nor of one rank, you must therefore distinguish them in their punishments.
Some there are which offend of infirmity, and err in simplicity: against such,
Genesis 3.24.
you that are Gods terrestrial Cherubims in this English Eden, must only
shake the sword, for that is sufficient. Prou. 26.3. Flagellum equo, frenum
asino, virga stolidorum tergo.


Others there are of a higher rank then the former, being both stout and bold
offenders; for whose mouths there must be prepared Bits, for whose hand,
Manacles; for whose feet, Stocks; and for whose backs Rods; as Solomon
intimates.

I may not presume to give directions to your wisdoms how to proportion your
severity to the several crimes you shall meet with; whether robbery, murder,
or the like. Only give me leave to be your Remembrancer concerning the Popes
bloud-hounds, Priests and Jesuits; who plot and contriue the death of Kings
and Princes, the ruin and destruction of whole Kingdoms: aiming not at
angles, acres, cottages, and widows houses, with Ahab, and the Pharisees, but
at Kings Palaces, whole countries: bloody Butchers, who will not foul their
hands with the blood of beasts but of men, and that not in the blood of base
abiects as Ahab in Naboths, but in the royal blood of Kings and princes; these
foxes must be hunted, discovered, worried, who if they be not destroyed, will
destroy our vineyard: O smite them seuer^ly, because they do but watch a time
to smite us mortally.

Time.
2 The time when it must exercised; when no warning will serve, nor easier
means p^euaile: when as the bench has given the malefactor both a discharge
(go thy way) and charge (sin no more) if he still iterat^ his offense, who
can pity him if punishment overtake him: Improbe Neptunum accusat, qui iterum
naufragium ^acit.
he that will needs to Sea^ when once already he has suffered shipwreck, if he
fall foul^ the second time, he may thank himself: if the axe of iust^ce has
been laid unto the roo^e of a naughty tree, two or three sessions t gether,
and still shall bring forth bitter fruit, dishonorable unto God, and da^ger^us
to the Commonwealth; what remedy if this tree be hewn down by the axe of
iusti^e (this being considered) that he who spares the bad, Bonis nocet qui
malis parcit. Exodus 4.6. Magdeburgen. Centur. 4. c 4. p. 190.
he iniureth the good, and himself most of all. The hand of Moses when as it
was str^tched out ^t was whole and sound, but when he withdrew it and h^ld it
in his bosom, it was leprous; which giu^th us to understand, that ^s for a
Ruler to punish and exercise severity when there is cause, will be commodious
unto him; so to use conniuency, is very perilous.

Causes.
Four causes wherefore it must be exercised: there is great cause why severity
should be exercised, in regard of 1 God, 2 Government, 3 Spectators, 4
Malefactors.

2 Samuel 21.9.
1 Of God, that his wrath may be appeased. So long as Saul's sin went
unpunished God was grieved but his sonn^s being hanged, he was appeased: God
sent a plague upon Israel because they tolerated open adulterers to perpetrate
their filthiness, Psalm 106.30.
but so soon as Phineas executed judgment, the plague was stayed.

2 Of the Government, that it may be established so says Solomon; Prou. 4.25.
Take away the dross from the silver, and behold a vessel for the finer, take
away the wicked from the King, and his throne shall be established in
righteousness.

3 Of the Spectators; Deuteronomy. 21.11.
that they may be cautioned and admonished by their surveigh of others
punished. In sanguine tuo caeteri descent ebedientiam. Poena ad paucos, metus
ad omnes.
We read of a malefactor who desiring pardon of the Judge for his fact, he
denied him, giving this reason; by thy punishment others will learn amendment:
punishment being like unto a thunderbolt, the smart whereof though some few
feel, yet all do fear.

4 Of the Malefactors; that they may be bettered and so blessed: the thief in
the Gospel had not died so penitently had he not died so painfully. Metior est
modica amaritudo in fancibu^ quam supplicium aeternum in visceribus.
It was good for David that for his folly he was afflicted, and much good
redoundeth unto the malefactors when they are in this life punished; it is
better to suffer a short though sharp punishment here, then everlasting torment
hereafter.

2 Justice general. General.

General justice is that which respects all, rewarding the meanest in well
doing, punishing the greatest in evil doing: the which will cashiere from the
seat of justice their several vices.

1 (...), all respecting of persons; Exuat personam iudicis, qui induit amici.
such a Ruler holds on his course of justice, though superiors frown,
equals murmur and inferiors repine: he acknowledges verity, not petigree.

2 (...), all bribing and vnder-hand-gifting; it appears by David's speech in
the Psalms, Psalm. 26.10.
how he conceived that the souls of all bribing Judges dying without
repentance were in hell; Dextra plena muneribus.
he wishing that his soul might not be with theirs; Gather not my soul with
theirs, whose hands are full of gifts.

All gifts and rewards are not unwarrantable.

There are,

1 Munera honoris, gifts of honor; 1 Kings 10.2.
such as the Queen of Sheba gave to Solomon.

2 Munera amoris, gifts of love; Genesis 33.9.
such as Jacob gave unto Esau.

2 Samuel 8 10.
3 Munera gratitudinis, gifts of thankfulness; such as Toi the King of Hamath
sent unto David; viz. vessels of gold and silver to congratulate his victories.

Quae in fia^m malam and dantur and accipiuntur. Muscul.
4 Munera corruptionis, gifts of corruption; which are both tendered and received
with an evil intent; namely to divert the stream of justice: these gifts are
vnallowable and damnable.

3 (...) all fearfulness, terror, and affrighting by superiors: Timiditas
iudicis est calamitas innocentis.
a godly Ruler must remember that the timidity of the Governor, is the
calamity of the inferior: whereas this general justice inableth a Judge to
do justice to all equally without respect of any; without hope of gifts from
any, and without fear of any whomsoever.

Voluntary.
3 Justice voluntary.
1 Pet. 5.2. (...). 2 Chronicles. 24.6. Exodus 30.14. Vt non est voluntarius
gubernator quem cupiditas trahit, ita nec spontaneus quem timor urget.

2 Kings 12.5. Gorravij. cuncta opera religionis debent esse voluntaria.
Deliberate. Prou. 18.31.


Governors in the Church are bound to perform their offices, not coactiuely,
but willingly; so must all Rulers that are appointed to do justice in the
Commonwealth. Iehoiada did that which was just in causing the people to bring
offerings unto the Lord, wherewith the Temple was repaired, but herein his
justice was blemished, in that he did it not voluntarily, by or of himself
(for during the space of 23. years, the breaches of the Temple were not
repaired) but coactiuely, being constrained thereunto by the strict iniunction
and mandate of good King Ioash.

As he is not a just judge whom covetousness draws, no more is he a
voluntary Ruler, whom fear constrains.

4 Justice deliberate.
He who answers a matter before he hear it, it is folly and shame unto him
(says Solomon) the want of deliberation in the execution of justice, is
disallowed of all sorts of men; as,

John 7.51.
1 By the Jews: Nichodemus says, that it was not the manner of the Jews to
judge a man ere he were heard.

2 By the Romans; Paul says, it is not the custom of the Romans to deliver
any man to death, Acts 25.10.
till the accuser come face to face, and that the prisoner have liberty to make
his defense.

3 By Heathens: Seneca says, Seneca. Qui statuit aliquid inaudita altera
part, aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuit.
he that censureth and pondereth not, suppose his sentence be just, yet
himself is unjust: wherefore it is most needful, that the cause be well
considered, ere the judgment be pronounced, because the sentence once passed,
cannot conveniently be recalled.

5 Justice Stable. Stable.

He who will be respected in his Magistracy, Levitas est mobilitas animi, qua
homines levi de causa mentes vel sermones facile mutant.
must avoid lenity, which is a flexibility of mind, whereby men are easily
drawn to alter their minds, words and actions, upon any small or no cause. A
Judge must not be like the vulgar Jews, who this day would deifie, and to
morrow crucify the same man; nor yet like unto Pilate, Iisdem labijs Iesum
misit ad crucem, quibus cum pronuntiaverat innocentem.
who commanded Christ to the Cross, with those same lips, with which he
pronounced him innocent: but he must be like the needle touched with the Load
stone of constancy, ever looking one way, or like the Egyptian Pyramid, upon
which was written (nec flatu nec fluctu) neither winds nor floods shall remove
me.

So that it largely and plainly appears, that Moses was faithful as to God,
to Aaron, so to the people over whom he was Governor, as is evident by these
three particulars of his diligence, love, and justice.

3 General Observation. Observation.
Those that are in Moses place, must be faithful as Moses was.
The truth of this Thesis, Saint Paul teaches in his first Epistle to the
Corinths, in these words, 1 Cor. 4.2.
it is required of disposers, that every man be found faithful: and for a
pattern we can find no man more fit then Moses: who in all the offices of
the house, was a faithful Monitor: in all the wants and necessities of the
house, was a faithful supplier: in all the controversies of the house, a
faithful determiner, and in all the guidance and ordering of the house, a most
faithful Governor.

Reasons are two, drawn 1 A Pari. 2 A Periculo.


A pari, fa^thfulnesse is required in persons that have less power then
Magistrates, as in

1 Governors of private families: those servants that have believing masters,
let them do them service, because they (that is) their masters are faithful
unto them, 1 Timothy 6 2.
giving them they allowance both seasonably and fully.

1 Samuel 22.14.
2 Servants: Abimelech conceiueth David to be a fit servant for Saul, because
he was a faithful man.

Tit. 1.6.
3 Children, hau ng faithf ll children.

Prou. 13.17. Prou. 14.5.
4 Messengers, a faithful Mess ger preserves.

5 Witnesses, who must speak^ the truth, and nothing but the truth.

If therefore faithfulness be requisite in Governors, Servants, Children,
Witnesses; all of them being of an inferior ra^ke; it is as much, if not more
necessary in Rulers, whom God has set in a place transcendent.

A periculo, it is a case very dangerous and hurtful, to be a Magistrate, and
not to be faithful: it will be hurtful two ways.

1 To them that are inferior: inferiors will eye and imitate those that are
in higher place. The course of nature will sooner fail (says Cassiodorus)
then the people leave off to assimulate their Rulers: Cassiodor. Fulgentius ad
Theodoret^m Senatorem ep. 6. qui in seculi culmine constituti sunt, aut multos
ad salutem ducunt, aut plurimos secum perdunt. 1. Isaiah. 21.23.
as the head is affected, so most commonly the whole body. If the Governor who
is the head, be unfaithful, he makes many more unfaithful besides himself:
this is plainly laid down by the Prophet Isaiah in his first chapter, who
when as he had said in the 21. verse, that the faithful City was become an
harlot; he gives the reas^n thereof in the 23. verse, viz. their judges were
unfaithful. The Citizens of Jerusalem did evidently discern their Judges
unfaithful sitting on the seat of justice, and therefore they resolve to be
as unfaithful in their course of merchandise.

2 To himself, that is, the Governor: for if a Servant, a Messenger,
Witness, or Child, that is unfaithful, cannot avoid and escape the
punishment of unfaithfulness; how shall Magistrates escape, whose
unfaithfulness extends much farther?

The fourth General is the Application.
Wherein I humbly crave leave that I may apply it;

1 To you the Honorable Judges, Judges.
in whom God and the King has reposed such trust, as (at this time) to give
you the power oyer et terminer, to hear and determine those causes and suits,
as also to help and reform those many grieuances with which you shall meet
within the circuit of these eight Counties: that you will be well pleased to
take Moses his faithfulness into your consideration, and to let him be your
president in the exercise of your function. O let his science direct you, his
conscience provoke you to faithfulness: toward God by your pious and zealous
deportment; Plant. Ne officij vestri satis memores, immemores sacere videar.
Psalm.
toward Gods Ministers embracing and countenancing such as are painful and
peaceable; and toward Gods people, which you shall testify both by your
diligence for them, and your love toward them, especially by doing of justice
among them, according to the aforesaid rules of justice, which I have so much
the more enlarged, Counselors. Basil in cap. 1. Is. Intollerabile est
superbiae argumentum existimare se nullius egere consilio. Egardus. Nunquam
defendendas suscipiat causas quas novit esse malas. Solon. Consulenda non quae
suavissima sed quae optima.

Gregor. Turpe est defendere quod non mihi constiterit esse aequum. Papian. Non
tam facile est excusare fraticidium quam facere. Exodus 23.2.


by how much I know that it is most necessarily required toward the
supportance of your faithfulness. But lest I make you seem unmindful of your
duty by pressing it too far, and urging it too long, I will end it with
David's short exhortation; love innocence, and the thing that is right; for this
shall bring you peace at the last.

2 To you the learned Counselors, whose calling every intelligent man will
acknowledge both useful and needful, that you blemish not your worthy
profession.

1 By undertaking and countenancing such causes as are naught. Solons advise
was, that men should counsel rather things wholesome, then merely
delightsome. Saint Gregory says, it is a vile part to undertake the defense of
that which in it self is not honest. We read of Papian the Orator, who being
requested by Antonius Caracalla the Emperor, to defend the fratricide of his
brother Geta, replied: it is more easy to commit it, then to defend it: the
Lord himself gives a law straightly against it, thou shall not speak in a
cause to wrest judgment; and menaceth a curse against such as practice it; woe
to them that call evil good.

2 By imparting the secret passages of your Clients cause, and his intended
proceedings unto his adversary, against which branch of unfaithfulness, call
to mind that speech of the Poet in another case: Ovid.
Eximia est virtus praestare silentia rebus:
At contra grauis est culpa, tacenda loqui.


Prou 11.13.
But especially that of Solomon, he that is of a faithful heart, concealeth a
matter.

3 By being unstable and fickle in your counsels; against which sort of
counselors, Salustius ad Caesarem. Qui huc illuc fluctuantes agitantur.
Salust bitterly inueieth: you shall make your faculty ridiculous, while you
are so various and inconstant in your opinions, denying that to be no law this
Term, which you auoued to be law the last.

4 By defiling your hands, souls, and consciences with gifts and bribes, which
hinder just proceedings; whereas you ought to love verity more then opulency;
and to learn even from Balaam, Aegard. Magis apud vos valeat amor very quam
lucri. Ministers. 1 Cor. 4.2.
thus much fidelity; as not for a housefull, much less for a pursefull or
handful of silver, to do that which is unjust.

3 To you my brethren in the ministry (to whom I will speak the less, because
you are the least number in this worthy auditory) that you be found faithful
according to the Apostles iniunction: To fulfill which aright, our care must be
to shun such things as hinder it, viz.

1 Idleness, God having set us in his vineyard, the harvest being great, we
must bestirre our selves, always remembering that speech of Saint Paul: Woe
unto me if I preach not the Gospel.

1 Pet. 4.11.
2 Vain glory: a faithful Minister, will not Preach himself, Prosper. de vit.
contemp. l. 1. c. 23.
but Christ: he will so speak, that in all things God may be glorified, not
intending to draw from the people (plausum, sed gemitum.)

1 Cor. 10.33.
3 Covetousness: Saint Paul teaches us by his own example, not to seek
altogether our own profit, but the profit of many, that they might be saved.

Jurors.
4 To you the worthy Jurors, who are sworn to deal faithfully betwixt the King
and his Subjects, the Plaintiff and Defendant: let it be your care to proceed
according to evidence and Conscience. Forget not your oath, Secundum acta and
probata. Busaeus de statibus
which is to deal impartially, without all respect of persons, either for
fear or affection, which oath is of an astringent nature: he that swears an
oath to bind himself by a bond, Prou. 30.3.
he shall not break it, but shall do according to all that proceeds out of
his mouth: be not you of the number of those Jurors, who are resolved of their
verdict, ere the evidence be produced, or the cause opened, and are so stiffely
made in or against the cause, tha^ ^hey cannot be diuerted; but tread ye in the
golden path of truth and equity, resolve with constancy to continue therein,
and whosoever shall use means to turn you out of that way, answer them with
Iephtah: Judges 11.25.
I have sworn, I cannot go back.

5 To you the Officers of the County; I mean, Officers.
Constables, Bailiff^^, and the like; who are taken in to further justice: be
advised to deal faithfully. Be not you so dim sighted, and wilfully
ignorant, as that you cannot attach a party, while he is both present, as also
your Writ extant. You know with what intent Jonathan carried his arrows into
the field; not to hit or hurt his friend, 1 Samuel 20.22.
but to safeguard him, and admonish him to be gone (go thy way) use not you
your Writs in that kind, as he his arrows; advise not men to be gone, when
you should summon them to appear: but be faithful in that office which you
have undertaken. Concerning which persons, there is also required the care of
you the Justices, that if you find any one of these Officers, by his (non est
inuentus) to abuse the Country; that you thrust him out, and set another
Officer in his place, who will deal more faithfully.

6 To you the trusty Witnesses, Witnesses.
upon whose testimony depends the issue of every cause, that you may be wary
and well advised what you speak, that nothing proceed from you but truth.
Solomon makes a short, Prou. 14.5.
yet a perfect description of a faithful witness; a faithful witness will
not lie: the unfaithfulness of a witness, is to speak that which is false,
the which is flatly forbidden in Exodus; Exodus 20. Exodus 23.1.
thou shall not bear false witness: and again, thou shall not put thine hand
with the wicked, to be an unrighteous Witness. Remember I pray you that he who
by oath gives in false evidence, shall find a threefold inconvenience.

1 Committit culpam, he offends heinously, he sins exceedingly, falls
foully: if a sin to speak falsely, how great a sin to swear falsely? a false
Witness says Isiodor, offends three ways:

Isidor. de sammo bono lib. 3.
1 In Deum, against God, cuius veritatem annihilat: whose truth he would
nullify.

2 In iudicem cuius iudicium perturbat, he is offensive to the Judge, causing
him to do injustice against his own intention and resolution.

3 In accusatum, quem suo testimonio condemnat: he is injurious to the
accused, whose innocence he overthrows by his false testimony.

Greg. Qui salsum testimonium dixerunt, nullatenus ad testimonium sunt
admittendi, quia infames sunt, and just repellendi. Omnis qui falsum
testimonum dicit contra proximum suum dignus est ut cani^us pro^ciatur. Deuteronomy.
19 19. Pro^. 21 28. Pantheologia Reguem. p. 1101. Psalm. 15.3. All.
2 Amittit famam, he loses his reputation, in such sort, as that ever after he
cannot be respected or credited.

3 Incurrit poenam: he brings upon himself, punishments both temporal and
eternal.

1 Temporal: the ancient Jews did so abhor false witnesses, as that they
caused them to be torn in pieces with Dogs. The Lord in the book of
Deuteronomie describes the punishment of the false Witness: you shall do
unto him as he thought to have done unto his brother.

2 Eternal, a false Witness shall perish, viz. aeternaliter. David says that
such shall not enter into Gods heavenly Tabernacle, but shall come to utter
destruction, Psalm. 5.6. per^les omnes qui loquuntur mendacium.

7 To you all: that counsel which our Savior gave to all, as touching
watchfulness, the same I give to you all concerning faithfulness, be
faithful.

And lastly, to the end that all you may be provoked unto faithfulness,
hearken unto some short motives which are added in the conclusion: these are
four in number.

Presidence. 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.
1 Gods presidence; 2 Gods observance; 3 Gods indulgence; 4 Gods recompense.

1 Gods presidence: God the Father who has called us, he is faithful; so
Christ Jesus our blessed Savior, he is an absolute pattern of faithfulness
far above Moses, a more faithful Prophet then he, for he taught all things:
a more faithful Priest then he; for he offered up himself for the sins of
the people: a more faithful Judge then he, for he will render to every man
according to his works. Observance. B^etius. Mag^a est n cessi as probitatis,
cum agit^s ante oculo^ iudicis cuncta ceruentis.

Pr^dentius. Quicquilag, su^tim palamve, memento inspectatorem semper adesse
Deum. Hic intuitus sammi reg, ante oculos me itis propositus ad omne bonum
excita^at.

Lens molestior est in facie, quam vel que corporis maculae: si^ exigua peccata
in ejus vita pro magnis habentur quia vita ejus omnibus conspicua.

Livius Drus. Quo cives universi ce^nere possint qua ratione utar vitae
degendae. Indulgence.




2 Gods observance: God narrowly observes their course, and theref^re they had
need to keep compass: so says Solomon: if there be oppression, injustice,
or unfaithfulness in a City, he that is higher then the highest, observes:
who will not walk warily (says Boethius) that is in the sight of the Judge
continually. The counsel which Prudentius gives is very wholesome, viz.
whatsoever thou do openly or secretly, remember that God beholds thee, and
then thou will perform thy work faithfully: Whereunto let me add the
observance of men; a Judge or Governor is as the face in the body: which as it
is of all parts of the body most conspicuous, so a Wen, a Wart, or Spot upon
it, is not endured, because of every man it is easily discerned and espied Let
the Magistrate walk circumspectly, because he walks visibly. Liuius Drusus
the Tribune, who dwelling in a low cottage, not discernable by any passenger;
and a Carpenter making him an offer, that for five Talents of silver, he would
raise it up higher, and make it most conspicuous: he replied, I would give thee
as much more as thou ask of me, if thou could turn the inside of my
house outward, to the end that all the Citizens might see how faithfully and
justly I do deport my self in my private family. Therefore let your study and
care be to walk so uprightly, as that you need not be terrified or dejected
at Gods or man's obseruancy.

3 Gods indulgence: how ever a man be defective in many things, yet if he be
sincerely faithful, God covers and pardons all his infirmities, not
excepting either against the person or action of that man in whom he finds a
faithful heart. Example hereof we have in Judah, Hosea 11.12.
wh f^r her sins deserved to be rejected of God, yet because she ruled with
God, and was faithful to the Saints, that is, when she ruled, she was
faithfully affected, therefore she was beloved and commended of God: that man
may be certain of Gods favorable indulgement, who has a care of his
faithful deportment.

Recompense.
4 Gods recompense and reward of faithfulness, both here and hereafter.

1 Here in this life; they that are faithful, shall hereby obtain a good
report among men: there are a sort of men (says Saint Jude) who will be
speaking evil of them that be in government. Jude 8.
Now what a happiness is it to a Ruler, that his enemies cannot speak of him
as of an evil doer; cannot justly accuse him, cannot blemish him. Daniel had
many enemies who sought an advantage, Dan. 6.4. Nullam occasionem potuerunt
invenire propterea quod fidus esset.
or some just occasion against him: yet so faithful was he (says the Text)
that they could find no fault in him: the name of Moses shall be honored to
the worlds end, because he was found faithful: neither shall such a man
obtain and retain only a good name, which is to be prized above gold and
silver, but all other temporal blessings: Prou. 28.20.
the faithful man shall abound with blessings.

2 In the life to come; God does recompense it with eternal glory. Our Savior
shall say to all such as are faithful at the day of judgment: Come thou good
and faithful servant; because thou have been faithful in a little, I will
make thee Ruler over much, enter thou into thy Masters joy: which blessing is
promised to the Church of Smyrna, Revel. 2.10. (...)
be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life: for
which life the Lord fit us all; and unto which the Lord bring us all in his
own appointed time, and that for Christ Jesus his sake, his only Son, our
blessed Savior, to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit be glory, Amen.

FINIS.

