CHRIST'S COMBAT AND Conquest: OR, The LION of the tribe of IVDAH, vanquishing
the Roaring Lion, assaulting him in three most fierce and hellish Temptations.
EXPOVNDED, AND now (at the request of sundry persons) published for the common
good, by THO. TAILOR, Preacher of the Word of God, at Reeding in Barkeshire

HEBR. 2.18. For in that he suffered and was tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted. Tentatus est Christus, ne vincatur a Tentatore
Christianus. August. PRINTED BY CANTRELL LEG, PRINTER to the University of
Cambridge. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT Worthy and noble Knight, Sir FRAVNCIS KNOLLIS, and the virtuous
Lady LETTICE his Wife, all blessings of this life and a better.
SIR,
WHEN that great Prophet Moses, was to be confirmed in the certainty of his
vocation for the delivery of Gods people out of Egypt, Act. 7.30.
There appeared unto him in the wilderness of mount Sinai, Christ himself so
called, (...) Just. Ma^t.
an Angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in the bush: Exodus 3.^.
and he looked, and behold the bush burnt with fire, and the bush was not
consumed. A sight at which Moses Act 7.31.
wondered; and so may we. But if you please with Moses, Exodus 3 4.
to turn aside to see this great sight; that is, Act. 7.31.
draw a little nearer to consider it, This it is:

I. The bush (which at that time betokened the people of Israel, Exodus 3.7.9.
under the oppressions of Egypt) signifies the Church of God: for, 1. As a
bryar-bush is a base and despicable thing, made for nothing but the fire, or to
stop a gappe, or some other base use: so seems the Church and members to be
in the eyes of men; in so much as not the most eminent members, the blessed
Apostles themselves, are 1. Cor. 4.10. and ^^ (...).
despised, and accounted the filth of the world, and the offscouring or
out-sweepings of all things: but the Head of it, our Lord himself, was in the
eyes of men without I^a. ^^.2.3.
form or beauty, despised and rejected of men, who hid their eyes from him,
and esteemed him not. 2. As a bush pricketh and vexes him that deals roughly
with it; so shall the Church of God be as a stiff and prickly bramble, to
vex, and wound at length, all the proud enemies of it, so as Zach. 12.3.
all that lift at it shall be torn, though all the people of the earth should
be gathered against it. 3. As the creatures for their own safety make their
neasts and muses in a bush; so the mighty Creator (not for his, but the bushes
safety) vouchsafes Deuteronomy. 33.16.
to dwell in this bush of the Church. This bush was in mount Exodus 3 1. Famous
for six memorable things in Moses done there. 1. This vision. 2. Fasting there
forty days and nights. 3. Receiving the law there. 4. Striking the rock for
water. 5 Lifting hi^ hand^ against Amalec. 6. Breaking the tables of stone.
Horeb, and God was in the bush: even so the Church is in the mountain of the
Lord, lifted up (as a mountain above the valleys) in holiness and privileges
above all the earth besides: for of this mountain the Lord has said, Psalm.
68.16.
there will I dwell for ever.

II. The bush burns with fire: In this resemblance is shadowed the oppressed
estate of the Israelites in the Egyptian furnace: and by fire here is meant,
the most painful, and pitiful afflictions and miseries, which seize upon the
Church and members, as a raging and devouring fire upon a dry bush: for, 1.
Fire is a diffusiue and spreading element, catching whatsoever combustible
matter is near it: even so not a sprigge of this bush of the Church, shall
escape the flame of affliction, but whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus,
2. Tim. 3.12.
shall suffer persecution: for either the fiery darts of Satan shall scorch
them within; or they shall be ^inged with the fiery 1. Pet. 4.12.
trialls of the worlds hatred; or at least, they must look to be be-smeared,
and blacked in their names, with the colli^ and smoke of odious, false, and
scandalous imputations: and what are Quid aliud sumus quam flamm^ pabulum?
Gods people (says one) but the fe^el of the wicked worlds fiery indignation?
2. Fire shines and enlighteneth: so the afflictions of the Church, as fire
enlighten the mind, Psalm. 119.71.
teach the statutes. The rod and correction (says Solomon) Prou. 29.15.
give wisdom: and the Lord Job. 33.16. and 36.9.
opens by correction, (says Elihu) the ears of man which he had sealed: in
which use, this fire of affliction becomes as an other Exodus 13.21.
pillar of fire, to enlighten and guide the Israel of God, in the night of
their wandering through the wilderness of this world, toward their land of
promise that heavenly Canaan. 3. Fire gives heat and warm'th: so the heat of
this fire of affliction melts and thaweth our frozen hearts, condensed and
congealed by the pinching air of cold security: this fire kindles devotion,
enflameth our zeal, Isa. 26.16. and Hos. 5.15.
warmeth our prayers, and makes us hot s^tors for relief. 4. Fire softneth
and smodreth mettalls: Exodus 9.27.
Pharohs steely heart will melt and soften while it is in this hot furnace:
yea, in the same man it separateth dross from pure metal, and like that fire
which burnt only the Dan* 3.^7. Ignis non perdit s^d purgat.
bands of them that were cast in, but not their bodies* so it only consumes
the corruptions, but preserves alive the children of God, who only walk at
more liberty and further enlargement in the fire, then they did out of it; and
as gold, come forth more purified, more glorious. 5. Fire is a climbing and
ascending element: so the fire of affliction marketh the heart to ascend, and
raises the thoughts to heauen-ward. Misery makes the prodigal Luke 1^.17.
bethink himself of his Fathers house, when he is a great way from it: and
this is the fire which Moses saw seazing upon the bush.

III. The bush burning is not consumed: Stabilitate^ populi ex veritate
promissionum dei adumbraui^. Iunius in analys.
signifying the preservation of the Church and members (as Israel in Egypt) in
the hottest furnace of their afflictions. Well may we wonder, that so flaming
and terrible a fire, falling upon so contemptible a bush, and so dry and
despicable a shrub, should not presently turn it into ashes: for why? is the
fire too weak; or is the bush so strong as to defend it self; or is it not
disposed or apt to be burnt and consumed by so fierce a fire? Certainly it is
not from the impotencie of the fire, nor from the strength or constitution of
the bush (which is in the matter of it as combustible as any chafe, and as
easily destroyed as any stubble) that it is not consumed. But, 1. This fire is
not kindled against the bush, out of the sparks of Gods wrath, and indignation
(which is indeed a Heb 12 29.
consuming fire) but of his fatherly affection and love, not for the hurt of
the bush, but for the Heb. 12.10.
profit of it: not to destroy the persons, but the sin for the persons sake.
We have indeed kindled, and blown up our selves a Heb. 10.27.
violent and devouring fire, which God might send into our Lament. 1.13.
bones, to burn us up, as fire burns the Psalm. 83.14
forest, and as the flames set the mountains on fire: But the Lam. 3.22.
mercy of God is as water to quench this fire, (for else would it burn to the
bottom of hell) and in stead of a Ezec. 22.22.
furnace of fury which melts away his enemies, he sets up in Zion, a
furnace of favor, only to melt the metal, Isa. 27.9.
consume away the dross, and refine his chosen ones to become vessels of
honor. 2. Because the fuel of the consuming fire of Gods wrath are slaves,
not sons: those wicked brambles, which if they escape one fire (says the
Ezekiel. 15 7.
Prophet) they fall into another, which shall consume them: but not this bush,
which is only made brighter and better by the flame, but not blacker, not
worser. The chafe and stubble must feed the fire of wrath, never to come
forth more; but the pure metal is cast into the furnace to come forth so
much the purer, as it has been the longer tried. 3. Because the Exodus 3.2.
Angel of God is in the bush. This Angel was Jesus Christ, the Lord of the
holy Angels, and the great Angel of the Covenant. For Moses says expressly
of this vision, ver. 4.
The Lord appeared unto Moses: and, God called unto him out of the midst of
the bush: and S. Luke, Act. 7.31. agreing with Exodus 3.6.
recording the same vision; after that he had called him an Angel, brings
him in, saying, I am the Lord of Abraham, etc. This same presence of the Son
of God, was noted the cause why cast upon one kind of serpent, they kill him:
so much more (...) it is, that the lea^es of Gods word, which properly belong
to the bush of the church, and opposed to Satan's poisoned temptations, overcome
and master them. And thus as Deuteronomy. 33.16.
Moses requested that the blessing of him that dwelt in the bush, might come
upon the head of Joseph; even so, the good will of him that dwelt in the bush,
come upon your head, upon the head of your virtuous Lady, upon the heads of
your children, to the sweetning, verse. 23.
and crowning of your age: And blessed of the Lord be your portion, for the
sweetness of heaven, and for the sweetness of the earth, verse. 23.
till you be satisfied with favor, and filled with the blessing of the Lord.
Amen.

Reeding, October. 28. 1618. Your Worship^ in the Lord to (...)* THO. TAILOR.

In CHRIST'S Temptation consider,
1. The preparation: parts, 3. 1 Christ's entering the lists: Here, 1 Time: Then.
1 When he had been baptized. 2 When he undertook his high office. 3 When the
Spirit had descended upon him 4 When he had received testimony from heaven
that he was, The Son of God. The Teacher of the Church.

2 Person: Jesus. 3 Guide of his way: was lead of the Spirit. Here, 1 The
Guide: the Spirit. 2 The manner: was lead.
4 Place: into the wilderness. 5 End: to be tempted of the Devil. Here, 1
Author, the devil. 2 End it self: to be tempted.

2 His expectance of the enemy: Here three things: 1 How he was furnished: He
was filled with the holy Ghost, Luke 4.1. 2 His company: He was with the wild
beasts, Mark. 1.13. 3 His employment: 1 He was tempted within that time, Luke
4.2. with lighter onsets. 2 He fasted: in his fast, 1 Time: forty days and
forty nights. 2 Effect: he was afterward hungry.


3 Entrance of the aduersaaie: where, 1 The time, then, when Christ had fasted,
and was hungry. 2 The name of the adversary, the Tempter. 3 The manner of his
entrance, he came: in an assumed shape, externally.

2 The combat it self, in 3 fierce onsets. First consists of an 1 Assault: in
it 1 The ground: If thou be the Son of God. 2 The inference: Command these
stones to be made bread. Here, 1 Facility, Command. 2 Readiness of object,
these stones. 3 Utility, to be made bread.

2 Repulse: in it 1 The manner: it was, 1. reasonable, 2. meek, 3. modest. 2
The affection, negative; But: conjunction discretiue. 3 The matter, a
testimony of Scripture, It is written. 4 Parts of the testimony; 1 Negative,
Man lives not by bread only. 2 Affirmative, but by every word which
proceeds, etc.


Second consists of 1 Preparation: here 1 The time: then. 2 The place, set
down, 1 in general, the holy City: Luke expresses it to be Jerusalem. 2 in
special, a pinnacle of the Temple.
3 The manner how Christ was conveyed thither, in 2. things, 1 He took him
up. 2 He set him on the pinnacle.

2 Temptation: in it, 1 Assault: in it, 1 The ground, If thou be the Son of
God. 2 The matter, Cast thy self down. Here, 1 the action, Cast down. 2 the
agent, thy self. 3 the place whence, from hence, says Luke, where mean
3 The argument to persuade him, a testimony of Scripture, in which 1 General
consideration, It is written. 2 Special matter: 1 As abused by Satan. 2 In his
right use. Here, 1 Angels ministry, keep thee. 2 Who seals their commission,
He (...) 3 The limitation, in all thy ways. 4 The manner, they shall bear
thee in (...)



2 Repulse: in it, 1 Resistance: Jesus said unto him. 2 Reason; 1 Scripture
alleged: for it is written to the contrary. 2 In the allegation, 1 who must
not tempt, thou. 2 who must not be tempted, The Lord. Thy God.
3 action of tempting.




Third: in it 1 Assault: in it, 1 Preparation; in it 1 Choice of a fit place:
Here 1 What place it was; the top of an exceeding high mountain. 2 How
Christ came thither; the devil took him unto, etc. 3 Why he chose that place.
2 A vision represented: Here 1 What it was, All the kingdoms of the world,
and the glory of them. 2 How he represented them, He showed him. 3 How long
the fight lasted, in a moment, says Luke.

2 Dart it self: in it 1 A profer: All these will I give thee. 2 A reason: for
they are mine, and to whom I will, I give them: in Luke. 3 The condition: in it
1 the matter, worship me. 2 the manner, fall down: if it be but externally.


2 Repulse: in it, 1 The denial; But Jesus answered. 2 The manner; Avoid
Satan: sharp in the Title Satan. Commandment, Avoid.
3 The reason: from a testimony of Scripture; in it, 1 Allegation: It is
written. 2 Precept: in it 1 Person to whom, thou, every man. the whole man, in
soul. body.

2 Matter: shall worship and serve,.i. divine worship. 3 Object: the Lord thy
God, and him only.




3 The issue, 1 Christ's victory: 1 The time; when the devil left him; Then. 1
When Christ had stoutly resisted. 2 When all the temptations were ended: in
Luke. 3 When Christ had said, Avoid Satan.
2 The manner: he departed from him. 3 How long: for a season, says Luke.
2 His triumph 1 A note of attention set as a star before it: And behold. 2
What we must behold, 1 The coming of the Angels unto Christ: here 1 When they
come. 2 To whom they come. 3 Manner of their coming.
2 Their ministry unto him; where 1 How they ministered unto him, by Adoring
him as Conqueror Comforting his Soul (...) Body (...)

2 Why they did so, Not for necessity on Christ's part; But their own duty, as
to Their Lord. The Head of (...)






MATTHEW. 4.
VERSE. 1. THen was Jesus led aside of the spirit into the wilderness, to be
tempted of the devil.

2. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward
hungry.

3. Then came the Tempter to him, and said, If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.

4. But he answering, said, It is written. Man shall not live by bread only,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

5. Then the devil took him up into the holy City, and set him on a pinnacle
of the Temple,

6. And said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: for it
is written, that he will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands
they shall lift thee up, least at any time thou should dash thy foot against a
stone.

7. Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy God.

8. Again the devil took him up unto an exceeding high mountain, and showed
him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them,

9. And said unto him, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down, and
worship me.

10. Then said Jesus unto him, Avoid Satan: for it is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

11. Then the Devil left him, and behold, the Angels came and ministered unto
him.


Our Lord Jesus Christ having passed the former part of his preparation to his
ministry and office, by his most holy baptism, (of which we have spoken at
large in the former words;) now he proceeds to the second, which stands in
temptation: For as in the former he publicly revealed himself to be that
Messiah so long expected, in whom salvation is purchased to all believers of
Jews and Gentiles: so herein he shows himself most evidently to be that
promised seed of the woman, who was to break the serpents head, and him who
was set apart and sent from his Father, to destroy and dissolve the works of
the devil. And therefore this holy doctrine, bringing us such glad tidings of
Satan's confusion, and our own rescue out of his hands, must be most welcome to
us; whereof if we would taste the sweetness and benefit, we must stir up our
best attentions, affections, petitions, to hear with readiness, receive with
gladness, and practice with fruitfulness, such holy instructions as this
Treatise will abundantly affoard unto us. Wherein must be handled three things:
1. The preparation to Christ's combat, verse. 1.2. 2. The combat it self, with
the several assaults, from v. 3. to v. 11. 3. The issue and event, v. 11.


The preparation has three parts: 1. Christ's entering the lists, by going into
the wilderness. 2. His expecting of the enemy, by his abode and converse there.
3. The entrance of his adversary. The first part is enlarged by sundry
circumstances; as 1. the time when this combat was, Then. 2. the person
opposed, Jesus. 3. his guide, he was lead by the spirit. 4. the place, into the
wilderness. 5. the end why he came thither, to be tempted of the devil. In
the second part, three points are affoarded out of the three Evangelists: 1.
How he was furnished, he was full of the holy Ghost, Luke 4.1. 2. What company
he had, he was with the wild beasts, Mark. 1.13. 3. What was his employment:
1. he was tempted, Luke 4.2. 2. he fasted forty days and forty nights, and
afterward was hungry; which was both the effect of his fast, and the occasion
of the first temptation. The third general part, namely the entrance of our
Saviors adversary, stands in three circumstances: 1. the time, then. 2. the
name of the adversary, the tempter, before called a devil. 3. the manner of
his entrance, he came.

The first circumstance in the preparation is the circumstance of time, noted
in the word Then; which is not a word of supplement, but of reference unto the
former history of Christ's baptism, which this immediately succeeds: as
Mark. 1.12. Immediately the spirit drives him (note the present tense) into
the wilderness: so as Christ went directly from Jordan into the wilderness.

Then] 1. When Christ undertook his high office. 2. When he was baptized. 3.
When the spirit had descended upon him. 4. When he had received testimony from
heaven, that he was the Son of God, and Doctor of his Church. Hence note,
that The more God does grace any man, or advance him in gifts or place, Doctr
The more God graceth his children, the more Satan sets himself to disgrace
and molest them.
the more does Satan set himself to disgrace and molest him. We read not that
the Devil did ever set upon Christ, while he lived as a private man, though
perhaps he did: but now, his Father setting him apart to work man's redemption,
baptizing him, pouring his spirit upon him, and giving testimony with him,
that he is the Son of his love, now he is assailed with most violent
temptations. No sooner is he set apart to his office, therein to glorify God,
and gratify man, but he is set upon by Satan, a deadly enemy to both. Moses
was quiet enough till God set him apart to deliver his brethren, and after that
he was never at quiet. The like may be said of David, an eminent type of
Christ: while he kept his fathers sheep, he was at rest; but if he will set
upon Goliath, and be anointed King by Samuel, let him look to himself; Saul
will hunt him like a partrich, and so narrowly epsy his haunts, that himself
will say, he must surely one day fall by the hand of Saul. Zach. 3.1. when
Iehoshuah the High Priest (another type of Christ) comes to stand before the
Lord in his service, the Devil comes and stands at his right hand to
resist him. The Apostle Paul, so long as he was of the strict sect of the
Pharisees, he was highly esteemed, and lived quiet enough: but when he became
an elect vessel to carry the Gospel among the Gentiles, then he was tried and
buffeted; now he knows that bonds and imprisonment abide him every where, 2.
Cor. 7.5. and 6.5.

1. Satan's hostility against God, and his glory, Reasons. 1.
and the means of it, forces him to hinder whatsoever may further Gods
Kingdom and hinder his own. While the prisoner is in fetters under bars and
bolts, the Iaylour sleeps quietly; and while the strong man keeps the hold,
all is in peace: but disturb him a little, and you shall hear of him. Hence
it is, that the more weighty any calling is, and the more conscionable a man
sets himself to discharge it (which we see in Christ himself) the more
vigilantly does Satan watch to hinder it. Reach once at Satan's head, and he
will surely reach as high as he may at thine. 2
2. This is not without the good providence of God, who hereby will prove his
servants, to whom he will commit some special work, whether they will shrink
or no: he will have them also to have good proof and trial of his strength
and faithfulness in supporting them, that they may the better commit themselves
unto him in time to come, who has vpheld them formerly, and go on undaunted in
constant walking with him, through the experience of his goodness. 3. God sees
(though Satan's malice blinds him) that his children without such strong
trialls should not be so fitted for his service. 3
It is a trayning of them to great emploiments, and makes them not only more
expert in themselves, but also far more able to help others in any kind. God
would not exempt his natural and only Son from temptations, that he might
know how to help others that are tempted, Heb. 2.18. nor the Apostles, for the
same end, 2. Cor. 1.4.6.

Use. 1.
All sorts of men, the more they set themselves to glorify God in their places,
the more they should expect trialls. A Christian can no sooner give his name
unto Christ, nor the spirit descend upon him, but Satan with all his malice
will assault him. Christ was no sooner baptized, but he must go forth to be
exercised with Satan: and his members also, who not only by outward
profession, but inward sincerity also make a league with God to renounce Satan,
sin, and this evil world, shall not want all the molestation that Satan can
create them. Reu. 12. the red dragon watches for the child to be borne, to
devour it: and such is his malice, Whom Satan cannot hinder in the end, which
is salvation, he will trouble them in the way.
that, whom he cannot hinder of salvation, he will hinder of their peace and
joy, as much as he can: if he cannot chase virtue out of the world, he can
disgrace it: and if he cannot quite hinder all good proceedings, he will by
molestation delay them as long as he may. He is subtle; if he cannot do the
greatest evil that he would, he will do the lesser that he may; as by
Sanballat he did hinder the re-edifying of the Temple. The condition of the
child of God is military in this life; he has Satan and all his army of wicked
ones mortal foes against him. Many deceive themselves, who mean to profess
Religion so long only as they may enjoy peace, and credit, and the applause of
the world, so long as they may see Christ with a golden crown and scepter, and
follow him into Jerusalem with Hosanna: But they have not cast their accounts
right, no^ weighed the difficulties of sound profession of Christ; and
therefore, like the foundation of the foolish builder, when winds and floods
rise, they fall down right; with shame they forsake Christ, and religion and
all; they look back and run back to the filthiness of the world, they
embrace a course which stands with their own ease: but never shall they have
the honor of honoring God, or of effecting any thing which shall bring God
true praise, and themselves true peace.

It will be the wisdom therefore of every Christian, undertaking any
commendable action, so to look and begin with God, that ever he have another
eye upon Satan and his malice, both to expect it, and resolve, not to be beaten
off for it. Shall the Israelites being set out of Egypt run back again,
because Pharaoh pursues them? no, but hie them more hastily away. A wise
Christian may stop the mouth of satan, but never his malice.
Shall I give over my profession, because the greatest part of men hate and
reproach it? no, I must see Satan's old malice renewed, who casts a flood of
poisoned water against Christ himself; who should not avoid the same measure
of obloqu^e and reproach if he lived again upon earth. Was it thus with the
green tree? it is no marvel then if it be so with a dry. Shall I neglect my
duty, to which God and good conscience ties me, because I would not displease
men, and be thought no medler? then farewell Gods glory, if I go about to stop
the devils mouth; which if I could, yet I shall never stop his malice.

The more public a man's calling is, Use. 2.
the more does Satan aim at him to cast him down, who does conscionable
intend it: as for example: 1. The Magistrate; Satan stirs up David to number
the people, 1. Chron. 21.1. 2. The minister, Satan's chief aim is against
Cheiftaines in Church and Commo^wealth.
being the Lords standerd-bearer, the devil seeks to winnow him especially,
and begges leave to be a lying spirit in the mouths of 400 false Prophets at
once. And both these, because God has specially instituted these callings for
the beating down of Satan's kingdom, and lifting up the scepter of Christ: and
again, if Satan can foil the leaders, the bands are soon overcome: smite the
shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered; cast down Cedars, and they will
crush many shrubs with their fall. Hence must both these be more careful of
themselves then ordinary men, as being in greater danger, as men set upon
steep and slippery hills, beset with enemies to cast them down: And the less
that men see these oppositions, the less service do they to God or his
Church: For if they do their duty in one place or other, they shall hear on
both sides both of Satan and his instruments.

Now because the devil uses two special weapons against those in higher
place, to make them unprofitable or hurtful, one open, the other secret, it
behooves Magistrates and Ministers to watch against them both, and fully
resolve against both.

1. Satan will stir up his instruments openly against them: Let either or
both rebuke the world of sin, Magistrates and Ministers must watch against
two things especially.
and force men to walk in the narrow path of life, wicked men grow mad against
them, and rage with all open rebukes, and hellish and horrible slanders, and,
so far as they dare, blaspheme the ordinance it self in their hands. Hence
Jeremy was a contentious man with the whole earth, both Moses and Aaron take
too much upon them. What? must men now, because they must be counted peaceable,
suffer every man to do what he list, as though there were no God nor King in
Israel, till iniquity so abound as it know no bounds, banks, nor bottom? No,
but we must look both to the commandment, and to the promise: Ier. 1.18.19.
If sinners be obdurate as iron, and of brazen and impudent foreheads, we must
be as brazen walls to make their wickedness recoyle and bound upon them; and
with the palm tree rise against the burden that lies upon us.

2. If this will not weary them, but they hold on with courage, then he works
more secretly, more dangerously: If he see them inclined to gain, he will
offer them commodities and profits: If ambitious, he will choke them with
preferments: If given to ease or pleasure, he can easily persuade them to a
course of favoring themselves: And experience shows how commonly Satan
preuailes with men some of these ways: and who would think him now an enemy,
or in the field, and yet he has won a fort, which open force could not
attain?

Three means for their comfort and safety.
And, as being in great danger, they must add to this watch the means of
their comfort and safety: as 1. Let them look to their entrance and drift,
undertaking these functions not headily, or hastily, but as Christ did with
fasting and prayer. How few do it, who have much more need then Christ had,
and are in greater danger then he was? When ambition, or covetousness, or
idleness, or any thing but earnest desire of Gods glory, leads men into these
places (besides that they never do good) no marvel if they fall fearfully as
being not fenced; they cannot say God set them there, or will help them
against temptations. 2. Let them look that they have good warrant for that
which they do, and for every action of their calling, that they may see
themselves to be in Gods work: for so long they have promise of protection, He
will keep and help thee in thy ways. 3. Let them pray to God for power and
success, notwithstanding their trialls; which they shall do, if they see the
need of Gods strength as the Apostle did, Ephesians. 6.19. Pray for me; and besought
the Saints for Christ's sake and the love of the spirit, to strive with him in
prayer to God.

Seeing high estates are so dangerous, Use. 3.
why should not men content themselves with a mean ^ondition, Mean estate the
safest and best ^or 3. reas.
but insatiably gape after promotion? 1. high callings are like high trees,
upon the tops of hills, which are subject to every wind. 2. if height could
bring content, or a sweet life, it were more worthily desired; but we see it
consumes a man with envy, and fear, desiring still some thing beyond his
present estate. 3. there is as great sorrow in the fall, as labor in rising,
and to come down in the height is greater grief. And all this comes upon a
man besides Satan's malice.

Lastly, this serves to comfort Christians, who are acquainted with temptations
in the beginning of their conversion, Use. 4.
Four grounds of comfort for weak Christians in temptation.
and are ready to give up all, as seeing nothing but discomfort. For, 1. it was
the lot of Christ the head. 2. it is a cursed peace to be at peace with the
devil; and a blessed war to fight for God and Christ Jesus. 3. a thief
breaks not into an empty house, and a dog

The second circumstance, is the person opposed, Jesus.]

This will seem strange, if we consider in our Lord Jesus; 1. The perfection
of his nature; he was free from all original corruption, by his most holy
conception, by the ouershadowing of the Holy Ghost; as also from actual sin:
1. Pet. 2.22. he did no sin, neither was any guile found in his mouth: And
though he had our substance, and our infirmities, yet with one exception,
without sin, Heb. 4.15. 2. The perfection of grace: for he was now full of
the Holy Ghost, endued with infinite knowledge, wisdom, holiness, and grace;
and it might seem that there was no place or room for temptation. 3. The
perfection of his power, being the Creator and preserver of all things, the
Lord of hosts, by whose very word or beck, all creatures, as they be
sustained, so might be brought to nothing; who being at the weakest, was able
by one word to cast down to the earth all that came to apprehend him, and
compel the very devils to beg favor of him. 4. The perfection of his
fathers love, having immediately before testified, that he was his beloved
Son, in whom he was well pleased; who as in his private estate he increased
in favor with God, Luke 2.52. so now much more has he gained his fathers
love, as we have heard. And yet jesus must not escape the tempter.

Doctr. Not any excellency can exempt any man from Satan's temptations*
It is not any excellency or high respect, that can exempt any man from Satan's
temptations. If a man had all the perfections which Christ had, of nature,
grace, power, and the love of God; yet in this life he must be exposed unto
them. If we look at all the Worthies of the world, of greatest grace, in
greatest favor with God, as Job, Lot, Aaron, Moses, David, Peter, none of them
could escape this onset. Satan desires to winnow the Disciples as wheat, even
at the side of Christ, Luke 22.31. Nay, our first Parents, Adam and Eve,
created in absolute perfection, concerning present righteousness and
holiness, met with a serpent even in innocence, in paradise. If neither
holiness of person nor place, can privilege a man from temptation, but
Prophets, Apostles; yea the first Adam, and the second Adam also must be
tempted, who can expect immunitie from the tempter?

Reasons. 1.
1. This life is the time of warfare, and the world is the great field of God,
in which Michael and his Angels fight against the dragon and his angels; and
can the captains and leaders of the rest, that go before them in grace, in
strength, in knowledge, and holiness, escape the onset, seeing the sharpest
and most keen assaults of every battle, is upon the foreward, and forlorn
hopes?

2
2. Satan's malice being the greatest sin in the world, and the sin against
the holy Ghost, is directly, and professedly against God; and consequently
against those that appertain to God, because they do so. That he hates the
godly, it is because he hates God, Satan reuengeth himself upon God in his
servants.
and in us would be revenged on him; in the servants he persecutes the Master,
in the members the head, whereas his chief quarrel lies against the Master
and Head. This cannot be new to him that considers either Christ's prophecy,
Ye shall be hated of all men for my sake, Matthew. 10.^^.
that is, of all wicked men that carry Satan's image and properties; or else
the Saints experience of the accomplishment of it, For thy sake are we killed
all the day long, Psalm. 44.22. Whence it must follow, that the nearer any man
is to God, more graced, or more like him, the more is Satan's malice kindled
against him, and he is less exempted from temptation; the nearer Christ, the
more desirous is he to winnow him.

3. Gods providence so orders the matter, that where he gives greater
strength and grace, there should be greater exercise, 3
Greater strength, greater exercise.
to prevent pride, to keep grace on work, and to make his gifts known to the
world.

If Satan's malice and impudency set upon the green tree, Use. 1.
what will he do to the dry? If he dare make trial of Christ's strength, will
he fear our weakness? If he dare encounter with perfection, can we impotent
and infirm creatures look for exemption? No, we had more need arm our
selves, and expect our adversary: and the rather, because the Prince of the
world comes upon Christ, and finds nothing to help his temptations by; but
to us he needs bring no weapons; he finds in our selves a whole armorie of
weapons, by which he may fight against us; he finds a rebel within us, an old
Adam of our corrupt nature, that gives him strength and help against us; and
therefore his boldness will be so much the more against us, when he sees our
own wicked inclinations yielding strength to his wicked temptations. Many men
say, they are of so strong a faith, and of such grace, that they defy Satan,
they were never troubled with him, he has nothing to do with them: Alas
poor souls; the more grace, the more trouble: More grace more trouble.
if strength of faith and grace had given privilege from temptation, our Lord
Jesus had not been tempted: have thou more then he? or have thou more then Adam
in innocence? yet Adam in innocence was tempted. Oh take heed least the
strong man have carried all away, and so thou have peace: think thou that he
durst assault Christ, and dares not come near thee? dares he encounter with a
lion, and will he stand in fear of a fearful hare?

Temptation is no sign of Gods hatred, but of the devils. Use. 2.
It is the weakness of flesh to think, that a man's own, Temptation a sign
of the devils hatred, not of Gods.
or other men's temptations, proceed from an angry God, and thence to give
false witness against himself or others; being assailed by Satan. See we not
here Christ proclaimed and Son of God, and in whom his Father is well
pleased, yet subject to temptations by the devil? will thou now conclude, that
Christ is suddenly cast out of favor? Nay, our duty is, if we see any
buffeted by Satan, rather to pray for them, and pity them, then pass sentence
(as judges) upon them, considering that our selves also may be tempted. And if
our selves be not molested and troubled, let us take heed we have not given
Satan peaceable possession, which makes him now fawn upon us. Many will spit
at the mention of the devil, who are linked to him sure enough, and lulled
asleep with the pleasures and profits of this world, and are never diseased or
disquieted, because they go on pleasantly with full sail and gale to
destruction.

Use. 3.
This doctrine confutes that Romish delusion of driving away the devil, The
holiest water that ever was, did not drive away the devil.
and exorcising him with holy water of baptism. For the holiest water that
ever was, was that which washed the holy Son of God, and yet the devil was
never a whit afraid of that, but immediately Christ must go forth to be
tempted.

Papists use the name of Jesus, uttered in so many letters and syllables, to be
powerful to hinder the entrance of devils, and to drive them out being
entered. For (say they) when it is uttered, the authority of Christ is present,
which they cannot resist. But I answer; 1. Never did the Apostles acknowledge
any great miracle or work to be done by the name Jesus, but as Peter says,
Act. 3.6.13. by faith in his name, which goes beyond the bare repeating of it.
2. Satan delights to see silly people, being deluded, to abuse both this name,
and all the names of God to sorcerie; which is the cause, that when he is
raised by the sorcerer, he is content to be adjured by all the holy names of
God in the Scripture, as though they bound him: whereas he deludes them the
more, and exercises his malice against God in an high measure, and his holy
titles. If Satan fear not the person of Jesus, he less fears the name of
Jesus.
3. If Satan fear not the person of Jesus, but dares set upon him, certainly
he fears not the name and word. Christ might easily (according to Papists)
have shaken off the devil, and said, What? know thou not that my name given
me in my circumcision, is Jesus? how dare thou be so bold with me? And
surely, if that name in the mouth of a wretched man, would by any virtue in it
make him fly, then much more in the mouth of Christ himself. But all this is
but diabolical and Antichristian delusion. Phil. 2.10.
Object. But must not every knee bow at the name of Jesus, even of things
under the earth, by which are meant the devils? Answ. They wickedly abuse that
place: for the name Jesus is not only a title of Christ, but of his power,
majesty, and authority, sitting now at the right hand of his Father; which if
they had to command, they might command all creatures in heaven, earth, or
hell. Whence we see, that the literal understanding of that place is the
ground of Magic.

The like they speak of the relics of Saints, bones, apparel, etc. which
the devil cannot abide. I answer: 1. they have few or no true relics of
Saints, but false collusions: 2. if they had, what warrant, word, or calling
have they for the use of them? what is the use of dead bodies or bones in
Scripture, but to be buried; No use of dead bod^es or bones in scripture, but
to be buried.
yea if it be Christ's himself, so long as he is dead? 3. what virtue had any
body, bone, apparel, or any relic of any Saint above Christ's blessed body?
and yet the devil feared not that. If he feared not the virtue of Christ's
living body, Satan fl^es not the living body of the Son of God, and much
less the dead bones of a sinnfull man.
certainly he fears not the rottennes of a dead bone of whatsoever sinful
man. But this is also another trick of the mystery of Antichrist, plainly
discovered by our present doctrine.

The Jesuits teach at this day, that the Apostles appointed the manner of
hallowing water, and that being hallowed it has power to pardon sins, to
drive away devils and diseases, and by it they have wrought many miracles. But
I prove the contrary: 1. Their own Polidore Virgill affirms, De invent. rer.
lib. 5. cap. 8. Six reasons against Popish hallowing of water.
that Alexander the first a Pope instituted it; and therefore not the Apostles.
2. If the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses from all sin, 1. Ioh.
1.7. then hallowed water cleanses not venial sin, as they term it. 3. If
the weapons of our warfare be not carnal, but spiritual, 2. Cor. 10.4. then
hallowed water cannot drive away devils. Faith is our shield, prayer is our
buckler, and the word of God our sword; where is their holy water? 4. Their
miracles are either false relations, or collusions, or magical, of no other
use, but whereby we may know and discern, as by sure notes, the false prophets
and champions of Antichrist, of whom the spirit has prophesied, Matthew. 24. and
2 Thessalonians. 2. 5. The use of water is, 1. natural and external: 2. by
institution, sacramental and significatiue: the Scripture acknowledges no
other: If their holy water be hallowed, then it is hallowed by the word and
prayer: let them show this for their practice, if they can. 6. In this use of
it, it is one of the strange gods of spiritual Egypt, or mystical Babylon:
and there is a vain confidence in the creature, which is due to the creator.
Object. Elisha took salt, and healed the waters, 2. King. 2.21. Answ. 1. That
was common salt, not hallowed. 2. that effect was extraordinary, for that
occasion only, never since that time produced by any. When we have a pleasant
city infested with naughty and deadly water, and a Papist will come and heal
it with his hallowed salt, So said the blessed martyr Tho Hawks.
we will believe their doctrine, and hearken to their exorcismes, not before.

Use. 4.
Lastly, this doctrine yields us comfort in our temptations, in that our Lord
Jesus has begun to us. He was the best beloved, yet he must not lead his life
in delicacie and softness, but was in continual molestation; so as his whole
life was a continual monument of the cross, that we should not think much of
the same condition which our Head underwent: and besides, that we should in all
our temptations cast our eyes upon him, who was tempted that he might have
compassion on them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18.

The third particular in the preparation, is, the guide which Christ had in
this combat with Satan; he was led by the Spirit.]

Here consider 1. the name of the guide, the Spirit, 2. the manner of his
guidance, he was led by him.

I. By the Spirit indefinitely set down, what is meant? Answ. A spirit is
either created, Th^^e sorts of created spirits in this text.
or uncreated. Of the former we read of three sorts in this history: 1.
Diabolical, tempting us to sin: for the devil is a spirit that being
unchangeably turned from God, is called a spirit that rules in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. a lying spirit, 1. King. 22. an unclean spirit, Luke
11.24. such spirits are all the wicked Angels. 2. Angelical, comforting
Christ; and these are the good Angels, which now unchangeably cleave unto God,
called ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14. 3. Humane, hungring, the soul of Christ,
which (as other souls of men are) was a spirit; as, Father, into thy hands I
commend my spirit: and the humane and reasonable spirit of man returns to God
that gave it, Eccles. 12.7. None of these are here meant, but the divine and
uncreated spirit, even the third person in Trinity, even that spirit which had
now descended upon Christ like a dove, and that holy spirit whereof Luke says
he was full, The holy spirit of God here meant for three reasons.
4.1. And this 1. the opposition of the leader, and of the tempter proves:
for it were harsh to say, that Jesus was led of the devil to be tempted of the
devil: but he was led of the good spirit to be tempted of the evil. 2. The
same phrase is used, Luke 2.27. Simeon came in the spirit into the temple,.^.
in that holy spirit, of which mention was made in the former verse. 3. the
Chalde and Syriak expresses it, led by the holy Spirit.

II. The manner, he was led; not by any local transportation from Jordan to
the wilderness, as Elias from earth to heaven; or carried through the air, as
the spirit carried Philip from the Eunuch, Act. 8.39. but as one led by the
hand; so he was by a strong instinct of the spirit forced to go thither. And
for the strength of the motion, S. Mark says, (...), the spirit drives him
out: and S. Luke uses another word, (...), he was led out: not that any thing
befell Christ being forced to it or unwilling (for all his obedience was a
free will offering,) but he is driven or drawn as the faithful are drawn by
the Father: Ioh. 6.44. none can come to me, unless my Father draw him; namely
by the effectual and forcible working of his spirit in their hearts: not as
stocks and stones without wills, (...). Chrysostom.
nor as enforcing them against their wills, but sweetly inclining their wills,
and working effectually in them both the will and the deed, according to his
good pleasure.

But Christ sends the third person: Object.
how then does the third person lead him? Christ as God, and as the second
person in Divine Unity sends the Holy Ghost into the hearts of his elect:
Answ.
but consider him in the form of a servant, and so he is subject unto
providence, and led by the spirit this way and that: And this is, because the
humanity of Christ is the organe or instrument of his divinity, and in all the
actions and offices of it is moved and guided by the holy Ghost.

All Satan's temptations are appointed and limited by God. It is the spirit of
God that here leads the Son of God into temptation, Doctr. All Satan's
temptat^ons are appointed and limited by God.
and consequently God is the author of all the trialls of his Saints. Paul went
bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, Act. 20.22. Genesis 45.5. what a number of
trialls was Joseph cast into, being sold to a hard Master, a tempting
Mistress, to bands and imprisonment? yet he tells his brethren it was not
they, but the Lord that sent him thither.

1. Gods providence so watches over his creatures, Reasons. 1.
that not an hair shall fall to the ground, and much less shall the head of
Gods child fall into Satan's hand: this providence is wakefull, and suffers
nothing to come by chance or luck, but from a good hand, and for a good end.
2. Satan, 2
although he be never so malicious, yet is restrained and cannot tempt us
until we be committed into his hands: for the just are in the hands of God,
and not of Satan: he cannot touch their goods, no not the swine of the
faithless Gadarens, though he was a Legion, till he had begged leave, and
Christ said, Go: and much less their bodies no more then he could Jobs, till
the Lord say, Lo, all that he has, is in thine hands, only save his life. He
is a lion in cheines, and as he could attempt nothing against Christ until the
spirit led him to be tempted, and so committed him unto him; so neither against
his members.

Object.
But how can the spirit lead Christ to be tempted, and not be the author of
evil. Answ.
There is a twofold temptation, one of proof or trial, Tentatio probationis,
and deceptionis.
the other of delusion: by the first God tempted Abraham, Genesis 22. and the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 13.3. But of the second S. James says, 1.13. Let no man say
when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God tempts no man.

Object.
But this temptation of Christ was to delude and deceive him, therefore evil.
Answ.
If we consider a temptation to evil, we must conceive God to be an actor in
that which is evil sundry ways, though no way the author of evil: For in the
worst of them all God does most righteously use the malice of Satan, either in
the punishing and blinding of the wicked, or in exercising and trying his own;
God someway an actor in that which is evil, no way an author.
both which are just and good. As for all the sin of this action: 1. it can
be no work of God, because it is formally no work at all, but a vice and
corruption inherent in it: and 2. it is all left to Satan, who instilleth
malice, and suggesteth wicked counsels, and that to the destruction of men. As
for example: 1. Sam. 16.14. an evil spirit of the Lord vexed Saul; that is, so
far as it was a just punishment, it was of God, and Satan was Gods instrument
in executing his judgments so far as it was a punishment: but God left the
malice of it to the wicked instrument working after his own manner. But to
come to the very point: In the deceiving of Ahab and the false Prophets, 1.
King. 22.22. God not only nakedly and idly permitted, but expressly commanded
the wicked and lying spirit, saying, Go, and deceive, and prevail: Where we
must distinguish between the righteous action of God as a just judgment, and
revenge of God, and most properly ascribed unto him; and the malice of it,
which was the devils infusing corruption instigating to wickedness; which
very wickedness the wisdom of God directed and turned to the execution of his
most righteous judgment.

This serves to rectify our judgments in trialls, and clear our eyes to see
this hand of God in them: Use. 1.
commonly we look too low at men who are but dust, as though misery came out
of the dust; and we look too near us at the staff or stone, which with the
dog we bite, but consider not the hand that smites us. 2. Sam. 16.9. Abishai
looks at Shem^i that barked at David, and said, Why does this dead dog curse
the King? But David could tell him, v. 10. the Lord has bid him curse: that is,
he has so decreed and ordained, and in his secret will bid him.

Let us willingly submit our selves unto temptations, Use. 2.
because God by his spirit leads us to be tempted, as he did his natural
son: so Christ willingly yielded himself to be tempted, being led by the
spirit: he was lead, he was not forced and drawn to it, though the trial was
as great and fierce, as Satan could make it: and so let it be with us. For, 4.
Reasons to be contented and cheerful in trialls.


1. As we must be cheerful in doing the will of God, so also must we be
cheerful in suffering it. True it is, that trials and

These considerations are forcible to work in us a contentment of mind with
Gods fatherly appointment, without which we can never be cheerful in trials:
for nature will be working in Peter himself, and when he is an old Disciple,
he shall be led where he would not; P^ior est bello ti^or ipse bell^. Senec.
and oftentimes the fear of danger and trouble, is greater then the trial it
self.

What was it else that moved Christ in that bitter trial, when otherwise he
could have wished the cup might pass from him, to say, Yet not as I will, but
as thou will, but the remembrance that he came to suffer, as well as to do the
will of his heavenly Father? What else added such courage to Paul, Act. 21.13.
as to say, What do ye weeping and breaking my heart? I am ready not only to
be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord. What else made
the Martyrs so invincible in suffering, that often, when they might, they would
not be delivered, but that they found themselves led and bound by the spirit,
yea strengthened to all long-suffering with ioyfulnes?

Object.
But we pray not to be led into temptation.

Answ.
1. Tentation is twofold (as we said before,) one of trial, which we must
suffer with cheerefulnes; the other of delusion, against which we may and must
pray. 2. Again, there are two leaders into temptation: the spirit of God leads
Christ and Christians, the evil spirit leads the wicked at his will; we pray
against this leader, and not against the former. 3. And further, we must
distinguish between being tempted, and being led into temptation in our
Saviors sense: the former is a work of Gods mercy, to try, exercise, or
chastise any of his children; the latter is a work of justice, in which God
leaves a man to himself, so as the temptation is prevailing against him. Now
we pray only against the latter, which is, to be left, and so overcome in
temptation; neither does God so lead us into temptation, but to make us in the
end more then conquerours: So as still we may bid temptations welcome, and
with cheerfulness submit our selves unto them.

Use. 3.
In every trial see that the spirit lead thee: for this is a sure ground of
comfort, and has assured hope in it of a good end. Christ was not lead into
temptation by private motion, neither did he thrust himself unto it: no more
must we rashly run into, or pull dangers upon us, or thorough presumption
object our selves unto temptations: We must not thrust our selves into trialls,
but expect the leading of the spirit.
if we do, we must needs fall, and cannot expect safety, because we tempt the
Lord, and provoke him to withdraw his fatherly protection from us; whereas
there is no danger in following the leading and guidance of the spirit. Many a
man is of so strong a faith, that nothing can harm him; he is for all courses,
and all companies. But how can a man be safe where Satan's throne is? Peter
thought himself strong enough to go into the high Priests hall; but he found
in the end, it was no fit company for him. Others through vain prefidence of
Gods protection, run in times of contagion into infected houses, which upon
just calling a man may: but for one to run out of his calling in the way of
an ordinary visitation, he shall find that Gods Angels have commission to
protect him, no longer then he is in his way, Psalm. 91.11. and that, being out
of it this arrow of the Lord shall sooner hit him then another that is not
half so confident. Others are bold-hardy to set upon the devil in his own
holds, they dare enter into and lodge in houses given up by God to the devils
possession: which is (if it be out of ones lawful calling) to cast a man's
self into most probable danger: for whereas we ought to use all good and
lawful means for the preventing of imminent danger, this is to seek danger
and hurt; and commonly they that seek it, justly find it. The issue of such
presumption we may see in the sons of Sceva, Act. 19.16. who took upon them
to do as the Apostles did, namely to name Christ over them that were
possessed; but the devil seeing their want of calling thereunto, ran upon
them, and overcame them, so as they fled out of the house naked and wounded.
Others thorough temerity and rashness, bring on themselves much woe, who follow
the motions of their own spirits in their courses, and never or seldom
consider whether they have Gods spirit before them, or no: they look not for
warrant out of Gods word in the things they do or speak; they beg not Gods
direction and assistance; they spy not in what ambush Satan lies, what
advantages he easily takes, and so for want of Christian watchfulnes lay
themselves open to many evils and dangers, wherein they can meet with no great
comfort, because they cannot say with a good conscience, Lord, thou have led
me into this estate, but rather, I have cast my self into this danger.

If therefore thou would find comfort in troubles, Three notable effects
from assurance of the spirits guidance in trialls.
keep thee in thy way, that thou may never be without the leading of the
spirit; and then this will be the issue: 1. Being led by the spirit, thou will
follow willingly, thou will lay aside all reasonings, excuses, Nazareth, bids
not his parents and friends farewell, consults not with flesh and blood, but was
driven out with a strong motion of the spirit. This is the same free spirit,
which dwells in the hearts of Christians; he leads them to, and they obey,
and follow; Abraham follows him from his own country, and Moses into Egypt.
2. If thou see the spirit leading of comfort. 1. Pet. 4.14. therefore the
Saints rejoice in affliction, because the spirit of glory and of God rests
upon them. A valiant captain leading the way, encourages the most timorous
soldier to follow with courage and resolution: So this spirit which leads,
is a spirit of strength, and of power, not in himself alone, but supplying
with new strength those that give up

Use. 4.
As Christ was led by the spirit in all his course of life, so should
Christians: for as many as are the sons of God, are led by the spirit of God,
Romans 8.14. So the Apostles in their ministry went hither and thither, stayed
or departed, preached and prophesied by the spirit; they were forbidden by the
Holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia, and Bythinia, Act. 16.6.7. and 21.4.
certain Disciples told Paul by the Spirit, that he should not go up to
Jerusalem. And it is the duty of all true believers, to resign themselves in
subjection to Gods spirit.

Quest.
How shall I know when I am led by the holy Ghost?

Answ.
By these rules: 1. Gods spirit works in, and by the word: therefore if thou
inquire in every thing what is the good and acceptable will of God, Three
rules to know a man's self led in every thing by the holy ghost.
Romans 12.2. thou art led by the spirit. 2. Discern his guidance by the
mortification of the deeds of the flesh: for the life of the spirit is opposed
to the life of the flesh, Romans 8.13. Therefore in any strong motion, examine
thy self whether it tend to thy own profit, credit, or lusts: if it do,
suspect it, and cast it off: the Apostles in all the motions of the Spirit
respected the public good of the Church, not their own ease and reputation.
The guidance of the Holy Ghost requires denial of our own wills, strife
against the spirit that bears rule in the world, and against the spirit of a
man that lusts after envy. 3. Know it by the excitation of the spirit, which
still stirs and mooues the will and mind, and raises it from under the
oppression of the flesh, and thus preserues and maintains the gift of
regeneration, and effectually bends a man to obedience.

And this duty is necessary, 1. in regard of the unregenerate, who are blind
and in darkness, and without a guide know not what way to go: the natural man
perceiues not the things of God. 2. in regard of the regenerate, who are but as
little children, weak and feeble, and cannot go without a leader. And
therefore all of us need the leading of the spirit.

Into the wilderness.] This is the fourth circumstantiall point. A wilderness is
taken in the Scripture two ways: 1. For a place inhabited, although not fully
peopled, as Josh. 15.61. six cities of the Priests in the wilderness: and John
Baptist came preaching in the wilderness of Judea, because Zachary his fathers
house was there: and 1. King. 2. Ioab was buried in his own house in the
wilderness. 2. For a place utterly desolate, not inhabited or frequented of
men, but possessed only of wild beasts: and thus it is here to be taken, as
Mar. 1.13. he was with wild beasts, utterly separate from the society of men.
This place Christ makes choice of by the motion of the spirit, for these
reasons:

1. In opposition to the first Adam, 4. Reasons why Christ made choice of the
wilderness to be tempted in
who was tempted in paradise, a place in all the world strongest and fittest to
resist temptation in; and being overcome was cast out thence into the
wilderness, as all the world was in comparison. But the second Adam to recover
this loss, encountreth with Satan in a wilderness; the fittest place in the
world to be overcome in, and ouercomming restores us to the heavenly paradise
again.

2. That Christ might manifest both his willingness to be tempted, and his
courage against his enemy: the former, in that he appoints a place wherein
Satan might take al advantage against him: the latter, in that like a champion
he challenges the field where they two alone might try it out. A coward will
be ready to draw in the streets, that dares not look a man in the face in the
field: But Christ appoints a field, where Satan may have all his power against
him, and he no help at all: and by both these he shows himself the promised
seed, appointed to bruise the serpents head.

3. That Christ being known to be the only combatant and maintainer of the
fight, all the praise of the conquest over Satan might be ascribed to him
alone, and to bring in no compartners with him, as the Papists do the Virgin
Mary and other Saints; whereas Christ was therefore the only conqueror,
because he was of infinite power, as they are not.

4. In imitation of Moses at the giving of the law, and Elias at the restoring
of it, the one being 40. days in the mountain, the other 40. days in the
cave of Horeb: Christ at the bringing in of the glorious Gospel would be
answerable to those figures of him, who (as they) comes now out of a
sequestered place, wherein he was fitting himself to undertake so weighty a
business as this is.

No place in the world free from temptations.
1. Note hence, that no place in the world is free from Satan's temptations, but
he lays his snares in every place. Lot is caught in the cave, his wife in the
field, David in his house, Adam in paradise, and Christ is tempted in the
wilderness. The reason hereof is taken, 1. From Satan's diligence and malice, who
goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1. Pet. 5.8. and
is diligent in compassing the earth to and fro, Job. 1.7. his commission is of
large extent, no place in earth is privileged from his temptation. 2. From his
spiritual and powerful nature: no place is so secret but he can find it,
none so strong but he can enter it, none so holy but he can slily get into it,
and boldly stand even among the Sons of God, the Angels, Job. 1.6.

Use. 1. Seeing the whole compass of the earth is Satan's circuit, Satan's
circuit is the earths compass.
let us where ever we are, consider of our enemy, and of our danger by him,
seem the place never so secret, never so secure: the greenest grass may
harbor a serpent: And surely, the more free and safe we think our selves, the
nearer is our danger. There be two places in which men may think themselves
safest: 1. the place of their particular calling. 2. the public place of their
general, the Church: the former because of Gods promise; the latter because of
his presence: yet Satan shunnes neither, neither may we lay off our watch in
either. Experience shows how he lays snares in the special calling, whereby
many fall: some he wins to injustice, and secret cousenage; some to lying*
and swearing; some to Sabbath-breaking: Now though thou art in thy calling, yet
thou art not conscionable in it, and so art out of thy way, and without Gods
protection. The same experience gives witness to the truth of Scripture, how
Satan not only haunts us in our own house, but also follows us to Gods
house, and there intercepts the word, or steals it away, or corrupts the
judgment, or casts men on sleep, or occupies their minds with worldly and
base thoughts; and thus, where they think themselves most safe, they are most
foiled: The reason is this, though thou be in Gods presence, yet thou
set not thy self in his presence, but come carelessly and
inconsiderately; and so God having no delight in thy service, suffers the
devil to exercise his will on thee. So as there is no place, wherein we must
lay aside our watch, if we would not be overcome.

Use. 2. This shows the vanity and delusion of the Papists, who think the
devil is barred out of Churches by their crucifixes, consecrated hoasts,
crosses, and holy water: Neither Popish crosses, nor co^iurers circles, bar
the devil further then he lists.
For the Leuiathan of hell laughes at the shaking of these spears. Also it
shows the madness of Magicians and Coniurers, who think they can bind the
devil within their circles: For although (to delude them and win them sure
to himself) he be serviceable, and at their command, yet he keeps his liberty
permitted him of God, and compasses the whole earth.

2. Note, Some places are more fit for temptation then others.
that some places are more fit for temptation then others; as namely, solitary
and desert places. For Satan has then greatest advantage for his assaults,
when he has men alone, without the help of others to counsel, confirm, and
comfort them. This the Preacher confirms, Eccles. 4.9. Two are better then
one, and woe be to him that is alone; if he fall, he has none to help him
up: and, two are stronger then one, a threefold cord is not easily broken. Nay,
God himself did see disadvantage of solitary life, when he said, It is not
good for man to be alone. When did Satan assault Eve, but when she was alone?
when did he David, but being alone on his gallery? when Lots daughters, but
when they were alone in the cave? Genesis 19.30. And therefore the devil is
delighted to walk through solitary places, Matthew. 12.43. if he possess any,
he carries them into solitary places, Luke 8.29. and where do coniurers and
sorcerers talk with the devil, but in woods and wildernesses, where Satan
most easily appears. For these reasons: 1. Because being a Prince of
darkness, he hates the light, and passes all his exploits in as much
darkness, secrecy, and silence as he can. 2. He sees how easily we sin, when
there is none by to hinder us from it by fear or shame.

Use. 1. This overthrows the dotage of the Papists, who approve and magnify
as meritorious, The devil has monks and heremites where he would have them.
the strict and solitary life of their Monks, Eremites, and Votaries; who to
free themselves from Satan's malice, and for more holiness (as they say,)
voluntarily forsake the societies of men, and live by themselves in woods,
caves, cloisters, and wildernesses, as though they had the advantage of Satan
because of the place, whereas indeed he has them where he would. And because
they seem most to build upon the examples of John Baptist, and Christ
himself, both whom they find in the wilderness, we will a little clear this
place.

Lib. 2. de monach. cap. 39.
And first for John Baptist, whom Bellarmine says for his fare* apparel, and
strict manner of living, was a right pattern of true Eremits. True it is, his
life was austere, as his office and calling was singular and extraordinary,
and no ground for any ordinary office and order in the new Testament; wherein
he is no more to be imitated, then in his springing in the womb at Mary's
presence, which was an extraordinary testimony of an extraordinary person.
Besides, John being no minister of the new Testament (for the least Minister
in the kingdom of God is greater then he:) but the last of the Prophets, and
greater then any of them, how can any order of Evangelical Ministers be raised
from his example? Further, whereas Christ himself the Head of our profession,
came eating and drinking, and familiarly conuersed among men for good, why
should we not rather hold our selves to his example, into whose name we are
baptized, then John's who was an extraordinary forerunner of him? Lastly, we
have heard that the wilderness wherein John lived, was not such a wilderness as
they dream of, utterly remote from the society of men; but a wilderness, in
which were houses and cities, yea his fathers house; a wilderness though less
peopled then the frequented places of Judea, yet not without people, because it
was a wilderness wherein John preached, who preached to men, As their S.
Francis did, to show his great humility and charity.
And not to beasts; a wilderness wherein Christ among a multitude of people was
baptized: and so it scarce affords a color of their Eremiticall Orders,
vowing such a solitary life separate from all men, which John never did.

Christ's going into the wilderness, no ground to popish monks or Eremits for 4.
Reas.
And for the example of Christ, his going into the wilderness to fast and pray;
I answer: 1. Christ was led thither by the Spirit, but they of their own
heads: and to pretend a spirit without a word of warrant, is a frenzy and
delusion. 2. Christ went for 40. days, and came again to his calling; they
go and never return^ again. 3. Christ went to offer opportunity and advantage
to Satan, the more victoriously to foil him, and purchase heaven for us; they
in a superstitious end, to merit and purchase heaven for themselves. 4. Christ
never ate nor drank all the while he was in the wilderness, wherein would
they tie themselves to imitate him, they would soon grow weary of their
holiness and devotion. Accursed therefore be this monkish and anchorish life,
which professes open hostility to humane society, which thrusts them out of
their lawful callings, wherein they ought to be profitable to men in the
societies of Church, Commonwealth, or family. What? are these the lights of
the world, that fly the light like bats and owls, and prison themselves in
cloisters; whereas they should lighten others, and not thrust their light under
a bushel, or under the table? Are these the salt of the earth, who never apply
themselves to season the fleshly and unsavory manners and behauiours of men?
The Apostle teaches them another lesson, Heb. 10.24. saying, Let us provoke
one another to love, and to good works, not forsaking the assemblies, as the
manner of some is: implying that to be an unlawful calling, which cannot but
fail against such duties of charity as these be. It were to be wished, that
because the world receives no seasoning from them, the unprofitable burdens of
the earth were cast out upon the dunghill, the place which Christ himself
assigned unto them.

Use. 2. It teaches those that are troubled with temptations, to beware of
solitary and secret places, because Satan is there the strongest: and much
less must they thrust themselves into desert places, forgetting their
weakness, as though they would with Christ offer battle, and tempt the
tempter: for this his practice is no warrant for us: but they must avoid the
place so soon as they can, and get into the society and fellowship of men. Bad
company worse then solitariness.
Joseph when he was alone with his Mistrisse tempting him, fled out of the
house: so if there be none but the tempter with thee, take the benefit of
company so soon as thou can: but see thy company be good; for bad company is
far worse then solitarines, as many find, who being troubled in mind, or
tempted by Satan, run to lewd company, to cards, dice, drinking, and sporting;
and so by Beelzebub will cast out the devil: But this enlarges the grief;
and they find in the end the remedy nothing inferior to the disease: Whereas
had they resorted into the society of the godly, by godly and religious
communication and conversation, they had been much comforted and confirmed;
according to the promise of Christ, Wheresoever two or three are gathered
together in my name, I will be in the midst of them.

Use. 3. Yet if God shall by virtue of our calling draw us into solitary
places, we must be careful so to carry our selves as we may say with Scipio,
Nunquam minus solus qu^m cum solus.
We are never less alone, then when we are most alone: and with our Savior,
Ioh. 16.32. I am not alone, the father is with me. The faithful need never be
alone, because they may ever be in conference with God: then may they go close
to God, and sharpen their prayers, and meditate on his word and works, to fit
them better for their callings: then may they enlarge their hearts to God in
confessions and praises: and thus he that is led by the spirit into these
solitary places, is in safety; because, as the hills compass Jerusalem, so
does the Lord his people while they are in his service: thus shall Satan be
most disappointed, who while he hopes to make our solitarines his advantage, we
shall by it draw nearer unto God, and be set so much the more out of his reach.

4. Directions for solitarines.
Directions for solitarines:

1. Watch the benefit of time, to spend it best in musing upon

To be tempted of the devil.] This is the fifth circumstantiall point, namely
the end of Christ's going into the wilderness. Here consider two things: 1. the
author of the temptation, the devil: 2. the end it self, to be tempted of
him.

The deuill] that is, a wicked spirit, the Prince and captain of the rest, as
we may gather out of Matthew. 25.41. A wicked spirit, not by creation, but by
defection: Full of wickedness, whence Elima^ the sorcerer is called the child of
the devil, Act. 13.10. because he was full of deceit and wickedness: Full of
malice, a red dragon, full of poisons, seeking nothing but destruction: Full of
craft, an old serpent, more crafty then all the beasts of the field: Full of
power, called the Prince and God of the world, and the power of darkness: the
strong man keeping the ^old: Principalities, powers, etc.

The word comes of (...), traijcio, calumnior; (...).
and signifies an accuser, calumniator, or slanderer, having his name from his
continual practice: For so is he called the accuser of the brethren, which
accuses them before God day and night, Reu. 12.10. and no marvel, seeing he
durst accuse God himself as an enuier of man's happy estate, and careless of
Christ's estate here. But especially he accuses, 1. Man to God, as he did Job,
Satan accuses man, 1. To God.
that he served God in hypocrisy, and upon affliction would curse him to his
face, chap. 1.^.9. 2. Man to man, stirring up strife and contention from one
against another; 2. To man.
and by this means he works effectually in the children of disobedience,
Ephesians. 2.2. Where strife and envying is, there wisdom is sensual and
deuillish, Iam. 3.15. An example hereof we have in Saul, who, when the evil
spirit was entered into him, all manner of accusations came against innocent
David, and were received; that he was a traitor, and one that sought Saul's
life, etc. 3. Man to himself: when he has drawn a man to many loathsome
sins, 3. To himself.
then he stretches them beyond all the measure of mercy, aggrauates Gods
justice, extenuates his mercy, and all to bring the sinner to despair. Thus he
accused Cain, Achitophel, and Judas, whom he brought to confess their sin,
but to deny Gods mercy.

Whence note, 1. the miserable estate of wicked men, that serve such a Lord and
Master as the devil is; Satan's best wages to his most diligent servants.
who in stead of standing by them for their diligent service, will stand
against them to accuse them to God, to men, to their own consciences; will
reckon up al their faults, and deprave whatsoever was best intended. While he
can draw them along in his service, he will lie close like a crafty fox and
serpent, in one corner or other, to devour their souls: but afterward will
terrify them, and roar like a lion on them, setting in order before them the
villainies to which he himself tempted them; crying out on them as damned
wretches, and making them often cry out so of themselves even in this life, and
for ever in the life to come. And yet alas! he is the Prince of this world, to
whom generally most men yield their subjection and homage: yea, the God of this
world, to whom men offer themselves, and what ever they have or can make in
sacrifice: yea, men sell themselves as slaves and bondmen to be ruled at his
will. How should this one consideration move men to get out of his power, and
out of the service of sin, and come to Jesus Christ, who is meek and
merciful, one that covers sins, acquitteth and discharges; one that
answers all accusations, and crowns our weak endeauours, which himself
works in us, in such sort as a cup of cold water shall not go unrewarded?

2. Note, how expressly Satan has stamped this quality as his own mark
upon his children, who so lively resemble him, as that they have his name also
given them, Tit. 2.3. and 2. Tim. 3.3. and 1. Tim. 3.11. For how quick and
nimble are men to go between man and man with tales and accusations, to cast
bones of enmity? Sometimes charging men openly or secretly with things utterly
untrue and false, as Ziba dealt with Mephibosheth, 2. Sam. 16.3. sometimes
blazing infirmities, which love would have covered: sometimes aggravating with
vehemence of words, facts or speeches, which charity would give a favorable
construction unto, as Doeg pleaded against Ahimelec, 1. Sam. 22.9. sometimes
deprauing the truth by adding to men's speeches; and this cost Christ his life,
his enemies adding, I will destroy this Temple, and make another in three
days, made with hands: or diminishing it, by concealing that which might make
for a man. All which are Satanicall practices, who being the father of lies,
would chase all truth out of the world.

7. Rules or means against false accusation
Let all Gods children labor to express Gods image, in hating this hateful
sin, and help themselves thereunto by these rules. 1. Consider thy charge,
Leuit. 19.16. Thou shall not walk about with tales among thy people: and
consider, that whispering and backbiting are the sins of men of a reprobate
sense, Romans 1.29. 2. Receive no false accusation: receivers of stolen goods
are accessarie to the theft: if there were no receivers, there would be no
thieves; if no hearers, no informers. Drive away the slaunderer with an angry
countenance, as the Northwind drives away rain, Prou. 25.23. have no pleasure
in this sin of another man, Romans 1.32. 3. Do thine own business, look to
the duties of thine own calling: busybodies and pratlers are joined
together, 1. Tim. 5.13. 4. Take heed of envy: malice never spoke well, it is
always suspicious, ever traducing. Embrace the love of thy neighbors person.
5. Deal with an other man's good name, as thou would have him deal with
thine, if it came in his way. Consider thou may restore his goods, but never
his name: once broken, ever a scarre. A fellon is more tolerable in a
commonwealth then a slaunderer. 6. In receiving reports, excuse the person so
far as thou can; construe the speech or fact in the most favorable sense;
do as thou would be done to: and if thou can not, advise the reporter to
look to himself, Vide Perald. ^om. 2. p. 56^. de detractore.
and tell him that in many things we sin all. 7. Curse not the deaf, says
the Scripture: now a man that is absent is a deaf man. Object. But I speak
the truth. Answ. But not truly: 1. without ground, thou art uncalled and
unsworn; thou do it not by way of charitable admonition to the party
himself or others. 2. Not in a good manner, without love, pity, sorrow; nay,
thou reioycest rather in thy tale. 3. Not to any other end but to fill men's
mouths with prattle, and bring thy brother into contempt. And why speak thou
no good of him as well as evil, but art like a swine in a garden, that leaves
all the sweet flowers to dig or wallow in a dunghill.

Motives to lay aside and abhor calumniation and slaundring.

1. Charity is not suspicious, Five motives to lay aside calumniation and
slandering.
but in doubtful cases thinks the best. 1. love thinks not evil, 1. Cor.
13.5. 2. it couers a multitude of sins, Prou. 10.12. and 3. it gives to every
man his due, in his goods and good name. And therefore the tale-breeder,
talebearer, and tale-beleeuer, who do none of these, but hammer tales and
slanders upon the anuill of envy, and set them upon the wings of fame and
report, are uncharitable and unchristian persons, the devils fewellers and
gunpowder: for where no wood is, there the fire goes out; so where there is
no talebearer, the strife cease, Prou. 26.20.

2. We have a common proverb, A man museth as he uses; as himself uses to
do, so he imagines of another: and therefore to judge lewdly of another upon
bare suspicion, is commonly a note of a lewd person: those that are so ready
to tax men of hypocrisy, commonly are hypocrites themselves.

3. It is a question among the schoolmen, whether a man that has impaired
another good name, be bound to restore as he that has pilfered his goods;
and it is concluded by all the Doctors, that he is bound in conscience, because
a good name is better then all riches, says Solomon: and because it has more
enemies then our goods, even this law of restitution and satisfaction should be
of force to keep them off us: and if the law bind him that steals our goods,
to restore 5. fold, certainly he that steals our name, is bound to restore
50. fold, because it is so far above a man's substance, and the blot is never
wiped away. If serpents sting us, or mad dogs, or venomous beasts bite us,
there is some remedy; but against the tongue of the slaunderer there can none
be found.

4. It is one of the sins against the ninth commandment, to hear our
neighbor falsely accused, and not to clear him if we be able. Jonathan when he
saw Saul stirred up by tale-bearers against David, spoke boldly in his defense;
and said, Why shall he die? what evil has he done? And Nicodemus, when he saw
the Scribes and Pharisees so set against Christ, that they would have condemned
him being absent and unheard, stood up, and said, Io^. 7.51.
Does our law condemn any before it hear him, and know what he has done? A
good rule for us how to carry our selves toward all Christians.

5. We must hold us to our rule, to judge no man before the time, 1. Cor. 4.5.
and if no man, then, 1. No^ our superiors: people must not bolt out
opprobrious words against their Pastors and Teachers: sin is aggrauated by
the person against whom it is committed: to revile an ordinary man is odious,
but much more to revile the father of our souls or bodies, Pastors or Parents.
2. Not godly men and professors of the Gospel, as to charge them with
hypocrisy, and traduce with violence that which would receive a charitable
construction. Heb. 6.9. 3. Not such as in whom Gods graces shine more eminently
then in others, through pride or envy: this is a high sin, and cost Christ
his life: yea to disgrace and obscure Gods gifts, which ought to be
acknowledged with thankfulness, is in the skirts of that unpardonable sin,
and had need be stayed betimes: for it is to hate goodness; and if it did hate
it because it is goodness, it were far more dangerous.

3. Note: seeing Satan is such an Arch-accuser, and that his special hatred is
against goodness, If there be so many accusers, no marvel if godlymen want no
manner of accusation.
is it any marvel that the children of God pass through many slanderous
accusations? If speech be of the faithful Preachers of the word, neither
Prophets nor Apostles shall avoid most dangerous slanders* Amos shall be accused
by Amazia to preach against the King, and that the whole land is not able to
bear his words: chap. 7. v. 9. Paul and Silas, preaching nothing but Christ,
are brought before the governors, exclaimed upon as men troubling the city,
preaching ordinances not lawful to be received, and teaching men to worship
God contrary to the law, Act. 16.20. and 18.13. Let speech be of professors of
the Gospel, how do men in their minds accuse and judge that to be done in
vainglory, which is done in simplicity, and for Gods glory? and that to be
done in hypocrisy, or for commodity, or other sinister ends, which God sees is
done in sincerity? Yea as if men did see their hearts and inside, how do they
speak it, that such are not the men they make show of? or if grace evidently
appear in the eminent notes of it, they can so lessen, so diminish and clippe
the beauty and glory of it, as still they shall be disgraced. Our blessed Lord
himself was accused and condemned for a malefactor, yea and executed; his
doctrine, notwithstanding most heavenly, and as his enemies witnessed, Never
man spoke like this man, yet was condemned, his wonderful miracles obscured,
yea blasphemed, He cast out devils by Beelzebub: and shall the servant look
to be better then his Master? Lamentable it is to see how our times accuse the
first restorers of religion, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Bucer, and the rest, as the
layers of sedition and rebellion; and as lamentable, that such as preach the
same holy doctrine as they did, should under the titles of Puritans and
Schismatikes be coupled with Papists, yea accounted worse. And no marvel, if
the whole profession of religion be accused, and religious persons made the
songs of the abject, and scum of the land, because the devil is an accuser.
When the devil lays off his name and nature, and cease to be a devil, it
will be otherwise, but not till then. But let such as would be wise by Gods
wisdom, labor to see Satan's malice in all this; and that, if to be accused
be sufficient, who can be innocent?

4. Note: seeing Satan is such an accuse^ of us in himself and his
instruments, to God, to men, and to our own consciences; how careful ought we
to be in our whole conversation to stop Satan's mouth, So many accusers should
make us watchful of our selves.
and the mouths of wicked men, which will be open against us? How ought we to
make right steps to our feet, seeing we shall be sure to hear of the least
halting? How ought we to examine the uprightness of our hearts, that in those
accusations we may be bold to go to God, and say, Lord, do thou prove and
try me, if there be any such wickedness in me.

Rules to become inoffensiue and unreprovable, and so stop the mouth of Satan:

4. Rules to stop the mouths of all accusers.
1. The matter of thy work must be good, and warranted by the word: then God
will justify that which himself sets thee about, and thee in it. 2. The manner
of doing it must be proportional: a good thing must be done well, in good
circumstances. 3. The end must be found, namely Gods glory, and man's good. A
bad end spoils the best action. 4. In every thing remember, that Satan's eye is
upon thee to accuse thee, the eye of thine own conscience to witness for or
against thee, and Gods eye to judge thee, to whom thou must stand or fall as to
thine own Lord.

To be tempted.] The word to be tempted is spoken of, 1. God, 2. Man, 3. Satan;
all tempt.

I. God tempts, 1. when he proves the graces of his children: so he
proved Abraham, Genesis 22.1. and Job. c. 7. v. 18. 2. when he discovers the
sin and corruption which lurketh in them: and thus God tempted the
Israelites, who, when their desires in the wilderness were not satisfied,
usually broke out into murmuring and impatiencie, and showed naughty hearts,
full of distrustfulnes. And thus God is said to lead into temptation, when
being provoked to wrath, he withdraws his grace, that so his children by
their falls might see their weakness, as David and Peter; and that the wicked
might in justice be prepared to judgment, as Pharaoh burst into blasphemy,
Achitophel hanged himself through impatiencie, and Saul used unlawful means
to escape his cross.

2. Rules in Gods tempting of man.
But in these temptations of God, observe two rules: 1. That the word tempting,
referred to God, is ever taken in good part: for he tempts only to prove,
never to seduce: and his temptations are always good, because they proceed
from him that is goodness it self, and tend altogether to the good and profit
of his children; and are the execution of justice on the wicked, which is good
also. 2. That all these temptations are not to confirm Gods knowledge of men,
who perfectly knows what is in them, yea who sees things that are not as
though they were; but to bring men being exercised by them to the clearer
knowledge of him and themselves.

II. Man tempts, 1. God, two ways. 2. Man, Man tempts God two ways.
both himself, and others. Man tempts God, 1. By presumption and curiosity,
as when men forsake the ordinary means of their good, and presume too much
upon Gods help, to try whether God will use any other then the appointed means
to succor them: so it is said, v. 7. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. 2.
By distrust, when men by unwarrantable means try the power of God, whether he
can or will help or hurt. Exodus 17.2. when the Israelites by murmuring would
have water, Moses said, Why tempt ye the Lord? and Psalm. 78.18. they tempted
him in the wilderness, requiring meat for their lust, and said, Can God
prepare a table in the wilderness? Here they tempted him by doubting, 1. of
his promises, 2. of his presence, 3. of his power, 4. by limiting him to that
strait: 5. they thought he was bound to them, to fulfill their lusts.

Man tempts others, 1. When upon just occasion, Man tempts man 3. ways.
he tryes a man's affections and disposition to this or that: so Jonathan tried
his father Saul how he stood affected to David, 1. Sam. 19.3. 2. When men go
about by captious and subtle questions, and with fair show of words, to get
matter of reprehension and accusation against others. Thus the Pharisees came to
Christ, tempting him, Matthew. 16.1. and thus the Herodians came to him to
entangle him in his talk. 3. When men allure and entise one another to evil,
as Pro. 1.10, 11. Come, let us lay wait for blood, and have all one purse: so
the harlot said to the young man, Come in with me, let us talk our fill of
love till the morning.

Man tempts himself two ways: Man tempts himself two ways.
1. when his own concupiscence moves and draws him aside to sin: Iam.
1.4. Every man is tempted when he is drawn aside of his own concupiscence. 2.
when he wilfully calls himself into danger, as Peter when he went into
Caiaphas the High Priests hall among Christ's enemies and his; here he is moved
to deny his Master, and Satan preuailes against him.

III. Satan tempts, and in his tempting goes beyond all these: Satan
tempts two ways.
1. When by outward objects he stirs up inward corruption, as David walking
on his leds, and seeing Bathsheba, the devil wrought lust in him. 2. By
infusing inwardly evil motions and thoughts, without objects: and thus stood
he up against Israel, and caused David to number the people; a thing merely
needless as Ioab confessed, 1. Chron. 21.1, 2, 3.

Now thus God cannot tempt to evil: he withdraws his spirit, by outward
occasions he brings to light the sins of men; and punishes one sin with an
other, but moves no man to evil, and much less drives him to it, and least
of all infuseth wickedness into any man's heart; which to think were high
blasphemy. So men by tempting may stir up corruption in others, but to
infuse wickedness into the heart, belongs only to Satan, because of his
spiritual nature, and ready intercourse with our spirits.

Now seeing these temptations of the devil are so wicked, coming from evil,
and tending to evil, two points are worthy our consideration: 1. How Christ,
being so holy and powerful, could be tempted of the devil. 2. Why he would
be so tempted.

How Christ so holy and so powerful could be tempted of the devil.
no more then to hunger, thirst, weep. 2. Nor against the power of Christ to
be tempted, no more then it was a sign of infirmity and weakness in Adam so
to be, before infirmity and weakness came in. It argued not impotencie in
Christ, to die; nay, so to die, argued omnipotency. So it was not weakness in
Christ to be tempted, but willingness; and so to be tempted argued virtue and
strength. But howsoever the Apostle says, Christ was tempted, and like us in
all things, yet without sin: and Christ himself, Ioh. 14.30. The Prince of
this world comes, and has naught in me, that is, no sin at all: yet it is
hard to be conceived, and therefore we will explain it by these propositions.

1. That temptation that wholly rises from another, and not from a man's self,
is not necessarily mixed with sin: But such were the temptations of Satan to
Christ, wholly hatched by the devil: for there was no manner of evil thought,
no corruption in the holy person of Christ for any such to rise forth of. We
indeed have many temptations arising out of our own corruptions, which are
sin in the beginning, though no consent be given unto them, but are presently
resisted: but no such thing could be in the holy nature of Christ. A fire
kindled within the house is dangerous; but the lightning coming from without,
being but a flash, is without danger. Joseph allured by the words of his
Mistress, resisted and fled away, Genesis 39.12. this was not his sin. And
Hezekiah, provoked to distrust by Rabshakies railing letter, resisted and was
confident, 2. King. 19.10. it was not his sin: the temptation was wholly
without.

2. Those temptations, which are offered by others, either by voice, gesture,
or outward objects; or else by inward thoughts, utterly abhorred, without the
least liking, are not the sins of them that are tempted; their exercises and
trialls they be, not their sins: But such were the temptations of Christ; he
was troubled and vexed with them, as appears by his Avoid Satan; and the
voices and objects carried to his ear and eye; yea motions to infidelity,
covetousness, and idolatry, to his mind; but yet by the perfect light of his
mind, and the unchangeable holiness of his will, were instantly repelled, and
gained not the least affection, and much less left the least infection behind
them. True it is, that evil thoughts cast into our minds, can hardly be cast
out without some taint: for we are ready as tinder to receive such sparkles; we
must pause upon them, till they gain some delight, if not content. But it was
not so with Christ, whose perfect holiness was as water to quench all such
sparkles.

3. Of temptation there are three degrees: Three degrees of temptation.
1. suggestion. 2. delight. 3. consent. Suggestion is the mere motion of
another, altogether without us, and cannot be our sin, if neither of the
latter come to it; either of which two is a token of infirmity. But Christ's
temptations were all in suggestion, because he stood fast without alteration of
his mind, without the least delight or consent to the thing tempted unto.
Whereunto serves that distinction of glancing, and permanent motions; the
former passing through the heart without any footing, against no commandment;
the latter either without consent, against the tenth; or with consent against
all the nine.

Hence note: 1. Seeing Christ himself of so holy condition was subject to be
tempted, let no man living look to be exempted from temptations. Our Lord
Jesus that had no inward corruption to stir up any motion in him, cannot
avoid outward objects and persuasions to sin. But our case is far
otherwise: for suppose there were no devil assayling us, no outward object
that could be presented to us, yet we are tempted and led away by our own
concupiscence; we need no moving or stirring, but run headlong of our selves
into sin. If we had no enemies to batter down our walls and holds without us,
we have inward and domestical rebels and traitors, which continually betray
us. Where is the man now that boasts he was never tempted, and he has so
strong a faith, and is of such holiness, as he defieth Satan, and will spit in
his face, and he never was molested by him? But pitiful is this delusion: Is
thy faith stronger, thy holiness greater then Christ's? No, no, Satan is gone
away with all, the strong man has all in peace, else thou should hear of
him, and tell me an other tale. This example of Christ well considered, would
teach thee another lesson, namely, like a wise man, 1. to expect temptations.
2. learn to resist them as Christ did. 3. that the greatest temptation of all
is, The greatest temptation of all is, not to be tempted.
not to be tempted: for where Satan's malice shows not it self, there is no
good thing at all.

2. Note hence, that all Satan's temptations, be they never so hellish and
violent, yet cannot hurt us if we yield not to them. He never more fiercely
assailed any then Christ himself, yet Christ, giving no way to him, was a
little troubled and grieved, but not hurt. Satan may allure, but he cannot
force us.
So all that Satan can do to us, is but to assail and allure us, but force
our wills he cannot; for God has not put our wills in his power. Which should
teach us, 1. More carefully to resist the devil, who never gets advantage
of us, but by our own voluntary yielding, which rolls us into his sin and
condemnation. 2. Being fallen into sin, to accuse our own cowardlinesse and
carelessness: many being fallen into mischeife, lay load upon the devil, Oh
the devil ought them a spite, and he has paid it; and so lay all the blame
on him, not considering their own sin. True it is, the devil spights every
man, and the best most; but if thou had not more spighted thy self, thou
had done well enough: the devil did move, and gave a rise to a sin; but
who bade thee perfect and finish it? Can the devil make thee sin without thy
self? I deny not but that thou can not lay too much blame upon the devil,
but see thou laiest not too little upon thy self.

3. Note: in that therefore Christ fully overcame, and was not touched with
temptation, because by the perfection of his holiness he resisted at the
first, we must learn this wisdom; if we would not fall by temptation, to
resist the first motions, and beat back the first assault, which is a great
advantage. For, if Satan can get us to rest upon his suggestion, he presently
hopes for consent, and then hasteneth the execution forward: for the party is
won, and the means of executing shall not be far to seek. Hence are we
commanded, to give no place to the devil, but to break the head of the
serpent, hit Goliath in the forehead, tread on sin in the shell, and dash
Satan's brood against the stones while they are infants. For, Satan's first
assaults to be repelled for three reasons.
1. Satan is more easily driven back at the first; as ill weeds grow apace in
a rank soil, so by a little continuance, his temptation gets power,
strength, and greatness. 2. Man's power is daily lessened, and he is more unable
to resist; as in the body, the stronger the disease, the weaker the body. 3.
Many habits grow to a nature, (...). Arist.
and sieldome are habitual sinners reclaimed. When saw we a drunkard
converted, or a blasphemer, or a mocke-God, or a rayler at religion? No, the
delight in sin has delivered them into Satan's hands, to be ruled at his
will. It is in the recovery of the souls health, as in the bodies; it is more
easily obtained, if the disease be met with at the first assault.

The second point considerable is, Why Christ would be tempted. Why Christ
would be tempted, 4. reasons.
that he voluntarily submitted himself unto temptations, and was not violently
subjected to them, seeing he who was able to cast out devils by his very word,
and legions of them, could (if he had pleased) by his own power have commanded
the devils, not once to attempt the tempting of him. And therefore one
distinguishes between Christ's submission, of which this was a branch; and
subjection, which usually inferres necessity.

We may well assure our selves, that it being in his power, he would never so
voluntarily have yielded himself to such an unpleasant combat with so foul
an enemy, had there not been very weighty and urgent causes. And these we
shall see most specially respecting us rather then himself: he was incarnate,
not for himself, but for us: he suffered in our nature, not for himself, but
for us, that by his stripes we might be healed: he subdued and vanquished the
devil, not for himself, who was never under his power, but for us; and so was
tempted, not for himself, but for us; and that for these reasons:

1. That he might through temptation win that, which the first Adam through
temptation lost, and that as our fall was begun by temptation, so also might
our deliverance; that as the serpent by tempting the woman, bereaved us of our
happiness; so the same serpent, by tempting this seed of the woman, might
against his will help us to our happiness again.

2. That by his temptation he should not only overcome ours, as by his death
he destroyed ours; but by his resistance to leave us a pattern how to resist
the devil. He is the chief doctor, who not only teaches by precept, but by
vnfayling example, how we may rise from under temptation. He might have driven
back the devil with a word, but then had we wanted the benefit of his
example, which has both showed us our coat armor, and the right manner of
using it as he did. As a faithful captain, he trains his soldiers, and as
Gideon said to his soldiers, What ye see me do, that do you.

3. That he might be more able to succor them that be tempted. Heb. 2.18. for
in that he suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted: And Christ by being tempted was enabled thereunto sundry ways:
Christ by being tempted, enabled to succor us in temptation sundry ways.
1. By experience he learned wherein the strength of Satan did lie; that as
Dalilah, when she knew wherein Samsons great strength lay, did soon disarme
him, so Christ spoiled Satan of his locks. 2. He took knowledge and felt our
misery by reason of Satan's temptations, whereas he that has not felt misery,
does little know or believe the misery that another feels; but he that has
felt the like, has a fellow-feeling of it. Heb. 4.15. we have not an High
Priest, which cannot be touched with infirmites, but he was in all things
tempted in like sort, yet without sin. 3. As he would by temptation feel our
misery, so he was more enabled to show pity and compassion on them that are
tempted: Heb. 5.2. he is able sufficiently to have compassion on them that are
ignorant and out of the way, because he was compassed with infirmity. So as if
Christ had not had experience of the force, craft, instance of the tempter, and
of the misery, danger, weakness of the tempted, so far as without sin he
could, he had not been so able to succor them that are tempted, as now he is.

4. That by his temptation he might minister sundry grounds of comfort unto
us: as 1. That our temptations and trialls are not signs of Gods wrath, no
more then they were to Christ, of whom he had immediately before witnessed that
he was the son of his love: but exercises, which the Lord in wisdom uses
for the good of his children. If it had been evil to be tempted, A ground of
comfort out of Christ's temptation.
certainly Christ had not been tempted. 2. That we should not quail at the
sight of our enemy, as all Israel ran away at the sight of Goliath: but,
although he be never so huge and strong a Giant, yet he may be, and is
overcome, and that by Christ, true man, in the flesh: Yea, this victory over
Satan in our nature, and by our head, is the ground of ours, to whom he will
also give power to do the same. 3. That we have him a companion, yea an
invincible captain in our combat, who can never be overcome; but at the
weakest, and alone, like a mighty Sampson, slew down heaps upon heaps, and
bore away his enemies gates; and his presence shall make us invincible, that
look as Daniels fellows could not be touched with the fire, because there was
a fourth like the Son of God with them; so much less shall Gods children by
Satan's most fiery temptations, so long as the Son of God is with them. 4.
That we might see in him what glory follows victory, and what crowns are
prepared for the conquerours, and so comfort our selves in all difficulties, to
hold but unto victory.

Seeing Christ was tempted, Use. 1.
let not us be dismayed at temptations, but rather encouraged manfully to
resist them: for 1. By virtue of Christ's temptations, ours are sanctified unto
us. Motives to manfull resistance of temptation.
There was nothing which Christ did, but he sanctified the same to us, public
institutions of Gods worship, speaking and hearing the word, prayer, the
Sacraments; and all other private ordinances, meat, drink, sleep, yea even
infirmities that are without sin, pain, sorrow, temptations, nay death, and
the grave: the former, of a gate to hell, being sanctified for a wicket to
heaven; the latter, of a stinking cave to reserve the body for torment, altered
into a sweet bed to preserve it to eternal joy. 2. By Christ's temptation,
being our head, the force, and strength, and bitterness of our temptations is
abated, so as Satan cannot now so fiercely assault his members. Temptation may
fitly be compared to a sword, which, beaten upon a rock or stone, is so far
from peircing the stone, as it turns the edge, and makes it more unable
afterward to hurt. The devil took this sword, and laid on with both hands
upon Christ; but he, as the stone hewn out of the mountain, bears the
blows, turns the edge, and blunted his assaults, that they can never so
sharply pierce the members. The proud and furious waves of the sea, beating
themselves against a hard rock, break themselves and loose all their
strength: So is it here with the billows of temptation, beating themselves
against the rock on which the Church is built. 3. For our further
encouragement, in that Christ was tempted, and overcame in temptation, we have
assured hope of victory against Satan as Christ our Head had: for he has
trod Satan under his feet for us, nay under our feet too, Romans 16.20. Object.
Oh but we are yet mightily assailed, and in great perplexity. Answ. God
suffers Satan still to tempt and try us, and he does it busily, because his
time is short: but yet, though the Lord will have our graces tried, and will
see our courage and valor, yet he has him under his feet, and in his cheine,
so as we resist a conquered adversary; and, a little exercise being ouerpast,
we shall also have him under our feet.

In that Christ was pleased to be assailed with sundry temptations, Use. 2.
let us look up unto this author and finisher of our faith, and set before us
our pattern of imitation, who overcame not Satan for himself, as the Saints
have done, but for our salvation, and for our imitation. The former, that we
might draw power and virtue from him to overcome as he did, Look up to Christ
tempted for salvation, and imitation.
that as the Israelites being stung with fiery serpents, looking up to the
brazen serpent, might be cured; so we being stung by the temptations of this
old serpent and dragon, looking up by the eye of faith upon Christ, through
that blessed union betwixt him and us, might receive virtue and cure against
all these fiery darts. The latter, that we might not give place to the devil,
though he should assault us again, and again, no more then Christ did; that
we might learn of him what weapon to use, and in what manner to use it, both
to defend our selves, and offend our enemy; therefore would he not only
overcome one temptation, but many, one in the neck of another, for our
instruction and imitation: And hence we are commanded to look up to Jesus that
endured such speaking against of sinners, Heb. 12.3.

Hence we have a notable proppe of our faith, that we have an High Priest, Use.
3.
who would have experience of our infirmities, and in all things be tempted
like us, that he might be merciful and compassionate; therefore let us go
boldly to the throne of grace to ask help in time of need, in temptation, in
affliction, in want, Heb. 4.16. Thus Christ was typified by the High Priests in
the law, who were subject to like infirmities with others, that they might be
ready to comfort, and pray, and offer for them. Seeing Christ was therefore
afflicted, that he might be fit and ready to comfort others, with what boldness
may we approach to him in our need, and learn to comfort others with the same
comforts that we have received? 2. Cor. 1.4.5.6.

Having spoken of Christ's entrance into the wilderness, which is the former part
of his Preparation to the combat, we come now to the latter, which is the
expecting of his enemy: and in this there are to be ^^nsidered, 1. His
furniture, or how he was appointed: 2. His company, or how he was attended:
3. His exercise, or how he was employed. The first Luke has, chap. 4. v. 1. he
was full of the holy Ghost. The second Mark has, chap. 1. v. 13. he was among
the wild beasts. The third is twofold: 1. that he fasted 40. days, and 40.
nights, as all the Evangelists say. 2. that all that while he was tempted with
lesser onsets, as S. Luke has it, chap. 4. v. 2.

First, Christ went armed to the combat with Satan, he was; which had
formerly lighted upon him in the shape of a dove, and had so extraordinarily
fenced him with graces of sanctification above measure, that there was no room
to fasten any temptation upon him. The vessel that is full, no more liquor can
be conveyed into it: Christ was so full of the Holy Ghost, his nature so
perfectly holy and fully sanctified, as that not a contrary motion could once
invade him. Object. But some of the Saints, as John Baptist and Steven, have
been full of the holy Ghost, and yet have been foiled by temptation. Answ.
There is a twofold filling: 1. absolute and perfect, which is beyond all
measure; a special privilege of Christ, who must be filled for himself and
all his members. 2. comparatiue and imperfect, in measure: so those holy men in
respect of themselves at some other time, or in respect of other common men,
might be said to be filled, namely above the ordinary measure: But never was
any Saint so filled but that he had great emptines, and much room for Satan,
to frame and forge his temptations in. Doctr. When God brings his children
into the wilderness to be tempted, he armeth them with grace sufficient.


When God does bring his children into the wilderness, that is, into
temptation, he armeth them with sufficient power to withstand it. 2. Cor. 12.8.
when Paul was vexed with an extraordinary temptation, he prayed thrice, or
often; and answer was given, My grace is sufficient for thee: where by grace,
is not meant the free favor of God, as in many places, but the power and
strength of the Holy Spirit, which was a gift of grace, enabling him to stand
under it. And this is that which Gods children may expect; not to be exempted
from temptation, nor from much molestation, nor from many knocks, and foiles,
which bring them much sorrow: but yet at length God, whose hand is under them,
brings them through all. For so it is in 1. Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, and
will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able, but with every
temptation will give an issue. In which place the Apostle distinguishes of
temptations; Some are so deadly and diabolical, as a man is drowned and never
swimmes out of them: these we must pray against, Lead us not into temptation:
Others rise of humane imbecility, and are such as men can bear, by which God
tries the graces of his, and manifests their infirmity, and out of which his
grace gives evasion and deliverance, seem they never so dangerous: as for
example; what a great temptation was that of Israel in the red sea? yet God
brought them out of it. So for evil of sin; What strong temptations were
they that seized on Peter, David, Solomon, wherein they seemed utterly lost?
Yet the Lord held under his hand, and left them sufficient grace to raise them
again: Gods faithfulness was such to David and Solomon; and Christ's prayer,
that Peter's faith did not utterly fail.

1. We are the Lords soldiers and servants, and therefore he will help us:
Reasons. 1.
David thought this a good argument, Psalm. 86.2. O thou my God, save thy
servant, that trusts in thee. And this is Gods manner of dealing: When he
has a great work or trial for his children, he arms them with boldness,
constancy, and courage; as Sampson, when he was to encounter many Philistims,
what a measure of strength was he endued withal? When the Prophets were to be
sent to rebellious and stubborn people, the Lord made their faces as brazen
walls, Ierem. 1.18. and as adamants, Ezekiel. 3.9. The Apostles, being called to
the great function of calling in the whole world, the Holy Ghost fell first
upon them, and furnished them with singular gifts fit for that calling. How
boldly Peter preached and professed Christ at Jerusalem to the beards of those
that had put him to death, even the Rulers and Elders, appears in Act. 4.8.
but the cause of this was, that he was full of the Holy Ghost. The like we may
observe in Elias his reforming of Gods worship; and in the restoring of
religion by Luther, who was wonderfully gifted, 1. with undaunted courage, as
appears in his burning the Popes decrees, and his disputation at Worms: 2.
with fervent prayer: 3. with admirable and heavenly preaching. So the faithful
witnesses and Martyrs that are called to a hot brunt, are first armed with a
singular spirit, as that Protomartyr Steven, Act. 6.8.10. who was full of the
Holy Ghost, full of faith and power, full of wisdom and grace, that they were
not able to resist the wisdom and spirit by which he spoke. And was it not so
in Q Mary's days, that poor creatures were lifted up with such excellent
spirits, as that all the learning and wisdom of the Doctors, or all the power
of authority could not daunt them, but only those unmerciful arguments of
fire and faggot, could put them to silence?

2. The battle and cause is Gods, 2
the question between Satan and us is Gods glory and our salvation. God should
loose his honor, if any of his servants should be utterly overcome
This was Moses his argument, why the Lord should spare his murmuring people;
see Number. 14.15.16. Now if the devil prevail against us, God shall loose his
honor, which is dear unto him: But he will not suffer himself to be so
disgraced, as to let us be overcome by his enemy, neither shall the salvation
of his be prejudiced: for this were against the truth of God, whom Satan
accuses to be a liar.

3. He has armed us with his own armor, and furnished us with his own
strength, 3
and will not have his weapons be thought so weak and insufficient as to be
foiled in it: the sword of the Spirit is not so blunt, the shield of faith is
not so dull, the breastplate of righteousness is not so thin, as to receive
every bullet that comes, to hurt us.

4. Christ has made us members of his own body: and when the head can with
patience suffer the members, 4
which it is able to defend, to be pulled off from the body, then shall the
sound members of Christ be pulled away by temptation from him: which they must
needs be, if they were not continually supported by his strength.

Object. 2. Cor. 1.8. We were pressed out of measure, passing strength,
insomuch that we despaired even of life. Answ. 1. The Apostle speaks of humane
strength, which could never have passed through those trialls: but the power
and strength of God showed them an issue. 2. The Apostle speaks according to
the sense of his flesh, and what they were in their own feeling; as it is
plain in the reason of his deliverance in the next words, That we should not
trust in our selves, but in God that raises the dead. 3. The very scope of the
place is to show, not the unmeasurableness of affliction, but a great measure
of them, thereby to amplify Gods mercy.

Use. We should not be discouraged, though our trialls be very great: for we
shall not want sufficient strength to carry us through them. Yea, let us
check our weakness, while we torment our selves with needles fears, that God
takes little or no knowledge of our trialls, or will withdraw his grace, and
absent himself for ever. No, he tenders the weakness of his chosen, on whom
although the Spirit fall not so visibly as upon Christ, yet by virtue hereof
they have the secret distilling, and sensible, yea forcible working of the
Spirit in their hearts; such graces of faith, hope, patience, and boldness (in
case they keep their watch) as whereby they may as surely persuade themselves
of victory, as if they had received the Holy Ghost visibly as Christ did.

Strong motives to outstand temptations.
Add hereunto these considerations: 1. That it is impossible to be exalted to
Christ's kingdom, if thou be not assalted first with temptation: thou can not
be victorious, unless thou fight, nor obtain the crown unless thou be
victorious, Reu. 3.21. 2. That if thou be in great perplexity, yet think
not the Lord has forsaken thee: For 1. not to be chastised of God, is to be
hated of him: 2. he hides his face but for a season from his children, as the
mother does till the child get knocks and falls; only to let them see their
weakness, and more to depend upon him: 3. that there is a time when God makes
intimation to all his children of their election and salvation: and commonly
before this, that they may be fitted with hungring desire after grace, and make
much of it when they have it, there goes a trouble of mind, and fear, and
disquiet; so as a man thinks God is quite gone, when he is drawing graciously
unto him, and that he shall never ^eare more of him, when he is knocking by the
Holy Spirit to have entrance into his heart.

Therefore we may trust perfectly on this grace, and wait Gods time for his
full manifestation of it: the just lives by faith, and makes not have: Job,
if the Lord killed him, would still trust. Remember M. Robert Glou^r that
blessed Martyr at Couentry, crying to his friend Austen, He is come, he (...)
come: ^e looked for the Holy Ghost two or three days before, and made great
moan that he came not; yet he continued waiting, and he came at length, but
not before he came to the sight of the stake.

Secondly, of the company of Christ, and how he was attended: Mark adds that
circumstance, chap. 1. v. 13. He was also with the wild beasts. Which is not
to be passed without use, because the Spirit of God pleased to record it. The
Popish writers say, that the cause hereof was, that the wild beasts should
come and do homage to him their Lord, as they did to Adam. But this is a
devise of man's brain: for although Christ deserved honor and homag^ from all
creatures, men and Angels, yet this is not the time and place to receive it:
yea they forget, that Christ went into the wilderness to be humbled in a
special manner. Besides, the text mentions other business wherein Christ
was for those 40. days employed, as in the next branch we are to hear.

But the true and proper causes were these: Why Christ was with wild beasts:
4. Reasons.
1. To show what kind of wilderness this was, namely not such as that in
which John preached; of which there were many in Palestina, which were
distinguished by their special names, as the desert of Judea, of Ziph, of
Maon, etc. and such as were not altogether desert, and without people, or
incommodious for men to dwell in, but were here and there inhabited: But this
desert, wherein Christ was tempted, not noted by any addition, but the desert,
was remote from all company of men, and full of wild beasts; by which it is
plain it was unpeopled, and had no inhabitants but the wild beasts. If any
ask, which wilderness it was; I answer, it is not determined in the Scripture;
but it is not unlikely but it was that great wilderness, in which the
Israelites wandered 40. years, called by eminence, (...), the wilderness. And
we know, that there were some figures, which might shadow* the temptation in
this place; as Exodus 17.7. it is called the place of temptation, Massah and
Meribah, because of contending and tempting the Lord; here the Lord was
contended with and tempted. Again, Exodus 16.4. this was the place wherein the
Lord showed them, that man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God: compare it with, Deuteronomy. 8.3. This also was
the wilderness, in which Moses and Elias fasted 40. days; and if it were not
the same, it must needs be figured by it. But it is no article of faith, to be
stood upon or contended about. 2. This circumstance of history is added, to
show how helpelesse Christ was, without all help and comfort of man, where he
could look for no succor from any earthly creature or worldly means, nay all
the means against him. 3. To show that his power was so much the more
manifest, in that when Satan had him at the greatest advantage, and all the
means set against him, yet he goes away victor; and that none could share with
him in the praise of the victory, but it belonged to him of all the seed of
women. 4. To show the power of the Son of God, who could live peaceably among
the wild beasts, who, if he had been a common and weak man, had been
certainly eaten up of them.

Quest. How could Chist live peaceably and safely among the wild beasts?

Answ. When Daniel was cast into the den, the Lions spared him, but not through
the disposition of their nature (for presently they devoured his enemies) but
the text ascribes it to two causes: 1. to the Angel of God, that stopped their
mouths. 2. because he believed in his God, which, besides the faith whereby he
was justified, was even a faith in the miracle, by which he was strengthened at
this time. But I take it, another reason may be given of Christ's peaceable
converse among the savage creatures, namely, because he was endued with the
perfect image of God, and they did acknowledge him as their Lord, even as they
did Adam before the fall; which is a special privilege of the state of
innocence.

Christ has more peace among wild beasts, then among wicked men.
Hence observe, 1. That wicked men are worse then bruit beasts, they will not
acknowledge Christ when the wild beasts will; Christ shall have no peace among
them. If he come in Judas his hands, he will betray him; the Jews will accuse
him, Pilate will condemn him, the common sort will beat and buffet him, the
soldiers will crucify him. A great deal more security shall he find in the
wilderness among wild beasts, then in places inhabited by wicked men. And the
reason seems to be, that the higher the fall, the greater the wound; the
devil falling from such a height of glory, is most desperately wicked against
Gods image, especially in his son: wicked men falling from a blessed estate
of holiness and renewed reason, are desperately malicious too, so as the poor
creatures in their proportion retain more goodness in their nature then man
does in his; they still serve God in their kinds, man still rebelleth; they
fell from subjection to man, but man from subjection to God.

Use. This should both humble us, to see the little good that is left in our
nature, and also urge us to seek the renewing of it. And it should terrify
wicked men, who, resisting Christ in his word, members, graces, yea persecuting
him in his Saints, show themselves more savage then the creatures: the wild
beasts will acknowledge him that does him good; but the wicked man spurns
against him. Daniel was more safe among the lions then his enemies; and David
was compassed with ramping lions. Psalm. 22.13.


Note. 2. This affoardeth us a ground of comfort, that when the state of the
Church is afflicted, led into the wilderness, environed with men for their
dispositions as wild and fierce as Tygres, Lions, Leopards, Cockatrices (for
so natural men are described, Isa. 11.) yet it is in no worse state then
Christ himself once was: and as Christ was in the midst of wild beasts, and
was not hurt, so shall his members be; they may be molested and afraid of
danger by them, yea assaulted and slain, but not hurt. If the Spirit lead thee
into the wilderness as he did Christ, thou may be secure; if for good
conscience and Gods religion thou be set upon, thou shall not be hurt, as
the Martyrs were not.

Note. 3. In that our Savior now is safe enough, when all the means of safety
and comfort are set against him, we must learn to depend upon him, if we shall
come into the like case: when we have no way to help our selves, all means
fail, Christ as able to defend us as himself, both from wild beasts and
devils.
nay all means are against us, like so many wild beasts about us, then he is
able to succor us, as he was to defend himself alone, not only from the rage
of wild beasts, but furious devils. And this is the true trial of faith,
when we have no means, yea when means are against us. It is an easy thing to
trust God upon a pawn, but we must trust in his word, that is indeed to trust
in God. When the case is with us as it was with Moses at the red sea, the sea
before him, the mountains on both sides, Pharaoh and his host behind, then to
say, Stand still, fear not, and behold the salvation of the Lord, here is
found faith. When Aram and mount Seir came against Iehoshaphat, and he saw no
strength or means of his own, he said, O Lord, we know not what to do, but
our eyes are unto thee; and so, though his army was small, and his enemies like
grass on the earth, trusting in God he went away with the victory. And what a
holy and faithful profession was that of Job? If the Lord kill me, yet will I
trust in his mercy.

Rules to carry our selves by faith in the outward means:

I. Where they be. 1. Faith neglects not good means where they be, ^. Rules
to keep faith in the presence of outward means.
because Gods providence has affoarded them and appointed them for our good:
faithful Iaacob had a good care to provide for his family, Genesis 30.30. Isaac
said to his father, Here is the knife and wood, but where is the sacrifice?
Abraham answered, God will provide: so let us use the means, and God will
provide the rest which is wanting. 2. It has a right judgment of them, not as
things to be trusted to; neither art nor labor, expressed by the net, Hab.
1.16. nor wealth and riches, expressed by the wedge of gold, Job 31.24. nor
friends and alliance, expressed by the arm of flesh, Ier. 17.5. no, nor the
outward means of salvation, Ezech. 33.31. Faith knows it is not bread, but
the staff of bread that man lives by. David looks upon his staff and bow,
and says they cannot help him, Psalm. 42.6. and counts watching and building
but vain, except the Lord join his helping hand, Psalm. 127.1, 2. 3. Faith
uses means, but expects no blessing from them, but by the word and prayer.
Genesis 32.9. Jacob uses good means and policy in dividing his army, and
separating his bands, but withal gives himself to prayer, to get Gods arm
with him. Exodus 17.11. Joshua goes and valiantly fights the Lords battles;
but Moses must be at prayer in the mount, and no longer Joshua prospers then
Moses prays.

3. Actions of faith in the absence of means.
II. Where they be not: 1. Faith trusts where means be wanting, or against
them. Though ten thousand compassed David, yet would he trust, Psalm. 3.6. And
Abraham was a notable pattern of faith, when he had no means, but all was
against him, in himself and his wife; still he depended upon the naked word,
that God was true, and able to perform his promise, Romans 4.9.20.21. 2. Faith,
when it may, uses no evil means; it flies not in sickness to sorcerie, nor
in extremity to the Witch, as Saul did, for which he was rejected from being
King, 1. Chron. 10.13. It turns not to fetches of policy, nor to dig deep
counsels, on which a woe is pronounced, Isa. 29.15. It deuiseth not to smite
ones betters with the tongue: it takes not advantage of men's simplicity or
forgetfulness. 3. It observes how many great things God brings to pass
without, yea against the means; to show how little he depends upon them; and
therefore it will not stint the Holy One of Israel, but frame the heart to his
likeness. It sees the walls of Jericho fall down by seven days compassing,
Josh. 6.3. It sees all Midians host discomfited, by means of a dream of a
barley loaf, tumbled down from above into the host of Midian, Iud. 7.13. and
Ashurs host fly all away, supposing the King of the Hittites, and Egyptians to
come upon them, through a noise of chariots and horses, 2. King. 7.6. And
surely this is the course, in which God often encourages his children, who
thrive and grow they know not how, by virtue of the promise, that God will
fill his with hidden treasures. Whereas those that will feed themselves upon
the means, and trust God no further; Gods justice often lets them see their
folly, revenging their infidelity: they eat, and are not satisfied; they earne
money for a bottomless bag, Hag. 1.6. they go and trust in Physicians as Asa
did, and pine away: their wisdom and counsel is turned to foolishness, as
Achitophels: they have horses, and strength, and trust to it, Psalm. 20.7.8. but
they are fallen there where they trusted. And thus God lets men see, that
there is neither wisdom, counsel, power, or success against, nor without
the Lord.

Note 4. Not to think much if with our Lord we find men more savage then
beasts.
Christians must not think much to find men more savage then bruit beasts,
seeing Christ found it so: Lazarus found dogs more pitiful to him then
Dives; and Paul found the beasts, to which he was condemned at Ephesus, more
merciful then the men, 1. Cor. 15.31. The like entertainment in the world
must every Christian expect.

NOw we come to the third point in Christ's expectation of his Fasting, to which
he joined prayer without all doubt: this S. Matthew has, that he fasted forty
days and forty nights. 2. Temptation, by lighter onsets, as Luke says
plainly, he was forty days there tempted of the devil, and after that he was
hungry; and then began these three temptations.

In his fast, consider three things: 1. what kind of fast it was. 2. the
reasons of it. 3. the continuance, forty days, and forty nights.

For the first. Of fasts there are three kinds Kinds of fasts. 3.
:

1. Civil, as when men f^st for the health of their body; or when Saul fasted
pursuing the Philistims, 1. Sam. 14.24. and those forty, that vowed not to
eat till they had slain Paul, so intent they were upon their wickedness, Act.
23.14. This is voluntary: there is also one involuntarie fast, when men want
what to eat or drink, as Elias fasted, 1. Kin. 17.5. This is not here meant.



Moses, Exodus 24.18. and to Eliah, 1. King. 19.8. And of this kind was our
Saviors fast; because no man can fast so long, or half so long, and remain
alive; and much less can a man fast so long, and not be hungry all the while,
as it is said of Christ.



1. Christ's was a total fast, an utter abstinence; theirs is a mock-fast: they
glut themselves in the time of their fast with most dainty meats and drinks,
in fulness and delicacy. Christ's fast disagreeth from popish fasts in 7. things
or 8.
2. Christ's was voluntary, theirs is forced, against the use of the Primitive
Church, among whom it was left free to every man's conscience, when and how long
it pleased him to use it: neither were any laws set Gregory the great, or (as
other write) Telesphorus Bishop of Rome about 400. years after Christ; but it
was free for the time, and kinds of meats. 3. Christ's fast was for a necessary
cause; theirs Pharisie profess, I fast twice a week, etc. 5. Christ fasted
not as counting some meats unclean, which are all Peter's vision, Act. 10.11.
may all be lawfully used at all times for the nourishment of man: and the
contrary is a doctrine of devils. 6. Christ fasted not without instant prayer:
for even Moses or Elias: if they cannot, how dare they embolden themselves to
imitate Christ, and inioyne the meanest of their Disciples so to do under
pain of damnation? for this is the boldness of Bernard, saying, As Christ
forty days after his resurrection ascended to heaven, so none can ascend
thither that fasteth not these forty days.

And yet here I condemn not the Lent-fast among us, so it be observed only as
a civil and politic ordinance, and not as any religious fast or observation:
for I esteem it as lawful for a King for a time to forbid his subjects some
sorts of meat, and inioyne others as he sees most fit for his Commonwealth,
as for a Physician to prescribe a diet to his patient, forbidding some meats,
and appointing others for the health of his body. Much less do I condemn all
fasting in general, but wish it were more observed then it is, so it be
rightly: But this fast of the Papists, in the institution, observation, causes,
manner, and end of it, is wicked and sacrilegious.

Christ fasted this fast for 4. causes.
II. The affirmative ends of this fast of Christ were these:

1. To prepare himself by fasting and prayer to his most weighty full of the
holy Ghost, and seemed not to need the benefit of fasting and prayer to fit
him, yet he took on him our infirmities with our nature, and as man needed
such help as our selves do.

Ob. You said this fast was not for our imitation. Ans. True, it was not in the
extent, but in the end it was: in the former Christ is to be admired, in the
latter to be imitated.

3. To set out his miracles and divine power, for the honor and authority of
his person and doctrine, to show himself the Object. Moses and Elias fasted
this fast, and yet were mere men. Answ. They did it by his power, he by his
own: they were vpheld by the power of God, but he by his divine power: their
fasting was but a type and shadow of this. But to make every man able to
imitate this fast, obscures Christ's glory, and this miracle, and the Gospel it
self.

into the wilderness, and of his hunger. Wherein also this fast of Christ may
not be imitated: for we are not to offer any opportunities or advantages to
Satan, who is ready enough to seek and take enough: as we may not tempt God,
so we may not tempt the tempter, but pray that we may not be lead into
temptation by him, and watch least we fall into temptation, Mark. 14.38. yea we
must cut off and prevent his advantages, and shun all occasions wherein he
might assault us, as knowing our own weakness.

The third thing in Christ's fast is the continuance of time, forty Why did he
fast so long? Christ fasted no longer nor shorter time then 40. days, for 5.
reasons. Moses in monte ante legem, Elias in itinere sub lege, Christus in
deserto sub gratia.
why no more nor no less? Answ. For these reasons: 1. To be answerable to the
types. As Moses fasted 40. days at the institution of the law, and Elias at
the restitution of it, so would Christ here at the manifestation of the Gospel.
2. He exceeded not this number, least he should seem too inhumane and cruel
against himself: for he did no more then Moses and Elias had done, men subject
to infirmity. In our time he is no man that cannot strain one trick above
others: but Christ being in the shape of a servant, takes not upon him above
his fellow-seruants. 3. He would not fast less, because he would not seem
less then the Prophets, nor unlike them. 4. He would not fast more, because he
would not have his Deity now acknowledged by the devil. 5. He would not give
occasion to heretics to doubt of the truth of his body and humane nature: If
he had fasted longer then Moses and Elias, he might have been thought no true
man, but only in show incarnate.

Quest. Why is it added, that he fasted forty nights?

Answ. For these reasons: 1. To show that it was not such a fast as the Jews
used to keep, who fasted many days together, Forty nights added for two
reasons.
but ate at nights; as Daniel fasted for 3. weeks of days, chap. 3. v. 10.
Nor like the Turkish fasts, who so soon as they see a star, luxury, and all
uncleanness.

Doctr.
This example of Christ teaches us of what great necessity this exercise
fasting is, Fasting a most necessary duty.
both for the entrance, and comfortable continuance of the duties of our
calling, both general and special. This Nehemiah knew well, when hearing of
the calamity of Jerusalem, and his brethren the Jews, he fasted certain
days, and prayed before the God of heaven, c. 1. v. 4. And Ezra proclaimed a
fast, to seek the right way homeward, and safe from their enemies, c. 8. v.
21. see also Act. 13.3.

Reasons. 1.
1. Fasting in an holy and religious manner, helps forward graces that are
necessary for our calling; as, 1. the grace of conversion, and therefore is
made an adiunct of it: Joel. 2.12. Turn you with all your heart, with fasting
and weeping. 2. the grace of prayer; for as prayer sanctifies fasting, so
fasting strengthens prayer. Otherwise, to place Gods worship in fasting, is
to make the belly the God. 3. it helps forward the knowledge of the mysteries
of God and godliness: Dan. 9.3. conferred with 20.21. as Daniel was praying
and fasting, Gabriel was sent to instruct him, and revealed to him the mystery
of the 70. weeks. 4. it adds strength and courage in the Christian combat
between the flesh and the spirit; it is as a third, that comes in to take the
spirits part, and so helps to the victory by subduing the flesh.

2
2. The necessity and profit of this exercise appears in respect of our
selves: for, 1. If we want public or private benefits, fasting joined with
prayer is the means wherein God will have them sought and obtained. The
Beniamites after two sore overthrows, by this means got the victory, Iud.
20.28. Annah by the same obtained her Samuel: and David fasted for his child's
life. 2. If we be in danger of public or personal judgments, by the same
means they are to be diuerted: religious fasting is a chief part of the
defensive armor of the Church, as we may see in the examples of Hester, saving
her people from Hamans devise: and of the Ninevites, turning away the
destruction threatened by Jonah, by fasting and humbling themselves. 3. If we
be to attempt public or private duties, hereby we must fit our selves, and
obtain success and blessing. So did Nehemiah and Ezra, as we saw before: and
when Paul and Barnabas were separated to the work of the ministry, they
fasted and prayed, Act. 13.3. Yea, Christ himself spent a whole night in
fasting and prayer, before he chose his Disciples, Luke 6.12, 13.

3. Daily experience shows the necessity of religious fasting: 3
for, 1. How may men observe in themselves, that for want of this duty they
grow dull in their profession, and heavy in holy practices, yea empty of grace,
so as they may think the spirit is departed from them? yet when they have
renewed this exercise, they find themselves more ripe and ready, more quick
and able to good duties, as if they had new souls given them. 2. Do woe not
see, that the more conscionably a man carries himself, the more busily Satan
does bestirre himself against him? and had he not need so much the more fence
himself with coat armor, and fly to God for strength and protection? If a
good Magistrate or Minister be to be brought into any place, how does Satan
storm and bend his forces against him, because he thinks that then his
kingdom must down? Therefore if a man mean to be serviceable to God in any
place, it is meet he should first sanctify it by fasting and prayer, as
Christ did.

This serves to rebuke the great want of this so needful a duty. Use. 1.
What Magistrate or Minister, against whom Satan most shouteth, enters thus
into his calling, as Christ by fasting and prayer; but by gifts, favor, or
otherwise get livings and offices? but to God they go not; and this is the
cause that so little good is done, either in one calling or the other: as much
blessing as they seek, they have. So, what other reason can be given, that
many lingering evils and want of Gods blessing is in so many families; but
because men omit the chief means of procuring the one, and repelling the
other? Men think they have nothing to do with this duty, but when public
authority enioynes it, and that it is only the fault of Magistracy it is so
out of use; as though every Master of a family were not a Magistrate and Bishop
in his own house; or as if that were not a means for private blessings, which
is so mighty for public. Oh deceive not thy self: that which thou can not
do publicly, thou may do in thine own house; and therefore, if thou
want any grace or blessing, blame thine own idleness that seek it not in
Gods means.

This should move us to perform so needful a duty as this is, Use. 2.
and thereunto to consider of these reasons. Motives to fastin^, 11.
1. Consider the promises that are made, and have been made good to fasting and
fervent prayer. Remember that one example of good King Iehoshaphat, Moabites,
Ammonites, and they of mount Seir; whereupon he proclaimed a fast throughout
all Judah, and prayed earnestly, 2. Chron. 20.2.17. and before they had ended
their prayer, the Spirit of the Lord came upon Iahaziel a Leuit, who by the
spirit of prophecy foretold the victory, saying, Ye shall not need to fight
in this battle, O Judah, and Jerusalem: Fear ye not, but to morrow go out
against them, and the Lord will be with you: and so it came to pass: for the
enemies slew one an other, and the Jews gathered the spoil, and returned and
praised God in the valley of Beracha, that is, of blessing; so called ever
after.

Peter was in prison, sleeping between two soldiers, the night before he
should be brought out to death, being bound with two chains, and the Keeper
before the door watching the prison, at the ordinary prayer of the Church, an
Angel smote Peter, saying, Arise quickly, and his chains fell off, and he was
delivered, Act. 12.5. much more can extraordinary prayer, joined with fasting,
prevail.



Ahab fasting for the destruction threatened by Elijah, humbled himself; and
this fast of his not joined with true repentance, but only kept in the outward
ceremony, in abstaining from meat, in sackecloath, and giving some testimony
of outward sorrow, was not unrewarded, but obtained a repriue of the execution
of the sentence til his sons days. How much more respect shall we obtain of
God, if we join to the outward fast the inward graces of humility, repentance,
faith, and feruencie?

drunkenness, swearing, riot, and profaneness; these might be kept out
as well as cast out by this means: and unspeakable were the good that might
hereby be procured, as release from many evils, life, health, etc.

6. We have the example of the Jews, who besides all other Object. That was a
ceremony. Answ. The day was, not the thing, the equity of which binds us as
well as them, because the ends and causes bind us. And in the Gospel we have
the example of John and his Disciples, who fasted often: and Christ's Disciples
must fast, when the bridegroom is gone, and causes of mourning come.

Beside these, we have sundry other motives to religious fasting: as,

1. Shall Christ fast for us, and not we for our selves? 2. Shall gain of
godliness? 5. Is not this a seasonable exhortation? has not God sounded

1. Sins abound, as drunkenness, pride, and high wickedness, and there is no
more fear of Gods wrath in the Church and land. 2. The word and ministry is
more despised then ever, and less loved; Preachers and Professors of the
Gospel are scorned, as in the days of Noah; the heavenly Mannah is contemned,
and the contempt of it threatens a final departure of the bridegroom. 3.
Papists increase in numbers, in boldness, in pride, in power, and are so far
from being converted by the light, as they are daily more perverted and
perverse, notwithstanding the glorious Gospel of God, and the wholesome laws
of the land. Add unto these the swarms of Atheists, Macheuilians, carnal and
cold Protestants among us. 4. Who has not smarted in the common judgments of
the land, lingering by many years in plagues, unseasonable weather, fires,
waters, and the like, all of them forerunners of greater misery? Who can forget
the warning of gunpowder, and the present vnfeelingnes of it?

And were not these public evils, how many every one of us bewail Christ's
hiding of himself from our souls? His gracious beams shine not on us with
such comfort as they might, his word is not so fruitful in the best as it
should, dullnes and conformity with the times creep in upon the best; the Sun
and Moon, great lights in the ministry are darkened, and the stars loose
their light among professors. Is it not time to awake our selves, if ever, and
to betake our selves to sackecloth and ashes, to fasting and prayer, if the
Lord may be entreated to draw nearer us, and our souls nearer him?

The second part of Christ's employment, while he expected his enemy, was
temptation by lighter onsets, which is plain, in that S. Luke says he was 40.
days tempted of the devil; and then records Satan's solemn onsets upon him
in these three most fierce temptations. Whence we may observe his subtilty and
policy, who has a deep fetch in it: for,

Doctr. Satan by lesser temptations makes way to greater.
By lesser temptations he makes way unto greater. For, 1. As a wise captain
sends out his spies to see the state of the contrary army, their number and
strength, and to view what advantages may be taken, and perhaps sends out a
wing to make a skirmish only, to try their purpose and strength; so does Satan
here: he would by lesser temptations try the strength or weakness of Christ,
that so he might plant his maine forces against him accordingly. 2. He begins
with smaller things before he come with his maine forces and show his
blackness, because smaller things are easily contemned, or more easily yielded
unto: is it not a little one? and is there any great hurt in it? 3. He knows
by little things how to obtain great, easily winding himself by little and
little into the heart, as a cunning thief, if he can find room but for the
point of a wrinch, will quickly make strong doors to fly open. 4. He will
try if by small things he can make us secure, and negligent to put on all Gods
armor to fence us, because we easily think that smaller things need no great
resistance.

Use. 1.
As he dealt with Christ our head, so does he with his members: therefore as
Christ was able enough to epsy his slight, so must we learn to do; even
where Satan begins his temptation, Where Satan begins his temptation, we
must begin our resistance.
there to begin our resistance, and give him the repulse at his first motion:
we must resist smaller temptations, and keep off of the first staff of the
devils ladder, and kill every hellish serpent in the shell. 1. We must do as
wise citizens that are besieged, and will not let the enemy come to scale the
wall, or into the marketplace with purpose to drive him out again, but keep
them out without bullets reach. 2. We are wise to prevent bodily diseases at
the first grudgings, because we know that diseases get strength by delay, and
are hardly removed if they be suffered to settle. 3. Satan first lays objects
and occasions, and then tempts or works upon them. David was first moved to
look upon Bathsheba, which seemed a small thing: but had he had his armor on
his eye, his heart had been fenced from the desire, and himself from the act.
Peter was not first moved to forswear his Master, but first to go into the
high Priests hall, or to follow aloof off, and then to sit among Christ's
enemies, and then to do as they did. The devil comes first aloof, and seems
to require but some reasonable thing at first, but at last is impudent and
importunate for greater. Do we think that Judas was at first moved to betray
his innocent Lord? no, but first Satan wrought him to covetousness, and then
offered the occasion, thirty pieces of silver, and so struck up the matter by
degrees, and in the end oppressed him with his whole power.

Even so to draw a man from God and religion, he will begin with lesser things,
he will not bid a man hate religion at the first, but first to doubt of this
point or that, or hate, not all at first, but this minister or that; he sets
before his eyes some infirmities, which breed dislike, then he mooues him to
take counsel against him, then to scorn, rail, persecute him. When Saul was
commanded utterly to destroy the Amalekites, men and cattle, and spare none,
the devil thought it bootlesse to go against the whole commandment of God,
by moving him to spare all; but he might think it reasonable to spare some,
the King, and the fat beasts, especially upon so good an intention as to
sacrifice: but this was enough to depose him from his Kingdom.

Here therefore remember these rules: 1. To give no place to the devil, Ephesians.
4.27. And seeing we give him place three ways, 2
Rules of resistance, 3.
1. by letting into our hearts his suggestion. 2. by putting it in execution.
3. by not hating his motions, and the risigns of sin: we must carefully watch
against him in all these. 2
2. The less the sin is to which thou art tempted, the more suspect Satan's
further drift in it, which he ever hides at the first: for if he be not met in
the beginning, he makes no stay till he comes to the height of sin. An
example hereof we have in Eve, to whom Satan comes and says, Yea, has God
said so indeed? not that he did not know it, but his further drift was to make
her forsake that word, as indeed she did. So he comes to many a man, as to
Peter, and says, Go into such and such company among thy neighbors, to such
or such an exercise; which is a small thing: but he has a further drift; there
thou shall loose thy time, and thrust thy self out of thy calling, there thou
shall loose thy patience,, thy charity, thy piety, and coming home shall find
thy self much worse and weaker for going abroad: He did not bid thee go and
swear, and quarrel, and scoff, or abet these things in others, but he did as
bad: for these are the fruits, yea the best fruits that come from lewd and
unthrifty company. 3
3. Consider, that as the least poison in quantity kills or hurts, if it be but
once taken; so even the smallest sin is deadly poison to the soul. Set open
one gate of a besieged city, and the enemies will come in as certainly, as if
all the walls were rased. One serpent suffered to come so near as to wind
about a man's hand, is not easily shaken off. The beginning of sin is death,
and a bad beginning brings on a worse end.

Use. 2.
Let us beware we despise no temptation: to contemn a temptation is to neglect
ones armor, The least temptation is too strong for a secure adversary.
and the means of resistance; and no temptation but will be too strong against
a secure adversary. But let us learn to fear continually in respect of our
weakness, and let us prepare for war in the rumor of it, before the enemy
be in our necks, and will not suffer us to whet and fit our armor.

Use. 3.
This teaches us what to think of them that scorn men as being too precise:
What? must we not swear small oaths? may we not speak now and then a merry
word? may we not recreate our selves? (now by recreation, they mean gaming,
unthriftiness, cousenage, and the like:) may we not now and then be angry and
impatient, seeing flesh and blood is so weak, and it is but an infirmity?
what need a man be so precise and scrupulous, as to stand upon such small
triflles? all which is but to plead for Satan against our own safety.

He was afterward an hungrie] In these words is set down the effect of
Christ's fast; After he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he began to
be hungry: all the while before he was not hungry, neither did he want power to
have fasted longer, and by his divine power vpheld his humane nature, if he
pleased: but now the miraculous fast being finished, he begun to hunger.

Quest. How could Christ be hungry, seeing he was able to feed so many
thousands with seven loaves and two fishes? Besides, Ioh. 4.34. he says, My
meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. Or if he
could be hungry, why would he? Ans. Some have thought that Christ needed not
to eat, sleep, etc. as we need when our bodily strength is exhaust by labor,
by fasting, and watching. And some of the Fathers, as Ambrose, and Theophylact,
upon Mar. 11.12. hold that Christ only by dispensation gave his body leave to
be hungry when he pleased; as though he neither was wont, nor could nor ought
to be ordinarily hungry as other men, nor necessarily forced to eat. But we
must know, that Christ took upon him a true humane body, and the form of a
servant, in which he was obnoxious to all our infirmities, only sin
excepted. And the infirmities which he undertook not, are these:

1. He was not to take any which might hinder the perfection of his soul or
body. Of his soul, as vices, sins, What infirmities our Savior took, and
took not, in 3. propositions
pronenesse to evil, heaviness to goodness. Christ took miserable infirmities
in his soul, (as Augustine says) such as are, natural negative ignorance; as
of the day of judgment, and the time of figs fructifying; Damascene says)
damnable and detestable. Of his body, because it was extraordinarily conceived
and created of the Holy Ghost, who being of infinite wisdom and power, could
not err, or not bring his body to perfection. Therefore he was not to be
blind, lame, deaf, etc. which are infirmities in many other men.

2. Christ was not to take all infirmities in general: for 1. Some arise of
particular causes, which could not be in Christ; Christ took not all
infirmities of every particular man, for 3. causes.
as namely, can agree to Christ's most perfect conception of the Holy Ghost.
Vzziah his leprosy was a special stroke of Gods hand for a special sin: so
some are borne fools and simple: Neither could these belong to Christ, who had
no sin, nor cause of judgment in him.

Christ was to take upon him all natural and indetractable infirmities (as the
Schoolmen call them) and only them: Natural, that is, such as follow common
nature, infirmities common to all men: And indetractable, or inculpable, which
detract not from the perfection of his person, nor of his grace, nor of the
work of our redemption. Of this kind are hunger, thirst, labor, wearines,
sleep, sorrow, sweat, and death it self: all these are common to all men. Now
hunger being a common infirmity, incident to all men, yea to Adam in
innocence, (who was hungry and did eat, as Genesis 1.39. every tree bearing
fruit shall be to you for meat: and slept, c. 2. v. 21. a heavy sleep fell on
the man; yet without molestation:) therefore Christ did necessarily hunger as
other men do, not by an absolute necessity (for 1. he needed not have taken
our nature, or been incarnate: 2. as he was God, he could have exempted
himself from all the abasement and miseries that he suffered:) neither by a
coacted necessity; for he willingly submitted himself to this necessity: But
by a necessity ex hypothesi, or conditionate; having taken our nature to
redeem it, he was necessarily to take on him all our weaknesses, sin only
excepted; for these reasons:

Reasons why Christ took on him our infirmities, 5.
1. He was not only to be like a man, and in the shape of a man, but also a
very true man, like unto his brethren in all things, except sin: therefore it
is said, Hebr. 2.17. (...), Man's nature is known by defects, Gods by
perfection.
Anthropomorphites, and such like heretics.

2. This was a part of his obedience, and consequently of our vere pertulit
languores nostr^s, he has truly borne our infirmities, Isa. 53.4.

away the sting of them, least we should be wearied, and faint in our minds,
Heb. 12.3. and that we might have an example in suffering, 1. Pet. 2.21.

4. That he might be a compassionate High Priest, Heb. 2.17.18. touched with
infirmity, yea clothed with our frail nature, that

5. Himself confirms the same, in that he took not on him such a body of
ours as Adam had before sin, but such a one as Lazarus, Ioh. 11.35.38. and in
his agony, when he shed tears and used strong cries, Heb. 5.7. to sweating
water and blood in the garden, yea to death it self: from all which Adams body
was free before the fall. And by these his body was by a true necessity
overcome as ours are; and this not for a short time or space, at his pleasure,
but all the time of his life till he breathed out his holy spirit; yea
thirsting upon the cross it self, Ioh. 19.28.

Neither was this only to confirm the truth of his humane nature, but to
fulfill all righteousness, and carry away all the punishment of our sins,
and so work a perfect salvation for us. Therefore Christ truly and
necessarily was hungry, as we use to be.

As for that place, in Ioh. 4.34. I answer: Ob. Christ's meat was to do the will
of his father.
1. It must be meant comparatively, in that the execution of his calling, and
doing of his fathers will was preferred before his meat and drink. 2. It
belongs to the hunger of the soul, which is, to cleave to God and obey him in
his will; and so keeps not off the hunger of a natural body. 3. Christ did as
Abraham's servant did at Bethuels house, who having meat set before him, would
not eat till he had done his message, Genesis 24.33. and yet was subject to
hunger.

Quest. Differences between Christ infirmities and ours in five things.
What is the difference between Christ's infirmities and ours?

Answ. 1. They are all punishments of our sin in us, but not punishments of
his sin in him. 2. His humane nature being holily conceived, was in it self
free from them all, Non habuit ex debito pe^cati. Aquin.
and they do not necessarily attend it in respect of it self: But our nature
being tainted with original sin has contracted them inseparably, seeing by
one man sin came in, and death (of which these are forerunners) by sin went
over all. 3. Christ undertook them by a voluntary necessity; but in us the
necessity is forced and absolute: will we, nill we, we must carry them. 4. In
us they be the effects of our sin, in Christ effects of mercy. 5. Ours are
often miserable, acquisite, rising from particular causes, or sins; but so
were not Christ's. Object. If Christ took not all our infirmities, what say you
to Damascens argument, Quod est in assumptibile, est incurabile? how could
Christ cure all our defects, and not assume them all? Answ. All particular
defects rise out of the general corruption and infirmity, which Christ
undertook and cured, and therein these also; even as he which stops a
fountain in the head, stops all the streams without more ado.

Use. 1. Note the wonderful humility of our Lord Jesus, who would not only
take upon him our nature, but even our infirmities, and was not only a man,
but a servant also. If he had descended, being the Lord of glory, to have
taken the nature of Angels, or (if of man) such as Adam was in innocence, it
had been admirable humility, and such as has no fellow: But to be a worm
rather then a man, is lower then humility it self. Let the same mind be in us
that was in Christ, Phil. 2.5.

Use. 2. His infinite love is herein set forth: he was able to feed many
thousands with a few loaves and little fishes, yet he would want bread and be
hungry himself: he could and did give legs to the lame, yet he would be
weary himself for us: he could fill the hearts of others with the joys of
heaven, yet he would sorrow: he raised others from death, and yet he died. And
as this commends his love to us, so should it breed in us a love of him, to
express it in embracing a base estate for him, and in giving up at his call
our comforts, our liberty, our bodies, and lives: so did he for us.

Use. 3. This is a great comfort for the poor, and men in want, seeing Christ
and his Disciples not sieldome wanted what to put in their bellies: Matthew.
12.1. The Disciples plucked the ears of corn, and began to eat. Christ the
Lord of glory has sanctified thy want, thy hunger, thy penury by his: If thou
be in the world as in a barren wilderness, and live among hard-hearted and
cruel men, as so many wild beasts, think on Christ in this estate; thou art
no better, of no better desert then he, nor better loved of God then he, and
yet thou farest no worse then he: Oh murmr not, nor repine, but say with that
blessed Martyr, If men take away my meat, God will take away my stomach; he
feeds the young ravens, and will he neglect me? Only turn all thy bodily
hunger into a spiritual hunger after Christ and his merits, and then thou
shall be sure not to starve and die everlastingly, Matthew 5.6. Reu. 2.17.
but to be satisfied with the hidden Mannah of God.

Use. 4. Let rich men learn, that it is not good always to be full, and
prevent hunger, but to feel it, and know what it means: Christ was God, and
might have avoided it, but being man ought not, and would not, that he might
have sense and feeling of our infirmities, and so be a compassionate High
Priest. What else is it that breeds hardness of heart in rich men, but want of
feeling of the afflictions of Joseph? Gluttonous Dives took not to heart
Lazarus his want; and where are the poor most neglected, but where there is
fine and delicate diet every day? Especially the Ministers of Christ should
learn to endure want and hunger; as Paul had learned to want and abound, and
to be contented in every estate; else they will do but small good in their
ministry.

Use. 5. Christ is daily hungry in his members; Lazarus lies still at our
gates, and is not yet quite dead: therefore let us put on the bowels of
compassion toward him. Would we not have releiued Christ, if we had lived when
he did? or would we not now if he should be in need? Oh yes, (we say) we would,
else it were pity we should live. Well then, whatsoever we do to one of his
little ones we do it to himself, and so he accepts it, saying, I was hungry
and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me drink. Despise not thy
poor fellow-member, and turn not thine eye from beholding his penury, nor
thine ear from hearing his moanes and deep sighs: If thou should hear
Christ himself say, I thirst, (as once he did on the cross) would thou
give him vinegar and gall to drink? is that it he thirsts after? no, it is
thy conversion and compassion that will satisfy him; therefore use him kindly
in his members.

VERSE. 3. Then came the Tempter to him, and said, If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.

We have heard how our Lord Jesus Christ entered into the place of combat, how
he was furnished, attended, and exercised all the time while he expected his
enemy: Now we come to the entrance of his adversary, and after to the onset.
In this entrance observe, 1. The time, Then. 2. The name of the adversary, the
Tempter. 3. The manner of his ent^ance, he came.

I. The time, then, that is, when Christ had fasted 40. days and 40. nights,
and was now hungry. He was willing and ready to tempt him before, and so he
did now and then cast a dart at him, as we heard; but now supposing him to be
weak, and hungry also, he comes upon him with might and maine, and thence
strengthens himself, and sharpeth his temptation.

Doctr.
Note hence Satan's subtilty, who watches his opportunity, and takes us ever at
the weakest. Satan ever takes us at the weakest.
Thus he set upon Eve when she was alone, in Adams absence: and set Cain upon
Abel, when he was alone in the field, and helpless. Thus was Dinah set upon,
being alone, and was foiled. P^tiphars wife set upon Joseph alone, none being
in the house but they two: and the Gospel tells us, that the envious man sowes
tares while men sleep.

Reasons. 1.
1. Satan by the subtilty, of his nature, and long experience, knows our
estate, our temper, our hunger, our chief desires; and accordingly sets on
us. For though he know not the heart directly, yet he knows our corruption in
general, as we are men since the fall, and there is in it a root and spawne
of all sins. Further, by our outward behavior and gesture, he can gather our
special corruptions, as a Physician by outward signs in the water, pulses,
and the like, can judge of the particular disease within. Besides, his
experience gives him much light into our weaknesses, so as like a cunning
angler, he can bait his hook, so as he has experience the fish will take;
and though he see not the fish in the water, yet by his quill and cork he can
tell when he is taken. So Satan has for sundry men sundry baits, and can
tell by the eye, hand, speech, gesture, etc, whether the man be, or will be
taken.

2
2. The malice of Satan is such, as it aims directly at man's destruction; and
therefore to get his desire, and to have his prey, he cares not how cowardly he
sets upon us. Genesis 34.15. Simeon and Leui, plotting the destruction of the
Sechemites, persuaded them to circumcise themselves, which they thought they
would do to enjoy Dinah: but even when they were sore, they came most cowardly
upon them, and destroyed them, in a cursed rage, as Iaacob called it: Even so
deals the devil, he comes when we are least able to resist.

3. Satan well knows, that though he can tempt us, yet he cannot force us, and
if he overcome, 3
he must have help and ground from our selves, and therefore he must observe
for his advantage the time, place, person, his inclination to mirth or sadness,
to wantonness or desperation: his estate, whether rich or poor, high or low;
his general corruptions and personal sins, dealing no otherwise then the
Philistimes dealt with Sampson: they intended mischeife against him, but he
was too strong; now if they could watch a time when he was as weak as another
man, and know how to abate his strength, they would not miss of their end; but
this they cannot know but by himself, and none can get it out of him but
Delilah, who, if she cut off his locks, his strength is gone, and poor
Sampson is taken, his eyes put out, and sent to grind like a mill-horse: So
deals Satan.

As Satan watches all opportunities to mischief us, Use. 1.
so let us watch opportunities to resist him: Shall a thief watch at midnight
to rob thee and cut thy throat, Horat.
and wilt not thou watch to save thy self? Now we have time to arm and
prepare our selves against the evil day: never had our fathers such an
opportunity for heavenly and spiritual things: We have an acceptable time, a
day of salvation, 2. Cor. 6.2. a time of health and strength, to gather a
stock of grace and strength against the time of weakness. Is it not now a point
of wisdom, if we were as strong as Sampson, to know that we may be weak as
other men, and forecast a day of trial? Shall we not be worthily and
shamefully foiled, if in this our day, while we have means to gather
knowledge, to increase in faith, and grace, we lay not up for the day of
weakness? will it not be a gainefull policy to acquaint our selves now with
Satan's policy aforehand, and with what weapons he comes against us, that so
we may arm our selves with armor of proof against his fiery darts, and
learn so to resist him, that he may fly? And, not to do this, what is it
else but to become traitors to our own hearts?

How unhappily and foolishly do men cast off all this care to the time of
weakness and sickness, wasting all the time of their health and strength in the
world or other wretched courses? Now they have the day, Our sick and dying day
most unfit for resi^stance, for 3. reasons.
the light, the word, and Gods armory open to furnish themselves; but they cast
themselves into the night, and lay all the hazard of the combat upon the day
of sickness or death; then they will send to the minister, and think on
death.

Let us learn of Satan to watch our own weaknesses, and our personal
corruptions: Use. 2.
If the devil so observe us, let us so much the more observe our selves. The
enemy assaulteth the city where it is weakest, and there the wise citizens lay
most matter of defense. Here it will be fit to observe these rules:

Five notable rules for the watch over our own weaknesses.
1. Take heed we wilfully cast not our selves into infirmities, especially
sinful, as, immoderately to desire goods or gain. The feeding of
covetousness cost Judas dear: So the immoderate desire of pleasure, or
ambitious pursuing of honor, or nourishing to give place to the devil, and
brings forth manifold evils, as raylings, reuenges, quarrels, murder, etc.
For if Satan by reason of natural ^nfirmities, as hunger, poverty, and the
like, can take his advantage against Christ himself, much more can he work
his advantage against us by such immoderate and unruled passions.

Eve did. Delight brings practice, and repetition, an habit.

3. Watch thy natural desires with all carfulness, because in Esau, that
being weary and hungry after his hunting, he was so sharp set, that he made
a most childish and graceless match? even for one mess of pottage he did
forgo the birthright, whereby he had not only title to an earthly
inheritance, but to be one of the Fathers and Patriarchs, and one of the
promised seed, which profanely, and not without too late repentance he
rejected. Nay, we want not examples of Gods dear children, who not watching
their natural appetite, have been fowly foiled. How did Lot suffer himself
to be drunken time after time? and then how strongly did Satan assail him, and
prevail against him to commit incest with his own daughters? It is a natural
desire to seek and lay together the things and wealth of this world; and
herein how does Satan strive to bring in inordinacy upon every man? and who is
he that weakens not himself much, and gives advantage unto the adversary, by
sinful and inordinate desires of riches? for this is a root of all evil, and
those that will be rich (says S. Paul) fall into diverse temptations and
snares. Whence our Savior advises us to take heed, that our hearts be not
oppressed with surfeting, drunkenness, or the cares of this life; with which
many are become as drunk, as others with beastly quaffing. It is a natural
desire for a man after labor of body or mind, to unbend and refresh himself
with some recreation or sport: but here how does the devil watch, either to
thrust some unlawful exercise into men's hands? or, if lawful, to use them
unlawfully, wasting their time and goods, loving pleasure and pastime, or
choosing swearing, drinking, or idle company, and then they are presently
ouermastred. When did Satan set upon Peter? not so long as he was among good
company of Christ or his fellow-disciples, whose presence might have vpheld
him; but when he runs among a company of rake-hels, and sits him down among
the high priests seruing-men by a warm fire, now he is fit to be wrought
upon, and be brought from denying his Lord, to forswear him; and from that to
curse himself. Many such knockes are they sure to meet with, who turn
themselves out of their way and calling, and promiscuously run into all
companies, and all exercises, where God and Christ is not, but Satan and his
instruments with a whole band of temptation.

Paul's lesson, Phil. 4.11. to be full and hungry, to abound and to want, to be
abased and to be advanced, and in every thing to be content. Job, when he had
lost his goods and children, and was sore afflicted, then the devil set upon
him by himself, and Jobs friends, to distrust God.

Judas before Christ, so that all his holy doctrine was intercepted from his
heart; the sower sowed good seed, he sowed tares. We shall be sure of him, not
only when we are idle, as David, but when we are best occupied: which is the
cause, that when we have most strictly kept the Sabbath, and endeavored our
best, in all our duties public and private, we have much matter of humility;
and this may serve as an hammer against spiritual pride.

The Tempter] II. The second thing in the entrance of this adversary, is his
name, which is here changed; before he was called a devil, now a Tempter, but
with emphasis, that Tempter, (...), to distinguish him from other tempters. For
first, God tempts man, sometimes by afflictions, which are called
temptations, Iam. 1.2. sometimes by some special commandment, as he tempted
Abraham: sometime by occasioning objects, as 2. T^ess. 2.11. God sends strong
delusions, that is, objects enticing and deluding. But neither is this to tempt
to sin, nor a stirring up to it, but rather a proof what is in us, and a
trial what we will do; this is, (...), not (...).

Secondly, man tempts God, when he makes trial of Gods power and justice,
whether he can or will help or hurt; Exodus 17.2. Wherefore do ye tempt the
Lord? this is by curiosity, presumption, or distrust; as verse. 7. Thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God.

Thirdly, man tempts man, by seeking matter and occasion against an other, to
accuse and reprehend: so the Pharisees and Herodians tempted Christ by captious
and subtle questions, to bring him into danger: or by persuading to sin, as
Joseph's Mistress every day tempted him: But,

Satan is called a tempter by eminency, because, Doctr.
1. He was the first tempter to sin, Satan the most eminent and dang^rous
tempter.
moving and stirring up Adam and Eve in Paradise to sin: an old serpent. 2.
He makes a trade of tempting; ever since it is his profession, and no marvel
if he be denominated from his profession: he spends his whole time, policy,
and strength in Eve by the serpent, Adam by Eve; Ahab by his Prophets. 4. He is
furnished and stored with all arts to deceive: he can change himself into an
Angel of light: he takes occasion

Satan restless in tempting for three reasons.
Quest. Why is Satan thus restless in tempting? Answ. 1. Because of his
infinite malice; by which, seeing he cannot hurt God, he rushes upon his image
in man. 2. Because of his envy; that man should climb by Christ to that
estate, which himself is fallen from irrecouerably. He would have him
everlastingly unhappy like himself. 3. Because of his special enmity
against the godly: for all contraries tend to the destruction of contraries.

Use. 1.
If Satan be so restless a tempter, it behooues us so much the more to watch
and pray against him: The former the Apostle Peter commends unto us, that
seeing our adversary goes about continually seeking to devour us, we must
watch and resist, 1. Pet 5.8. If our adversary were capable of end of days,
or end of malice, we might be secure; or if he were wearied with continual
ranging, or did take rest or truce. But the Apostle tells us, that so long as
there is a world, there shall be a devil; and so long as he is a tempter, he
will continually compass us, whatsoever we are about: if a good thing, to
hinder it; as he stood at Iehoshuahs right hand: if an evil, to hatch,
contriue, and thrust it forward; and being done, to draw and spin out as much
wickedness from it as may be. So where ever we be, we are not without a tempter,
at home or abroad, in the street or in the field, alone or in company, in our
callings or recreations, in our eating and drinking, in our preaching or
hearing, reading or praying, the tempter spares no attempt against us. The
latter our Savior teaches us, namely to pray that we be not lead into
temptation, that seeing our enemy is mighty, subtle, and every way furnished
for the assault, God would give us strength to resist evil, and persevere in
good ways to the end.

Use. 2.
It justly reprooues their folly, who as if there were no tempter, are tempters
of themselves, care not what occasions and weapons they minister to Satan;
run into such company and courses, as if for want of Satan's malice, they
would lay snares and hooks for themselves, that Satan may easily draw them to
all evil. Of this sort are they that haunt alehouses and tauernes, seekers of
excess, drinkers down of health and wealth, drowners of sobriety and
honesty: what need this man any other tempter, that sets himself to save the
devil this labor? yet, least he should be alone in his sin, he will fit
him, and send in before or after him some swearer, or scorner, or Athiest; and
they together shall swill in oaths, and scoffs, and impiety with their
liquour, and notably confirm each other in lewdness and profaneness. Of this
sort also are they that watch the twilight to frequent lascivious company, or
the houses of light persons, men or women; or the society of such as are foul
in their speeches, and wanton in behavior; a secret poison infecteth the heart
hereby, and this is to seek the tempter: how has he fenced himself with
watching and prayer against temptation, that thus goes out to meet it? Joseph
fled these occasions, and ran out of the company of his lascivious Mistress.
Of this sort are they that use wanton and light attire: and those that go to
Mass, and say they keep their hearts to God: and those that set up images
before them, flat monuments of gross idolatry. Of this sort are they that
run to enterludes and plays, which are the devils bellows, and blow no few
sparks into the gunpowder of our own corruptions. It was wont to be said,
that there was no play without a devil; but there is never a one, but there is
a great many more devils then one, then seen; every part, person, action,
speech, and gesture almost, is a notable tempter and corrupter: what need these
be driven of Satan, that thus run before him? Of this sort lastly are they,
that seek to witches and sorcerers: these run to the tempter; as Saul, when
God was gone from him, took great pains to go to the witch; yet he went in
the night; but our witch-hunters run in the day; the tempter need not come to
them, they will find him if he be in any corner of the country.

This is a special use to ministers, Use. 3.
to be careful and watchful over their people against this tempter. 1 Thessalonians.
3.5. the Apostle from this ground provoke and testifies his care over them:
For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your faith,
least by some means the tempter have tempted you --. And how jealous was he
over the Corinths, 2. Cor. 11.3. saying, I fear least as the serpent beguiled
Eve through subtlety, so your minds should be corrupt from the simplicity of
Christ? and having written against the incestuous person, that he should be
delivered to Satan, to humble him; he writes in his second Epistle, c. 2.11.
that they should now receive him again, least Satan circumuent us, for we are
not ignorant of his wyles. The Apostle knew there was a tempter that did
mightily and continually assay, to bring in corruption of doctrine and manners;
that would hinder them from the word, and choke it in them; and therefore he
the was more careful. Thus should every good shepherd watch his flock
against this ravening wolf, and reside and abide with them as he is sure the
tempter does. How unsafe and destitute are many people left to the tempter by
the absence of them, who have taken their charge, is plain by the parable of
the tares; that when the husbandman slept, the envious man sowed tares: he
slept a little and slumbred, but he was present: and if the tempter take the
advantage of a little negligence in the presence of a Pastor, how will he
bestirre him in his absence? what an harvest of tares must be reaped by that?
It is sure the tempter will not be absent, neither month, nor quarter; and
therefore the Pastor had need, not only to be still present, but also
watchful, to epsy the state of his people, to help them out of sin, and
teach them to resist the tempter.

Use. 4.
Beware of tempting any to evil, or of withdrawing any from good: for this is a
Satanicall practice. Our Savior Christ, when Peter dissuaded him to go to
Jerusalem, said, Come behind me Satan: in which words he shows, that none can
tempt to evil, or from good, but Satan, or one led by him. So the Apostle Paul
called Elymas, who sought to dissuade the Governor from the faith, the child
of the devil, Act. 13.10. because, as Christ said of the Jews, his works he
did. What a number of devils are now in the world, continual instruments of
wickedness, alluring and drawing men from God and goodness? yea their trade is
to allure unto evil, as those that draw men to strumpets, and are bawds to
that filthy sin; so to alehouses, and there provoke them to drink, and to
excess; those that draw men to ordinary gaming houses; such as stir up men's
spirits to revenge; such as withdraw men from Gods house, and good exercises;
such as dissuade from religion and strict courses; such as commend only loose
and disordered mates for boon companions. In all these the speech is true,
Homo homini demon, one man plays the devil with another. All of them are
plain devils incarnate, tempters* and as the devils company is to be avoided,
so is theirs.

That we may be most unlike unto Satan, we must be continually provoking and
moving one another to love and good works, Use. 5.
Heb. 10.24. and exhort and edify one another, 1. These. 5.11. Every Christian
must by holy example, and holy admonition bring one another forward in goodness:
Four motives to stir up one another to good, as Satan does to evil.
if they be weak, to confirm them; if slow, to provoke and quicken them; if
astray, to revoke and recall them. Hereunto consider these motives: 1. Shall
Satan's vassalls exhort and persuade one another to evil, and be more diligent
to help one another to hell, then we to set forward Gods work, and help one
another to heaven? 2. Consider the bonds between us and our brethren: 1. the
bond of nature; bond of the spirit, which yet ties us nearer: for if we must
do good to all, much more to the household of faith: this bond makes Christians
to be of one body, and therefore, as members of one body, to procure the good
and salvation one of another: they are children of one father, brethren in
Christ, who have one faith, one hope, one food, one garment, and one
inheritance: will one member refuse to impart his help, his life, his motion
and gifts to another? 3. Consider the excellent fruit that ensues this
Consider these dull and backesliding

Came to him,] Here may a question be moved, How Satan came to Christ, Satan
comes to a man two ways.
being a spirit? I answer, Satan comes two ways, 1. Inwardly and more
spiritually, and that either by suggestion, troubling the heart and
understanding; and thus he put into Judas his heart to betray his Lord, Ioh.
13.2. or else by vision works upon the fantasy. 2. Outwardly and
corporally, either by some instrument; as to Christ by the Scribes, Sadduces,
Herodians and Peter; or else by himself in some assumed bodily shape. Now
after what manner was Christ tempted? I answer: Howsoever some good men think
Christ's temptation was only in motion inwardly, and not externally and
visibly; yet I think it was cheifely externally, and in a bodily shape assumed.

Their reasons for their opinion are two: 1. Because in the words following,
the devil showed Christ all the Kingdoms of the world in a moment, which to
do in a corporal manner were impossible; and therefore it was but in motion
and cogitation. But that is but to insist in the question; and when God shall
bring us to that place, we shall see that even this was done really, and not
only in imagination. 2. Reason out of, Heb. 4.19. where it is said, that Christ
was tempted in all things like us: now (say they) our temptations be inward by
cogitations and suggestions: and therefore so was his. But this is much weaker
then the former: for if he were in all things tempted like unto us, it is
plain he was externally tempted as we be; Adam by Satan in the external
shape of a serpent, Saul by Satan in Samuels shape; and it is the general
confession of witches, that their spirits appear in an external shape of
cats, mice, etc.

Our reasons which probably conclude the contrary (for it is no fundamental
point, necessarily and stiffely to be held, because the Scripture is not plain
in it) are these:

Christ's temptation external and in a bodily shape assumed, for 4. reasons.
1. As Satan in his combat overcame the first Adam in a bodily shape, and
external temptation, so it is likely he came against the second Adam in some
bodily shape: And that he thus exterternally assaulted him by outward objects,
is probable by these things in the text: 1. he spoke often to Christ, and
Christ truly spoke and answered. 2. he said, Command these stones, not stones
in general, but either offering, holding, or pointing at them being real
stones, as M. Calvin says. 3. he wills Christ to fall down before him and
worship him, even by bodily and outward gesture, and cites scripture for his
second temptation. 4. he took him, and lead him to the pinnacle of the Temple,
by local motion; neither was the second temptation in the wilderness as the
former was, but in the holy city Jerusalem, and on the pinnacle of the Temple,
as after we shall see. 5. Christ bids him depart. 6. how could he hurt himself
by his fall, if it were only in vision.

2. The word (...), does employ a corporal access; by which these temptations
differed from the former, wherewith he was exercised in the 40. days of his
fast: for they were lighter skirmishes, and leser on sets by suggestion sent
out like scouts; but now he comes in person with all his strength, and thus he
now came and not before.

3. Some good Divines make difference between Christ's temptations and his
members, which gives good light in this question; that whereas our temptations
are chiefly inward, because they find good entertainment in us, (our
disposition being like a mutinous city, that is not only besieged with strong
enemies without, but with false traitors within ready to betray it;)
contrarily, Christ's temptations, if not only, yet chiefly are external,
presented by outward voices and objects to his outward senses; but presently,
by the perfect light of his mind, and unchangeable holiness of his will,
discerned and repelled, that they could not get within him, and much less to
be moved and affected with them.

4. This is an history, wherein the lettet is so far to be kept as it is not
repugnant to the analogy of faith, or true interpretation of other Scriptures:
But that Satan should come bodily, or assume a shape, is not against the
scripture, but confirmed in the example of Eve and Samuel.

If it be further asked in what bodily shape he came, here I am with the
scripture silent. Only he came not in a Monkish habit (as the gross Papists
say) because there was no such in use in the world then, nor many hundred
years after. Note.
And yet it is obseruable, that themselves think this habit the fittest for
the devil, as indeed it has been since proved: for never did the devil in
any habit so prevail against Christ in his members, as in this Antichristian
weed.

1. Note hence what moved Satan thus to come, namely his own voluntary motion
and will, he came unsent for: Christ came led of the spirit* Satan comes of
himself.
Christ comes not but led of the spirit, Satan comes of himself. And the same
difference is to be observed between them that are led by the spirit of God,
and by this unclean spirit. Those that are led by Gods spirit, whatsoever they
be about, they will look to the motion, what warrant they have for it, whence
it is, and whether it tends, whether they be led, or undertake things of their
own head: they look whether the thing be good in it self, whether good in
them, whether convenient in circumstances, whether it belong unto them: and
hence they do it cheerfully, and with a blessing on it. Whereas whom Satan
caries, they look for no warrant, they set themselves on work, and execute
their own lusts, humors, and desires; yea in the things they do best, they
look for no warrant; and therefore, if it be in any thing that is good, every
thing is begun as with a left hand, they are without blessing and protection.
See this difference between Ahab, and Iehoshaphat, 1. King. 22. Ahab says,
Let us go up to Ramoth Gilead; but Iehoshaphat said, I pray thee let us ask
counsel of the Lord: and was there not as much difference in the issue? yes,
Ahab was strangely slain, a mighty man by chance drawing a bow hit into a
joint of his armor, and slew him; but Iehoshaphat was marueilously delivered.
And therefore look to your warrant in your actions, ask your hearts whether
you be led by the spirit, or come of your selves: and then you come of your
selves, when either you have no word, or attempt any thing against the word,
seeing Gods spirit and word cross not one another, and one never directs but
by the other. So if you be crossed in your actions or attempts, cast an eye
back to that which moved you to it, or whether you went by warrant, or upon
your own head. If you have gone and the spirit not leading you, what could you
expect but to be crossed? Act. 19.16.
Look on the 7. sons of Sceua, who would take in hand to cast out devils in
the name of Jesus; but being not led by the spirit, the evil spirit took
advantage on the want of their commission, and ran upon them, and overcame
them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out naked and wounded.

2. Note. Observe the impudency and boldness of the devil that thus visibly
comes against Christ. Had he not heard the voice from heaven? or had he forgot
it whilst it yet sounded? no, he begun all his temptations thus, If thou be
the Son of God. Or did he doubt that he was the Son of God? no, the devils
confess him so to be, Matthew. 8. and he knew by all the prophesies and
accomplishments, that Christ was he; the scepter was gone from Judah, he was
borne of a Virgin at Bethlehem, whom John went before in the spirit of Elias;
he knew the shepherds testimony, yea the Angels at his birth; he knew well he
was the Son of God. Satan would assail the son of God knowing him so to be,
for four reasons.
Quest. What? could it stand with his policy, so visibly to assail the Son
of God? Answ. 1. God in justice besotted him, that against his knowledge he
should encounter Christ for his own overthrow. 2. Though ^e knew, that Christ
was he that should break his head, and that he could not prevail against him;
yet his malice made him fearelesse, he would set upon Christ, whatsoever should
be the issue, himself could be but condemned. 3. He would against his
knowledge show his malice to God in molesting and troubling his blessed Son:
for here, and daily he sins the sin against the Holy Ghost. 4. God having
him in chains so ouerruled his malice, as it should be turned against
himself; and be a means to proclaim Christ in all ages, the promised seed
who had broken his head.

He which thus emboldned himself to come against Christ, will not fear to come
to thee, be thou as just as Job, yea were thou as innocent as the Lamb of God.
It is Gods great mercy, that he comes not so bodily and visibly to us as to
Christ: we know, if God give him leave, he can possess even any of our bodies,
as appears in all those demoniaks: he can assume a body also to terrify or
delude us withal, if God suffer him, as we see in Saul's example. So in Gods
just judgment, when men give up Gods service, and undertake to be agents for
Satan, he gives power to the devil to come to them in a bodily shape for his
better familiarity with them, as to witches, and the like. It is Gods mercy
that he comes not thus as he did to Christ, so ordinarily as he has done in
ignorant and Popish times; and we must pray, that even in visible shapes he may
neither terrify, nor delude, nor grow familiar with us. But the light of the
Gospel has forced him to come to us more secretly and spiritually, by wicked
motions and suggestions, partly from himself immediately, and partly mediately
from others.

And seeing we cannot hinder his coming to us, we must be so much the more
watchful, that when he comes, he may find us prepared against him. For as we
cannot hinder birds from flying in the air, but we may hinder them from making
nests on our heads: so we cannot hinder the flying motions of Satan, but we
need not suffer them to settle in us.

Quest. How shall I know when the tempter comes?

Answ. By observing these two rules: 1. Whenever thou art persuaded to any
thing that is evil, Two certain rules to know when the tempter comes.
then thou may know the tempter comes. Sometimes he persuades to sin by
extenuating it, why, it is but a little one, a grain, as light as a feather:
now comes Gods spirit never persuades that any sin is little. Sometimes by
the vtility and commodity of it; Oh it is profitable, by one oath or lie thou
may be a great gainer, and why should thou be so nice? but now the
tempter is come: for the holy Spirit commands thee not to swear at all, nor
to lie for Gods greatest advantage, much less thine own: and, what profit is
it to win the world with the loss of ones soul? Sometimes from the pleasure
of it: Will thou defraud thyselfe of thy pleasure? is it not as sweet as honey?
why, thou art but young, thou may game, and swear, and drink, and be
wanton: now thou have an occasion of lust, take thy time, thou can not have
it every day. But here the tempter is plainly come: for the Spirit of God
would wish thee to remember, that for all these things thou must come to
judgment: and, that neither adulterers nor whoremongers shall enter into the
Kingdom of God. Sometimes by remoouing the punishment and terror: Why who
sees? God is merciful, and easily entreated; you are a Christian, and no
condemnation is to them that are in Christ Jesus, and repentance wipes off all
scores. Here the tempter is come: for Gods Spirit says, There is mercy with
thee that thou may be feared: and, there is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus: but withal, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit.

Rule. When thou art dissuaded from any good belonging to thee, the tempter
comes; who as he can make vice seem beautiful, so virtue to seem ugly. He
can dissuade men from religion in great friendlines: 1. From a supposed
impossibility; How can thou (poor weakling) bear such a yoke? certainly
thou will never endure such strictnes, thou may set thy hand to the plough,
but thou will soon look back, and prove an Apostate. But here is a tempter
come: for Gods spirit teaches otherwise, that howsoever without Christ we can
do nothing, yet it is God that begins and perfecteth his good work in us,
whose yoke is easy and his burden light. 2. From the great trouble and small
necessity of it, from the disgrace it carries among men, and the contempt of
such as preach and profess it. Here is the tempter come: for the Spirit of God
teaches, that he that denies Christ before men, shall be denied of him before
men and Angels.

Further, he can dissuade from diligent hearing the word, and from reading the
Scriptures, because they be exceeding long, and hard to be understood. Why,
thine own business is such as cannot give thee leave ever to atteine any thing
to the purpose, especially because deep knowledge of points belongs not but to
Divines; for an unlettered and private man a little knowledge is best. Here is
a tempter come: though he should speak in the voice of an Angel: for Gods
Spirit bids private men search the scriptures, because they testify of Christ;
and commends private Christians, because they were full of knowledge.

Further, he can discourage the practice of piety, by suggesting, that to be
strict in life is to savor of too much purity, at least it will be counted but
scrupulousnes and too much curiosity: and, If thou will be singular, and
contemn and condemn all men but thy self, so will men deal with thee: Why,
thou live as though men were to be saved by good works, and not by Gods
mercy. Here the tempter is come: for the Spirit of Christ never quenched
smoking flax, but encouraged the care of walking in Gods ways, though it be
to walk in the strait way and narrow path that leads unto life.

Lastly, in all outward or inward temptations, let us look to Christ, who has
sense of both, that he might be compassionate to us in both.

If thou be the Son of God, command these stones to be made bread. In this
first and fierce assault, consider two things: Satan aims at four things in
this first temptation.
1. the ground of it, If thou be the son of God. 2. the inference, Command
these stones to be made bread, which is on a good ground to entice him to
evil. In which temptation Satan aims at four things directly. 1. To impugn
Gods truth, and word, and that notable oracle from heaven, testifying that
Christ was the Son of God. 2. To shake the faith of Christ: Satan knew well
enough he was the Son of God, and he makes not this a question, as though he
would be instructed in it; but that he would make Christ doubt whether he was
the Son of God. And note how cunningly he ties his policies together, as he
did against the first Adam; he calls Gods word into question, which is the
ground of faith; which if he can bring out of credit, faith fails of it
self. 3. Because of his present estate, to doubt of his fathers providence;
and because of his great hunger and want of means to supply it, to call his
own Divinity into question. 4. To use unlawful means to relieve and sustain
himself.

In these particulars, stands the drift of the temptation. As for that which
the Papists generally say, that it was to bring Christ to the sin of
gluttony, by which (they say) the first Adam fell; there is no sense so to
think: For 1. Christ's answer, which was directly fitted to the suggestion,
tended nothing to the sin of gluttony. 2. Gluttony is an excessive eating
of more then needs; whereas Satan desires no more then that Christ would at
his desire eat, to the necessary sustaining of nature: it is no great
gluttony to eat a piece of dry bread in extreme hunger; belly-gods and
gluttons satiate themselves with other more pleasant and delicate dishes. Let
us therefore know, that the proper end of this temptation, is distrust in God,
in his word, and sufficient and due means to releive his present estate.

If thou be the Son of God] that is, the natural Son of God, equal in
power, the delight of the Father, as the voice pretends, then do this that I
may believe thee; else deceive not thy self, because of the voice from heaven,
thou art but a pure man.

Doctr. 1.
Note how Satan does directly oppose himself against the word of God. Satan
directly opposes the word of God.
God had said Christ was his Son, Satan knew it, and after confessed it; yet
against his own knowledge he calls it into question, although he had seen it
confirmed by two strange signs from heaven, of which we have spoken. The like
was his practice, when he set upon Eve; saying, What? has God said thus and
thus? why? he knew God had said it, and that in the day they should eat, they
should die: and yet he labors to make them doubt of that truth, which both he
and they knew too well. This was ever his practice.

Reasons. 1.
1. Because of his great malice to God, who has every way set himself to
confirm his word, that his own truth might shine in his word to all the
world. Therefore he has outwardly confirmed it by many powerful, and glorious
miracles, such as the devil could never make show of; as raising the dead, the
standing and going back of the sun, the division and standing of the sea and
rivers, and the bearing of a Virgin: and inwardly, his holy Spirit persuades,
testifies, confirms, and seals up the word in the hearts of Gods children,
1. Ioh. 2.20. 2. Cor. 2. Now to make God a liar, and to show himself most
contrary to the Holy Spirit, he contradicts, and opposes, stormeth and rages.

2
2. He hates the word of God, because it is the greatest enemy to his
Kingdom, every way resembling God the author, and carrying his image. It is
light, and no marvel if the Prince of darkness resist it; it discouers his
subtilties, and fenceth the Christian against his policies; it discerns
spirits, that let him come as an Angel of light, he shall be uncased. As he
prevails in darkness, so he works in impuritie; now here the word resembling
God himself crosses him; it is pure in it self, and a purifyer, as Christ
says, Ye are clean by my word. Further, his chief power being in the
sons of disobedience, and in the hearts of infidels, here also the word clips
his wings, being the word of faith: and Ioh. 17.20. Christ prayed not only
for his disciples, but for all those that should believe in him by their word.
In a word, seeing he exercises his chief power in the sons of perdition,
who are given him to rule at his will; here the word is his enemy, because it
conuerteth sinners, and saves souls, called therefore a word of salvation.

3. He opposes Gods word through the malice he bears Gods children: for he
ever opposed true professors, 3
casts them into prison, and would never let them have a good day in the world,
if he might have his will, and follows them with temptations, and with outward
afflictions. But this is the sword of Gods mouth, and the sword of the spirit,
by which they cut through his temptations, and make them forcelesse: it is that
which comforts them, and sustaines them in their troubles, and directs them
happily to heaven, so as no way he can have his will of them.

4. It stands him in hand to oppose Gods word: 4
for his long experience has taught him, that so long as men hold to the word,
they be safe enough under Gods protection; and he could never win his
captaine-sinners to such high attempts in sin, were it not that he had first
shaken the truth of Gods word out of their hearts. How could he have brought
Pharaoh to such obstinacy against God and his people, as to say, Who is the
Lord? and, I will not let Israel go: but that he had brought the word in Moses
and Aarons mouth into contempt, further then the sting of the miracles forced
him. When Saul had once cast off the word of the Lord, Satan lead him as in a
chain, to hunt David, to throw a dart at Jonathan, to seek to the Witch,
against whom himself had enacted a severe law. The like of Ahab, Herod, Nero,
Domitian, etc.

5. The word of God is the sentence and rule of righteousness, 5
which condemns Satan; and therefore no marvel if he cannot endure it, and
wish it false, and love it no better then the bill of his own condemnation and
death eternal.

It is a note of a man foiled by the temptation of Satan, and of a deuillish
spirit, to call Gods word into question; Use.
either to deny it as false, or doubt of it as uncertain; either of which if
Satan can persuade unto, he has his wish: for he knows they are no subjects
to God that will not acknowledge his scepter, but doubt of the rod of his
mouth: he can easily blindfold them, and lead them whether he will, that deny
the light: he can easily vanquish them, and lead them captive to all sin, if
he can get them to cast away their weapons. Yet what a number of men has the
devil thus far prevailed with, in this violent kind of temptation? Some call
in question whether the Scripture be the word of God, or no; swarms of
Atheists, and Macheuillians, that hold the word but an humane devise and
policy; which is to open a door to all carnal and brutish Epicurisme, and
to confound man and beast together. Others doubt not of all, but of some
books: and others not of some books, but of some places of the holy
Scripture. But we see that Satan would have Christ, but to deny or doubt of
one sentence: and what Eues calling into question of one speech of God brought
on all our necks, all we her posterity feel. And it is in our natures, when
God speaks plainly against that sin, we make ifs, and peraduentures at it,
and so turn it off. As for example: 1. Our Savior teaches plainly, that
whosoever are of God hear his word, and his sheep hear his voice. Either men
must believe it, or deny it: and yet how few can we persuade conscionably to
hear the word? all who must plainly either make the voice of Christ false, or
themselves none of Gods, none of Christ's sheep, for not hearing it. 2. Our
Savior says expressly, He that hears you, hears me, Luke 10.16. and that
God speaks in the mouths of his Ministers, 2. Cor. 5.20. and that they have
an heavenly treasure in earthen vessels. But how few are of this mind? never
did any heathens so despise the voice of their Priests, and the answer of their
Oracles, as Christians in general despise our voice, in which God and Christ
profess they speak. 3. Christ plainly says, this word is the immortal seed
of our new birth, the sincere milk to nourish the soul, the bread of life,
heavenly food. But who believe him? for generally men have no appetite, no
desire to it, and can well be content to let their souls languish in grace,
and be staruen to death. And whereas they would go as far or farther into
other countries as Jacob and his sons into Egypt, when there was no corn in
Canaan, to supply their bodies with food, this they will not stir out of
their doors for.

Well, take heed of calling divine truths into question, stand not in them upon
thy reason and understanding, which are but low and shallow, suspect them in
things thou can not reach rather then the truth of Scripture, and make good
use of these rules. 1. In the rising of any such temptation, know, No divine
truth to be called into question for 3. reasons.
that Satan seeks advantage against thee, and would bring thee into the same
condemnation with himself, by the same sin and malice against God. If he
durst thwart so divine a truth, so strengthened from James; and yet he so far
deludes a number, as their sottish hearts say, There is no God, Psalm. 14.1.
Satan knows there is a day of reckoning and judgment, as the devils
confessed, Art thou come to torment us before the time? and yet he so besotteth
and blinds others, that they make but a mock of all, as those in Peter, who
mocked and said, Where is his coming? 2. Pet. 3.1. Satan knows, that God is
all an eye, to whom day and darkness are alike: yet in tempting men to secret
sins, he will make them say, Tush, who sees us? can God see through the
thick cloud? The devil knows, that God is just and will not take the wicked
by the hand; and yet he makes the sinner believe his case is good enough,
being a most graceles man; and makes one wicked man say of another, as in
Malachi, We count the proud blessed, etc. The devil knows, that he that goes
on in sin, shall not prosper; yet he makes the sinner, who turns from the
word, to believe he shall prosper.

As this temptation aimed to overthrow the word of God, so also the faith of
Christ in that word, namely to bring him from his assurance that he was the
Son of God. Whence we may learn, that,

Satan in his temptations against all the members of Christ, Doctr. 2.
aims to destroy their faith. This Christ himself witnesses, Satan in all
temptations seeks to overthrow the faith of men.
that Satan desired to winnow the Disciples, but himself prayed that their
faith might not fail, Luke 22.31. 1 Thessalonians. 3.5. for this cause when I could
no longer forbear, I sent Timothy, that I might know of your faith, least the
tempter had tempted you in any sort. And hence his continual practice is to
bring men to the extremes of faith, in adversity to despair, in time of
prosperity to presumption.

Reasons. 1.
1. He maligneth faith, as being a special gift and mark of Gods elect,
because it is given to them only, and to all them, and therefore is called the
faith of Gods elect, Tit. 1.1. and to faith is the work of regeneration
ascribed, 2
Act. 15.9. 2. All Satan's temptations tend to break off the covenant and
communion between God and his children, and therefore must in special manner
aim against faith: for by faith we are made the Sons of God, Gal. 3.26. and
God espouseth and marries us unto himself by faith, Hos. 2.20. and by faith
we are brought into the grace by which we stand. 3. He knows that faith is our
shield, whereby we both keep off the fiery darts of Satan, 3
and quench the same, and that faith is the victory whereby we overcome the
world: this is it that makes all his temptations forceles: for, though we have
no power of our selves to withstand him, yet faith gets power from Christ, and
lays hold on his strength, which quells all the aduersary-power of our
salvation. We stand by faith, says the Apostle; and Satan sees the truth of
Christ's speech, that the gates of hell shall never prevail against it. He has
reason therefore to labor to weaken it, and to root it out (if it were
possible) out of the hearts of men, and out of the world. 4
4. All his temptations bend themselves to cut off and intercept the course of
Gods love, and his favors to his children: he bursts with envy at the
happiness of the Saints. But unless he gain their faith, he cannot interrupt
this; for by faith, as by an hand, we receive Christ himself given us of the
Father, Ephesians. 3.17. and with him all his merits, and all things belonging to
life and godliness. We receive the promise of the spirit by faith, Gal. 3.14.
yea the presence of the Spirit, who dwells in our hearts: by faith we receive
the hope and hold of our blessed inheritance hereafter, Gal. 5.5. And whereas
Satan's continual drift is, to estrange God and us, faith only crosses him, by
which we have entrance and boldness to the throne of grace by our prayers, to
speak unto God freely as to our father, Ephesians. 3.12. Hebr. 10.22. yea, to ask
what we will, and obtain not only all corporal blessings good for us, but
also the sanctified and pure use of them; whereas the unbeliever corrupts
himself in them continually. 5. Satan well knows, 5
that faith is the ground of all obedience, without which the word and all Gods
ordinances are unprofitable, Heb. 4.2. without which there is no pleasing of
God, Hebr. 11.6. in any thing: for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Has
he not reason then to assay by all his strength, to take this hold from us?
Does not he know, that the foundation being overthrown, the whole building
must f^ll, and the root ouerturned, all the tree and branches come down with
it? Sever a man from his faith, he tumbles in impiety and unrighteousness, he
is odious to God in all things, Satan ^ramples upon him, and leads him at his
will. From all which reasons we see, that Satan especially in temptations aims
at our faith, as he did at Christ's.

Those who never felt any temptation, Use. 1.
but ever believed, and never doubted (as they say) never had faith: No
temptation, no faith.
for never had any man true faith, but it was assailed most fiercely: never was
faith laid up in the heart of any child of God, but the combat between nature
and grace, faith and frailty, flesh and spirit, was presently proclaimed. Eues
faith was won from her quickly: Abraham's faith was mightily assailed, which
because in such a combat he retained, he was renowned and styled the father of
all the faithful, and faithful Abraham: Moses his faith was shaken, and his
great sin was unbelief: Job in his misery was many ways assailed to
distrust God, as his words import, If he kill me, I will trust in him still:
and Satan's aim was, to bring him to blaspheme God, and die.

As the devil labors most against our faith, so should we most labor in
fortifying it. Use. 2.
Policy teaches men to plant the most strength at that fort or part of the
wall, Because Satan most oppugneth our faith, we must most fortify it.
where the enemy plants his greatest ordnance, and makes the strongest
assault. And nature teaches us to defend all our parts but especially our head
and heart, and such like vital parts: the very serpent will save his head so
long as he can, by natural instinct, whatsoever become of other parts. Our
chief fortress is our faith: we have no grace but is worth preserving and
saving; yet of them all, Faith is as it were the Head and leader; it sends the
vital spirits of heavenly life to the whole man. Let grace therefore teach us
to save this grace, which is the heart of a Christian above all the rest, and
to beware of the least prick or crack in it, which is dangerous. A man may
receive great gashes and wounds in his arms, and thighs, or exterior parts,
and recover it well enough: not so in the heart or brain. Though thy comfort,
joy, feeling, yea and fruits may fail, take heed thy faith, thy root fail
not. This is that which the Apostle Peter exhorts, 1.5.9. -- whom resist
steadfast in the faith: wherein if a man sit not very fast, Satan will soon
vn-horse him.

And of all others let afflicted and humbled souls lay hold, and make use of
this exhortation; for Satan does with so much the more violence assault them,
as he finds it easier to prevail with them: for well he knows, that
howsoever they heartily detest all other sins, and much ado he has to bring
them to his lure in other, yet their spirits being oppressed and wounded by
the sense of sin, and Gods dispeasure for it, he finds them inclinable
enough upon every triuiall temptation to despair; and so makes a wide breach
by their improuidence, watching narrowly all other things, but not that which
they ought most of all, and which Satan most of all impugneth.

Quest. How may I strengthen and stablish my faith?

Answ. By observing these few directions:

3. General directions for the fortifying of faith.
I. Consider the excellency of this grace: for those only that know it, are in
love with it, and will use means to preserve and increase it. And this
excellency appears in these branches: 1. It subsistence or foundation,
Excellency of faith in 4. things
Heb. 11.1. from whence also Christians are styled, 1. Cor. 1. and, the
household of faith, Gal. 10.6. of which Christ himself has undertaken to be
the author and finisher, and has appointed all his ordinances to breed and
perfect it in the hearts of all that shall atteine the end of it, which is
salvation, namely the word of faith, Romans 10.8. the sacraments the seals of
faith, chap. Blessed is he that has not seen, and yet believes: It espouseth
us to God and Christ, and ascerteineth us of the marriage day: It honors
God, as Abraham by believing gave glory to God, and makes us witness that God
is true, which is not more honor to God then our selves, Ioh. 3.33. 3. All our
Syrophenissan. All things are possible to it, Mar. 9.23. Give Peter faith, he
shall consciences, Romans 5.1.2. comfort in afflictions; it bears great weights
vncrusht, it self being (...), a sound and sure foundation. According to the
measure of faith, is the measure of all other graces and comforts. As a man
believes, so he obeys, loves, prays, and is heard. Yea not only the
measure of grace here, but of glory hereafter is proportioned to the measure of
faith. And is it not worth preserving and increasing?

II. Use means to increase and strengthen it, and they be these: Means of
fortifying faith, 4.
1. Acquaint thy self with the word of God, often read, repeated, preached,
meditated, and conferred on: this is the word of faith,

2. Observe the tokens of Gods love and favor toward thee; David, Psalm. 23.
vlt. and 1. Sam. 17.34.37. and Psalm. 143.4.5. and 77.7. to 13. Has the Lord
forgotten to be merciful, and shut up his loving kindness in utter
displeasure? I said this is my death: yet I remembered the years of the right
hand of the most High, I remembered the works of old. And how justly do some
faint in trouble for want of observing the ways of God with them in former
trialls and deliverances?

The former, by the witness of the Spirit, which will always uphold us in
afflictions, if our care be not to grieve and quench him: So long as the spirit
of consolation possesses the heart, what sound comfort can be wanting? but if
he depart in displeasure, neither can our faith or comfort be long vpheld. The
latter, by keeping good conscience: for faith and good conscience stand and
fall together: an accusing conscience weakens faith, and destroys boldness,
that we dare not come near unto God; whereas contrarily our election is made
sure by good works, 2. Pet. 1.5. and by the fruits of the Spirit. It stands us
in hand, if we would stand against Satan in the day of trial, to take heed of
admitting any thing against our conscience: which the Apostle compares to a
ship fraughted with precious wares, such as faith, love, joy, with other
graces: Now if we crack our ship of conscience, we make shipwreck of faith
and the other graces, which good conscience had preserved.

Lord increase our faith: and that good man, Mar. 9.24. Lord I believe, help my
unbelief. Christ prays for the not failing of thy faith, wilt not thou pray
for thy own? The least faith can pray for more.
A special mark of the least measure of faith, is, that it can pray for more.

III. When thou feel Satan assalting thy faith, and hiding from thine eyes
the love of God, then set before thine eyes Gods gracious promises made, and to
be made good to thee in Jesus Christ; both because 1. of the generality of
them, which run without excepting thee, if thou do not except thy self; as
also, 2. because they are built and grounded, not upon thy sense and feeling,
but upon Gods unchangeable love; as also, 3. because he has commanded thee to
believe. Object. Oh, but would you have me believe, when I feel nothing but
corruption in myself, and correction and displeasure in God? Answ. Yes: for
faith must be where is no feeling, and may be: one thing is the being of a
thing, another the discerning of it. Does not the sun shine, though a cloud
or some other thing be between our sight and it? Nay, then when sense and
feeling cease, faith begins her chief and most glorious work. Was it not
Abraham's commendation, that he believed against belief, and hoped against
hope? when all nature and sense was set against him, he held the word of
promise against sense and nature. Nay, our blessed Savior, in whom was no
grudgings of infidelity, but assured faith in his father, yet in respect of his
present sense and feeling cried out. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? David believed in the word of God, and not his eyes; and so must thou,
that thou hear God speak, and not that thou see. Thomas when he would
believe no more then that he saw and felt, our Savior said to him, Be not (so)
faithless, but faithful.

In the strongest encounter wait still till Christ come to ease thee, he is
not far off, and commit thy self in weldoing into his hands as into the
hands of a faithful Creator; say with Hester, I will go to the King, if I
perish, I perish; it may be he will reach out his scepter graciously, and I
shall live; but if I must needs perish, I will perish under the wing of my Lord
and Husband.

So much of Satan's second drift in the first temptation. In the third place he
seeks to make Christ doubt of his Divinity, and call in question whether he
was the Son of God, or no, from his present necessity: as if he had said,
See thou not in what famine and need thou art? thou have fasted here these
40. days of my knowledge; What is become of thy father, and of his providence,
whose Son thou art proclaimed? Is this the care thy father has of thee? Does
he think thou can live of air, or feed of wind, or digest stones? Art thou
(weak creature and staruen) he that must prevail against the gates of hell?
Art thou the Messiah, that have not a morsel of bread to put in thy mouth? No,
if thou were the Son of God, he would care a little more for thee: no
natural father that had a drop of affection, would leave his child so
destitute. Whence we may learn, that

Satan seeks to make the members of Christ (as well as the Head) call in
question their adoption and salvation, Doctr. 3.
Satan's drift is to make men call in question the truth of their adoption in
their trialls.
for present adversity and want. A notable instance hereof we have in Job,
whom when the devil by Gods permission (to bring him to blaspheme God) had
robbed him of his goods, had slain his children, had afflicted his body with
most painful and loathsome botches; then he sets upon him, and sets all his
friends upon him, to make him believe that God also is his enemy, and has
brought his sin upon his head. And this he taught his instruments, the wicked
rulers, or rather raylers, Matthew. 27.41. when Christ was in most extreme
torments, and terrors of body and soul, hanging on the cross, they said in
scorn, If he be the Son of God, let him come down from the cross, and we
will believe on him: He trusted in God, let him now deliver him if he will
have him: for he said he was the Son of God. As if they had said: Is not
this a notable deceiuer to say he was Gods Son, and now is in extreme
danger, ready to perish shamefully, and no hope of any deliverance? If he were
the Son of God, would he suffer him to perish? So it is his ordinary
temptation to any believer: Do thou not see thy self poor and despised, in
want and sorrow? See thou any one sign of Gods favor? Art thou not deprived
almost of all the pleasures of the world? See thou not that God cares for
beasts and fowls, which he feeds in due season, but thou art neglected?

Reasons. 1.
1. This comes to pass, because of Satan's malice toward God himself; he would
not only falsify his word, who has said, that No man knows love or hatred
by all the things before him, Eccles. 9.1. but also impeach his providence and
care over his children, who whatsoever their outward estate seem to be, are
still as dear unto him, as the apple of his eye; and when they be as most
unknown, yet are they known. 2
2. Because of Satan's malice to piety and religion, which by this means he
seeks to chase out of the earth: for the world keeps it under, and commonly it
rises to no great matters. Now if God respect it not neither, who would be
godly? what profit were it to serve the Lord? 3
3. Satan herein has much strength from our own corruptions, and ploweth
often with our own heifers: for we desire rather to walk by sense then by
faith: we hardly believe without pawnes and pledges; every man trusts his own
eyes, and thinks wisdom good with an inheritance. Hence his temptation finds
the easier entrance and better entertainment. 4. Satan ever in these
temptations has a further reach then he shows, 4
namely that he may hence persuade men to some unlawful means to relieve
themselves, and better their estate; no longer to depend upon God, who has
cast off the care of them; but to shift for themselves, and (as he moved
Christ himself) to make stones bread. 5
5. Satan has gotten no small advantage against Gods dear children by this
kind of temptation, and brought them to take their own ways, as if God had
quite forgotten them. Abraham thought God had left him to the cruelty of the
Egyptians, and that there was no way to help him, but by lying, and teaching
his wife so to do also. Lot was so environed by the Sodomites, as to avoid
their fury he saw no way, but to offer his daughters to their abuse and
filthiness. David was so hunted by Saul, as he must shift for himself by
faining himself mad. An heart now cleaning unto God, and resting in his
assured love and providence, would have waited till God had come unto it, and
not turned it self to carnal counsels.

This condemns their folly, Use.
who judge themselves and others by outward things, which fall alike to all:
who may see by this, what spirit it is that suggesteth them. It is a delusion
of Satan, and general in the world, to make men deem themselves and others
happy, and in Gods favor, because they prosper in the world, and Gods people
unfortunate, because the world crosses them for the most part. For:

1. By this conclusion Christ himself the Son of God, who had all his
fathers love powered upon him, Outward things make neither happy nor unhappy:
four reasons.
should have been most hated of his father, and a most unhappy creature: He was
in want of house, of money, of friends, of food; the world had no malice in it,
which was not cast upon him: and he was not only forsaken of men, but in such
distress on the cross as he complained he was forsaken of God. And yet all
creatures were not capable of that love wherewith his Father loved him, when he
loved him least.

2. Neither the testimony of Gods love, nor the dignity of his children stands
in outward things, nor in the abundance of worldly comforts: for then the rich
glutton should have been far better then Lazarus; Abraham, Isaac, Iaacob, who
for famine were glad to fly their country, should be in less grace with
God, then the wicked Kings to whom they went. The Apostles, who were the lights
of the world, who were in hunger, thirst, nakedness, buffeted, without any
certain dwelling place, reviled, persecuted, accounted as the filth of the
world, and the offscouring of all things, should have been in no better
account with God then with men. The Saints in Heb. 11.36. to 39. who were tried
by mockings and scourgings, by bonds and imprisonment, were stoned, hewne
asunder, tempted, slain with the sword, wandered in sheepskins, etc. being
destitute, afflicted, and tormented, should have lost both their dignity in
themselves, and their favor of God. But they lost neither of these: For the
same text says, that the world was not worthy of them, being men of such
worth, and that by faith they received a good report, namely from God and all
good men.

3. The beauty of Gods children is inward: that which argues Gods love, is the
gift of his Son, faith, hope, a joyful expectation of the future
inheritance. 1. Ioh. 3.1. Behold what love the Father has bestowed upon us,
that we should be called the sons of God. In which words, the Apostle
calls our eyes back from beholding earthly dignities and prerogatives, which
we are ever poa^ing into, and have hawks eyes to see into the glory of the
world: But he would have us behold Gods love in other things then these,
namely in the inward notes and marks of Gods children. And here is a maine
difference between that love which comes from God as God, Difference between
the love of God, as God, and of God as a Father.
and that which comes from him as a Father; between that which he bestows
on his enemies, and that which he bestows on his sons; that which
bond-children receive, which are mooueables, and that which the sons of the
freewoman receive: for this is the inheritance: let Isaac carry that away,
and no scoffing Ismael have a foot in it.

4. Whereas Satan from crosses, losses, afflictions, anguish, and durable
sorrows persuades that men are not Gods children, the Apostle (Heb. 12.6.8.)
makes a clean contrary argument, that afflictions and crosses are signs of
Gods love rather then of hatred, and marks of election rather then of
reiection: Whomsoever the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son
he receives. If ye be without correction, whereof all are partakers, then are
ye bastards, and not sons. And, 2. Tim. 3.12. All that will live godly in
Christ, must suffer persecution: the world must rejoice, while they must be
sorrowful, and cannot but hate them because they are not of the world. It is
the condition of Christian hope, that those who will be conformable to Christ
in glory, must be conformable to him in his sufferings.

Rules to withstand this dangerous temptation.

Rules to confirm the heart in the love of God, notwithstanding outward
crosses.
1. Rule. Labor to confirm thy self in the assurance of thy adoption, which
Satan would have thee stagger in, as Christ here: and if thou be assured
thou art Gods child, it will draw on an other assurance; namely, that God will
be careful of thee, to relieve thy want, and deliver thee in thy distress,
whose love surpasses the love of most natural Parents to their children; as
appears, Isa. 49.15. Can they that are evil, give their children good
things? how much more shall God our heavenly Father give good things to his
children, which he sees good for them? Quest. How shall I confirm my self in
my adoption? Answ. By thy resemblance of God, as the natural child is like his
natural father. In Adam we lost the excellent image of God, let us labor now
to find it restored in the second Adam. Means to confirm to a man's self his
own adoption, 3.
1. Examine the life of God in thee, who art naturally dead in sin: the
breath of this life is heavenly thoughts, meditations, affections: the actions
of this life are spiritual growth, and increase in grace and virtue;

2. Rule. When thou feel grudgings of diffidence arise, and Satan will urge
thee how thou can think thy self respected of God, being beset with such a
world of trouble, and almost drowned in a sea of vexations, without bottom or
bank; Now call to mind and set before thee Christ's blessed example, in whom
as in a glass, thou may see the sharpest of thy sorrows in any kind, not
only sanctified and sweetened, but mingled with admirable love of his father.
What evil befalls thy body and soul, or thy estate inward or outward, which
he has not borne and broken, and yet never the less loved of his Father?
Thou want comforts of body, house, land, meat, money; he had not a foot of
land, not a house to hide his head in, not any money till he borrowed of a
fish, not a cup of cold water till he had requested it of the Samaritan, who
would give him none. Thou want friends, respect in the world, yea where thou
well deseruest, yea where thou might justly expect it: Remember it was his
case; his friends became his foes, his scholar a traitor, the world hated him
causeles; he came to his own, and his own received him not; he was without
honor in his own country, he had evil repaid him for good; he wept over
Ierusalems misery, but Jerusalem laughed at his. Thou want peace of
conscience, can not see a clear look from God, nor feel any ease from the
sting of thy sins, thy sorrowful mind dries up thy bones, all outward
troubles are nothing to this: But remember that never was any so laden with
the burden of sin as Christ, when his bitter torment expressed such words as
these, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

3. Rule. From these crosses, by which Satan would drive thee from God, labor
to see how near and graciously God draws toward thee; Sundry ways of God
drawing near his saints in their troubles.
and thus beat him with his own weapon. 1. The Lord helps forward our
salvation by them, being sour sauces to bring us out of love with our sweet
sins, and of this evil Job: for as a man by wrestling knows his own
strength better then before, so is it here. 3. The Lord is never nearer his
children then in trouble, in fire and water, in six troubles and in seven, to
support them with strength and patience, to give a blessed issue and use, and
turn it to his own glory in their mighty deliverance, and to their best; all
things are turned to their best, to recompense their light afflictions with an
eternal weight of glory. As Christ said of Lazarus, This sickness is not to
death, but that God may be glorified, Ioh. 11.4. so we may say, This poverty,
loss, disgrace, etc. is not to the utter undoing of a man, but that God may
have glory in his deliverance and glorification.

So much of the third drift of Satan in this first temptation: now of the
fourth. In that the devils last drift in it is, to have Christ in his want and
hunger, to use an unlawful means of supply, note, that,

It is an ordinary instigation and temptation of the devil, Doctr. 4.
or a deuillish spirit, To use unlawful means to help our selves is
diabolical.
to use unlawful means in our want to help our selves. Because Christ had no
ordinary means of getting bread, he must provide for himself by
extraordinary. Genesis 25.29.32. Esau comes out of the field weary and hungry, and
almost dead for meat: how must he supply his want? Sell thy birthright (said
Satan:) and so he did. Peter was in great danger in the High Priests hall: how
must he help himself out of their hands? Deny thy Master (said Satan,)
forswear him, and curse thy self: and thus he gat out. Saul was in great
straits, God was gone from him, he was not answered by Vrim, nor oracle: how
shall he do for counsel? he must go to the witch of Endor: and so the devil
sends him from himself to himself who can tell him more then all his Vrim,
his dreams, his Prophets. Sarah wanted a child, she had a promise of one, but
she laughed at that, Genesis 16.2. yet must she have one another way; she gives her
maid to her husband, and she brings an Ismael, a mocker and persecutor of the
promised seed.

1. Satan sees how easily he can weaken our confidence in God, Reasons. 1.
seeing we are ready to trust more in the means then in God: he knows our
infidelity, which makes us hasty, and soon weary of waiting. 2. He knows*
how derogatory this is to the promise, necessity, which we say has no law, but
falsely. Hence is the common speech of the world, to defend any injustice, Why,
I must live, I must not put forth my wife and children to beg, I must so
exercise my calling as to maintain my wife and family, I must utter my wares
though I lie, and swear, and exact, and deceive: and so under a color of
good, and pretense of necessity, no wickedness comes amiss in the course of
ones trade.

Use. 1.
This teaches us to bewail the pitiful estate of numbers of men, taken in
this snare of the devil: as,

1. Numbers of men oppressed with poverty, because they say they must live;
they must live in an unlawful calling, wherein they be slaves and drudges to
every man's sin: such as are Players, Iesters, Wisards, Tumblers: such are
scholars, who for preferment run into Popish countries, and betake
themselves to Seminaries, and so become traitors. Yea those that have no
calling, must live too: but how? by filching, stealing, or begging, as idle and
roguish vagrants; and those at home whose extreme idleness brings poverty upon
them as an armed man. Or else by gaming, cheating, and by their wits. The whole
course of all which, is but a prentiship to the devil.

2. Others that exercise honest trades, but easily help themselves forward by
swearing, lying, facing, false weights, measures, and tricks which they put
upon men: They never stick for a penny-profite to hazard their souls: He is
no quick chapman, if he cannot lie for advantage: neither can he be trusted
unless he swear: he must swear, or he must not sell: he must sometimes make
the best of an ill bargain, and with a little color lay it upon another man's
neck: for why should he willingly wrong or undo himself?

3. Others a number, 1. who by misdemeanors have brought just reproach upon
themselves, and seek to salve it by lying, facing, and shifting, and perhaps
by worse means. This was the case and sin of good David: he had corrupted
himself with Bathsheba, he was afraid the adultery would come home to him, he
sends for his worthy captain Vriah to go home to his wife, that so it might
be covered; but when it could not that way, good Vtiah must be slain at David's
appointment, and so he would hide adultery by murder. 2. like unto these are
those, who having outragiously ouershot themselves in notable riots by word or
deed, and being called to account for it, lay all the blame upon drunkenness, a
sin indeed of strong burden, able to carry away many sins upon it; but
never was any sin lessened by another, but aggrauated, and the excuse is a
confession of a double sin, which in all true judgment deserves double
punishment. 3. servants or children, who having committed a fault, hide it by
lying, and so to avoid an inconvenience, run into a mischeife.

4. Others, being sick and diseased, are persuaded and resolved to go to
Wizzards and Witches, cunning men and women, and so get release by breaking the
prison. A pitiful cure, when the devil is the Physician. Saul never went to
the Witch, till God was gone from him. And take this for a certain conclusion;
1. Whosoever goes or seeks to a Witch, in losses, crosses, etc. let him
boast as much as he will of his faith, it is but a Satanicall faith, a faith in
the devil, and not in God, by which the Witch works all that is done. 2. The
remedy is far worse then the disease, severely revenged on Saul, 1. Chron.
10.13. and on Asa, 2. King. 1.16. 3. The devil has got from them, that which
he could not from Christ; namely, to use another means of release then God
appointed.

Some there be that are hearers of the word, yet if they see any person
extraordinarily visited, will give him counsel to seek out to the cunning
man. Is it because there is never a God in Israel? is this a small sin? By Gods
law they ought to die that seek to thrust a people from their God, and drive
them to the devil, Deuteronomy. 13.10. But this is a greater sin then that.
Miserable comforters that wish them to go to hell for help.

Let us carefully look to such rules as may keep us from using unwarrantable
means, and they are four: Use. 2.


1. Consider that all means outward and ordinary are but servants, to which
God has tied neither blessing nor providence, 4. Considerations to fence us
from using unwarrantable means.
further then he pleases, that our affections should not be tied to them, nor
our eyes fixed on them, but on his hand who disposes means to his own ends.
It was the sin of the Israelites to limit the Holy One of Israel, namely to
means, that when they saw no means, they saw no God: whereas a heart loosed
from the means, and rightly disposed to the author, does not stint him neither
to the measure of affliction, nor to the time, or means of deliverance. Job
will not tie God to any measure, but commits himself wholly to him, saying, If
he kill me, yet will I trust in him. For the time of deliverance, the godly
commit it to God, in whose hand times and seasons are: the just man that lives
by faith, makes not haste, Isa. 16.28. For the means of deliverance, Abraham
is secure of it, My son, God will provide: he saw no means of the promise,
if Isaac were offered, yet he lays him on the altar, on the wood, and receives
him from the dead.

2. Consider, that any good thing is then beautiful, when it is compassed by
good means. Satan ever aims at one of these two things, to hinder every
thing that is good, or, if he cannot do that, Satan ever seeks to blemish
that good which he cannot hinder.
then to thrust it on by evil and ungodly means, that he may at least blemish
that which he cannot hinder: and, if he cannot overtake us in the matter, yet
to get beyond us in the manner of doing it. We must therefore watch in both
these, that what we do be warrantable; as to preserve our selves, and provide
for our families: (He is worse then an Infidel that does it not:) but withal
know, that he is no better then an infidel, that does it by evil means, or
after an unwarrantable manner.

3. Consider, that there is no necessity, if ordinary and lawful means
fail, to use unlawful. When men say, I must live, and I must maintain my
family; here remember, that must is for a King, nay, absolute and unlimited
necessity is for the King of Kings. It is not absolutely necessary, that thou
live, but so long as God pleases: yea, it is absolutely necessary, that thou
rather perish, and not live, then break Gods commandment. If thou perish for
want of means, thou may go to heaven as Lazarus, and exchange a miserable
life with an happy: But if to keep thee from perishing, thou loose thy soul,
this is to leap out of the pan into the coals. Thou therefore that must
provide for thy self and thine, I tell thee, thou must do it by a moderate
and honest care, warranted by the word, and not shift and prole, as if all were
fish that comes to net: that is all the necessity that God has laid on thee,
the other is suggested by Satan.

Three excellent properties of faith in want of means.
4. Labor to live the life of faith, which will exclude such distrustful
thoughts and practices. For the property of faith is: 1. To believe the
promises of God, when we see the clean contrary; as, when we feel our own
sins most, then most to believe our own justification; out of the deep with
David, yea out of the whales belly with Jonah, and in darkness with Job to see
light. 2. To see things invisible, to make things absent, present; yea God
absent present, and to set him continually at the right hand. Moses feared not
the wrath of the King, because he saw him that was invisible, Hebr. 11.17.
Elisha being in Dothan feared nothing, when his servant cried out; because his
eyes were open to see the Angels, as fiery chariots protecting him. 3. Faith
is never so working as in perilous times, because then there is most need,
most use of it; then it sets it self a work, and mingles it self with the
promises of God, by which it quickens and puts life unto a man, when he is
half dead: as Psalm. 119.49. Remember thy promise wherein thou have caused me to
trust: it is my comfort in trouble: for thy promise has quickened me. Now it
bestirres it self, to make Gods faithfulness and truth his shield and
buckler. Notable is that example of the three children, Dan. 3.16, 17. who were
in present danger of their lives, and cast into an hot furnace: In this danger
now their faith bestirres it to provide for their safety, not by any yielding,
or blanching, or buckling to the unjust command; but by furnishing their
mouths with a resolute answer, Be it known to thee, O King, that we will not
worship this image; and by preparing their hearts (through their confidence in
God, who was able to deliver them) rather to yield themselves to the fire and
raging flames, then to any part of that commandment. And were faith and Gods
fear working in the heart, it would destroy false fears and infidelity,
which Satan prevails in mightily, causing men to seek help by unlawful
means, if the lawful be never so little set out of sight.

Command these stones to be made bread.] Here is an inference upon the former
words, If thou be the Son of God: upon a true ground Satan raises a
dangerous consequence: Christ was the Son of God: true. Must he therefore
needs make stones bread?

It is an ordinary temptation of the devil, to infer mischeiuous conclusions
upon true premises. Doctr.
Satan infers mischeiuous conclusions upon true premises.
God had no respect to Cains sacrifice, as to Abels: Whereas now Cain should
have offered of the best, as Abel did; and have brought faith with his
offering, by which Abel offered a better sacrifice, Heb. 11.4. Satan infe^res
upon it, Therefore kill thy brother. Saul received no answer of God that was
true: but that therefore he should go to the wi^ch of Endor, was Satan's
inference, both against the law of God, and Saul's own law. God is a (...) God:
a true premisse, and the scope of all the Scripture: but, that Jonah should
therefore ^^ie to T^rs^ish, and not go to preach the destruction of Nini^e,
was a Satanicall inference. A man must pity himself, and do what he can to
repel evil from him, and avoid danger: but that Christ should therefore not
go up to Jerusalem to suffer, was a dangerous consequence of Satan in Peter's
mouth; whom therefore Christ calls Satan.

Reasons. 1.
1. Satan is cunning, and seeks by mingling good and evil, truth and
falsehood, to justify that which is false, and to draw it on with the truth. If
he should never speak truth, he could never deceive half so much: therefore
he speaks many truths, to give credit to his lies: and the same he has
taught all his agents. Do we think, that a false teacher or heretic could do
any great hurt, if he should not lay his leaven in a lump of truth? would not
every man at first reject him, if he should bring never a true doctrine? but
therefore, that his heresy may spread like a gangrene, he comes with a fair
pretense of many truths which cannot be denied. Do we think, that the Church
of Rome should have so prevailed in the world, or that Antichristian state
should have been endured, or could any Papist be suffered in ours or any
wel-ordered country, if they did not color all their abominations and false
religion with some general truths? if they should not in word and show hold
and recite the articles of faith and principles of our religion, concerning God
in unity of essence and trinity of person, concerning Christ, the Church, etc.
were it possible, that any Christian state could bear them, while indeed and
in truth they reuerse the whole foundation of religion, and are limbs of
Antichrist? No, their deceit is a mystery, and walks in darkness, and the mask
and vizards of truth with pretense of holiness, has held the swords of Princes
from them, which else had long since been sanctified in their overthrow.

2
2. Satan can do no other, who cannot speak truth for truths sake: for being
a liar from the beginning, he loves not truth, and therefore if he speak
truth, it is to corrupt the truth, or to stablish some lie. Lying the devils
mother tongue.
Lying is the devils mothers tongue. Ioh. 8.1. Sam. 28.17* 18. Satan in the
habit of Samuel spoke many truths; as, that the Lord had rent the Kingdom
from him, and given it to David, (because he had so spoken he would do it, and
because Saul obeyed not the voice of the Lord nor executed his fierce wrath
against the Amal^kites:) and that the Lord would deliver him, and the
Israelites into the hand of the Philistims the next day, etc. But all this was
to feed Saul in his delusion, and hold him in his sin, as though he were
Samuel, as verse. 17. the Lord has done it, even as he spoke by mine hand: and
v. 19. to morrow shall thou be with me, etc. So in the new Testament we have
the devils confessing Christ to be the Son of God, the Holy One, the sum
of the Gospel; and Paul and Silas to be the servants of the high God, Act. 16.
but both Christ and his servants put them to silence, and would not have them
to speak the truth, because it was to deprave and slander the whole truth, as
though Christ and his servants had been in league and agreement with the
devils, and so their doctrine had been not divine but diabolical. Thus Satan
like a barge-man looks one way, but rows another.

3. Satan sees how our nature is easily carried through a general show of good
or truth, 3
to take in with it error and falsehood hand over head, without trial or
discerning: For though our blessed Savior would not confound stones and bread,
yet we easily take stones with bread, and serpents with fishes. The whole
Masse-booke is but an heap of idolatrous prayers, and ceremonies: but yet
because there is some show of good in it, many Scriptures, and some tolerable
and good prayers, with many devotions, it is wholly received without trial, of
millions given over to delusion.

4. Satan the prince of darkness can transform himself into an Angel of
light, 4
2. Cor. 11.14. and the false Prophets will be confident that the truth is with
them: Zedechiah will oppose Micaiah, and Hanani will smite Jeremy, and make
yokes against the King of Babels yoke, Ier. 28.11. The Donatists in Africa
cried out, that the sound Christians were traitors to the holy books, and
themselves the defendors of them. The Papists at this day cry out with
Dioscorus the heretic, I defend the opinions of the fathers, and their whole
doctrine is condemned with mine.

Let us learn to be wise and try before we trust, Use. 1.
not taking all things in gross, but first examining and proouing them:
Falsehood carries often a show of truth, and truth often couers falsehood: no
vice appears in his proper color, but under the likeness of some virtue. The
Romish whore of Babylon offers not her wine of fornications in the bark of
some poisoned plant, or shell of some poisonfull or venomous creature, but has
conveyed them all into a cup of glistering gold, Reu. 17.4. and this has
entised the great ones of the earth, who gazed at the glister of the golden
boule, but never looked what was in it: the glorious style of Catholic Church,
Vicar of Christ, Peter's successor, has deceived such as liked not to try
before they did trust: and so has universality, antiquity, fathers, consent,
and the like. Eve should have examined the words of the serpent, and Adam the
gift of his wife; and then neither of them had been deceived. The builders of
Babel, had they examined the motion before they had made onset, had avoided
that confusion. Abraham should have tried the counsel of Sarah, before he had
taken her maid into his bosom. This examination and trial by the touchstone
of the word, will show the inconsequence of such dangerous conclusions. How
lamentably are many great wits and gifts given over in Popish countries for
want of this sound trial, taking their religion by tradition, offering to the
shrines of their forefathers, that often they can spend their goods and lives
for it, as though it were the only truth.

Let us labor to avoid these common darts, these falsely concluded conclusions
which Satan seeks to have us assent unto: Use. 2.
It is a great subtilty of the devil, by which he overthrows many, and must
the more circumspectly be watched against. See some instances of this his
stratageme, in matters of faith, and of practice.

False conclusions in matters of faith.
I. In matters of faith: 1. In the Scripture it is a frequent ground, that God
is merciful: true, therefore (says Satan) be bold in

II. In matters of practice, many ways: 1. Thou art the Son of God, False
conclusions on true grounds in matters of practice.
then make these stones bread, thou may be a little bolder then other, God
will not be so angry with thee. Here see a plain Satanicall inference: For the
child of God must honor his Father, Mal. 1.6. and fear to offend him. If I by
profession draw near unto God, I must the more sanctify my self, and grace
my profession. 2. If thou be a man, a gentleman, a man of valor, do not put
up this wrong, but revenge this quarrel: else every one Vengeance is mine, and
I will repay: and a Gentleman must be of gentle behavior, not savage, fierce,
and cruel: a man of valor must pass, by offenses: It is the glory of a man
to pass by an offense, Pro. 16.32. 3. Faux, an incendiarie, a Clement, a
Rauilliac, a Catholic villain, or universal mischeife. 5. But thou art now
in danger, therefore now deny thy profession, forswear thy religion, abjure
Christ, at least cast one Paul was a man of learning, and in a populous place
at Corinth, but he thought nothing worthy to be known, but Christ and him
crucified: neither stood his preaching in the enticing speech of man's wisdom,
but in plain evidence of the spirit, and in power, and that for good reason,
1. Cor. 2.2.^6. And can I think that Satan has any care of edifying my
Object. These Preachers agree not among themselves, and therefore I will
believe never a one of them. Ans. Thou must search for wisdom as for silver,
and for understanding Come out from among them my people, least ye partake of
their plagues; separate from their preaching and prayers, from their fellowship
and company, from civility and salutation; thou may eat their meat, but
say not grace with them; pray for them, not with them. Ah, but if my conscience
be good, I must not forsake the fellowship, as the manner of some is, Hebr.
10.25. as knowing, that such pure assemblies cannot be found under the whole
cope of heaven.

And if we would fence our selves against these wicked inferences of Satan, we
must carefully observe these rules. 1. Believe not every spirit, but prove the
spirits whether they be of God, 1. Ioh. 4.1. as goldsmiths separate gold and
dross, and examine every piece of gold by the touchstone. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. Try
all things. 2. Compare doctrines, (...).
and the reasons of them with the Scripture: if a doctrine disagree from any
part of the word, it is erroneous and dangerous; as namely that of the real
presence, which impugnes the article of Christ's ascension. (...).
3. Hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. When we have considered and
known truths, we must with Mary lay them up in our hearts, to be ready to
serve our use.

Command these stones to be made bread.] We have considered the scope of Satan
in this first temptation; which was, 1. to impugn the word of the Father,
proclaiming Christ his Son. 2. to shake the faith of Christ. 3. from
consideration of his present estate, to bring him to doubt of his Fathers
providence. 4. to use an unlawful means to releive himself. We have heard
also what a dangerous inference he brings upon a true ground. Now we come to
the more special handling of the suggestion it self; wherein we shall see how
cunningly Satan conuaies it, and how instantly he follows it, 3. things
cunningly contrived in this one suggestion.
implying in these few words; 1. that it is an easy thing: say the word, or
Command, here is no labor: and being so easy, why should Christ stick at
it? 2. that it is now fit; here is an object ready, here be stones, these
stones. 3. that it is harmless, only a proof of the power of the Son of
God, and in reason what should Satan have gained by it? and Gods Son cannot
sin, nor God be angry with his Son. 4. that it is a necessary thing: is it
not necessary for a man that is ready to starve, to eat and procure bread? If
he will live, he must eat. 5. that it is a glorious thing, to command stones:
I say not Pray, (for by prayer as great things as this have been done; the sea
dried, fire turned into water, the Sun stayed in his course, to stand still,
yea and go back) but command by thine own proper power. 6. that it is a work
of special use, not only for the relief of thy self in this want, but to
satisfy me; for if thou make stones bread, I will confess the finger of
God, and believe thy Fathers voice, that thou art the Son of God, and
accordingly account of thee: and so shall all that shall come to the knowledge
of this great and extraordinary work. 7. that it is not unreasonable: to
command a few stones to be made bread, will be no hurt to any man; and if thou will not transubstantiate many stones, turn but one stone into bread: so it
is, Luke 4.3. Say to this stone that it be bread, in the singular number;
whereas it is probable, that at first he offered him many, or all the stones in
the place, which Matthew records: if Christ think that too much, he will be
content that he turn but that one into bread, as Luke has it. 8. the Son of
God should demean himself as the Son of such a Father, who is heir and
Lord of all things: me thinks thy estate is not suited to thy person; and
therefore by this action manifest that which thy estate does not: and if thou
do not, give me leave to doubt of thy person, and take thee for an impostor.
Doctr.


It is an ordinary temptation of the devil to shake the faith of Gods
children, to move them to turn stones into bread: Satan ordinarily moves
men to turn stones into bread.
For as he dealt with Christ in want, Christ was hungry, and the devil shows
him stones, let him turn them into bread if he will: so is it with men who are
tempted in like manner, if they be in want: Bread you must have, What need I
tell you of so sensible a want? and therefore shift for your self, here be
stones, at least one stone in time of need, turn it into bread, why to help
your self you may use a little extraordinary or unwarrantable means. When
Satan seduced Eve, he persuaded her to turn a stone, or rather an apple into
bread: why, thou see how God enuies your full happiness, and do thou
believe his word to be true? no, no, it is but to keep you from being as Gods,
which, what an excellent estate it is, you now know not. Esau was very hungry
when he came from his hunting, and he must die if he turn not a stone into
bread: and as Satan never goes without his stones, that is, his objects, so
there was a mess of broth ready, for which profanely he sold his birthright:
I am almost dead, and what is the birthright to me? Saul was extremely
haunted and vexed, and knew not what to do with himself; God was so far out
with him as he answered him no way; and now he must get him to another
patron, and who is fittest for him, who is gone from God, but the devil? He
must now seek a familiar to answer him, 1. Sam. 28.7. the stone is not far
off, there is a witch at Endor, and he can eat no bread but from her hands.

There be two especial reasons or occasions, whence Satan groundeth and
follows this temptation of turning stones into bread: 1. the avoiding evil:
2. the procuring of some apparent good; both which he knows our hasty
inclination unto.

Snares laid by Satan in avoiding our troubles.
I. In avoiding troubles he lays two snares, and has two plots: 1. To turn
stones into bread, by using some unlawful means. Abraham to save his life may
lie, and entreat Sarah so to do. David, thou art in danger, fly to Achish,
play the fool and dissemble, thou see no way else left, devise a way of
safety beyond Gods. Peter, thou art now in the midst of thy Masters enemies, if
thou turnest not stones into bread, and help thy self by lying, swearing,
cursing, and denying thy Master, look for no other then to die with him. Thou
that art a poor man, see hard times as if thou we^^ in a wilderness, and
here is nothing but stones, no way but to turn them into bread, thou can not
live if thou do not lie, or steal, or swear, or be unjust; poverty and
danger shall come armed upon thee. 2. If we cannot thus help our selves, but
the evil continues, then Satan solliciteth us to repine and murmur within our
selves. Psalm. 116.11. I said in my distress, that all men are liars: and
31.22. I said in my have, I am cast off: And this, to bring us to disclaim
confidence and waiting upon God any longer; as Iehoram said, 2. King. 6.33.
this evil is from the Lord, and shall I attend any longer upon him? Thus he
daily shows us our crosses, as so many stones to move us to impatiencie, and
gain from us our affiance in God, that hereby he may both pull and draw us
from our strength, and help, and glory from God. Both these are apparent in
this dart against Christ.

II. In the purchasing of some apparent good, he knows the have of our
unbelieving hearts as well as in the former, Numbers have learned this trade of
the devil to make stones bread.
and how easily we are brought to turn stones into bread. In the matter of the
world, what a number of men are there of this trade, which we may fitly call
the devils Alchymistry? Some by extortion, usury, and oppression makes stones
bread; as many landlords just of the devils last, that by racking their rents
would have the tenant get bread out of stones: nay not so merciful as he; for
no doubt, if Christ had made bread of stones, he would have let him eat it;
but so will not these, but eat up bread, and sweat, and all. This is called
bread of violence and oppression, Pro. 4.17. and because being made of stones
it is hard of digestion, it needs a cup of wine, which is at hand too: for,
they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence. Others by
deceit and subtilty turn stones into bread, and glory when they can go
beyond their brethren, by tricks of wit or cunning: and this seems to go a
step beyond the devil, who would have Christ turn stones into bread, that is,
something into something; but these would turn nothing into bread, but only
live by their wits. Solomon calls all bread thus cunningly changed, stolen
bread, and bread of deceit, which seems sweet in the mouth: but that ye may
know whence it comes, he tells you that for all that it returns to his former
property: Pro. 20.17. The bread of deceit is sweet to a man, but afterward his
mouth is filled with gravel. Both these the Apostle condemns, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
Let no man defraude or oppress his brother in any matter: for the Lord is the
auenger of all such.

In procuring health in sickness, or helping our selves to recover our
losses, he easily persuades us to witches, sorcerers, and to try many
unwarrantable conclusions, and enforces them strongly, persuading us else that
we shall miscarrie and perish by our own negligence.

Use. 1.
This shows us that Satan never comes without stones, that is, objects of his
temptations; Satan never comes without one stone or other.
at least he has one stone, which if he offer, he seems reasonable. He has
not only a Bathsheba for David, but every man has his several Bathsheba,
some dear lust or other, which Satan will still be feeding his eyes and senses
upon: Nay, as Mar. 5.5. in the parties possessed, he armed them with stones
against themselves, and made them beat themselves with stones; so out of our
own scrip he fetches stones against us, he knows the inclination of our
wills, the stream of our affections, the constitution of our humors, the
predominant desires of our hearts, and accordingly assaulteth us. Nay, not
only in evil things, but in the best of all he wants not one stone or other
against us: Even the tree of life it self (a sacrament of Gods covenant of
life) will serve his turn; and he wishes not Eve to eat all the apples on
it, but seems very reasonable while he offers but one. In coming to the word,
and sacraments, and prayer, he is content if a man bring but one stone in his
heart, one sin, either hardness of heart, that the seed may fall in stony
ground; or unbelief (for how know you that this is the word of God?) or
covetousness, which is as thorns to choke all; or malice and envy (for then
God will put none of his precious liquor into such a fustie vessel:) or
wandering thoughts, or dislike of the Preacher, or any other lust (though but
one) he cares for no more.

We should therefore never go without our fence in our own houses, or in Gods
houses, that we may escape the danger of this battrie. Yea, let us watch Satan
in base and despised things, as an apple, or a stone, in idle words or
unfruitful speeches, in the matter of a pin or any small trifling matter:
for even in these things he can get much advantage, and sow discord between the
nearest of all, even the husband and wife.

Use. 2.
This teaches us, that the scope of all Satan's profers, is to make men
earthly-minded: Satan lessoneth men rather then to want bread to get it out of
stones.
he cares not how much men be addicted to seek bread, yea he would have the^ so
eager of bread, as rather then want it, to get it out of stones: for 1. He
would fill the heart with these base desires, that there might be no room for
better. 2. He in the channel of our corruption since the fall, to which we are
easily persuaded, and very hardly (if ever) recovered back again. God in his
word deals clean contrary, and every where reineth us in, where Satan spurs
us forward: that calls us out of the world, forbids us to seek^, that is,
immoderately the bread that perishes; calls us to heauenly-mindednes; to
converse and traffike in heaven* and send our affections above; to seek after
Christ the bread of life; to give all diligence to make our election sure; to
seek the Kingdom of God. From whence, when we find our selves strongly set
upon this world, with neglect of better things, to scrape and gather bread and
things for the body, we must labor to epsy Satan's suggestion in it, together
with our own inclination to swallow down all such temptations, and forthwith
to cast our eyes upon such Scriptures as may be back-biasses to our natural
motion.

Note the cold comfort that Satan affoards his followers: Use. 3.
when they need bread, he offers them stones, as with Christ here. Satan
allows his servants stones for bread
Matthew* 7.9. what man is there among you, that if his son ask him bread* will
give him a stone? as if he had said, No father that loves his child, can be so
unnatural* but Satan, who cannot but be an unnatural murderer, here for
bread offers the Son of God a stone. It is clean otherwise between God and
his children: for if fathers which are evil, can give good things to their
children, much more our heavenly Father gives good things to them that ask
him, even things according to their need: Your heavenly Father knows that ye
stand in need of all th^se things. If they have need of Christ the bread of
life, he gives them this bread of life: If they need the Holy Ghost, he gives
the Holy Ghost to them that ask him, that is, not only beginnings of grace,
but increase of it in greater measure, and a comfortable feeling and fruition.
If they need temporal mercies, he gives them more then they ask, as Solomon,
yea above all they are able to ask or think. Who would not think himself
happy to be Gods favorite rather then stand to the devils wages, who for
bread will reach him stones?

The way to get bread, is not at the devils appointment to turn stones into
bread* or use unlawful means* but, Use. 4.
Gods way to get bread, contrary to the devils, in 3. things.
1. To fear and serve the Lord* Exodus 23.25. If thou will serve the Lord thy
God, he shall bless thy bread and thy water: the good land* and all the fruits
of it were promised to the Israelites* so long as they were homagers to God: no
good thing shall be wanting to such, Psalm. 34.10. If we serve him, we shall
never need turn stones into bread, even as Christ here did not, who refusing
Satan's offer was Adam must till the ground. 3. In our lawful calling to depend
upon Gods blessing, which makes rich, leaving all the success to God: and
this will make us content with that estate which God makes our portion by good
means.

VERSE. 4. But he answering said, It is written, Man lives not by bread only,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

IN this answer of our Savior repelling the Tempter, 4. things are to be
considered: 1. the manner. 2. the affection, negative, Bu^. 3. the matter of
it, a testimony of Scripture, It is written. 4. the parts of this testimony: 1.
negative: man lives not by bread only: 2. affirmative, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.



First, it was a reasonable answer: our Lord did not shake off the Tempter
without an answer, though he deserved none; but, to show that he did not refuse
the motion, of a wilful mind, but upon just ground, he makes him a sufficient
answer: whence our Savior would teach us, that

Christians must be reasonable to most unreasonable adversaries.
Doctr. If we be to deal with our most deadly adversaries, suppose them as
malicious as Satan to Christ, yet we must do nothing, nor speak nothing of a
wilful mind, but take the guide of reason; and the ground of conscience with
us. For, 1. the will of man not ordered by reason, Reasons. 1.
is like a wild colt without a rider, most untamed and intractable, most
hateful to God, and most hurtful to men: and a note of men reserved to the
judgment of the great day to be punished, i^, to be presumptuous and stand in
his own ^onceit, 2
2. Pet. 2.10. 2. Reasonable men must have reason for their actions at the
least: for herein i^ a difference between the beasts and men, they are lead by
sense and appetite, but men by reason, from which if men depart, they
degenerate into beasts, being lead with sensuality, 2. Pet. 2.12. 3. Our
Saviors example carries us further, 3
that we should not only be lead by reason in our affairs, but by reason
sanctified and renewed, reason directed by the word: and this not only here,
but in all his course of life: Mar. 10.40. when he refused the unreasonable
request of the sons of Zebedeus, he gave a just reason, saying, It is not mine
to give, but shall be given to them for whom it is prepared: I must not give
the chief seats in my Kingdom according to kindred and affection, but
according to my Fathers election.

When he rebuked Peter, and called him Satan, he gives a reason for such
unwonted sharpenes; For thou art an offense unto me, thou sauourest not the
things of God, thou would hinder man's redemption, and Satan could have done
no more, Matthew. 16.23. Act. 1.7. when the Disciples would know of Christ at
his ascension, when he would restore the kingdom to Israel, he denies their
request, and gives a reason, It is not for you to know this, my father has put
times and seasons in his own power: ye have another task, to be witnesses to
me, etc. intend this, look to your Apostleship.

Use. This reprooues the frowardnes and unreasonable wilfulness of men, and
especially in their dealings with their adversaries, taking violent courses,
not respecting conscience, religion, nor reason it self, but standing upon
their will, and saying, This I will do, let see who shall hinder me, and let
him undo it if he can. Now persuade this m^n, Oh, but let not passion guide
you, but show your self a man, cast away this impotent and womanish reason, to
such as are bruitishly destitute of reason, I will because I will; No, he is an
enemy to all your persuasion, his will outrunnes his wit and reason, his lust
is his law, his conscience, and his religion. But if any thing can reclaim
such a man, if he be not rather an heathen then a Christian, let him set
Christ's example here before him, who would not be wilful without reason to the
devil himself in a most deuillish motion; and will thou to thy brother, to
thy neighbor, yea to thy wife, children? etc. Either set thy self to walk in
thy Lords steps, or get thee another Master.

Secondly, this answer of Christ was a most meek answer. Five reasons of
Christ's meekenes to Satan.
Christ was omnipotent, able with a beck to have confounded the devil; he
might by his power have driven him back to hell, and made him actually know
and confess he was the Son of God; but he Christians must overcome
adversaries, rather by patience the^ by power.
then by power; as Christ obtained his full victory not by majesty, but by
abasement and passion. 2. To teach us, that when we suffer indignity and wrong
of evil men, as Christ here of the evil one, we Doctr.
Hence note, that

Christ not so rough with Satan as with some wicked men, no^ as with some of
his dear Disciples
Christ cut not Satan here so short as he did sundry wicked men, nay as he did
some of his beloved Disciples? Peter, how sharply was he checked for dissuading
Christ from Jerusalem and, Ioh. 21.21. when he asked curiously concerning John,
what he should do; Christ said, What is that to thee? so he might have said to
Satan, What is that to thee, whether I be the Son of God, or no? but he does
not.

1. Not because he loves his disciples and Gods children worse then Satan,
Reasons. 1.
but because the devil and wicked ones must be let go on to the height of
impiety, as Satan here: and Judas, how patiently did Christ bear him all the
while; yea at his apprehension calling him friend? they go on to confusion
without check or bands almost in their life and death: But he will take up his
children in the beginning, they must not be let run too far, as good
Parents reclaim their children timely.

2. God declares his power in taking the wicked at the height, 2
as Pharaoh: Romans 9.17. for this cause have I stirred thee up, that I might
show my power in thee, and that my name might be declared to all the world: if
Pharaoh had been taken at the first, the Lord had never had such glory of his
overthrow.

3. The Lord hereby declares his long patience to vessels of wrath, Romans 9.22.
all which bountifulness and patience, 3
because they abuse, and are not lead to repentance by it, they are excuseles
and condemned justly, as having heaped coals of wrath on their own heads. Who
could so long have endured Pharaoh, but patience it self?

4. The Lord hereby declares the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy,
whom he has prepared to glory, 4
Romans 9.23. for as he has prepared them, that is, decreed to glorify them, so
he daily prepares them to glorious uses, as we do our vessels by rubbing and
scouring, separating corruption from them, and the rust of sin by his rough
handling them, judging them in the world, not to condemn them with the world.

If the Lord be not so quick with thee in his corrections as with others, Use.
1.
thou had need be the quicker with thy self to judge thy self, and see what
estate thou stand in, that thou be not in the upper stairs and room of
sin. Take heed of thy self, The greatest judgment of all, not to be judged
at all.
when God lets thee alone to thy self. The greatest judgment of all, is, not
to be judged at all. When a man has cast off his son, and lets him run his
own riotous ways, as careless what becomes of him, it is a certain sign he
shall never enjoy his land: so is it with God, and the sinner pacing on without
control in his sin.

If Christ be thus meek and patient with Satan himself, Use. 2.
and God use so great patience to vessels of wrath, this commends unto us
the grace of meeknes toward our brethren much more. 1. This is the
commandment of our Savior, who was a special Schoolmasters of meeknes,
Learn of me, for I am lowely and meek: He was herein testified to be the
Son of God, because the Spirit descended on him in the likeness of a meek and
harmless dove: and thus we must testify our selves the Sons and children
of God, by the lighting of the same Spirit of meeknes upon us, Gal. 6.2. 2. A
meek spirit is much set by of God, and preserueh peace with men, by soft
answers and readiness to forgive and pass by offenses.

Use. 3.
This reprooues men of a fiery and furious disposition, men as meek as rough
Esau; right Ismaels, their hand is against every man, and every man's hand
against them, like Lamech who if he be provoked, will revenge a word with a
blow, a scoff with a stab. But others, let them alone, offend them not, you
shall have them meek enough, tractable enough: but move such a one but a
little by a word, or the least neglect as may be, Oh he is presently as meek
as David at Nabals churlish answer, he will kill and slay, even all, presently
in his hot blood. But is this Christian meeknes, to be so boisterous like a
sudden wind, which thy self scarce knows whence it is or whither it tends?
no, but a brutish meeknes; for even the beasts will scarce stir unprovoked;
nay we say the devil is good so long as he is pleased; and thou art good no
longer. But thou that art so impatient, and thus betrayest thy meekenes toward
thy brother, what would thou do, if thou had the devil in hand, as
Christ had here? Also this makes against railers and scoffers of others: for
Christ railed not on the devil himself, nor would overcome him otherwise then
by humility.

Christ's answer most modest.
Thirdly, this answer of Christ was a most modest answer. Satan would have him
confess himself the Son of God, this he denies not, nor yet affirms, but
modestly acknowledges himself a man, Man lives not by bread only. The like
we may note elsewhere, being called to his confession before the governors;
If he were the King of the Jews, Matthew. 27.11. If he were the Christ, Luke
22.67. If he were the Son of God: he did not directly affirm it, but either,
Thou say it, or ye say that I am, not denying, but modestly assenting; and
ordinarily he called himself the son of man, not the Son of God: teaching
us by his example, when we speak of our selves, to speak modestly. Paul
being to speak of great things of himself, Note.
speaks all in another person, 2. Cor. 12.2. I know a man in Christ above
14. years ago, etc. taken into paradise, etc. and John, speaking of himself,
says, And when Jesus saw his mother, and the Disciple whom he loved: and, who
leaned on Jesus at supper, chap. 19.26.

Alas how far are we degenerate from this our pattern, who if we but the
sons of mean men, we will stand upon it much more then Christ did upon
being the Son of God? we will pride it out, and ruffle, and brag, and
bear our selves upon our ancestors, if they be stepped but one step above the
lowest: Christ, when he had good occasion, would not scarce profess himself
the Son of God, being of another manner of spirit then that which breathed out
that brag in the temptation afterward, All these will I give thee.

Now to come to the second point in the answer, namely the But Jesus answered,
and said,]

The conjunction discretiue shows our Saviors disagreement from Satan, and
that his answer is negative to the temptation: for although Christ both might
by that miracle of turning stones into bread, have showed himself the Son of
God, and now needed bread being hungry, yet he would not yield to Satan.

Quest. But seeing Christ, who as God could have turned stones into sons of
Abraham, could much more turn stones into bread, so easily by his word (for if
he had spoken to the stones, as Satan desired, certainly they would have had
ears to hear him: Why Christ who could turn stones into bread would not. 5.
reasons.
) why would he not do it? what hurt had it been? Answ. 1. Miracles must
confirm faith in believers unto salvation, Ioh. 2.11. but Christ knew the
devil could not believe, if he had all the miracles in the world. Besides, he
had even now heard the Fathers was now a time of humiliation, of temptation, of
affliction, wherein it was fit to avoid all show of ostentation, which was the
scope of the temptation: for Satan would only have him to show what he could
do for a need, for a vaunt of his power. Now in a time of serious humiliation
to advance himself by a miracle, had been as seasonable as snow in harvest. 4.
Christ would not give the

In that Christ here would not make his Divinity known to Satan, neither by
word nor miracle, we may note, that

Doctr.
Christ will not purposely make himself known to such as he knows will make
no right use of him. Christ reuealeth himself only to such as make right use
of him.
Luke 22.8. when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad: for he had heard many
things of him, and hoped to have seen some miracle: But Christ would not work
any sign in his presence, because he had wrought works enough already to
prove him the Son of God: neither was it fit to prostitute the power of God,
to the pleasure of a vain man, who would have made no right use of it. Matthew.
12.39. this evil and wicked generation seeks a sign, and none shall be
given them save the sign of the Prophet Jonah. Why? had they not infinite
signs and miracles both then and afterward? Yes, but they had none such as
they would have: for they would have some extraordinary sign; as Matthew. 16.1.
Master, show us a sign from heaven: as if they had said. Either cause the
sun to stand still, or go back, as in Ioshuahs and Hezekiahs days; or the
Moon to stand, as in Aielon; or call for an extraordinary tempest of thunder
and rain, as Samuel did, which made all the people to fear the Lord and
Samuel exceedingly, 1. Sam. 12.18. or call for fire from heaven as Elijah did.
These and the like they thought beseeming men of God: as for turning water into
wine, restoring of sight and legs, etc. those they saw little power in. But
why would not our Savior give them such a sign as they desired? Surely he had
just reason, the same in this our doctrine; for they did not desire it for a
good end, but (as Luke says expressly) to tempt him: not to help their
infirmity, but to feed their curiosity: neither to increase and strengthen
faith, but to nourish their infidelity. For had that bin their end, had they
not beside the doctrine of the Prophets, and the fulfilling of the promises,
the blessed doctrine of the Son of God, of whom some of themselves said,
Never man spoke like him; and for the confirmation of that, many and mighty
powerful miracles, which were signs from heaven, showing that he was from
heaven? And yet for all this they believed not.

So, Matthew. 27.42. the high Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees said, If he be the
King of the Jews, let him come down from the cross, and we will believe him.
No doubt, Christ could, but he would not; not only because it was an hour of
darkness, but because he knew they would never have believed him: Psalm. 22.22,
23. I will declare thy name to my brethren, to the seed of Jacob, to Israel.

1. This practice of Christ is answerable to his precept, Reasons. 1.
Matthew. 7.6. Cast not holy things to dogs, nor pearls before swine. By holy
things and pearls, are meant the things of Gods Kingdom, Christ and his
merits, etc. so called, both to show the excellency of them in themselves,
being above all pearls, Pro. 3.14. as also our duty, to prize and lock them
up in our hearts, and keep them (as we do our pearls) safely in our memories.
By dogs and hogs, are meant malicious and obstinate enemies, convicted of
enmity against Gods word, of whose amendment there is little hope: every man
naturally is an enemy to God and his word, and so a dog and a swine; as Christ
called the heathens and Gentiles, It is not lawful to take the childrens
bread, and cast it to dogs. Now to such as these we must preach and offer the
Sacramens, yea Christ offered himself and came to call sinners: but when his
word and miracles were rejected, and himself evil entreated, as among the
Pharisees, then says Christ, Let them alone, they are blind leaders of the
blind.

2. Christ shows himself unto none but such as he loves, 2
and love him, Ioh. 14.21. and this was the ground of Judas his speech, Lord,
what is the cause, that thou will show thy self to us, and not to the world?
the world sees him not; for none sees him but to whom he shows himself;
and he shows himself to none but such as love him; and none love him, but
such as love his word, and keep it, verse. 23.

3
3. This was one cause, why Christ spoke so many things in parables, that such
as would be blind might not see; and such as would not make a right use of his
holy doctrine, might not understand, Matthew. 13.13. For many that heard them,
let them go without further question in a careless manner, whereas the
disciples of Christ inquired of him his meaning, and one learned of another;
and so that which for the difficulty drove others away, became in this manner
of teaching, much more easy and familiar, yea much more perspicuous and clear
then any other.

4
4. Never could extraordinary means, convert such as believed not the word, the
ordinary means: and therefore Christ never or seldom gratified the Scribes
and Pharisees with miracles or extraordinary means, because they resisted his
doctrine, person, and works: or if any wicked men saw any of his mighty works
and miracles, they saw not himself in them; as Pharaoh, what a number of
miracles saw he? yet he was never the better, he would not acknowledge God nor
his servants: and in the wilderness, they who saw miracles every day and moment,
yet not believing the word of God in them, were never the better; the arm of
the Lord was not made bare unto them.

Use. 1.
Ignorant persons, that know not Christ, no^ desire to know him, are in a
woeful estate, being such as Christ counts unworthy to reveal himself unto:
and therefore he either keeps the means from them, or leaves them without grace
to make an holy use of them.

Use. 2.
In worse case are they that have the means, and yet no taste of them, Numbers
of me^ to whom Christ never reueileth himself.
no reformation by them: their covetousness, their pride, their drunkenness and
uncleanness will not be left; as many that come to Church to hear the word
and receive the Sacraments, and yet are no better then dogs and swine, and
altogether unreformed in their lives and courses. Some draw the word of God
into question, and would be taught by Angels, or miracles, as Satan here: but
Christ will not make himself known to them no more then to him: so says
Abraham to Dives in hell, when he denied his request, They have Moses and the
Prophets, if they will not believe them, neither would they believe if one
should rise from the dead. Some are resolved to live as they list, let the
Preachers say what they can: whereas he that is in Christ, to whom he reueales
himself, is a new creature: for Christ speaks to the heart, not to the ear
only. Others say, they are decreed to life or death, and therefore, do what
they can, they cannot change Gods mind, and hence never go about to change
themselves: But, had Christ showed himself to these, he would have directed
them to the means of saving knowledge, namely to the Scriptures which testify
of him, Ioh. 5.29. and to faith, which unites to him, and to the fruits of
faith, which testify the truth of it, to his glory and their comfort. Others
will be saved by faith alone, and by a profession of the Gospel, and so
neglect the works which justify it, and the power of godliness: whereas, if
Christ in the Ministry had revealed himself to such, he had quickened their
faith, and not left it as a carkase: for faith without works is dead. Others,
poor simple people, will be saved by mercy alone, and never labor for
knowledge, faith, or true feeling of their own estate, and care not how sin
abound, that mercy may abound much more: But, had Christ met with them, he
would let them see their misery in the causes and effects, and teach them to
hunger after mercy in the means, and, having obtained it, to go and sin no
more, least a worse thing follow.

Others, disclaiming the doctrine of mortification, and self-denial,
therefore dislike the word as too strait a doctrine, stripping them of their
pleasures and profits: and hence some hold on in their lusts, some return with
the swine to their wallowing in the mire, they cannot die to sin, they cannot
live without laughter, mirth, and sports: Whereas, had Christ revealed himself
unto them, he would have taught them, that his yoke is an easier yoke then the
yoke of sin, and that there is no sound comfort but in mortified affections
and actions.

Whosoever would have Christ reveal himself fully unto him, must labor to be
thus qualified: 1. He must be humble: Use. 3.
Three properties of such (...) to whom Christ will make himself known.
for he teaches the humble in his ways, Psalm. 25.9. but the proud he sends
empty away; as rain makes valleys fruitful, but falls off the mountains,
which are therefore barren. 2. He must long and desire to meet Christ in his
ordinances: for Christ is the scope of the thou shall meet him. And this
desire, if it be sincere, will vent it self in earnest prayer, to be taught of
God, Teach me thy statutes, Oh open mine eyes, that I may see the wonderful
things of thy law. And it has a promise to be answered, Ioh. 14.21. I will
love

It is written.]

Christ might have oppressed the devil by his divine power, but, being as man
to be tempted, he would as man overcome: 1. to magnify man's nature. 2. to
torment Satan the more: and 3. to teach us how to overcome him. And by this his
practice he gives to understand, that,

Doctr. 1.
The word written is a chief part of our spiritual armor to foil Satan by;
The word is a principal weapon of our spiritual warfare.
yea indeed the principal weapon of our spiritual warfare is the word of God.

1. Ephesians. 6.17. Take unto you the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God:
Reasons. 1.
and therefore, as a sword, it serves 1. to defend us: 2. to wound Satan: 3. to
cut asunder all his temptations: so it did serve Christ here. Neither is it a
carnal weapon, but the sword of the Spirit, that is, a spiritual weapon as
the fight is spiritual, not made by man, but tempered, framed, sharpened, and
put into our hands by the Spirit of God himself: for whose word else (...) it?
or whence has it power but from Gods Spirit? Reu. 1.16. It is called the
two-edged sword, which goes out of the mouth of Christ: because it is sharp
and piercing, to wound all his enemies: it pierces to the very bones and
marrow. With this sword he slayes the wicked, Isa. 11.4. with this he visites
Leuiathan, and slaies the dragon, that is, the mightiest enemies of his Church,
Isa. 27.1. with this sword he consumes Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. and with this
sword he foiles the devil here: with the same he slaies corruptions, and
Satanicall temptations in the hearts of his own children.

2
2. This part of our armor was signified by the sheilds, wherewith Salomons
Temple was hanged, Cant. 4.4. and by the smooth stones, whereby David smote the
Philistim, 1. Sam. 17.40. here the son of David, and David's Lord, smites the
Goliath of hell with a deadly wound: Saul's armor is here refused, worldly
weapons, wisdom, and subtilty, and one stone is taken from the fountains of
holy Scripture, out of the bag of his holy memory, and by it Satan falls.
Yea, it is the armory of the Church, whence all other parts of Christian armor
are to be had.

3. All the contention and fight of Satan, is to fasten some error and falsehood
upon us: now therefore the only fence from error, 3
is to be girded with the girdle of truth: now the title of truth is often
given to the word of God, Psalm. 19.10. the judgments of the Lord are truth:
and Ioh. 17.17. thy word is truth: to show, that so long as we hold to the
word, we are sufficiently armed against all falsehood and error, both in
judgment and practice. And the like may be concluded from that it is called
light, discovering and chasing before it all mists and darkness.

4. The word is a complete armor, couers every part of the soul, 4
gives fence, and direction to the mind, vndeestanding, memory, The word a
complete armor.
thoughts, all the affections, and all the faculties of the soul: it couers
every part and member of the body, teaches the eye to look, the ear to
hear, the tongue to speak, the feet to walk: it directs us in all our
conversation and actions of life toward God and men, even to all conditions of
men, superiors, equals, inferiors, poor and rich: further, it guides us in
all conditions of life, in all times, in all places, in all ages, prescribing
rules to children and men, young and old; in all exercise and use of things
indifferent, as meat, drink, apparel, recreation: in a word, in all things
concerning this life, or the life to come. So as here is a sufficient defense
for all occasions.

5. Never did any man receive any hurt from Satan, or his own corruptions, or
from this evil world, 5
but either because he did not draw out this sword, or did not rightly use it.
What other was the cause of the deadly wound of our first Parents, and ours in
them, but that they drew not out this sword of Gods word, but suffered the
serpent to wring it out of their hands? How could Peter have been so
grievously wounded in the High Priests hall, but that he forgot the word of
Christ, which had admonished him of it, the power of which was such as it
healed his wound as easily as it had done Malcus his ear, which he had struck
off; and therefore wanted no power to have preserved him, if he had remembered
it? What a s^^refull wound befell Lots wife, because she cast off this armor,
and forgate the word charging her she should not look back? The like of
Solomon, all his wisdom could not fence him if he cast off the word of God,
which had charged him not to meddle with outlandish wives; but neglecting that,
must fall by them.

Use. 1.
This is a confutation of Romish teachers, who disarme men of the Scriptures,
and wring this special weapon out of the peoples hands: common people may not
have the Scripture in their vulgar tongue; Papists by suppressing the
scripture, wring the weapon out of men's hands.
for this (says Harding) is heretical. But this place is sufficient to prove
the contrary: whence I conclude thus: The weapons whereby people are fenced
from Satan's temptations, are not to be taken from them; but the Scriptures are
the weapons of defense against Satan's temptations: and again, If all the
common people be assaulted and wounded, and all have to do with Satan, then
all have need of this fence and cover against this most capital and deadly
enemy: But the assaul^ is made against all, and Satan seeks without exception
whom he may devour; and therefore all without exception need the fence of the
Scriptures. And further, Whosoever turn the people naked unto all Satan's
temptations, and disarme them so as they cannot but be overcome, are guilty of
all the wickedness of the people, to which Satan draws them; and also of their
destruction, unto which they be drawn: But Popish teachers by destituting the
people of the Scriptures, turn them naked into temptation, and disarme them;
and therefore are guilty of all their sin and damnation.

This practice* against the scriptures.
But this practice of theirs is, 1. Against the Scriptures: for God would
therefore have the Scriptures written, and commended to men in their own
language, not only for the learned, but unlearned also, that it might be
familiar to all sorts of men. Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12. Thou shall read the words of
this Law before all Israel, that they may hear it, and learn to fear the
Lord: and he names their men, and women, children, and strangers. Object. But
this belongs to the Jews alone. Answ. No, the reason is perpetual, all of all
ages must fear the Lord; and therefore have the means, the word of God.
Ierem. 36.6. Jeremy commanded Baruch, to read the word of the Lord in the
hearing of all Judah, and in the audience of the people. Job. 5.39. Search the
Scriptures. Object. Christ spoke to the learned, the Scribes and Ph^risies.
Answ. But the reason of the precep* belongs to all, who desire life eternal.
Col. 3.16. Let the word of God dwell plentifully in you: and, 1. v. 9. he
prays, they may be filled with the knowledge of the will of God, in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding: now all the Colossians were not
Clergymen. And how does the Lord encourage all his people to understand and
obey the words of the law? Deuteronomy. 4.6. Only this people is wise, and of
understanding, etc.

2. It is against the example of Christ and the Apostles: 2. against the
example of Christ and his Apostles.
Christ taught in a known tongue, so the Apostles were endued with diverse
tongues to preach to every nation in their own tongue, and all the writers of
holy scriptures did write them in the tongue best known, most vulgar and
common, whereby it might more easily come to every ones knowledge: for
whatsoever was written, was written for our learning, Romans 15.4.
that we by patience and consolation of the Scriptures might have hope: so our
Savior says, These things are written, that ye might believe: so as whosoever
must have faith, hope, patience, comfort, must be acquainted with the
Scriptures: and if these be entailed only to learned men, so may they.

3. It is against common sense, 3. against common sense.
and as if one should advise another who is to meet his enemy in the field,
that if he would drive away his enemy and get the victory, he must lay down
his weapon, or leave it behind him. Object. But the Popish Doctors put other
weapons into their hands to fight with, as crosses, holy water, charms, and
coniurations, wherewith the ruder sort yet content themselves. Answ. These are
weapons of the devils own forging; the Leuiathan of hell accounts of these
spears but as straw, and laughes at them: as if a man being to encounter a
most furious and furnished enemy, should cover himself with a cobwebbe, and
think he were well furnished: No no, Satan puts these into men's hands, to keep
them from the word, which is the only charm, the only cross, the only
hallowed water, that can conjure him, which our Lord by his blessed example
has taught us to use.

4. It is against the ancient Fathers: Augustine says, 4. against the Fathers.

Ad Volusian^^^ Epist. 3.


Deus in Scripturis quasi amicus familiaris loquitur ad cor doctorum and
indoctorum: The Lord in the Scripture speaks familiarly to the conscience of
the learned and unlearned. Iren^us says, Contra Valentin lib. 3. cap. 12.
Hac omnia contulit (...) Scripturarum Dei ignorantia: The Valentinians fell
into all their heresies through their ignorance of the Scriptures. But how
should Papists believe Irenaeus, when they will not believe the Son of God,
who tells the Sadduces, that they erred because they knew not the Scriptures?
Ad Coloss* hom. 9.
Chrysostom has these words, Audite quotquot estis mundani, and vxoribus
praeestis ac liberis, quemadmodum vobis Apostolus Paulus praecipiat l^ger^
Scripturas, idque non simpliciter, neque obiter, sed magna cum diligentia: and
again, Audite omnes seculares, comparate vobis biblia, In Epist. ad Coloss.
c^p 3. v. 10.
animae pharmaca. And Hieroms gloss is good: Hic ostenditur (says he) verbu^
Christi non sufficienter, sed abundanter Laicos habere debere, In Isa. hom. 1.
and se inuicem docere vel monere. Lastly, Origin shows his judgment in this
affectionate speech, Vtinam omnes faceromus illud quod scriptum est, Scrutamini
Scripturas: Oh that we would all do as it is written, Search the Scriptures.

5. Against learned Papists themselves.
5. It is against the Popish writers themselves. Cai^tan, a very ingenuous man,
and a great scholar, says, Hinc discamus arma nostra esse sacras Scripturas:
Let us take this for a good lesson, that the holy Scriptures are our only
weapons. Di^z a Portugal Friar says, That as Laban in the night deceived
Jacob, by giving him in stead of fair Rahel, bleare-eyed Leah; so Satan
deceiues us in the night of ignorance, with vain traditions for divine
Scripture. Yea, and Bernard himself, whom Harding brings in as a favorer of
his cause herein, says, That at Bethlehem the common people sang Psalms and
Halleluiahs, yea in the fields as they were plowing and mowing, etc.

By all this we conclude with our Savior, Ioh. 3.20. They do evil, and
therefore they hate the light: they have a long time deceived the world, by
holding it in ignorance, a principal pillar of their religion; and labor
still to hold it in blindness, dealing no otherwise then the Philistims dealt
with the Israelites, 1. Sam. 13.19. who to hold them in base bondage and
servitude, took all their weapons from them, and left them not a smith in
Israel, least they should get weapons, and so get from under their power.

Use. 2.
If the word of God be a principal part of our spiritual armor, then ought we
always to have the Scriptures in a readiness; not only the Bibles in our
houses (which many have not, who have their corslets hanging by the walls;) but
put on upon us, Ephesians. 6.17. and that is, when by diligent reading, hearing,
meditating, and study of it, but especially by earnest prayer, that God would
open our understandings to see his good pleasure in it; we have attained such
skill, as we can wisely shape an answer to the nature and, quality of any
temptation.

Alas, how lamentable is their estate, that regard not the sound knowledge of
the word, but content themselves in their ignorance, whereby Satan holds them
under the power of darkness? for impossible it is, till men come to know the
truth, that ever they should come out of the snare of the devil, and to
amendment: see, 2. Tim. 2.25.26. Many spend their days in reading fables, or
profane histories, or cannot tell how to pass their time, but by taking in
hand the devils books and bones (as one calls them) cards and dice, or some
other unwarrantable exercise; all which give Satan more power over them. But
the armor of proof, against Satan and their own corruption, which is the
word of God, lies in the book untouched, vntossed, as if men were at league
not to disturb Satan at all, but let him blind them, bind them, and lead
them at his pleasure. Others will defy and spit at Satan's name, but they have
no word against him, but do as a foolish and inconsiderate person, that will
quarrel with a man of might, and defy him, as though he could make his
party good, but being without any weapon, carries away the blows, the smart
of which makes him feel his folly, which formerly he could not see.

Others are enemies to such, as would teach them the use of this weapon: men of
valor and strength will pay liberally such as take pains with them, to teach
them the skill of their weapon, and willingly take their directions: but such
cowards a number are in this field, that as they dare not look an enemy in
the face, so have they resolved, never shall weapon come in their hands; they
are enemies to such as would furnish them. Others would fight with Satan, and
with the word, but in the wicked abuse of it, making charms and exorcismes of
sundry words of Scripture, highly taking Gods name in vain: some write the
Lords Prayer in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin: some the words of some of the
Gospels; some the names of God and Christ: But all this is sorcerie and
magic, and a fighting for the devil, yea a shooting in his own bow. Others
will have the Scriptures to resist with, but they be not ready nor at hand,
they bear many blows before they can recover their weapons: when they get a
Scripture against him, for want of exercise and experience, it is but as a
sword in a child's hand, who can neither well help himself, nor yet much hurt
another more then he is like to hurt himself.

Then the word of God is used aright, Doctr. 2.
when a man has skill thereby to cut off temptations, The right skill of Gods
word is to cut off temptations by it.
and contain himself in his duty: Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy promise in
mine heart, that I might not sin against thee: Prou. 2.10.11.12. When wisdom
(that is, Gods word) enters into thy heart, and knowledge delights thy
soul, then shall counsel preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee,
and deliver thee from the evil way, and from the man that speaks froward
things.

Reasons. 1.
1. The word of God is the law of God: now what is the use of a law, but to
keep a man within the bounds of godly life? then he lives according to the
law, when he says, I must, or must not do such a thing, because the Law
wills me so: so he is a good Christian, that can say, I must do this,
because Gods word commands it; 2
or not do it, because it forbids me. 2. It is called a light to our feet,
and a lantern to our paths: now what is the use of light, but to show a man
the right way, and direct him to avoid the wrong, and keep him from falling?
3. It is called the oracle or testimony of God, 3
wherein he testifyeth what he allows, and what not: and then we use it
aright, when we straiten all our paths according to this rule.

Use. 1.
Therefore let us keep us to Scriptures in all Satan's temptations; whereof we
may say as David said of Goliahs sword, 1. Sam. 21.9. Oh give me that, there is
none to that: put off all Satanicall suggestions with, It is written. Now it
will not be amiss, to show in some instances how a Christian may by the word
furnish himself, and cut asunder by this sword every temptation, though Satan
be never so instant in tempting him.

These instances are four: 1. temptations to despair: 2. to presumption, or
profaneness: 3. to pride and ambition: 4. to injustice and wrong.

In temptations to despair, how the word fenceth.
by these motions which we must by it resist. Object. 1. What have thou to do
with God, or God with thee? how is he thy Father as thou professest; see thou
not his hand against thee, yea his wrath upon thee? Answ. Yet it is written,
that even when the whole wrath of God (such as I cannot bear, if I had all
created strength) was laid upon Christ, he remained the dear Son of God, and
could say, My God, my God: and Romans 5.8. God sets out his love toward us,
seeing that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us; much more now,
being justified by his blood, shall we be saved from wrath.

Object. 2. Satan being thus put off, goes on, and says, Thy sins are
infinite in weight and number, thy debt is above ten thousand talents, how
can God save thee? thou have not a farthing to pay: what? is it justice,
think thou, for God to remit so many sins without satisfaction? Answ. It
is written, Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that puts away thy sins for mine own
names sake, and not remember thine iniquities for ever: and again, Where sin
has abounded, grace has abounded much more: and the parable says, that the
Master forgave all the debt to the hopeless servant.

Object. 3. Well, if thou have thy sins forgiven thee, where is thy joy and
peace of reconciliation? the Kingdom of God is peace and joy, but alas poor
fellow! thou art pensive and melancholy, and God has left thee without
comfort. Ans. It is written, Psalm. 97.11. that light is sown to the righteous,
and joy to the upright of heart: and, they that sow in tears, shall reap in
joy.

Object. 4. What speak thou of joy? why, thy cross is intolerable, sickness
and diseases eat thee up, poverty pincheth thee, and reproach every where
meets thee. Answ. But it is written, Heb. 12.6. whom he loves, he chastens:
and that no man knows love or hatred by all that is before him, Eccles. 9.2.

Object. 5. Thine are tedious afflictions, durable and lasting ones; thou have
prayed thrice, yea a long time to have them removed, and art never the better:
why will thou go on, and still loose all thy labor? why, thou know not,
whether, or when thou shall be heard? Answ. It is written, Psalm. 50.15. Call
upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee, and deliver thee: and
Hab. 2.3. If the vision stay, wait: for it shall surely come, and shall not
stay: and, the just shall live by faith: and, He that believes, makes not
have.

Object. 6. But were thou not better to go to this wise man, or that cunning
woman? thou should quickly recover thy health, or stolen money, or things
that are lost: thy loss is great, and thou must use means for thine own.
Answ. It is written, Leuit. 20.6. If any turn after such as work with
spirits, or after soothsayers, to go a whoring after them, I will set my face
against such a person, and will cut him off from among his people: and it is
written, that Saul was cast off for this practice.

The second sort of instances, is in motions to presumption or

Object. 1. But it is in vain to serve the Lord, and what profit is there in
his ways? Word cutteth o^^ temptations to presumption.
the worse the man is, the better is his estate; and the more godly, the more
crossed in the world. Answ. It is written, It shall be well with them that
fear the Lord; not so to the wicked: and again, that the light of the ungodly
shall be put out, when the light of the godly shall rise brighter until
perfect day: and the end of the just is peace.

Object. 2. What need so much fear of condemnation, seeing there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus? Answ. It is written, that such
must walk after the spirit, and not after the flesh: and, that such must work
out their salvation in fear and trembling.

Object. 3. But if thou be predestinate, what need thou care? and if thou
be not, all thy care will not avail thee. Answ. It is written, that I must
study to make my election sure, 2. Pet. 1.10. and, that I must believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life.

Object. 4. But what need thou be so strict? shall none come to heaven but
such strict persons, think thou? why, God requires no such strictnes. Answ.
It is written, that the Master is a hard man, who will stand strictly for
justice: and, that we must walk precisely, Ephesians. 5.15.

Object. 5. But why should thou respect these preachers so much? do thou
not see how they take upon them to disgrace thee for such and such courses? and
they are men as well as others, no better, many of them worse. Answ. It is
written, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Have them in singular love for their works sake: and,
that our our Savior said, He that hears you, hears me: and that the least
Minister in the New Testament, is greater then John Baptist, who yet was
greater then any Prophet, Matthew. 11.11. and, that God did send two bears, and
destroyed 42. of those wanton children, that mocked and reviled the Prophet
Elisha, 2. King. 2.23.

Object. 6. But thou art young, thou may swear, and game, and swagger, and
be wanton; these are but tricks of youth, and sowing the wild oats, etc.
Answ. It is written, As a man sowes, so shall he reap: and, remember that for
all this thou must come to judgment.

Object. 7. Oh but think thou, that God sees or takes notice of every thing?
or if he should, he is merciful and easily entreated, and thou have time
enough to repent. Answ. It is written, that all the ways of a man, are before
the eyes of the Lord: and to him day and darkness are alike: and, that to
abuse the patience of God, is to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath.

Object. 8. Oh but thou have now a fit opportunity, and occasion to take thy
delight; the husband is gone a far journey, Bathsh^ba is at hand, and now it
is twilight: why should thou deprive thy self of thy pleasure? take thy
time, thou can not have it every day. Answ. It is written, Prou. 5.3.8. The
end of a strange woman is more bitter then worme-wood: and, keep thy way far
from her, and come not near the door of her house: and, that neither
fornicators nor adulterers shall enter into heaven, 1. Cor. 6.9. and Ephesians.
5.3. but fornication, and all uncleanness, and covetousness, let it not once
be named among you, as becomes Saints.

The third rank of instances, is in motions to pride and self-conceit,
Object. 1. The word cutteth off temptations to pride.
You are a man rich and high, well friended, well monied; why should you stoop
to such a one? this were a base thing indeed: let him seek to you, or do you
crush him. Answ. It is written, God resists the proud, 1. Pet. 5.5. and, in
giving honor, go one before another: and, pride goes before the fall: and,
that the haughty eye is one of the six things which the Lord abhorres, Prou.
6.17.

Object. 2. But you are a man of knowledge, wise, and learned, what need you be
so diligent in hearing sermons, especially of such as are far your
inferiors? you can teach them, not they you. Answ. It is written, Isa. 5.21.
Woe be to them that are wise in their own conceits: and Christ has said, He
that despises you, despises me, Luke 10.16. and that Job despised not the
counsel of his maid, much less must I of the least Minister: and that we
know but in part, and are to consider not who, but what is spoken: and that
the same Spirit is mighty in one, and in another.

Object. 3. But you are a man of gifts and authority, and these will carry
you through all, and you may rise and tread such and such under your feet;
who dare say any thing to you? Answ. It is written, Matthew. 18.6. Whosoever
offends any of these little ones that believe in me, it were better for him
a millstone were tied about his neck, and he cast into the midst of the sea:
and, He that does wrong, shall receive according to the wrong that he has
done; and there is no respect of persons, Coloss. 3.25.

Object. 4. But you may follow the fashions of the world, in strange apparel,
ruffian behavior, monstrous tyres; who may else? how else should you be known
to be a gentleman, or a gentlewoman? Answ. It is written, 1. Pet. 3.3. that
even women's apparelling must not be outward, as with broydered hair, and gold,
etc. but the hid man of the heart must be vncorrupt: for Sarah, and other holy
women trusting in God, did so attire themselves: and again, Fashion not your
selves according to this world, but be renewed in the spirit of your mind: Be
ever of the newest fashion there.

Object. 5. But it is a small matter, and of great credit, to swear, and
curse, and speak big words: it is a way to get reputation, and be respected
as a man of spirit. Ans. It is written, Leuit. 24.16. He that blasphemeth the
name of the Lord, shall be put to death, all the Congregation shall stone him:
and Iam. 5.12. Above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven nor
earth, nor any other oath; but let your Yea, be Yea, and your Nay, Nay.

Object. 1. Thou art a great man, The word cutteth off motions to injustice.
thou have tenants, thou may and must live by them; they are thy servants,
and thou must enrich thy self by them: rack their rents, bind them to suit
and service, they cannot resist thee. Or, thou art a Master, keep thy servants
wages from him, make thy use of it, weary him, poor snake what can he do?
pay him at thy pleasure, he will endure any thing rather then loose thy work.
Answ. It is written, Iam. 2.13. Judgment merciles belongs to them that show no
mercy: and, those that grind the faces of the poor, shall one day be ground
under the millstone of Gods heavy displeasure: and, Leu. 19.13. Thou shall not
rob thy neighbor: the workemans hire shall not abide with thee till the
morning. The reason is in Deu. 24.15. Least thy servant cry against thee to the
Lord* surely it shall be sin unto thee.

Object. 2. But thou may make the best of thine own commodities, by hoising
the prices, and diminishing or corrupting the quantity or quality. No man can
force thee to sell thy own in dear times, unless thou will; and much less
to give it away to the poor and needy: then shut up thy heart, live to thy
self, let others shift for themselves as thou do for one. Answ. It is
written, that covetousness is the root of all evil, and that it is idolatry:
and the Lord has sworn by a great oath, even by his own excellency, Amos
8.4. that he will never forget any of their works, that swallow up thee poor*
and make the needy of the land to fail; that were weary of the Sabbath,
because it hindered their setting of wheat to sale; that made the Epha small,
and the shekel great, and falsified their weights, and sold corrupt corn, that
is, took all courses for gain. Besides the fearful fruits of covetousness
in Achan, Gehazi, Ahah, Judas.

Object. 3. But thou lendest thy money too freely: ten in the hundred thou
may take by law; but if by cunning tricks and devises, thou can get
twenty in the hundred, thou shall grow rich the sooner. Answ. It is written,
Luke 6.35. Lend freely, looking for nothing again: and, Deuteronomy. 23.19. Thou
shall not give to usury to thy brother: and, Exodus 22.25. If thou lend money to
my people, thou shall not be an usurer: and, Leu. 25.36. Thou shall take no
usury nor advantage, neither lend him money nor victuals to increase: and,
what shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and loose his own soul?

Object. 4. But thou art a poor man, and defraudest thy self of profit, thou
may by an oath, or a lie, or a little cunning and slight get good gains:
and why need thou be so nice? Answ. It is written, Prou. 22.2. The rich and
the poor meet together, and the Lord is the maker of them both, that is, in
their persons, and in their estates: and Leu. 19.11.12. Ye shall not swear by
my name falsely, neither defile the name of the Lord thy God: and, that the
curse enters into the house of the swearer and theife: and, ye shall not
steal, nor deal falsely, nor lie one to another: and, that all that love
abomination and lies, shall be kept without the gates of the holy City with
dogs, Reu. 22.15. and, that I must not lie for Gods glory, much less for my
own profit.

Object. 5. But thou may revenge thy self upon thy enemy, and make him
know whom he has in hand: broach some untruth or other upon him, and thou
shall at least disgrace him: and if thou le^st him go with this, every one
will scorn thee. Answ. It is written, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay,
says the Lord: and, Thou shall not bear false witness: and, Matthew. 7.12.
Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, the same do you to them: and,
It is the glory of a man to pass by offenses.

Object. 6. But the cause is good, the Catholic cause, it is but a title of
rebellion or treason, indeed it is a meritorious work, and thou shall be
canonized a Romish Martyr, if thou shall kill a King, or Queen, or Prince that
is an heretic: but above all, if thou can by one terrible blow, not only
kill the King, Queen, and Prince, but also the whole Counsel, all the Lords,
all the Judges, all the laws, all the lawmakers, yea and blow up the whole
Parliament house, and with that three heretical Kingdoms together. Answ. Here
we can hold no longer, but in such a temptation as is to so direct a worship
of the devil, with our Lord say, Avoid Satan, be packing foul devil, for it
is written, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: and, 1.
Pet. 2.14. Submit your selves to all manner ordinance of man: and the fearful
judgment of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with their accomplices betide such
Catholic rebels as dare lift up their hands against the Lords anointed, not
to cut off his lap, but his life, which is the life and breath of all his
people.

Use. 2.
The like use has the Scripture in the right use of it against all errors and
heresies: The Scriptures the hammer of heresies. Instance in justification by
works.
as we may see in these instances: 1. If the Papists would teach us
justification by works: Answ. It is written, Romans 3.20. by the works of the
law shall no flesh be justified: and the like in Gal. 3.3.4.5. And Paul had as
many merits as any, yet he would not be found in his own righteousness, Phil.
3.9. and, our righteousness is but as filthiness, or filthy clouts: and, after
our best endeauours we are but unprofitable servants.

In transubstantiation.
2. If they urge us with transubstantiation and real presence: Answ. It is
written, that after Christ had given the Sacrament, he went into the garden,
and suffered; which he could not, if he had been eaten before, and not being
glorified: and 2. remembrance is of things absent: 3. he continues in heaven
till his coming to judgment, Act. 3.21. 4. the Fathers ate the same
Sacramental bread, 1. Cor. 10.3. and yet Christ was not then in the flesh: 5.
there is no alteration in the sign of Baptism; and there is the same use of
the sign of the Lords Supper.

In the seven Sacraments.
3. If they object unto us 7. Sacraments, we reply against their 5. bastard
ones; as in that of Matrimony for the rest, thus: 1. it has no sign
instituted by God; when he brought Eve to Adam, here is matrimony, but no
sign: the ring which they make a sign, is not. 2. it is not proper to the
Church, as Sacraments are, but common to Jews, Turks, and Infidels. 3. every
Sacrament belongs to every member of the Church: but matrimony belongs not to
their Priests and Votaries. 4. all Sacraments serve to confirm faith: so does
not Matrimony. Adam in innocence had no need of faith, but he had need of
Matrimony.

In original sin after baptism.
4. If they tell us, that by Baptism original sin is quite washed away, we
answer: No: true Baptism takes away the guilt, but not the being of sin:
and it is written of David, Psalm. 51.5. that he confessed he was still in
original sin: see also Romans 7.7. and Iam. 1.13. In absolute necessi^^e of
baptism.
5. If they would thrust upon us the absolute necessity of Baptism: Answ. It
is written, that circumcision (being the same in signification and use with
Baptism) was omitted in the wilderness 40. years: and, that David doubted not
of his uncircumcised child's salvation: and, that children are holy through
their believing parents, 1. Cor. 7.14. In communion in one kind.
6. If they will administer the Communion but in one kind, against this their
sacrilegious practice we have Christ's institution, and the example of the
Apostles, besides the Primitive Church.

This mighty effect of the word in the right use of it, Use. 3.
shows the Scriptures to be of God, and the authority of God, and not of man
(as the Papists teach us) not of the Church, of Fathers, Counsels, Popes in
Peter's fictitious chair, or the company of Cardinals. What writing of man can
have authority over men's consciences as Gods word has? Or who will believe the
Church, that will not believe the Scripture? Is not the word truth, and all men
liars and subject to error? Now shall that which is not subject to error, be
subject to that which is subject to error?

Whatsoever writing does indeed confirm error, Use. 4.
is not Canonical Scripture: for this confutes all error, in practice and in
judgment: therefore Apocryphal books are not Canonical and divine
Scripture; 1. because in every of them there is some repugnance to the
Scripture: 2. because they were not wri^ten by any Prophet, nor in Hebrew: nor
3. given to the Jews as Gods Oracles, as all the old Testament was, Romans
3.1.2. 4. because Christ and the Apostles cited not any of them. This I speak
not against the books (which contain in them many good moralls, and, in my
judgment, may of all humane histories be best used) but against the Papists,
who would thrust upon us invocation of Saints, and prayer for the dead, etc.
from their authority.

See hence the reason, Use. 5.
why Satan and all his instruments were ever enemies to the true preaching and
professing of the word; namely, because in the right use it is the only hammer
of the Kingdom of darkness. He storms not at frothy and foolish delivery, or at
Professors that are loose and ungirt, and can take liberty for any thing they
list. Only faithful Preachers and Professors, that rightly preach and
profess, bear the burden of Satan's and the worlds malice: Christ's innocence,
and the Apostles power could not fence them from it.

Use. 6.
Lastly, acknowledge it a singular privilege of the Church so beset with
enemies, to have so sufficient and perfect a word, 1. written, that all men
might have the benefit of it: 2. preached, and rightly divided according to
every man's particular necessity. It is a great comfort, that poor as well as
rich, base as well as noble, have a share in it in an equal large manner. The
chief privilege of the Church of the Jews, was, to keep Gods word in the
letter, Psalm. 147.19.20. and Romans 3.2. but it will be our pre-eminence above
them, if we lock up the true sense of it in our hearts, Job. 22.22. and Pro.
22. It is a sure stay, and a shield to them that walk uprightly. No thief,
nor robber can steal it, no it cannot be taken away with our lives; it is
Mary's good part, which was never taken from her, neither can be from us,
being a perpetual freehold.

Man lives not by bread only: 2. Affirmative, But by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.

First, of the sense of the negative part. Man] that is, a mere common and
ordinary man, and much less I that am the Son of God. Lives not] that is,
preserves not the natural life of his body. By bread] is meant all necessary
and ordinary means of meat, drink, rest, sleep, physic, recreation: for so
it is also used in the fourth petition of the Lords prayer. Onely] here bread
is not opposed to other means of sustenance, as flesh, fish, etc. but to Gods
blessing, without which it cannot sustain our bodies. But by every word] that
is, every thing, a common Hebraisme, verbum for res, and more specially for the
decree and ordinance of God, appointed to sustain man: so the words following
implie. That comes out of the mouth of God] that is, whatsoever God has
decreed, commanded, or promised that it shall preserve life.

Now the sum of Christ's answer, in more words is this: Thou say I must now
have bread to satisfy my hunger, or else I cannot live; but thou speak like
thy self: If my Fathers word be to sustain me without this means, I shall
live thereby without bread: my Father is not tied to ordinary means for
preserving of life, who is all-sufficient, and almighty, and does what and how
he will. And this cannot be doubted of, seeing it is written in Deuteronomy. 8.3. by
Moses, that when the Israelites were in the wilderness as I am, hungry and
having nothing to eat, no more then I have, he fed them with MAN 40. years,
to teach them, that man lives not by bread only (for they had none) but by
every word and means which himself appointed. Besides, if I should distrust
my Fathers providence, and turn all these stones into bread, yet, if his word
come not to give virtue and life unto them, all this would not help, all this
bread would be no better then stones, as it was before. And therefore I will
still expect his word, and not turn stones into bread at thine.

The negative part affoardeth us this lesson, that

Outward and ordinary means are not of themselves sufficient to sustain and
preserve the life of man. Doctr.
Outward means not sufficient to sustain the life of man.
Luke 12.15. man's life stands not in abundance. If we make an induction of
all the chief means, either of the being or wel-beeing of man's life, we
shall easily see their insufficiency. 1. Bread.
1. Bread is a special means appointed to strengthen the heart, Psalm. 104.15.
but yet there is a staff of bread, which is another thing then bread, and this
being broken, we shall not be strengthened, but fade in the midst of bread.
Hence is the sentence accomplished against many, Leu. 26.26. Ye shall eat, and
not be satisfied: the Lord gave the Israelites quails in the wilderness,
enough to maintain 600000. footmen for many days; but a secret poison was in
it, that the more they had, the more they died, as of an exceeding great
plague; so as the place was called the graves of lusting, Number. 11.33. Yea,
although our bread did not grow out of the earth, but fell from heaven as
Mannah did, yet our Savior says, Ioh. 6.49. Your Fathers did eat Mannah in
the wilderness, and are dead. 2. Clothes are a special means to preserve a
man in natural heat: but yet raiment of it self cannot keep him warm: Hag.
1.6. 2. Clothes.
Ye clothe you, but ye be not warm: and of David in his age it is said, that
they covered him with clothes, but no heat came to him, 1. King, 1.1. 3.
Physic is a remedy appointed by God to regaine health and strength,
distempered or decayed: 3. Physic.
but Asa goes to the Physician, and pines away for all that, 2. Chron. 16.12. 4
Mo^y.
4. Money is a good means to provide necessaries for the sustenance of man's
life; and therefore men labor, and take much pains for it. But, both labor
is in vain, except the Lord build the house, Psalm. 127.1. and, thou shall
earne money, and put it in a broken bag, or a secret rust shall consume it,
Hagg. 1.6. 5. Strength is for the war, 5. Strength.
and a good means for the defense of life and right: but strength alone is
weakness: Psalm. 20. An horse is a vain thing in battle: and therefore David
goes against Goliath, not with a sword or a bow, but in the name of the Lord, 6.
Counsel.
that was his strength. 6. Counsel and policy is for a State both in peace
and war: we see how soon Reh^boam ran through ten parts of his Kingdom,
by the bad counsel of the young men. But yet there is no counsel nor policy
that can prevail against the Lord. Many are the devices of man's heart, but the
counsel of the Lord shall stand. The counsel of Achitophel, which was like
unto an oracle of God, was turned into folly.

Reasons. 1.
1. The means themselves are without life, and in a very short time rot away of
themselves; or if they be living things, as sheep, oxen, beasts, birds, and
fishes, they must loose their lives before they can come to be helps of ours:
how can they then give life, or keep life in us by themselves, being dead?
The death of the creatures shows, that our life is not from them, but from
something else. 2
2. God has prescribed means of life, and tied us unto them, but not
himself: he is able to do whatsoever he will, and his providence is of equal
extent and latitude with his power, which cannot be restrained to means, these
being finite, that infinite. And hence it is, that means are ordinarily
necessary, but not absolutely, seeing God in his absolute power can feed us
with stones, 3
as well as raise men out of stones. 3. If means alone could sustain a man,
how comes it that the same wholesome meat that feeds some, should poison
others? how comes it that men using means, as men in a consumption eat as
much as others, and yet pine away, and are farnished? that men labor and
toil, and get money, and yet thrive not, but their state is in a consumption
still? how comes it that they who are best fed, as great personages, are less
lively and healthful? Poor day-labourers, who fare hard and course, laugh at
rich men for maintaining Physicians, and yet are still sick: poor men's
children thrive better, and look fairer with Daniel and his fellows, feeding
only of course pulse, then many that fare daintily with the Kings children.
See we not the Fathers before the flood, living some 700. some 800. some 900.
years and above, of greater strength and stature by far, and they carried
near a thousand years upon their backs, more lightly then we can carry
half an hundred? and yet they lived upon herbs only: we have also flesh and
fish, of all sorts, with the best and most exquisite cookerie: so that if our
lives were pinned upon the means only, where they lived near a thousand
years, we should by our means live many thousands. 4. God is the God of life,
it is he that continues our lives, 4
and not the means; and all means are in his hand to be either blessed, or
blown upon at his pleasure. What can an hammer or saw do, without the
artificers hand? no more can the means, which in Gods hand are as a tool in
the worke-mans, whose hand can do many things without tools, but they nothing
without his hand. 5. What means that petition, which every man must daily use
for daily bread, even he that has the most, but because he may have bread, 5
and want that in bread which may do him good and help?

1. Learn hence how to conceive of means aright, Use.
namely as things not to be trusted to, because by one blast of God, 1. Means
not to be set above their own place
they may become unprofitable and vnsuccessefull, especially when men are loath
to raise their thoughts beyond them. Asa his physic shall not help him,
because he trusts in the Physicians. Israel shall die of that flesh, wherein
they thought their life was. And it is just with God, that when the means
step up into his place, and men ascribe that virtue unto them, which only
Gods blessing adds unto them, he depriues men either of the means, or of the
right and comfortable use of them. And were not the means too too much
magnified, and set above their own place, men would not so spend their days
in carking cares for them, with such instance and neglect of all things else,
as if they were ever to live by bread only; not so wise as the fool and
churl in the parable, who when he had goods enough for many years, would have
his soul take his rest; but these men having bread and means enough for many
ages, are as restless and insatiable, as ever before: their life stands in
seeking and holding abundance.

2. Let us learn to trust God without the means; which the worldling cannot
do. In plenty, in health, Use. 2.
when the barnes be full, and the chests ready to break with treasures, the
most earthly churl can be content, and praise God for all: but in poverty
and sickness his heart lets him down, as though God is not as able and
willing to help in one estate as in another. But now faith were it present,
would most show it self: it is a dead faith, that withdrawes it self from the
living God, and sets it self on dead things.

Use. 3.
3. Learn we to moderate our care for the things of this present life, as such
who value them according to their right estimate, which without a superior
virtue can do us no good: for what is food, apparel, and the like, but base
things without Gods blessing, which men of thousands enjoy abundantly, and yet
by a secret curse either upon the wicked getting or holding them, want the
comfort that many poor men have, whose portion is but a mite to the others
superfluity? And what is the reason, that men bury themselves alive in the
graves of their lustings and earthlines, but that they falsely conceive of the
means, and place them above their worth or work? What says the worldling? is
it not my living? and must I not look to that? I tell thee no, it is not thy
living, unless thou live by bread alone, or have that animam triticiam, that
wheaten-soule of the rich man in the Gospel, who thought he must now live many
years, because he had wheat enough. Object. But you speak as though we were
to expect miracles for our maintenance, or to cast off our callings, to neglect
the means, and live by the word of God. Answ. 1. Miracles are ceased, and yet
if God bring us into an estate wherein all means fail us, God remains as
powerful and able, as merciful and willing to help as ever he was, and rather
then his children shall miscarrie, he will save them by miracle. 2. Our
callings and means are not to be neglected, because, 1. Christ denies not but
that man lives by means, but not only by them: 2. they are a part of that (
every word of God) whereby man lives; and if ordinary means be offered, we may
not trust to extraordinary, without some special promise or revelation: 3. it
is a tempting of God, to pull poverty on our selves, or cast our selves into
danger, and is a breach of his ordinance, who inioynes every man to get his
living in the sweat of his brows. But one thing is a Christian care, another a
carking care for the things of this world: one thing is the care of the world
in Mary, who especially minds the one thing necessary, another in Martha, who
distracts her self with many businesses, neglecting the good part which should
never be taken from her: one thing to possess the world, another to be
possessed by it: one thing to use means, another to trust in them.

Use. 4.
More care must ^e had of Gods blessing, then (...) means.
4. If man live not by means alone, be more careful for Gods blessing then for
the means; be more thankful for that then for these: else he that made bread
and gave it thee, can break the staff of it; else he can make thee great and
rich, but lay a sensible curse on thy person and estate, either in thine own
time, or in thy heirs. And as for thanksgiving, Christ never used any means
but by prayer and thanksgiving, and taught us to pray for daily bread,.1. for a
blessing upon bread. It is a greater mercy of God to give us comfort of the
creatures, then the creatures themselves: Yet a number, as if they lived by
bread only, The comfort of the creatures, a greater mercy then the creatures
themselves.
come to their tables as the hog to his trough, or the horse to his
prouender, without either prayer or thanks. A wonder, that every crumme
choakes them not: for without Gods blessing it might.

But by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.] This affirmative
part of the testimony, alleged by Christ, Doctr.
teaches us, that, It is only the word of God, Only the word, yet every word
of God preserves the life of man.
and every word of God that preserves the life of man. But first we must
distinguish of man's life, which is either supernatural or natural; and also
of the word, which is put forth either for the life natural or supernatural*
The former is a word of Gods power and providence, creating and governing all
things according to their natural courses, called in the text, a word that
goes out of the mouth of God: for no word of the creature, can produce the
being or well-beeing of any other. The latter is the word of truth, whereby he
does quicken the soul, and repair it to his own likeness: and this word
proceeds not only out of the mouth of God, but of his Prophets, Apostles, and
Pastors: and this word begets and preserves a supernatural life in man, as
the other does a natural, Ier. 15.19.

Now our Savior means here the natural life of the body, and the word of
Gods power and providence, generally sustaining the being and life of all
creatures: and not that a man can live by the written word without meat and
drink. It is true, How the soul lives by the word of God.
that the soul of man lives by Gods word of truth: for, 1. he is be gotten a
Christian by it, and borne of this immortal seed, Iam. 1.18. 2. he is
nourished by it, as by sincere milk, 1. Pet. 2.2. 3. as bread increases the
body in all dimensions, so the word strengthens the soul in faith, patience,
comfort, hope, love; as children grow by milk. 4. bread strengthens the heart,
and all the strength of a Christian is in the word; it preserues the natural
heat, and the word makes his heart burn within him, and keeps it in a
readiness to every good word and work.

But yet this is not the proper meaning of this place, neither can it agree
with the meaning of Moses, who plainly speaks of the bodily hunger of the
Israelites, and the seeding of them with Mannah, that they may know that man
lives not by bread only: nor yet with the mind of our Savior Christ; nor
with his present condition; nor with the drift of Satan's temptation; nor with
the sound repelling of his dart, which was, that Christ for the appeasing of
his bodily hunger, after his forty days fast, would turn stones into bread.

And now, we knowing what is meant by the word of God, even the powerful word
of Gods providence, in creating and governing all things; How man lives by
every word of God.
we are further to consider, that our Savior adds an universal particle,
every word: the reason is, because this word is twofold, ordinary and
extraordinary. Ordinary, when God changes not his ordinary course, but by
means proportioned unto the ends (which are a part of his ordinary word,)
preserves and maintains the life he has given; as daily bread, sleep, and
the like. Extraordinary, when by his word and decree, he pleases to preserve
man either above, or without, or against all means. The word sustaineth, 1.
Above all means 3. ways.
I. Above the means, sundry ways; 1. above all that man can expect: thus God
gave the Israelites Mannah in the wilderness, and water out of a rock: thus
he tied a ram to to be sacrificed in stead of Isaac: thus he brake the
cheeke-tooth that was in the iaw, and water came thereout for Sampson, Judge.
15.19. and by his word provided a gourd to come over Jonas his head to shadow
him, and deliver him from his grief, c. 4.6. thus Elias by ravens. 2. when he
makes a little means go beyond themselves, as Christ made 7. loaves and 2.
fishes to serve 7000. persons, and much left: thus he made a few clothes serve
Israel forty years, so as their shoes did not wear out: thus the word of God
made a little meal and oil serve the Prophet and a widow a long time: 1.
King. 17.14. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, the meal in the barrel shall
not be wasted, nor the oil in the cruse diminished, till the time that the
Lord send rain: and so it was, though they ate nothing else all the while. 2.
King. 4.42. Elisha had 20. loaves sent him, and some ears of corn: he
commanded his servant to set them before the people: Oh (says he) what are
these to an hundred men? but the Prophet said, The Lord has said, they shall
eat, and yet there shall remain: and it came Daniel. II. Without means Gods
word causes man to live, as Moses, II. Without all means.
Elias, and Christ himself, who had immediately before seen the word of God
preserving him already 40. days and nights, and could further if he pleased.
III. Against means, as the Disciples sent out, were promised if they drank
any deadly poison, III. Against all means.
it should not hurt them: so fire burnt not the three children, though cast
into it, when it burnt their enemies, and their own bands. All this is meant
by that our Savior says, every word: and thus most aptly he returns the
temptation; Man lives not only by bread, that is, the ordinary means, but by
extraordinary also, even above and beyond means, yea without and against
means; And therefore, where thou say I must have means, Gods word says,
there is no absolute necessity of them: my Fathers word can still sustain me
without bread, as he has done these forty days already.

1. The word of God is it, Reasons. 1.
which gave being and beginning to all things when they were not, and much
more does it continue the being of them now when they are. Psalm. 104.30. If
thou send forth thy spirit, they are created. By Spirit, here is not meant the
essence of God, but a power and secret virtue proceeding from God, all one with
this word of God, by which things were not only created at the first, but are
still renewed, and that daily, and yearly as it were again created. Ioh. 1.3.
In that word was life, that is, not only inherent in the Son of God
himself, but as an efficient to communicate life to all living things.

2. The word of God is as it were the prop and stay of the world, 2
without which all things would fall into confusion. Every man knows by
nature, that God maintains and preserues all things; that it is he that
stretches out the heavens like a curtain; that he sends forth the winds out
of his treasure; and raises the waves of the sea like mountains; which are
great things: but nature teaches not, how God does these things, by what
means: only the Scriptures teach that he does all this by his word; that as
in the creation God said, Let there be light, and there was light, and so of
all other things Gods word was his work: so in upholding and preserving it, he
does it by his word, as Heb. 1.2. who vpholdeth all things by his mighty word;
which word when God calls in, the creature falls to nothing. Act. 17.28. In him
we live, and move, and have our being.

3. The same word of God, 3
which gives virtue and force to the creatures in themselves, does also
sanctify them unto us: every creature is sanctified by the word and prayer, 1.
Tim. 4.6. the word shows how to get them, how to use them, and prayer obtaines
of God a right tenure, and a pure use, which indeed is the blessing or
sanctification of them.

4. The same word carries them beyond the strength of their nature to do us
good: 4
bread and wine in their own nature can but nourish and feed the body, but
Gods word in the institution of the Sacrament, makes them feed the soul to
eternal life.

Quest. But how may we conceive of this word, whereby God does govern and
preserve the creatures? Answ. By Gods word we must not only conceive his
decree and will, but a powerful commandment, and effectual, to which all
his creatures yield free and willing obedience. This commanding word was put
forth in the creation, Psalm. 148.5. he commanded, and they were all created.
Men when they attempt, and perform any great matter, because their power is
small, must use great labor, and many instruments and helps: But by the word
of the Lord the heavens were made, Psalm. 33.9. He said the word, and all things
were done. This commanding word is put forth in the daily government of God:
Psalm. 147.15. He sends out his commandment upon the earth, his word runs
very swiftly: that is, nothing can withstand and hinder the power of his word:
here the word and commandment are all one. The senslessenesse and deadnes of
the creatures, their vastnes and fierceness hinder not his word, but without
delay, yea with marvelous celeritie and swiftness they execute his word:
Psalm. 148.8. If God speak to the heavens, they shall hear, and cover
themselves with darkness at noone day, as in Christ's passion. If he command
the Sun, it shall hear his word, and go back or stand still: If he command
the winds or sea to be still, they shall be still; and presently there shall
be a great calm: If he send forth his word, the mountains of ye shall melt,
Psalm. 147.18. If he command the whale, he shall set Jonah on dry land, cap.
2. v. 10. If he command the solid and senseless earth, it shall hear, and
rend to swallow up Corah, Dathan, and Ab^ram. If he command the fire not to
burn, it shall hear, and not burn the three children. If he command dead
men, they shall hear, and come out of their graves, as Lazarus, etc. and all
men at the general judgment. But as God can see without eyes, and reach
without hands, so also does he speak without a tongue, as the light, the
firmament, the heavens, and other his works can hear his voice without ears:
neither wants he a means to make his mind known, and his pleasure manifest
to the most senseless creatures.

This should teach us to depend upon this word of God, Use. 1.
for our lives and means of maintaining them: for so our Lord Jesus did in
this barren wilderness; he would not sustain himself but by Gods word. Do
thou want means of living and maintenance? Consider, that man lives not by
bread alone: This word can make the air light, without and before either
sun, moon, or star, The word of God made the air light without the sun,
and the earth fruitful without the rain.
Genesis 1.3. This word can make the earth fruitful, before the rain had ever
fallen upon it, Genesis 2.5. Want thou bread? God has not locked up thy life
in bread, it may be he has another word, which if thou hear with Moses and
Elias, thou shall live without bread. Asa, when he was in a great strait, 2.
Chron. 14.11. (for he was with five hundred and fourscore thousand, to
encounter with an army of ten hundred thousand, and three hundred chariots:)
he looked up to this word of God, and said, that the Lord could save, by many,
or few, or by none. Have thou means of living? yet depend on this word, thy
life stands not in bread, or in abundance: if God withdraw his word, neither
restoratiue quails, nor heavenly Manna, if thou had them, shall preserve thy
life. How often does God blow upon the second means, to bring us to this word?

The faith of this truth does fence the heart with sound comfort, when all
outward means do fail: Use. 2.
if the heart can say to it self, What if God do not give me my desire by
this means or that? I know God has more words then one, more blessings then
one, and man lives by every word. And faith strengthens the heart, 1. By
setting before the eye Gods power in this word, Faith in this word strengthens
the heart many wa^es.
how that one word of his mouth is enough to help us: one word is able to
create innumerable armies of Angels and creatures; one fiat is enough to make
all creatures, and all this to come, or go, or will God do me good, if he see
it good for me? 2. By assuring the heart, that his will is as ready to do us
good, as his word is able: and it sets the promise before us, that nothing
shall be wanting to them that fear God. The former, in the example of the
leper, Matthew. 8. Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean: and in the
next words, to show he is as willing as able, he says, I will, be thou clean;
by which word proceeding out of the mouth of God, his leprosy was instantly
cured: his will was his word, and his word was his work. The latter in the
example of Abraham, whose faith set before his eyes Gods promise, that in Isaac
his seed should be called, and that by Isaac he should be a Father of many
nations; and therefore when at Gods word he went out to offer Isaac, and Isaac
asked him where was the sacrifice, he answered, God will provide: One eye was
on Gods word commanding him to slay his son; another upon this other word,
that God was able to raise him up from the dead, whence after a sort he
received him; and that he also would do so, before his promise should be
frustrate. 3. By setting before the Christian heart, the blessed issue and
success of vnwauering confidence in the word of God.

The Israelites going out of Egypt, and wandering in the wilderness so many
years, by the appointment of Gods word, he did supply all their wants by his
word, and it became all things unto them, which their hearts could desire: 1.
he paued them a way in the sea, and suddenly made the waters a wall unto them.
2. he gave them bread from heaven, even Angels food, and that (in our text) was
by his word. 3. he gave them water out of a rock, and that by his word; he
bade Moses speak to the rock. 4. having no means for clothes, his word kept
their garments for forty years from waxing old. But what need we go out of
our text, in which the example of our Head and Lord may best confirm us? for,
wanting bread in the wilderness, he would not turn stones into bread, but
waited on the word of his Father, till the Angels came and ministered unto him:
even so the adopted sons of God treading in the steps of our Lord, shall by
virtue of the same word, always find releife one way or other. Who would have
thought, that ever Job should have swomme out of that misery, having lost all
his cattle, substance, and children? but because, when the Lord was a killing
him in his own sense, he trusted in him, the Lord raised him and doubled the
wealth and prosperity he had before. Who would have thought that ever Daniel
should have escaped the lions den and teeth, being cast in amongst them? or
that Peter should have escaped Herod's sword, being bound in chains, and
watched of soldiers, to be brought out to death next day? But trusting in the
Lord, this word shut the mouths of the lions; and opened the prisons iron
doors, and brake in sunder the chains, and so both of them were wonderfully
delivered.

Surely this doctrine well digested, is full of comfort and quietness, and would
set the heart at rest* and make all outward troubles easy. If a man could once
get his heart to trust in the word, as David did, Psalm. 119.42. it would
sustain the soul in many troubles, and bring in so sweet a contentment as the
world is a stranger unto. On the contrary, whence is it that men's hearts fail
them, and they sink in their troubles, but because they trust to the means,
and not to the word of God, at least not to every word of God? If God cross
them one way, they think he has no other way to do them good.

If man live by every word of God, Use. 3.
then take heed of making that a means of living, which God has never
warranted; but see that what thou live by, proceed out of the mouth of God.
How does he live by every word of God, that gets his living either in whole or
in part contrary to Gods word? Object. But we see such as use no good means,
but mantaine themselves in good estate by robbing, stealing, oppressing,
usury, gaming, false wares or weights; it seems that even these creatures
have a word of God to sanctify them, and put virtue in them to such persons;
or else they could not live by them. Answ. We must distinguish between the
things themselves that are gotten, and the unjust manner of getting them. The
creatures themselves are by a general word of God sanctified, and set apart by
God to feed and maintain good and bad, as well the wicked as honest getters of
them, even as the sun and rain shines and falls upon the just and unjust:
And the unrighteousness of particular persons cannot alter Gods general decree.
But if we consider the special manner of getting such goods, that is not
sanctified, but condemned by the word of God: 1. Because the person is not in
Christ, who restores our right unto us, and then he is but an usurper and a
bankrupt, who buildes his houses, goes fine in apparel, decks up himself and
his, and spends most liberally, but it is all with other men's money: He that
knows not this, thinks him a rich man; but he that does, knows that he is
not neither thrifty nor wealthy: the creditor comes, and casts him into prison,
and makes his bones and body pay the debt. 2. As his person, so his course is
accursed: for the only way to get a blessing from God on the means, is to use
his own means; who has commanded first to seek the Kingdom of God, and
then other things; and has accursed all that wealth and maintenance of the
body, for which a man does hazard or loose his soul. 3. When a man does live
by bread, against the word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, it is
rather a death then a life; his bread becomes poison and as rats-bane in his
bowels, because he has it without a promise, and without blessing.

Object. I see no such thing. Answ. Many poisons are long a working, but the
end of such is death, and the more slowly they work, the more slily and
certainly they kill: And if the Lord do not inuert the order he has set in
nature, by cursing the particular creature, be sure he has in his justice
reserved a curse for the unjust person, and he shall not avoid it.

This doctrine specially applied lays hold upon sundry sorts of men, who live
contrary to the word. They are these:

I. Such as live out of lawful callings, which are one part of the word of
God, that we should get our living in the sweat of our brows: and so long as
we are in our way, we have his word we shall be provided for. And the word
proceeding out of the mouth of God, is, that he that will not labor, must not
eat, because he eats not his own: and such as will not live after this word,
by Gods word they ought not to live, because they are idle and unprofitable
burdens of the earth; who 1. abuse Gods providence, who ties the ends and
means together: 2. infringe that good order, which God has established for
the avoiding of confusion in Church or commonwealth, namely that every man
should serve God in the service of man, in some warrantable and profitable
civil calling: 3. as he is no better then an Infidel, that depends only on
means, seeing man lives by every word of God; so he that in a lawful course
of life prouides not for his family, is worse then an Infidel. Of this sort
are our knots of companions, of drinking, and gaming company, and wandering
rogues and beggars: I knit them together, because they are all of a strain,
and either are beggars, or shall be. These commonly come not to Church to hear
their duties, and therefore they must be taught by correction and discipline of
those that are the executioners of justice.

II. Such as think they live well enough, and yet it is by deceiving others,
by stealing, oppression, extortion, lying, swearing, and falsehood in buying and
selling: and why (say they) may not a man help and shift for himself? But
consider, 1. What a poor help it is, when a man will use unlawful means, and
to shift out of one evil by another: He does, as the Prophet speaks, avoid a
lion, and a bear meets him. Pilate would keep his place by unlawful means,
the delivering of Christ to be crucified: but, besides that he brought innocent
blood upon himself, he lost his place, and slew himself. 2. Consider that if
Gods word of blessing go not with the means, his word of curse does: and so
the Prophet Zachary says, that the curse enters into the house of the
swearer, and of the thief, c. 5. v. 4. and this curse shall remain in the
midst of his house, and consume the very timber and stones. This curse often
scatters ill-gotten goods as fast as they were ever hastily gathered, if not in
his own days, yet in some unthrifty heir after him. 3. Consider how God
crosses the vain conceit of unjust persons; they think all that is any way
gotten, to be gain and profit; but the word is, Pro. 10.2. that treasures of
wickedness profit nothing, they cannot help a man from the hand of God; nay when
the evil day comes, they are gone, and leave a man alone to graple with death
and judgment, and turn a man naked to the sentence of condemnation for his
wicked getting and holding of them.

III. Another sort of men, who live not by the word of God, but against it, are
usurers, V^l minimus fructus ex pecu^^a perc^pe non potest sine De^ offensione
and proximi in^^ria. Calis epist. 226
who pull themselves out of all lawful callings, and set up a trade for the
public evil, and their own private good; which, were there nothing else
against it, proves it not to be of Gods devising: for every calling of Gods
devising, is helpful to men in general; but the Spirit of God has given this
a name from biting and hurting. But we have the Scripture most expressly against
it, whether it be manifest, as is a contract for gain, as for ten pound to pay
eleven at the years end; or covert, whereby men find devises (which they call
mysteries) to defeat the laws, and seem to contract, and either not to lend,
or not for gain.

The word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, says, Exodus 22. verse. 25.
If thou lend money to my people with thee, thou shall not be an usurer, thou
shall not oppress him. Mark how usury and oppression is all one. And,
Deuter. 23.19. Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother, the usury of
money, meat, or any thing that may be lent. But the usurer that will live by
his money, and not by Gods word, says, Yea but of the Gentiles they might,
though not of a brother: To which I say, that now the partition wall is taken
away, and neither Jew nor Gentile remains, all are our brethren in Christ; and
therefore of no man must usury be expected, unless thou be worse then a
Jew. Let the usurer answer this if he can. Again, those Gentiles were of those
nations of the Canaanites, which they were commanded to destroy, and usury was
as teeth given them, and allowed by God to eat them up withal. Ab hoc vsuram
exige, quem non sit crimen occidere. Ambros.
See thou a man, whom thou may lawfully kill? take use of him, but not of
thy brother.

Object. I will not take usury of the poor, but of the rich. Answ. But the
text is, Thou shall not take usury of thy Brother, be he poor or rich:
though the rich be better able to suffer wrong, yet thou art not by any word
enabled to offer it.

The word, which proceeds out of the mouth of God, says, Psalm. 15.5. He that
gives not his money to usury, shall dwell in the Lords tabernacle, and rest on
his holy hill: and, Ezekiel. 18.17. he that has not received usury and increase,
etc. wherein it is plain, without all tricks, that either to give out, or
take in usury excludes out of heaven. Object. He means, to oppress a man with
usury. Answ. Every usury is oppression, and every usurer fears not God.
Leuit. 25.36. Thou shall not take usury, but fear the Lord. Object. But that
law was judicial, not moral. Answ. That is false: for our Savior renewed it
in the Gospel, Luke 6.35. Lend freely, looking for nothing again: therefore it
is moral. Besides that, usury is condemned amongst the great transgressions of
the moral law, Ezekiel. 18.13.

Object. We may do as we would be dealt by, and it is charity so to lend as
another may benefit himself. Answ. No man in need would borrow but freely,
unless he were mad; neither is it charity nor humanity to take money for a
duty, the nature of which is to be free. Charity seeks not her own, and much
less other men's; but of these sorts of wicked men the speech is true, Their
mercies are cruel. As charitable as that usurer is, so conscionable is he that
follows: His conscience will not suffer him to take above the law, not above
ten in the hundred, and that he hopes he may according to the wholesome laws
of the Land. Answ. Where were his conscience, if the law of King Edward the
sixth were revived, whereby it was utterly forbidden, according to the Canon of
Gods word, and the ancient Canons of the Church? But for the Statute now in
force, enacted Elizab. 13. c. 8. 1. I say, it allows no usury, but punishes
the excess of it. 2. The title of the Act is, An act against Usury. How then
is it for it? 3. It calls usury a detestable sin: how then can it secure
thy conscience? 4. All usury above ten in the hundred is punishable by the
forfeit of the usury. 5. What if the laws of men should permit what Gods law
condemns? is it not plain, that this conscionable man flies Gods law to
shelter his sin under man's, as though the laws of man were the rule of
conscience, and not Gods laws; or as if the law of an inferior can dispense
with the law of the superior; or as if Moses permitting one evil in the Jews
(namely, the putting away of their wives for preventing a greater) did allow
thereof, or warranted the sin to the conscience of the hard-hearted husband.

We conclude then, that the usurer lives not by any word of God, but against
it. And to these add the ba^ds of this sin, the brokers to usurers, that
live or raise gains by letting out other men's money: I will say no more to
them, but if he be shut out of heaven that lends his money to usury, he shall
hardly get in, that is his agent. And humane laws condemn thieves and
accessaries. It is a Statute of Henry the 7. anno 3. that all such brokers for
usury, shall pay for every default twenty pounds, and suffer half a years
imprisonment, and be brought to the open shame of the pillorie. It is just with
God, that Saul and his armor-bearer should fall together, and die on their
own swords.

IV. Such live not by any word of God as encroach upon the Sabbaths of God, by
laboring either in themselves, or in their servants, as 1. by buying or
selling wares, Neh. 13.18. 2. by works of the six days, whether in harvest or
earing time, Exodus 16.29. and 34.21. and Neh. 13.15. 3. by traveling for gain
or pleasure. For the Sabbath was made for our spiritual profit: it is a day to
give and collect alms, and not gain. Manna it self must not be gathered on
the Sabbath, much less must more ignoble sustenance: If it be sought, it shall
not be found. Object. 1. May I not do a little to set forward my work for the
beginning of the week? Answ. No: Manna might not be sought, though early in the
morning, and though it was but a little way off, and required little labor.
Object. 2. May I not take a fair day when it comes, the weather being
uncertain and catching? Answ. Thou may as well say, May I not take a purse
when it comes? will thou be a thief and rob God of his due? Should not ill
weather and Gods judgments rather force thee to repentance and obedience, then
to sin? Object. 3. It lies me upon a bond, my estate, and many poor men
depend upon me. Answ. First, pay thy bond to God; faith, and obedience never
brought loss with it; and better were it to loose a little commodity, then
Gods favor, and a good conscience; nothing is so heavy as Gods curse for this
sin.

V. Common gamesters, and such as make a gain of play, live not by any word of
God; it is a common theft, and they come directly under the 8. Commandment,
and that precept of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole, steal no more,
but rather labor with his hands. And as they live out of a calling, so their
course is an unjust taking into their possession, that which no law of God or
man does warrant them by any manner of lawful contract; and the Civil law and
Fathers condemn that gain which is gotten by play. See, August. epist. 54.
In the same rank of thieves are they that live by keeping dice-houses or
gaming-houses, and such places of lewd resort.

Use. 4.
Let us take some rules, whereby we may comfortably pass our lives according to
Gods word, and avoid all these sins against it. There are three, 1.
concerning our calling: 2. our states: 3. our maintenance of life.

The rule concerning our calling is this: The carriage of our calling according
to Gods word, is a special part of that word of God by which a man must live.
Quest. How may I carry my calling according to Gods word? Answ. By these
means: 1. We must make choice of such callings for our selves and ours, as
be profitable for the Church or Commonwealth: there be many vain and
newfangled inventions, which rather maintain sin, then bring any good to
the Church or Commonwealth. But God therefore bestows variety of gifts, to
furnish men to the variety of callings, all for the common, and every ones
private good. 2. Seeing not the having of a calling, but the right use of it
glorifieth God, we must use our callings with the practice of sundry virtues.
1. In faith and obedience to God: faith makes our persons, obedience makes our
actions approved of God; yea, every duty of our calling ought to be an
obedience of faith, looking at the commandment and promise; the commandment
keeps us within the compass of our callings, the promise secureth us of good
success. A good action not warranted by a calling is sin. 2. In diligence,
not wilfully neglecting, but serving and redeeming the means of Gods
providence: Every man must abide in his calling, and keep him in his way, for
so long he is sure to be provided for: thus he auoides idleness and
destruction, and maintains the order and rank wherein God has set him. 3. In
cheerfulness, not carking or excessiuely careful, but doing the labor, and
leaving all the success to God. Some are heart-lesse in their callings,
because it brings in so little profit and return; and labor an the ox, who
must go out his journey, but without cheerfulness or heart, which God looks
for in all our duties. Such should consider, 1. that callings were not only
ordained to get money, but help us chearefully through our way, and contain
us in a course wherein to please God. 2. that the goodness and worth of a
calling is not to be measured by that profit it brings in to us, but by the
public benefit, and as it is rightly used: God may be served as well in the
basest, as in the best. Others see no likelihood of doing any great good, and
so either draw back from their calling, Ier. 10 9.
or else heavily and vnchearefully go on. But we must renew our strength and
courage, and know that our labor shall not be lost, Isa. 49.4.5. 4. In
holiness, which 1. sanctifies our callings by the word and prayer, 1. Tim.
4.5. 2. subordinateth all earthly and special things, to the general and
heavenly things of the Christian calling; yea it makes us express our
spiritual calling in the use of the civil: it will make a man sometime for
religions sake, hear the word in the six days, unless some other necessary
occasion come between, ever preferring the more necessary business. 3. It
keeps in the heart, 1. a love of God, aiming at the preferring of his glory
above all: it suffers not a man to esteem his calling a preferment of
himself, or a reward of his service past; but a means of advancing Gods
glory in further service. 2. a love of men, who partake in the benefit of our
labors, with whom we must exercise charity, justice, meeknes, etc.

The second rule concerns our wealth and maintenance, namely, not to content
our selves, that we can live by such o^ such means, unless we can say, Gods
word does warrant me, that this i^ my meat, my drink, my apparel, my money,
my house, my land, etc. Quest. When can a man say this? Answ. 1. When a man
having nothing of his own, nor right to any thing, becomes a believer,
ingrafted into Christ, and so owner of that he has. A man may have warrant and
title from man, that his house and land is his, and he is a robber that shall
defeat him of it. But all men and Angels cannot give me a possession, and true
title before the living God, but only his Son, who is Lord and heir of all.
First, know thy self a member of Christ, and then his right is thine. 2. When
the manner of getting them is lawful, and that is, first, when it is just,
when a man has used no indirect means, but they are either lawfully
descended, or else by faithful and painful walking in an honest calling, God
has added them as a blessing of a man's labor: Secondly, when it is moderate
and retired, when a man so provides for earth, as he especially storeth up for
heaven: first, seeking Gods Kingdom, and the one thing necessary, without
covetousness, and the love of this life; nay, accounting all things dung in
comparison of Christ. 3. When the manner of using them is warrantable, that a
man shows himself a good steward in the holy dispensing of them, using them
as furtherances of piety, as pledges of love toward men, and as testimonies
of sobriety in himself, and every way making them servants to his Christian
calling. Prou. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy riches. 4. When his affection is
indifferent, both in the having and holding of them, that a man may say, These
be mine, I am not theirs; I have them, they have not me; I am their Master to
command them, they command not me. And why should we not draw our affections
from them, seeing, 1. the wicked are as rich, yea richer in these things then
the best? at the best they make not their Masters better: 2. they be no
inheritance, they be but mooueables, changing their Master as the giver will;
and while we have them, they are but lent us: 3. we are but stewards, we sit
not in our own, but have a large account to make: yea we are very pilgrims and
travelers, and shall go lightlier and less laden: 4. we must not measure or
tie God unto them, nor esteem of his love by them.

Thus a man may use the mercies of God with comfort, for his necessity and for
his delight in the days of his pilgrimage: thus may he dispose them to his
heirs as the right owners, with hope of Gods blessing to stand with them:
nothing of which can be expected in goods ill gotten, or spent, to which
nothing but Gods curse is intayled.

The third rule concerns our health and sustenance, namely, that it is far
better to want means, then to procure them by any other means, then that
which proceeds out of the mouth of God. Yet numbers will maintain their
lives, health, and estate not by Gods word, but directly against it: for
example, they that seek to witches and sorcerers for health, or goods lost, or
stolen, or upon any other occasion whatsoever. Whereas the word proceeding out
of Gods mouth, Leu. 18.10. is this, Let there be none found among you that
uses witchcraft, or is a regarder of times, or a sorcerer, charmer,
soothsayers, or that counsels with spirits. Object. But Gods word and
ordinance is with them to do us good; and much good they do, which none else
can do. Answ. God has a twofold word: 1. of blessing. 2. of judgment: the
former proceeds out of the mouth of God, who is goodness it self; the latter
sometimes he permits to proceed out of the mouth of the devil, giving him
power to work lying wonders, that the seekers of him might believe in him to
their final destruction. Thus the devil* who can do nothing against Gods
word, does what he does by Gods word spoken in judgment and justice. Whence I
conclude, 1. It were better for a man to want cure then have the devil his
Physician: better for a man to want Ahab to have wanted Naboths vineyard, then
to loose the whole kingdom for it: Better for Judas to have wanted the thirty
pence, then to hang himself for them: for Ananias and Saphira to have wanted
the third part of their possession, then to die for it.

2. Rule. Better it were to want the means of health and maintenance, Asa had
wanted Physic, then be struck with death because he trusted in Physicians?
Better it had been for Gehazi to have gone in ragge^, then to apparel
himself by lying and deceit, which apparelled himself and all his posterity
with leprosy. Whether was the state of Lazarus (that died for want of means,)
or of Dives better that fared deliciously every day? Less have men to answer
for, who have no meat to strengthen nature, then those that have abundance,
which they pervert to strengthen themselves in sin, sacrificing their
strength to the service of the devil, and to their lusts. We our selves know
numbers in all corners, who were better continually to be bedridde, and sick,
or maimed, then to abuse their health and lives in such riotous and ungracious
courses, to the destruction of themselves and others. Nay, as our Savior said
of Judas, it had been good for him he had never been borne; so may we say of
numbers of graceless persons, better they had never seen the sun or enjoyed
life, then so to have consumed their lives in the service of sin and Satan's
temptations.

Lastly, If we live by every word of God, then let us be thankful to God for
our lives, Use. 5.
and for his word of blessing upon the means: and seeing our lives hang upon
his word, to prolong them, or cut off the thread of them, we must labor to
live to him and his glory. It becomes the just to be thankful. A great
unthankfulness were it to rebel against him, by whom we hold our lives, and
all the comfort of them: See we not how those that hold land in copy, are
willingly bound to suit and service to the Lord, who is often but a mean man?
The Sidonians would not war against Herod, because they were nourished by his
land: and shall we be in war against our Lord: by whose hand and word we
live, move, and have our being? And even this thanksgiving is his gift also:
for as the matter for which, so the grace by which we are thankful, is all
from him; so as we must depend on him both for blessings, and for grace to be
thankful.

VERSE. 5. Then the devil took him up into the holy city, and set him on a
pinnacle of the temple:

6. And said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: for
it is written, etc.

WE come now to set down and expound, by the assistance of God, the second
onset of the devil upon the Son of God, by a violent and hellish temptation,
nothing inferior to the former, in the furious, malicious, and cunning
contriuing of it.

In the entrance whereof, we must remove one rub by the way, concerning the
order of this temptation, wherein the Evangelists seem not to agree among
themselves: for whereas S. Matthew makes this the second, S. Luke makes it the
last, and puts the last in S. Matthew into the second place. And herein some
learned men have stumbled, and have devised simple shifts to reconcile the two
Evangelists. Some think, that they write not the same history, nor of the same
temptations, but of temptations urged at sundry times. These are confuted by
the very matter, phrases, and words, which are in both the same, and need no
other conviction. Others think (and they of the learned Papists) that in some
ancient books, S. Luke observes the same order in the temptations with S.
Matthew, and that the difference crept in by the heedlesnesse of some writer:
Which is a needless devise of them, who strive to prove the Canonical
Scripture to be corrupted in their fountains, that so their corrupt Latin
Translation may prevail; but both impeaching the watchfulnes and care of God
over the Scriptures, as also the diligence and faithfulness of the Church,
which is pretended to suffer her self wholly to be abused, by the carelessness
or unfaithfulness of some one Scribe.

But the truth is, that it does no whit prejudice the truth of the Evangelical
story, that the Evangelists do not stand so much upon order, where it is not
so necessary, as upon the matter and the things themselves done, which they
faithfully report, and in which they jointly accord and agree: as oftentimes
they stand not upon words, nor sometimes upon sentences, but one deliver the
same fact in one style of speech, another in another form; but so, as one is
so far from crossing another, as he gives thereby more light and certeinty
unto the other.

Quest. But whether of these observed the right order, as the temptations were
passed? Answ. I am out of doubt, that Matthew sets down the right order as
they were done: 1. Because he passes his story by such particles as imply an
orderly consequent: as, Then the devil took him, then he took him again,
then the devil left him, etc. whereas Luke used the particle and, (...).
in his passages, which notes no certain order, as the former does: his care
was to relate the whole matter, but was not so accurate for order. 2. The
coherence and dependence of this second temptation with the former shows, that
Matthew observes the right method: for Christ having by a testimony of
Scripture, confirmed himself in the confidence and trust in his Father, Satan
immediately seeks to make his advantage of Christ's words, and seeing he will
needs trust his Father, he would have him trust him too much; If he need no
bread being hungry, he needs no stairs to go down from the pinnacle of the
Temple; the last temptation does not so fitly cohere with the former, as this
second does. 3. After Christ had bidden Satan avoid, Matthew adds, Then the
devil left him, as being obedient to his word; plainly showing, that that was
the last temptation. Luke has it not in such dependence, but thus, And when
the devil had ended all the tentation, he departed.

In the combat note two generals, 1. The preparation to it. 2. The temptation
it self. The preparation contains such necessary circumstances, as by which
the temptation might more easily prevail; as, 1. the time, Then. 2. the place,
first general, the holy City: secondly special, a pinnacle of the Temple. 3.
the manner how Christ was conveyed thither, The devil took him up, and set
him on the pinnacle. The temptation consists, 1. of the assault. 2. of the
repulse.

The assault has three things: 1. the ground of it, If thou be the Son of
God. 2. the scope or aim, namely, the sin or sins to which he was tempted,
Cast thy self down. 3. the argument or persuasion to enforce it, For it is
written, he shall give his Angels charge over thee, etc. The repulse of our
Savior is by an other testimony of Scripture, not contrary to that which
Satan alleged, but expounding it, that he might in the right sense of it,
fence and secure himself from the temptation, as after we shall see.

First, of the preparation: Then] This particle shows not only the time of
this temptation, but also the order as I noted: Satan having no success in the
former, renewes his assault, and would assay another way. He had been kindly
and gently used of Christ, who had answered him courteously; nay, he had
convinced him by Scripture, that he had nothing to say against it, and yet he
goes on in his malice, as though he had had both great provocation and
advantage. Whence,

Doctr.
Note the property of wicked men ruled by Satan, who by no means can be
brought to lay off their malice toward Gods children. Deal gently with them,
they are like nettles, the softlyer touched, the sharper they sting: Deal
plainly with them, and convince their consciences by the word, that they have
nothing to say for themselves, yet being convinced they give not over, no more
then Satan here, but proceed in mischeife. And what are the reasons.

1. Because the godly in their courses do oppose themselves to the darkness of
this world: Reasons. 1.
now there is no fellowship between light and darkness, no way to reconcile
them, as we may see in the example of the wicked Sodomites against Lot: first
he resisted their wickedness, when they came about his house to abuse the two
men; he gives them fair words, I pray you my brethren; he conuinceth their
consciences, Do not so wickedly; and out of his weakness he offers them his two
daughters: but, being a righteous person, whose soul was daily vexed with
their uncleanness, neither his piety, nor humanity, nor entreaty, no nor his
weakness and sin could please them, but, Away with him hence, he is a stranger,
shall he judge and rule? now we will deal worse with him then with them, Genesis
19.9.

2. Christ gives another reason, Ioh. 8.44. 2
You are of your father the devil: for his works ye do. In that Chapter
Christ plainly teaches the Jews, that he is the light, verse. 12. they tell
him he bears record of himself, and therefore his record is false, v. 13. he
tells them he shall go from them, and carry the light with him, and they shall
seek him, and not find him: what (say they) will he kill himself? v. 22. he
tells them that he that keeps his word, shall never see death: then said
they, Now we know thou have a devil, v. 25. He tells them, Before Abraham was,
I am: and they take up stones to stone him. Here were the children of the
devil, who was a manslayer from the beginning: And of these Christ said, Ye
go about to kill me, a man that has told you the truth, v. 40. and, Ye do that
which you have seen with your father, and not only seen, but felt him moving
and stirring in their hearts: for he works mightily in the sons of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2.

3. The more light and grace the Lord manifests in any of his children, 3
the more must the darkness of wicked ones fight against it. It is not their
innocence, their holiness, their wisdom, their peaceable course of life, that
can fence them; nay, these bring all the malice of the wicked on them, and lay
them open to their rage. Steven a man full of faith and power, whose enemies
were not able to resist the wisdom and Spirit by which he spoke, Act. 6.8.
yet drew they him to the Council, and suborned false witness against him: where
what should he do? They might, and did see his face shine as the face of an
Angel, v. 15. In his Apology he begins as a person at the bar, with a
loving and moving speech, Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken: afterward in
the course of his speech, as a faithful servant of God, and true teacher, he
freely reprooues them, c. 7. v. 51.52. calls them resisters of the holy Ghost,
betrayers and murderers of the Just, he could convince them out of all the
Scriptures, as Christ did Satan here: But the more full of the holy Ghost he
was, the more were they filled with deuillish fury, like so many devils or
furies, their hearts brast for anger, they gnashed with their teeth, more like
fell and savage beasts then men; they showted with a loud voice, stopped their
ears, ran upon him, cast him out of the city, and stoned him.

4
4. The incessant malice of the wicked against the children of God, is a running
stream from this of the wicked one, against the natural Son of God: the
devil would still, if he could, tempt and molest Christ himself in his own
person, but that he cannot, he will therefore be sure to molest him in his
servants: he would obscure the glory of Christ in himself, but seeing he
cannot do that, he will do what he can by himself and all his members, to
extinguish that glory of Christ in those beams, wherewith his servants are
graced and honored: And this makes this war so irreconciliable.

Use. 1.
Therefore let us not marvel when we see good things, and good men resisted,
nor condemn that presently which we may see opposed: but, 1. Turn our eyes
upon that natural enmity which is between the seed of the woman, and of the
serpent. 2. Upon men's stubbornnes against the truth, and malice, by which the
sinner given up by God to Satan is obfirmed and hardened. 3. Upon the powerful
work of Satan in men of great gifts, that being convinced in conscience, even
against that light, can resist godly and innocent men. 4. Upon the love of men's
sins, profits, and pleasures, which sets on forward this hatred against their
conscience. What could Christ himself do to conciliate Judas his favor? did
not he know, that Christ was the Messiah, did he not preach him? did he not
work miracles in his Name? did not Christ make him one of his family, and
prefer him to be the steward of his house? did he not warn him of his sin,
and bear him most patiently? Yet his heart being upon covetousness, for a
small commodity he will betray Christ, and that against his conscience. 5.
Other personal and private occasions, may force men of great gifts to malign
and hate (against their consciences) most innocent persons. The Jews knew,
that Christ was the Messiah, that he was most powerful in doctrine, and most
holy in his life; yet they loved their own praise, and therefore thrust down
Christ; If we let him alone, all will believe in him. They thought themselves
so much dishonored, as Christ was honored. Sometimes fear of great men, or
some loss, or check, may cause this obstinate opposition. Pilate knew Christ
was an innocent man, he washed his hands, and would have no hand against him;
he pronounced him innocent, saying, I find no fault in him: his wife being
troubled in a dream, sent him word, he should have nothing to do against that
just man. Yet against his conscience, and his own words, he proceeded to
condemn him. Why? how could he be so blind and wicked? surely it was fear of
Caesar, and of some check: for he had heard them say, If thou let this man
go, thou art not Caesar's friend.

It should teach us to go on undaunted in our godly course, Use. 2*
making no account of all the malice that the devil or his instruments can
create us, and never offer to shake hands with them; we shall never have done
if we go about to please them, we can not do it unless we will be as bad as
they, if we retain our savor of goodness, it does but provoke them.

Many men may hence see what spirit rules them, Use. 3.
who when they hear Scripture against their sins and unwarrantable courses,
they go on still as a chafed colt, that cares neither for pale nor hedge, but
flings over. These men would be loath to be compared to the devil, but we
shall see them far worse, and the devil not so bad as many of them. When he
hears Christ allege Scripture, he says nothing against it, but was silent,
he replies not, and much less railes on him, as a fantastical or precise
person. But reprove the swearer, the drunkard; the gamester, the unjust
courses of men in their trades, Sabbath-breaking in Masters or servants, and
do it out of the Scriptures as Christ did; we shall have the same measure
that he had returned from the Scribes and Pharisees, who rayled outright on
him; He is too precise and severe, we can do nothing for him; or, What has he
to do with our government, or trades? or, He might find other things to
speak of.

Thus if Paul speak against Diana, or whatsoever the crafts-masters live by,
all the city is in an vproare against him. It seems men are loath in their
callings to meddle with the word of God, or the directions of it, else we
should have to deal with them. It were too much to sit down silent, and go
on in sin against the word: but to resist the word in terms, or to rail
upon the Preachers thereof, goes one step beyond the devil.

Use. 4.
Take knowledge of the secret working of the devil against the light and truth,
in such as spurn against it. They cannot abide that truth and innocence
should acquit it self; but though they see nothing but meekness, patience,
and innocence, yet will side against it, as though they had the greatest
advantage and occasion. What is the cause, that men will take part with most
abject and base persons, and bring the curse on themselves, in condemning the
innocent, and justifying the wicked in their horrible riots and misbehauiour,
but the hatred they carry against goodness? Why did the Jews band themselves
for Barrabas, and seek to acquit him? was it because there was any cause of
love in him? knew they him not to be a murderer, and a rebel? Yes; It was
hatred of Christ that made them stick to him: and why hated they Christ, but
because he was the light? Some there be of that Jewish generation left, to
whom, if Christ be weighed with Barrabas, he will seem too light; Barrabas
shall carry the credit and defense from him; Not him, but Barrabas.

Into the holy City,] We come to the second circumstance in the preparation to
this second assault, which is the place that Satan chooses; set down, 1. in
general, the holy city. 2. in special, a pinnacle of the Temple. What holy
City this was, Luke expresses, c. 4.9. He brought him to Jerusalem, here
called the holy City.

Jerusalem is called the holy city, not because of any holiness in the place:
for no place as a place is more holy then other. It is true, that we read in
Scripture of holy ground, as Exodus 3.5. mount Horeb where Moses stood is called
holy ground, and Moses must put off his shoes. But this was no inherent
holiness in the place, only for the present the presence of God appearing
after a special manner, makes a special holiness to be ascribed unto it.
Neither is it called holy in respect of the people and inhabitants: for the
faithful city was long before this become an harlot, Isa. 1.21. and Christ
not long after this combat, cries out against Jerusalem, That she had killed
the Prophets, and slain such as were sent unto her, and proclaims a speedy
desolation against her. But it was so called,

1. Because God had made choice of this city to put his name there, 2. Chron.
7.12. I have chosen this place for my self. Hence was it called the City of
God, and Gods holy mountain, Dan. 9.16. and the holy hill of Sion; because God
had chosen it, and sanctified it for himself, wherein himself kept residence
and made it eminent above all the places of the earth.

2. Because of the holy things which were there established, even all the holy
worship of God; it was not lawful for the Jews to sacrifice or eat the
Passover any where but in Jerusalem.

There was the Temple built on mount Moriah, wherein, I. There was the Sanctum
seculare, the utter court of the Jews, and Salomons porch which did rise up by
14. stairs, wherein Christ preached often, and Peter healed the lame man, Act.
3.3. and probably, where Peter converted 3000. souls at one sermon. In this
porch was the great brazen altar for whole burnt offerings, on which altar the
fire (which at Aarons first offering in the wilderness fell from heaven, Leuit.
9.22.24.) was to be kept perpetually before the Lord; the which when Aarons
sons neglected and offered with strange fire, they were burnt with fire before
the Lord. In this court was the great brazen sea, wherein the Priests washed
themselves, and the beasts to be offered on that altar, especially their feet,
because they were to minister barefoot before the Lord. Both of them holy
representations of Christ; the former of his sacrifice, who gave himself for a
whole burnt offering: the latter of the fruit of it, he being the lauer of the
Church, by whose blood we are washed from the guilt and power of sin.

II. There was the inner court, which was called the Sanctum, or the
Sanctuary, or the court of the Priests, whence the Jews were barred. There
was here, 1. the altar of incense for sweet perfume, wherein the Priests were
evening and morning, to burn the holy incense before the Lord, as a sweet
smelling savor unto God, and no strange incense might be offered thereon,
Exodus 30.9. While Zachary stood at the right side of this altar, offering
incense to God, the Angel Gabriel stood and foretold the birth of John Baptist.
This was an holy type of Christ, who offered himself on the altar of the
cross, a sacrifice of sweet smell to God his Father, and through whom God
sauoureth a sweet smell from all our duties. 2. In this court was the golden
candlestick, with seven lamps, and seven lights, which were fed with most pure
holy oil, night and day, to lighten the whole inner court. And this was an
holy type of Christ, the light of the world, enlightening all his elect with
spiritual and heavenly light. 3. In this court was that golden table, on which
the holy shewbread was ever to stand, even twelve loaves, which were to be made
of the purest flower of wheat, and were to be renewed every Sabbath, the old
loaves converted to the Priests use: a holy type of Christ, in whom alone the
Church and every member, setting themselves continually before God, are
nourished and preserved unto eternal life. 4. In this court was that costly
and precious veil, of blew silk, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined
linen, made of broydered work with Cherubims, the use of which was to
separate the Sanctum from the Holy of Holies: this veil at the death of Christ
was rent from the top to the bottom. A notable representation of the flesh
of Christ, which hid his Divinity, but being rent asunder by his passion on
the cross, the way to heaven was laid open unto us.

III. There in the temple was the Sanctum Sanctorum, and in it the Oracle,
called the inner house of God, into which only the High Priest went alone once
a year, and that in the feast of expiation, wherein all the Jews must fast
and afflict themselves. A most notable type of Christ: for as it was called an
Oracle, because God thence gave answer in doubtful cases; so who is the
Fathers Oracle but his Son, who is the word of his Father, by whom he speaks
to us, by whom we speak to him, and through whom the Father hears us? In
this Holy of Holies was the Arc of the Covenant, and in this holy place stayed
the Arc almost 430. years, signifying Christ the author of the covenant
between God and us. In which Arc or chest were kept 3. things: 1. the tables
of the covenant, written with the finger of God, signifying Christ, who is the
fulfilling of the law. 2. the rod of Aaron which had budded, a type of the
Priesthood of Christ, who in the world seemed a dead branch and dry, but after
his death and resurrection began again to flourish, and bring fruits of life
to Jews and Gentiles. 3. the pot having Manna, a holy type of Christ the bread
of life, and that Manna that came down from heaven, Ioh. 6.35.

In this Holy of Holies over the Arc was the holy cover, called the
Propitiatory, prefiguring the Lord Jesus, whom the Father has made our
Propitiatory by faith in his blood, (...).
Romans 3.25. Here also were the two glorious Cherubims, set like Angels on
either side the Arc, looking upon the Arc, figuring the holy Angels
ministering to Christ, and earnestly desiring to look into the mystery of our
salvation, 1. Pet. 1.12.

These were the chief holy things established in the temple at Jerusalem, but
not all: for there were beside these, the observation of all holy rites
appointed by God, the chair of Moses, and in it the law read and expounded:
there were the holy persons, the High Priest with all his holy garments, with
Vrim and Thummim, and on his forhead, HOLINESS TO THE LORD: there were other the
holy Ministers of the Lord, who had the Lords holy oil upon them, of Gods own
composition, with strait charge, that no other should make or use it out of
this use. Yea, here had lived the ancient Kings and Prophets, David, Solomon,
Josiah, Hezekiah, who were special types of Christ. In which regard Jerusalem
the seat of God and Gods worship, is called the city of perfect beauty, the
joy of the whole earth.

3. It is called an holy city by comparison unto other great cities of the
neighbor countries, wherein idols and devils were worshipped in stead of God,
as Babylon; or whose worship was the devise of man's brain, and no institution
of God, as Samaria, Cesarea, and others, 2. Kin. 17.33.

4. It is called holy in type, two ways. 1. As it was a type of the Church
militant, of which the members are holy in part, at least in profession. For
the whole Church of God was gathered together 3. times every year before the
Lord; at the feasts of Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles: Psalm. 122.4.
Thither the tribes of the Lord go up, and appear before the Lord. 2. As it
was a type of the Church triumphant, even that celestial Jerusalem which is
above, that new Jerusalem into which no unholy thing can enter, but is the
eternal habitation of the holy God, the holy Angels, and Saints.

5. It was called holy, or the holy city, because it was the fountain of Gods
holy religion, which being first seated there by God, must be derived thence,
and sent out to all other nations. Mic. 4.2. The law shall go out of Sion, and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: therefore was it the Metropolis and mother
city, the heart of the earth, placed in the midst of nations by Gods own
confession, Ezekiel. 5.5. Nay, there must the precious blood of the holy Son of
God be shed, which must stream and run out to the salvation of all nations;
and himself preached the King of the Jews, upon the cross as upon the
theater, in Hebrewe, Greek, and Latin, and that in the time of the Passover,
when there was a concourse of all the people of Jews and other nations. There
the Apostles must give their first witness of Christ, and thence must carry
it into Judea, Samaria, and all nations to the utmost parts of the earth, Act.
1.8. And 8.1. the Church of the New Testament was first gathered at Jerusalem,
and thence by persecution scattered into all nations. In this regard it was
called (...), the holy city: for all the holiness of all other cities was
derived thence.

Doctr. 1.
We learn out of this title, what it is that makes places and persons holy,
even the presence of God, of his word, and worship. Thus the ground was called
holy, Exodus 3.5. and the place where Joshua stood, when the captain of the
Lords host appeared unto him, chap. 5.15.

Reasons. 1.
1. Whatsoever was in the law separated to God and his service, was called holy:
the Sabbath was holy, the Priests garments holy, Exodus 28. Thou shall make holy
garments for Aaron thy brother: Holy, both because they were peculiar to the
holy Priesthood (for none else might put them on,) and because they were to be
used in the holy place, (for when they came forth of the Tabernacle, they must
put them off:) and thirdly, consecrate to holy uses, and to be an holy type of
Christ's righteousness, a precious robe wherein all our sacrifices are offered.
The flesh was holy, which was offered to the Lord in sacrifice, Hagg. 2.13. For
places, Bethel was an holy place, when Jacob saw the vision of the ladder
there; and the Temple was holy. For people, the Jews were called an holy
nation, and Christians an holy Priesthood, and Saints by calling, 1. Pet. 2.9
For persons, some are sanctified in the womb to some special service, as
Jeremy, cap. 1.5. and John Baptist. Yea, every faithful man's heart, is as it
were an Ark of God, in which are kept the Tables of the Law, yea the
Tabernacle of God, and the Temple of the holy Ghost, where he pleases to
dwell. And thus was Jerusalem an holy city, so long as it continued in the
true worship of God.

2
2. This appears by the contrary, seeing this holiness was no further annexed
to this place, then God tied his presence to it: for when as the Jews had
crucified the Lord of glory, both the Temple and City, as profane were
destroyed, and delivered into the hand of the Romans, and are now in the hands
of the Turk, a nest of unclean and idolatrous beasts, most savage enemies of
Christ, and Christian profession.

3. That place must needs be holy, where the Lord dwells as a Master in his
house; teaching, ordering, and supplying all necessaries: where Christ the holy
Son of God walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, being
conversant among the flocks of shepherds: where the holy Spirit of God is
present to power out his treasures of wisdom and grace, by means of the word
and Sacraments, which are his chariot, and which, not accompanied with the
Spirit, are but dead and ineffectuall to regeneration: where the holy Angels
are present to assist the ministry, to repel hindrances, to behold our
order; but especially desirous to look into the mysteries of our salvation:
where the holy Saints upon earth, are met together to seek and see the face of
the Lord, joining together in all the parts of his pure and holy worship, in
hearing his holy word, receiving his holy Sacraments, preferring publicly
their holy prayers, greatly by this means glorifying God, and enriching their
own selves: Surely, this is Bethel, the house of God, and the gate of heaven.

This teaches us not to despise our assemblies, Use. 1.
nor to think our Churches unholy for some corruptions. Look upon Jerusalem,
Matthew. 23.37. you shall see the eleven tribes were Apostates, there were in it
dumb dogs, Isa. 56.10. there were Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites; nay, at
this time the doctrine of the law was corrupted by the false glosses of the
Pharisees, and the Temple almost a den of thieves, full of buyers and
sellers. Yet for all this, the Evangelist calls it the holy City, even when it
had more corruptions in it, then the Church of England has at this day. Why?
1. Because there was the service of the true God set up in the Temple, the word
preached, and sacrifices offered, and the meetings of the Church of God. 2.
Because as yet they had not received a bill of diuorcement. Have not we the
word truly preached, and the Sacraments for substance truly administered? And
for discipline, I will say, I wish we had the execution of so much as the
Church allows. Or, when did the Lord give us a bill of divorce? or, what
Church has convinced us, that we cannot be acknowledged for a true Church? If
they say, they of the Separation have; I answer, 1. They have labored to
discover some errors, but none fundamental in us, nor without as many in
themselves. 2. We may well doubt whether they be a Church or no, seeing by the
profession of some of their teachers, they will not join themselves to any
Church at this day upon the face of the earth, and so renounce all Communion
with all the parts of the Catholic Church in the world. But we must not think
much, if some unstable persons forsake our communion, seeing in the golden and
flourishing age of the Apostles themselves, some such there were, Heb. 10.25.

As for our selves, we may strengthen our selves against them by these
conclusions. 1. We know, that the word of truth is truly preached amongst us,
which appears by the daily conversion of thousands, whereas never was man
converted by a word of error, Iam. 1.18. 2. We know, that our Ministers are of
God, because by them so many are begotten to God: Our Savior thought this a
good reason, when he said, Believe me that I came out from the Father, for the
works sake. The blind man had good insight into this matter, Ioh. 9.30.
saying, If this man were not of God, he could do nothing: and a wonderful
thing it is, that ye know not whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes.
So may I say to the Separatist, Do thou not know whence that Minister is,
who has opened thine eyes? 3. We know, that our meetings are holy meetings: 1.
our people is outwardly called by an holy calling, and to an holy end: 2. they
profess faith in Christ, which is an holy profession, and in charity (if we
see no open reigning sin) are to be judged Saints: 3. congregations are
called holy in Scripture from the better part, not from the greater, as an heap
of wheat mingled and covered with chafe, yet is called wheat. 1. Cor. 6.11.
Now ye are sanctified, washed, and justified: but in epist. 2. cap. 12. I fear
that when I come among you, my God will humble me, and I shall bewail many of
them that have sinned, and have not repented of their uncleanness, and
fornication, and wantonness, which they have committed. Diverse other abuses
there were, yet among Saints and beloved ones. 4. mixed congregations are holy
in Gods acceptance, esteeming them not as they are in themselves, but as
members of Christ. When Israel was at the best, it was a rebellious and
stiffenecked people: yet Balaam said, He saw no iniquity in Iaacob, nor
transgression in Israel, not that there was none, but that none was imputed.

4. We know that we have no warrant to separate from holy things, neither for
some defects cleaving to them, nor for ill men either handling them, or
communicating in them. The Prophets never made any separation in times of
greatest corruption, even when they cried out of their wickedness. 1. Sam. 2.24.
Do so no more my sons (said Eli:) ye make the people trespass: How? By
making them loath the service and sacrifice for your wickedness, v. 17. And
when many abuses were among the Corinths in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
yet a man that did carefully examine himself, might communicate of it with
comfort. Yea our Savior Christ was often in the Temple, teaching and praying,
and so were his Disciples, though it was a most corrupt place.

Object. 1. How may I pray with an evil man, seeing God hears not sinners?
Nay, his prayer is abominable. Answ. 1. The speech in Ioh. 9.31. is not
universally true: for God heard the poor Publican confessing himself a
sinner. 2. Though God hear him not for himself, yet he hears him for the
people; as Balaam blessing Israel, being both a wicked man, and speaking
against his heart, God heard him for the people, Number. 23.

Object. 2. But how may I communicate with a wicked Minister, or with what
comfort? Answ. The wickedness of the Minister may some what lessen the comfort,
but neither diminish the perfection of the Sacrament in it self, nor hinder
the efficacy thereof to us; seeing the efficacy depends only upon the
promise of God, and the faith of the receiver, and is no more to be refused
then the gift of a King, though the conuayance be drawn by a wicked Lawyer.
Ob. But how can he be a means of conuaying grace to me, that is a graceless
man? Answ. Grace is compared to water: now may not water that passes through a
wooden or stony channel, which it self is so undisposed that it cannot
receive or have any benefit of it, make a whole garden fruitful? It is
Augustines simile. Besides, I would ask, whether any could with comfort refuse
Judas his Baptism. Ioh. 4.2. even when he was a devil incarnate. If it be
said, They knew him not so to be, then belike a man may receive the Sacrament
fruitfully of a secret profane man or infidel, and the wickedness of a
Minister (if it be secret) pollutes not the Sacrament; and then it must follow
necessarily, that no comfort and truth of the Sacrament can depend upon any
Minister; for then none could have any assured comfort, that they have ever
received a Sacrament, because no man can look to the sanctification of any man's
heart, and cannot certainly without revelation know who is indeed truly
sanctified.

Object. 3. But what say you to a dumb Minister? he is no Minister, and
therefore he can perform no ministerial action: his Baptism, is no Baptism;
his Sacraments, no Sacraments; his prayers, no prayers. Answ. 1. For
themselves, I say their Ministry is unlawful to themselves, and without
repentance a certain matter of destruction. 2. I cannot blame those, who with
their own peace, and the Churches avoid them. 3. We must distinguish between
such a man, and a mere private man: for although they be no good and lawful
Ministers of God, yet because they come in the room of Ministers, by the
election of the Church, to whom God has given power to ordain, they are now
public persons, and Ministers, though no good ones. 4. Being thus enabled by
the Church to give what they can, and bound by being in the place of a Pastor,
though he come never so inordinately to administer Sacraments, we may receive
from him what he can give. 5. We must distinguish between a calling, and the
execution of it; for it proves not he has no calling of a Minister, because
he executes it not. A Magistrate cease not to be a Magistrate, or to want
office, because he does not duly execute it. Object. But the Magistrate is an
able Magistrate, so is not this Minister. Answ. A Magistrate is a Magistrate,
who for the ignorance of his place may be called an Idoll-Magistrate: the
substance of a lawful and good Magistrate, is to be able to judge of causes,
but not of a Magistrate simply, who is chosen by election of people, or by
course: so it is of the substance of a good and lawful Minister of God, to be
able to preach, but not of a Minister simply. And as a Magistrate not able to
weild martial affairs, and so defective in a special part of his office, yet
no man refuses the good that he can do for peace: even so, endeavoring in
the mean time for a sufficient Ministry, and groaning under this burden,
which private men cannot cast off, I take it, the good things which they can
give, may be taken at their hands. Object. But by communicating with them, we
communicate in their sin. Answ. He that receives the Sacrament at the hands
of a Minister, who is an adulterer, neither makes him an adulterer, nor
partakes of his adultery. If we either made him Minister, or communicated with
his insufficiency, which our souls groan under, some part of the guilt would
stick to our fingers. But we communicate only in the Lords ordinances, so
far as he is able to administer, and justify not the lawfulness of his
calling, but that he only is in the room and place of a Minister, whom we
cannot avoid, unless we will put away the Lord in refusing his Sacraments.

Object. Hos. 4.6. Because thou have refused knowledge, thou shall be no Priest
to me: therefore ignorant Ministers are no Ministers. Answ. 1. True; no
lawful, no good ones, approved of God, to me. 2. The Prophet rather gives a
rule in election and deposition of such, then shows how far they may be used
while they stand: So we deny not but such ought not to be chosen Ministers,
nor that such ought not to be deposed: but, that nothing ought to be received
of them while they stand, we deny, especially seeing we well know, that in
ancient Churches there were Deacons, who were assistants to Pastors and
Presbyters in reading, administering Sacraments, Baptism and the Eucharist, yea
and in Catechizing, who had not the office of Pastors. All which I speak not to
maintain this foame of the Church, which she has been too long in scumming
off; but to remove causlesse scruples of weak consciences, who are ready to
deem all their actions nullities, and utterly reject Sacraments at the hands
of such unpreaching Ministers.

Object. 4. But how may I partake where open sinners are tolerated to receive
the Sacrament? do not I partake of their sins? Answ. Christ entered into the
same Temple with wicked persons, and ate the same Passover with Judas, and was
undefiled: the Prophets lived in the midst of a polluted people, and joined in
the public exercises of religion: and those few of the Church of Sardi defiled
not their garments among a multitude of wicked persons.

Object. Isa. 52.11. and, Reu. 18.3. Come out of her my people, touch no
unclean thing, etc. Answ. If we compare the Prophets precept, with his
practice, we shall easily see he means not of any schismatic separation:
he calls Gods people out of that wicked multitude, but where read we, that
himself did bodily separate? and therefore, this must be a coming out, and
departing from their evil, not local, but moral: q.d. 1. have no
fellowshippe with their unfruitful works. 2. do not countenance them in
their evil. 3. reprove them. 4. touch no unclean thing, that is, consent not
to any wickedness among them. But, 1. It is one thing to touch the holy things
of God, another the uncleanness of men. 2. separation from the wicked in body
is impossible, except we will go out of the world. The Disciples could not be
rid of Judas, unless they would depart from Christ himself. 3. unless they can
prove an established idolatry among us ripe to the plague, as in Babylon, they
cannot prove a separation in body and mind. 4. of this separation a reason
is given, not because they cannot partake in any holy thing, while the wicked
are in presence; but, least ye be partakers of her plagues.

Object. 1. Cor. 5.11. If any be a fornicatour, or covetous, or an idolater, or
a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one eat not. A little leaven
leaueneth the whole lump. Answ. 1. The place is meant of private familiarity
and amity, so far as a man is not bound, or tends to the countenancing of
his sin. 2. It implies that he ought to be excommunicate, if he hear not
the Churches admonition, (as the whole context will show) and so cut off from
Christian communion for the time. 3. If a man were excommunicate, some were
bound to eat privately with him, as his wife, children, and servants: for
these are necessarily bound, and do not countenance him. 4. A man may and must
eat sometimes with notorious wicked persons; as suppose a man in the same
ship, or prison, or army, and can have no meat but among vile wicked persons,
here a man may not refuse it, least he famish himself. So at the Lords table:
such as admit wicked persons, having power to repel them, communicate with
their sin and countenance them therein: but a private person, whose soul is
vexed with their sin, and does what he can to redress it, but cannot, is not
polluted by them; he is forced to eat with them, he may not starve his soul.

As for that, A little leaven leaueneth the whole lump, the Apostle speaks it
to the governors not to suffer such wicked persons, and provoke only
private persons, the pieces of that lump, to be the more watchful over
themselves, but not to refuse Gods ordinances for them: And as neither that
Church of Corinth ceased to be a Church for suffering that wicked man (for the
Apostle honors them with that style while he checketh that sin,) so neither
do particular members cease so to be for that such are suffered, much less.
Look to thy own soul: the Apostle wishes every man to examine himself
rather then others.

Object. 5. But how can I hear the word with profit from a wicked man? Answ.
1. A wicked man may preach salvation to another, and damnation to himself; as
Judas and the builders of Noah's Arc. A statue may point another the way, but
it self stand still. 2. An instrument has all his efficiency from the first
moouer, who is God himself: a knife without motion will cut if the hand will
use it. 3. The word is like the light: now as the light of the Sun is not
defiled, though it pass through the dirtiest places, so the word is not
polluted through a wicked preacher. 4. Look to thy own disposition, that thy
soil be good as the seed is good, take the benefit of the Sun and rain, and
it is no matter whether the hands be clean or foul that cast and disperse the
seed. 5. Let Preachers consider what a bar it is to all their labor to be
scandalous, covetous, disdainefull, envious, noted for gamesters, companions,
etc. how their example does more harm then their teaching can do good; with
how little power or prevailing he can point his finger to other men's sores,
which every one can point at in himself; what an odious thing it is to make
Gods people to loath Gods ordinances, because of him; and what a woeful case
it is that Paul intimates of such teachers, who preaching to others, themselves
by disobedience become cast-awayes, 1. Cor. 9.27.

Rules to avoid entangling and seduction by Separatists persuasions.

1. Labor for wisdom to discern between maine truths in doctrine, and
inferior in discipline; as knowing that Jerusalem was the holy City before
Nehemiah builded the wall of it: between the person and the place, not
condemning the place for the person; between the thing and the use, and
condemn not the use for the abuse; between offices and executions, substance
and circumstances; the being of a thing, and the well-beeing of it. 2. Labor
to reform thine own heart first, for that is in thy power to amend; and then
thy own family; and, if it be in thy power, go further to the house of God:
but if thou be a private man, and this be not in thy power, thou must turn
thee to prayers and tears; and yet so strive in seeking the well-beeing of
things, as by unthankfulness thou loose not the comfort of the things
themselves. 3. Be low in thine own eyes, suspect thy own judgment, condemn
not, much less contemn those that are not every way as thy self. Pride and
contention of spirit are inseparable; and it is folly to look that men who
have a different measure of grace, should not differ in judgment, and though
they walk in the same way, yet not after the same manner. 4. Testify thy
self a sound Christian by the badge of Christ, which is love: By this shall
all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. Study to be
quiet (says the Apostle,) and follow things that concern peace. Love will
make the best even of bad things, and give a charitable construction of things
doubtful, and pity and pray for such as err howsoever, and much more if they
err of ignorance.

Use. 2.
This doctrine teaches us, that the way to sanctify a man's person or family,
is to set up the worship of God in his heart or house. 1. Thy heart must be the
Temple of God, yea as the Arc within the Sanctuary: In the Temple God was
daily worshipped, there were daily sacrifices offered, the Scriptures read and
expounded, and prayers preferred unto God from his people. Thou must get
proportion in all these, if thy heart be Gods Temple: thou must privately, yea
secretly apart daily worship God with personal worship, daily offer the
sacrifices of praise and thanks for personal blessings and deliverances, daily
prefer thy personal prayers, daily apart read and apply the Scriptures to
thine own use: for thus must it be in Gods temple. And further, thy heart must
be as the Arc, wherein were kept the tables of the Law, written with Gods own
finger: endeavor in obedience to all Gods commandments, entreat God to write
his law in thy heart, that thou may never depart from it. Thy heart as the
Arc, must keep the pot of Manna, a type of Christ the food of life; close
Christ within thy heart, and hold him as thy life never to part with him: for
that pot figured the Sacraments, in which Christ is propounded the food of the
soul. Thy heart as the Arc, must contain Aarons rod that had budded,
signifying the discipline and government of Christ, unto which thou must
subject thy self: let this rod flourish in thee, and stoop with reverence
and fear to this scepter.

2. Thy house and family must be sanctified also, by setting up and preserving
Gods worship there. We read of some of the Saints, who had Churches in their
houses: Every Christian professing holiness must have the like care and
endeavor in such family-exercises as God has prescribed: as, 1. In diligent
teaching and instructing the family, partly in reading, and partly in
delivering precepts out of the word. It is Gods commandment, Deuteronomy. 6.7. to
whet the law continually on our children, and train them up even from childhood
in the Scriptures. The benefit whereof shall be, 1. to fit them for the public
ministry: 2. to cause the word to dwell plenteously in them: 3. it is a notable
means for their growth in godliness, and to contain them in good order.

2. In calling them to account for things delivered, by catechizing, pitifully
neglected in families, who yet would be thought to be Gods people. This is the
driving of the nail to the head, to stick the surer. It works care in those,
who easily reject good means. It hinders vain thoughts, words, and exercises.
It banisheth much folly and ignorance, that is bound up in the hearts of
children and servants.

3. In applying the works of God past or present, on our selves or others, to
move them to confidence and trust in God, by the works of his mercy, and to
fear to offend by the works of his justice: and by this means, the seeds not
only of true religion, but of good conscience, shall be sown in them betimes:
this was holy Abraham's practice, for which God would not hide his secret works
from him, Genesis 18.19.

4. In daily private prayer with the family, at least every morning and evening
solemnly on our knees, making confessions of sins, and requests to God,
together with thanksgiving. Psalm. 55.17. Evening, and morning, and at noone,
will I pray and make a noise. Daniel three times a day prayed, and praised God
in his house, as he was wont, chap. 6. v. 10. The excellent use of which, is
the opening of the door of Gods treasury to the family, by which it is
enriched with the best blessings of God. Besides, the Lord shall hereby have
some honor, that is due to his mercy upon the family.

5. In edifying the family with Psalms and melody to the Lord, as it is Col.
3.16. In these daily duties does the sanctification of a family consist.
Whereunto we may be persuaded by these motives: 1. In that they are the
practices of men fearing God, such as Joshua and his house, Cornelius and his
household. 2. In that by these exercises the family shall not only be
sanctified, but also blessed; as Obed Edom and his house for the presence of
the Arc. 3. What madness is it, to reject and banish Gods word and worship
out of doors, and yet think God is there? Nay, where sound grace comes, there
is the Spirit of prayer and supplication in every family apart, Zach. 12.14.
and where this worship of God is not set up in families, there is nothing but
a conspiracy of Atheists, and a wicked brood bringing Gods judgments on
themselves, and the business passing through their hands.

Jerusalem is called holy, being once sanctified to the Lords use; Use. 3.
which teaches us, that we should reverently both conceive and speak of all
such things as are set apart to the Lords use.

1. Some persons are consecrate to the Lord, as the tribe of Leui, of whom the
commandment was, Thou shall not forsake the Leuit all thy days. And the
Prophets: Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. So in the New
Testament, The Minister that rules well, is worthy of double honor: Yea, if
the widows which were set apart to inferior offices about the poor, must be
honored, 1. Tim. 5.3. much more the minister that stands in Gods place and
stead. Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the oversight of you. Thus Cornelius
reverenced Peter, and the Eunuch Philip. Nay, not only the minister, but every
believer is separate to God, and sanctified to carry the Covenant, and has
the anointing of the Spirit; which the Lord acknowledges on them, and
speaks reverently and lovingly of them, calling them his holy ones, yea the
apple of his eye. They see not this, who can persecute and revile them for
hypocrites, and count them as the Apostles (whose doctrine they profess) the
scum of the world.

2. Some places are for their use to be accounted holy, because God is there
present in his worship, as the places of our meetings; not that any inherent
holiness is annexed to the place, or cleaves to it out of the action of Gods
worship; but while God is present in his worship, we must account it holy
ground, and the house of God. When God appeared in Bethel to Iaacob, he said,
How fearful is this place? surely it is no other then the house of God. We
must therefore put off your shoes with Moses, that is, our base and vile, our
sinful and sensual affections, yea our lawful (if earthly) thoughts, when
we come to this holy place. Look we bring no thoughts with us unbeseeming the
place where God is, separated from other common places to holy uses. Look that
in this place we use no gesture or behavior, unbeseeming a man that has
business with God being present. To sit talking, or sleeping, or laughing, or
gazing, suits not with this place. And further, if God please to account the
very places holy for the use, and presence of God in this use; what shall we
think of them that conceive so basely of them, as they would love a Parish
better, in which is no Church? Others profane them with base practices, and
unconscionably suffer them to fall or decay, and will be at no charge to make
or keep them handsome, sweet, and beautiful. Styes were fit for such swine: As
their affection is, so is their devotion.

3. The holy ordinances of God must not be touched but with holy respect and
reverence: of which it is said, It is not safe to play with holy things. 1. The
word must be received, read, heard, spoken, as the holy word of God. To make
jests of Scripture is a wicked practice. God looks graciously on him that
trembles at his word, Isa. 66. 2. as good Josiah, whose heart melted, hearing
the words of the law. So the names and attributes of God, are never to be used
in frivolous admirations; but every knee must bow unto him, Phil. 2.10.
Neither ought we to laugh at Gods judgments on others. 2. An oath is one of
the holy ordinances of God; and to swear in common talk vainly, is not to
show reverence to this holy ordinance. Swear not at all, that is, uncalled,
Matthew. 5.34.35. neither being called, but in truth, justice, and judgment:
for an oath is appointed to decide controversies, which other means cannot.
How few consider whether the matter be worth an oath, or whether they be called
to it, or whether it might not have been better passed by Yea or Nay, or by a
bare asseueration? A wicked man is described by being a swearer, Eccl. 9.3.
but a godly man not only not swears, from which a man by education or
civility may abstain, but also fears an oath, in what company soever he is,
or what occasion soever he has. 3. A lot is another special ordinance of God,
to decide a controversy from heaven by God himself, when all means on earth
fail. Therefore lots must not be used without great reverence and prayer,
because the disposition of them comes immediately from the Lord, Prou. 16.33.
and not but in great matters, not for recreation: for it is said, to cause
contentions to cease among the mighty, Pro. 18.18. neither do we read that it
was ever used, but in very great things, as the dividing of the land of Canaan,
the election of high Priests and Kings, and the surrogation of Matthias into
the place of Judas. Hence it follows, if dice and cards be lots (as I think
they be) that all play by them is unlawful.

4. Some times are sanctified above other, as the Sabbath day, all which must
be passed holily, with much reverence and respect, both remembering it before it
come, yea rejoicing in the approach of it; and when it is come, to sanctify
it; 1. In our hearts: for external observation of the Sabbath, without inward
holiness and affection to the duties of Gods service, Exodus 34 25.
is hypocrisy. 2. We must not meddle with any part of the duties of our
ordinary calling: for that is no holy thing. 3. Much less travel to markets
or faires: but every man must stay in his own place, Exodus 16.29. Neh. 13.15.
to 9. 4* Least of all must we set any part of it apart to our recreations:
these be no holy things: sports are inferior to our lawful callings, which
are to be laid aside, far from holy things, and unsuitable to the Lords
holy day. The like (if not more) may be said against pampering a man's self and
others, by feeding or feasting, and of drinking, or any such wicked passing
away the Sabbath. The same also is to be spoken of a day of feasting, or
public thanksgiving, which have the reason of a Sabbath.

Of these, and all other Gods holy ordinances, we may say as the voice said to
Peter, What God has sanctified, pollute thou not.

Doctr. 2.
A place is no longer holy, then God and his worship is present. Was Jerusalem a
holy City? how then is the beautiful city become an harlot? how is it, that
this city which was the seat of Gods worship, and the habitation and
collection of the S^ints, is now an harbor of Turks and Infidels, ouerrunne
with Turcisme or idolatry? Surely, because the cause of this holiness ceased;
the worship of God was corrupted, the Son of God despighted, the Gospel of
God rejected, the Saints of God murdered, the day of visitation neglected. And
therefore, they being infinitely departed from God, and his pure worship, God
departs from them; and God being gone, the place cease to be holy. Bethel,
while the vision of the ladder lasted there, was an holy place, and so long as
Gods worship continued there: but when it admitted the pollution of idolatry,
it must be called Bethel no more, but Bethauen. When the congregation of
Israel brought the Arc from Gilgal, and set it up in Shilo, then was Shilo the
standing house of God, the seat of religion and justice which God had chosen,
Josh. 18.1. but for the sins of this place, the Lord rejected it; as Ier.
7.12. Go now to Shilo, into my place where I set my name in the beginning, and
behold what I did unto it for the wickedness of Israel: if we will know what,
look 1. Sam. 4.4. when by the villainy of Elies sons, and outrage of the
people, the Lord was provoked, he gave Israel into the hands of the Philistims,
there were 30000. footmen slain, the Arc was taken, Hophni and Phineas
slain, Eli the high Priest brake his neck; then did the glory depart from
Israel, and the Ark never came at Shilo more.

So the Temple at Jerusalem was holy, the city holy, so long as they continued
in the true worship of God; but after they crucified the Lord of life, both
city and temple as profane were destroyed; so as Jerusalem, although the holy
city of God, if her filthiness be found in her skirts, she shall be bad in
derision, Lam. 1. the most beautiful rod, if held out against God, shall be
broken: yea, the Temple of God, if it become a den of thieves, God will
depart from it. For what is it that can tie God to any place, but his own
worship, to which he has tied himself by promise?

Let not the vain Romanist boast of the pretended chair of Peter, from which
God cannot possibly depart. Use. 1.
Can God depart from Shilo for the sins of Priests and people, where first he
put his name, and can he not depart from Rome? Can he depart from the holy
city, where he promised he would rest, and can he not be driven from the great
city of the whore, to which he never made any such promise? Can he depart in
displeasure from her, whose foundations were laid among the holy mountains,
Psalm. 87.1. and can he not depart from the whore, that sits upon seven
hills? Shall Bethlehem where Christ was borne, be forsaken, and cannot Babylon
where Christ is daily crucified? Nay, Reu. 11.8.
the Lord is long since departed from her, and her final confusion is at the
door.

And if Jerusalem, once the holy city, but now a cage and nest of unclean
Saracens and Turks, be left of God, Use. 2.
what a superstitious error prevailed in former times, wherein such bloody
battles were fought for the recovery of the holy land, most superstitiously
putting religion and holiness even in the place it self, after all the holy
things were profaned, and God himself departed? The evil success of such
battles ever showed, how God was offended with such superstitious wars: and
another mischeife by them oppressed the Christian world to keep it in
blindness: For the Pope making his advantage of this blind devotion, if any
King or Prince in Christendom stood between him and his proceedings, one way
or other he would send him out of his own country in expedition for the holy
war, and there hold him till he had effected his own designs in that
Princes country, and so strengthened himself in all lands, as histories
manifest.

Let us not bear our selves as though we had God so sure, as the Papist
thinks he has him in a box, Use. 3.
or pretend any vain privilege that we have to exempt us from danger: True it
is, we have the word with peace, liberty, and protection; but the fear is,
that our security and deadnes of heart, with dissolutenes and profaneness in
behavior, will forfeit all. God sends Jerusalem to Shilo, Ier. 7.4.12
saying, Trust not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord; but amend
your ways, and I will let you dwell in this place: but if you will not, go to
Shilo, and see what I did to it, and look for the like. So now God sends us to
Jerusalem, that we may consider what he did to it, being once the praise of
the earth: and if the same sins be found in us as were in Jerusalem, the Lord
will do no other with us, then he did with it; even as he threatened, 2. Kin.
21.13. he will stretch over us the line of Samaria, that is, bring the enemy in
our necks; and the plummet of the house of Ahab an idolater; take away his
holy things, and exchange them with filthy idolatry, and wipe us as a man
wipeth a dish, even turn us vpside down. What were the sins of Jerusalem
but pride, idleness, fullness of bread, and contempt of the poor? in all
which England does equal, if not go beyond Jerusalem: and yet we charge our
selves as little with our sins as Jerusalem did. And if we look to the
immediate causes and forerunners of Ierusalems overthrow, and compare them with
our land, we shall see it high time to look about us: for,

I. In general, Jerusalem had grievously sinned, and therefore was had in
derision: Lam. 1.8. Her sins were great, many, of long continuance, with
treasured wrath; and all this in a place of such means and light. Now no place
in the world has more means then we, we are far beyond Jerusalem in means,
and therefore far beyond her in sins.

II. More specially: 1. They did not hear the words of Gods servants the
Prophets, nor obey them; therefore the Lord made that house like to Shilo, Ier.
26.6. and hence Jerusalem afterward had time enough, but too late to charge her
self with rebellion, Lam. 1.18. and to acknowledge the righteous judgment of
God against it. Never were the Oracles of heathens despised so amongst them, as
Gods holy word is generally of our people; no man almost lets it come near his
heart, a manifest argument that God will one day speak so as he will be
heard. 2. Jerusalem would not take knowledge of the day of her visitation, as
appears in Luke 19.43. and Matthew. 23.37. therefore her habitation was made
desolate. As little know we the worth of our blessed means: but perhaps we may
know it better in the want of them. 3. Jerusalem remembered not her latter end,
therefore she came down wonderfully, Lam. 1.9. she was careless and never
considered the account she was to make of her liberties, and so hardened her
self in sin, and grew to contemn the good means she had, through the
daily custom of them. This also was the immediate forerunner of Niniuehs
destruction, Zeph. 2.13. This is the rejoicing city, that dwelt careless and
said in her heart, I am, and there is none besides me. How is she made wast,
and the lodging of beasts? Every one that passes by her, shall hiss and wagge
his head. And the reason is, She bore her self upon her privileges, her holy
things, her strength, wealth, populous and flourishing estate, specially upon
the promises of God, which they perverted, being all made with condition of
obedience, which they had long before forfeited: yea so likely and constant an
estate she had, as none in the world would have believed, that the enemy should
have entered the gates of Jerusalem, Lam. 4.12. so as he came unlooked for. The
same is our conceit, we think our staff so strong that it can never be
broken, we remember not what is the end of security: when men cry, Peace,
Peace, comes sudden war.

4. Jerusalem had two sorts of Prophets in her: First false Prophets, which
flattered them and sought out vain things, false prophesies and causes of
banishment, Lam. 2.14. Such was Hanani, who opposed Jeremy, and said the Lord
would within two years break the yoke of the King of B^bel, Ier. 28.2. and
Ahabs false Prophets would bid the King go up to battle against Gods
commandment, and prosper. This was one cause of her ruin, Lam. 4.13. for the
sins of her Prophets and Priests: not that the people had not sinned, but
when leaders, and such as should preserve purity of religion and manners, are
so corrupt, it argues a general corruption running down from the head to all
the members, which must needs bring the whole to a consumption. A second sort
were faithful and sincere, and the entertainment of these was such in
Jerusalem, as God most severely revenged. Jeremy was cast into the dungeon,
Micaiah into prison, nay our Savior challenges Jerusalem of such cruelty
against the Prophets, as did bring all the righteous blood upon them from Abel
unto Zachariah, Matthew. 23.37. But of all cruelty they filled their measure in
crucifying the Lord of the holy Prophets: Matthew. 21.38. the Householder sent his
servants to receive fruits, but they evil entreated them, and beat some, and
slew others: at last he sent his Son, saying, They will surely reverence my
Son: but they said, This is the heir, Come let us kill him, and the
inheritance shall be ours. Now what will the Householder do? He will certainly
destroy those wicked men, and let out his vineyard to others. Expressing
plainly in this parable, Gods dealing with Jerusalem, and theirs with him, and
what was the immediate cause of their destruction. A dangerous thing it is to
wrong the faithful Ministers of God: Do my Prophets no harm, says the Lord:
and to persecute Christ in his members, shall not be unrevenged.

5. Jerusalem had many warnings before their utter overthrow. It was besieged
by Pharaoh Necho, by Senacherib in Hezekias time, in Rehoboams time by Shishac
King of Egypt it was sacked and overthrown, 1. King. 14.26. It was subdued
thrice by Nebuchadnezzar king of Babel, twice under Ioakim, and the third time
under Zedekiah, the city was wasted, the Temple burnt, and the people
captiuated into Babylon, 2. King. 24. and 25. After seauentie years, when by
the permission of Cyrus King of Persia, the Temple was builded by Zerubbabel,
the City by Nehemiah, and the law restored by Ezra, and the Lord came again
to his Temple: yet being again provoked, some years after it was taken by
Antiochus Epiphanes King of Syria, the law burned, the Temple profaned, the
daily sacrifice removed, the sanctuary of strength polluted, and the
abomination of desolation set up, as Daniel had foretold, chap. 11. v. 31. and
made a wonderful effusion of blood. After this, the City and Temple was
reedified by Judas Affomanaeus, and began to flourish: but it was not long,
before it was again taken by Cu. Pompeius, a Roman Captain, whom Aristobulus
called to help him against his brother Hircanus for the Priesthood. All these
were fair warnings, whence they might perceive, 1. how righteous the Lord was
in not forbearing their sins: 2. with how little reason they could stand upon
any outward privilege, if they would go on in provoking the Lord: 3. how
loath the Lord was to reject them utterly, if by any means they could be
reclaimed. But when no means would do them good, the Lord gives them to utter
desolation by Titus and Vespasian, who ruinated the city, defaced the Temple,
and left not one stone upon another, as Christ prophesied, Matthew. 24.2. And
since that time it has ever been profaned, and in the hands of the greatest
enemies of God and man, next Satan himself; polluted with most horrible
idolatries, the Jews driven from thence into all lands, and in all lands
vagabonds, the blood of the Son of God lying upon them and their children
till this day.

Oh the patience of God toward us! the many warnings and threatenings that we
have had, by many treasons, conspiracies, sundry open and secret practices of
our enemies, by sea and by land! (Remember 88. and 1605.) by sundry plagues of
many kinds, and every day renewed, renewes some warning or other: And yet, how
fall we back more and more? how strong are the Papists? how bold? how
malicious and furious, as mastiues that have bin long in the chain? Oh that we
were so wise, rather to take example by others, then to be made examples to
others; and to take warning by others harms to prevent our own! Why should we
think our selves so safe from the touch of this doctrine, or exempted from the
lot of all Churches and lands? Where was there ever a more holy place, a more
holy City, a more holy Temple, then at Jerusalem? yet by security departing
from the Lord, the Lord left them. What Church in all the world, whose
flourishing estate has always lasted? Cast we our eyes upon the Churches
planted by the Apostles themselves, that of Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus,
the Churches in Asia: they had their times, but knew it not till it was too
late: now all are become dens of thieves, and sunk down into the deadly
poison either of Mahometisme or Antichristianisme.

It was the oversight and overthrow of the most renowned Churches, never long
to prize their liberties in the presence of them, but had leave a long time to
bewail their absence. Time was when Jerusalem had God near them, his
Prophets, his Law and Oracles, her Nazarites purer then snow: But not long
after, there was never a Prophet left, never a sign, her Nazarites blacker
then a cole, the ways of Sion forsaken: Oh now for one Prophet more! Time was
when they had the Son of God among them, and his Apostles, and the sound of
the blessed Gospel was first offered to them: But not long after Christ and
his Apostles, the note was altered, and the case changed: for the sons of
peace, and Ministers of peace, they hear of Titus and Vespasian, of wars and
bloodshed, of famine and death meeting them a thousand ways.

Now time is, we have God near us, and Christ his Son, and the Ministers of
reconciliation, and we know not our happiness. Time may come, when we may wish
one good Minister in a country, one sermon, one holy Sabbath spent as we have
seen many with too much neglect: a Lent may come for this long ope-tide. The
Lord knows how little we desire the day of vengeance, neither can we
prophecy; but blessed is that man that sees the plague and hides himself,
whereas the fool must go on to punishment.

THE second thing in this second circumstance, is the special place, namely
The pinnacle of the Temple.]

The Temple was the highest place on the mount Moriah, and the pinnacle was the
highest place of the Temple, to wit, a battlement about the top to keep from
falling down, Deuteronomy. 22.8. called pinacles from their sharpness, as our
pinacles are the sharp tops of our buildings, or spires.

Satan makes choice of this place; 1. As fit to his temptation, the scope and
aim whereof we shall see afterward. 2. Beginning a new temption, he changes
his place, to see if thereby he can change Christ's mind: so did Balaam, to
see if any place would serve him to curse Gods people, shift from place to
place. And it is not unlike but our dicers and gamesters have learned this of
the devil, when the play runs against them, to shift places for better
luck, as they say. 3. The place was full of danger to stand upon, and much
more for the height to fall from. 4. The Temple was an holy place, dedicated to
Gods worship and service; what has Satan to do there? but he takes upon him,
as though he had to do every where, and can stand among the sons of God,
against the sons of God. It may be Christ will think himself privileged
there, as the Pope in his chair, that he cannot err what ever he do. Or if
he can abuse the Temple, to make it a means of the overthrow of the Son of
God, he shall with one work both dishonor the Father so much the more, and
destroy the Son.

Doctr.
Satan either fits his temptation according to the place where he finds a man,
or draws him to a place fit for his temptation: Both which we see here against
Christ; being in the wilderness hungry, Satan fits his temptation to the place,
to make stones bread; and now being to assail him with another kind of
temptation, he draws him into a place fit for his temptation. This subtilty of
Satan we may observe in the first temptation of all: there was but one
forbidden tree in Paradise, and there Satan fits his temptation to the place,
to eat of that. So he finds Peter in the common hall, there he tempts him to
deny his Master, a place most fit for it, where all else denied and abused him;
and, if he should not so do, he should be in like danger: Nay, he not only
fitted the temptation, but also drew Peter to the place.

1. Satan does not use all temptations in every place, Reasons. 1.
but such as he will have some advantage in by the very place it self: he
knows it were bootlesse, if the place as well as other circumstances be not
fitted to him. It had been in vain to have tempted Cain to slay Abel in his
fathers house: but he drew him into the field after him, and so prevailed. He
knew Joseph was a most modest and chaste man, and it had been in vain to have
moved him to uncleanness, so openly as he did Zimri and Cosbi at the door of
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, or as openly as Absalom who defiled his
fathers Concubines in the sight of all Israel: and therefore he sets upon him
in a secret chamber. He knew it was no fit place to tempt Noah in the Arc, in
the midst of the waters, when there seemed but a step between him and
death: but, sitting under the vine in his vineyard, he was easily overcome with
it. While David was in his flight before Saul in caves and wildernesses, it was
bootlesse to tempt him to folly, he had no leisure, his thoughts were taken up
in holy prayers and consultations with God; but when he was on his pinnacle, on
the top of his turret, the place was fit to spy Bathsheba and have her fetched
to him, and so the sin was finished.

2. Satan knows, that sins are of diverse sorts, 2
and though all be works of darkness, and so should fly the light, and walk
in solitary and private places, as extremities on the left hand, thefts,
murders, adulteries, etc. yet some other are best brooded in the light and
places of public resort, as pride, prodigality, and a number of riots and open
disorders: for example; Herod swore an oath to give Herodias whatsoever she
asked, to half his kingdom: when she asked John's Baptists head (which was an
heinous murder of them both upon an innocent man) the very fitnes of the place
brought it forth. Great men often swear hundreds of oaths in a day, and forget
them presently, if they were made privately: But because Herod had sworn
amongst the people, for his credit sake, and for them that stood by, John must
presently loose his head.

3. The largenes of Satan's commission gives him leave to make choice of what
place he list, 3
and thence to make his best advantage: no place is privileged, for he
compasses the earth, and is the Prince of the air, and stands sometimes in
the presence of God, to get leave to afflict the children of God; so as there
is no desert so solitary, no pinnacle so high, no city so holy, no Temple so
sacred, but Satan dares and can even there watch Gods people a mischeife: nay
in Paradise he tempted Adam, and Judas at Christ's own table.

Use. 1.
This may advise us to keep our selves so far as we can from places of
probable danger, which Satan has after a sort fitted for temptation. Some
places are dry and barren, no goodness is there exercised, or to be had, nor to
be done: in these places the evil spirit walks, there he haunts (as we see
in the parable:) and therefore our rule must be this: Where we can neither do
good, nor take good, those be no places for us. Many civil men's houses, how
is the time eaten up in vain and idle speech, and the most tolerable talk is
worldlines, and the talk thereof is endless. Object. What hurt is in that? Sol.
Yes, it is a dry place, and it cannot be answered, when even this shall
shoulder out better speech. Other places are not only empty of good, but
filled with evil, that as hardly shall a man come safe out of them without
some poison or corruption, as out of a plaguey or leprous house: For how can a
man be safe where Satan's throne is? as,

1. Places of idolatry, where a man must either show his dislike, or else give
a secret consent. Men can go into places where the horrible idol of the Mass
stands, and keep their hearts to God: but commonly God gives such unwarrantable
boldness a check, and experience shows what a tang it leaves after it. 2.
King. 16.10. Ahaz went upon another occasion to meet Tiglah Peleser King of
Ashur at Damascus, and only seeing an altar there, he was so in love with it
as he sent to Vriah the Priest the pattern of it, and the fashion, and whole
workmanship of it to have another like it in all points, against Gods
commandment. And how has a secret infection poisoned a number of our
travelers, who falling in love with Romish idolatry, have brought the fashion,
and pattern, and workmanship of it over with them, and that because they
run vnwarrantably into places of danger? So how dangerously do men run
into great Papists houses, where there are a thousand allurements and
entisements, pure religion scorned, belied, and all to besmeared with shameful
lies and opprobrie, and the contrary magnified and extolled as the only truth;
yea the Scriptures themselves not less abhorred then the thief hates the
gallows, and thrust down under men's devises and Popes Decrees, yea the word
of salvation condemned and burnt (as they were of old by Antiochus and
Maximinus) as the books of heretics; and the godly professors scoffed under
the style of Scripturers and Bible-bearers? Men think it no danger to be
familiar in such places, to be servants to such Masters; which is to lead
themselves into temptation. Alas, what Communion is there between light and
darkness, between Christ and Antichrist?

2. Not only places of spiritual whoredom, but also corporal: If Satan get
a man into such a place, he has his snares and bands, her lips are snares,
her hands as bands, her words are cords to draw a man in as an ox to the
slaughter. How can a man avoid the unclean spirit in such foul sinkes as such
places be? Pro. 5.8. My Son, keep thy way far from her, and come not near
the door of her house: and 6.32. he that goes in to her, besides that he
destroys his own soul, he finds a wound, and dishonor, and a reproach that
shall never be put away. And the same commandment, that has forbidden any
evil, has forbidden also all the occasions of evil.

3. We must avoid drinking houses, gaming houses, and places of such rude and
hellish resort. How suddenly are minds corrupted in bad company? what quarrels
and causlesse blows? what vain and ribaldry speech, which corrupts good
manners? what expense of precious time? what riot of goods? what wast of wit,
and loss of reason it self is commonly in such places? so that a good mind
sees himself in a little hell while he is there: and where lodges Satan, if
not in such houses, which are servants to every man's sin, and where are baits
and snares, which are enemies not only to Christianity, but even to ciuility
and humanity it self? There Satan has one room filled with swearers, an
other with scoffers, a third with drunkards, a fourth with gamesters; and all
his rooms are full of idle and disordered persons, who for the time have cast
up their callings, and are at leisure for any work of the flesh which their
master the devil will now employ them in.

4. Add hereunto the places of stage-plaies and enterludes, places of as great
danger as any of the former, Satan's schoole-houses: There you shall hear
oaths, and lies, and scoffs of base varlets against not only their betters
among men, but of God himself, Ludi sce^ici spectaculae turpitudinum, and
licentiae vanitatum* Aug. de ciuit. Dei. l. 1. cap. 32.
and his holy religion: There you may see sin acted and represented, which
ought not to be named among Saints: There you shall see men wearing women's
apparel, and perhaps women men's: There you shall see men traveling of child,
as one said of Nero being an actor in a Tragedy, to which his part called
him; and all kind of adulterous behauiours, and such shameful gestures and
actions, as the light of nature has descried and condemned. What shall I
speak of that lewd and wicked dancing of young men, Scipio propter animorum
canendam pestilentiam, ipsam scenam construi proh^b^bat. Aug. ibid.
in the habit and gestures of women, like Herodias: which what an incentiue of
lust it is, may easily be conceived in Herod's example: and the poison of
amatorie kissing of beautiful boys, is unto lust as fire to flax, or oil to
fire. And least you should think I did wrong the^ in calling these places the
devils schools, Cyprian does no less, accounting the Stage Player (teaching
boys to be effeminate, by instructing them how to play the women, Magister
non erudiendorum, sed perdendorum puerorum. Cypr.
and to express wanton gestures) to be the devils Usher.

All these are places of certain peril, where no man can miss the Tempte^:
if he can draw men into these places, he will not fail to fit them with
temptation. Let us therefore make a covenant with our eyes, not to behold such
vanities and lustful spectacles; and with our feet, not to wander into such
bypath; and with our selves, to avoid the very appearance of evil. It will
sort well with our weakness, to avoid temptation, to pray against it, to
watch our selves least we be overcome, rather then to follow, and much less to
go before the Tempter.

Use. 2.
But if we must needs come in such places, as are fitted above others for
temptation, then must we fence our selves more strongly against such
temptations, as the custom of the place offers.

Quest. How may we do so?

Answ. By observing these rules.

1. In all places put we on our Christian armor, without which Christian life
cannot stand. When a man goes among thorns and stubbes, had he not need have
his shoes of the Gospel on, if he would not be pricked and peirced to the
heart? Or if a Christian want his sword, how should he cut the bands of sin
in sunder? How should a soldier stand in the hours of skirmish, without his
corslet and breast plate? or how should he quench or repel the fiery and
furious darts of Satan and his instruments, if he want the shield of faith?
That man that puts on this armor of God, shall overcome all difficulties, and
stand where many have fallen: for he has with him the victory that ouercomes
the world.

2. In all places lay hold on all opportunities to do good, as Satan does to
do evil. He that has goodness in him, shall come in no place but he may find
some fitnes to communicate it. If in places of good resort, men may and ought
to make gain of that occasion. Can good men meet, and not be better one for
another, whereas the wicked cannot meet but be worse? Here a man may 1. observe
Gods graces in others, to be a pattern to himself. 2. draw out understanding
of them, by godly and fruitful questions, or conference: Pro. 20.5. 3. stir
up others to diligence in going forward, and to greater love, Heb. 3.13. and
inoffensiue walking. Others may be ignorant; and here is occasion for thee to
pity them, and open thy lips with wisdom to feed them, Pro. 10.20. Others may
be dull and slow in Gods ways, and these must be provoked and encouraged.
Others by infirmity may be going astray, and thou perhaps may be a means to
turn him, and win a soul. Others may need an exhortation, an admonition, a
loving and brotherly reproof: or may need comfort: A wise man may now watch
occasion not only to prevent Satan's baits, who would keep Christians from
doing the good they can, but also to acquit himself in all places to the good
of others, and his own comfort.

3. In places of bad resort, or scorners, if our calling lead us into them, let
us take with us the exhortation of the Apostle, 2. Pet. 3.17. Take heed ye be
not plucked away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your own
steadfastnes. And besides, 1. let us grieve, that we are fallen into such
company. 2. let us think of some good or special work of Gods mercy or
judgment, fresh in memory. 3. if there be apparent evil, either give apparent
token of dislike; or in a wise and peaceable manner, so speak as Gods honor
be not by our silence trodden down. 4. if there be no opportunity or place for
good, depart with all speed, Prou. 14. ver. 7. and beware of falling into the
like company again.

Took him up, and set him on the pinnacle.] The third circumstance in this
preparation, is the manner how Christ was conuaied to Jerusalem; Then the
devil took him up into the holy city, and set him on a pinnacle of the
Temple. Some of great learning and piety hold, that Christ's presence in the
holy city, and on the pinnacle, was only in vision, and not corporal. Their
reasons are these: 1. Some of the Prophets thus are said in vision to go from
place to place; as Jeremy must go to the river Perath, and back again, c.
13.4. and, Ezec. 11.24. The Spirit of God took me up, and brought me in a
vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea: and, 8.3. And took me by an hairy
lock of my head, and the Spirit lift me up between the earth and the heaven,
and brought me by a divine vision to Jerusalem. 2. Because the Evangelists say,
that the temptations were in the wilderness, and therefore could not be
actually in the holy City, or on a pinnacle, but in vision. 3. Because Luke
says, that the temptations being ended, Christ returned into Galiley, namely
from the wilderness.

But it seems, Christ's being in Jerusalem, and on the pinnacle of the Temple,
was not in vision, but in deed and truth; and the reasons well considered are
too weak to prove the contrary: because, 1. It overthrows the end of the
temptation, which was to cast himself down headlong, for the Angels would
keep him without hurt. How could he hurt himself by an imaginary fall? or
what needed he the Angels help? Neither could he cast himself down, if he
were still in the plain of the wilderness. 2. It seems not to stand with the
holiness of Christ, seeing every vision, which is a work of Satan, intending
by it to delude man, is either a deceiving of the outward senses, (whereby he
makes a man think he sees, hears, or feels something, which indeed and truth
he does not: as the witch of Endor made Saul believe he did hear and see
Samuel, when he did not, 1. Sam. 28. And after the same manner, if it were a
vision, supposing that Christ was awake, he must not see the ground of the
wilderness, where they say he was, but upon that ground the City, Jerusalem, the
Temple, and pinnacle, and himself standing on the top of it, when indeed it was
not there.) Or else, a vision presented by Satan must be an illusion of the
mind, whereby he makes a man think that of himself which is not true; which
can far less agree with the holiness of Christ, whose imagination could not
be so far abused, as that he should think he was carried, when he was not
carried; or to think himself to be there, where he was not: for this were
contrary to that unmeasurable wisdom, which was with him. And if Satan had
had such power over the superior part of the mind of Christ, he might
likewise have persuaded him he had not fallen when he did fall, or he did not
worship him, if he had done so.

As for the objection taken from the example of the Prophets; I answer, Great
is the difference between the visions of God, and visions from Satan. They know
their visions to be divine, and not to delude or deceive them, they knew the
Spirit of God took them up in divine visions; but here it is said, The devil
took up Christ; and the text mentions that theirs were visions, so it does
not here.

For that which is objected out of the Evangelists, that the temptations were
in the wilderness; and if it were not in vision, only the first should be
there: I answer, 1. The Evangelists say, that Christ went into the wilderness
to be tempted, but none of them say, that all these three were in the
wilderness. 2. If they should have said, that the temptations were in the
wilderness, it had been true: for (as we have heard) Christ was tempted with
other temptations then these in that place within the forty days.

Whereas it is further said, that Christ returned after the temptations into
Galily, and therefore the last temptation was in vision upon the plain, and
not on the mountain: I answer, 1. No one Evangelist says, he returned from
the wilderness. 2. That the Evangelist has reference to the last temptation,
which perhaps was finished in the mountain either in that wilderness, or
near it, after Christ was led back from Jerusalem, and there the temptations
ended.

And now, seeing that his presence in the holy city, and upon the pinnacle was
real and local, not in vision and mental, the next question is, How the
devil took him up, and set him on. Answ. It must necessarily be one of these
two ways; either Satan must lead him, or else must carry him.

The former, that Satan took him as a companion, or a leader, seems not so
probable: 1. Because Christ of his own will would not go; for (as we have
heard) the Spirit led him into the wilderness to be tempted; and he would not
of himself go elsewhere, because the Spirit of God called him thither, and no
whither else. 2. Christ would not do it at Satan's instigation, whom he knew
to be the Temper: for neither must we do any thing at Satan's request, be it
never so lawful: for what ever we do, we must have a word of God to do it in
faith. 3. If Christ had yielded to be lead as a companion, he might have
seemed to have sought temptation, and been a co-worker with Satan against
himself: but it was enough to yield himself a patient in it. 4. The distance
of the holy city from the wilderness, which was (as those say that make it
the least) twelve miles from Jerusalem, admits not that Christ being hungry
and ready to faint, should follow Satan so many miles.

The latter therefore seems to be the right manner of Christ's conueyance,
namely, that he was carried by Satan through the air, who by Gods and Christ's
permission, took him up, and transported his blessed body to Jerusalem, and
set him on the battlements of the Temple. For, 1. the words, he set him on the
Temple, signifies he set him down, who had formerly taken him up; and if he
had power to set him there, why should he not also have power to carry him
thither? And, if he had not carried him thither, but Christ had followed him,
the Evangelist would have said, When they came to the pinnacle of the Temple,
and not set him on the pinnacle. 2. This was the hour of the power of darkness,
wherein Satan was allowed to take all advantages to further his temptations:
and he might think this violent transportation a means, either of shaking
Christ's faith with terror and fear what might become of him, being now
delivered into the hands of Satan; or else to make him swell with pride and
insolency, that he was able to fly in the air, or to be conuaied in the air
from place to place, without hurt, which an ordinary man could not: and this
would well fit the scope of the temptation ensuing.

Quest. But how could Satan carry the body of Christ, being a spirit? Or if
he could, why should he? Answ. He is a spirit, 1. of wonderful knowledge and
experience, to diue into secrets of nature, to work strange and hidden things.
2. of exceeding great power, to shake the earth, move the mountains, and
confound the creatures, if God should not restrain him. 3. of admirable
agility and quicknes, proceeding from his spiritual nature, whereby he can
speedily convey himself and other creatures, into places far remote and
distant one from another. 4. he knows to apply himself to the creatures, and
to move them not only according to their ordinary course, but with much more
speed and quicknes. 5. he is able to appear in the form of a creature or any
person, not by deluding senses, but by assuming to himself a true body, and
move it by entering into it, and to utter a voice in a known language, as he
did in the serpent, and so he can in other creatures, which have instruments of
speech. And thus it is not difficult to him to transport a body.

Witches and wisards have been often by their own confession transported into
remote places by wicked spirits, which they call familiars. Besides, good
Angels (being in their nature Spirits as Satan is) are able to transport men
hither and thither as Christ was in the air. Act. 8.39. The Spirit of the Lord
caught away Philip, and carried him from Gaza to Azotus, which was about 36.
miles. Some understand it of an Angel of the Lord, as Mr. Beza notes. But if
God by himself miraculously did that, the additions to Daniel (to which as
much credit is to be given as to any history, which is not Scripture) affirm,
that the Angel of the Lord carried Habbakuk out of Judea into Babylon by the
hair of the head.

Now, why Christ must be thus carried by Satan: Answ. 1. It was not against the
will of Christ, but willingly he puts himself into the hands of the devil, to
pluck us out of his hands. 2. It was not impotencie or weakness in Christ, but
power and resolution, who would not recoyle, nor shun any place where Satan
would appoint for his assault, or would carry him, being as well the God of
the mountains as of the valleys. Here therefore we must not admire the power
of Satan, but the patience of Christ, that suffered himself to be carried of
the devil, being it tended to the greater confusion of Satan, and the glory
of his own victory. 3. Our blessed Lord would be tempted in all things like
unto us, that as a careful head he might sympathize with his members. God for
the trial of his children, sometime suffers Satan to have power even over
their bodies: and therefore Christ to sanctify this affliction to his members,
would suffer even his own blessed body for a while in the hands of Satan. 4.
What marvel if Christ suffered himself to be carried by the devil to
temptation, that suffered himself to be carried by his instruments to
execution? How was he haled and carried by the devils limbs from place to
place, from Annas to Caiaphas, from him to Pilate, from him to Herod, from him
to Pilate again, and from him to the place of execution? Satan in himself
might as well carry his body into Jerusalem to be tempted, as his limbs carry
it out of Jerusalem to be crucified; and as well might he suffer Satan to lead
him into the mountain, and tempt him, as his instruments to lead his body unto
mount Caluary to kill him.

Use. 1. Consider the wonderful love of God to mankind, who would give his
only Son, and the Son of his love, to such abasement, to deliver him not
only into the hands of Satan's instruments, to mock, to spit upon him, to
buffet, yea to condemn and kill, but to deliver his blessed body into his own
hands to carry and recarrie at his pleasure. Add hereunto the wonderful love
of the Lord Jesus, who was a willing patient in the hands of the devil
himself. He knew it was the will of his Father, and therefore submitted
himself unto it. He knew it was a part of that whole righteousness, which he
was to fulfill, and therefore he resists not. He knew it to be as great an
indignity as never could be the like; yet for out sakes he is well content with
it.

Now as Christ was content, because he loved us, thus to be tossed of Satan
here, and of his instruments afterward, so let us show or return our love to
him. If we be tossed by Satan or by his instruments for Christ's sake, as the
Saints have been, from prison to prison, we must be contented: our love to our
Lord must help us to swallow it, and not shrink from him. Consider, we may be
in the hands of the devils instruments, but he was in the devils own hands
for us: this would make us shrink.

Use. 2. Observe hence, that the work of our redemption, though free to us,
yet cost Christ dear. He must be not only in the hands of Judas to betray
him, of the Jews to scoff him, of Pilate to condemn him, and of the
soldiers to crucify him; but personally in the hands of the devil to tempt
him. And had not Christ been thus, and worse then thus, in the hands of the
devil, we had never been gotten out of his hands. Here take we notice of the
execration of our sins, and the wofulnes of our estate: our sins put him
into Satan's hands, he must put himself in our place or stead before we can be
rescued.

Use. 3. Observe the wonderful power of our Lord Jesus, that being in the
hands of the devil can come out safely: nay his mighty power shines herein,
that by his own coming into Satan's hands he brings us out, an unlikely and
contrary means, but such as by a divine power preuailes for himself and all
his members. Could any other but he work Satan's greatest disadvantage by
offering him the greatest advantage? Here is omnipotency, to work by
contraries, to kill death by dying, to shut the grave by entering into it, to
remove hellish pains by suffering them, and to pull his members out of Satan's
hands by putting himself in. The Philistims desired but to get Sampson into
their hands, and prevailed: but here is an invincible Sampson, his enemy cannot
hold him.

Use. 4. Hence we see that Satan may have power over the bodies of men, God
permitting him, to carry them as he lists and grievously to afflict them, as
we see in Job. That Satan can transport the bodies of witches, all histories
record. That he can bewitch the bodies of unbelievers, none deny. But our
example teaches, that even the godly themselves may be bewitched; as Jobs body
was, and the woman of Canaan her daughter, a daughter of Abraham, Matthew. 15.22.
For if the devil has power here over the body of Christ himself, he may also
over his members. Many presume upon the strength of their faith and graces,
that Satan can have no power over them, and they defy him: But have thou more
strength of faith and grace then Christ had, over whose body Satan had power
for a time to carry and recarry? Object. Witches have assayed to bewitch such
and such, but have confessed their faith to be so strong as they could not
prevail. An. They allege a false cause to feed the former delusion: for the
true cause of their not prevailing is Gods restraint, not the strength of faith.

Use. 5. Here is a ground of comfort, if the Lord permit the bodies of his
elect to Satan's disposal; it is no argument (suppose a man be witched or
possessed) that a man is not then the child of God: for 1. Christ was as dear
unto God now, being in the devils hands, as before. 2. Christ was safe enough
now in the hands of the devil, and so are all they that are in Christ. He was
no less in his Fathers hands now then before. 3. He was not left in the hands
of the devil, but permitted for a time of trial and temptation: So it is no
argument of final delivery up to Satan, when the child of God is for a time
delivered into his hands to exercise him. 4. It is rather an argument of Gods
child, and conformity with Christ, to be maligned of Satan and vexed by the
devil. Satan may winnow and fifth Gods children, but their faith thorough
Christ's prayer shall not fail, and the gates of hell shall not prevail.

VERSE. 6. If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: For it is written,
etc.

NOw after those three former circumstances, which contained the preparation to
this second temptation, we come to the temptation it self; which consists of
the 1. assalt: 2. the repulse. The assault contains, 1. the ground of it, If
thou be the Son of God. 2. the matter and scope of it, cast thy self down.
3. the argument enforcing it, For i^ is written, etc.

(If thou be the Son of God) is the same with the former: which shows, 1.
Satan's importunity and violence. 2. His subtilty: by often making question of
it he will see if he can yet bring Christ to make it a question. 3. His malice
against Christ, laying still his greatest forces against his faith, which was
the greatest moat in his eye: dealing herein like an experienced soldier, who
seeing a town or fort in any hope to be won, will not away at first repulse,
but will assay it again and again with new assalts. Whence we may learn,
that,

Doctr.
Satan will not stick to urge the same thing often, if thereby he may advantage
himself, or disadvantage us. With how many new messages and devises did he
urge Balaam to curse the people of God? Still he changes places, but all is
one temptation, to curse the people of God. By how many means did Satan by
himself, by Jobs friends, and his wife, seek to withdraw him from his
confidence in God, bringing a number of several arguments, and all to prove
him an hypocrite? For that was the foot and burden of all their discourses.

Reasons. 1.
1. It may be the circumstances of time o^ place may yield him some advantage,
as here he thought the pinnacle fitter then the wilderness: as Balaak thought the
top of Pisgah more commodious perhaps for Balaam to curse Israel in, then the
high places of Baal, 2
Number. 23.14. compared with 22.41. 2. Sometimes our disposition is more secure
and remiss, especially having outstood and overcome a temptation; and then
Satan comes again, and by the same temptation (not finding us the same men)
suddenly surprizeth us. Wherein he deals with us as David with the Amalekits,
who having took a great spoil from him, and his wives, they fell to eat, and
drink, and dance; and lay scattered because of the prey: In this security
David comes upon them, and recovered all, and they lost more then they had
gotten. So deals Satan with us; when we grow secure (after we have prevailed)
he winnes more then before we had got. 3. Sometime the thing, 3
which Satan would win from us, is so necessary, so excellent, as if he get
not that, he can gain nothing at our hands. This makes him renew the same
assault, as here; the faith of Christ had been a sweet morsel, and, if he
gets not this, he gets nothing: So our faith is so precious, as he still aims
at it, because he knows if he overthrows this, we are as branches without a
root, withering and dead, soldiers without a shield.

Look for the same temptation again and again. Use. 1.
The fencer having had a shrewd wound, will not easily lie open in that part
again. The Citizens, who have stood out a siege, will survey the places most
battered, where the enemy had his strongest hope of entry, and will most
fortify them against another time.

Where we are most tempted, know that there is some special grace to be kept
or lost. 2
A thief will not hanker after an empty chest: but if he know where Jewels or
treasure is, he will haunt there.

Abandon all doctrine of doubting as Satanicall, which Satan is much and often
in, both against Christ and his members: 3
And no marvel, seeing doubting warreth against faith, by which only Christ is
apprehended, and heavenly life and heat kept in us. But of this before.

Cast thy self downe] Now follows the matter and scope of the temptation, and
the If thou, because thou art the Son of God, can live without bread; upon
the same ground thou can go down without stayres. And both Satan's
allegation of Scripture, and our Saviors answer, show that this was the
principal aim of the devil. 2. To fasten upon Christ vain glory as well as
vain confidence: as if he should say, Thou shall have great honor, and every
man will believe, if thou by this miracle show thy self the Son of God: to
this purpose I have fitted the place, where is greatest resort, and where the
Son of God ought especially to make himself known: For where should the
Son be made known, if not at his Fathers house? Satan knew he had overcome
the first Adam by a temptation of vain glory, and now he assaulteth the
second, Ye shall be gods: and, Thou shall be known to be the Son of God, if
by flying in the air thou can come down without hurt. 3. To bring him to
tempt God, and try whether he be so powerful as to save him in such an
attempt; whether so true of his word as to keep him, and whether the Angels
did diligently watch him, and bear him up, as their commission was. 4. Satan
intended directly to kill him, being a manslayer from the beginning. For every
way the dart intended his destruction, if he should cast himself down: for
thus Satan thought, If he cast down himself, and kill himself, then he is
not the Son of God, and so I shall gain him: Or, if he cast down himself,
and not kill himself, yet shall I make him both disobey God in tempting him,
as also obey me. Thus either way Satan makes sure of his prey. 5. Satan had yet
a further fetch, which made him so bestirre himself, seeking in Christ's
downfall, our utter ruin, disgrace, and destruction. Strike off the head, all
the members with that blow are slain. The bent of all Satan's temptations
against the Head, is against all the members. Out of the same ground Satan
raises a clean contrary temptation to the former. In the former he mooues
Christ to diffidence and despair; in this to presidence and presumption. In
the former he would have Christ use unlawful means; in this, to reject all
means, even lawful. In the former he persuades him to distrust where God had
promised; in this latter, to trust where God had not promised. In the former,
that bread was absolutely necessary; here, that a ladder and means of going
down, were not necessary at all: as if he should say, Thou say that God is
able to uphold thee being his Son without means; go too, let us see how
true that is. If he can ordinarily and extraordinarily preserve thee, then,
Cast thy self down headlong from this pinnacle: for being the Son of God,
thou shall be sure to be preserved safe without hurt.

Doctr.
Whence observe, that the devil in tempting men, labors to bring them to
extremes: and when he cannot prevail in one, he would fasten on them the
clean contrary sins. If he can get Christ, because he is the Son of God,
either to contemn his Fathers providence, as in the former; or to presume on
the same, as in this temptation, either will please him. 2. Cor. 2.10. the
Apostle shows, that this is one of the wyles and stratagems of Satan, by
clean contrary ways to destroy the Church: either by too much lenity, which
let fall the censures of the Church, so as the incestuous person was not at all
corrected; or when they began to use too much rigor and severity, forgetting
the rules of Christian meekness and charity. And in the incestuous person
himself, it will please him well, either that he go on without all remorse of
his sin, and the Church not meddle with him; or that by the severity of the
Church, he be swallowed up of sorrow. In regard of both which the Apostle
says, We are not ignorant of his wyles. Act. 14.11.19. when Paul and Barnabas
came to Lycaonia, to preach and publish the Gospel, observe Satan's wyle in the
people* either they must receive them as God, and sacrifice unto them out of
blind zeal and devotion, at which the Apostles rent their clothes; or else
they must take them and stone them, as they did Paul, and drew him out of the
city, supposing he had been dead, v. 19. Matthew. 21.9. when Christ came riding
to Jerusalem, multitudes flocked after him, spread their garments in the way,
cut down boughs to strew therein, and cried Hosanna, he was the son of
David, the blessed one that came in the name of the Lord; the people said, it
was Jesus, the Prophet of Nazaret, and all the city was moved: But before
night, Satan had them in another extremity: such was the envy of the Scribes
and Pharisees, that Christ was either glad to fly the city that night; or the
fear of the people, that none durst entertain and lodge him: v. 17. so he
left them, and went into the town of Bethania, and lodged there. And within
few days after, all cried, Crucify, Crucify.

1. This comes to pass, because Satan is contrary to himself; Reasons. 1.
according to his disposition are his ways. Though he be the Prince of
darkness, yet can he transform himself into an Angel of light, 2. Cor. 11.14.
He appeared in the shape of a serpent to Eve, in the shape of a Prophet to
Saul. Sometime this crooked serpent can deny Christ to be the Son of God, as
here; and sometimes preach him so to be, Mark. 1.24.

2. His dexterity and slynesse is another cause, 2
whereby he can make one ground, and that a good and true one, to serve to
rear up two extreme evils, in such cunning manner as he was in hope to
deceive the wisdom of God himself thereby: for here out of Gods word, that
Christ was his Son, he inferres two contrary conclusions, both contrary in
themselves, and both contrary to Gods word.

3
3. He knows there is but one good and straight way to heaven, that the Lord
has commanded us to walk in that way without turning to the right or left
hand, that he has placed the virtue in the mean: and therefore he cares not
in which extreme he can thrust us, so as we keep out of that mean appointed.
He hates nothing but virtue and grace, which God loves.

4
4. He knowing the propensitie and inclination of our corrupt nature, (which
desires to know no mean, but is rather disposed to any vice in extremity,
then to rest in obedience unto Gods commandment;) fits us according to our
inclination, and tastes us first in one extreme, then in another, and holds us
there where we best please our selves. Hence we account extremes virtues.

5
5. Many are the by-ways that lead to hell on all hands, there being but one
truth: and the devil carries such incessant malice to man, that he cares not
in which of them a man come to hell, so he come at length.

Beware then of Satan's subtlety, of his contrariety and extremities. Use.
In matters of Gods worship, his scope is to make a man either profane, and
cast off all care of religion; or if men will not be drawn from some devotion,
then he seeks to make them superstitious, in which extreme he holds the
blinded and devout Papists, who worship both false gods, and the true God with
a false and vain worship. Act. 17. the Apostle having charged the Athenians
with superstition, he adds this reason, because he saw an altar to an unknown
God. The same of those, who will worship God in devises which he never
commanded, and place it in things which indeed hinder it. And so some hate
Popery, but not profaneness. Satan aims also at the Minister, to make him
idle and negligent in preaching, and is well pleased with that, because where
vision fails, people perish. But if he cannot hold a man in idleness, then he
seeks to get him to preach, either of pride, or envy, or flattery, or for
perferment, or vainly and unsoundly; and then the more he preaches, he likes
him never the worse; or maliciously against good men, and good ways, and then
he preaches nothing else but what Satan (if he must needs preach) would do.

In hearing the word, he would first have men slack of all conscience of doing
or obeying, that hearing their Masters will, and not doing it, their stripes
may be the more. If he cannot do that, but sees a man make conscience of his
ways, then he will make him scrupulous, and make needless questions of every
thing; and, to hinder his peace, he will make more sins then ever God made.

In judging of ones own estate, he will make a man believe that God never
elected such a wretch as he, he never had truth of grace, all is hypocrisy,
God never loved him; so many sins, so great falls, such unworthiness as
never was in any child of God. On the contrary, if faith withstand this
temptation, then comes pride in stead of former deiection, and makes him think
his election so sure, as though he take all unlawful liberties, he shall be
saved; Oh the son of God cannot do amiss, nor the Father hate him.

Sometimes to destroy boldness of faith he will suggest, that sin is so
great in such and such circumstances, as it cannot be forgiven; now the heart
is heavy and lumpish, and has no cheerfulness in God. But this being a little
blown over, he will bring the same man by degrees, to think what a fool he
was; for his sins now are not so great, so dangerous, as others be, nor
himself so great a sinner: and now the sadness of sin being shaken off, he
grows merry, and too too light, forgetting all his former heaviness.

In the course of life, he gets beyond many in these extreme courses. In
spiritual things, numbers of men are held in a profane and wicked scorning of
religion, of Preachers, and Professors, whose names they cannot abide. Some of
these are sometimes called out of the snare of the devil, and then Satan is in
a contrary corner, he will have them zealous; but not according to knowledge:
If the Master will not send his servants to pluck up all the tares before
harvest, they will stand no longer in the field of the Church, but grow
resolute in schism and separation.

In civil things, how many examples of men have we extremely covetous in their
youth, but prodigal and voluptuous in extremity in their age; and so on the
contrary, and in diverse other instances?

Rules to avoid these extremities of Satan.

1. Look we still to to the word, which points us our way for the warrant of
our actions, and the manner of doing them, and says, This is the way, walk in
it, Isa. 30.21. 2. Watch we the fickleness of our nature, which may be seen in
the Barbarians, Act. 24.4.6. who accounted Paul a God and a murderer, at one
time. 3. Consider we what it is that we are eagerly set upon, and suspect it,
because our nature is to be in extremes, and Satan's hand is likely in it to set
it forward. Never are we so violent for Gods kingdom, as for the world.

Cast thy self down.] In the scope of this temptation, which was to
presumption (for the allegation following would persuade him, that God would
preserve him whatsoever he did, though he threw himself from the pinnacle:) we
learn this point of instruction, that,

Doctr.
Satan does incessantly labor to draw men unto presumption, and vain glory, as
here he did the Head. And this presumption in a word, is nothing else but a
vain confidence, that we are this or that, or can do this or that, without
any word or ordinance of God. A vain hope without warrant is the very being
of presumption.

1. Sam. 4.3. Israel went to war against the Philistims, and were slain
about 4000. men: but they would make another onset more warily (as they
thought) then before: they would send for the Arc from Shilo to save them; and
when it came into the host, all Israel gave a shout, that the earth rang of
it, presuming that now they were safe enough: But all this was done of their
own heads, and without warrant; and therefore God discomfited them with an
exceeding great slaughter of thirty thousand footmen; and the Arc (wherein
they were so vainly confident) was taken, the Priests Hoph^i and Phineas
slain, Eli breaks his neck, and such a confusion there was, that the Arc
never came at Shilo more.

Number. 14. After the men were sent to search the land of Canaan, and had
returned and told the Israelites, that the land was good and fat, but the walls
reached up to heaven, and there were sons of A^ak giants, then the people
murmured and distrusted: But, the sentence of the Lord passing against them,
that they should wander forty years in the wilderness, according to the forty
days in searching, till that age were all wasted, none of which should come
into the land, except Caleb and Joshua, ver. 40. then they up betimes in the
morning, and they were ready against the word of God to go; Moses forbids
them, tells them God was not with them; yet 44. presumed obstinately to go,
and were pitifully consumed.

2. King. 14.10. Amaziah King of Judah, having gotten a notable victory against
Edom, presuming of Gods hand and help with him, but not asking God counsel,
would also make war against Israel, but unhappily, as such attempts prove;
for he was overcome, and Iehoash King of Israel took Amaziah, and broke down
Ierusalems wall, and spoiled the house of the Lord, and the Kings house of all
the treasure there. Josiah a good King, presuming of Gods assistance without
his word, undertook an unwarrantable war against the King of Egypt: he
might have thought God would help him, who sought the Lord with all his heart
against an open idolater; but not seeking the Lord in this* he was mortally
wounded, and left his Kingdom in great trouble and confusion. 2. King. 23.

Now Satan is most usual in temptations to presumption, Reasons. 1.
for these reasons. 1. He has experience, how easily we are foiled with this
kind of temptations; how soon he foiled our first parents in the state of
innocence; how good David was overthrown, presuming of his own strength, when
he forced Ioab to number his people. And those whom he could never shake with
distrust, he has quite overthrown with presumption. 2
2. Satan knows, that of all temptations, this is most agreeable to our
corrupt nature. It is pleasing to us, to conceive of Gods mercy and power
toward us in any course our selves affect: whereas temptations to despair are
irksome, and grievous to the flesh, and have not ordinarily so much help from
the flesh to set them forward as this has; and therefore the devil is
sometimes, but not half so often in them. Again, he knows it goes with our
nature and stream, to presume of our own goodness, strength, and virtue. Peter
and the rest of the Disciples, presumed they should not be offended at Christ,
nor forsake or deny him: but yet not long after, even they who professed they
would die with him rather then deny him, left him and fled away, Matthew. 26.33.
etc. 3. He knows, that presumption is an extreme of faith and hope, and does
no less extinguish faith then despair, 3
nay more often does foil it, seeing a man in despair is more fearful, more
watchful, but a presumptuous man is fearelesse, careless, and will easily
thrust himself upon any adventure, as fearing no sin. 4. Satan knows that
presumptions are great sins, 4
prevailing sins, Psalm. 19.13. a tempting of the Lord (as the answer of our
Savior implies) when we leave his way and means, and will try our own, a
sin which does much provoke God to displeasure: we see it in Peter, who fell
fearfully above all the Disciples, because he was most presumptuous of all;
Vbi d^xisti, sufficio, ibi defecisti: vbi tibi placuisti, ibi peri^sts. Aug.
of whom Augustine says, When thou beginnest to say, I have enough, thou
beginnest to fail; when thou have an ouerweening opinion of thy self, thou
art undone.

Quest. What may we think of Ionathans action, who himself alone with one man
his armor-bearer, went out against a whole army of the Philistims? Was it not
a strange tempting of God, and a great disorder in time of pitched battle? 1.
Sam. 14.

Answ. It may seem so at first; but indeed it was not temerity in him: for 1.
He was guided by a secret and strong instinct of Gods Spirit. 2. He had a
general promise, that so long as his people feared God, one should be able to
chase a thousand, and two ten thousand; and therefore took no more with him
then one, being fully assured that God would go out with him, and fight for
him against God and his enemies. 3. He set God before him, with whom he said it
was not hard to save with many or with few, v. 6. Besides, he knew they were
Gods enemies, saying, Let us go to the uncircumcised. 4. The event was a
singular deliverance of God in that needful time: for God sent a fear among
the enemies, and an earthquake, etc. and armed Jonathan with such a spirit and
power, that the enemies fell before him for fear, even at the sight of him.

Object. But the instinct of the Spirit is strong and not doubtful, as this
was: v. 6. It may be the Lord w^ll be with us. Answ. The first instinct drew
him to the place where he was to receive a sign of confirmation from God; as
v. 9.10. If they say, Come up, we will go* (a sign they were lazy:) If they
say, ^arrie till we come, we will not; that was a sign of their courage. And
this was a certain sign, which strongly assured him, v. 10.12. Quest. Is it
lawful now for any so ^o do? Answ No: it was a singular fact* not to be
drawn into example, unless a man can allege a new promise; seeing all the
ordinary promises of Scripture join the means and end together.

We must conceive all this doctrine of Christ's temptations above an ordinary
history, not only relating a thing done, Use. 1.
but belonging also to us to make our use of it, as of other Scripture. And
hence let us learn to beware of these temptations to presumption, which are
many ways darted against us, both in things spiritual and temporal. I. In
spiritual things: 1. When men cast aside the known word of God, they dare
swear, and curse, and blaspheme; they dare adventure to break the Sabbath,
dare lie and be unjust, against their conscience; they dare do any thing
against the justice of God, though they know his will to the contrary: and all
because they presume of Gods mercy, which in their conceit has eaten up all
his justice. But in Ioh. 19.11. Christ inlargeth the sin of the Jews and
Judas, because it was against their conscience, He that delivered me, has the
greater sin: he was warned, he heard my doctrine, saw my miracles, and so did
you. And thou that know thy Lords pleasure; and dare go against it, shall
know how fearful a thing it is to fall into his hands. If thy conscience
condemn thee, God is greater then thy conscience.

2. Others are persuaded that Christ died for all, and therefore they may be
the bolder in their sins; grace has abounded, what though sin abound much
more? Christ has blood enough, and merit enough, what need they fear? But
here is presumption without warrant. For in Christ's death, before it can be
fruitful to us, there must be two things, 1. an actual accomplishment, 2. an
effectual application to the soul in particular. Physic, though never so
sovereign, if it be in the pocket vnapplyed, does the patient no good: And if
the death of Christ be applied to thee, it works the death of thy sin:
Christ died to abolish sin, and destroy the works of the devil.

3. Many others are carried along in their presumption, by a deceitful
supposition, that they can come out of their sin, and repent when they list.
But here is a vain hope without warrant, or else bring me a word that promises
repentance to morrow, if this day thou neglect it; this is thy day, thou
know not what the morrow may bring forth. Now thou have life, health, the
word, ministry, and memory* perhaps this is the last day thou shall enjoy
all these. Oh* but I hope to repent: But show thy warrant, else Satan has thee
in the bands of presumption. Besides, it is just with God, that he who will not
take Gods time, should never come to his own. And dangerous it is to put our
souls to adventure till the last hour.

4. Others feed a conceit, that howsoever God deal with others, he will not
grow into such displeasure with them, they are further in his books then so;
as Satan here intimates, that Gods Son may do what he list. But it is a
practice of wicked men, to make covenants with death, and secure themselves
that when the sword passes through the land, it shall not come near them, and
to cry Peace, Peace, when the trumpet has sounded war. Again, tell me thou
that presumest so far to sin, art thou further in Gods books then Adam in
Paradise, yea then the Angels in heaven? Do thou excel in holiness those
Worthies of the world, Moses, Aaron, David, Hezekiah? yet these could not
escape when they sinned. Shall the whole world (sinning) be drowned, and shall
thou avoid the deluge? No, no, the highest mountains in the world shall not
save theee: nay, if thou could climb into heaven, the Angels were cast
thence.

5. Others presume of the end, and fly over the means; hope for salvation,
but neglect the means, the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer. Oh, but they use
means, they know God and their duty, as well as the best. But it is a
presumptuous knowledge; they think they need no more, they profess they know
God, but in their works deny him, Tit. 1. vlt. Yea, they believe all the
Articles of Christian faith, if we believe them; but it is a dead and vain
faith, without works of piety and charity, such as shall profess great
acquaintance with God in the day of judgment, but to whom he shall say, Depart
from me ye workers of iniquity. Yea, but they come to Church, and pray to God
as others do, and hope to be saved in their religion what ever it is, so long
as they mean well: and what need men be so precise and curious? But these
prayers are presumptuous and abominable, if thou turn thine ear from hearing
the law: and so long as thou live in thy lusts, and walk not precisely
with God in all his commandments, (though thou fast, and pray, and afflict
thy self never so much,) God will not hear, nor help. Therefore never
presume of an harvest without a seede-time; as a man sows, so shall he reap.

6. Others (and a common presumption it is) think themselves in the high way
to salvation; their names are written in the book of life, never to be rased
out; they are beloved of God, and therefore they may do what they will, and
leave undone what they list; they may enjoy their pleasure and liberty, their
salvation depends not upon their works, but upon the election of God that
shows mercy. And thus out of a vain presumption, they are idle and
unfruitful in the work of the Lord, and sometimes grow Libertines and
scandalous, and still God is the same (they say) and loves them. But what can
be a more evident note of Gods displeasure, then to be given up to such a
delusion? as if the goodness of God would not lead his to repentance; or as if
mercy were not with him to be feared. But thou, out of the hardness of thy
heart which cannot repent, treasurest up wrath against the day of wrath.

II. In things of this life Satan preuailes exceedingly with this temptation of
presumption.

1. When men conclude of Gods love by temporal things, all which are common to
good and bad. By which sorcerie, when they are most cursed, they think
themselves the happiest men under the Sun. Whereas none knows love or
hatred by any thing before him; and as God begins his love at things within,
faith, fear, uprightness of heart, and the like; so must we begin the
knowledge of it. And if we compare Dives estate with Lazarus, Pharaohs with
Moses, Simon Magus with Simon Peter, who said, Money and gold have I none, we
shall easily see what little ground the Scripture affoardeth for such
presumptuous conceits.

2. Many of our great men venture to travel into places of idolatry, and
think themselves strong enough against any such temptations as they meet
withal: but, 1. Were there zeal indeed, there would be also a
witnesse-bearing against such horrible idolatry; whereas if they do not act
idolatry, they consent to those that do. We read of some noble and Heroical
spirits, stirred up by the motion of God, to disgrace and witness with their
blood against that horrible idol of the Mass. 2. It is a just judgment of
God on many, who perhaps against their purpose, are caught in the snare of
Popery, and infected with the poison of their heresies, because they are given
up to delusion for want of just detestation of it.

3. Others are bold-hardy, to run into places infected with the plague without
a just warrant, or sufficient calling, only pretending the strength of their
faith: which is temerity and rashness, often paid home with much sorrow and
bitterness. Has not God tied his care over us, with our care over our selves?
Has not he in ordinary course tied our safety with the means? Act. 27.
Except these abide in the ship, they cannot be saved: and so some upon boards,
and other upon planks, came safe to land. Yet I condemn not that presence with
infected persons, which charity and conscience requires: but in way of
ordinary visitation, it is as unsafe for us to go to them, as for them to
come amongst us, and a tempting of God.

4. Some are so bold-hardy, as to venture upon the dangerous places, which are
given by God to be possessed of the devil, and (as if they were Exorcists)
will adjure the devil, and out-dare him: and this they think to be strength
of faith. Which is indeed a folly, and extreme presumption, often repaied as
it was in the sons of Sceua, Act. 19.16. who undertaking to adjure the devil,
(wanting a calling, commission, and every thing but presumption) were driven
away, rent, and wounded. Others are of mind, they can never be bewitched, nor
all the devils in hell cannot touch them, their faith is so strong. But that
is a presumption, seeing no man can absolutely assure himself he shall be free
from Satanicall molestation. Christ could not be free, whose faith is as strong
as thine.

Cast thy self down.] Here be in these words three things further to be
considered: 1. the action, which the devil would effect, the casting down of
Christ. 2. the agent, not the devil, but Christ himself must do it, Cast thy
self. 3. Luke adds, from hence, where means of safety were.

Doctr. 1.
All the travel of the devil, is, to cast down Christ, and in him all
mankind. The estate of the Church is militant while it is here below, and the
battle is maintained between Michael and his Angels, and the Dragon and his
Angels, Reu. 12.7. and therefore as in a battle the contrary part by all the
power and policy it can, seeks to cast down and overthrow, not the captain
only, but all the adversary power, and discomfite the whole host; so is it
here.

To clear this point, we must know there be three estates from whence Satan
has ever sought to cast men down.

1. From the estate of innocence and grace created: Adam was no sooner set up
in this happy and glorious estate, but Satan cast him down. And from this
pinnacle we are all cast down in him. The second Adam himself was sundry ways
assayed in these temptations and sundry others, to be cast down also from the
same most innocent estate: which had been the casting of us all not out of the
earthly paradise with Adam, but a casting down from heaven unto hell.

2. From the estate of regeneration and grace renewed. Satan's continual labor
is, either to keep men under condemnation from the state of grace, or to cast
them down (if it were possible) from that estate, to which they are by Christ
restored. He works effectually in the sons of disobedience, by hardening
their hearts, blinding their minds, and leading them hoodwinkt at his pleasure
to damnation: 2. Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be now hid, it is hid to them that
perish, in whom the God of the world has blinded their minds, that the light
of the glorious Gospel, which is the image of God, should not shine unto them.
And for the elect, he sets upon them false Prophets and seducers: he is
incessant in most malicious tentations, by which he foyleth them often in foul
manner: and if he cannot cast them down from their estate in Christ, yet he
often casts them down from the comfort of it, both by inward and outward
sorrows and persecutions. Reu. 12. the Dragon, when he cannot kill the woman,
and her seed, he will cast out of his mouth waters like a flood to drown them:
and if that prevail not, he will stir up war with the remnant of the seed,
which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

3. From the pinnacle of their outward estate or office, which they hold in the
Church or Commonwealth: for so he did here with Christ; when he had gotten him
to the pinnacle, he thought to get him down easily: at least he will do his
best to cast him down, for he should fall with witness.

First, if he see a man on the Pinnacle of the Temple, a teacher in the Church,
lifted up above others in gifts or place, he will leave no stone vnturnd to
cast him down: for he knows, that (as if he had here cast down Christ, he
had cast down with him all his members, so) if he can cast down an eminent
teacher, he casts down with him as many as depend upon him. And here no
teacher can secure himself, if he were in place above all the ministry of the
New Testament: nay, the higher the pinnacle, the more slippery and dangerous to
fall. Judas his place was an higher place then any ordinary minister of the new
Testament stands upon: but yet how fearfully was he cast down by the devil,
who put it in his heart, and prevailed first for the betraying of his Master,
and then the hanging of himself? How did the devil seek to winnow as wheat
the rest of the Disciples, that stood on the same battlements, who had as
certainly been cast down, but for the power and prayer of their Master. Luke
22.31.

How strongly may we clear this truth, if we observe one experience, which all
the ages of the world have confirmed? namely, that the devil has ever striuen
to set men on the Pinnacle of the Temple, to cast them down, and the Church in
them. How has he by wicked means, as flattery, money, and corruption, advanced
them into the highest places and pinacles of the Church, whom he might use as
his chief agents to ruinate and bane the Church; as the false Prophets in the
old Testament, that would ever with the squirrill build and have their holes
open to the sunside, ever keep in with Princes, and sing sweetly to the present
times; As also the false Apostles that would suffer nothing for Christ, but
under a color of preaching Christ, abolish Christ and his doctrine, taught and
maintained by the true Apostles. How does the Church complain, that she was
never so wounded as by the watchmen, who also robbed her, and took away her
veil from her? Look into the records of 1500. years, and we shall not read
almost of any persecutions of the Church, but raised and with all heat pursued
by proud, persecuting, and Antichristian Bishops, who kept the chief places in
the Church. And ever since the Bishop of Rome has bin by the devil lifted up
into the highest pinnacle of the Temple, his casting down and fall into so many
monsters of doctrine and manners, has been in this Christian world the ruin
and downfall of so many as whose names are not written in the book of life.
All this comes to pass by the malice of the devil, whose tail draws the
third part of the stars of heaven, and casts them to the earth, Reu. 12.4.
Against these stars and lights of the world he bends his forces: If he can
cast them down to earthlines, or service of any lusts, he has his desire.

Secondly, if he see a man upon the pinnacle of his own house, he will (if he
can) cast him down thence, and for this purpose will lay his plots and
objects. David walking in his battlements, was soon cast down thence by the
sight of Bathsheba. Especially if a man be a Magistrate or Governor, standing
on the pinnacle of authority, the devil will cast him down, if by any means
he can: His example will cast down a great many with him, he stands high, many
eyes are upon him, and so many see him. If Rehoboam commit idolatry, all Judah
will sacrifice under every green hill. If the Magistrate be fearful,
negligent, or any way noted for vice, those under him will take it for a
license.

The reasons, why Satan seeks thus restlesly to cast men down from every good
estate, are these: Reasons.
1. Because himself is cast down from heaven to hell. Reu. 12.13. when the
dragon saw that he He would have and hold every man under his own
condemnation. 2. Because of the extreme corruption of his nature, who is
pleased with desire Cain, and in the rest of the posterity of the Fathers
before the flood, till all flesh had corrupted their ways. When God had given
his law and set up his pure worship, he presently cast his people down within
40. days before the calfe, and after before other idols of the nations, which
was their destruction. So soon as ever Christ was called to his office, he
must either cast himself down from the pinnacle, or cast himself down to
worship Satan, as we shall see in the next temptation. And as a serpent never
vents any thing but poison, so Satan never speaks in other language but the
issue and effect is, Cast thy self down. From this corruption of his nature,
he is called (...), the wicked one: and he that can fill his agents with
wickedness (as Elymas was called the child of the devil, Qu^ efficit tale,
illud ipsum est magis tale.
because he was full of subtilty and mischief, Act. 13.10.) must needs be full
himself.

Seeing then Satan's whole drift is to cast us down, Use.
note what a wonderful mercy of God it is, that we stand and are vpheld,
especially such as stand upon higher pinacles and places then other, against
whom he redoubleth his forces. Ye stand by grace, says the Apostle. It is not
the goodness of nature, yea if it were clothed with innocence, that can support
us, no if it were Angelical: It is the grace and strength of our invincible
captain, that we are not every moment cast down into hell, seeing there wants
neither skill, nor malice, nor diligence in our adversary, no nor advantage or
inclination in our selves. Let us therefore acknowledge, that by the grace of
God we are that we are, and say with the Apostle, 1. Tim. 1.12. I thank God,
which has made me strong.

Use. 2.
We must learn from this incessant industry of the devil to cast us down, to
be so much the more watchful against him.

Quest. How shall I do this? Answ. By observing these rules. 1. Take heed thou
suffer him not to lead thee to a pinnacle: Rule. 1.
for although our Lord and Savior, being filled with the Spirit, and led by
the Spirit, gave him leave to set him on the pinnacle, yet must not thou follow
him thither, who art not so fenced or furnished. For he never sets any on a
pinnacle, but (as Christ here) to cast him down. And then the devil sets a man
on the pinnacle, when by wicked or base arts, a man rises to wealth, or honor,
or any public place in the Church or Commonwealth: he will willingly lend his
help and hand, thus to exalt and set up men, but as the hangman helps the
thief up the ladder, to turn him off with a breake-necke. Haman was advanced
to great honor; but was it not to his greater ruin and downfall? Did not ^e
help up Herod by pride and ambition, almost above the pinnacle? when he spoke,
Oh, it was the voice of God, and not of a man. But was it not to cast him down
lower then all his people, to be presently eaten with lice? He sends up
Nebuchadnezzar to the pinnacle of his palace, and that was great Babel which he
had built for the honor (not of God, but) of his Kingdom; and by the might
(not of God, but) of his own power. But the issue was to be cast down among
beasts, and not a fit companion for Princes or his people, till he knew who the
Lord was.

From Princes to Counselors. Achitophel was on an high pinnacle, when his
counsel was accepted as an oracle of God: but the end was, that when it was
despised, he should cast himself down, and hang himself.

From them to their inferiors, but rich and great. David saw the wicked man
in great prosperity, on an high pinnacle, strong, spreading like a green bay
tree: but suddenly he was cast down, and he could not find where he had
been. Psalm. 37.35. The like of the rich man in the parable, Thou fool, this
night shall they fetch thy soul, etc.

From these to great Churchmen. Judas was set in the Apostleship, Satan
finding him there, cast him down to hell, he went to his place, so woeful a
spectacle as beseemed the son of perdition, and the betrayer and murderer of
the just and innocent Son of God. How many examples of men have we, who out
of pride, and ambition, flattery and corruption, have advanced themselves into
chief places, and as the times called on them, against their consciences were
cast down into horrible practices against the Church, and after into woeful
outward misery, as Cardinal Poole, Gardener, Bonner, and the like. Compare
their lives with their deaths.

Others raising themselves by multiplying, chopping, and engrossing of livings,
have been cast down from their gifts, their reputation, their profiting of the
Church, from their sobriety and ciuility; and some from the outward wealth they
so lay about them for so eagerly, and died beggars.

Other ordinary men are raised by Satan to a great state of wealth, as usurers,
oppressors, and unjust persons, -- Lucri bonus est ^dor ex re Qualibet. --
Iuuenal.
that think all savor of gain sweet, though it be never so filthy, on Gods
Sabbaths, out of laborers lives and bellies. But Satan has cast them down
already into the curse of God, and only the execution of the sentence awayteth
them. Others stand upon the pinnacle of pride, and Satan sets every man upon
this pinnacle if he can, as knowing that pride goes before a fall. Did not he
suggest to our first Parents, that they should be as Gods, if they ate the
forbidden fruit? that by lifting them up in their own conceit, he might cast
them down from their happiness? It was the same suggestion, which he would
here fasten upon the Son of God: If thou will here cast thy self down, all
Jerusalem must needs confess thee to be the true and undoubted Son of God,
and honor thee accordingly.

Use the means to be stablished in grace, Rule. 2.
seeing all Satan's labor is, to cast us down from the grace of God. 2. Tim
2.1. My son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. Train thy self
to humility; for God gives grace to the humble, and ever humbles his children
that he may exalt them. Waters stand in valleys, not in mountains. Joseph was
raised out of prison to be the second man in the kingdom. David was by little
and little raised, from a shepherd to a warrior, from thence to a Kings
son, from thence to a Kingdom. Mordecai was first in danger of his life, and
in great distress, and afterward his head was lifted up. This humility, 1.
will not suffer a man to affect pinnacles, as seeing their danger, but content
himself in a mean estate, which is safest: 2. it will make a man rejoice
rather in Gods humiliation, then in Satan's advancing; the former tending to
exaltation, the latter to ruin and downfall.

Rule. 3.
As Satan is ever plotting to cast thee down, so be thou ever raising thy self
up. 1. By means of the word, which is the staff of a Christian, raising him
in his falls, and strengthening him in his standing. 2. By prayer, which gets
Gods hand with thee to uphold thee, so as the hand that must cast thee down,
must be stronger then Gods. 3. By heavenly conversation, lift up thy soul and
affections daily, seek the things that are above, mind heavenly things. Satan
would not have a man mount above the pinnacle, nor will suffer him (if he can
hinder) to get up to heaven: therefore in regard of his malice, we must put
more labor to this business. Our affections are like the leaden plummets of a
clock, by their own weight ever tending downward, and Satan often hangs his
weight upon them; and therefore we must every day be winding them up. 4. By
fostering, not quenching the motions of the Spirit.

Thy selfe] Quest. Why does not the devil cast Christ down? Did he want
power, who had now carried and set him on that dangerous pinnacle, or did he
want will to throw him down? Answ. There wanted no will in Satan any way to
mischeife our Lord, to which purpose he strained all his wits in these
temptations: but, 1. He wanted power and strength, being bound in chains, and
bridled by God, so as it is as far as he can now go, to tempt Christ to cast
down himself. His commission went no further then to carry his holy body to
the pinnacle, and there set it. 2. For him to have cast down Christ, and Christ
to be a mere patient, had not furthered him a whit in his drift and scope: he
intended to bring Christ to sin, and if Christ cannot be gained to be an
agent, or a voluntary patient, he cannot sin. Besides, he specially
intends to bring Christ to the sin of presumption, in throwing himself
down, which he could not effect by his casting him down, unless himself
(bearing himself upon his Fathers protection) can be brought to cast himself
down. 3. Although afterward Satan had power by his instruments to put our
Savior Christ to death, yet now he could not by casting him down the pinacles
do it, no more then the people could, when they attempted to cast him down
the hill: for his hour was not yet come, he had not yet done that great work,
which he came into the world to do, and the hour for the power of darkness
was not yet. Hence he is a suitor to Christ to cast down himself.

Satan can tempt and persuade us, but he cannot force us to sin: Doctr. 2.
or, He cannot cast thee down, unless thou cast down thy self. He sets
Christ on the pinnacle, he cannot throw him down, but persuades him to throw
down himself. He crammed not Eve with the apple, nor gave it into her hand,
but persuaded her to reach and eat it. He did not kill Saul himself, but
persuaded him to cast down himself upon ^is own sword. He did not put the
halter about Judas his neck, nor was his hangman, but was of his counsel, and
made his own hands his own executioners: therefore it is said, Act. 1.18.
(...), factus praeceps, he threw down himself from an high place, not only
of his office, but from off the tree whereon he hanged himself.

1. This comes to pass by Gods restraining power, Reasons. 1.
which suffers not Satan to do what he list: for then he would suffer no good
thing or person upon earth, but destroy all the order and government of God
both in Church and Commonwealth: then should every man not be a wolf only,
but a devil to a man. Hence he is feign to take out a new commission, and
power from God for his several designs, and cannot go beyond the limitations
of it, though the greediness of his pray be never so great. 2. 2
No man is hurt but from himself, Dico peccatum non esse, si non propria
voluntate pecc^tur: August. contra Fortun. Manich.
and out of the voluntary inclination of his own mind unto evil; which
Satan knows well enough, and therefore he ever works on our corruptions, and
cannot poison us, unless either he get us to drink of his cup, or intoxicate
us by our own. 3. God has made the will of man as a fountain of all humane
actions, whether natural, civil, moral, or divine: 3
and herein has given a man a kind of power under God over himself, by
inuesting every man's will with this natural property, that his will is free
from coaction and force: for a man to say, the will can be forced, is to speak
a contradiction, Volunta^ ^ogi non potest. Arist.
and as much as to say, that the will in the same time and thing can be willing
and nilling; which if it could be forced, were true.

To understand this better, we must know, that there be only two ways to
move, change, or bend the will. First, from an internal agent or principle,
and this is twofold: 1. God himself the author of all natural faculties, in
whose hand the heart of Kings, and all men, be to turn as he pleases, as the
rivers. 2. The man himself to whom God has committed this will, who has
power to dispose it to this or that object: as Adam in innocence had freedom
in things divine and humane, and now we his posteriry in the latter. Secondly,
by external moouers; and these are either, 1. the natural object of the will,
which is some good so apprehended in the understanding, and strongly urged upon
the will; or 2. some passions, lusts, affections, and appetites, which incline
the will this way or that.

Quest. How then is it said, that the devil filled Ananias his heart to lie to
the holy Ghost? Act. 5.3. and of Judas, that the devil entered into him, and
put into his heart to betray his Lord, if he cannot move the will? Answ. It is
not denied, but that something besides God, can move the will: but the
question is, of the manner. God mooues it by his own and absolute power, even
without our selves, and against our selves, as when he changes an heart of
stone into an heart of flesh. But other without us cannot move our hearts,
neither by any proper power that they have over them, nor yet without our
selves first gained unto them; but then they move our wills, when they can
either make us apprehend and understand some object, or move passion or
appetite, whereby to incline our wills. Thus the good Angels may and do
propound divine truth and good unto our understanding, and move our wills to
embrace it and choose it, but not always with effect, because the power is not
in them, but in our selves. A good Angel admonished Joseph in a dream, by
which his will was bended to provide for Christ and himself. Thus also the
devils and wicked Angels move the will, by working upon the fantasy and
imagination; as in many Melancholic persons to hurt themselves and others:
sometimes by setting good colors upon evil, so that the understanding
apprehending evil in the case and color of good, may bend the will to it; as
Peter in denying his Lord, thought it good and safe for the present: sometimes
by raising up passions, and working in them; as Saul in a passion to cast his
spear to kill his good son Jonathan, a barbarous and unnatural fact; yet
the devil gained his will to it, having first raised a cloud of dustie passion
to darken his understanding: and the other Saul in his fury and hot mood to
waste and persecute all that called on Christ: sometimes by stirring up lust
and concupiscence; as David being enflamed with lust, the devil working on
this corruption, gained his will to those foul facts, which above all
blemished him.

As for the examples alleged, thus Peter says, that Satan filled Ananiahs
heart; not that he brought any new wickedness into his heart, but, that which he
found he stirred up, and persuaded his will to play that dissembling part; for
he should carry it away closely and cautelously enough. And thus the devil
put treason into the heart of Judas: he knew him to be a covetous wretch, and
had often watched him how he was deceitful in the administration of his
Masters money: now his affection being troubled, and stuffed with covetousness,
Satan uses this as a means to persuade his will, for money to attempt this
foul and barbarous treason.

In all which we see, that our wills are not under the power of the devil, who
deals with us as wicked men, who when they persuade any evil, infuse none of
their wickedness into us, but only by their speech stir up that which is in
our selves, and persuade us thereunto.

4. It is not enough for Satan's malice and cruelty to bring mischeife on the
bodies of men, but the thing he aims at is, 4
to bring guiltines on their souls; as our Savior here, I doubt not but he
would willingly have killed him, if it had been in his power to cast him
down, as it was to carry him up: but he had far rather that Christ should
do it himself, and so have an hand in his own death. In Job Satan was not
contented to cast him down in bringing misery upon his body and estate, but the
thing he aimed at was Jobs casting down himself by blaspheming God, that so
he might bring guiltines upon his soul. And Satan knows, that when he can
bring a sinner to give up his will to his persuasion, his sin is so much the
more sinful, because to a voluntary sin is added, 1. a deliberation: 2. an
election of evil, and a preferring it before good: and 3. a willing execution
of that which a corrupt understanding has embraced, and a corrupt judgment
and will preferred for some corrupt end.

5. Satan's slinesse and usual subtilty in his temptations, 5
shows that his strength lies in inward persuasion, and not in outward
violence: He insinuates like a serpent, and pretends great good will, as here,
Thou shall show thy self the Son of God; as though he in earnest sought the
honor of Christ: and, as if he would have bettred Adams estate, he said, Ye
shall be Gods. He transformes himself into an Angel of light, and ordinarily
deals with us as with Saul, who, when he saw the devil himself, he made him
believe he saw Samuel Gods worthy Prophet.

Use. 1.
This doctrine serves to comfort us, considering the impotency of our enemy. He
is a weak enemy, and cannot overcome him who is not willing to be overcome. He
can egg us on to evil, compel us he cannot. Ad malum hortari potest, cogere
non potest. Chrysostom.
And as Christ said to Pilate, Thou could have no power over me, unless it
were given thee from above; so Satan can have no power but from God, not over
beasts, Matthew. 8.31. not over wicked men: Ahab a wicked King could not be
deceived, nor set on to move a needless war, till the Lord sealed Satan's
commission, 1. King. 22.21. And much less over the godly, as we see in Job,
till God said, All that he has is in thine hands; till then, neither he nor
any thing he had was in Satan's power. Nay, not an hair of our head falls to
the ground without the providence of our heavenly Father. And another sound
ground of comfort is, that as he cannot hurt us without the will of our
heavenly Father, so he cannot without our own wills: for if he could, he would
never be resisted in his temptations; whereas we see in Joseph, Job, and by
experience in our selves, that some hellish temptations are by grace, and the
watch over our hearts, repelled and resisted.

Use. 2.
Hence we see that nothing can do us harm but our own sin: death without
sin is but a gate to life, the devil a great and cruel enemy, but nothing
so dangerous as our own sin, this slaies us without him, he hurts us not
without this. What reason have we to be in love with sin, while we profess
we hate the devil, who can do us no such harm? Which must stir up our
watch against our own corruption: for if he plow not with our heyfer, he can
get no advantage.

Many having sinned lay the blame on the devil, who (they say) ought them a
spite, Use. 3.
or a shame. But as the Lord said to Cain, so say I to thee, If thou do
evil, sin lies at thy door: and, it is thy sin, not the devils. Object.
Oh but he tempted me. Answ. So he did Christ here: and had not thou cast
down thy self, he could not have done. It was indeed the devils sin, that
he beguiled the woman, and he had his judgment for it: But it was her sin
that she was beguiled, and arraigned, and judged by God for it. It is the
theefes sin to steal thy money, and he shall be hanged for it: but if thou
leauest thy money without doors, and never look after it, it is thy fault
and folly, and what could thou look for else? The devil is a sly thief
and robber: but he commits not his robbery as other thieves and Burglers, he
will not break open the door, nor draw the latch; but, where he finds the
door open, and an house prepared and swept, there he comes and makes spoil,
Luke 11.25. And if a man know a rank thief, were he not worthy to be robbed
that will open his doors, and give him entertainment? Oh let not us extenuate
our sin, or lay the blame on the devil, who cannot hurt us without our own
weapons. He cannot make us swear, or curse, or drink, or kill, or break the
Sabbath: All that he can do is, to stir up our corruption, present objects,
stir up passion to trouble the judgment, and persuade or solicit. He can
suggest, he cannot force. And therefore do as David, taking all the blame of
our sins upon our selves: when the devil stirred him up to number the
people, and he came to see his folly, he thought not his sin less, because
Satan moved him, but said, I have done very foolishly: Alas, these silly
sheep what have they done?

Take heed of Satan's voice, which is ever to cast thy self down: Use. 4.
every temptation to sin has this voice in it, Cast thy self down: and too
too many hear and yield to the same. Some cast themselves down, by casting
themselves back from God and his truth, forsaking the right way. Thus every
Apostate has cast himself down, and has need of that counsel, Remember
from whence thou art fallen, and do thy first works. Others cast themselves
down by falling into a puddle of base uncleanness, as covetousness,
drunkenness, swearing, lying, etc. unbeseeming the place, name, and honor of
Christians. Were it not too too base a deiecting of himself, if a Noble man
should sort himself to lie in a barn among beggars; or any man to lie in a
stie among swine? So for a Christian to demean himself like a worldling, or
Epicure, or Atheist, is as great a debasement. Others cast themselves down
into the pit of despair, when any sorrow or trouble extraordinary presses
or pincheth them. If God cast them down a little, they cast themselves down
immeasurably, as Cain, Judas: nay, Gods servants think sometimes, that God
has forgotten them, and will not remember seasonable mercy.

But do thou in all temptations answer Satan thus; No Satan, I know thou can
not cast me down, God (to whom the honor of it is due) be praised for it; and
I will not cast my self down: if God cast me down, Psalm. 119 71.
I shall rise again, who only can and will turn his humiliation of me to my
exaltation.

From hence.] So Luke adds: that is, from the battlement, which God had
straightly enjoyed as a means to keep men from falling, and to prevent danger.
Deuteronomy. 22.8. When thou buildest a new house, thou shall make a battlement on thy
roof, that thou lay not blood upon thy house, if any man fall thence. And this
was the manner of the Jews buildings, to build their houses not ridged as
ours, but with a flat roof, as most of our Churches be, and battlements about;
and their roofes thus made, served them to many good purposes; as Josh. 2.6.
Rahab brought the spies up to the roof of the house, and hid them with the
stackes of flax which she had spread upon the roof. Act. 10.9. Peter being
in Ioppa in Simons house a tanner, went up upon the house to pray. Of this kind
seemed that house of the Philistims, which Sampson at his death pulled down,
upon the roof of which, stood 3000 persons to behold while Sampson was mocked.

Doctr. 3.
Satan seeks especially to draw such to sin, who have most means against
it. As Christ was not set on a pinnacle, which had no stairs to go down by,
but where were stairs; and he must notwithstanding them, cast himself down
headlong. So dealt he with Adam in his innocence, who having all perfections
his soul and body were capable of, yet must he needs reach at the bettering
of his estate: had Adam known any misery yet, his sin had been so much the
less, if he had been enticed vnwarrantably to mend his estate; but he did (as
the parable speaks) set an old patch upon a new garment, which was both idle
and disgraceful. And the means of his sin, was as idle as the end: for, had
he not all the trees of the garden, and fruits of paradise to eat upon? and
were not all else means enough to keep him from one forbidden fruit? If God had
restrained all but one, he had not wronged him: he had furnished him with all
strength against temptation, if he would have used it: he had no manner of
discontent in his estate: yet if he had been overcome in that supposall, to
have enlarged without God his own allowance, his sin had not been in that
degree, and so out of measure sinful, as the having of all these means made
it. Who must deny our Savior Christ, but one of his disciples? who must
betray him but another? both of them abounding with means to the contrary,
having been advanced by Christ into the high offices of Apostleship, to be
next attendants of Christ, who heard his doctrine, saw his miracles, and were
eie-witnesses of the integrity of his life, yea both specially warned by
Christ of those particular sins, and Peter had professed to die rather then
do it.

1. The malice of Satan is such, Reasons. 1.
as he is not content that men sin, unless he can bring them to aggrauate
their sin, and do it as sinfully as may be: and therefore he is industrious
to get men to sin against the means. For this adds weight to the sin,
and provoke Gods anger much more then another sin. Examples we have in
Exodus 32.31. when Israel had made a calfe, Oh says Moses, this people have
sinned a great sin. It was great, 1. in the kind, idolatry. 2. in the
manner, being against such means: it was not many days before that, that
Moses had received the ten commaundement^, which themselves heard delivered in
such thunder, lightning, and terrible voice, as made them profess what ever
the Lord should command them by Moses, they would do: and besides, the ten
commandments thus vttred and delivered, Exodus 20. in the 22. verse a special
addition was annexed, Ye shall make you no Gods, of silver or gold, etc. They
had immediately before received an extraordinary food by Manna, which then they
enjoyed: Moses was in the mount with God, to receive more laws for their good:
Aaron was with them to advise them. But against all these and many more means,
they worship a calfe, and so highly provoke God, as after a great slaughter
of men, 3000. in number, Moses hardly obtained pardon for the residue. David's
sin was so much the more heinous, in that he had many wives of his own, 2.
Sam. 12.1.
as Nathan in the parable shows, and makes himself to confess. A rich man
had many sheep and oxen, and the poor man had but one lamb, which ate his
morsells with him, and slept in his bosom (which was Bathsheba in Vriahs
bosom:) and the rich man refused to dress any of his own sheep, and slew and
dressed the poor man's sheep. David himself hearing it, before he knew it to
be his own case, could say, As sure as the Lord lives, he shall die that has
done this: and Nathan said, Thou art the man, etc. And this sin so provoked
the Lord, that the sword never departed from his house, and his repentance
could not cut off that part of the sentence, but his own son Absalom must
defile his fathers wives, in the sight of all Israel.

Hence it was also, that our Lord answering Pilate, aggrauated the sin of
Judas, Ioh. 19.11. He that delivered me unto thee, has the greater sin: he
knew he delivered an innocent to death, he was warned, he was a friend and
familiar, his sin was a great sin, and so great as God took him in hand,
and laid the burden of it presently upon his soul, and he found no ease but in
hanging himself.

2
2. Satan knows these sins more trouble and wound the conscience then other,
because this circumstance lays the sin directly upon our selves, and takes
away excuses; God was not wanting to prevent such; a man cannot say he could
not remedy it, no good means was wanting to him, only he was wanting to
himself and the means. And thus the Lord reasons with his people to bring
them to the sight of their own corruption, Isa. 5.4. What could I do more to
my vineyard which I have not done?

3
3. Satan knows, that to sin against means is a compound sin, and like to
a complicated disease, hardly cured: for besides the sin, to which a man is
drawn, there is, 1. a neglect of a man's own good: 2. there is a base
estimation of Gods great kindness in offering the means of our good; and
consequently, God himself is despised in the means; yea, there is an
unthankful rejecting of grace offered. And what is further to be done, but to
leave such a one as remediless?

4
4. Well knows Satan, that God has denounced and executed greater plagues upon
these sins then other, where means were not present. He punished adultery
in the law with death, not simple fornication, because one had means to avoid
the sin, the other wanted it. So for theft, Prou. 6.30. If a thief steal to
satisfy his soul, because he is hungry, men despise him not; a restitution
may be made, he must not die; comparing the sin with adultery, in which no
restitution must be made, they must die the death. Capernaum, which was lifted
up to heaven in respect of the means of salvation, neglecting those stairs,
cast her self lower into hell then Tyrus and Sidon, which never had the like
things done in them. Nay God, whose nature is to be merciful, in this case
takes pleasure, and delights himself in severity: Prou. 1.22. Ye have
despised all my counsel, and set my correction at naught, therefore will I
laugh in your destruction.

This doctrine is of great use through the whole life.

1. If where more means be to hinder sin, Use. 1.
there sin is aggrauated: how heavy be the sins of our age, who in the
means are lifted up above all the ages of 1500. years before us? How may the
Lord complain of us, as Hos. 8.10. I have written to them the great things of
my law, but they have counted it a vain thing? The means that we have, do
set our sins in a far higher degree then were the sins of our fathers.
Theirs were in the night, ours in the day; theirs were ignorances in
comparison, ours are presumptions, of knowledge and set purpose: theirs were
errors and sins, ours are rebellions and obstinacy: they could scarce do
any other, we will not: their ignorance invincible, ous affected. And as our
means be greater, so our judgment and account shall be straighter: for, to
whom God gives more, of them he requires more, Luke 12.48.

2. Content we not our selves, that we have stairs or means; Use. 2.
as many who say they come to Church, hear the word, receive the Sacrament,
have some measure of knowledge, and be able to speak of religion: seeing the
presence of the means brings Satan more fiercely upon thee, and threatens thy
greater danger, if thou growest not in soundness of Christianity by them.
Consider whether the Scripture be not true, saying, 1. Not the hearers of the
word, but the doers thereof shall be justified. 2. Knowers of their Masters
will, and not doers of it, shall be beaten with more stripes. 3. Many seem to
be partakers of grace, who are peruerters of it, and turn it into wantonness,
who are of old rolled or billed unto condemnation. 4. Many in the day of
judgment shall say and allege for themselves, We have eat and drunk in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets; to whom the judge shall say, I
tell you, I know not whence you are: depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

The Jews had the ministry of John, of Christ and his disciples, the Gospel
of the kingdom preached, which was as Iaacobs ladder, to rise up by the
stairs and s^aues of it unto heaven: but for all this, because they walked not
worthy of these means, Christ tells them plainly to their faces, that
Publicans and harlots should go into heaven before them. And the same shall be
said of every formal Christian, contenting himself with an outward show of
goodness, and not answerable to the means he has, without any inward, or
constant change by them.

3. Let us beware of Satan's wyle, neither to neglect means, nor yet to sin
against them. Use. 3.
I. In spiritual things, the means of salvation are stairs to heaven: 1. If
thou be not a member of the Church, and abidest in the ship, thou can not
be saved, Act. 27.31. 2. If being ouerrunne with the disease of sin, thou
waitest not at the poole wherein and when the Spirit moves and stirs the
waters, thou can not be cured, Ioh. 5.4. Refuse the word and Sacraments, thou
perishest. 3. If God have showed thee, oh man, what is good, and what he
requires of thee, surely to do justly, to love mercy, to humble thy self,
and walk with thy God: if thou cast thy self off these stairs into injustice,
unmercifulness, pride, and profaneness, by this fall thou do break the neck
of thy soul. So when the Lord affoards many gracious means within a man and
without: without, the exhortations and precepts of his word, and the warnings
of his correcting hand; then, 1. suffer the word of exhortation gladly, let the
word rule thee, sin not against the word by which thou art to be judged. 2.
let the rod open the ear that was sealed, and correction be thy instruction:
it is a note of blessedness to be chastened, and taught in Gods law. The Lord
is glad to add this means to let in the former; and if men still fall back
more and more, the Lord casts such persons off.

So when he inwardly uses either checks of conscience, or else the motions of
his Spirit, sin not against them: for, 1. the voice of thy conscience must
thou hear one day, therefore suffer it not to go on in accusing thee, but
still it by casting out the core of sin, that makes it so restless and
painful. 2. quench not the motions of Gods spirit: for this grieves him, and
makes him go away in displeasure, and then all thy sound comfort is gone with
him.

II. In temporal things, sin not against the means. He must eat that must
live, he must work that will eat, sow to reap; he that would avoid a strange
woman, must love his own wife; all the soldiers and people in the ship must
come safe to land, but then must they not cast them into the sea, but abide in
the ship. Isa. 37.33. the Prophet in the Lords name tells Hezekiah, that
Senacherib shall not enter into the city; but if hereupon Hezekiah, should have
bid them set the gates open, would not the Prophet have told him he had
betrayed the city? For a rich man to be an usurer, or an oppressor, is a
greater sin then it is taken for, because it is against the means: yet who
are usurers else? who oppressors else? who grind the faces of the poor? who
detain the wages of poor servants, but they? For a man to break the Sabbath
for gain is a great sin, as appears in the poor man that went out to
gather sticks: but how great then is it in rich men who need not, having much
means beyond the present necessity? and yet they, or their servants and
workmen, must be gathering sticks to burn themselves withal in hell. Who
sees not the malice of the devil here, who will have the Lords day worldly and
wickedly spent, wherein God has set up the special means to draw men from it?

For it is written,] Having spoken both of the ground of this assault, and also
of the scope and matter of it, we come to the third consideration in it,
namely, The enforcing or urging of it by a testimony of Scripture. Satan had
persuaded the Son of God to a most foolish practice: would any mad man or
fool cast himself down from an high place, and pash himself all to pieces
at any man's persuasions; and cannot now the Son of God, the wisdom of his
Father, discern danger in this motion? Satan is too black here, and lays his
snare in vain before the eye of that which has wing. But to hide his
blacknes, he draws a fair glove over a foul hand, and assayes to make the
case without all danger or absurdity: he has that to say, which the Son of
God cannot refuse: he has Scripture to persuade him; for no reason is
comparable to this, to assure the Son of God, who must hear the word of his
Father, that there is neither danger, nor unreasonableness in this motion;
nay, there is much good in it: 1. he shall show himself to be the Son of
God: 2. he shall show his affiance in his Fathers word, which has fully
assured him of his Fathers protection: as if he should say, Thou being the
Son of God, may without danger cast thy self down hence; but do not
take it on my word, which perhaps thou may suspect, but take it on thy
Fathers word: If that has any truth in it, there is no danger in my motion:
And because thou shall not think that I speak without book, it is written in
thy Fathers book; If I had a Psalter here I could show it thee, that he has
given his Angels charge over thee to keep thee, that thou dash not thy foot
against a stone: and though thou cast thy self down, they shall bear thee
up, and save the harmless. And if they should fail of their duty, thou
being the Son of God, can sustain thy self by thine own proper power
and virtue.

Here consider two things, 1. the general consideration of the allegation, It
is written. 2. the special matter of it, He will give his Angels charge over
thee, etc.

Doctr.
The devil can and does allege Scripture to further his wicked purposes: as
here. In his tempting of Eve he made the ground of his temptation Gods word,
Has God indeed said ye shall not die? In the deluding of Saul, he took the
help of Samuels prophecy, 1. Sam. 28.17. The Lord has done even as he spoke
by mine hand. So his instruments the false Prophets pretend the word of the
Lord, as Hanani, Ier. 28.2.

Reasons. 1.
The reasons why Satan alleges Scripture, are these: 1. To hide his person,
and to transform himself into an Angel of light: here he counterfeits David's
voice, nay, the voice of the Spirit of God, speaking in the written word. He
would feign persuade Christ that he is a lover of the truth, and under a
testimony of Scripture would hide his horns. 2
2. As hereby himself dissembles holiness, Regula credendorum and agendorum.
so he would color the matter to which he tempts us, to be just and lawful:
for is not that lawful, which the word allows; 3
seeing it is the rule of faith and manners? 3. He frames himself according to
the disposition of parties with whom he is to deal: Christ stood much upon
Scripture, and would do nothing without Scripture, and if he cannot draw him
by Scripture he shall prevail nothing; and thus he deals daily with tender
consciences, he can bring them to any thing by a Scripture of his own
misshaping. 4
4. This comes to pass by reason of his malice, 1. against the Scripture,
which he seeks to abuse to a contrary end, seeing the Scriptures are written
that we might not sin, 1. Ioh. 2.1. 2. against the godly, to overcome them
with no other then their own weapons: Christ had made the written word his
shield, his sword, he will therefore assay with his own weapon to wound him:
and so he deals with his members. 5. Here is not only Gods permission, 5
but his ouerruling power: for hereby the father of lies against his heart and
nature, gives witness to the truth, and strongly argues it to be the
strongest weapon, that has strongest power over the conscience.

Quest. How does Satan allege Scripture? Answ. He is Gods ape; and as God,
alleges Scripture three ways: 1. by his Spirit and inward motion, as to
Abimelech in a dream, Genesis 20.3. 2. by his Ministers and servants, Angels or
men. 3. by his own lively voice, as to Adam: So can Satan, 1. by suggestion.
2. by his Ministers, who transform themselves as if they were the Ministers
and Apostles of Christ. 2. Cor. 11.13.14.15. not only delivering the word, but
also truly. 3. by voice in some assumed body, as undoubtedly he did to the
first Adam, and here to the second.

Seeing then this wicked spirit can and does allege Scripture against us,
Use. 1.
it behooues us to try the spirits whether they be of God or no, 1. Ioh. 4.1.
not to believe every one that can allege Scripture; for so we might believe
the devil himself. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. our commandment is to prove all things,
and hold only that which is good. Our president is in Act. 17.11. the Bereans,
when they heard the Apostles, searched whether the things spoken were so. We
take no coin without due trial.

Quest. How shall I try the spirit that brings a sentence of Scripture? Answ.
1. By diligent study and reading of Scripture, diligently searching out the
truth: for the determination of every truth must be by Scripture: Dubium.
and though Scripture seem to be opposed to Scripture, we must not with
Papists draw determination of matters from Scripture: so says the Apostle in
Ephesians. 4.14. Let us not be carried about as children with every wind of
doctrine: how should we do other? but follow the truth in love. Examine the
places, circumstances, antecedents, and consequents, confer with other
Scriptures; to all which it must agree. 2. Follow and frequent the ministry,
as not content with the knowledge of the Scriptures without the true
understanding of them: Non in legendo, sed in intelligendo. Hieron.
for they consist not in the bare letters, but in the pithie sense, said the
Father. And this true understanding will help us to lay it to the analogy of
faith, whereunto it must be agreeable, and will make our senses exercised in
the word. 3. Add hereunto prayer, which procures the Spirit to lead us into
all necessary truth. David never ceased to pray to be taught, as we may see
through the whole 119. Psalm. 4. Consider the end and scope of the Scripture
alleged. If it lead thee into an action condemned by the law of nature, or
against other direct Scriptures, or principles of religion, it is of the devil
the father of lies: for Gods Spirit never alleges Scripture but to lead us
into the knowledge and practice of some truth. This is Moses his rule, Deuteronomy.
13.1. If a false Prophet rise up, see what he aims at: if it be to draw thee
from the Lord, his worship, or word, take heed of him: so if Satan by any
instrument of his shall bring the word, and pretend great zeal, if the end be
to draw thee to superstition, idolatry, or Popery, beware of him, his scope
discouers him. If a doctrine or Scripture be alleged to nourish any fleshly
delight, or to hold men in sin, though the words be Gods, the allegation is
the devils: as, At what time soever a sinner repents, etc. and the thief
was saved at the last hour; and therefore, if thou can say two or three good
words at thy death, all shall be well: here is the devil, saying It is
written: for all Scripture truly cited by Gods Spirit aims at mortification,
and the furtherance of repentance. If a Scripture be alleged and urged to
threaten and discourage such as fear God, and show forwardnes in good ways,
or to animate the sinner, promising him peace and life, it is Satan's
allegation: for if Gods spirit allege Scripture, that word is good and
comfortable to him that walks uprightly, and the threats of the law are fit
provision for impenitent persons.

This teaches us not to content our selves to know the Scripture, Use. 2.
and be able to speak of it, or to allege it: for the devil knows the
word, and can allege it readily, yea he is expert in it. Many men deceive
themselves in their estate, and think themselves sure of salvation, if they
can get a little knowledge of the Scripture above others: as though Satan could
not allege it, or as though the wicked could not preach it, as Judas did, or
ungodly men profess it, who take the w^rd into their mouth, and hate to be
reformed, Psalm. 50.16.17.

But let us take heed we come not behind the devil himself, while we thus
highly conceit our selves: Use. 3.
for 1. Are there not a number of ignorant men, almost as ignorant as if the
Scriptures had never been written? and shall not the devil condemn these,
who has gained so much knowledge in the word, which contains not one word of
comfort for him, but judgment that makes him tremble? Yet these, whom they
would make wise to salvation, and to whom they offer the joys and comfort of
life eternal, are utterly ignorant of them.

2. Many read the Scripture, but as Satan, not to inform or reform
themselves, nor to make themselves better, but both themselves and others far
worse, as not only heretics and learned Papists, who bend all their knowledge
to suppress and hide the truth, but all such as by the Scripture seek to
maintain their own errors and sins, which they will not part with: And
these are no better then the devil.

3. Others will read Scripture, and hear, and know it, but without all
special application and grace in the heart, wherein they should differ from
the devil and wicked men, who know the word, but affect it not, do it not,
nay, cannot abide the special application of it to do them good: and this does
nothing but increase sin and judgment: sinne] Iam. 4.17. to him that knows
to do well, and does it not, it is sin, a great sin, without excuse or
cloak: Ioh. 15.22. iudgement] for such shall be beaten with many stripes.

4. Others brag of their knowledge; they read the Bible, at least David's
Psalms, and they know as much as any Preacher can tell them. But stay, the
devil reads the Psalter as well as thou, and can quote David's Psalms more
readily then thou, he can read the Bible, he knows as much, yea more then any
Preacher can tell him: what say thou more of thy self, then the devil can
do of himself, and more truly? And what have thou gained by all this
challenge, but thine own conviction of great sin, without excuse, but not
without witness? Is not thy own mouth thy judge, who professest so much
knowledge, and so little grace, love, practice? To sin wilfully and
presumptuously, against the light, is an extraordinary conformity with Satan.

Rules of reading, and hearing the word religiously.

1. Consider the excellency of the word above all precious things, and how
dangerous it is to take Gods name in vain; which is then, when the word is
frustrate of his right end. 2. They are called holy Scriptures, (...).
not only in regard of that holy truth contained in them, but because they are
instruments, by which the elect are sanctified and made holy, Ioh. 17.17. and
therefore are never to be used without holy affection, nor without endeavor to
grow up in holiness. 3. They are the word of faith: (...).
therefore we must mingle the word with faith, and lay up the precepts and
promises thereof to believe it. 4. The Scriptures being the rule of life, we
must submit our whole man to the obedience and practice of it, with all
sincerity and constancy. Hereby we shall go beyond the knowledge of the word
in devils and ungodly men.

NOW for the place it self, we must consider it two ways; 1. As abused by
Satan in his allegation. 2. As we find it holily set down by the Spirit of God.

In Satan's abuse of this Scripture, we may see many particulars: 1. He wrongs
the words of God, when he urges them spoiled of the right sense of the holy
Ghost. 2. He peruerteth the right order of Gods spirit in his allegation: for
whereas Gods spirit first suggests the word, and then frames the heart to
obedience of it (for the property of the sheep of Christ is, first to hear
the voice, and then to follow, Ioh. 10.27.) Satan first will have men to
conceive opinions, or attempt practices pleasing to him and themselves, and
then afterward seek out some Scripture to justify them. Thus Iohanan and the
captains were resolved to go into Egypt* but sent for Jeremy to see if they
might have the word of God to go with them, Ier. 42.3. compared with verse
20.3. He wrests the right end: for whereas all Scripture is written that we
might not sin, 1. Ioh. 2.1. he abuses this part of it to draw Christ to
sin* and whereas all the precious promises of God* should hold us in the awe
and fear of God, this promise must occasion Christ to pr^sume upon an
unlawful action. 4. He willingly mistakes the persons: for whereas that
Psalm, and the great promises of it, hold true in Christ our Head, yet
notwithstanding it was principally written for the godly members of Christ, and
the adopted sons of God: neither can every thing in that Psalm be so fitly
referred to Christ in himself, as in his afflicted members. Besides that, the
Angels minister otherwise to Christ himself, then to his members: Christ by
his own power bea^es up himself, and Angels, and all things, Hebr. 1.3. 5. He
falsifies the text, by adding partly to the words, partly to the sense. To the
words, he adds, least at any time, which adds no small strength to the
temptation, including even that time wherein he should be iumping between the
pinnacle and the pauement. To the sense, thrusting his dart into the sense of
the place, as if that place said so much in effect to him, Cast thy self
down* which Chrysostom has well observed, Homil. 5. ex varijs in Matthew.
saying, Cast thy self d^wne, was not written, but was the poison of the
serpent, cunningly mingled with the sweet comfort of the Scripture. 6. He puts
out and conceales that which most makes for Christ, and against himself,
namely, those words [ in all thy ways,] which most warreth against this
headlong casting down of himself: for it is not the way of a man to cast
himself from such an height, but to seek the stairs, o^ the ordinary way.
And these words were not unawares omitted, but maliciously and purposely: for
if Christ shall hear him speak of his ways, and consider that this casting
down of himself pertained not to his way, one piece of his own argument had
overthrown the whole. 7. In the allegation he commits the fallacy of
division, intending Christ's overthrow, by disioyning the things which God has
coupled together: for whereas the words of that text in the right sense,
consists of two parts, namely, 1. a promise of protection, and preservation: 2.
the condition of keeping a man's self in his ways, Satanas promissionem obij
it Christ, conditionem vero abijcit. Par. in locum.
without which condition no promise of God belongs unto us (for godliness has
the promise of this life, and the life to come:) Satan reiects the condition
wholly, and diuorceth it from the promise. This is Mr. Iunius his observation.

8. From every part and word of a most excellent text, he can urge his most
hellish temptation, and make all fair weather when he intends nothing less:
as if he should say; If thou be the Son of God, cast down thy self, I do
assure thee, nay, the written word assures thee of protection and safety: for
in such a Psalm, namely, the 91. verse 11. thou have the word of thy Fathers
promise: yea, in one promise, a number of promises: for, 1. If thou will know
the parties that shall support thee, they be Angels, creatures swift, mighty
and powerful. 2. If thou doubtest of their will, they must do it, they can
neither will nor choose, it is their charge, they are commanded so to do. 3.
If thou ask the manner how, they must bear thee up, that if thou would thou
can not fall. 4. If thou doubtest of their cheerfulness, or willingness, or
diligence, there is no fear; for they must do it as mothers or nourses (as
the word signifies) who out of their tender love bear, and carry, or lead the
infant with great watch and circumspection, that it fall not, and so come to
hurt. 5. If thou think there is any limitation of their commission, there is
none; for they must bear thee up at all times. 6. To take away all suspicion
of fear from thee, they must save thee not only from great danger, as
breaking thy bones or neck, but from the least danger, thy foot, the lowest
and basest part shall not stumble or be hurt, much less thy head, thy self.

Thus subtly intending to hold with the hound, and run with the hare, Satan
has pricked out a place which seems forcible enough to persuade any
reasonable man to his purpose. Hence note, that

Doctr.
A principal wile of Satan, is, to assay (if he can by no means else) to
overthrow men by the overthrow of Scriptures. Genesis 3.1. Has God indeed said,
ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? It were strange and marvelous
he should say so, seeing he knows it would better your estate. In this his
first temptation, of all other he chooses to make Gods word a means of their
and our overthrow, thinking it not an easy thing to destroy Gods image in the
soul, unless he could first destroy the word of God out of their heart. 1.
Sam. 28.15. when the devil would delude Saul, and hasten his death, he lays
the ground of it in Gods word, and taking on him the person of Samuel says,
The Lord has done even as he spoke by my hand; abusing and alleging that
Scripture in 1. Sam. 15.28. The Lord will rent the Kingdom from thee this day,
and has given it to thy neighbor, who is better then thou. Mar. 1.23. the
devil comes to Christ, and tells him he knows him well enough, Thou art Jesus
of Nazareth, even that holy One of God, that holy One that was promised,
figured, and expected, even that Redeemer and holy One of Israel, Isa. 41.14.
even that holy One foretold by the Angel, Luke 1.35. And all this was by
Scripture, to overthrow both Christ himself, and the faith of believers, as
though there were some secret compact and familiarity between him and them:
and perhaps hence arose that speech, By Beelzebub he casts out devils.

Reasons. 1.
1. Satan knows that Scripture is the will of God revealed, and has sway in
the conscience, as being inspired by the holy Ghost, as the only rule of
faith and life; and if he can turki^ the Scripture out of his right sense and
shape, he peruerts judgment, and holds the conscience in error; and these
errors are dangerous, and near of kin to obstinacy. For till the truth of
God come to his place again in the conscience, it will stiffen it self in
error even to the death. So as by this stratageme Satan usurps the
conscience, which is Gods right, and so leads men at his pleasure.

2
2. His malice sets him clean contrary to God in his proceedings. God has
given his Scripture to save men by, and therefore it is called, a word of
salvation: now Satan would herein cross the Lord, in perverting the word to
men's condemnation. The Scripture is in the Church as a law to the
Commonwealth, to contain men in the compass of faith and godly life; whence
it is called Statutes, and precepts, and judgments. But Satan seeks to
enforce it as a law to thrust men from faith and obedience. The Scripture is a
word of truth, of holiness, of wisdom, every way resembling God the author:
Satan therefore, being the greatest enemy to Gods image, is the greatest
enemy to the Scriptures, and desires to pervert them, by establishing by them
errors, heresies, false doctrines, wicked and foolish opinions and practices.

3. His subtilty and policy is not inferior to his malice: for, 3
1. He has a special slight and trick of his own, by pretending truth to
impugn it, and with Scripture to fight against Scripture; which he has taught
his special factors, heretics, and seducers: for why else did Christ forbid
the devil to witness to him, but that even that truth he speaks, ever tends
to destroy the truth? And in the text, why cites he the truth, but to draw
Christ into an error? 2. He will gain to himself some credit by this
practice: for seeing speeches and testimonies depend much upon the credit of
the speaker, by his quoting of Scripture he would be taken as if the truth of
Scripture depended upon, or needed his witness.

4. Satan must do thus, if he will prevail against Christ, 4
or his servants: for Scripture in the true sense of it, is no patron of
sin, nor ever stands on the devils side.

Of all temp^^tions beware most of them which come armed with Scripture: Use.
for hardlier can we epsy the subtilty and danger of these, then those which
are directly against the Scripture. And by temptations of this kind, Satan
mightily prevails in points both of doctrine and practice; which it shall not
be amiss to give some taste of, and in both we shall observe how Satan does not
so much use as abuse Scripture.

I. In matters of doctrine. 1. For the establishing of the Headship of the
Church in the Pope, the ordinary Papists have found a Scripture in Ioh. 21.16.
where Christ says, Feed my sheep. I answer: first, that place speaks not of
any headship or spiritual government, but of fee^ing by the word and
Sacraments, which the Pope never does: secondly, it is a commandment not
given to Peter alone, but to all the Apostles, who were equally Apostles with
him, but applied to Peter specially, not to note any Primacie, but secretly to
check him for his threefold denial, whereby he made himself unworthy to be a
Disciple. Object. But Peter says he has two swords, and therefore the Pope
has both spiritual and temporal jurisdiction. Sol. This is a place of Satan's
alleging, when that which is spoken literally, is wrested into a figurative
sense. And where Peter is commanded (Act. 10.13.) to kill, and eat^, the Pope
may kill, and slay, and eat up whom he will or can, Prince with people. But
this is a place literally to be taken, and one part of the argument* hangs with
another as the dream of a sick man: for the Pope, if he be Peter's successor,
must feed the sheep, not feed on them. But Bellarmine, who would make the world
believe his wit is thinner, has devised a far more sufficient place: 1. Pet.
2.6. Behold, I put in Sion a chief corner stone, elect and precious; that is,
the Pope: In his preface to the controversy, De Romans Pontif. and lib. 4. cap.
5. But what may we think to reap from him, that dares begin his
controversy with so high a blasphemy? and least we should think it fell
inconsiderately from him, he takes it up again. For does not both Paul and
Peter teach, that this stone can be meant of none but of Christ, does not both
of them add, He that believes in him, shall not be ashamed? must we now
believe in the Pope? And who is this living stone that gives life to all that
are built upon him, besides Christ himself? None can arrogate it to himself,
or attribute it to another without high blasphemy. Therefore I conclude this
point, boldly affirming that the devil could not more impiously abuse this
place, then has blasphemous Bellarmine.

2. For the point of justification by works, is alleged that place of James,
2.21. wherein they add unto the text, 1. a false gloss, by works of the law.
2. a false distinction, saying that they justify as causes; whereas we grant,
that as effects they justify, that is, declare a man to be justified: so did
Abraham's works declare him to be just: and this is not the justification of
the person, which is only by faith, but of the faith of the person, which is
manifestly dead without them.

3. In that great sacramentary controversy they allege, This is my body:
wherein Satan has taught them to abuse Scripture, in taking that literally
which is figuratively spoken, as often to writhe that unto a figure which is
spoken literally: and whereas they exclaim against us for denying the words of
Christ, as heretics, we are far from denying Christ's word^, but disclaim
their false meaning, which destroys the Scripture, seeing Scripture stands not
in words, but in sense.

4. To establish the false doctrine of free will, they furnish themselves with
that place in Ier. 17.7. Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and
whose hope the Lord is. But what do they else but imitate the devil, in
cutting off that part of the text which makes against them? for in the next
verse it follows, The heart of man is deceitful above all things, who can
know it? showing, that man in himself is utterly destitute of all grace.

5. For the Jesuitical trick of equivocation, or mental reservation, they
have Scripture and Example: Ioh. 1.21. they asked John if he were a Prophet, he
said, No, whereas he was one: for Zachary called him the Prophet of the
Highest, and Christ said that there was not a greater Prophet then John:
therefore John equiuocated. Answ. Whatsoever was the true meaning of the
question, that John answered plainly unto. If they meant to ask him if he
were that singular Prophet, whom they fancied to come together with their
Messiah, he truly answered, no. If he were any of the ancient Prophets, who
were long before Christ, he truly answered in that sense, no. If he were a
Prophet by his proper office, he truly answered, no. For howsoever he was by
grace and power a Prophet, being sent of God to reprove and convert sinners;
yet by ordinary office he was no Prophet, neither did he prophecy.

But what is this to those mental reseruations; Are you a Priest, Garnet? No,
says he, meaning not a Priest of Apollo, or Jupiter. Were not you in England
at such a time? No, not as the Sun in the firmament, or as a King in a
Kingdom. A strange madness, that men professing knowledge and zeal, should
so dally with lies and oaths: which tricks of theirs, were they justifiable and
sound, we should have little use of Magistracy or tribunalls, especially where
matters are determined by men's oaths: he were a very block that would suffer
any thing to be fastened upon him. The murderer might swear he never slew man,
namely, with the iawbone of an ass, as Sampson did. The drunkard might swear
he drunk never a drop, if he can inwardly conceive of water, or aqua
^oelesti^* or the Poets nectar, or what he can faigne. The adultr^^^e might
swear she was never tou^ht, if she can inwardly conceive of any creature, as
of a Bull, or a Swanne, as the Poets faigne of Pas^ph^e and Laeda. And were is
lawful to dally with God, and men's consciences, after this manner, we could
pay them home in their own kind: for suppose a man were in their Inquisition,
and were asked if the Pope were Supreme over all Kings; if a man were disposed
to equivocate, be might say and swear, yea; reserving his secret meaning, not
by right, but only in his own proud and ambitious desire; and thus delude
them.

II. In matters of practice, you shall have no sinner but he has a Scripture
reached to him, to lie safe under in the holding of his sin, but robbed and
turned out of the right sense. The Atheist, that cares for no Scripture, yet
has one text for himself, Eccl. 7.18. B^e not just overmuch, nor ouerwise:
and so he has enough to cast off all care of knowledge, and conscience. The
image-munger has a text, to let nothing be lost: he has a good use for his
images; if they cannot serve to worship, they may serve for ornament. The
swearer has a text in Jeremy, Thou shall swear in truth, righteousness, and
judgment: therefore he will swear so long as he swears nothing but that
which is true. The Sabbath-breaker has his text, The Sabbath was made for man,
and not man for the Sabbath. The murderer and adulterer think themselves safe,
seeing they find David in both these sins, and yet commended of God. The
drunkard has his lesson, Drink no longer water, but a little wine for thy
stomach, and often infirmities sake. The covetous person knows, that he that
prouides not for his family, is worse then an Infidel, which through many men's
wickedness, is a ground of much covetousness. The lazy Protestant has his
text, We are saved by grace, and justified by the blood of Christ freely: what
can his works do? what need they? The idle person has his text, Care not for
to morrow, let the morrow care for it self. The usurer has his plain
place, Matthew. 25.27. -- that I might have received my own with usury. The
thief, has the thief on the cross, repenting at the last. The carnal
Gospeller cares not what sin he venture on, because where sin has
abounded, there grace has abounded much more. The careless Libertine is
predestined to life or death, do what he can, and do not what he list, he
cannot change Gods decree: and so he will do what he list. The obdurate and
hardened sinner says, At what time soever a sinner repents, God will put all
his sins out of his remembrance, and therefore he will not repent till he be
dying. Lastly, the unjust person he has his rule in the unjust steward, who
was commended by Christ: who was indeed commended for his providence, not for
his injustice. In all these thou may hold this for a good rule, It is the
devils divinity, to confirm thy self in any sin by whatsoever thou
hear or read in Gods Book; all which in Gods meaning is direct, and the
only preservative against all sin.

NOw we are to consider this comfortable Scripture in the holy use of it, not
as we have it wrested and mangled by Satan, but as we find it set down by
the holy Ghost, Psalm. 91.11. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee,
to keep thee in all thy ways: They shall bear thee in their hands, that thou
hurt not thy foot against a stone.

In which words the godly are secured, and assured of safety in danger, not
only because the Lord himself is become their refuge and protection, as in
the words going before, but in that to his own fatherly care and providence,
he has added a guard of Angels: to whose care also he has committed the
godly. Wherein for explication, we will note these particulars,

1. What is the ministry of the Angels, namely, to be the godly man's keepers.

2. Who seals their commission, He has given them charge.

3. The limitation of it, In all thy ways.

4. The manner, they shall bear thee up in their hands.

5. The end, least thou dash thy foot against a stone. Which is a borrowed
speech taken from mothers or nurses, who lead or carry their tender children
in their hands, that they stumble and fall not to hurt or endanger themselves.

The word Angel, is a name not of nature (for so they be spirits) but of
office, ministering Spirits, to God, to Jesus Christ, and to Gods elect. His
Angels] that is, the good and elect Angels, called his, 1. By creation: for
they had not being of themselves. 2. By more immediate ministry, they assist
him, and stand before his face; whereas the wicked Angels are cast down from
heaven, from enjoying his presence. 3. By grace of perseverance: for they fell
not from their estate, as the wicked Angels did, and are now confirmed by
Christ that they cannot fall: and hence is Christ called the head of men and
Angels, in whom all things in heaven and earth consist, Coloss. 1. verse. 17.
that is, are preserved, sustained, and governed, whether visible or invisible;
and consequently a mediator of the Angels in respect of special grace of
confirmation, by which they inseparably adhere to God, although in respect of
that mediation which is restrained to redemption, the Angels have no need of it.

Charge] This charge is not a general commandment over the Church in
general, but a special charge over every godly man, over thee. And the charge
is directed to many Angels to keep one man; for the word affoards us more
comfort, then that Popish and ungrounded conceit, of every man's having his
particular Angel.

Quest. Why does God give this charge to the Angels? or why does he use their
ministry? Answ. Not for any necessity (for he by his word and beck does
sustain heaven and earth, and without them can keep his own:) but out of his
good will to us, he declares his love and care of us, who has so abundantly
provided for our safety, and made far more glorious natures then our selves
our keepers.

To keep thee] This custody of the Angels stands, 1. In observing and
watching their persons, souls, bodies, and estates; and therefore are called
watchmen, Dan 4.10. And I saw a watchman, and an holy one come down from
heaven. 2. In propulsing and auerting evil: so here, There shall no evil come
near thee, for he will give his Angels charge over thee. 3. In defending them
in good, as Elizeus and his servant being compassed with enemies. 4. In
comforting them in trouble, as Hagar, Genesis 21.17. and Jacob, 32.1, 2. and
Christ in this place.

In all thy waies] Namely, in such courses as God has appointed, and in all
these, in all times, and in all places, in all estates and conditions. In the
way into the world, in birth and infancy, the good Angels keep Gods little
children, Matthew. 18.10. In the way thorough the world they keep us, as the
Israelites in the wilderness, Exodus 33.2. In the way out of the world, their
charge is to keep us, as we may see in Lazarus, who when he died the Angels
carried his soul into Abraham's bosom. In all our ways, by day and by night,
they keep us so long as we are in our callings.

They shall bear thee in their hands] this is a borrowed speech: for Angels
have no hands, nor bodies: sometimes they assume bodies in their ministry to
others, but these bodies are not theirs, neither were they naturally and
hypostatically united unto thm, but for the time created and assumed: but, from
what beginning they were taken, or into what end after the ministry they were
resolved, it is idle to enquire. Here hands are ascribed to them as elsewhere
wings, both improperly, one shows the speedines of their motion, the other
their fitnes and tenderness in our keeping: For their charge is not only to
foresee danger and admonish us, but they must be actual helpers, to bear us
up from ground, when we are ready to fall, and g^^ knock, as a tender mother
or ^ourse, if they see the little child falling, will haste and catch it before
the head comes to ground.

That thou dash not thy foot against a stone.] That is, that thou hur^ not thy
foot against any rub or occasion. Angels are nourses, we are as infants in
spiritual matters, on every occasion ready to fall into sin, and by it into
all dangers, spiritual and temporal. Now the Angels keep us not only from
hurt by others, but from bringing hurt on our selves, even the least; they keep
us from hurting our head, yea our foot. Object. But how do the Angels
perform their charge, when some of Gods children not only stumble, but fall
spiritually, and bodily, and take great harm. Answ. The reason is, because no
man keeps his way so diligently and uprightly as he ought. If we did never
fail, God would never fail us, no more would his holy Angels; nay, such is
their love, as they would not have us to take the least hur^ in the world,
while we walk faithfully in the ways and commandments of God.

The Angels of God are the tender keepers of Gods children in Gods ways, that
no hurt can betide them, Genesis 32.5. Doctr.
When Iaacob was in great fear of his brother Esa^, the Angel of God met him
to comfort and defend him. When S^dome was to be destroyed, the Angels came to
Lot to forewarne and have him out of that wicked city. Psalm. 34.7. The Angel
of the Lord pitcheth his tents round about them that fear the Lord, and
delivers them.

1. Because of Jesus Christ our Head, Reasons. 1.
to whom they are subject as to their Lord and head, who has reconciled things
in heaven and earth, Angels and men, Col. 1.20. In our selves and our own
vilene^ we could not be endured by these blessed spirits, but now Christ
becomes our Head, and for him they tend us as his members. 2. Their love to us
is another ground of their custody of us, 2
manifested in that they are compared to nourses: neither can they but love
those whom they see God loves* now they see God loving us so dearly, that he
spare^ no^ his own Son, but gives him to the death for us; and therefore
they dearly love us and our good, they desire our salvation and promote it,
they rejoice that our salvation is wrought, and are glad of our repentance, by
which we lay hold on it. 3. And specially this charge and commandment of God
is the cause hereof; 3
so as now it is not out of courtesy, or the goodness of their nature only,
that they do us good, but by virtue of this charge and commandment of God,
whom they love as their chief good, and to who^ they are bound in absolute
obedience by the eternal law of their nature; so as although they are charged
by god, yet are they not forced or coacted, but out of their perfect love of
God they watch over our good.

Use. 1.
This doctrine affoa^ds a use of great consolation: for when we consider our
own weakness and impotencie on one hand, and the multitude, power, and policy
of our enemies on the other, when we see a whole army of sins besieging us,
and a whole legion of dangers behind them to oppress and swallow us; now this
doctrine touching Gods providence in the ministry of Angels, will be able to
support us; when we shall consider, not only that Gods protection is as a wall
of fire round about us, but that he has set and pitched his Angels round
about us as a guard, Ordo gratiae praeponderat ordini natura. Th. Aqu.
of whom we may say with Elisha for their multitude, They are m^re that are
with us, then they that are against us; and for their power, they are called
the Angels of God power, far stronger then the wicked Angels and powers
that are against us. And when we shall consider, that God has given a charge,
and that not to one or two Angels, but to the whole blessed company of them
over every godly man, how can we but assure our selves, that we shall be
defended and protected? If a man were to pass by ship over a dangerous sea,
full of gulfes, sands, rocks, and robbers, if the King should give him ^etters
of safe conduct, it would much comfort him, and help him through his voyage:
but if this King should send a great navy to conduct him over, yea and should
not only go in his own person, but call out all his men of war to see him
safely arrived, this were so comfortable as he could not wish more. But thus
does the Lord with his children, not only himself going with them through the
world, but guarding them with his holy Angels, who willingly affoard their
ministry, because of their love to man, but in respect of Gods word and charge
much more willingly, that of Gods Angels they become our Angels, Matthew. ^8.10.

What an unspeakable comfort is it, that when we loose the watch over our
selves many ways, through sleep of soul or body, the Angels watch over our
safety? Matthew. 2.13. Joseph was asleep, and thought not of that danger which
was even upon him, by means of Herod's cruelty: but even in that sleep the
Angel watched and admonished him by a dream, both of the danger, and the
means to escape.

How great a comfort is it, that when we see such difficulties between us and
our desires, as we can never overcome, then we have Gods Angels present to do
it to our hands? Mark. 16.3. when the good women that came to embaulme Christ's
body, were very much troubled how to come to his body, and asked who shall
roll away the stone, for it was a very great one; when they looked, they saw
the stone rolled away, and it was done by the Angel, as Matthew. has it. Gods
Angels roll away all stones and impediments, and make our way smooth to all
good duties.

No less comfort is it, that when Satan begins to insult, and makes as if
he would trample upon us, we have a stronger guard about us, any one of the
Angels being as able to shut the mouth of this roaring lion, as they were to
shut the mouths of those hungry lions, into whose den Daniel was cast.

And for the further strength of our faith and comfort in this doctrine, the
Scripture notes three things further concerning Angels, worth observing: 1.
Their wisdom and providence in pitching about us, so as we lie open no where.
Ex. 14.19. when Israel was gone out of Egypt, the Angel of the Lord who went
before them to lead them out, now removed and went behind them, because now
Pharaoh and his people pursued them. The power of the Angel was no less if he
had stayed before them as he was, being Christ himself, but for the comfort
of Israel, and our instruction, the Angel changes his place, and stops
between them and the danger. 2. Their uniting of themselves, and strength for
our safety; one of them readily will help another in helping us: Dan. 10.13.
one Angel being resisted by the Prince of the kingdom of Persia, Michael one
of the chief Princes came to help him: who whether he were an Angel, or (as
it is more likely) the Prince and Lord of the Angels, even the Angel of the
great covenant Christ himself, it is every way full of comfo^t. 3. Their
patience toward us, who if they should be gone from us a^ often as we by sin
provoke them, we should perish every moment. But as God is long-suffering, so
has he charged his Angels to be; and therefore they wait still for our
return, and rejoice in the repentance of sinners, Luke 15.10. and abide in
their charge and ministry still.

Use. 2.
Again, this doctrine is a ground of manifold instruction.

1. Has God affoarded us the ministry of Angels? then note the privilege
and pre-eminence of Gods children, whose nature being assumed by the Son of
God, gives it dignity above the Angels, who are the ministers of our humane
nature in the head and members, Angels are indeed called the sons of God,
but tha^ is by creation. Christ never gave them this honor to call them
brethren. Nay, there is a nearer conjunction between Christ and us, then
between Christ and the Angels, which conjunction does privilege us with
their attendance. 1. By reason of his conception and incarnation, taking on him
the seed of Abraham, and not of the Angels, by which he becomes flesh of our
flesh. 2. By reason of his spiritual contract, taking us to be one with
himself, by which we become flesh of his flesh, and so nearely set into him,
as the Angels cannot be, who are not members of this Head, as the elect be.
Christ indeed may be called their head, but as a Lord and commander, not by
such spiritual union as is between Christ and the Christian.

Herein we may see the love of God in setting his Angels to be our keepers.
The more noble, potent, numerous, and diligent the custody is, the more is the
care and love of the thing kept. How great thanks therefore owe we unto our
God, who notwithstanding he is daily offended with our sins, yet affoards us
the ministry of hi^ Angels? Who, and what am I, that God is so mindful of me,
that he should give so many glorious creatures charge over me, that he should
give me such a privilege, that even the holy Angels (whose dwelling is in
heaven, and see the face of God, who are all spirit and no flesh, who are free
from all sin and misery) should so narrowly attend me a lump of earth, a
piece of flesh, compassed with so many sins and miseries, as I can look no
way either before or behind them? David in the 8. Psalm burst out into the
praise of God, when he considered that God had affoarded man the use of birds,
beasts, and fishes: O Lord, faith he, what is man that thou ar^ so mindful of
him, and have prefer^ed him over the works of thy hands? How much more should
we, when we see our happiness by the ministry of the glorious Angels?

2. Let us learn hence to look to our conversation, because of the Angels, 2.
Cor. 11.10. for they are our keepers and obseruers, they see all the good and
bad we do, and we do nor speak any thing without many witnesses. Sin makes
God take away our hedge, Isa. 5.5. it greiues the Angels of God, and lays a
man naked to all his judgments. Shall we willingly offend them, from whom,
under God, we receive so great and daily comforts? If we did believe, or weigh
this doctrine, we would not: but because we see not God, nor his Angels, we
love neither, nor fear to offend either.

3. Let us beware of wronging the children of God, even because they have the
protection of the Angels. To rise up against any of them, is to rise up against
the Angels their keepers. Offend none of these little ones: for their Angels
behold the face of their heavenly Father, and thou prouokest the Angels against
thee. If the Sodomites rise up against Lot, the Angels will save him and
destroy them. If Balaam will go to curse Gods people, he shall have an Angel
against him with a sword drawn ready to kill him.

4. Learn we to give God the honor of our salvation and safety, when we have
avoided any danger, public or private. It is not by chance, nor by our
providence and policy, but Gods charging his Angels to save and keep us.
Daniel did rightly ascribe his deliverance to God, by the ministry of the
Angel, chap. 6.22. My God (says he) sent his Angel, and shut the lions
mouth.

5. To be partaker of all this comfort, these means are to be used: 1. Become
a godly man: Psalm. 34.9. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth his tent round about
them that fear the Lord: Hebr. 1.14. They are ministering Spirits to the heirs
of salvation. 2. Hold on in a godly course, keep thee in thy ways, in the
duties of thy calling, general and special; for thus long the charge of the
Angels stands in force. 3. Pray (not to Angels, but) to the God of heaven, to
send his Angel before thee, to direct and assist thee in thy duties and ways.
For what God has promised, we must pray for: Genesis 24.7. Abraham tells his
servant, that God will send his Angel before him to take a wife for his son:
and this Angel prospered his journey, v. 40. And that this was the practice of
the Church of Egypt, appears by Moses his message to the King of Edom, Numb.
20.16. Being ill entreated in Egypt, we prayed to the Lord, and he sent an
Angel, and brought us out of Egypt. I doubt not but this duty, were it more
faithfully practiced, would bring home much more success and comfort, then
many men find in their labor, who scarce know whence or how their
prosperity comes unto them.

Object. If God should send his Angels in humane form, and as familiarly to
converse with us as aunciently they did with the Patriarchs, we should believe
this doctrine: but now there is certainly no such thing. Ans. 1. Christ is now
in heaven, where our conversation ought to be by faith, rather then by the
visible apparition of Angels. 2. The beginnings of the Church needed such
heavenly confirmation, but now the word is sufficiently confirmed by the Son
himself from heaven. 3. The Scriptures are perfect, and fully and plainly
reveal unto us Gods will in every particular, as if the Angels should come
and teach us daily. 4. The blessed Spirit is more abundantly given in our
hearts, and supplyeth their absence in bodily shape and apparition* 5. We must
labor to get the eyes of our souls open, and then we shall with Elishaes
servant see their comfortable presence, notwithstanding they take no bodies to
appear in.

VERSE. 7. Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the
Lord thy God.

NOW follows the repulse of our Savior to this second temptation, wherein
are two things, 1. his resistance: 2. his reason, drawn from a testimony of
Scripture.

I. Christ resists, and yields not, albeit he hears Scripture alleged.
Why? If ye were of God (says Christ) ye would hear his word: Iam. 4 5.
neither does Scripture speak any thing in vain. But the reason is, 1.
because our Lord perceived that the word was wrested and abused by Sathan^ and
2. that Scripture abused, binds not to obedience: 3. that Scripture turned out
of his right sense, is not Gods word, but carries something in it besides
Scripture: and then if an Angel from heaven should bring it, we must be so
far from receiving it, as to hold him accursed: 4. for our example, that we
should not take all allegations hand over head, (but as Christ here) try
whither they tend; if to cast us down, refuse them.

II. Christ resists, but not without reason, but by Scripture, and opposes
Scripture to Scripture, not as repugnant one to another, but by way of
collation and conferring one with another, that the right use of one, may
overthrow the abuse of the other: not in way of contrariety, but of
commentary.

Quest. But why did not our Savior shut his mouth, by telling him how wickedly
he had abused the text he had alleged, by adding, detracting, and wresting it
to a contrary end and meaning?

Answ. This might indeed have confounded him sufficiently: but our Savior his
combat is not only victorious for us, but exemplarie; and therefore we are
herein trained in our fight and encounter: 1. To hold close to the Scripture in
answering the devil; It is written again: which word of our Savior notes
how he buckled the Scripture to him, both as a buckler to defend him, and as a
sword to foil and wound his enemy: and so must we, who are not so able to
dispute with Satan about the true meaning of a place, as our Lord was. 2. To
inform us, that the best and only way to discover the abuse of Scripture is
Scripture, it being the only rule and judge of it self, and all the
controversies rising out of it. And therefore the devil, no sooner heard this
testimony, but his mouth was shut, as well knowing how the wisdom of his Father
had discovered his subtlety. The best commentary of Scripture is Scripture;
every man is the best interpreter of himself, and so the Author of the
Scriptures is the best interpreter of them. 3. To let us see, that although
Satan had abused the Scripture, yet he nor we must overcome by no other weapon,
and that the abuse of a thing, takes not away the right use of it; nor good
things to be rejected, because they are abused by them that can use them
aright. If Christ had been of the Papists mind, he would have condemned and
shut up the Scriptures from common men, because the devil had abused them: for
so do they, because heretics his instruments do abuse them, the Laity may
not meddle with them.

But it is plain, that in things necessary, no abuse in one, takes away the
right use in another. As for example: A murderer uses a sword to kill a man;
may not another use a sword, or that sword in his own defense? And are not the
Scriptures, the sword of the Spirit, more necessary? A drunkard, a glutton, a
proud person, abuse meat, and drink, and apparel, to surfeting, drunkenness,
riot, and excess: shall we therefore cast away meat, drink, apparel, and
refuse the necessary use of it? And is not the word a more necessary food?
Because a wolf comes in sheeps clothing, must the sheep cast away their
fleece? No: the Prophets did not refuse the word of the Lord, because the false
Prophets did say, The word of the Lord, as well as they.

Object. Then it is no good argument, that we must reject such and such things,
because the Papists have abused them. Answ. If they be good, and necessary, it
is not; as are the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, Churches, and whatsoever stands by
Gods ordinance in divine or civil use. But in things unnecessary, that we
might be as well, or better without their use, it is a good consequence;
Idolaters have abused them, therefore we must forbear them, as Bishop Jewel
speaks.

Doctr.
The infallible Judge, and speaking-decider of all controversies in the Church,
are the holy Scriptures in the true sense of them. Our Lord here gives the true
meaning of one Scripture by another, in this his controversy with the devil.
Deuteronomy. 17.9.10. In any matter of difference, the people must come to the Priest
or Leuite, and they must judge and determine all differences according to the
Law; and all the people upon pain of death must stand to that judgment. Now
this Priest was a type not of the Pope, but of Christ, on whose mouth all must
depend for the decision of all controversies. Josh. 1.7. the book of the Law
was given to Joshua, to decide all matters among the Jews, from which he must
not depart to the right hand or left hand: He was an eminent type of our Jesus
or Joshua, whose voice speaking in the Scripture (the book of the law) we must
attend unto in all things. Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures: and our Savior
said to the Sadduces, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, plainly affirming
that the Scriptures rightly known, were a sufficient fence from all error.
Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. Matthew. 19.4.
Christ by Scripture refuted the Pharisees abuse of that Scripture of Moses, for
putting away their wives. Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony.

Reason^. 1.
1. This is true by reason of the perfection of the Scripture: Psalm. 19.7. The
law of God is perfect, so perfect as man and Angel are accursed that shall
add unto it. Prou. 30.5.6. Every word of God is pure, a shield to those that
trust in him: put nothing unto his words, least he reprove thee, and thou be
found a liar. It is a perfect Canon or rule, which as a strait line shows the
crookedness of that which is not strait. It is a touchstone and trial of
all truths. It is a perfect law, which is an universal judgment, to direct
all, and for all to be led by which live under it. It is perfect in the effect,
2. Tim. 3.16. It is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and instruct
in righteousness, and to make the man of God perfect. Object. The Apostle
says, it is profitable, but not that it is sufficient alone. Ans. We say not
it is therefore sufficient, because he says it is profitable; but, because it
is profitable for all purposes of teaching, improouing, and making the man of
God perfect, therefore it is sufficient and perfect.

2. In the Scripture we have the voice of God speaking from heaven, 2
then which voice no voice of man or Angel can be more clear or manifest.
Prou. 2.6. Out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding. His wisdom
in the Scripture, is above Salomons in answering all dark and deep questions;
and no case can be propounded, which has not there his satisfaction and
determination. Object. But the Scriptures are a dumb judge, and cannot
determine controversies. Ans. 1. We give earthly Kings leave to give definitive
sentence and judgment in cases by their writing, by which numbers who never
heard their voice, but read the writing, understand their meaning: and shall we
now call them dumb judges? or shall we deny this privilege to the King of
glory, to determine by writing, but we must blasphemously account him a dumb
judge?

2. The Scriptures are not a dumb judge, but a speaking judge: Romans 3.19. That
which the Law speaks, it speaks to them that are under the law. (...).
Heb. 12.5. Ye have forgotten the consolation which speaks to you as
children. Ioh. 7.42: Does not the Scripture say? and what says the Scripture?
so as it is a speaking judge, and gives to it self a mouth, and a voice, and
that a loud one, (...). Romans 9.27. the Apostle quoting the Prophet Esaias, says,
Esaias cries out concerning Israel, etc. 3. How does their speaking judge
determine all causes in Christendom delated unto him at Rome, but by writing,
and bulls, and breues? and yet he scorns to be counted a dumb judge.

3. That is the noble and infallible judge of all controversies, 3
to which all flesh must stand, which has his authority of himself, no way
delegate: but the Scripture is (...), for it self to be believed, because it
is (...), inspired by God* from whom lies no appeal, whose judgment can by no
means within or without it self be corrupted, whose voice alone cannot err
or be led by passion, affection, or respect of persons, but is an unchangeable
truth as God himself is, the author of it. In every commonwealth, the fittest
decider of a controversy in the Law, is the Lawe-maker, the King himself: the
same is also true in the Church.

4
4. Christ himself decided all controversies by Scripture: so did the Apostles:
so the ancient believers brought all their doubts to the Scriptures, after
their example.

This serves to discover the wickedness of the Church of Rome: who, Use. 1.
1. that they may be judges in their causes, and 2. to avoid the light of
Scripture, which they see so direct against them; fly the Scriptures as an
incompetent judge of the controversies of religion between us: and in stead of
the Scriptures, they appoint us four Judges, the authority of all which is
superior (by their doctrine) to the authority of Scripture.

The first judge is the Church: for that (say they) is to judge of Answ. 1. We
ask what they mean by the Church: They say, the Catholic Church. But that is
impossible to be judge upon earth, because it is a company of all the elect in
heaven and earth, which never was on earth at one time. Then they say, the
visible Church. But what if the Church be not visible sometimes, as in Elias
his time, or be in the wilderness? Then they say, the Roman Church, which
has ever been visible these 1500. years. Now we know our judge, and how our
cause is like to go, in which it is a party. But, 1. It is not the Catholic
Church, unless a finger can be an hand, or an hand the whole body, or a part
become the whole, and falsely and ridiculously call themselves Catholics. 2.
That is no true Church, which disagreeth from Christ the Head, as Augustine
says, and is fallen off Christ by many fundamental errors; as idolatry,
justification by works, and the like; which yet are maintained by Romanists.
3. We hold that the Orthodoxe and true Church is, 1. A witness and keeper of
the Scriptures: but a jewel has his price and excellency from it self, not
from the keeper. 2. Having the Spirit of Christ, the Church can discern true
Scripture from false and supposititious writings; but this by the help of
Scripture: as a goldsmith by the touchstone can discern gold from other
mettells; but he makes it not gold, but only tries it so to be. 3. It is to
publish and declare the truth of Scripture without adding, or diminishing, as
an Herald or crier manifests the Kings pleasure, but it receives no authority
from him. 4. The true Church is a ministerial interpreter, as having the gift
of prophecy, but tied to interpret and judge of Scripture by Scripture: Christ
is a magisteriall interpreter.

But that the Church on earth should have authority over Scriptures, is too
unreasonable. 1. It is to prefer men's voice and testimony above Gods. 1. Ioh.
5.9. If we receive man's testimony, the testimony of God is greater. Ioh. 5.
vlt. If ye will not believe Moses his writings, how will ye believe my
sayings? as if he should say, If ye believe not Scriptures, my testimony will
do you no good. True it is, that our Savior said, I receive not testimony
from man; that is, I need no man's testimony: for John gave witness to Christ:
no more does the Scripture in it self. For Christ was the light, whether John
witnessed to it or no: so is the Scripture the word of God, whether the Church
be witness or no. But we admit the Church to give witness, but not authority:
see it in a familiar example: A man owes me money, I have a bond and witnesses,
he denies it, I produce the bond, and the witnesses that clear the matter, and
affirm the bond to be his act and lawful; do these now make the bond true,
or the debt good, or only clear it so to be? for if they should not
witness, the debt and bond were true: Even such is the witness of the Church
to the Scripture. 2. The voice of the spouse is inferior to the voice of the
bridegroom, and howsoever a man may be moved by the Church to hear the
Scripture if he be unconverted, as Augustine being a Manichie, yet a man
endued with Gods Spirit, and the gift of faith, esteems the Scripture for it
self above all the words of all men, as Christ himself at length was of far
more authority then the woman of Samaria, when the men thereof said to her, Now
we believe not for thy word, but because our selves have heard him. So as when
we have the Papist asking us (as if every one of them does, when the word has
put them to their shifts:) But how do you know Scripture to be Scripture but
by the Church? we must answer, by the Scripture, taking with us the help of the
Church, and especially by the Spirit of God revealing the truth unto us: for
the sheep of Christ hear his voice, and follow him. And when we ask the
Papists, how they know the Church to be the Church, or where it is, some say it
is here, some there, some hold us off with one mark, some with another, but at
last they come to know the Church by Scripture; and that is the Church which
the Scripture says is the Church: so in all other questions, that must be the
determination which the Scripture determines.

3. The Church cannot be judge, because it must be judged by Christ's voice, and
not be a law unto it. Commonwealths must receive laws from the Prince, and
not the Prince from his people: and as it is in bodies politic, so in the
mystical body of Christ. And as in the natural body the head rules the
members, not contrarily, so is it here.

4. How absurd is it to affirm, that that which is subject to error, must be
judge and superior to that which is free from it? But the Church may err,
even the true Catholic Church on earth may err, and does when it departs
never so little from the Scripture, although it cannot depart from the
foundation, nor incorrigibly err: for every man may err, and therefore that
which consists of every man: even the Apostle was compassed with infirmity.
Besides, the maine difference between the Church militant and triumphant, is,
that one may err, the other is quite freed from error.

Augustine, or that says Donate, Aug. epist. 48. ad Vincent. Donatistam.
but, This says the Lord. 5. The interpreter of Scripture must be divine and
infallible as it self is, and certain: but the interpretation of Fathers is
humane, infirm, sometime according to passion, or contention: so as often
(even by Bellarmines often confession) they spoke minus caute; the best of them
wrote retractations, and other things being old then they did being young.
Seeing therefore there is no stability in Doctors, let Christ be acknowledged
of us the chief Doctor of his Church: Matthew. 23.8. One is your doctor, even
Christ.

Their third judge and decider of controversies are Counsels, Nicen, anno 332.
Ephesine, anno 450. of Chalcedon, anno. 456. and of Constantinople, anno 386.)
may err: and although it blasphemously equal the four Counsels to the four
Evangelists, yet we know that even these have erred. Greg. lib. 2. ^pist. 2^0.
For that Nicene General Council determined, there should be at any case but
one Bishop in one city, which is against the Scripture, Act. 20.28. Philip.
1.1. The twelft Canon of that Council condemned all kind of war among
Christians. The 13. Canon holds the necessity of the Eucharist, as the
necessary viaticum, or provision of a Christian at his departure. Also it erred
in the matter of ministers marriage, stayed by Paphnutiu^. And the
Constantinopolitan Council gave all equal honor and authority to the Bishop
of Constantinople with the Bishop of Rome; which the Papists themselves
generally hold to be a great error, and yet perhaps was none. And the consent
of ancient Fathers is, August. lib. 2. de bapt. con^^a Donatist c 3.
that plenaria Concilia, universal and Oecumenicall counsels may err and be
mended by latter Counsels.

3. There was a true sense and interpretation of Scripture in the Church before
any of these general Counsels. The first general Council was the Nicene,
wherein were 318. Bishops gathered by Constantine the Great against Arrius: but
this was not till the 328. year after Christ: and was there not all that while
the gift of interpreting and judging of Scripture, that now we must seek a new
means, erected so many hundredth years after the Apostles?

4. The Counsels themselves determined by the Scriptures of the Scriptures, as
the first Nicene general Council, where Constantine enjoined, and accordingly
they determined all according to Scripture. It seems in those days the
Scriptures were above Counsels: and since Counsels and decrees of men got
wings to fly above the Scriptures, it was never well, as one of them selves
speaks. Well may we now say with Nazianzene, who therefore avoided all
meetings of Bishops, quod nunquam vllius Concilij bonum and foelicem exitum
vidisset; yet he had seen some which the Papists stand unto.

And we also, seeing the gross errors of Counsels (as that ancient Council
of Carthage under Cyprian, appointing rebaptization to such as were baptized by
heretics: the 2. Ephesin Council, in which were more then 300. Bishops, is
called by Leo himself, living in Theodosius his time, conciliabulum latronum,
a den of thieves: the 2. Nicene Council appointed images made by man's hand to
be worshipped: a most gross error and idolatry. The Roman Council under Pope
Stephanus, condemned Pope Formosus, and all his decrees: and the Council of
Rauenna condemned Stephanus, and restored Formosus. One of them must needs
err. The Council of Constance appointed a number of gross errors, as that
the cup should be taken from Laikes, that faith given to Protestants, under the
Emperors promise and seal, is not to be kept, etc. and it condemned a number
of John Hus his articles, which were orthodoxe and consonant to Scripture. The
Council of Trent was a sincke of all Antichristian errors:) now we, I say,
seeing such gross errors of Counsels, may not or ought not we with the
ancient Fathers, appeal from Counsels to the holy Scripture?

Jerome on Galat. 2. says, The doctrine of the holy Ghost is that which is
delivered in Scripture, contra quam si quid statuant concilia, nefas duco: If
Counsels determine any thing contrary thereunto, Aug. l. 2. de bapt. cont.
Don. c. 3.
I account it abominable. And Augustine, being pressed by the authority of
the African Council, at which Cyprian was present, appealed from it to the
Scripture, with this reason, We may not (says he) doubt of the Scripture, of
all other we may doubt. Nay, Panormitan, the great Popish Canonist and Lawyer,
says plainly, Plus credendum est simplici, laico scripturam proferenti, quam
toti simul Concilio; We must more believe one poor simple layman that
brings Scripture, then a whole Council. I will add nothing of the Romish
trick of falsifying the books of Counsels, and corrupting, changing, adding,
and detracting from the Canons; which makes them yet more uncertain and
insufficient to rule the Scriptures by: this might be instanced in the Nicene
and Mileuitan Council, and others; but the further dispute hereof belongs to
the schools.

deal plainly: for when they pretend the Catholic Church, Doctors,
Counsels, they mean all Romish: for, Rhem. in Romans cap. 1. ver. 8.
with the Rhemists the Catholic and Roman faith is all one. Gregory de
Valentia, says, By the Church, we mean her head, the Roman Bishop.
Bellarmine has these words, The Pope himself, De Christo. lib. 2. cap. 28.
without any Council, may decree matters of faith. And the Canon Law says,
that all his rescripts and decrees are Canonical Scripture, and that he may
dispense, 1. against Gods Law, 2. against the law of nature, 3. against an
Apostle, 4. against the New Testament.

Now that the Pope cannot have authority at his pleasure to judge the
Scripture, is plain: 1. Because a Council is above the Pope, as the most and
auncientest of Papists believe, and two general Counsels, of Constance and
Basil decree, Ge^son. Aeneas Sylv.
and that the Council has power to restrain, yea and depose him, and so has
done. And yet a Council (as we have seen) wants this authority over the
Scriptures. Bellarmine would not believe or approve it, but for the
observation of the Church, and common opinion. Now the Sorbonists of Paris
deny it. 2. Because we know the Pope can err in his chair in matters of
faith, and interpretation of Scripture. As for example: Romans 8.8. They that are
in the flesh, cannot please God: Pope Syricius thus interpreted it, To be in
the flesh, is to be married, therefore the Priests must not marry. Ioh. 6.53.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you: Pope Innocent 1. thence determined the absolute necessity of
the Eucharist to salvation, and therefore it must be given to infants. Luke
22.38. Behold two swords here: Pope Boniface 8. interprets it of the temporal
and spiritual sword delivered to the Pope. Nay, they have not only erred many
of them, but been gross and wicked heretics. Liberius Pope about the year
350. was an Arrian, and subscribed to the unjust condemnation of Athanasius,
and afterward as an obstinate heretic was deposed. Honorius the 1. ann. 626.
was a Monothelite, held that Christ had but one will, and so but one nature:
and for this heresy was condemned in three general Counsels. In the year
1408. at a Council held at Pisa, consisting of a thousand Divines and Lawyers,
two Popes were deposed as once, to wit, Gregory 12. and Benet 13. the tenor of
whose deprivation calls them notorious scismatikes, heretics departed from the
faith, scandalizing the whole Church, unworthy the Papacy, cut off from the
Church. What? must we obey in error, scandal, and heresy? or can the Pope
alter the nature of that which is false, and make it true?

3. When there were two or three Popes at once, and none knew which was the
right Pope, or the chief Pastor, whither should men go for their determination
of controversies in religion? or when themselves disagree in interpreting
Scripture, how can we know which of them to lean unto? See an example: Mat.
16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church: some Popes
understand it of Peter's person, some of Peter's chair, which they say is at
Rome, some of Peter's confession. We have all unerring Popes, maintaining these
several interpretations; how shall we choose the best? what, upon a Popes word?
every one of them has that. Therefore there must be a superior interpreter,
and more infallible, namely, the Spirit of God in the Scriptures.

4. How know we he has any authority over any other Bishop, seeing the
Scripture gives him none? How may we know he is not carried by affection,
seeing he is a party in the Churches Controversies, and by Canon cast out from
being a Judge? How know we no appeals lie from him, seeing the Fathers have
appealed from Councels which are above him? How can we know that he sits in
Peter's chair upon earth, seeing the Father has taught us, Cathedram in coelo
habet, qui i^tus docet cord^. Aug.
That he sits in heaven who inwardly teaches men's hearts?

Therefore we renounce all such corrupt Judges, and lean to the vncorrupt
Scripture.

Use. 2.
Secondly, seeing the Scriptures are the best Commentaries of themselves, and
the Judge and decider of all doctrines and controversies; Ministers that would
stablish truth of doctrine, must be careful to prove and justify all their
collections of doctrine out of Scripture: for thereby they setle the faith of
their people upon a sure ground of faith and manners: all other foundations are
sandy, all other proofs liable to exceptions. Why then should
Protestant-Preachers, who defend against Papists the sufficiency of Scripture
to make Gods people perfect, and hold it the rule and square of all doctrine,
cross their judgment by their practice? for every place of Scripture
alleging a dozen or twenty testimonies of Doctors, Fathers, Councels, nay
profane Poets and heathens; all which are darkness it self, and without light,
further then they borrow from the Sun in the Scripture.

I am not so nice, as that I think not there may be a sparing and sober use of
humane testimonies in Sermons; sometimes in cases of Grammar; sometimes in
matters of great controversy, to show the consent of the ancient Church,
especially dealing with an adversary that will claim all antiquity for him;
sometime by way of conviction, to shame Christians by the heathen, as the Lord
did the Jews by Chittim and Kedar, and the sluggard by the pismire. Neither am
I an enemy to learning, but would have a man well seen in natural
Philosophy, in humane literature, in the writing^ of Fathers and Schoolmen,
and be as a good householder stored with things new and old. But needlessly, and
for ostentation, to give tongues unto dead men, and in the message of God, to
put to silence the voice of God, speaking in the Scripture, to set up Hagar the
handmaid above Sarah her mistress, is a fearful sin against God and his
word, and a crying sin of these days; wherein for a man to tie himself
close to the Scripture without such flourishes, and to scorn to send a rich
Jewel to the painter, is to bring a blot on himself, that he is a man of no
learning. For what means else that common cry, that no man is against this
manner of preaching, but they that cannot use it? Well has he learned his art
that can most hide it here, that God may have all the glory: for he is not
commended here, whom men praise, but whom God allows. The Apostolical
teaching of Christ was not in words which man's wisdom teaches, but Gods: he
is the best scholar that can teach Christ plainlyest: and for my part, if I
would set my self to be idle, I would choose that kind of Preaching which is
counted so laborious. The same I say for disputations and controversies in the
Church and Schools: never can we look for an end of them, till we tie the
determination of them to the Scripture alone, the right Judge. A stratageme of
Satan for Antichrist to fly the Scripture which should soon end
controversies, and hide his poison in the infinite windings of Fathers,
Counsels, traditions, etc. Well I know, that God has a secret work in
punishing the unbelieving world, by the continuance of the man of sin till
his time come: but having well thought of the props on which he stands, yet
in the days of such light, there is none that does him more service, then this
hiding of his mystery in such a thicket of uncertainties, wherein it is
impossible to come to any end or issue. We may follow the fox from one burrrow
to another, and from hole to hole, because we are forced. But whosoever looks
to come to an end of controversies, by following him from Father to Father,
from Council to Council, from one Decree to another, from one Tradition to
another, with infinite labor examining and scanning the words and syllables of
ancient and later times, he shall fall short of his expectation: For all this
while the determiner of the controversy is not present, but set aside.

And what other reason can be given, that whereas the chase and pursuit of that
beast of Rome has been continued with extraordinary speed and strength for
above these hundred years last past, and he has been followed into every
hole wherein he hid himself, yet the controversies so beaten and canuased, are
in man's eye as far from composition or determination as at first, not one of
them yielded up on either hand? I say, no other better reason can be given, but
that we are not agreed of the Judge of the cause; and so long as they can hold
them off the Scriptures, they will not be set down by any other authority.

Use. 3.
Thirdly, this doctrine must provoke us to the diligent reading and study of
the Scriptures: for hereby we shall come to be stablished in the truth, and
able to discern the abuse of Scriptures, by conferring them with themselves:
this is the best way to keep us from errors and sects, and to find out the
true sense of Scripture.

Object. But do not our adversaries read the Scriptures as diligently as we?
and are not they as skillful to compare Scriptures, and yet abide in error and
heresy? Answ. Here we must consider, 1. the person that must read: 2. the
rules to be observed in reading.

Object. So the Papists say, that only religious persons ought to read the
Scriptures. Answ. Every Christian ought to have the book of the law with him,
as the Jews had before their eyes, and in their hands continually, Deuteronomy. 6.10.
every Christian ought to have the word of Christ dwell plenteously in him,
Coloss. 3.16. every one ought to be ready to give a reason of the faith he
professes, to every one that will ask, 1. Pet. 3.15. every one ought to
attend to the sure words of the Prophets and Apostles, as a light shining in a
dark place: for so the Apostle Peter writes to all Christians, and not only
the Clergy.

Yet no Christian ought to read unprepared, neither can every one read to
profit, but such as are qualified, 1. With humility in the sense of our own
simplicity and infancy in heavenly things, becoming fools in our selves,
that we may subscribe to Gods wisdom in the Scripture, and captiuating all
our own thoughts to the obedience of Christ. Psalm. 25.9. God teaches the
humble. Matthew. 11.25. Thou have hid these things from the wise, and revealed
them to babes. And what is the reason that heretics, Sophisters, and Papists
of great learning, read the Scripture but understand not, but because they give
not up their reason and humane wisdom, which is enmity to God; and scorn to
be children, delivered to be taught and formed by our heavenly Master? 2. With
desire and love of Christ, and his truth: the scope of all the Scripture is
Christ, and thou must desire to know and advance nothing but Christ crucified.
Pro. 4.13. Love wisdom, and she shall keep thee. When men come prepossessed
with opinions to set up men's devises, and traditions, and wicked opinions,
according to which they must interpret Scripture, and not examine them by the
Scripture: or if they bring a purpose to magnify the Pope, and advance his
religion in stead of Christ's, no marvel if like the images they have eyes and
see not, read and understand not. They love not Christ, nor will have him to
rule over them, but his Vicar, neither love they the truth in the Canonical
Scripture further then it will stand with their Popish Canon law. Or, if a man
come to read out of custom, and coldly without feruencie and love, experience
will tell him, though thus he read much, his profit shall be but small. 3.
With repentance, and faith, and a good heart. 2. Cor. 3.14. when the heart of
Israel shall be converted to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away: this
veil is natural ignorance, and infidelity. Where the former is, no marvel if
the word read and known be not understood, as a blind man cannot see the
sun shining in his strength. Where faith is absent, and is not mingled with
the word, it must needs become unprofitable. Impossible it is that the wisdom
of God can dwell in a wicked heart; no man puts precious licour into a fustie
caske. This is the cause, that men of great learning want sound understanding,
because they want sound conscience. Hos. 14.10. The ways of God are right, but
the wicked fall in them.

4. With a purpose not only to know, but to practice. Ioh. 7.17. If any man
will do my will, he shall know whether my doctrine be from heaven. The scope
of the Scripture, is not only to believe in the Son of God, but to walk in
the obedience of faith. Now if men read over all the Bible an hundred times,
either for knowledge only, or for vaineglory, or to advance themselves into
preferments, or to oppose the truth, as heretics and Papists do, no marvel
if they never attain the true sense of them.

5. With prayer for the Spirit to lead us into all truth, because the
Scriptures were inspired by Gods Spirit at first, and the same Spirit is only
able to acquaint us with his own meaning. If any man want wisdom, he must
ask it of God, Iam. 1.5. so did David Psalm. 119.18. Open mine eyes, that I may
see the wonderful things of thy law. Is it any marvel, that they who fly the
judgment of Gods Spirit, and stand to the Church, Pope, Counsels, and only
swallow that sense which they give, and never look after Gods Spirit, should
miss of the true meaning of the holy Ghost, and fall into and tumble in a
number of errors and heresies?

To these might be added meditation, diligence, keeping of order and time,
special application, and the like. These things let them be brought to the
reading of Gods word, and no man shall loose his labor, he shall be taught of
God, who has promised to reveal his secret to them that fear him.

So much of the qualification of the person.



Rule. 1.
The first is that in our text, conference of Scripture: there the Spirit of God
by plain places expounds those which are more difficult. Thus Nehem. 8.8.
Ezra opened the Scripture, by comparing it with it self, and so made the
people to understand, as Iunius notes out of the original. So the Bereans
having heard the doctrine of the Apostles, searched the Scriptures; that is,
compared their doctrine with the doctrine of the old Testament. Thus the
Apostles themselves, teaching Christ's resurrection, Act. 2.16. prove it out of
the old Testament: viz. Psalm. 16.10. Thou will not suffer thy holy one to see
corruption. And to prove that those words cannot be meant of David himself,
he appeals to another testimony in 1. King. 2. where it is said, that David
slept with his fathers, and lay buried in his sepulcher, and so saw corruption.
This is a special way whereby the Scripture gives wisdom to the simple,
Psalm. 19.7. And for this purpose the Lord has in great wisdom tempered the
Scripture with some hard places, to exercise men's senses, and try their
diligence in comparing of Scripture, whereof there were no need if there were
no hard places. How comes it that many pervert the Scripture to their own
destruction, but because they confer not one part with another, which would
lead them into the right sense? How come the Arrians, when they hear Christ
say, The Father is greater then I, and other such sayings, to hold to the death
that Christ is not true God, coessentiall and coequall with his Father, but
that they do not compare this with other places; as Ioh. 1.1. That word was
God* Philip. 2.6. He thought it no robbery to be equal with God: Romans 9. --
which is God blessed for ever. And consequently, that the former place speaks
of his humane nature, the latter of his divine nature?

How could the Papists suffer shipwreck of faith, and heretically err in the
foundation of religion, teaching justification by the works of the law out of
Iam. 2.21. Was not Abraham our father justified by works? but that they
confer not other places to help them into the right sense; as Romans 4.2. and
3.20. We are justified by faith, without the works of the law: and, Tit. 3.5.
Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his grace
he saved us. Which places being compared show, that one speaks of
justification before God, as Paul; the other of justification before men, as
James; the former of justifying the person, the latter of justifying the faith
of the person.

When they read such places as these, Awake thou that sleep: and, Turn you,
turn you, O house of Israel; hence they conclude, man has free will in his
own conversion. Whereas, would they compare these with other places, as Genesis
6.5. The whole imagination of man's heart is only evil continually; and, it is
God that works both the will and the deed, etc. the reconciling of such places
would force them to see that till God work us, we are mere patients, and
after that, acti agimus, being moved we move: for his grace must not be idle
in us.

The lewd and disordered Libertine, when he reads that we are justified by
faith without works, casts off all care of his conversation: What can his
works do? what need they? But he could not thus pervert the Scripture to his
destruction, if he compared it with such Scriptures as say, that faith without
works is dead: and, that faith works by love. The reconciling whereof would
teach them, that although works be excluded from justification, yet not from
faith: they must be in the person justified, though not in the justification of
his person.

This conference of Scripture, is either in places parallel and like, or in
such as seem to be opposed, and unlike.

The conferring of like places brings great light to the reader. As for
example: 1. Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing.
If we would understand what is meant by this nothing, compare we it with, Gal.
5.6. In Christ Jesus neither uncircumcision avails any thing, nor
circumcision: where nothing is, to avail nothing, and is not referred to
circumcision, or uncircumcision it self, but to the person it is nothing to
his salvation. So Psalm. 110.1. Sit at my right hand till I make thy enemies thy
footstool. If we would know whom this is meant of, compare it with 1. Cor.
15.25. For Christ must reign till he have put all his enemies under his feet.
Psalm. 2.7. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: this place is
explained by the like, Heb. 1.5. For to which of the Angels said he at any
time, Thou art my Son, etc. Psalm. 97.7. Worship him all ye Gods: what is
meant by Gods, and whom must the Gods worship? see Hebr. 1.6. When he
brought his first borne into the world, he said, Let all the Angels of God
adore him.

Concerning unlike places we have this rule, That they speak not either of the
same thing, or manner, or time; and by wary observation of the circumstances,
this will easily appear in examples.

gift of the Spirit were led into all truth, and freed from error. Yet Peter
greatly erred after that, Gal. 2.11. Answ. The Apostles were led into all truth
of doctrine, and erred not, but were not free from all error in life and
conversation: now Peter's error was not directly in doctrine, but in
conversation with the Gentiles. So as the opposition is not in the same thing.

My word shall not depart from thee, nor from thy seeds seed for ever, says
the Lord: yet Matthew. 21.43. the kingdom shall be taken from you? Answ. The
Prophet speaks of the whole true Church of God, which shall be perpetual
upon earth: our Savior of the nation of the Jews. So as the seeming
opposition is not in the same.

Thy faith has made the whole: here faith is greater then charity: but in 1.
Cor. 13.13. charity is greater then faith. Ans. They speak not of the same
faith: the former place speaks of justifying faith considered with his object
Christ, which not absolutely as a quality, but relatiuely as apprehending
Christ, is greater then charity: the latter of miraculous faith, which is
less.

Romans 7.22. Paul delights in the Law of God: yet, v. 23. Paul resists This
is indeed an opposition in the same person, but not in the same part: Paul
stands of spirit and flesh: according to the former part, he delights in the
law, according to the latter he rebelleth against it.

Luke 10.28. Life is promised to the worker, This do and live: not to him that
works, but to him that believes, is faith imputed to righteousness. Answ.
Both speak of the word, but not of the same part of the word, which stands
of two parts; the law, and this promises life to the worker; and the Gospel,
which promises life to the believer.

Ioh. 5.31. If I give testimony to my self, my testimony is not true. If I
testify of my self, my testimony is true. Answ. Consider Christ's testimony
two ways: 1. As the testimony of a singular man, and thus considering
himself as a mere man, he yields to the Jews, that his testimony were unfit,
and not sufficient in his own cause, because by the law, out of the mouth of
two or three witnesses every word must stand: but, 2. Consider him as a divine
person, coming from heaven, and having his Father giving witness with him,
thus his testimony is infallible, not subject to passion or delusion: And of
this the latter place speaks.

Matthew. 10.8. Freely ye have received, freely give. Luke 10.7. The The places
speak of the same persons, but not of the same works; the former of
miraculous works, which are not to be bought and sold for money (the use of
them being only to forward their ministry:) the latter, of the function of
preaching, and labor in building the Church: equity requires that he that
labors in the ministry, should receive recompense for his labor, Gal. 6.6.

Hos. 13.9. God is not the author of evil. Amos 3.6. There is no It is not the
same evil; but, that the evil of fault, this the evil of punishment.

Prou. 20.9. Who can say, my heart is clean? Matthew. 5.8. Blessed 1. A man
absolutely considered in himself is all impure; so the former place speaks:
but relatiuely considered in Christ, he is pure; so the latter. 2. No man is
pure in respect of the presence of corruption, but the godly are in respect of
the efficacy and rule of it.

The Apostles must go out into all the world. Matthew. 10.5. They must not go
into the way of the Gentiles. Answ. Distinguish times, and the Scripture will
be consonant enough: the former place is meant of preaching after Christ's time;
the latter, while he was living on earth. Both are true, because the times are
diverse.

God sent not the Son to judge the world. Ioh. 5.27. The Father has given
all judgment to the Son. Answ. The time of his abasement, at his first
coming, when he came not to judge, but to be judged, must be distinguished
from his second coming in glory and majesty, to judge the quick and the
dead: of this the latter.

Thou shall not steal: chap. 11.2. Rob or spoil Egypt. Answ. A special
commandment of God never opposes a general, but is only an exception from
it. So of Abraham's mental slaying of his son. If a man of himself should
steal or kill, it is sin; but if God bid, it is not.

I am the Lord, I change not: yet it seems he is changeable. Ier. 18.7. Answ.
The Scripture speaks not in the same respect: God changes not in himself,
but in respect of us: he is changed (as the schools speak) non affectiue,
sed effectiue, in respect of his work, not of his affection: for so there is no
variablenes or shadow of change in him.

Judge me according to my righteousness. Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant. Answ. There is a twofold righteousness, one of the
cause, another of the person: by this latter he will not be justified by
himself, but in the other he desires to be justified: his cause was good,
there was no such thing as they laid to his charge. If Job would dispute with
God, his own clothes would make him unclean: but when he deals with his
calumnious friends, he says, I will never let go mine innocence* till I die.

Luke 1.33. -- of his Kingdom there shall be no end. 1. Cor. 15.24. He shall
deliver up the Kingdom to his Father. Ans. Luke speaks of Christ's Kingdom
in respect of it self, the Apostle in respect of the administration of it. In
the former respect it shall never be abolished, Christ shall always have a
people to rule, always a Lordship and Headship; but he shall give up his
Kingdom in respect of the manner and means of administering it, he shall not
rule as now he does, by Magistrates, Ministers, the Word, Sacraments, and other
ordinances.

Isa. 64.6. All our righteousness is as filthy rags. Ephesians. 5.27. Church is
called glorious, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but holy and
without blemish. Both are true: the Prophet speaks of the Church militant, the
Apostle of the Church triumphant.

Act. 15.10. Circumcision, and such like rites, are called heavy Apostles nor
their Fathers were able to bear. 1. Ioh. 5.3. To them that love God, his
commandments are not greiuous; and his yoke is an easy yoke, Matthew. 11.30.
Answ. They were intolerable in respect of the rigor wherein Moses propounded
them, to be fulfilled: but not in respect of imputation (of Christ's
righteousness,) inchoation (of inherent righteousness,) and acceptance, God
accepting the will and faith, for the deed: Christ stood between those heavy
burdens and us, and carried away the curse of the law.

Act. 15.27. Circumcision is abrogated: yet Paul circumcised Timothy, Answ.
True, it was taken away as a Sacrament, but it was not yet honorably buried,
and therefore it remained only as a ceremoni e.

Matthew. 9.6. The Son of man has power to forgive sins. Luke Father forgive
them, they know not what they do: why prays he thus to his Father, if
himself might forgive them? Answ. Though all the Persons in Trinity forgive
sins, yet not in the same manner: the Father bestows, the Son merits, the
holy Ghost seals up and applies remission of sins.

Ioh. 10.29. None of my sheep, no elect shall perish, none shall pluck was
elected, Matthew. 10.4. and yet perished, was the Son of perdition, Ioh. 17.12.
Ans. Election is twofold, either to life eternal, whereof John speaks, chap.
10.29. and so Judas was not elected: or to the office of Apostleship, and from
this he fell.

Ioh. 1.8. He was not that light. Ioh. 5.35. He was a burning and It speaks
not of the same light: John Baptist was not the Sun of righteousness, the
Messiah, that light that brought light in the world; but he was a light, and
gave a notable testimony to that light.

Mic. 5.2. Bethlehem was little among the thousands of Judah. Math. 2.6. Thou
art not the least. Answ. The Prophet speaks of it as it was in his time, in it
self, as it was of a little circuit and compass: but the Evangelist, as it
brought forth Christ the Son of God, the Messiah: in this respect it was
great, which in it self was but of small estimate.

God said, It is not good for man to be alone. Paul says, It is good for a man
not to touch a woman, 1. Cor. 7.1. Answ. God speaks so, 1. ratione medij,
because of propagation: 2. remedij, to avoid fornication, and wandering lusts:
3. mysterij, because marriage should be a type of the union between Christ and
the Church: 4. and adiutorij, because man wanted a fit helper. But the Apostle
speaks not simply, but comparatively; it is not so good as not to touch a
woman: or it is good, that is, commodious in these times of persecution, when
all the world raged against Christians, not to touch a woman; it is not fit to
have the burden of a family in such times. Again, he speaks of such as
himself is, such as have the gift of continency.

Reach hither thy finger, and thy hand, and thrust it into my side: yet, ver.
17. he says to Marie, Touch me not. Why so? Answ. Because Thomas must believe,
and have his faith helped, who professed he would not believe, unless he might
touch him* but Marie believed, and did not need this indulgence, she would
hold him with her, and have the comfort of his bodily presence.

that he might be the Lord of the dead and living. Matthew. 22.32. God is not
the God of the dead, but of the living. Can God be the God of the dead, and
not the God of the dead? Ans. Christ speaks not simply as the Apostle does,
but in the sense of the Sadduces, and by an hypothesis of their surmise: as if
he should say, God is not the God of such dead, as you surmise shall never rise
again: but because they are indeed to rise again, God is their God.

Rule. 2.
Another rule to be observed in reading, to get the true sense of Scripture, is
this: If any place seem to uphold sin directly, it must be expounded by a
figure; as, 1. King. 18.27. Cry aloud, for he is a God, either asleep, or in
a journey, or pursuing his enemies. Here is a manifest Ironie. Matthew. 26.45.
when Christ took his Disciples asleep the second time, after he had
commanded them to watch, he says, Sleep on; which was a sharp reprehension
of their dullness. The like may be said of these places, Judge. 10.14. 1. King.
22.15. Eccles. 11.9. Mark. 7.9.

In all doubtful places, let us ever receive that exposition, which is
according to the analogy of faith: Romans 12.6. Rule. 3.
If any man prophecy, that is, have a gift of interpreting, let him interpret
according to the analogy of faith: so that if the letter of a Scripture cross
the analogy of faith, that is, agree not with the sum of the doctrine of
faith, contained in the Decalogue, Creed, and Lords prayer, it must be
understood by a figure. As for example: Where the text says, This is my body;
seeing the literal sense fights with the Article of faith, by which we
believe that Christ is ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of
God, till he return to judge the quick and the dead, it must be understood in
the figure, usual to Sacraments, by which the thing signified is put for the
sign: and contrariwise. So, Luke. 7.47. Many sins were forgiven her, for
she loved much: to gather hence merit of remission for our works of charity,
with the Papists, is against the ground of faith, by which we believe remission
of sins, which is directly opposite to merit.

Great diligence must be used to discern the right scope of the place doubted
of; which being neglected, Rule. 4.
makes way to manifold errors. See an instance: The good Samaritan showed
mercy to the man that fell among thieves, and was left half dead, and
wounded. Now to gather hence, with the Papists, that men are but half dead in
sin, and being a little helped by grace, are able to work out their
salvation, is to miss the cushion, and wander beyond, and beside the scope of
the place; which is, to show who is our neighbor, and what charity binds us
to, and not what we can do of our selves. Besides, being a parable, it
proves nothing besides the maine scope. Else one might hence prove, that of
all men Priests and Levites are most unmerciful, and that there is chance.

If a doubt rise out of a promise or threat, Rule. 5.
know that they are all conditional, although the condition be not expressed.
Yet forty days, and Niniue shall be destroyed; with a secret condition,
except Niniue repent. So a promise of long life is made to the godly, and yet
they often die young: therefore a secret condition must be understood, thus,
unless God see it better for them to take them away young from the evil to
come. Isa. 38.1. Set thy house in order* for thou shall die, and not live: yet
Hezekiah lived fifteen years afterward: therefore there must be understood
the condition of Gods will, which was concealed. Genesis 20.3. God said to
Abimelech, Thou shall die for the woman, yet he died not: the exception was,
Unless thou restore her. See this rule at large in Ezekiel. 33.13.14.

Rule. 6.
Neither stick too fast to the letter, nor yet insist too much in allegory or
metaphors. The Jews greatly sinned in the first, and are yet held from their
conversion by this plot of the devil. For as the multitude of them in the
Prophets time, while the Ceremonial law stood in force, stuck to the outward
ceremony and letter, and offered sacrifices and beasts, and did such things as
were commanded, but went no further; they washed the outside, but not the
inside; they offered the blood of beasts* but rose not so high as the blood of
Christ; they killed the bullockes and sheep, but not their sins, nor took
notice of that mortification of corruption, which these would have put them in
mind of: So at this day, reading the prophesies of Christ's spiritual
kingdom, set out under the types of most flourishing temporal kingdoms, they
stick in the letter and loose the sense, denying the Messiah to be come,
because they see not that flourishing estate and temporal happiness, which
they grossly and carnally imagine.

This was the judgment of God upon Origin, who was in such extremities in both
these, that although his wit served him to turn all the Scripture almost into
allegories, yet he stood most absurdly to the very letter: as in that of Matthew.
19.12. Some have made themselves chaste for the kingdom of heaven: he foolishly
interpreted the place, and made himself be made chaste by men, not discerning
Christ's distinction, who speaks of three sorts of Eunuchs, Eusebius. eccles.
hist. lib. 6. cap. 8.
some so borne, some violently cut and made so by men, some voluntarily by
repressing their lusts, abstinence, temperance, etc. this last he confounded
with the former. And he might as well have plucked out one of his eyes, because
Christ says, It is better to go into heaven with one eye, etc.

So on the contrary, many heretics have defended their heresies only by
translating of Scriptures into allegories. The Apostle speaks of such as
denying the resurrection of the body, turn all the testimonies of the
resurrection into an allegory, meaning thereby only the spiritual
resurrection of the soul from sin. Of which sort was Hymeneus and Philetus,
who destroyed the faith of certain, saying the resurrection was past already,
2. Tim. 2. v. 17. And of this sort are the Familists at this day.

The Papists denying the marriage of Ministers, hearing the Apostle say, that a
Bishop must be the husband of one wife, turn it into an allegory (I had like
to have said, a jest:) He must, they say, be the Bishop of one Bishopric; as
though his children must not be governed in his own house, which is plainly
distinguished from his Diocese, 1. Tim. 3.4.5. Thus they defend the sacrifice
of the Mass, by Genesis 14.18. where it is said, that Melchisedec brought forth
bread and wine to Abraham, and he was the Priest of the high God: with them
this must needs signify, that the Priest offers Christ to God, for the sins
of quick and dead.

In every small diversity and difference in numbers, Rule. 7.
which are historically mentioned, we must not suspect error in the Scripture,
but our own ignorance. Act. 7.14. All the souls which came with Iaacob into
Egypt, were seventy five: but in Genesis 46.27. they were seventy souls. Here
are five ods. Some say, Luke follows the translation of the Septuagint, which
was famous and of great authority, and would not bring his history in disgrace
for so small a difference. I doubt not but Luke, and Steven, and Moses agreed.
Mr. Iunius thinks that Steven mentions the four wives of Iaacob, and his
two sons, Er and Onan that were dead, excluding Iaacob himself; but they
came not into Egypt. Calvin and Beza think there was some error in the
writers: which is not improbable, seeing in writing the Greek, the word (...),
signifying five (being in the margent) might easily creep into the text for
(...), which signifies all. And thus both Moses, and Steven, and Luke may be
reconciled, who both likely wrote seventy.

But howsoever, according to our rule, the Spirit of God often in setting down
numbers, uses the figure Synecdoche, a part for the whole, and in a diverse
respect puts down a greater or less number. As for example: 1. King. 9.28.
Solomon sent his servants, who took from Ophir 420. talents of gold: 2. Chron.
8.30. he took thence 450. talents of gold. Here is 30 talents ods. Answ. They
received of King Hiram 450. which they brought to Solomon, partly in substance,
as the 420. partly in account, much being spent about the charge of the navy,
even the 30. talents. 1. Sam. 13.1. Saul reigned two years over Israel:
whereas he reigned forty years, Act. 13.21. Answ. He reigned two years well,
de iure, lawfully: but being rejected from being King, the other are not
numbered. Iunius upon this place proves this interpretation by four arguments.

Matthew. 17.1. Christ took Peter and John the sixth day after: Luke 9.22. eight
days after. Answ. Both are true in a diverse respect: Matthew accounts only
the intermediall days, not the two extreme pieces; Luke accounts them all.
Sometimes some numbers are cut off for breuity, and to make the number run
more full and round: as in Judge. 20.46. of the Beniamites were slain five and
twenty thousand; here wants an hundredth, as appears v. 35. for the foresaid
reason. 2. King. 15.33. Iotham was 25. years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned 16. years in Jerusalem: yet it is said in the 30. verse, in the
twentieth year of Iotham the son of Vzziah. Answ. The former text speaks of
the years that Iotham reigned for himself: but he had reigned 20. years in
his fathers time, being struck with leprosy for meddling with the Priests
office; and all the years he reigned in his fathers life time are counted to
his fathers reign; for he was not Rex for that time, but prorex.

The like rule also we must observe in diversities of names and places, if we
would not stick in the sand. As in this example: Matthew. 27.9. It was fulfilled
which was spoken by the Prophet Jeremy: whereas it was spoken by Zachary, c.
11.13. and not by Jeremy. Many learned men trouble themselves more then needs
in reconciling this place. 1. Some say, that S. Matthew ioynes together both
one place in Jeremy, c. 18.1.2.3. of the potter, and this of Zachary, 11.13.
But there is little or no agreement between them. 2. Some say, that it is not
in Ieremies writings that are Canonical, but in some Apocryphal writings of
Jeremy, which the Jews had, and which Chrysostom confesses he saw wherein
these words were. But it is not likely, that the holy Evangelist would leave a
Cononicall text, and cite an Apocryphal; or give such credit to that, or seek
to build our faith upon it. And by our rule that book should be Canonical. 3.
Some say, that Matthew forgot, and for Zachary put down Jeremy: but with
more forgetfulness, that holy men writ as they were moved by Gods Spirit.
This error Erasmus takes hold of, from Augustine, who in his third book
concerning the consent of the Evangelists, chap. 7. defends and excuses this
error. 4. Some think it the error of heedlesse writers, who might easily so
err: but all the oldest copies, and the most ancient Fathers have the name of
Jeremy. 5. Some say, that Zachariah being instructed and trained up with
Jeremy, did deliver it by tradition from Jeremy, and so Jeremy spoke it by
Zachariah: which might be true, because it is said in the text, As was spoken
by Jeremy, not, written. But 6. the most compendious and likely way of
reconciling is this, that Zachary and Jeremy was the same man, having two
names, which was very usual among the Jews: as Gedeon was called Ierubaal and
Ierubesheth, Solomon was called Iedidiah, Iethro was called Hobab and Revel,
Iehoiacim Ieconias and Coniah, Hester was called Edissa, Simon Peter Cephas and
Bar-iona, Matthew was called Leui, Jerusalem Iebus and Salem, etc.

These are such rules as not only the learned (who besides these have the
benefit of arts and tongues, the knowledge of phrases, the benefit of
disputation, and the like,) but even the simplest may make good use of: 1. To
understand the Scripture aright, and so discover the subtilty of Satan, and
seducers. 2. To convince error, and let others see their errors, and so
gently lead them back into their way again. 3. They be great means to
justify the truth, and glorify God. 4. Practisers of them have comfort in
themselves, that they are lovers of the truth, and desire to find it, even with
much labor and industry. 5. The want of this diligence and study of Scripture,
is the very cause, that so many stagger and doubt of our religion, and are so
indifferent that they cannot tell whether to lean to Papists or Protestants,
and so hold doubtful to their death. Yea, and many go away and fall off from
us, and depart to Antichrist^ which is a just judgment of God upon them,
because they were so far from receiving the truth in the love of it, as they
would never take pains to search into the Scripture, which witness of the
truth.

WE are now come to speak of the allegation it self, and the force of the
reason, taken out of Deuter. 6.16. where the Israelites are forbidden to tempt
the Lord, as in Massah. How they tempted him in Massah, is set down in Exodus
17.7. being in want of water and distress, they contended with Moses, and
said, Is the Lord amongst us? 1. They doubted of his power, and so would try
whether he could give them water in this their want: for the word nasah,
properly signifies to make trial; as David is said not to have tried and
proved before to go in armor, 1. Sam. 17.39. where the same word is used. 2.
They doubted of the truth of his promise, not believing him to be amongst them,
as he had promised, unless he would show them in all have some sign of his
presence, in present supply of their necessity; and therefore they say, Is God
amongst us?

Now mark how aptly and wisely our Lord and Savior applies this place. I. In
his choice: he is now on the pinnacle, and in a dangerous place, and well knows
that this prohibition was a fitter place to study and meditate on, then those
large promises in that most comfortable Psalm. For howsoever all Scripture is
profitable and divine, yet some Scriptures fit some persons, and some
occasions, better then other. It is a true and comfortable promise, Isa. 1.18.
Come, let us reason together, though your sins were as red as scarlet, etc.
But for a man not truly humbled, the threats of the law are fitter to meditate
on: neither does the Lord so inuit the Jews till they be humbled. It is true,
God hears not sinners: but such a place is not so fit to be meditated on, and
applied by such as are seriously beaten down already in the sight and sense
of sin. He that provides not for his family, is worse then an infidel: a
true and holy speech: but if a covetous man apply it, it hurts him, he has
other places to study on; as, Beware of covetousness: and, covetousness which
is idolatry, is one of the sins which shuts out of heaven. The holy heart of
Christ could equally meditate and apply all Scripture; but by this his choice,
he would teach us to make choice according to occasions. II. In direct meeting
the devils drift, which was to move Christ to vain confidence, and make
trial whether he was the Son of God, or God his Father, by throwing himself
down. Comparing this place with the former, he shows him, that it gives him
no leave to cast down himself: for this were not to trust God, but to tempt
God, as the Jews did in Massah: but I doubt not of my Fathers power, and
therefore I need not try it. I distrust not the truth of his promise, and
presence with me, what need I make trial of it? I have a commandment, which I
must not separate from the promise, as thou do. Thou pretendest a promise,
but no promise extends to the breach of any commandment, but has his ground
and dependence upon some commandment or other. Thou would have me cast my
self down, and promisest help, but no promise can secure him, that
attempteth that wherein he tempts God, as this action would.

In the words are, 1. the person that must not tempt, Thou: 2. the person that
must not be tempted, The Lord thy God: 3. the action of tempting, not tempt.

I. The person, Thou. Some think that the pronoune [ Thou] is to be referred
to Satan; and [ the Lord the God] to Christ himself, as though Christ had
said, Thou shall not tempt me. But, 1. It was never written, that Satan should
not tempt Christ: if it had, it had been false. 2. It is a negative
commandment of God, directed to his people, which binds all persons, at all
times, in all places; and not to be restrained to this occasion. 3. Satan was
irrecouerably fallen from the Covenant of grace; and so, although Christ was
his Lord in respect of his power, yet not his God in respect of the Covenant of
grace, which those words have special respect unto. 4. Satan proceeds to tempt
him still, and therefore that is not the meaning. 5. Christ in this humble
estate would not manifest himself, much less call himself Lord and God.

II. The person who must not be tempted. The Lord: if he be a Lord, he must be
feared, obeyed, honored, not tempted or provoked. Thy God: though he be my God
and my Father, I must not presume, I must not abuse my Fathers goodness and
providence where no need is. A loyal subject will not presume upon the
clemency of his Prince, to break his laws, or a loving child upon his
fathers goodness to offend him.

III. The action of tempting. To tempt God, is to prove and try God (out of
necessity) what he can do, or what he will do, and whether he be so good, so
merciful, so just, as his word and promise say he is: so, Heb. 3.9. Your
Fathers tempted me, and proved me, and saw my works. The mother of this sin
is infidelity and unbelief, 1. of Gods power, as if his arm were shortened:
2. of his goodness, as if he were not so careful of his chosen as he is. For
else what need I try that which I were assured of? The issue of it, or the
branches that shoot from this root, are put forth, 1. In judgment. 2. In
affections. 3. In counsels and actions of life.

1. In judgment and matter of doctrine, to prefer our own conceits above
the word of God, whereof the Apostle speaks, Act. 15.10. Why tempt ye God,
to impose a yoke upon the Disciples necks, which neither our Fathers nor we
can hear? as if he should say, Why do you of the circumcision, vainly
swelling and trusting in your own strength, falsely conceive and teach without
warrant, to anger the Lord with, that by the fulfilling of the law ye can
attain salvation, binding up the power of God to the law as necessary to save
men thereby? what an intolerable yoke is this, which no man is able to bear?
What shall we think then of the Papists doctrine, who lay the same yoke upon
men's shoulders? What is their whole religion but a plain tempting of God, and
a provoking of his anger, while they lay on men the yoke of the Law? This is
the sin of all other heretics, who like the Pharisees, set the word of God
behind their own inventions, and properly and directly fight against faith,
which leans it self wholly upon the word of God. Faith looks at Gods
constitutions, it suffers not judgment to arrogate above Gods judgment; it
beats down humane wisdom and reason, and brings the thoughts and reasonings
into the obedience of God. It teaches not impossibilities, as they of the
circumcision, and Papists do at this day.

II. In affection: 1. By diffidence and distrust. Psalm. 78.18. They tempted God
in their hearts, in requiring meat for their lust. Here were many sins in
one: 1. a murmuring and grudging at their present estate: 2. a tempting of Gods
power, Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? v. 19. 3. a denial of his
presence; If God were amongst us, he would prepare us a table: 4. making have,
and appointing of time, and place, and the manner of helping them; he must
now, in the wilderness set up a table: 5. wantonness, having sufficient and
necessary Mannah and water, by an immediate hand of God, they must have meat
for their lust. 2. By curiosity, when men vainly desire extraordinary
things, and neglect ordinary, and must have such signs as they list, either
out of mere curiosity, as Herod would have a sign only to please himself in
some rare sight; or in pretense of confirming them in the truth, as the Jews,
when Christ had sufficiently confirmed his heavenly doctrine with powerful
miracles, they rejected this, and must have a miracle from heaven, Matthew. 16.1.

Quest. Is it not lawful to ask a sign? did not Gedeon, Judge. 6.17. and
Hezekiah ask a sign, and Moses, and it was granted? Answ. Yes, it is lawful
in four cases. 1. When God offers a sign, we may require and ask it, as he
offered one to Hezekiah: and not to require it is a sin, as in Ahaz, who when
the Lord bade him ask a sign, he says, he will not ask a sign, nor tempt
the Lord, Isa. 7.11. But he tempted the Lord now not in tempting him, and
grieved him much, v. 12.

2. When an extraordinary calling and function is laid upon a man, he
considering his own weakness, and the many oppositions which he shall meet
withal in the execution of it, may for the confirming of his faith, demand a
sign: and this was Gedeons case, who of a poor man of the smallest tribe of
Israel, was extraordinarily called to be a Judge and Ruler. Or when such an
extraordinary work or calling is to be made manifest to the world to be from
God, for the better prospering of Gods work, a man may desire a sign, as did
Moses Exodus 4. and Elijah.

3. When God gives an extraordinary promise to his servants, of effecting
something above all they can see or expect, he pleases to condescend to their
weakness, and for confirming of their faith he hears them asking a sign: as
Hezekiah being extraordinarily restored, seeing 1. his own extreme
weakness; and 2. the word of God passed, Set thy house in order, for thou
shall not live but die, required a sign: and God affoarded him an
extraordinary one. The Virgin Mary had such an extraordinary promise as never
was, to be a mother without the knowledge of man; she asked how that could be:
God gave her a sign, saying, Thy cousin Elizabet has conceived, and shall
bear a son, and so shall thou.

4. When an extraordinary testimony to a new form of doctrine is requisite,
extraordinary signs may be required. As for example: The Gospel at the first
publishing of it, was joined with the abolishment of all the ceremonial law,
and all the ordinances of Moses, and bringing in a new religion (in respect of
the manner) through the world, against which both Jews and Gentiles could not
but be deadly enemies. Now the Apostles did desire and obtain the power of
working many signs and wonders, of healing, killing, raising the dead,
commanding devils, and the like.

But to ask a sign out of these cases, is a provoking and tempting of God: as
1. out of diffidence or malice, as the Jews bade Christ come down from the
cross, and they would believe him, assuring themselves he was never able to
do that. 2. For curiosity and delight; as Herod desired to see some marvel;
or for satisfying our lust, as Israel. 3. For our own private ends, not aiming
directly at Gods glory, and denial of our selves; as the Jews followed Christ
not for his miracles but for their belly, and the bread: and the Virgin Mary
herein failed, requiring a miracle of Christ, rather for a prevention of
scandal for the want of wine, then the manifesting of Christ's glory; for which
Christ checked her: for it was a private and light respect, to which miracles
must not be commanded, Ioh. 2.4. 4. for confirming of that doctrine and
authority, which is sufficiently confirmed already* Ioh. 2.18. Show us a sign,
why thou do these things, why thou whippest out buyers and sellers out of
the Temple. He shows them none, they tempt God herein; was not the whipping of
them out, and the authority he had shown, sign enough of his divine
authority? did not he solely and alone overthrow and turn out a number of them
without resistance? did not he by his word challenge the Temple to be his
Fathers house, and himself the Son of God? Having thus confirmed his
authoriry by this sign, he would show them no other.

Thus the Papists as a Pharisaicall seed tempt God, looking for more miracles
to confirm the same doctrine, which Christ and his Apostles have sufficiently
confirmed by many and powerful miracles. When they prove that we teach
another doctrine, we will show them other miracles.

III. To tempt God in action, is thus: 1. To enter upon any thing without a
calling: for that is to step out of our way, when we do that which we have
neither word nor promise for: this is in the text. 2. To walk in a course of
sin, and live in our wickedness, especially when the Lord by blessings moves
us to repentance. Malach. 3.15. They that work wickedness be set up: who be
they? in the next words the Prophet shows, saying, They that tempt God are
delivered. So as all wicked persons are tempters of God. 3. To presume upon
extraordinary means, when ordinary means may be had: thus the 3. worthies of
David tempted God, that went for water in danger of their lives, whereas they
might have had it nearer in safety, 2. Sam. 23.15. but when they brought it to
him, he considered how they had sinned to satisfy his sinful desire, and
would not drink it. And this is the tempting of God, intended in this place,
to fly down refusing the stairs. 4. To run into places, or occasions of
danger, in soul or body, is to tempt God; as to run into wicked company, or
exercises. Peter, notwithstanding Christ foretold him of his weakness, yet
trusted of his own strength, and went into Caiaphas his hall, and seeking the
tempter found him, and himself too weak for him.

Our Savior would here teach us what a dangerous sin it is to tempt the
Lord, it being so absolutely forbidden the people of God, not only in the
old Testament, but in the new. 1. Cor. 10.9. Neither let us tempt Christ, as
some of them also tempted him.

For 1. It is a plain contempt of the Lord in his providence and
constitutions, when a man either neglects the means, Reasons. 1.
which God has appointed to bring forward his purposes, or betaketh himself
to such means as God has not appointed. 2
2. It is a manifest argument of infidelity, and hardness of heart. When a
friend promises me to do me good at my need, or to stand by me in time of
danger, I will feign a need or danger, to try whether he will be as good as
his word or no; what does this but imply a suspicion in me, that my friend will
not be as good as his word, therefore I will try him before I need him? And
thus he deals, that will needlessly tempt God. 3
3. No relation between God and us may encourage us to tempt him. He is our
Lord, a strong God: do we provoke the Lord? are we stronger then he? 1.
Cor. 10.22. Let not the Princes of the Philistims dally with Sampson, for he is
strong and will revenge himself by pulling the house over their heads: the
Lord is strong and mighty, Sampsons strength was but weakness to him, therefore
let not us tempt him, least we go away with the worse, as the Philistims did.
He is our God, even a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. it is no safe dallying with
fire. He is our father, therefore we must fear him as Iaacob knows Isaac is
his father, yet is afraid to go to him disguised, least (said he) I seem to
my father to dally or mock. 4
4. The greatness of this sin will appear in the greatness of his punishment.
It cost good Josiah his life, 2. King. 23.29. He would try what he could do
against Pharaoh Necho, when he was admonished of the Lord, not to go against
him. For this sin the Lord swear that not one of the Israelites above 20.
years old should enter into Canaan. It cost the lives of 600000. men, besides
women, who for tempting God, were destroyed of the destroyer, 1. Cor. 10.9.
Good Zachary for not believing the Angel, which came with tidings of a son,
was struck dumb for requiring a sign. Even the best, if they tempt God, shall
not carry it clear away.

Object. Psalm. 34.8. Taste, and see how good the Lord is: and, Romans 12.2.
prove what that good and acceptable will of God is. Answ. There is a twofold
knowledge of Gods goodness: 1. speculatiue, by which we know God to be good in
himself and to us: 2. experimental, in something not revealed. The places
alleged speak of the former, only this latter is a tempting of God.

Use. 1.
This serves to discover unto us, our failing against this doctrine, and that
every of us cannot so easily put off this sin as we think for.

1. Is it not ordinary amongst us, that read the word, and of Gods power
therein? we hear his promises, we taste by experience how good and bountiful
God is, and yet in any strait, in every danger, we can be ready to tempt him as
in Massah, saying in our hearts, Is God with me? does God regard me? am I not
clean cast out of sight? can I ever be helped, and swim out of this
distress? Thus the unbelief of our hearts is ready to make God a liar. When
there was a marvelous great famine in Samariah, and Elisha said, To morrow at
this time two measures of barely shall be at a shekel, and a measure of fine
flower at a shekel: a Prince answered, If the Lord would make windows in
heaven, could it be so? he answered, Thine eyes shall see it, but thou shall
not eat of it. And he was trodden in pieces in the gate for his unbelief. 2.
King. 7. ver. 19.

2. How generally are we in love with our sins, which out of Malachi, we have
showed to be a tempting of God? God has powered abundant mercies upon us the
people of England, yet we go on to provoke and tempt him; the more his
mercies, the more our sins: how can this abusing of goodness but heap up wrath
against our selves. Can there be a greater tempting of God in his justice,
then to go on and trade in sin without repentance, presuming that God will
not punish us? What a number of notorious wicked persons are resolved to add
drunkenness to thirst, and sin to sin, and yet at last mean to be saved?

3. How hardly can we be kept from wicked companies and occasions? Though we be
warned by Christ's voice speaking in the word, as Peter was, yet we thrust into
Caiaphas his hall, and the Players hall, which is the devils school, and will
not avoid occasions, till the end of sin bring sorrow and bitterness
incurable. How easily do men loose the watch over themselves, against their
own resolutions, and the motions of Gods word and Spirit? when they might
redeem their precious time, gained from their special calling to the
general, in reading, meditating, prayer, etc. presently the devil thrusts
them out of both callings, to gaming, drinking, or bowling, or such
unprofitable exercises. Oh when God lays you on your deathbed, this one
sorrow (if God ever give you sense of your estate) will be ready to sink you;
that you have loosely and unfruitfully parted with your time, and now you
cannot buy an afternoon to bewail the loss of many in, with all your
substance.

4. How prone are we to venture and rush upon any thing without a calling, or
without a warrant? as when men cast themselves into unnecessary dangers, hoping
that God will deliver them. Many run on an head into unlawful contracts,
without care of any word to guide them. Others strike the hand, and undo
themselves by suretiship. Others cast off profitable callings, and betake
themselves to unprofitable and hurtful; as usurers, and their bawds; and
keepers of smoake-shops. And some will run upon ropes for praise or profit.
In all this men are out of their way, and in a course of tempting God. Would a
man cast himself into the sea, in hope he should never be drowned; or on a
persuasion he should never be burnt, cast himself into the fire? We having
stayres, are prone to leap down: Christ our Lord would not do so.

5. How common a thing is it both in matters of soul and body, to sever the
means from the end, which is a plain tempting of God, as our Savior here
calls it? Every man hopes to go to heaven, but never seeks the way. What a
number will be saved he bought bread, Ioh. 4.8. God will never feed thee with
the heavenly Mannah by miracle, where the means are to be had, but are
neglected.

How many will either be saved as the thief was on the cross, or they will
never be saved? they make their salvation but an hours work, and make as
short a matter of it as Balaam, who would but die the death of the righteous.
What a tempting of God is this, as if a man would add his oath unto Gods, that
he shall never enter into his rest? Christ has sufficiently set forth his
divine power by that example of him on the cross; he need not, nor will not
do it again, in saving thee by miracle. It is a better argument, Christ saved
the thief at the last hour on the cross, therefore he will not so save me,
then otherwise. What a common sin is it to neglect the means, and despise the
word, as a weak and silly means, as the Preachers be silly men? Oh, if we had
greater means, some man from the dead, or some Angel from heaven, or some
miracles, we could be better persuaded. A great tempting of God: as though his
wisdom had failed in appointing sufficient means for the faith of his
people. Christ reproved this infidelity, Job. 4.48. Except ye see signs and
wonders, ye will not believe. Notably Luther: If God should offer me a vision,
I would refuse it, I am so confirmed in the truth of the word. How commonly do
men stand out the threats of the word, plainly denounced against their sin,
even in their own consciences; which is nothing but to tempt God, and try
whether he will be so just and strict?

In the things of this life men tempt God many ways.

viz. By the sweat of thy brows, thou shall get thy bread. 2. The omitting of
any ordinary means of our good, or ouer-prizing of any means, is a tempting
of God to take them from us, and a revenging of the abuse. Hezekiah, though the
Lord say he shall live 15. years, must not omit means, but take dry figs,
and lay to the apostem. Asa must not trust to Physic: for then he shall never
come off his bed. 3. In our trials when we murmr, grudge, make have, or
use unlawful means, we tempt God, and incur this great sin. So as none of
us can wash our hands of it, but it will stick with us: and we had need daily
to repent of it, because it daily thrusts us under the displeasure of God.

Use. 1.
Labor we to nourish our confidence of Gods power and mercy, which is an
opposite unto this sin, and strive against it. Quest. By what means? Answ.
By observing these rules: 1. See that in every thing, thou have Gods word and
warrant for that thou do: say not, I hope I may do this or that; but I know
I may do it. If thou have a word, thou may be bold without tempting God:
that is the ground of faith, and tempting of God is from infidelity. Act.
27.34. when Paul was in extreme peril, he tells the mariners, they should
come safe to land. Why, what was his ground? even a special word; the Angel
of God told him that night, that none should perish.

2. Walk with God as Enoch, provoke him not by sin, then may thou pray
unto God, and secure thy self under his wing in danger without tempting him.
So long as a man has a good conscience with Paul, and an upright heart with
Hezekiah, he may be bold with God, and rejoice in himself, and assure himself
that Gods power and justice is his; he will not sink in trouble, nor say, Is
God with me?

3. Use the means conscionably, which God has appointed for the attaining of
good ends. Paul had a word, that they should all come safe to land; yet they
must not cast themselves into the sea, nor go out of the ship. Never did any
promise of God make the godly careless in the means. Daniel had a promise of
return out of Babylon after 70. years, and knew they should return: and
turning the book, and finding the time expired, he uses the means, and is
diligent with fasting and prayer, that God would accomplish his word, Dan. 9.2.
Iaacob had a promise of God, that he should return into his country, he knew
all the devils in hell could not hinder the promise; yet seeing his brother
Esaus wrath was a stop or bar, he uses means to remove this let; he
goes to God, and wrastles with him by prayer, then he sends his presents, and
orders his droues with all the wisdom he could; and by this means prevented
the danger. Christ himself having stairs will use them. Remember for
spiritual life and natural, he must eat that would live: for spiritual
war and temporal, he must carry his weapons that would overcome: for
earthly and heavenly harvest, he that would reap must sow. The sick needs
the Physician. In our earthly or heavenly ^rauell, let us with Iaacob prevent
whatsoever lets would hinder us from our country, or the end of our way.

4. Whether thou see means or no, subject thy will to Gods in all things. If
he kill thee, yet trust in him still. David in the want of means of comfort,
said, Behold, here am I, let the Lord do whatsoever is good in his eyes. The
three children seeing no means of escape, escape, ^nswered the King thus, Our
God is able to deliver us; and if he will not, yet we will not worship thy
image: we are sure of his presence, either for the preservation of our bodies,
or the salvation of our souls.

VERSE. 8. Again, the devil took him up into an exceeding high mountain, and
showed him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them:

9. And said unto him, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down, and
worshp me.

NOW are we come by Gods assistance, to the third and last Temptation of our
Lord and Savior, which at this time he sustained, and powerfully vanquished.
For although our Savior had twice repelled his violence already, yet
notwithstanding Satan continues his assault. [ Again,]

Doctr.
Whence we may note, the importunity of Satan against Christ and his members,
in temptation to sin. That he is restles herein against Christ, appears in
that he dares set upon him here again, and again, and the third time, even
so long as he has any leave given him. And after this our Lord himself lead
not a life exempted and freed from temptation: for, Luke 4.13. Satan left
Christ but for a season. And for his members, we may see in Job, how many
armies of temptations he would have oppressed him withal: one could not finish
his tale of dismal tidings, till another came and ouertooke him; even as one
wave in the sea, ouertakes another. And in Joseph, how did he stir up the
hatred of his brethren against him? not content with that, they must cast him
into a pit; and there he must not rest, but be drawn out either to be slain,
or at least sold to the Midianites: being in Potiphars house, how was he every
day tempted by his wanton Mistress? refusing that folly, how was he hated of
her, and cast into a dungeon by his Master? and there he lay a long time, till
the time came that Gods word must be verified for his advancement.

1. Because he is eagerly set upon the destruction of mankind, and therefore
will be hardly repulsed: Reasons. 1.
he seeks continually to destroy, and leaves no stone unturned. 2
2. He hopes at least by importunity to prevail, and by continuance of
temptations to break those whom at first he cannot foil. Well he knows,
that instance and multiplying of temptations, may drive even strong Christians
sometimes to be weary and faint in their minds. And the rather, because he
knows the state of Gods children is not alike, but as often in their bodies, so
the strength of grace in their souls is sometimes weakened and abated. 3. His
policy is oftentimes to make one temptation a preface, and step to another; 3
and a lesser way to a greater. For, 1. considering Christ's hunger, it seems
small to make stones bread: 2. but a greater sin then that, to cast himself
down, when there is no need: 3. but the greatest of all, is plain idolatry,
Worship me. 4. If one kind of temptation will not take so well, he turns to
another: as here, 4
If Christ will not distrust, let him presume; if neither, let him be covetous.

To teach us to beware of security, Use. 1.
seeing Satan takes not any truce, but as a raging powerful enemy, desperate
and yet hopeful of victory, will not be repulsed, but assail us again and
again. Yea, though we have once and again overcome his temptations, as Christ
had done, yet must we stand on our watch still: for he will set afresh upon us.
And why? 1. This is the Apostles counsel, 1. Pet. 5.8. because Satan is a
continual enemy, therefore we must be sober and watch. 2. Where he is cast
out, he seeks re-entry, Matthew. 12.24. 3. Though God of his grace often
restrain his malice, it is not to make men secure, but to have a breathing
time to fit themselves better for further trial. 4. Security after victory
in temporal war, has proved dangerous, and has lost more then all their
valor had won; 1. Sam. 30.16.
as the Amalekites having taken a great spoil of David's, and burned Ziglag,
sitting down to eat and drink, and make merry, were suddenly surprised and
destroyed by David's sword. But in the spiritual combat, security is much
more deadly. 5. It is the wisdom of a wise Pylot in a calm, to expect and
provide for a storm, and in a troubled sea, after one great billow to expect
another in the neck of it: Even so, while we are in the troubled sea of this
world, it will be our wisdom to look for one temptation in the neck of
another. And seeing it is with us as with seafaring men, who by much experience
have learned, that in the trouble of the sea, the greatest danger and tossing
is toward the havens, where there is least sea room: therefore let us toward
our end, in sickness, and toward death, look for Sathan^ strongest assaults,
and in the mean time prepare against them. Yea, let us learn to prepare
against all kinds of temptations, as our Savior here resists all kinds in
these three general ones, and herein teaches us so to do: for, shall Satan
dare to renew so many temptations against our Lord, and will he spare any of
his members?

Use. 2.
Here is a ground of comfort for Gods people, who, when temptations come thick
upon them, are often dismayed as though God had forsaken them, and so grow
weary of resistance; yea, and not sieldome they grow into words of impatiency,
Never were any so molested as they. Good David said once, This is my death,
and, all men are liars, even all Gods Prophets that told him he should be King:
there was no way but one, he must one day fall by the hand of Saul. But be of
good comfort, and possess thy soul with patience: for 1. No temptation takes
thee, but such as befalls man, 1. Cor. 10.13. and the same afflictions are
accomplished in thy brethren which are in the world, 1. Pet. 5.9. 2. Thou have
the natural Son of God most restlesly assalted by the devil, and pursued
with all kinds of temptation, to sanctify all kinds of temptation to thee.
And herein thou art not only conformable to the Saints of greatest grace, but
even to thy Lord and Head. 3. The more assalted thou art, the surer argument it
is thou art not yet in Satan's power, but he would win thee. Thou have more
cause to fear, if all be quiet with thee. When an enemy has won a city, he
assaults and batters it no more, but fortifies it for himself. If the strong
man have possession, all is at peace: but if there be any resistance never so
weak, he has not won all. Therefore resist still, stand thy ground, and
faint not, and if thou do any time faint, desire to resist still, and thou
still resistest.

Use. 3.
See here an express image of the devil in wicked men, who are restless in
their wickedness: no child so like the father, as they like their father the
devil in this property. Their feet run to evil, and they make have to
blood, Pro. 1.16. yea, they are so restless that they cannot sleep till they
have done some mischeife, c. 4. v. 16. and the more they be resisted and
opposed, the further are they from desisting, but grow more violent, as Satan
here. See this restless disposition in the wicked Sodomites: they came about
the house of Lot to abuse the Angels, they cannot sleep till they have done
their villanny, they are all the night about it: when Lot persuades them to
desist, they are further off, and more violent; now must Lot take heed to
himself: when the Lord from heaven strikes them small and great with blindness,
and resists them, yet they will not give over, but sought the door still.

The like restlesnes we note in the Jews, the wicked enemies of Christ, who
were so thirsty of his blood, and nothing else could serve them, and no means
could hinder them, but they consult in their hall how they may apprehend him,
they send out in the night to apprehend him; being come to catch him, he with
a word struck them all to the ground, yet they go on: having apprehended him,
they keep him all night in Caiaphas his hall, and at the break of the day,
Caiaphas the high Priest, the Elders, Scribes, and Pharisees held a solemn
Council to put him to death: And when his gracious words confounded them, and
they saw his innocence shine out, when they heard the Judge clearing him, and
saw him wash his hands from his blood, yet they grew more violent, and called
his blood upon them and their children for ever. Exodus 32.6. when the
Israelites would sacrifice to the golden calfe, they rose up early in the
morning. We shall ever see wicked men in their wicked courses make more have,
then good speed: and the more opposed, the more violent. Aaron durst not resist
them. How restless was Judas till he betrayed his Lord, and earned that price
of blood, both his Lords and his own? and how far was he from desisting,
notwithstanding the gracious means he had to hinder him?

There are three special things, wherein men do most expressly imitate Satan,
and manifest his image upon themselves.

1. In incessant malice against God, and his children. Satan was a manslayer
from the beginning, and so in the beginning was his son Cain, who hated his
brother, and slew him, because his works were good, and his own evil, 1.
Ioh. 3.12. Of this progeny were the cursed Jews that went about to kill
Christ, Ioh. 8. and all those that hate and malign the children of God.

2. In slandering and false accusing: Reu. 12.10.
for Satan is called the accuser of the brethren, and so are they, 2. Tim. 3.3.
Calumniation is the constitutiue form of Satan, and the Jews had an express
image of it upon them, Matthew. 26.60. How do they compass their malice against
Christ? thus: they sought false witness, and thereby played the devils:
first, they desired to have two witnesses, but they would not serve; then two
more, but they also would not serve (and mark by the way, it seems they
examined them apart:) at last some came that accorded, and upon their word they
condemned Christ. All the while they will seem to take a course of law,
justice, and equity: but all is but a color. 1. Though, according to their
plot, they must put Christ to death unjustly, yet themselves do not devise
slanders, but only are willing that any should come in and speak against him
in somewhat; they will have two witnesses: it was enough for Magistrates to
receive witness, not to be judges and accusers themselves. Besides this, they
will not deal underhand, but have witnesses, and witnesses that must agree,
and they ask him what he answers to them: and all in public, to show that
they did not devise slanders in corners, but dealt as men that would justify
their proceedings, and stand to their doings. Yet for all these fair and
colorable pretenses, their plot is to pronounce the sentence of condemnation
upon him.

3. In boldness and impudency in sin: no age, nor ours want numbers of
examples of wicked persons sold over to sin, who are as naturally carried to
wickedness, as sparks to fly upwards, and as busy as bees in contriuing their
wicked purposes; night and day is too little to spend in the confusion of their
lusts. As violently are they carried into their riots, drunken matches,
adulterous and filthy meetings, murtherous and reuengefull plots, cursed and
blasphemous oaths, rotten and poysonfull language, wicked and diabolical
courses, as the swine were hurried by the devils into the lake. And if devils
were incarnate, and should put on men's shapes, we cannot devise how they could
otherwise carry themselves more to corrupt humane society, and more to heap up
their own and others damnation. And let the Magistrates or Minister use means
to reclaim, or (if that be hopeless) to restrain and hinder their malice, Oh
they are so far from giving up their courses, as they rage and storm so much
the more; they will not be so wronged, as be at every man's command; they did
swear, and will swear; they were drunk, and will be drunk; and to justify
any thing that they have wretchedly done, they will repeat it.

And do we not in all this see the express image of the devil of hell in
these earthly devils, that are as restless and unweariable in mischeife as
he, and as far from laying aside their wickedness (even when they cannot
compass it) as he?

Use. 4.
Let us learn a good lesson from the devil, and his imps: they will hardly be
repelled from mischeiuous attempts, no not by Christ himself; so we on the
contrary must as hardly be driven from good purposes and practices. Which is
the rather to be learned, because we have that within us, which will make us
easily danted in good things; as Peter himself, after he had been long with
Christ, was so daunted with the voice of a damsel as he easily forsware his
Master. All Satan's instance in evil, is to bring us from instance in good,
against whom we must every way fortify our selves. First, in the subduing of
any sin or corruption, how will nature recoyle? how stirring will Satan be to
keep his holds? how many baits and objects will he present unto thee? how many
fears, and losses, and crosses (as rubs) will he cast in thy way, and all to
drive thee from the field against thy sin? But now is a time to make use of
this doctrine: Are wicked men so constant to the devil at his instance, and
must not I be constant for God at the instance of his blessed Spirit? I will
hold out by Gods grace, and if I be foiled once and again, as the Israelites
in a good cause against Benjamin, I will renew the battle the third time, I
shall at length carry away the victory: this sin is one of Satan's band, like
the captain, and I will not be driven out of the field by such a crauen that
will fly, if he be resisted. Secondly, the graces of God are as so many
precious jewels locked up in the closet of a godly heart, the devil is
instant to rob and bereave us of these; we must be as hardly persuaded to
give up these, as to be spoiled of our earthly treasure and riches.

1. Our faith were a sweet morsel to Satan: but we must resist him, steadfast
in the faith. Job will hold his faith in spite of the devil: let him loose
his goods, his health, his friends, his children, he will hold his faith, and
profess if the Lord kill him too, he will still trust in his mercy. 2. He
would steal away our love of the Saints, and with it the life of our faith,
and therefore he sets before us many infirmities of theirs, and suspicions of
our own, and some fear from others: but notwithstanding, our delight must be
in the Saints that excel in virtue. Jonathan will not be beaten off the love
to David, though in all outward respects he had little cause; only because he
saw God was with him. 3. He lays siege to our sobriety and temperance, and
lays many baits: but Joseph will not yield to the many assaults of his
Mistress. 4. He would make us weary of prayer, which is our strength; and if God
delay, he tells us he hears us not, we loose our labor: But we must wrestle
by prayer, as Iaacob, till we obtain, and as the woman of Canaan, beg once
and again till Christ hear us; if he call us dogs, so as we cannot sit at
table, let us beg the crummes (as whelps) that fall under the table. 5. He
would make us weary of our profession, is incessant in setting the malice of
the world upon us, yea great ones, multitudes and all: But the Disciples by no
whips, mockes, threats, or persecutions could be daunted, but rejoiced in them,
and went on more chearefully. 6. He would have us weary of well doing, and
beginning in the Spirit to end in the flesh: But as Nehemiah in building the
temple and wall, said to his crafty counselors, should such a one as I fly?
so let every Christian say, Should I loose all my labor, and that crown of
life that is promised to all them that are faithful to death? No, I will not
do it.

The devil took him up into an exceeding high mountain,] In this third
temptation, we are to consider two things: 1. the assault. 2. the repulse. In
the assault, two things: 1. the preparation: ^. the dart it self. In the
preparation, 1. the place. 2. the sight represented. The dart consists of 1. a
profer; All these will I give thee: 2. a condition; If thou will fall down and
worship me: 3. a reason; for they are mine, and to whomsoever I will, I give
them.

First of the place: and in it, 1. what place it was: 2. how Christ came
thither: 3. why Satan chose that place.

I. The place was the top of an exceeding high mountain. What this mountain
was, we cannot define, and the Scripture being silent in it, we may be sure it
is no article of faith. Some think it was mount Ararat, on which the Arc of
Noah stood in the flood, the highest mountain in the world. But without all
reason: for that was in Armenia, another part of the world, Genesis 8.4. And there
were a number of great hills round about Jerusalem fit enough for this purpose.
As. 1. There was mount Moriah, where Abraham offered to sacrifice his son
Isaac, where Solomon built his Temple, and wherein Christ stood in the former
temptation. But the text is plain, he was carried from thence into an higher
mountain by far. 2. There was mount Ghion, where Zadok and Nathan at David's
appointment anointed Solomon King: 1. Kin. 1.33.34.
But this was too low. 3. There was a mountain over against Jerusalem, called
mo^s offensionis, the mountain of scandal, where Solomon in his age (deceived
by outlandish wives) built an high place for Chemosh, and Molec, the
abominations of the children of Ammon and Moab, 1. King. 11.7. which high
places (so hard it is to thrust down superstition once set up) continued
standing 363. years, and were destroyed by Josiah. 4. There was mount Caluary,
where Christ suffered: but that was not so high as this mount spoken of. 5.
There was mount Oliuet, a famous mountain, about six furlongs from Jerusalem:
here David wept, flying before his son Absalom: here Christ often watched,
and prayed, and wept over Jerusalem: for it was so high as that from the top of
it (as Josephus reports) one might discern all the streets of Jerusalem, and
see a far off to the dead sea. 6. There was mount Sion, higher then all
these, which was called the mountain of the Lord: for those that have written
concerning this city, know that the foundation of it is among the holy
mountains, and among them all mount Sion was far the highest, and therefore
David made a fort there, called the city of David. 7. There were besides
these, without Jerusalem, mount Nebo, from the top of which Moses stood and
beheld all the land of Canaan, and was commanded to die. This is generally
held to be the mount, to which Christ was carried: and so could I think, were
it not that it was quite without Palestina, and not in the land of Canaan: for
Moses only there did see the good land, but must not enter into it. 8. There
were within Palestina, besides these, mount Basan, and mount Hermon, very high
hills, in comparison of which Sion is said to be a little hill, Psalm. 42.6. and
68.16. Now it is very probable, that this temptation was upon one of these
hills: but we must not be curious to determine where the Scripture does not.
Which soever it was, the text says, it was an exceeding high one.

II. How came Christ thither? Answ. After the same manner that he was formerly
transported unto the top of the pinnacle, as we have showed in the former
temptation. 1. The more to humble and abase Christ. 2. To terrify him, if it
might be, to see himself so carried and tossed by Satan.

III. Why did Satan make choice of this place? Answ. 1. Because it best fitted
his temptation, and furthers his purpose: for if he had stood in a valley, and
made a show of the world, and the glory of it, it might more easily be
discovered to be a delusion and deceit. But here is a brave prospect. Excelsa
promit (...) in excels^.
2. He is to promise mountains and great matters, and therefore brings him to
a mountain, there to view his commodities which he would barter. 3. Some say,
he chose a mountain in way of imitation of God: or rather we may say in
exprobration of him, who in the mount Nebo let Moses see all Canaan: but Satan
does more: 1. Moses must go up that mount, God carries him not, but the devil
carries Christ. 2. God lets Moses see only the land of Canaan, the devil lets
Christ see all the Kingdoms, and glory of all countries. 3. God will give a
small country, to a country of people to possess, so long as they give him his
worship, and service: but the devil will give all the world to Christ alone,
if he will but once fall down and worship him.

Hence note, Satan had Christ in the wilderness, a low and solitary place, he
could do no good upon him; he raises him extraordinarily to the pinnacle of
the Temple, and Christ is to good for him there; now he thinks him not yet
high enough, but if he can get hi^ to the top of an exceeding high mountain,
he despaires not but to obtain his purpose against him. This policy of Satan
teaches us, that,

Doctr.
Those that are in highest places, are in greatest danger of falling. And when
he uses one temptation against a man in the wilderness, in a low and mean
estate, he doubles his forces, and secondeth his assaults against a man set
aloft, and in the mountain, as his practice against our Savior teaches. Saul
while he was in a low and private estate, was dutiful and humble; but, being
raised into the throne of the kingdom, how did Satan prevail against him till
God vttely rejected him? Nay, David himself, while he was in the vallie, was
holy, full of vows, prayers, watchfulness, he was meek and merciful; but
being set in the chief seat of the kingdom (as it were in the mountain) how
soul, bloody, proud, became he by Satan's malice; as in adultery, murder, and
numbering the people was manifest?

1. Satan as he thought to have great advantage against our Savior even by the
place, Reasons. 1.
so he knows that the mountain, that is, the high places will affoard him
advantage against us: For whereas low estate keeps us careful and respective
of our selves, the mountain makes us forgetful, proud, insolent, voluptuous;
as good Hezekiah in his sickness could pray, weep, and be humble enough, but
no sooner recovered he his mountain, but he prides himself in his wealth and
treasures. David confesses of himself, that in his prosperity he said, he
should never be moved, because God had made his mountain strong, Psalm. 30.7.
Thus easily does vain confidence creep on him that sees himself stand on a
mountain, though otherwise his heart be according to God. No marvel then, if
ease slay the fools, and the prosperity of the foolish destroy them, Prou.
1.32. if Satan have them in the mountain, he needs no more, their own state
will overthrow them.

2. Satan, as he desires men in the mountain, that is, in high place, to
sin; 2
so he desires that every sinner were in a mountain or high place, because as
the place it self will draw forth that corruption which is within, so it will
hold them in their sin: For great men commonly are not more licentious then
incorrigible; hardly are they reclaimed, and who dares call them to account?
And besides, their sins are more infectious and scandalous: for all the eyes
of inferiors are upon them. A man that stands upon an high mountain, is a
fair mark, and may be seen of millions at once. So as if in the
commonwealth, Rehoboam commi^ idolatry, all Judah will do the like under
every green tree, a (...) under every green hill, 1. Kin. 14.22. In the Church,
if the high Priests contemn Christ, the people will buffet him, and spit in
his face, Matthew. 26.67. In the family, if the Fathers eat sour grapes, the
childrens teeth are set on edge. Commonly the proverbs are verified: like
Prince, like subjects; like Priest, like people; like mother, like daughter.
Nothing can lie on the mountains, but it easily slideth down into the valleys.

3. Satan herein directly opposes God in his course and proceedings: for the
Lord advancing men, 3
and carrying them into these mountains of the Church, Commonwealth, or
Family, he therefore raises them, that they should be greater instruments of
his glory, and man's good. Now Satan mightily strives to have these the greatest
instruments of Gods dishonor, and hurt of humane society. Well he knows, that
the punishment of such men's sins cease not in their own persons, but
descends on the valleys round about them. If Ahab make all Israel to sin,
all Israel shall be scattered as sheep without a shepherd. David numbers the
people, all his people are plagued: he sins with the sword, and the sword shall
never depart from his house: good Josiah met with that threatening four hundred
years after. The devil cannot bring a greater mischeife into the earth, then
by throwing down such as stand in high places of the Church and Commonwealth.

Therefore let prayer be made especially for all in authority and Use. 1.
em^nencie, 1. Tim. 2.2. Not only in respect of the burden of their calling,
and the hazard and peril of their persons; but especially because of Satan's
special malice against them, and the multitude of their temptations: the place
is slippery, and dangerous to fall. How do we puff up our selves, when our
small things go well with us? How could we be easily carried away with the
tickling of vain glory and pleasure, who scarce taste of them? Of how much
strength therefore may these be conceived in Kings and Princes, who have a sea
in comparison of our drops? Which forbids us to marvel, when we see the most
excellent Kings, David and Solomon, altogether impotent to withstand the waves
of temptation.

Besides, the devil keeps not only in the country, but in the court, and his
malice against us, stirs up his rage against our chief Rulers: as when the
Devil had a malice to Israel, he set upon (...) to number the people. Which
one consideration should stir us daily in our prayers to be mindful of our
Prince and governors, that as our prouocations bring temptation upon them, so
our petitions for them may help them through all.

Use. 2.
Such as are in any eminency or place above others, must be so much the more
watchful, and let this meditation be as an antidote to expel the poison,
swelling, and inflammation of pride, that the higher thy hill is, the more is
Satan's malice and plots against thee. If a man stand upon the top, or any
part of mount Sion, that is, be a teacher in the Church, he must know that he
is a light set upon an hill or mountain, all eyes are upon him; and therefore
Satan that stood at Iehoshuahs right hand, will not be far from him: let him
make right steps to his feet, least be treading awry, many be turned out of
the way. Let such as are eminent in profession above others, be more watchful
then others: Satan is more busy with thee, because thou shall open many
mouths against thy profession, and he will wound many through thy sides, he
will make many ashamed because of thee, and because of thee he will make Gods
enemies to blaspheme, 2. Sam. 12.14. Thy slip or fall shall make all Gath and
Askelon ring of all thy pro^ession; for they are all alike, never a good one of
them all, etc. Such as are carried into the mountain of earthly prosperity,
must labor for more strength and watchfulness, then if they were in a lower
estate: else Satan will make this condition as the dead sea, in which no grace
can live. Show me one (excepting our Lord Jesus) that ever came better from the
mountain, that is, was the better man for his prosperity. Numbers there are
that have come out like gold, brighter and purer out of the fire of affliction;
but so dangerous it is to stand upon this mount, as the Lord once and again
forewarned and charged his own people, that when they should come into the
good land which he had given them, then to beware that they waxed not fat,
and forgetful, and rebellious against him. We know that the moon being at
full is furthest from the Sun, and commonly fullness and abundance withdraw
us from our Sun of righteousness, whence we have all influence of light and
grace.

Let this point work contentment in our hearts, Use. 3.
and cause us to prize a mean and comfortable estate, wishing no mountains
but that holy mountain of God, where we shall be free from all gunshot, and
safe from all temptation. Here is an holy ambition, to affect and aspire to a
kingdom, wherein we shall reign as Kings. In the mean time, if we desire
superiority or command, let us labor to overcome sin, the devil, our
selves, and our lusts, let us depose them from reigning in our mortal bodies.
And if at any time we begin to admire our selves and others, for outward
prosperity and greatness in the world, let us turn our eyes another way, and
esteem Gods wisdom and fear above all outward happiness. This was the
wisdom of Solomon, with which God was so well pleased, that having it in his
choice to ask riches, or long life, or victory, he asked wisdom before them
all, and God gave him both that and them. Let this ever be our wisdom, to
affect goodness not greatness: this brings Satan upon us, that drives him away
from us.

The second thing in the preparation, is the sight represented, in which
consider these things: 1. what was the sight, All the kingdoms of the world,
and the glory of them. 2. how Satan represented them, he showed him. 3. how
long this sight lasted, in a moment, says Luke.

The sight was all the kingdoms of the earth, both the kingdoms themselves,
and the Majesty, beauty, glory, and order of them; Quest. But were there not
many sorrows, vexations, and tumults in the world? why does Satan show none of
these? Answ. 1. His policy and subtlety would not make show of any thing,
which would hinder his temptation, but did all to further it. His scope was to
bring Christ into love with the world, and for this purpose he must make it as
lovely as he can, as a cunning fisher must hide the hook, and show nothing but
the bait. 2. He knew that by this very trick he ouerthrewe the first Adam, to
whom he showed nothing but the fair side of the apple, and benefit and
bettering of their estate, how by eating of it they should be as Gods; but hid
all the inconvenience, that it was a breach of Gods commandment, and that the
issue was death. And so he goes about to circumuent the second Adam.

And showed him] Some think in a map. But he needed not have carried him
into a mountain for that. Neither in a vision, illuding his mind and
fantasy; because this he might have done either in the wilderness, or on the
pinnacle, if it could agree so well to the perfection of Christ's mind. But I
take it, he offered the images and representations of them all sensibly and
actually, after a wonderful and strange manner, making their images to appear
to his senses. And if a man by his art can represent to the senses in a glass,
any person or thing so lively, by which he that sees not the thing it self,
discerns a notable image of it; how much more may we think, that Satan by
his art and cunning can represent to the sense, the images of things which are
not indeed present? A lively confirmation whereof appears in his lumber, I
mean sorcerers and iuglers, who by the devils help most cunningly delude the
senses. But Christ did indeed see the images, and most glorious representations
of the world, and the kingdoms of it: the which that he might think to be the
things themselves, and the better to persuade him that he saw the things
indeed, he set him on an exceeding high mountain; notwithstanding he knew,
that the highest mountain of the world could manifest but a small part of the
whole; and if it could, yet the strongest eye of man could reach but a little
way, and were not able, at least in so small a time, to distinguish the
particulars thereof.

in a moment, (...). In accurate consideration, a moment is the fortieth part
of an hour* for a point of time is a quarter of an hour, and a moment of time
is the tenth part of a point of time. But I think we are not to take the word
so strictly, which here notes a very short time, much shorter then the
fortieth part of an hour: and with Chemnitius, I think it to be the same with
that in 1. Cor. 15.52. (...), in a moment; and explained in the next words,
(...), in the twinkling of an eye, which is indeed no time, but the beginning
rather of time, seeing there is no distinction between time past, and time to
come. Howsoever, we must take it for a very short space of time, and that the
sight was gone before Christ could well consider of it. For so the like phrase
is used concerning Sodom, that it was destroyed in a moment: for the sun
rose very fair, and before ever they could consider of such a storm, the Lord
showred down fire and brimstone.

Now the reason why the devil used such a speedy and quick representation,
was, to ravish Christ suddenly, and stir up his affections by the absence of
it, to desire to see it again: dealing with Christ as we with our little
children; when we would make them earnestly desire a thing, we let them see it,
and hide it again, give it them into their hands, and suddenly take it away
again. So did Satan. Secondly, Satan might have another trick in it, to
disturb the mind of our Savior: for as a sudden flash or light does dazzle
the eyes of the body, so does a sudden flash or sight of this or that object,
easily dazzle the eyes of the mind, and in stead of pleasure with it, at least
it brings some trouble and perturbation. Howeuer, he thought it would fit and
bring on his temptation. Thirdly, shadows will abide no looking on, no
examining, and therefore the devil is so quick in taking them in.

It is an old practice of the devil, to let death into the soul, Doctr. 1.
by the window of the senses, and especially by the sight: for here he would
overcome Christ by the sight of the world, and the glory of it. Thus he had
gained Eve to sin by the sight of the apple, which was beautiful to the eye:
by hearing that she should be as God, if she did taste it: by touching, tasting,
and pleasing all her senses with it. The sons of God saw the daughters of men
that they were fair, and took them to them for wives: which was the cause of
the deluge. Ahab saw the vineyard of Naboth lie so conveniently to his
demeanes, as he must needs compass it by murder.

1. The senses are the near servants of the soul: Reasons. 1.
if Satan can make them untrusty, he knows he can by them easily rob the
soul, yea and slay it. For senses work affections, and affections blind
judgment. David sees Bathsheba, presently affects her, his violent affection
blinds his judgment, he must have her company though it cost Vriahs life. I
saw (said Achan) among the spoil a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred
shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels; and I coueted them,
and took them, Josh. 7.21. How was Adam otherwise deceived by Eve, but first
in his affection, and then in his judgment?

2. As Satan lays his baits in all the senses to steal the heart, so
especially in the eyes, 2
dealing as the chapman that would vent his wares, he lays it forth on the
stall that men may see it, and oftentimes the very fight of it, without further
offer draws on the buyer to a bargain. He knows he loses not all, if he
gain but an unlawful look: because there is sin begun, though not
perfected.

3
3. The sense is to the soul as a door to the house: A man that would come in,
or send any thing into an house, must go in and send it in by the door. Even
so, although the devil by his spiritual nature, can and does apply himself
to our spirits without our senses, yet other tempters cannot reach the soul so
immediately. Eve could not work Adams heart directly, but by the outward
senses of hearing, and seeing especially sent in the temptation. Poisons cannot
reach the heart, unless by the senses they be drawn in. So wicked mates
cannot convey their corruption one into an other, but by the outward senses;
hearing their wicked and incentiue speeches, and seeing their graceless and
infecting actions. But besides this, so full of malice is our spiritual
adversary, that he would not only immediately take up our hearts, but fill up
all our senses, and by them continually sends in burning lusts, and by the
same door covetous desires, and by the same ambitious and aspiring thoughts,
and by the same reuengefull intentions, and such like, till the house be full
of wickedness.

4. Satan knows that God has appointed the senses for the good and comfort
both of body and soul, 4
especially the sight and hearing to be the senses of discipline, to furnish
the mind with knowledge of God, with faith which is by hearing, with hope of
his gracious promises, with heavenly meditations, and contemplation of his
great works which our eyes behold. Now Satan would cross all this gracious
constitution of God, and make the lights of the body, be means to blind the
mind; he would fill up the senses, and take them up with such objects, as
shall not only corrupt the heart, but keep out those means of grace, which
the Lord would by them convey into the heart: so that the soul should be
further poisoned by the same means, which the Lord has prepared as an
antidote, by which natural poison and corruption should be expelled.

This doctrine enioyneth a diligent custody of the senses. Use. 1.
A good householder suspecting thieves and robbers, will be sure to keep his
doors and windows fast. And we knowing that our senses are the doors and
windows of our souls, must look to these doors, lock them, bar them,
bolt them fast, that the devil enter not this way. True it is, that the inside
must first be made clean: for out of the heart proceeds an evil eye, Mark.
7.22. But whosoever is resolved to keep his heart in any rightnes, must think
it his next care to shut out, and keep out whatsoever might be let in, to
decline it and turn it from God again. What made the holy Prophet, Psalm.
119.37. pray so earnestly, that God would turn his eyes from beholding vanity,
but that he knew, that even a good heart (such as his was) could never hold
out, unless the outward senses, especially the eyes, which by a Synechdoche are
there put for the rest, (both because they are special factors of the soul,
and because of the multitude of their objects, and in regard of the quickenesse
of sight above all the rest of the senses laid together) were well
safe-guarded? Can the heart or marketplace of a town or city be safe from
the siege of the enemy, if the gates be cast open, or the walls demolished, or
the ramparts bared of their fence and munition? Why did Job make such covenants
with his eyes, but that he knew that without such a fence every object would be
as a snare to entrappe his soul? Job. 31.1. Nay, let an heart never so
seasoned with grace, suffer the senses to leake, the soul is in danger of
shipwreck. Was there ever heart of ordinary man or woman more innocent, or
more filled with grace, then Eues in her innocence? And yet when as Satan set
upon her senses, he sent in by them such poison, as wrought death unto all her
posterity.

Rules for the ordering of our senses aright.

1. Beware of the life of sense, which is a brutish life. 2. Pet. 2.12. the
Apostle speaks of men lead by sensuality, even as the bruit beasts, who
follow sense and appetite without all restraint. Thus did the Gentiles, who
were therefore given up to a reprobate sense, Romans 1.24. And the danger of this
estate Solomon notes, Eccles. 11.9. when he bids the young man walk in the
sight of his own eyes, and after the lusts of his heart; but withal, Remember
that for all this he must come to judgment. Let such think hereon, that
think it is free to give up their senses to feed themselves upon every object
themselves please.

2. Consider that God made the senses to minister to a right ordered heart, and
not the heart to follow the senses: and therefore the heart must be watched,
that it walk not after the eye, which is to inuert Gods order. And what a
deluge of sin ouerfloweth the soul, when the understanding is buried in the
senses, and the heart drowned in sinful appetites? David gives his eye leave
to wander, and look lustfully after Bathsheba: and what waves of misery one
ouertaking another did he bring into his soul? And what marvel then if
natural men neglecting their duty, in taking off their eyes from unchaste
objects, never rest till they come to have eyes full of adultery, 2. Pet.
2.14. not ceasing to sin, according to our Saviors speech, Matthew. 6.23. If
the eye be evil, all the body is dark, yea and the soul too.

3. Keep the parts of Christian armor upon thy senses, that thou lie not open
there. A valiant captain knowing that the enemy is easier kept out, then
beaten out of a city, has great care to plant his garrison about the gates
and walls; there he sets his most faithful watch and ward, there he plants his
chief munition and ordnance. Had David kept his armor on his eye, he had not
been so foiled by Bathsheba: If on his ear, he had not been so injurious to
Mephibosheth, by means of slandring Ziba, 2. Sam. 16.3, 4. Solomon wishes us,
Not to look upon the color of the wine in the cup, that is, with too much
pleasure to stir up desire. He would have us keep our fence upon our ears,
not to give ear to a flatterer or whisperer, but brow-beat him, and drive him
away with an angry countenance. The Apostle Paul would have our ears shut
against evil and corrupt words, which corrupt good manners. Daniel desires not
to taste of the Kings dainties, nor will pollute himself with them, chap. 1. v.
8. And so we must fence our whole man, as we may not touch any unclean thing,
and yield nothing to the course of waters.

4. Feed thy senses with warrantable objects: 1. God: 2. His word: 3. The
creatures: 4. Thy brethren: 5. Thy self.

First, our eyes are made to see God himself, here below as we can in his
backe-parts, hereafter as we would, face to face. And therefore a base thing it
were to fix them upon the vain pleasures and profits of this life: This is
fitter for bruit beasts, that have no higher object. Again, what fairer or
fitter object can we choose for our senses, then himself that made them with
all their faculties, and gives us so much comfort by them? Pro. 20.12. The
hearing ear and seeing eye, God made them both: and both of them as all things
else ^e made for himself. Further, where can we better place our senses, then
upon him from whom all our help comes? how ought our eyes to be continually
lifted up in holy and fervent prayers and praises, considering both our
continual necessities and supplies? So David, I lift up mine eyes unto the
hills from whence my salvation comes, Psalm. 121.1. and, As the eye of the
handmaid is lifted up to the hand of her Mistress, so are our eyes unto thee,
Psalm. 123.1. Lastly, how can we place our senses better, then upon him who is
the most pleasant and durable object? To see God in Christ reconciled, to hear
and know him become our father, is so rauishing a sight as the Saints have
run through fire and water to apprehend it. And for the continuance, it will
feed the senses everlastingly; yea when the senses themselves decay and wax
dull, this object shall feed them, and be never the less sweet. And therefore
as Solomon advises, Eccles. 12.1. while thou have thy senses, fix them upon
this object; Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before they be
dark that look out at the windows, etc. If a man set his senses and feed
them upon any outward object, wealth, honor, pleasure, buildings, and the
like: we may justly say to him, as our Savior to his disciples, when they
gazed upon the beautiful workmanship of the Temple; Are these the things your
eyes gaze upon? verily, the time comes, when one stone shall not be left upon
another vndemolished. The like may be said of all earthly objects whatsoever.
Only this object shall grow more and more glorious and desirable.

Secondly, God made our senses to be exercised in his holy word, which leads
us to himself: Heb. 5.14. the Apostle requires, that Christians should have
(...), senses exercised in the word: Pro. 2.2. let thine ear hear wisdom.
1. Hence comes faith, which is by hearing. 2. Hence we draw the comforts of the
Scriptures, which are the consolations of God in our trouble. 3. Hence are we
admonished, directed, and wholesomly corrected. Pro. 15.31. The ear that
hears the rebuke of life, shall dwell among wise men. 4. The danger of
neglect is great: 1. he that turns his ear from hearing the law, his prayer
is abominable: 2. uncircumcised ears resist the holy Ghost, Act. 7.51. 3.
itching ears that turn from the truth, do (by Gods just judgment) turn
unto fables, 2. Tim. 4.3. 5. It is a sign of a man that has given his heart
unto God: for he that gives his heart, will give his senses too, knowing that
God requires both. Pro. 23.26. My son, give me thy heart, and let thine eyes,
that is, thy senses, delight in my ways. And our Savior says, He that has
an ear to hear, let him hear. Seeing therefore that this is so notable a
means of guiding our senses, let us more carefully give up, and take up our
eyes and ears with the sight and sound of Gods word upon all occasions, in the
hearing and reading of the Scripture. I would ask the most carnal man that
is, whether this in sound judgment be not a better object for our senses then
bowls, or tables, and fitter for all times, especially for the Sabbath.

Thirdly, God made our senses to profit our selves by his creatures, that by
them we might glorify him their Creator, and not by them corrupt or ensnare
our selves. Isa. 40.26. Lift up your eyes aloft, and behold who created all
these things. This use David makes, Psalm. 8. when I see the heavens, the
earth, and the works of thy hands, then said I, Lord what is man that thou art
so mindful of him? and concludes the Psalm thus, How excellent is thy name
through all the world? And why? 1. The invisible things of God, his power, and
divinity, and eternity, were made visible to the very Gentiles by things
created, Romans 1.20. And shall we either not look on them, or so look upon
them as they to make us inexcusable? shall we only enjoy the natural use and
no spiritual or divine use from them? 2. Consider that God for this purpose,
has made the countenance of man, not as the beasts groueling on the earth, but
erected unto heaven: and he has made the eye of man not as the beasts, but (as
Anatomists observe) has given it one muscle which they want, whereby he can
turn his eye directly upwards with admirable quicknes; that it should not so
fix it self upon any thing below as the covetous eye does, but by occasion of
things below turn it self upward to their Creator. Yea, he has compassed our
eyes with brows, and lids, and fences from dust and earth, that though we
look sometimes on the earth, yet the least dust or earth should not get into
them. 3. Let us labor to use our senses in beholding Gods works, as they in
Ioh. 2.23. that saw the works of Christ; of whom it is said, Many believed in
the name of Christ, seeing the works that he did. So let the works which we
see God has done, be at least inducements to believe him so much the more.

Fourthly, God made our senses in respect of our brethren, both to benefit
them, and our selves by them. 1. Our eyes to behold their misery, to pity
them, to relieve them. Turn not thine eyes from thine own flesh. Herein the
unmerciful Priest and L'euit were condemned by the pitiful Samaritan. Our
ears to hear the cry of the poor: Prou. 21.13. he that turns his ear from
the cry of the poor, himself shall cry and not be heard. Numbers never make
this use of their ears: but God has a deaf ear for them. 2. Our eyes to see
the good example of our brethren, to imitate them, to glorify God for them.
Our ears to hear their godly counsels, admonitions, reproves, and so be
bettered by them. 3. Our eyes to see and consider their danger, to pull them
out of their infirmities, the fire, and to cast out the mote of their eyes. Our
ears to hear what is fit to be spoken of them, to defend their good names if
they be traduced. For God has given us two ears, not rashly to receive every
information, but to reserve one for the party, least he be condemned unheard,
vnconuinced.

Fifthly, and lastly, God made our senses in respect of our selves, not only to
be faithful keepers of the body, but diligent factors and agents for our own
souls: as 1. That our eyes should ever be looking homewards, and to the end
of our way, as quick and expedite travelers, and not fix themselves upon
every thing we see here below. This is done by heavenly conversation. 2. Our
ears should be bored to the perpetual service and obedience of our God, as
our Lord himself was; Psalm. 40.7. Thou have bored mine ear: alluding to that
ceremony in the law, Exodus 21.6. If a servant would not part from his Master,
his ear must be bored and nailed to the post of the house, and thus he became
a perpetual servant, he was nailed and fixed to that house and service; So we
must yield an obedient ear, as Solomon calls it, unto the counsels, will,
and commandment of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ.

3. Our eyes were made to be conduits of tears, for our own sin and
misery, and for the sin and wretchedness of other men. Psalm. 119.136. David's
eyes gushed out with rivers of tears, because men keep not the word: how wept
he then for his own sins, that wept so for others? Good Lot his righteous
soul was vexed in hearing and seeing the unclean conversation of the
Sodomites. Thus should our senses be so far from conceiving pleasure in
sinful objects, as these must be the continual grief of our souls. And
can we indeed look upon our selves, and not see something which is a brand of
our sin? or can we behold any creature, and not see some express prints and
marks of our sin, and vanity upon it? Surely this one meditation would be
effectual to keep us from casting our eyes upon unlawful objects, and so from
making our selves a prey to the devil.

Use. 2.
This serves to reprove such as fail in this watch of the senses: for who does
not? yet some far more dangerously. Such as have in their houses Popish
pictures and images, which are alluring harlots, corrupters of the heart, which
is an opening of the door to the devil; a sign of a man willing to be
seduced. Experience shows, that when a man is in love with such images, he
easily falls out with Gods image in himself and Gods children. 2. Such as
delight in lascivious pictures, and filthy portraytures of naked men or women,
in whole or such parts as may stir the corruption of the heart, which should
be beaten down by all means. We need bring no oil to this flame. Yet the
devil has gotten such pictures in request in this wanton age, wherein every
thing is almost proportional. 3. Such are far from this watch of their
senses, as so attire and disguise themselves, or lay open their nakedness to
ensnare the senses of others. Let them not say, they think no hurt in it,
unless they can be sure that no other think hurt by it. 4. Such as like the
images have ears and hear not, eyes and see not; care not to hear the word
or read it, never taste Gods goodness in it, neither does the breath of heavenly
life ever pass through their noses. 5. Such as frequent wicked company, and
delight in the ungracious actions and speeches that they hear and see, or can
digest them without reproof or dislike manifested. The devil has a
through-fare among such companies, who are conspired against God and goodness.
Add unto these such as read, or have in their houses lascivious and wanton
books, teachers of lewdness. Add also stage players and their beholders,
that cast open all gates and walls to the devil. 6. The covetous eye, whereof
Solomon says, Eccles. 4.4. his eye is not satisfied with riches, neither does
he say, For whom do I thus labor?

In that Satan would draw Christ to the love of the world, and thereby makes no
doubt but to ensnare and cast him down, we learn; that,

The love of the world easily makes a man a prey and spoil to the devil.
Satan well knew, Doctr. 2.
that if he could get Christ to fall down to the world, he would easily fall
down to him. Where by the world, I understand not the goodly workmanship of
God in the frame of the heavens and earth, which we must love and admire: but
all the riches, honors, pleasures, profits, and allurements of it, without
God, or before God: as when men are willing servants and slaves to worldly
desires and corruptions. 1. Tim. 6.10. The desire of money, is the root of all
evil, a fruitful mother of much mischeife. There is no sin so impious, so
unnatural and barbarous, that a man in love with the profits of the world will
stick at. And more plainly, ver. 9. They that will be rich, fall into
manifold temptations and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which
drown men in perdition and destruction: which in sense is all one with this,
That such a one makes himself a willing spoil and prey to the devil. Hence
they are called deceitful riches, because they easily lead us out of ths right
way. Matthew. 13.22. and Job, 18.8. The wicked walks upon snares, and the grin
shall take his heel.

1. The love of the world banisheth the love of God out of the soul. He that
is a lover of the world, is an hater of God. Iam. 4.4. Reasons. 1.
Know ye not, that the amity of the world, is enmity to God? Whosoever
therefore will be a friend of the world, makes himself an enemy to God: now
what sin will an enemy of God stick at? And the Apostle John plainly
diuorceth these two which can never agree in one, 1. Ioh. 2.15. If any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him. And if the love of God sway
not the heart, Satan will easily incline it to any sin.

2. Where there is the love of the world, that heart has already renounced God
in heaven, and given it self to be possessed, 2
ruled, and commanded by the god of the world. For look what a man cheifely
loves, he not so much possesses it as is possessed by it. Whence the Apostle
is not afraid to call covetousness idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5. and, Coloss. 3.5. not
only because the chief love, but the chief trust, hope, and confidence goes
with them. They say to the wedge of gold, thou art my hope. And further, as the
heathen idolaters worshipped and served gods of gold and silver, so these serve
and obey their golden and silver god, wherein they take up their chief desires
and contentment. Now having denied the God of heaven, and thrust himself out
of his protection, a man becomes to be in the power of the devil, and ruled at
his will.

3
3. The love of the world spoils us of our armor and strength, by which we
should be fenced from Satan's subtilties. For, 1. Whereas our chief fence is in
Gods word, it first intercepteth the word, and estrangeth the heart from it:
as, Ezech. 33.31. They sit before thee, and hear thy words, but their hearts
go after their covetousness: secondly, it choaketh the word, that it becomes
as seed cast among thorns, which choke it presently: thirdly, it scorns the
word, as may appear, Luke 16.14. These things heard the Pharisees which were
covetous, and mocked. Now is not such an one easily snared by the devil, who
is thus disaffected to Gods word? Is not he easily bound, that wants, yea
scorns his weapons? 2. The love of the world, whether the pleasures, profits,
or glory of it, as a thief steals and robs our graces which are another
chief part of our strength. Good Hezekiah a little tickled with vainglory,
made himself and his land a prey and spoil to the enemy. Wise Solomon loved
too much the unlawful pleasures of the world, and how did it rob him of his
wisdom? The Disciples while yet Christ was with them, were stirred with love
and debate for superiority and greatness, which did much hinder them, and
took up their thoughts when they might have attended to better things. How
many for love of the world and preferment fall from their first love, abate
their zeal, become cold and indifferent, as the times are.

4
4. The love of the world where it is rooted, delivers a man so far into the
hands of Satan, as he easily falls from all show of goodness, and dangerously
reuolts from all the goodness that seemed to be in him. The young man that came
to Christ with many good shows and desires, hearing of selling all, and giving
to the poor, goes away heavily, and we hear no more of him. Demas once a
companion of Paul, but easily forsook the truth, when he embraced the present
world. Judas an example almost without example, a disciple at Christ's elbow,
endued with excellent gifts Apostolical, of doctrine, of miracles, etc. having
his heart glewed to the world, for a trifle fell from his place, from all the
affection he had sembled to his Master, from the society of his fellow
disciples, and stood with them that betrayed him.

5. Experience shows, how when Satan has thrust the love of the world into a
man's heart, he has power enough; 5
1. To bind that man's hands from the works of piety and mercy. He is a bad
tenant; the more land he holds, the less homage he does unto God. And as for
works of mercy, he will not part with his crummes, like the rich man in the
Gospel. And as he lives altogether unprofitable to others, so to himself; he
has no care of his salvation: Thou fool, this night shall they take away thy
soul. 2. As he has no power to do any good for God or man, so he will suffer
nothing. A man loving the world flies affliction for Christ: Matthew. 13.21. when
the sun rises, he withers: when persecution comes, he is offended, and falls
away to the hinderance of many. They that mind earthly things, are enemies to
the cross of Christ, Phil. 3.19.

Oh therefore love not the world, nor the things in the world, Use. 1.
1. Ioh. 2.15. A necessary exhortation to us, to whom it is as natural to love
the world, as for water to run down a hill. And who can hardly affect it,
without being infected with it? Hereunto lay hold on these motives. 1.
Consider how hard it is to love God, and the world too: even as hard, as to
look with the same eye (says Augustine) up to heaven, and down to the earth
at the same time. The more love a woman bestows upon a stranger, the less she
loves her husband: whence S. James is bold to call worldlings, adulterers and
adulteresses, c. 4.4. whom the Lord will not endure to dally, and sport, and go
a whoring after the world; Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.

2. Consider that a course lead in lusts, Ephesians. 2.3.
is fitter for the Gentiles then those that profess the teaching of grace;
Tit. 2.11. for the grace which has appeared, teaches us to deny worldly
lusts. Our relation to Christ, of whom we are called Christians, must draw our
affections out of the world: for, 1. He has chosen us out of the world, so
that now he professes of us, They are not of the world, Ioh. 15.19. 2. He gave
himself to deliver us out of this present evil world, Galat. 1.4. 3. No man
has benefit by Christ's death, but he that with the Apostle, is crucified to
the world, and the world to him, Gal. 6.14. 4. The world as it has no part of
his death, (for he dies not for the world) so no part in his intercession* Ioh.
17. I pray not for the world. 5. In the entrance of our profession, we have not
only renounced the world, but proclaimed and vowed war against it: and
therefore shall prove no better then runagate soldiers, yea Apostates, if we
fight not against it. The love of the world is a leaving of Christ's colors.

3. Consider what cause there is in the world to love it: 1. In respect of God;
it is contrary to his nature; he is holy, pure, righteous; the world lies in
unrighteousness. It is contrary to all his commandments: He commands holiness
and sanctification: it incites to all uncleanness in soul and body: he commands
truth, sobriety, etc. it teaches to lie, swear, curse, slander, and
circumuent. He commands all fruits of the spirit: it inioynes all the works
of the flesh. He commands to give our goods to the needy: it wills us to get
our neighbors. 2. In respect of it self: it is changeable, variable,
inconstant: and will thou affect that which thou can not hold or enjoy? 3. In
respect of thy self: is it not madness, excessiuely to love that which does
thee so much harm, pricks as thorns, and peirceth with so many sorrows,
crosses, losses, persecutions? which if thou be good will fight against
thee, and pursue thee with mortal hatred, and only slays those which resist
it not.

4. Consider we what strangers and pilgrims we are in the world, and so be
moved to lay bridles upon our affections: which is the Apostles argument, 1.
Pet. 2.11. Dearly beloved, a^ pilgrims and strangers abstain from earthly
lusts. Let us estrange our affections from this world, and deal as wise
travelers, that make the greatest Cities but through-fares to their own home.

Use. 2.
Let this doctrine moderate our affections in seeking and having, yea and not
having the things of this life. This is the common error, that men look
altogether upon the beauty, glory, and fair side of the world, and wealth of
it; but never look upon the inconveniences of them, and how strong they are to
pull us away from God, or how apt to make us a spoil to Satan: which one
consideration would somewhat abate our heat and affection toward them. How
ambitiously do many affect promotion and great places, not considering in what
flipperie places their feet are set? How eagerly do they desire wealt^, as
though it had no power to draw the heart from God, and the wealth of heaven?
How unsatiably do they pursue pleasure, not considering how the devil insnares
them, and makes them lovers of pleasure, more then lovers of God.

Surely were men acquainted with their own hearts, they would not suffer them
so to roaue in these desires. Oh, says one, if I were a rich man, how liberal
would I be to the poor? But alas, he knows not what spirit he is of: the
devil would make no doubt to change his mind, if his state were changed, and
make of this liberal man either a prodigal, or an usurer, or an oppressor,
and do much more mischeife then he can in his low estate. Oh, says another,
were I in high place, I would right wrongs, and set things in order. But so
said Absalom, and yet who did more wrong then he, deflowring his fathers
concubines, and deposing (if he could) his father himself. And such right
would many do, if they were in higher place. All which is an argument how open
we lie to Satan in such estates.

To conclude this point, observe these few rules: 1. Put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and care not to fulfill the flesh. Romans 13.14.
2. Use the world as not using it, 1. Cor. 7.31. 3. Count all things dung for
Christ, as Paul did, Phil. 3.8. whose blood is set against and above all
corrupt things. 4. Pray that thy heart may be set upon Gods statutes, and not
inclined to covetousness, Psalm. 119.36. First seek the kingdom of God and
his righteousness, etc. 5. Whether thou have the world or no, show not thy
self a lover of it, by increasing thy wealth, or bettering thy estate, by
swearing, lying, deceiving: rejoice in no part of it, which God reaches not to
thee by good means: desire none but that on which thou may crave a
blessing, and for which thou may return praise: hold none but with moderate
affection and mind to forgo, when God calls for the whole or any part to good
uses: use none but with sobriety as not using it, and that ever to Gods glory,
and the good of men.

VERSE. 9. All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.

NOW after the preparation, standing in the choice of a fit place, and
presenting a glorious vision, we come to the dart or temptation it self: in
which there is, 1. a profer: All these will I give thee. 2. a reason: For they
are mine, and to whomsoever I will I give them. 3. the condition: If thou will
fall down and worship me.

And first of the profer. Before he had showed his wares, now he tells the
price. All these] here is no pinching, nor parting of the matter: but 1. Christ
shall be an absolute Monarch, none shall share with him: There is the extent of
the profer, he will part with all. 2. The quality of it; All these, the glory,
beauty, wealth, and all that can be desired in the world: all that he saw, and
nothing else: he would give him unmixed and vnblended glory and honor, without
sorrow, trouble, shame, or vexation: for he saw none of them. 3. I will give
thee: but he will not barter or sell these so dear to Christ as he would to
another, but he will deal kindly with him, he will as good as give them to
him, if he will but make a leg, and thank him for them.

Note here the nature of all the devils promises; they seem to be liberal
and very fair, Doctr.
whereas indeed they are miserably foul and deceitful. Who could expect more
frank and plain dealing then is here pretended? but look a little nearer, we
shall see it vanishing into nothing but deceit and mischeife. For 1. What is
this great all that he makes profer of? A great catch, just nothing, but
shadows and representations of things, in themselves nothing at all but the
show he had made. 2. As this great all was but a show, so it was but for a
moment: for shadows cannot continue: and what were Christ the better if he had
been put in possession of the things themselves, if they so suddenly vanish
away before he can give a sight of them? 3. His best and largest promises here
are but in the transitory kingdoms of this life, which all pass away as a
shadow, so as if he had offered and could have performed the things themselves,
it had been no great matter: he never offers and makes good any sound grace,
or the things of Gods kingdom, which are things only worth harkening after.
4. Will he give all the kingdoms, and all the glory of them to Christ alone?
why, what righteousness or justice could be herein? will he rob and spoil all
other Kings, and rulers in the world of their right and sovereignty, which God
had invested them in, and this all at once, and in a moment? 5. Whereas he
pretends a gift, he intends a dear bargain: and offering nothing but pure and
unmixed glory, he would rob Christ our head and all his members at once of all
joy and happiness both external and eternal. Of this kind are all his
promises: be promised to Eve deity, but it proved mortallity and misery: he
promised Cai^ respect and love, if he could make Abel out of the way; but it
proved the casting of himself out from the face of God, and his fathers
family.

1. He that means not in true dealing to perform any thing, Reasons. 1.
may promise as much as he will. Satan meant not to give Christ one kingdom,
and he may as well promise all as one. 2
2. His enmity and hatred of God, and man's salvation, makes him large in his
promises: he knows how s^^ly temptations on the right hand steal into the
heart, and that no enemy is so dangerous as he that comes in pretense of
kindness. When he seeks to draw man to hell with him, he takes on him to
teach him how to become a God. When Christ was to suffer, he would have him to
spare himself, to hinder man's salvation: he will offer kingdoms, all
kingdoms, with all the wealth and pleasure of them. Satan herein deals as
Iaacobs sons with the Sichemites: they made very fair promises, that if they
would be circumcised, they would give their daughters, and take their
daughters, and dwell together as one people, Genesis 34.16. but they talked
deceitfully, v. 13. intending only to revenge upon them, as they did when the
males were sore by means of their circumcising. Satan can promise a victory to
Ahab, but it is to chase him before his enemy to confusion. 3. He knows man's
credulity and folly, 3
who is easily taken with fair words which makes fools feign, their eyes
being wholly upon things before them. Besides, howsoever our blessed Lord here
was fenced that the least inordinate affection could not fasten upon him,
although he had all the objects in the world to move him, yet he commonly
finds men and women fitted for his turn, doting upon the world, and needs no
such large offers as here are made to Christ, but for less commodity and glory
then that in one kingdom will fall down and worship him. 4
4. Satan is so much the larger in his promises, to imitate God, whom he sees
encouraging his servants by making covenant with them, and promising them all
the good things of this life and that to come, as to Abraham, All that thou
see I will give thee. Now to draw men from Gods covenant, if it were
possible, and to disgrace the same, Satan seeks to get men in league with him,
by larger promises of the world then ever God made to one man, because that
carries their whole desires: and as God for the ratifying of his covenant has
appointed Sacraments and seals, so the devil has certain words, figures,
characters, ceremonies, and charms for the confirmation of his league with
them, and their faith in that league.

Hence observe a difference between Gods promises, Use. 1.
and the devils.

1. They differ in the matter. Satan profers earthly shadows, earthly
kingdoms, things that glance through the sense, worldly things which may be
perceived, and thrust into the eye and senses all at once, Act. 25.23.
the best of which is but a fantasy; as Paul calls the great pomp of Agrippa
and Bernice, things of a moment for continuance, that last as long as the
fullness of the moon, scarce seen but vanishing. But the matter of Gods
promises is the kingdom, not of earth, but of heaven, and the glory thereof,
to which all earthly things are but appendices: things which cannot be
shadowed: for the eye cannot see, nor the ear hear, neither can it enter into
the heart of an earthly man, to conceive what God has prepared for them that
love him, 1. Cor. 2.9. The great promises of God are matters of faith, not of
sense; and for continuance, he promises a kingdom unshaken, eternal,
reserved in the heavens; a glory not withering or fading, unlike the glory of
flesh: of all which the Prophet says, it is like the flower of the field, Isa.
40.6.

2. They differ in the scope and aim of them. Gods promises all serve to
provoke and encourage men to lay hold upon the covenant of life, to draw men
nearer God in faith and obedience: 2. Cor. 7.1. Seeing we have these precious
promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,
and grow up unto full (...) in the fear of God. But Satan's promises tend to
fix (...) world, as here he would make Christ the greatest (...) it, to
withdraw men from God and their covenant with him, to pull them from the
service of the God of heaven, to worship himself, or serve their lusts, or
embrace the world, or bow to any thing but the true God.

3. They differ in the accomplishment. God is ever as good or better then his
word: Tit. 1.2. God who cannot lie has promised. To David, (as Nathan
witnesses in his reproof, 2. Sam. 12.8.) he gave his Lords house, his Lords
wives, his Lords kingdom, and if that had been little, he would have given
him more. To Solomon he promised long life, or wealth, or wisdom, and in the
accomplishment he gives him both life, and wealth, and wisdom. But Satan is
never so good as his word, but a liar in all his promises. For, 1. He wants
power to perform, when he promises that which is none of his, as the
kingdoms of the world. Or, 2. He wants purpose and will to perform his
promise: For, had he a purpose and mind to have given Christ the kingdoms of
the world, if he had had power? Does not he envy to every man the fruition of
any creature of God? Can he willingly affoard a good man a good moment? And did
not he more malign Christ's good and comfort then all other, because he
exceeded all other in grace and Gods image? Or 3. wherein he has power and
purpose to be an honest devil of his word, it is with a far more mischeiuous
purpose: as here if he could have given the whole world, he would for Christ's
overthrow: for what cares he for the world, or what use can he make of it, but
to make it a bait and train to catch men by it into his own destruction. The
ground hereof is this; As every promise of God is a testimony of his love, so
every promise of Satan is a token of his malice. An example of the devils
faithfulness we have in our own Chronicles: In the reign of Edward the
first, when the Welchmen rebelled, their captain resorted to a coniurer for
counsel, whether he should go on in the intended war against the King, or
no: yes (said the devil) go (...) in thy purpose; for thou shall ride through
cheap side with a crown on thy head: and so he did indeed, but it was off,
and he was carried in triumph as a prey to the King.

This may justly reprove and shame many professed Christians, that will scarce
give Gods promises of grace and life the hearing, though they are founded in
Christ, in whom they are all yea, and amen, flowing from his love, and tending
to our eternal happiness with himself. Many will not be brought to hear them;
many hardly when they have nothing else to do; and many hear them as things
not concerning themselves; for then would they take more delight in them. But
if Satan promise any earthly kingdom or profit, he has our ears, our hearts
at command, all our speech runs upon the world, our desires and hopes are for
earth and earthly things: and being thus earthly-minded, how expose we our
selves to Satan's assaults, and offer our selves to be won by his most
treacherous promises.

This teaches us what to think of that doctrine and religion, Use. 2.
that teaches men to be promise* breakers: what may we think of it, but to be
a treacherous, unfaithful, diabolical religion? But such is the Romish
religion, as we may easily see in two or three instances.

1. In that article of the Council of Constance, that Faith is not to be kept
with heretics: that is, Protestants: and so brake promise with John Hus, who
had not the Emperors only, but the Popes safe conduct. Against the examples
of good Joshua, who kept promise (though rashly made) with the Gibeonites, and
with the harlot of Jericho* and of David, who kept truth and promise with
Shimei, a seditious and cursing wretched traitor.

2. The Church of Rome teaches by the doctrine of equivocation, to break the
promise of a lawful oath, before a lawful Magistrate, and teaches the
lawfulness thereof. But the Scripture condemns a double heart, and the
deceitful tongue: and proclaims woe against them that trust in lying words,
Ier. 7.8. and that make falsehood their refuge. In lib. de fide cum haeretic^s
seruanda.
Yea, Molanus a great and learned Papist concludes, sincere faedera and
iuramenta sunt intelligenda, all leagues, and especially oaths, are sincerely
to be understood, and condemns plainly such mockeries and dalliance with
promises and compacts, by one or two instances; as of him that made truce with
his enemy for thirty days, and wasted his enemies country and camps only in
the night: and of Aurelianus the Emperor, who coming before a town Tijana,
and finding the gates shut, to animate his soldiers, with great anger said, I
will not leave a dog in the town: they hoping for the spoil, bestirred
themselves to ransacke the town; but being won, he would not give them
leave to spoil it, but bad them leave never a dog in it, and let the goods
alone. This was but a dalliance, condemned by the Papist himself: and yet had
more color of truth then Popish equivocation can have.

3. The Romish Church teaches men to break promises and oaths with lawful
and Christian Princes, exempting subjects from obedience, and putting swords,
dags, daggers, powder, and all deadly plots into their heads and hands, against
the Lords anointed. A treacherous and deuillish doctrine.

Use. 3.
We see also what house treacherous and deceitful persons descend of, such as
care not how much they promise and how little they perform, men most unlike
unto God, and resembling their father the devil, who is most lavish and
prodigal in his promises, when he knows he has neither power nor purpose to
perform; men of great tongues, which swell as mountains, but of little hands,
not performing mole-hills. Of these Solomon speaks, Pro. 25.14. He that
glories of a false gift, (that is, speaks of great things that he will do
for his neighbor, but fails in the accomplishment) is like a cloud and wind
without rain. A cloud seems to offer and promise rain, but the wind takes it
away, and frustrates a man's expectations. And the same is true of all windy
promises. Which we must carefully avoid, and use these rules against
slipperines in promise: 1. If a man would be like God, who cannot lie in his
promises, he must strive against it. But Satan is a liar from the beginning,
and the father of lies and liars. 2. Faithfulness in contracts is the sinew of
humane society, which Satan would have cracked, that he may bring all to
confusion. 3. The heathens that were given up by God to a reprobate sense, are
branded with this mark, they are truce breakers, Romans 1.31. 4. It is a mark
of a man in the state of grace, who has obtained remission of sins, that in
his spirit is no guile, Psalm. 32.2. 5. A note of a man that shall dwell in Gods
holy and heavenly mount, is this, he speaks the truth from his heart, Psalm.
15.2. and, Revel. 14.5. They only shall stand on mount Sion, and sing before
the throne, who have no guile in their mouths. Especially we must be careful
of two promises, whereof God and the Congregation have been witnesses: as, 1.
That of baptism, which we must have a special care to look unto: for, if we
fail in keeping touch with God, no marvel if we fail with men. 2. That of
marriage, which the Prophet calls the covenant of God, Mal. 2.14.

THE second thing in this profer, is the reason annexed, Luke 4.6, For it is
delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it.]

The devil, like a desperate man, that is sure in this bowt to kill or be
killed, lays about him with all the skill and strength he has, yea he is put
to his shifts, so as no base or mischeiuous devise comes amiss, by which he
may either in fair combat, or cowardly attempts oppress his adversary: and
that which he cannot do by strength and power, he will attempt by falsehood and
lies, which he heaps up here together most like himself, the father of lies,
that stood not in the truth.

And here he challenges the power and glory of the world to be his, 1. In
possession: 2. In disposition.

First, he affirms it to be his, but not directly, but indirectly; by gift,
it is delivered unto me. But this is a most notorious lie: for the earth is
the Lords, and all that therein is, the world, and all that dwell therein,
Psalm. 24.1. and, Deuter. 10.14. Behold, the heaven of heavens is the Lords thy
God, and the earth with all that therein is. And where read we that ever he
committed these into the hand of the devil?

Object. 1. Ioh. 14.30. he is called the Prince of the world; therefore he
speaks true. Answ. 1. He is called the Prince of the world, not simply, but as
it is corrupted: the prince of this world, says the text; which world? this,
which lies in malice and hostility against the Son of God, and the means
of salvation. 2. He is not so a Prince, as having any right unto any creature:
for he cannot possess a pigge without leave: but by tyranny he forces and
commands as a Prince, the wicked world unto his obedience: for the world
departing from God to his adversary, God in justice gives Satan leave to
prevail, and rule in the sons of disobedience. But will it follow, that
because he rules in the world by sin and death, being the Prince of
darkness, and having the power of death, therefore the parts of the world
must needs be his?

Object. 2. He is called the God of the world, 2. Cor. 4.4. Ans. True, not in
respect of dominion over things created; but, 1. in respect of corruption: for
he is the god of the evil in the world, the author, ringleader, and
nourisher of all evil. 2. in respect of seduction: for he is bold to use all
earthly things, which are made to Gods glory, to serve to set forward his
temptations, and wicked men's lusts, and so to set up his own kingdom. 3. in
respect of opinion or estimation, because the people of the world make the
devil their god. But this no more proves him to be indeed the God of the
world, then an idol is proved to be a true God, only because idolaters so
esteem and make it.

Secondly, the devil affirms it to be his in disposition, that he may give
it to whom he will; which must needs be another lie, because it is not his in
possession: for nothing can give that which it has not. 2. the Scriptures
ascribe this to God, as a prerogative, and peculiar to him: By him Kings
reign, Prou. 18.15. All Powers that are, are ordained of God, Romans 13.1. He
makes low, and he makes high. It is the most high that bears rule over the
kingdoms of men, Dan. 4.22. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, Job
1.21. 3. another notorious lie is, that having them to dispose of, he will
dispose them to Christ, which is impossible, seeing Christ had them already
disposed unto him, and had received them of his Father, so as he only could
say, Matthew. 11.23. All things are given to me of the Father: and, Ioh. 3.35.
The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hands. Therefore
the devil offering him the kingdoms of the world, must needs lie. Psalm. 2.8.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. If then Satan say, All this
power will I give thee, it is a lie: for all power was given him in heaven and
in earth of his Father, Matthew. 28.18. So as in this profer he belies the
Fathers gift, and the Sons right, and derogates from the glory both of the
Father and of the Son. 4. another lie is his false boasting, making himself
Lord and Caesar of all, when he has not one foot of all he speaks of, like
Salomons Bragadocio, There is one that makes himself rich when he has
nothing, and when he pretends his unjust usurpation in the world, to be a just
possession and title to the world.

And thus we have examined the substance and truth of this reason, and have
found neither substance, truth, nor reason in it. Here note; that,

Bad causes must ever be thrust forward by bad means. Doctr.
Satan had a naughty matter in hand (as no better can beseem him) namely, the
overthrow of the Son of God, and all the salvation of mankind; and the
means by which he would effect his purpose is suitable, lying, and falsehood,
and boasting: and he is no changeling, never a true word comes out of his
mouth. 1. King. 21. Iezabel had a wicked end to bring to pass, namely, the
disinheriting of Naboth, and setting Ahab into his possession: and what means
does she use but bribery, perjury, and murder of Naboth and his children; and
all this under a color of religion, and revenge of Gods cause, a fast being
proclaimed before it. Matthew. 26. the Jews had as wicked a cause as ever was
undertaken, viz. the oppressing and murder of the Son of God: and what means
must they use? for what had the just man done? They must accuse falsely, and
suborne false witnesses, and deprave his words, and make him speak what they
list. And what other means used they to falsify and suppress the truth and
glory of his resurrection? In this place, Satan aims to bring Christ to
idolatry, and the means is covetousness. Peter had an ill cause in hand, to
hinder Christ from being apprehended, and his means was bad, unwarrantable
striking.

And this must needs be: 1. In respect of God: Reasons. 1.
when a bad action is undertaken, he leaves it, and as he permits the action
only, so he permits bad means, but never appoints or approoues any means
to bad and wicked purposes; which therefore must be wicked and unhappy. 2
2. In respect of Satan, who seeks to make every action as sinful as
possibly may be: he knows that all instruments of falsehood are hateful to
God, and therefore the more wicked means are used, the more detestable and
damnable the action is. 3
3. In respect of men themselves: for those that make no conscience of bad
ends, make none of the means; as we may see in David himself, whose
conscience being so sleepie as to take another man's wife, he will make no
bones to hide it by murder of his faithful captain. 4. In respect of the
means themselves which are near enough at hand: 4
bad means are easily found and attempted. What might be more difficult then
to pick matter against the Son of God, to bring him not only under
disgrace, but unto death? Yet the Jews could easily find a law, by which law
he was to die: or if they had had none, they could easily make one. If they
wanted true witness, they could suborne false. If they wanted witness from
others, they could make use of his own, We our selves have heard him, what
need we any other witness?

Use. 1.
This teaches us to suspect those causes and actions that are brought about by
bad means: as, 1. When men run out of Gods ordinances, and will not live by
some honest calling and means of life, but by cards, dice, bowls, bets,
cousnage, and such instruments and means of injury and wrong, they are
convinced to live a lewd and wicked life: for a good and honest life is blessed
by God, and carried by good, and lawful, and honest means, such as these be
not. 2. All such goods as are gotten by lying, swearing, deceiving,
Sabboth-breaking, ouer-reaching or helping forward sin in any man, are here
not only to be suspected, but condemned, and sentence passes against them, as
such which the devil has taught to bring them in by evil means, both of them
accursed by God, and the gainer for them. 3. All actions which are brought to
pass by unwarrantable means, are likewise to be suspected not to be of God,
who orders due and lawful means to good and lawful ends, Zach. 4.2.
and has as many pipes to convey good unto us, as eyes to provide for it. Saul
must needs know his condition was unhappy, and his business unprosperous,
when he must run to the witch to help himself. So their cause is worse then
naught that run to the wisard for help in diseases and losses: God is gone
from them, and the remedy is far worse then the disease. Yet how common is
it, not to seek to them by night as Saul did, but even by day, as not ashamed
of of it? Herod he would not break his oath, no, that was not for his credit:
but he might well know it to be a wicked one, which could not be kept but by
murder of John Baptist. Object. Why, what would ye have him forsworn? Answ.
He had brought himself into such a snare, as either he must be forsworn, or a
murderer: Now of these, to have broken a cruel and wicked oath, should have
hindered murder, which is a sin in an higher degree against God and man; and
to keep a wicked oath is worse then to make it. This is rather to be thought
of, because even godly men themselves are too ready to effect good things by
bad means: as Iaacob* will get the blessing by lying, Rahab will save the
spies by a lie, Lot will save his guests by prostituting his daughters: In
which, how ever the Lord sometime commends the fact and faith of the parties,
yet he never commends the manner, which blemished both the doers, and the
actions. The rule that we must walk by, is in Romans 3.8. We must not do the
least evil, for the greatest good. Therefore let us take heed of these base
tricks of the devil, to effect our desires by wicked means. Many condemn
good men, because they stand nicely upon some small things, which if they would
yield unto, they might do themselves and others great good; but they have
learned another lesson, not to do the least thing against their conscience to
procure themselves the greatest good. God need not their error to glorify
himself, and do his people good by.

4. That religion which is set forward by bad and wicked means, is to he
suspected and condemned: true religion was ever maintained by truth,
simplicity, humility, patience, mercy, love, meekness, etc. But the Church
of Rome must needs defend a bad cause, the means are so extremely wicked, as
violence and power, treachery and subtilty, fire and sword, murders and
massacres, King-killing and powder-plots, lies and equivocations, and what not?
It was once said, Omnia venalia Romae, at Rome all things are sal^able; and now
it may be said, Romae omnia venialia, at Rome all things are pardonable. One
demonstration for memory sake: That religion which vpholds it self, 1. by
ignorance, as the mother of devotion. 2. by disgracing and reproaching the holy
Scriptures, abhorring them no less then a thief does a pair of gallows, and
warning men to take heed of them* 3. by upholding images and image worship. 4.
perjury, by freeing subjects from the oath of allegiance. 5. disobedience, yea
rebellion to Princes and Parents. 6. murder and massacres of all Princes and
people, Kings and kingdoms, by sword, fire, poison, powder, poynyard, openly
or trecherously. 7. adulteries and fornication by their stews and
sheet-punishments, yea with large reuennewes by them. 8. by lies, legends,
lying and straw-miracles, notable tricks and collusions, as once in the images
of the heathens the devil often spoke; but the Priests in stead of the devil
speak thorough images, and make them move, sweat, nod, etc. to deceive simple
people. I say such a religion cannot be of God, because the means of advancing
it are from the devil. But the Romish is such a religion: therefore, etc.

Here is a glass for liars and boasters to see their faces in, and their
resemblance to their father the devil. Use. 2.
He promises an whole world, when all proves but a shadow and image. He takes
upon him to dispose all things in the world, as though they were his, whereas
we must go to our heavenly father, the father of lights, for every morsel of
bread. Wherefore whosoever would any way advantage himself by lying or
deceiving, it is manifest the spirit of the devil rules in him. And therefore
cast off lying as a ragge and relike of natural corruption, and speak every
man the truth to his neighbor, Ephesians. 4.25.

It is a received opinion in these days, that Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit
viuere, No dissembler, no man, and plain dealing is a jewel, but he that
uses it shall die a beggar, and some men are too honest to thrive in the
world: such common speeches argue the common breach of this commandment. But
know: 1. How far are we degenerate from our forefathers: they lived simply by
their hands according to Gods ordinance: but now many live by their wits;
whence it is that trades are called crafts and mysteries, because more live by
craft and the sin of their trade then the trade it self. 2. The Lord is the
auenger of all such wrong by secret cousnage and lying: for he sees that thou
deceiuest him that trusts thee; and because it is hidden from men, his own
hand must revenge it. 3. What a shame is it and slander to Christian
profession, that men professing salvation by Christ, should so carry their
trades as a man that comes to deal with them, must come so suspitiously as if
he were to fall into the hands of so many thieves; and having dealt with them
has just cause to say, that he might find more just dealing with Turks and
infidells? Whereas if this vice were put off, a child might traffic in the
dark without delusion.

The same of boasters, who brag of things they have not. As Job speaks of the
Leuiathan of the sea, so may we of the hellish Leuiathan, He is the King of all
the sons of pride. As, 1. Many bear themselves out in fine apparel and
bravery, when indeed nothing is their own, if their debts were paid. And if
every bird had his own feather, they might well go naked. 2. Others, to raise
themselves, make no bones to lie and magnify their estate, as the often
experience of the world shows, that widows and widowers promise great things
of themselves, and much wealth, whereas the greatest wealth prove debts. 3.
But if you will see the very natural protrayture of the father the devil, if
ye will hear his very voice, look upon the Bishop and Pope of Rome. For,

1. He has engrossed all the kingdoms of the earth into his own hands,
saying, All these are mine, yet not directly, but in ordine ad Deum. 2. I give
them to whom I will: I can set up and thrust down, I can bind and loose
subjects from their obedience at my pleasure. 3. I will give thee all these, if
thou will fall down and worship me; if thou will be my vassal, and a found
Catholic, let my laws bind thy conscience, and persecute with fire and sword
these heretics, thus thou shall hold thy kingdom, else not. 4. But this is a
small thing to challenge the kingdoms of the world, and therefore he
challenges to be Lord of heaven, hell, and purgatory, to open and shut at his
pleasure, as his three crowns imply. Here is a brag that puts down the
devil quite: never was the devil ouermatched in boasting and lying but by the
Pope his eldest son, that in him we might have a plain demonstration of
Antichrist, whom the Papists themselves say must be begotten by the devil.

If thou will fall down and worship me.] NOW follows the condition of Satan's
large and prodigal profer, which is the third thing considerable in the dart.
In it are two things: 1. the matter he requires, worship. 2. the manner, fall
down and worship me. The thing he desires is worship and honor due to
God: for so our Saviors answer implies, that he must worship God only. And
for the manner of this worship, he must outwardly bow and bend unto him, or
prostrate his body in way of homage unto him. Wherein we see marvelous cunning
and malice combined.

1. His cunning, in making it appear so small a mote: for being a worship
proper to God, as we see by comparing our Saviors answer with it, 1. He would
make it in show and appearance, but a bowing of the body, a small thing, a
gesture which God greatly regards not; as if he had said, as Bathsheba to her
son, 1. King. 2.10. I have a small suit unto thee, deny me not: which small
suit if Solomon had hearkened unto, it had cost him the loss of his kingdom.
And the same did our Solomon by his wisdom discern in this place. 2. In
making it so necessary a thing to worship him: me, with emphasis; me, of whom
thou must have the world if thou have it: me, who am so able and willing to
reward so small a service toward me: God does not so reward his worshippers.

2. His extreme malice: in that, 1. he would rob and deprive God of his
honor, which is due to him alone, and to no creature else. 2. he would have it
conferred upon himself, Gods greatest enemy. 3. he would have none do it him
but Jesus Christ the Son of Gods love, thus to wrong his Father the more:
whereas God expects no other of his enemies, (...). 4. he implies how little
God regards or rewards his worshippers.

The connection of this condition with the premises shows; That,

Doctr. 1.
Satan's profers are never free, but upon some wicked condition or other. He said
he would give all the world and the glory thereof to Christ, but now he adds a
condition, which makes it a dear bargain. He offers freely, he will give all
the world, and the glory of it, but the condition is dangerous; if Christ will
fall down and worship him. The devil offered to put our first parents in
possession of further knowledge, and no less a gift then deity: he makes as
though he would out give God, but all upon this dangerous condition; if they
would eat the apple which God had commanded them not to touch. He would help
Cain to the favor of God, and all the love of his parents: but upon condition,
he would kill his brother Abel: for when there was none else to be loved, or to
do sacrifice, he should obtain all. Judas comes to the high Priests, and
says, What will ye give me? Matthew. 26.15. and they appointed him thirty
pieces of silver: but upon his own condition, to betray his Lord and Master: an
heavy condition for so light a sin. Potiphers wife proffered Joseph great
honor and rewards, but upon a foul condition, of committing whoredom with
her.

1. As Solomon says of the harlot, Reasons. 1.
She hunteth for the preciou^ life of a man, so does Satan incessantly, and
therefore can give nothing freely: for a free gift is a pledge of love between
parties; but he carries a mortal hatred toward mankind, seeking by all
means to devour us, 1. Pet. 5. v. 8. Seeing therefore his love is like that,
of a ravening lion to a lamb, no marvel though he bestow nothing freely.

2. The end and scope of all Satan's gifts is discovered in our text, viz. to
pluck men from God, 2
and so bring them to damnation; and indeed they are not gifts, but wages paid
for doing some work. 2. Pet. 2.15. Balaam loved the wages of unrighteousness.
Now, if we look into the history, Number. 22.17. these were great gifts and
honors promised, upon condition of cursing the people of God. So as by the
judgment of the holy Ghost, all such gifts taken upon such dangerous
conditions, are wages of unrighteousness. And as a General never gives pay but
to such as fight under his colors, so Satan never gives pay of worldly
preferment, but to such as fight his battles.

3. Never man gets any thing from Satan, but by way of contract, or bargain,
where the conclusion shall be for himself: 3
and being the arch-enemie of all charity, he will never make an exchange but
for the better. He gives Adam an apple, but it was dear bought with the loss
of Gods image, and all his happiness. He offers the second Adam the whole earth,
but with such a condition, as he must for it forsake heaven. Quest. But is
there any man so extreme wicked, that will contract with the devil, or
receive any thing upon any condition at his hands? Answ. The devil will do
nothing for any man but by virtue of a compact, and why should he be at any
man's command, but in hope of his reward, no more then any man would be at his,
but in the same hope? But this compact is either, 1. more open: 2. more secret.

A more express and solemn contract is that of witches, coniurers, and
sorcerers, wherein there is a mutual promise of service between the devil and
the witch. And this promise is not only made by solemn words, but by deeds
and seals; as some diabolical signs, figures, or ceremonies, for the
ratification of this league and compact. And this is evident by the confession
of all witches at this day, and by the Scripture. Of this kind was this in our
text; Satan offers to compact with our Savior Christ, and there wanted nothing
but the free consent of our Savior to the condition.

But the more secret compact is the more general, and no less dangerous,
though Satan be less seen in it. And of this kind the devil makes many
covenants in the world, and innumerable persons contract with him underhand,
perhaps not thinking they do so. And this two ways, 1. By a secret faith in
the devil. 2. By a secret consent unto the devil.

Secret faith in the devil is, when a man uses any superstitious or
diabolical means for the effecting of his desire, which he knows neither in
themselves, nor from Gods institution, have any such power to effect things,
but from the power of the devil: as the use of charms or spells, figures,
characters, amulets, scratching of a Witch, or the like: which having no power
in themselves, nor by Gods ordinance, can do no good but by a secret faith in
the devil, who by Gods permission puts power in them to heal men for their
delusion.

Secret consent unto the devil, is yet more common then the former, though the
former be the common cure of common people: namely, when Satan secretly
suggesteth and offers to make a covenant and bargain with a man, without any
express form of contract, but by inward temptation puts the motion into
the heart (as of Judas) that if he will use such an unlawful means, or upon
such a condition, he will effect his purpose, which he earnestly desires to
attain: now the party blinding his own judgment by the eagerness of his
affection, gives his consent to Satan, and accepts the condition: which mutual
and silent consent of party with party, is a real bargain and covenant.
Satan solicites the heart, and the heart consents to Satan: here is a secret
compact, by which numbers of men are in league with the devil, that would be
loath to be thought so to be. Yea, numbers there are that receive the greatest
part of their earthly portion at the hands of the devil, by virtue of this
compact, secretly believing or consenting unto him.

This serves to let us see the difference between Gods gifts and the devils,
in four things: Use. 1.
1. Gods gifts come all from grace and love, he freely bestows his blessings:
for his love is everlasting before our own being, and our inheritance is
eternal above our merit, and in the heavens above our reach. But Satan's gifts
proceed out of his endless hatred, and are wages of unrighteousness. 2. Gods
gifts are derived to us by good and warrantable means, diligence, labor,
prayers: Satan's, for the most part, by wicked means. Gods conditions are
profitable and safe: Satan's hurtful and dangerous, by the breach of some
commandment, by impiety or injustice. 3. Gods gifts are first bestowed upon
us, and then obedience is required as a testification of thankfulness, not as
merit: Satan's are after our work as a merit and wages of sin; first fall down
and worship me, and then I will give thee all these things. 4. Gods gifts are
in mercy, for our salvation and comfort, and encouragement in his service:
Satan's, to draw us from his service, and to dragge us to destruction.

Let this doctrine make us afraid to receive any thing from the hand of the
devil, and accept of nothing but God offers. For, Use. 2.
1. God is more able and willing to do us good then the devil is, unless we
think with those wicked ones, that it is in vain to serve the Lord. 2. An
enemy is never so dangerous as when he flattereth and fawneth: he never kisseth
but kills, with Ioab, or betrayeth with Judas: his gifts are dear bought,
his conditions are intolerable: he will have a better thing for it, even our
precious souls. 3. A little from Gods hands is far better then if we could
receive all the world, and the glory of it, at the devils: for this comes with
blessing, with promise, with contentment, with good conscience; so does not the
other. Therefore be the just man's portion small or great, it is ever precious:
it has no sorrow added to it, as Solomon speaks. Quest. How may I know I
receive any thing from the devil? Answ. When any thing is gotten by the breach
of any commandment of God, as by swearing, lying, deceit, oppression, and the
like, this is a gift of the devil, and the wages of unrighteousness.

Note here how like the usurer is to the devil: the devil says, Use. 3.
he will give, so the usurer faith he will lend, which should be free as gift:
but then comes a condition of ten in the hundredth, which is more then the
lending is worth. Satan is an enemy to all charity, and so is he. The like may
be said of covetous men, who will do no good but where they look for return
of the like or more, as like the devil as may be, and altogether unlike to God
who does good where he can receive none, sowes where he reaps not.

Use. 4.
See the misery of men, who accept of Satan's profers. 1. Such as are in open
league with him, as wizzards who bind themselves to renounce God, and their
baptism, and redemption by Christ, and to believe in the devil, to expect
aid from him, and give him body and soul for that help; which is the
substance of the solemn leagues, made by such limbs of Satan; he is of the
sure side with them, they can gain nothing by him, unless he gain themselves
first. And such by Gods law ought not to live. 2. Worldly-minded men, with whom
he deals as with Esau, he gives them a mess of pottage, but on condition to
sell their birthright; a silly match is made presently, an exchange of earth
for heaven. 3. Men impatient in losses or sickness, who run to the witch, as
not knowing what to do with themselves. But Satan never eases the body of
temporal pains, but to cast the soul into eternal. 4. Ambitious and
discontented persons, that take preferments of Satan upon base conditions:
Absalom shall have a kingdom, on condition he will rebel against his own
father. Zimri a captain under Baasha, 1. Kin. 16.10. shall have the kingdom
of Israel, if he will rebel and slay his Master. Discontented Papists shall
divide the land among themselves, if they will blow up the Parliament house.

Now if we would avoid the dangerous compacts with Satan, let us observe these
rules. 1. Beware of profaneness, which is a sin, where men carelessly loose
heaven and the joys thereof for these lower and earthly things, as Esau to
satisfy his lusts despised the blessing, Heb. 12.16. Let there be none such
amongst us. 2. Believe the truth of Gods profers and promises, to rely on
them, and thou shall be fenced from Satan's lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. 3. Consider
how easily men power out themselves for Balaams wages: covetousness carries away
their whole heart, and yet in the end they are deceived as he was; in stead of
his reward he was slain in his return homeward, Number. 31.8. 4. Consider how
little joy there is in that which is received at the devils hand: neither Ahab
nor his posterity enjoyed Naboths vineyard. Judas brought back his 30. pieces,
and hanged himself. According to that of Solomon, The wicked rosteth not that
which he takes in hunting. 5. Moderate thy affections not to desire the
kingdoms of this world and the glory of them, but a far more glorious
kingdom in the world to come, and all these transitory matters only to help
thee forward to that.

The condition of Satan's profer teaches us further; that,

All his drift in his temptations, Doctr. 2.
is to draw men from Gods service to his own. An example whereof we have in
Saul, whom he drew from his hope and trust in God, to seek and sue to himself
for help. He entered also into Judas to draw him from his Masters side and
service to his own, to make him a leader and captain against Christ, Luke
22.3. Neither fails he of his purpose and scope, but effectually prevails
in the world, and in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. For if we look
to that part of the world, which is indeed the world, not visited by the light
of grace, and the Gospel, they in general are vassalls to Satan, and profess
homage and service to him in ceremonies and rites, as Gods people to God
hmselfe. 1. Cor. 10.20. Those things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they
sacrifice unto devils, and not unto God: Which is spoken not in respect of the
intention of the worshippers, but of the mystery in that idol worshipped,
which indeed tended to the worship of the devil the deviser and setter forward
of the same. And at this day in those newfound countries, experience shows,
how those heathnish and barbarous people, not having the true knowledge of the
true God, do therefore esteem the devil as God, and the devil appearing to
them in visible shapes they fall down and worship him, and offer many services
and sacrifices unto him; upon this ground, because God is merciful and
amiable, and will not hurt them, Non est n^cens nature Deu^. Cic.
and therefore they need not be so obsequious to him, but the devil is
terrible, and fearful, and churlish, and therefore must be pleased and
worshipped, Ne noceat.

Nay, Gods own people and children are often drawn from the worship of their
God, to the worship of the devil, in the most base and submisse kind of
worship. The Jews themselves offered unto devils, and not unto God, Deuteronomy.
32.17. and what did they offer but their dearest things? as Psalm. 106.37. they
offered their sons and daughters unto devils: A marvelous high wickedness,
wherein the Israelites themselves imitated the barbarous heathens, among whom
Satan had brought in this unnatural cruelty, to kill their little children,
and offer them to Molech in the valley of Hinnom, v. 38. Thus they shed innocent
blood by a diabolical fury, and polluted their land at the devils
instigation. Thus it was in the time of Ahaz, and of Manasseh; against which
the Lord showed great indignation and vehemence, Ier. 7. and 19. and, Ezekiel. 16.
And the rather, because it was against a special law enacted for this purpose
(which we would think Gods own people should not need) Leuit. 17.7. They
shall no more offer to devils, after whom they have gone a whoring; and the
sanction follows, This shall be an ordinance for ever. Yet Gods people forgate
Gods institution, and natures instinct, and so put off all religion and
natural affection.

Reasons. 1.
And this comes to pass: 1. Because of Satan's pride and ambition, who will not
content himself with any thing, but that honor that is due to God. He being
the Prince of the world, and the god thereof, Ioh. 14.31. 2. Cor. 4.4. will be
worshipped by the world as a God, and takes upon him as if he were so indeed:
whereas he is so only by his own usurpation and affectation, and the wickeds
delusion and acceptance. 2. Because of his malice to God, 2
to whom he is most contrary. God has by the law of creation, of nature, the
moral law, yea by the law of faith, and all other bonds, tied man to his own
service: now Satan seeks contrarily to deprive God of his due homage, and
draws men from the knowledge and practice of Gods will, that he may rule them
after his own will, 2. Tim. 2.26. 3. Because of his hatred to mankind, 3
to draw men into the greatest offense and displeasure of God. It is an evil
thing and bitter, to depart from God and his service: but to give this to Gods
deadly enemy, is a sin most hateful and dangerous. 4. It is all the
business that Satan has in the world, for which he leaves no stone unturned, 4
no means unattempted, to set up his own kingdom above and against Gods
kingdom; a compendious way whereof is to hinder, corrupt, or destroy the true
worship of God. 1 Thessalonians. 2.18. Satan hindered me: namely, the true worship
which Paul sought to establish. He corrupted the worship of God among the
sons of God by the daughters of men, Genesis 6. And he sought to destroy all
Gods worship in the posterity, by destroying Abel.

Quest. But is it possible that Satan can so prevail to draw men to worship
himself in stead of God? And what means uses he to effect it? Answ. Yea it
is plain and usual, as we shall easily see, if we consider, 1. the ways that
a man worshippeth the devil: 2. the means how he brings men thereunto.

I. The ways are laid down in these four conclusions:

Conclus. 1. Whosoever worshippeth for God that which is not God, he
worshippeth the devil for God. Deuteronomy. 32.17. They offered unto devils, that
is, to gods whom they knew not. In all divine worship, whatsoever is not
performed to God, is performed to the devil, there being no mean between
them in worship. But how has the devil drawn Pagans and heathens to set up
and worship false gods, devils indeed, Mars, Jupiter, etc. yea and Gods own
people to worship Dagon, and Baal, and Molech? At this day all the Eastern
people of Turks and Saracens worship Mahomet, a god of their own making.
And the Papists all give divine worship to stocks and stones, the work of men's
hands, to rags and relliques, to their breaden and baked God in the
Sacrament; as base an idolatry as can be found among the heathens: in all which
they have fallen down to the devil, and worshipped him.

Conclus. 2. Whosoever worshippeth God in any other means then himself has
appointed, he worshippeth the devil, and not God. If the manner of Gods
worship prescribed by himself in the Scripture be refused, that cannot be Gods
worship, because the manner is devised by the devil. Thus do they who
profess the true God distinct in three persons, but worship him according to
their own devises and humane traditions; as the Papists that worship God in
images, pilgrimages, and a thousand devises mere strangers to the Spirit of
God in Scripture, thrust in by Satan for his own service.

Conclus. 3. Numbers will not be persuaded they worship the devil, when indeed
they do. For as then we worship God actually, when we serve and obey him, so
then men worship the devil, when they do the works of the devil, Ioh. 8. He
that is a slave, a vassal to the devil, is an apparent worshipper of him.
Yea, so near a service is between them, that the devil is said to beget many
sons in the world, Ioh. 8.41. now every son honors his father. Thus do
all they that are subtle to pervert the straight ways of God, as Elymas,
therefore called by Paul the child of the devil, Act. 13.10. because he sought
to hinder the word and work of God. Thus do all those tares, the children of
that wicked one, Matthew. 13.38. which grow up in Gods field to the molesting and
annoyance of the Lords wheat. Thus do all they who when they should spend the
Lords Sabbaths in his worship, they worship and serve the world in buying and
selling, or the devil in play and gaming in their own houses, falling down
to the worship of the devil, when true worshippers are in Gods house,
performing their homage and service to him.

Conclus. 4. Satan preuailes against numbers, by drawing the affections of
their hearts from the true God, to something besides him, to love, trust, and
follow it more then God: as the voluptuous person, that makes his belly his
God, and so is a lover of pleasure more then of God: and the covetous person
making his wealth his God, whom Paul therefore calls an idolater. All these and
many more are worshippers of the devil, and fallen down to him, and cannot
possibly worship the true God.

II. How and by what means Satan does thus prevail. And the means are these:
1. He has often the secular arm, and humane authority: 2. Chron. 11.15.
Rehoboam ordained Priests for the high places, for the devils, and for the
calves that he had made. Thus Antichrist, the beast of Rome, Reu. 13.16. by
power made all both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, to receive
his mark in their hands and foreheads. So he did in our country by fire and
faggot in Queen Mary's days. 2. Sometimes he draws men to his own worship by
policy; for he can transform himself into an Angel of light, he can preach
Christ for a need, to overthrow the preaching of Christ, Mark. 1.34. he can be
a lying spirit in the mouths of four hundred false prophets, 1. King. 21. at
once: and can put on the shape of Samuel, being still a Satan. 3. Sometimes
by fair promises, as in our text, he will give a whole world to bring Christ
to one sin: Thou shall have ease, pleasure, wealth, credit; in a word, thy
hearts desire, if thou will fall down and worship me. 4. By persuasion, that
it is a vain thing to serve God, Malach. 3.14. no joy for the present, no
recompense hereafter: thus he carries with him innumerable companies with
things present, not considering the time to come. 5. By threatening of crosses,
losses, disfavor, as Balaac said to Balaam, Thy God has kept thee from
preferment. By violent persecutions, Revel. 12.13.15. the red dragon
persecuted the woman which had brought forth the man child; the serpent cast
out of his mouth waters like a flood, to cause the woman to be carried away. 6.
By effectual delusion, by means of signs, wonders, false miracles, and
sleights, which Satan puts forth to give credit to false worship, as it
is spoken of the great Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. that he shall come by
the working of Satan, with power, signs, and lying wonders, and in all
deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness among them that perish: and thus shall the
beast deceive all those, whose names are not written in the book of life. Thus
many are deceived in Popery, by the iugling and crafty conueyances of the
Priests, and often by magic, making their images appear to sweat, to nodde,
to roll their eyes, to pass voices through them, and make blood appear in the
host; which they would have their people believe: and thus Satan mightily
draws them to the worship of himself.

Here let us learn to bewail the misery of men seduced by the devil, and
thrust from their God, whether more openly, Use. 1.
or more secretly: as, 1. Such as join to Popery, renouncing the worship of
the true God, and fall down to the devil to worship him. Reu. 13.4. and they
worshipped the dragon and the beast: noting that the worship of the beast, is
the worship of the dragon. Now they worship the beast that give him power over
the Scripture, over the consciences of men, to make laws to bind them, to
pardon sins, to open heaven, hell, purgatory, and receive his bulls and
canons before the Canonical Scripture. A lamentable thing, that Satan gets such
great ones daily to fall down, and worship him.

2. Such as get livings by bribery, symony, chopping and changing, and such
indirect courses: here the Chaplein has fallen down to the devil, and
worshipped him, and he has bestowed the benefice.

3. Such as seek to witches for help, or cunning men and women* a plain and
open service of the devil, by virtue of a league and compact, at least secret.
Should not a people seek to their God? or can all the devils in hell remove
the hand of God?

4. Such as by flattery, dissembling, injustice, lying, swearing, or breaking
the Sabbath, obtain wealth, or profit. All this the devil has given thee,
because thou have fallen down and worshipped him. Whatsoever a man does
against the word, against his oath, or conscience, is a falling down to the
devil, and a worshipping of him.

Take heed of coming under the power and service of the devil: and to that
end observe these rules: Use. 2.
1. Hold thee to Gods word and will in all duties of piety and justice, both
for matter and manner. For we must not only do our Masters will, but also
according to his will. 2. Hear and foster the motions of Gods Spirit, which
are ever according to the word. It is a note of a man given up to Satan, to
have continual disobedience breathing in him, Ephesians. 2.2. The foul spirit
savors nothing but the flesh. 3. Renounce the world daily, be not a servant to
any lust, neither take pleasure in it. For when Satan finds a man serving
pleasures, he halters him with them, and clogs him with cares of riches and
voluptuous living, Luke 8.14. 4. Walk in the light, love it and such as walk
in it. It is a sign of a man in Satan's snare, to despise the^ that are good,
2. Tim. 3.3. to make a show of godliness, denying the power thereof, v. 5. Satan
himself pretends light, but walks in darkness, and leads such as he rules
in the same path. 5. Contend for the faith, Iud. 3. and Gods pure worship,
stand for God, be at war with thy sin, keep an inward conflict and
combat; for, not to be tempted of Satan, is to be possessed by him: Luke
11.21. When the strong man keeps the hold, all is at peace.

VERSE. 10. But Jesus answered and said, Avoid Satan: for it is written, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

NOW we come by Gods assistance, to the answer of our Lord to the devils third
dart. In which consider three things: 1. the denial and resistance, But Jesus
answered, and said: 2. the manner of it, Avoid Satan: 3. the reason, For it is
written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, etc.

First, our Savior would not yield to Satan's temptations: 2. nay he repels it
with great vehemence. 3. he has just reason so to do.

I. Christ would not yield to the temptation, no not for a world. Quest. Why?
what hurt had been in it? Answ. 1. He had taken the honor of God, and given it
to Satan: whereas the Lord has said, I will give mine honor to none other.
2. He had consented to a lie, viz. that the world was Satan's in possession and
disposition. 3. He had partaked and abetted all that injustice and wrong which
Satan would offer to all the inhabitants of the earth, if he had yielded, or
accepted any thing from him. 4. He had impeached his own right, and present
possession of all things, whereof he was right heir, already invested by his
Father. 5. Although the worship required was external, yet it was divine; and
so in giving it to Satan, it had bin idolatrous, which had entangled the Son
of God in sin, and unfitted him to the redemption of mankind. So as in
respect of God, of Christ, of us, and the whole Church, it had been every way
woeful and dangerous, as Satan, yea our Lord well knew.

Hence we learn, from the example of our Savior Christ, Doctr.
to esteem and prefer Gods glory above all the world. Christ could not be
corrupted with gold, nor silver, nor kingdoms, nor glory, but as a good
Physician sees all diseases and eye-sores, without contracting hurt to
himself: the glory of his Father in his eye, is an antidote to preserve him
without infection. And no marvel, seeing he had formerly preferred the glory
of his Fathers mercy in man's salvation, above the glory of heaven it self,
which he left, and became a man of sorrows, and was numbered among the wicked
to that purpose. Here is an example for us, which we cannot attain, but must
look on a far off for our imitation, to come as near it as infirmity of
flesh will affoard us.

Moses, that man of God, so preferred the glory of God before the world, that
he made a strange choice, viz. to suffer with Gods people, rather then to enjoy
the treasures and honors of Egypt, Heb. 11.24, 25. Nay, he was so set for Gods
glory, as he preferred it before his own part in the book of life, Exodus
32.32. Rather then thou should not glorify thy mercy in thy people, and
rather then thou shall give the enemy cause to blaspheme, rather blot my name
out of thy book, let me have no part in heaven. The Apostles also following
the steps of our Lord, for Gods glory, and the Gospels cause, did glory in
the worlds contempt, and rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer for
Christ, Act. 5.41. Paul bare in his body the marks of Christ, Gal. 6. ver. 17.
and was a prisoner, Ephesians. 3.1.

1. Gods glory is the chief good, Reasons. 1.
and the utmost extent of all his own counsels, and actions, wherein he
manifests his mercy or justice, Romans 9.22.23. and so it ought to be of ours;
1. Cor. 10.30. whatsoever ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the glory of God. An earthly child honors his father, when he imitats him in
good: so do we honor our heavenly Father in this imitation. The first thing
in Gods intention, must be the first in ours.

2
2. The practice of this duty is a fruit of faith, and a support of faith. Heb.
11.24. By faith Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter. The
consideration of Gods faithfulness in promising and performing better things,
makes these inferior things small in our eye: as Moses therefore preferred the
rebukes of Christ before the treasures of Egypt, because he looked at the
recompense of reward. And that the sight of Gods glory, worthy to be set above
all things, takes the part of faith to foil temptations, is apparent in our
text, by the practice of our holy Savior.

3
3. In the Lords prayer the first petition is, that Gods name may be hallowed,
set before the desire of daily bread, yea before remission of sins, because
all these are but means tending and serving to the maine end of all, which is
Gods glory. All our good, spiritual and temporal, are or ought to be means
tending to that end.

4
4. Gods glory is the dearest of all things to himself, of which he is most
jealous, and so ought to be to all his children, as we profess our selves to
be. And what can more rejoice the heart of a gracious and ingenuous child, then
the honor and high respect of his parent?

5. According to our estimation of God himself is our respect of his glory, 5
and so much as we esteem his glory, so much we esteem himself. It is true
that Gods glory is eternal, and so abides in it self not capable of our
addition or detraction, and God will be ever most glorious, though we never had
been: neither need he our help to make him glorious. The sun would shine in
his brightness and glory, if all creatures were blind and no eye saw it. But
yet he will try how much glory we will ascribe unto him, and how we prize it,
and how industrious we are to magnify and exalt it: not that he can get any
good by it, but we our selves reap the fruit: even as the fire is not hoter,
because we stand by it, but we are hoter; so while we glorify God, not God but
our selves are become better and more glorious. God loves his glory as he
loves himself* and we, as we love himself, so we love his glory.

6
6. This is the perfection of Christianity and grace here, and of our glory and
immortality hereafter, to prefer his glory above all the world. The Spous^
(Cant. 2.18.) calls Christ her best beloved, which he could not be, if she
loved any thing better then him. And our Savior cashiereth him as unworthy to
be his follower, that does not at least in affection and full purpose, forsake
father, and mother, and wife, and children, and goods, and lands for his sake.
This perfection of grace the holy Martyrs atteined, who rather then they would
dishonor God in yielding the least show of idolatry, refused the whole world,
yea their lives. And the perfection of glory in the life to come is, that
nothing else occupy or distract us from being wholly taken up in the immediate
glorifying of God, without either saciety or ceasing.

Let us learn to be of the same mind with our Lord Jesus, Use. 1.
in whom we have a worthy pattern of constancy and heavenly resolution, in
that all the world and the glory of it could not move him, no not by a gesture
to impair his Fathers glory. The heathen man could say, if he would forswear
himself for any thing, it should be for a kingdom. Absalom for a kingdom
would kill his own father. Iehu for a kingdom makes no end of murders: One
says of him, What was a basket full of heads to a kingdom? 2. King. 10.8.
Herod for a kingdom kills all the male children. Nay it were to be wished,
that only kingdoms could draw men to mischeife: for then should not Ahab
murder Naboth for a field, nor Judas betray his Master for thirty pence, nor
Christians and Protestants lie and swear, and forswear, and transgress for a
piece of bread. How many executions have we for 30. pence, or 13. pence? Which
shows how degenerate men are from Christ, whom all the kingdoms in the world,
nor the greatest things in them could move in the least manner, and as it were
indirectly, to dishonor his Father. Nay, what shall we say of them, that
profess, they nor no man else can trade, and buy, and sell, to live without
some lies, and dissembling sometimes? These may carry the name of Christ, but
the mind of Christ is far from them. Others think, and say, What need men
be so nice to stand upon so small scruples, as not accept so good offers and
promotions in the world, which have some condition or other annexed, which
their conscience cannot without offense swallow? What, may not ^e call a little
evil good; and a little good, evil; that so he may raise his own estate, and
do himself, and others much good? And thus be is every where accused of
indiscretion. But to these we object Christ's example, who would not be moved
with all the world to do that he was not warranted for in the Scripture. And
for the imputation of indiscretion, we allege Moses example, who when he was
at age (says the text) refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter,
and chose rather to suffer with the people of God. And to all such alledgers we
say in one word, Either was Christ far wide in refusing so great an offer, or
else are they.

Use. 2.
As we must prefer the glory of God above the world, so we must promote it by
our best means: The Magistrate by procuring and stablishing that whereby God
may be most glorified, not administering justice by affection or reward, or
sparing offenders by a cruel mercy, who should be made examples to others, or
not encouraging the godly: All this dishonours God highly. The minister must
use his gifts, not for any private end, but for Gods glory, as a good servant
that gains all for his Master. And every private man must so carry his course
of life, his trade, his speeches, as God may be honored in all things: his
light in all things must shine, that our heavenly Father may be glorified:
therefore in every thing whether it will carry the commendation not only of
truth and honesty, but of Christianity and religion.

To stir us up to this duty, see some motives:

1. All creatures in their kind do glorify God, and keep their standing, the
sun, the stars, the heavens declare the glory of God. Psalm. 19.1. the ox
knows his owner, and the ass the master of his crib, Isa. 1.3. the crane,
swallow, and turtle know their times, Ier. 8.1. What a shame for Israel then
not to acknowledge their benefactor, but come so far behind the unreasonable
creatures? What a shame for Christians to come behind the Israelites, who
partake in far greater mercies and means then they did?

2. Hereby we manifest our selves to be the servants of God, in resisting the
dishonor of God, and standing out for our Lord, against Satan, wicked men,
hypocrites, whose whole desire is to obscure and darken the glory of God, and
as far as they can with violence to tread it under foot: Especially having
vowed in our baptism so to do. He is a coward that seeing the readiness and
alacrity of the enemy, is not by it provoked to stout resistance, especially
standing in a good cause, and sure of victory. Can a child endure his father to
be dishonored and wronged by word or deed, and put it up? Can Gods child,
seeing a son honors his father?

3. Our time is but short, we are in our last conflict, the time of our full
deliverance and introduction into heavenly glory is at hand, the crown is in
our eye, almost upon our heads already: and therefore let us encourage our
selves a while to be instant for the glory of God, which is our last scope and
chief expectation: even as a traveler that sees the evening come upon him, is
so much the quicker till he attain the place he desires; so we having the
evening of our life approach, and our last hour, should set our selves forward
with more speed and alacrity toward our home, holding on our right way, which
is the glorifying of God in all things.

4. We have a cloud of examples before us: 1. of holy men, who have endured
Martyrdom, and rejoiced in the flames, that they were worthy by their so
exquisite torments to glorify God, as Christ told Peter that by such a death
he should glorify God. Ioh. 21.
2. of holy Angels, who spend all eternity in magnifying Gods holiness and
glory: Isa. 6.3. one cries to another, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord: the whole
world is full of his glory: and, Luke 2.14. Glory be to God in the highest
heavens. And shall not we approach to the Angelical life, which is the
happiest of all creatures? 3. of the blessed Son of God our head, whose whole
life was nothing else but a seeking of the glory of his Father: And should not
the members imitate the head? Have we so many faithful guides in so dangerous
a way, and should we be so cold and slow in the imitation of them?

5. Our glorification is indiuidually knit to our glorifying of God: as, 1.
Sam. 2.30. Him that honors me, will I honor. Yea Christ claims his glory
on no other condition but this, but that he had glorified his Father on earth,
Ioh. 17.4. As among men, great benefactors are well pleased with small
testimonies of thankfulness, where ability wants to perform much: so the
Lord accepts our small obedience and study of glorifying him, that he
plentifully remunerates it.

Means to come to glorify God in some good measure.

1. Pray for wisdom, and a sound judgment. Phil. 1.10. that ye may discern
things that differ, being filled with the fruits of righteousness, to the
glory and praise of God. For every thing will not please and glorify God. 2.
Renounce thy own glory in doing things. Ioh. 8.49, 50. How can ye which
receive honor one of an other, seek the honor that comes of God? Certainly
Christ sought not his own praise, but the praise of him that sent him. 3.
Observe Gods wisdom in his word and works; his power, justice, and mercy;
his benefits and corrections on thy self and others; in all things praise him:
He that praises me, glorifieth me. Psalm. 50.23. 4. Honor God in an honest
and Christian conversation: gracious speeches, and an unspotted life, honor
the Gospel: hereby stop the wickeds mouths, and glorify God, 1. Pet. 2.12.

II. The manner of this answer of Christ; Avoid Satan] which differs somewhat
from Christ's other answers, being more plain and sharp then they, as
appears, 1. in the title he gives him, Satan: 2. in the commandment, Avoid.
First, he calls him Satan, which is the third name given him in this history:
for he had before been called a devil, that is a false accuser, and a tempter,
and now he is called a Satan, signifying an adversary or enemy: 1. to God
directly: 2. to man, both in his person, whom he often possesses and vexes,
Matthew. 4.24. and also in his estate, which he does often endammage and
impouerish, as we see in Job.

And Christ does now so term him, 1. To show him that he takes better notice
of him then before: for he called him by no name before, though he was called
by the two former terms by the Evangelist. 2. That we should see further into
his nature, the more to beware of, and detest him. 3. To show us how we may
detect an adversary, and smell a devil; namely, when he sets against and
opposes the grounds of religion. 4. To teach us that he is no friend, that
offering us wealth and honor, would draw us from God and religion. The greatest
kindness here is the greatest cruelty.

Auoid] 1. This is a word of indignation, as we say to a dog, auant: for
Christ was much offended and angry against this temptation, when he saw and
heard Satan so impudent and blasphemous. So Christ gives this as a reason of
the same speech to Peter, Avoid Satan; for thou art an offense unto me. Christ
shows indignation, because Satan shows his blackness. 2. It is a word of
rebuke and castigation of Satan's importunity and impudency, who would not be
satisfied at the first and second assault, but still renewes more hellish and
horrible temptations. Thus Luke expresses it, Hence behind me, as one not
worthy any longer to behold his face. 3. It is a word of dismission, or sending
him packing, and carries in it the force of a commandment. An heretic (says
the Apostle) after once or twice admonition avoid, Tit. 3.10. Thus deals our
Savior with Satan here, who is haereticorum hereticissimus, an arch-heretike:
as a great man talking with a wrangling fellow, whom no reason will persuade,
commands him away, he will hear him no longer.

Quest. Why was our Savior so angry at this temptation above the former,
wherein he exercised meekness and patience? Answ. 1. His wisdom knew how
far he was to bear Satan at this time, and how much to suffer from him, and
then how his mouth must be stopped, which meekness and lenity would never
do: there is no hope to win or overcome a devil with kindness, nor to shake
him off that way; nay rather this will more inuit on his malice, he will go
so far as he is suffered. 2. Christ thirsted after man's salvation; and his
love to us and our redemption, made him so angry with the devil, who sought by
all means to hinder it: for had he been defiled with sin, the work of
redemption had auailed us nothing. 3. To note the hatefulness and detestation
of that sin of idolatry, whether it be covert or open, that if our dearest
friends should solicit unto it, even the wife of the bosom, we should pursue
them to death, and so show our deadly hatred against it, Deuteronomy. 13.1.6. 4. The
two former more concerned himself, but this concerned his Fathers glory
directly: he hears him claiming all to be his, quartering the arms and
royalties of God, making himself a God, and challenging worship due to God:
this he could not bear: his tenderness and zeal to his Fathers glory, would
not endure so vile a creature to carry away, no nor to challenge any part of
his worship.

Gods causes must ever more affect us, then our own. Doctr.
How full of lowliness and meekness was our Lord and Savior in all his own
causes? He did not strive nor cry, neither was his voice heard in the streets:
he would not break a bruised reed, nor quench a smoking flax, Isa. 42.3.
Matthew. 12.20. When he was reviled, he reviled not again. When he was called
glutton, drunkard, a friend of Publicans and sinners, Matthew. 11.19.28. in stead
of returning rough language, he calls, saying, Come unto me all ye that are
weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. He was lead as a sheep to the
slaughter, and opened not his mouth: when thy accused him of capital things,
knowing that his answers would not be taken, he answered not a word. Now he was
in his own cause. But when he takes his Fathers cause in hand, how does he
cloth himself with zeal, which even consumes him? Ioh. 2.15. in purging his
Fathers house, he lays about him, and whips out the abusers of that holy
place. Moses in his own private cause was the meekest man upon the earth,
being contumeliously worded by Miriam and Aaron, he presently pardons it, and
prays for Miriam, and gets her cured of her leprosy. In Exodus 32. that
froward people was ready to stone him: yet when God begins to be angry with
them, he forgets all, and prays God rather to put his name out of his book,
then not to pardon their sin. But, seeing the calfe, his calm spirit is
vanished, and he breaks the tables of stone that were in his hand. The Apostle
Paul every where prouokes Christians to meekenes, patience, and laying aside of
revenge, and stirringnesse of spirit in private causes: yet (Act. 17.16.) when
he saw the idolatry of the Athenians, his Spirit was stirred up in him.

Reasons. 1.
1. The religion which we profess, should bind us unto God most straightly:
therefore Augustine notes the word either a religando, or a relinquendo, that
where religion is, it will leave all for God. And hence is self-denial
enjoined, as a necessary preparation, to him that will profess religion.

2
2. Gods glory is preferred by himself above all his creatures, as being the
end of them all; and therefore must so be of us, even above our selves: for of
him, and through him, and for him are all things. We see in the commonwealth
how the instruments of public justice, if any service be commanded from the
King, must lay aside their own business and ease, and execute the Kings
pleasure before their own. Such a good servant for his Lord was Paul, saying,
My life is not dear unto me, so I may finish my course with joy.

3
3. Our Lord Jesus has more affected our cause then his own: what an infinite
love showed he in descending from his glory, to work the great and painful
work of our redemption? what infinite misery did he sustain to help us out
of it? what an happiness forsook he to recover us to that which we had forsaken?
what a dear price did he pay for our ransom, when we were lost? Is it not fit
now, that we should be earnest in the cause of such a friend? May not he well
disdain, that any thing in the world (never so much concerning us) should be
preferred before him, yea or equalled with, or loved without him?

4
4. Do we know that God himself is the chief good, and should not we cast our
eyes beyond our selves, sinful lumps and heaps of dust, that all the
springs of our affections might run into this maine? Shall we bestow the pitch
of our affections upon lower things (as earthly-minded men do) when we may
satiate them with God himself, and the things of his glory?

5. There is no loss in neglecting our selves for God, but great advantage:
for his eye is upon us to be a speedy, faithful, 5
and royal rewarder of us. The preferring of our Lords cause above our selves,
is the preferment of our selves in the end. He that loses his life for my
sake (says Christ) shall find it. And therefore as Cesars eye made his
soldiers prodigal of their blood; so Gods eye upon us should make our selves
small in our own eyes, that his glory may be maintained and reserved wholly to
himself. Moses preferred Gods honor before his own: for he looked for the
recompense of reward.

The use hereof belongs to such as are specially set forth to set up Gods
causes. The magistrate is not now a private man, Use. 1.
to seek himself, or to set forward his own designs, or to show his heat in
his own private causes, but to prefer Gods causes before ^ll men's, his own
or others. David a King, how calm was he in his own case, when Shimei
traitorously railed upon him, and Abishai would have fetched his head, Oh no
(says he) God has bid him rail, etc. But when Gods cause was in hand, Oh
then, away from me ye wicked: and, I will have no wicked person in my house,
(...) will timely destroy the wicked from the house of God. Good Nehemiah
neglects his own allowance, and departed from his own right for the peoples
sake, c. 5. but c. 13. how zealous is he for God? he will not let God loose
his right: not one whit of the Sabbath must be allowed to any use but
Sabbath-duties. Such a courage for God and the truth, ought the Magistrate to
have, as neither for fear of men, nor any man's favor or affection, he neglect
any thing which God would have him do, especially for the house of God, and
the offices of it. Alas, how many Magistrates are of Gallios mind, to think
religion but a matter of words, as if God made them governors of men only,
but not of Christians; keepers of the second table to preserve peace and
justice, and not of the first to preserve piety and religion? and if they be
so, why are not blasphemies, and horrible oaths, and innumerable profanations
of the Sabbath severely punished? why are not Popish and profane persons
compelled to come into the house of God? Shall a pilferer of a trifle of a man's
goods know, that the Magistrate bears not the sword in vain, and shall not he
that robs God of his glory, by cursing, swearing, contemptuous breaking of the
Sabbath know the contrary?

The calling of a Minister is more specially to promote the causes of God,
which therefore must affect him above all his own respects. How earnest was
Christ in his Fathers work, when his parents came to seek him at twelve
years old? he rebuked them for interrupting him; whereas in all private
converse he gave them reverence, Luke 2. When his disciples brought him meat,
he neglected that also, saying, It is my meat, and drink, to do the will of
my Father. And if preferring Gods causes will not suffer us to respect our
selves, much less will we be hindered by others: we cannot tune our songs to
men's ears, but must deal faithfully and plainly, though we displease men.
How zealous was Christ against the hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Matthew. 23. though it created him much envy and malice? When he saw the
invincible hardness of heart in his hearers, how did he mourn in his spirit,
and looked angerly about him? Mar. 3.5. Surely if we go about to please men,
or set up our selves in the world, Gods causes will affect us slenderly:
Therefore it shall be our happy portion to set the top of our ambition the
glory of God, and in our judgments and practice, prefer the winning of
souls before the winning of the world.

Use. 2.
Let every man learn to consider what business God has put in his hand to
do, and not be hindered in that; for that is Gods work, Gods cause, upon which
depends some part of Gods glory. And whatsoever he may glorify God in, for
which he can warrant his calling, let him set that forward, and let no respect
hinder him: let him not suffer God to be dishonored in his family, nor where
he can hinder it: let the spirit of patience swallow a number of private and
personal wrongs; but, when God comes to be wronged, let him stir up the
spirit of zeal and courage.

Use. 3.
Here many are reproved, who fail against this doctrine: as, 1. Men that
follow nature abandoning religion, hot and fiery in their own quarrels, not
a word can be sooner uttered against them, but they are ready to draw, and to
stabbe: Their own names may not be mentioned without all due respect: But for
Gods causes and quarrels, let others look to that. How hot was Cain in his
own cause? but so much the cooler in Gods causes and service. Haman, how busy
in his own private quarrel to bring Modecai to death, yea to destroy the
whole Church, had not his gallows caught himself? Oh beware by these examples
of more zeal in thine own cause, then in Gods; in thy own name, then in
Gods. 2. Such Ostriches as can digest any high contempt of God, without
indignation or reproof, and can suffer men to swear and curse by God and
Christ, his blood, wounds, and tear him to small pieces. It would be thought
disloyalty to hear the Kings Majesty's name or title contumeliously spoken
of, and not bring the party to condign punishment. It was an old law among
the Romans, that if any man did swear by their God Ianus it should be death,
unless the Senate approved it, or it were made before a Priest: why? that it
might be either punished or reproved. It were well if we had such a law
amongst us. 3. When care of our own houses eat up the care of Gods house:
things shall be neat and convenient at home, no care how Gods house lies. When
base trifles are preferred before Gods word, and the good settling of it; as
stage plays and enterludes. When Gods Sabbaths and time must give place to our
callings, or recreations, or are passed away in Gods worship, more heavily then
holy days or worke-daies. Here is a man affected more with his own sin, then
the highest causes of Gods glory.

III. The reason of our Saviors denial: For it is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Our Savior had sharply reproved Satan's impudence in his bold on set this
third time; but yet because it is not sufficient to thrust off an adversary
with heat of words and sharp reproaches, unless there be added also a direct
answer and satisfaction to the matter in hand: he therefore most fully
answers by the Scriptures, even the devil himself, not contenting himself
by his power to repel him, which Satan now begins to feel, unless also by
the power of the word he convince him, and thereby award the dart, and break
the temptation into pieces.

Which must be our rule in dealing with vain and iangling adversaries; not to
answer them according to their foolish disposition or provocation, nor to be
like them in frowardnes or stifnes, in heat and perverseness, but to answer them
with words of wisdom, with sound matter and moderation, both to convince them,
and beat down self-conceit in them; which is the meaning of those two
precepts, Prou. 26.4.5. which seem contrary; but are easily reconciled by the
due respect of persons, places, times, and other circumstances. Ever remember
one rule, that no adversary (suppose the devil himself) is to be answered by
affection or passion, but by judgment and sound reason: Yea, if we have no
hope to win our adversary, or do him much good, as Christ had none of the
devil, yet we must testify to God and his truth for the confirmation of our
selves and others.

The testimony alleged is out of Deuteronomy. 10.20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God: thou shall serve him: and, Deu. 6.13. An universal and affirmative
precept, by which every creature is bound to his Creator, and him alone, to
perform divine worship unto him. And it is aptly applied by Christ to this
dart of Satan: For it implies, 1. That he himself, as now standing in this
conflict with Satan, is a creature of God as he is man, though otherwise as
God he be equal to his Father. As man he is subject to the law, and to this
precept among the rest. 2. That Satan is not God, as he pretends by his
unjust claims, nor any way equal to God. 3. That therefore neither must he
being a creature, give the least divine worship from God; nor he that thus
claims it, can by any means be capable of it. 4. That the Scriptures of God
reserve unto God his due worship, and forbid that any creature shall share with
him. Christ stands not to dispute whether the sight presented were a shadow or
substance, nor whether he would give it him or no, but holds him to the
Scripture, which vpholds his Fathers right.

Quest. But why does our Savior change, and add to the text of Scripture, as
not regarding that terrible woe denounced against such as add or take away
from the word, and contrary to that, in Deuteronomy. 12.32. Here our Savior, 1.
changes: Moses says, Thou shall fear: Christ says, Thou shall worship: 2.
adds: for Moses has not the word only, which is of Christ's putting to that
text.

Answ. 1. Here is some difference indeed in words, but not in sense, and
therefore it is no corruption of the text, nor letting out the life of it,
which stands not in the words, but in the true sense.

fear into worship, and just cause: for, 1. Moses uses fear, which is a
general word, in which is contained all such divine duties as godly men ought
to perform unto God: and our Savior mentions one special, which is included
in that general; which thing Moses speaks as well as he, in the general; as
he that commands a whole, commands every part, inward and outward. 2. Hereby
our Savior aptly meets with Satan's temptation, If thou will worship me; he
uses the same word, not tying himself to Moses his words, but keeping the
sense, but to Satan's word: and, 3. He notes the nearenesse and vndiuidednes of
Gods fear and his worship; as where the cause is, there will be the effect, so
true fear and worship go together; where one is, there will be the other: and
for this cause one is put for the other, not here only, but elsewhere, as Esa.
29.13. their fear toward me was taught by the precept of men: Christ
alleging it, Matthew. 15.9. says, You worship me in vain.

As for the word only added, which is not in the law, it no way adds any
contrary or diverse sense to Moses, but only expounds or gives a fit
commentary to the text, and speaks that plainly in one word, which Moses
does in more: as Deuteronomy. 2.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him,
and walk after no other gods: which is all one with our Saviors, Thou shall
serve him only. As he that says, The King is the supreme governor, and none
but he; says in effect, The King is the only supreme governor.

3. Christ and his Apostles had a privilege in alleging Scriptures without
error, and were infallible expounders as well as

4. This alteration of words is made by Christ, to warrant us, that Scriptures
alleged by teachers according to their right

5. To warrant us, that principles of religion expounded by warrant of
Scripture are truly interpreted, though the Scriptures only before God: here
the Papists exclaim on us as accursed heretics, because we read not the word
only, in all the Scripture. But we read it in effect, and in true sense, Romans
3.28. and, Ephesians. 2.8. by faith without works; which exclusive is all one as to
say, only by faith, as our Savior interprets the exclusion of other gods by
the word only. As if I should say, I did such a thing without help; is it not
all one to say, I only did it? If Christ's interpretation be true and
warrantable, so must ours in the point of justification. And if the devil
himself had not yielded to Christ's allegation, he might have said, Thou
thrustest in the word only, and addest to Gods word, and therefore art not the
Son of God. But the Papists deal more impudently with us, then the devil
did with Christ, who said no such thing, but yielded to evidence of truth,
which they will not.

In the precept it self are three things: 1. the person: 2. the matter: 3. the
object. 1. The person, thou] the whole man and person, which consists of a
body and soul: thou, any reasonable creature that challengest God to be thy
God. 2. The matter shall worship and serve. Worship is twofold, Civil, or
Divine.

Of duty, when men are to be reverently acknowledged for something wherein God
has preferred them before us, as for years, gifts, graces, authority: or
such as are set over us, as parents and fathers of bodies and souls, of
Church, and country. And this is required by the 5. commandment, and Romans
13.1.7. neither does the Gospel and Christianity take away, but teach
ciuility. And performed by the godly, both in speech, as Daniel said, O King;
and Paul to Festus, O noble Festus: and also in outward behavior and gesture,
as Iaacob bowed seven times to Esau; and Joseph taking his sons from the
knees of his father Iaacob having blessed them, did reverence to his father
down to the ground, Genesis 48.12. David inclined his face to the earth, and
bowed himself to Saul, who pursued his life, 1. Sam. 24.9. The like of Ruth to
Boaz, chap. 2. and of Abigail to David, 1. Sam. 25.23. she fell on her face,
and bowed her self to the ground, and fell at his feet. 2. Of courtesy, which
is a fruit of humility, when a man to his equals and inferiors shows
reverence and respect; as Abraham to Lot, Genesis 13.8.9. and to the Hittites his
inferiors, cap. 23.12. he bowed himself before the people of the land: Far
unlike the surlinesse and stiffenesse of proud and conceited persons, who
being void of all good nature, nurture, and religion, know not to bow to any,
neither their betters in the way of duty, nor equals in way of courtesy.

Divine worship is twofold, 1. inward, the sum of the first commandment,
standing in fear, love, and the like: 2. outward only, only mentioned in the
latter branch, must be extended and referred to the former too. The latter of
these is here meant: for the word properly signifies to kiss or adore, (...)
by some outward gesture to manifest a veneration. 1. Because this was it which
Satan required of Christ, namely, to fall down or bow unto him: but Christ
aptly refuses it. 2. This worship proceeds from an inward fear and
apprehension of a divine excellency and power, not communicable to any
creature, which Satan well knew: for even by this bowing he would have Christ
to acknowledge in him a power to dispose of all earthly things, which is proper
to God.

And him only shall thou serve.] By service is not meant the inward service of
the heart: for the words in Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord, and serve
him, will not bear it: the first thereof betokening the inward service, the
second the outward, following the former as the effect the cause. Neither would
our Savior inuert the order, in setting the stream before the fountain.
Therefore this word serve, serves to expound the former, as an addition,
signifying nothing else but the outward service of God; so that Christ here
shows, that it is not enough to give God outward reverence, but that we must
(as servants) perform duties according to his will: so the word signifies,
being taken from servants, (...).
who perform service to bodily Masters in bodily actions.

3. The person to be worshipped and served is God only. Him onely] whom we call
the Lord our God, according to the speech of Samuel, 1.7.3. Direct your hearts
unto the Lord, and serve him only: for his glory will he give to no other.
Quest. Must we give outward worship to none but God? Must we not bow our knee,
and uncover our heads, to our King and Rulers? Must we not rise up to the
hoare-head? Leuit. 19.32. Must we not serve one another in love? How then must
we outwardly worship and serve God only? Ans. We must not deny any civil
worshppe to any man, to whom God has made it due: but external religious
worship must not be given to any creature, man or Angel.

Quest. How may we know one from the other? Answ. They differ greatly: 1. In
the kind, one is seruill, the other sociall; the former due to an absolute Lord
and commander, the latter due from one fellow-seruant to another. This
distinction is grounded in Reu. 19.10. where the Angel refused the worship
done him by John, upon this ground, because he was a fellow-seruant, and one of
the brethren: for John being overcome with the greatness of the Angels glory
and splendour, out of humane infirmity ascribed to him more then civil honor,
and mixed some religious worship with it, which only was due to God.

2. Another difference is in the intention of the mind in worshipping.
Religious bowing is, when a man inwardly apprehends a divine power proper to
God, and incommunicable to the creature; or, when godhead or divine properties
are conceived in the thing bowed unto. As for example: in falling down to an
image, uncovering the head, praying, etc. the mind now conceiues a divine
power in the image of knowing ones thoughts, hearing, helping, and the like; at
least that God has tied his presence and grace to such a place where such an
image is set up. But the civil bowing to the King, or superior, or to the
chair of estate, is a mere token of civil subjection, without any conceit of
deity in the mind, only because we see in them excellent gifts of God, or in
place above in the Church, commonwealth, or family. For the same gesture may
be civil and spiritual according to the intention of the mind of the
worshipper.

3. The end distinguishes them: the one is to exercise godliness, the other to
express ciuility: the one (...), the other (...): one done as a man is a
member of Gods kingdom, the other as he is in the rank of an earthly
kingdom. As for example: Kissing of the Popes feet is a worship done to a man,
and so seems evil; but, being tendered to him as to the Vicar of Christ, as
one that can pardon sins, and cannot err, this religious end makes it a
religious worship, and therefore none of his, being not offered to any other
Prince or Emperor upon the earth.

4. Some difference may be taken from the common estimation of the thing
worshipped, as if it be generally esteemed or reputed divine, and deity
ascribed to that which in it self has it not: The host (as they call it) is
generally held to be Christ's very self: now for a man (suppose a Protestant
that knows it to remain very bread, and that no such deity or change is in
it) to bow down before it, to uncover his head, or use gestures of adoration
to it, is an external religious gesture, and is unlawful, although his
intention be not to worship it, but because in common estimation he ascribes a
kind of Godhead to the creature as others do. And whereas adoration is a sign
of subjection to the thing adored, and a note of inferiority in deed, or in
will; by this gesture this person makes himself inferior to a creature, and
gives worship and pre-eminence to that which in his knowledge has neither
life nor sense; which is senseless, and against common reason.

5. A plain difference between civil worship and divine, is, that all divine
worship is absolute and immediate; which is plain in this instance: God in all
his commandments must be absolutely and simply obeyed, with full obedience,
never calling any of them into question, never expostulating or reasoning the
matter with God, seem they to us never so unreasonable. As Abraham against the
law moral, and even against the law of nature, without all reasoning, rises
up early to kill his own son, when God bids him, who will be simply obeyed
for himself. But all obedience to men is respective, to God, in God, and for
God, and as far as God has appointed them to be obeyed, and no further. God
must be obeyed against the Magistrate, the Magistrate not against God, but so
far as his commandments are agreeable to Gods. Man as man is not to be
obeyed, but because God has set him over us in the Church, Commonwealth, or
family.

Whence we see, that civil worship has his rise and ground in the worship of
God; and what is the cause, that so little reverence is given to superiors,
whether Magistrates or Ministers, Masters or Parents, in these dissolute and
unmannerly days, but because Gods worship decays, and is not laid in the
hearts of inferiors, the force of whose commandment would force reverence to
superiors? What other cause is there, that inferior impudent persons of both
sexes take such liberty (without all respect of conscience, truth, or manners)
to chatter against Gods Ministers and the Kings, toward both whom God has
commanded more then ordinary respect; yea with all bitterness to scoff, rail,
curse, threaten, with horrible, damnable, and incessant oaths, more like
furies then men, even to their faces? but that Gods fear is utterly shaken out
of their hearts: and where Gods fear is absent, how can we expect any fear of
men? The heathen Priests were honored, because heathen gods were feared: which
shall condemn Christians, among whom neither Gods Priests and Ministers, nor
the Ministers of the King Gods vicegerent, and consequently, not God himself
is feared and honored.

All religious worship, whether outward or inward, is due to God only. Doctr.
For inward worship, it is most express, Ioh. 4.24. God being a Spirit, he
must be worshipped in spirit and truth: And it might be proved in all the
parts of inward worship; as 1. Love: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and all thy soul. 2. Fear: Isa. 8.13. Let him be thy fear and
dread: Fear him that is able to cast body and soul into hell. 3. Trust and
confidence: Prou. 3.5. Trust in God with all thy heart. 4. Faithful prayer:
Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the time of trouble: and, How can they call on
him in whom they have not believed? But of this there is little question. As
for outward worship, if religious, all of it is his due only. Psalm. 95.6.
Come, let us kneel before him, and bow down to God our maker: Whence it is
manifest, that all the gestures and signs of religious worship, as bowing of
the body, of knees, lifting up of eyes, or hands, and uncovering the head with
religious intention, is not to be yielded to any but the true God.

Reasons. 1.
1. A reason hereof is in the text, because he only is the Lord our God: our
Lord, of absolute command, and we his servants, whose our souls are, and our
bodies also, to be at his beck in religious use, and none else: and our God,
by the law of creation and daily preservation, as also by the covenant of grace
and redemption: he has not only created, but preserves, yea redeemeth our
souls and bodies also, and no creature has any right unto us (as David
says.) Christ refuses here to bow to the devil, not only because he is a
devil, but because he is a creature.

2. In our text we see, that Satan will yield God is to be served, but not
only, 2
he would have a little service too. Nebuchadnezzar would be contented God
should be served, but he would be served too: if they would but fall down and
bow to his image, he desires no more. Let Christ be as devout toward his
Father as he can inwardly, Satan desires no more but a little outward
reverence. But the three fellows of Daniel tell the King, they will worship
their God only: and Christ tells Satan the chief idolater of all, that he
must serve God only even with external and bodily service.

3. If outward religious worship were due to any creature, 3
then to the Angels the most glorious of all: but they have refused it and
deuolued it only to God as his prerogative. Judge. 13.16. Manoah being about
to worship the Angel that appeared to him, the Angel hindered him, saying, If
thou will offer any sacrifice, offer it to God. And Paul condemns an outward
humility in worshipping of Angels, Col. 2.18. Reu. 19.10. the Angel refused
John's worship: and chap. 22.8. when he fell down at his feet to worship
him, being amassed, and perhaps not knowing whether he might not be the lamb
himself, of whose marriage he was speaking: and the reason in both places,
why he refused even that outward reverence, was, 1. taken from the Angels
condition, he was but a fellow-seruant: 2. because it was proper to God,
Worship God: who is there opposed to all Angels good and bad.

4. Idolatry may be committed only in the gesture, 4
neither can we set our bodies (which ought to be presented as living and
reasonable sacrifices to God) before idoll-worship without the crime of
idolatry: no external dissembled honor can be given to an image with safe
conscience: for which cause Origin was excommunicated by the Church, for
offering a little incense to an idol, though he were forced thereunto by a
sudden fear.

5. Some things must be had alone, and admit not of a second. 5
No man can serve two Masters. One woman cannot have two husbands at once: her
husband is jealous of any partner or corriuall. Now God alone is our Master and
Hushand, and therefore he alone must have religious honor.

This serves to confute the Popish doctrine and practice of their image and
Saint-worshippe, and of giving (many other ways) Gods peculiar worship
clean away to the creatures, not only bowing to images of wood, and stone,
and metal, but inuocating them, vowing unto them, offering gifts unto them,
lighting candles before them, offering incense, dedicating days, fasts, feasts
unto Saints departed, etc. Wherein they commit most horrible idolatry, against
this express commandment, which commands the service of the true God only.
As we shall see further in these grounds:

1. No image may be made of God: Grounds against image worship.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image of any thing in heaven or
earth: for, Thou saw no image, only thou heardest a voice, Deu. 4.12. And
what w^ll ye liken me to, says the Lord? Yet this was a rude people, and
needed all the books that might be. Consequently, God is not to corruptible
thing is conceived to be like him, Romans 1.23. 3. God is vncircumscriptible and
infinite: therefore an image of him is a carved image, and puts it in a Deuteronomy.
27.15. 6. God will not be worshipped in any image, but of his Son: Ioh. 5.23.
All men must honor the Son, as they honor the Father. Let image-mungers
show us what images God will be worshipped in besides Jesus Christ, the
engraven form of his person, and we will worship as many images as they No man
says in his heart, Half have I burnt, or eaten, or warmed my self withal,
and shall I worship the other half as a god? Are not as good blocks as this
every where? and as good stones in the pauement? Is not one as worthy to be
worshipped as the other? How has one deserved to be burnt, and the other to be
reserved for adoration? The same folly is in the Church of Rome: one piece of
the host they eat, another they set up to be worshipped, and want
consideration to say, Was not the piece that is eaten, as worthy to be
worshipped as this? Is this better then that? So that that of the Prophet is
verified of these idolaters, They that make them are like unto them, even as
blockish as the very blocks, which if they could reason, would surely say, Am
not I as worthy to be worshipped as my fellow? am I baser then my equal?

Object. 1.
But they have gotten a late distinction, by which they put on a cloak to hide
the filthiness of their idolatry. Worship (say they) is either that high and
great worship proper to God, which is called (...)* or less and inferior
worship called (...), or service: the former they cannot without idolatry give
to Angels and Saints, the latter they may.

Answ. 1.
But, 1. God cannot be deluded by a distinction of words, seeing the thing it
self is idolatry: let them call it what they will, to delude the world and
themselves withal, the thing is as gross idolatry as ever was among the
heathens, let them lessen it as they can, and call it a less worship,
consisting in external reverence, and inferior to that which is given to the
samplar. For so long as they bow to Saints (which they cannot for shame say is
for civil reverence, unless they had eyes to see them:) they go directly
against the commandment, which says, Thou shall not bow down to them. And
the Lord hereby distinguishes his true worshippers from idolaters, I have
reserved seven thousand which never bowed the knee to Baal. And so long as they
invoke them, vow unto them, swear by them, knock their breasts before them,
creep unto them, etc. do they think they have ears and hear not? nay, do
they not ascribe the seeing of their hearts and wants, omnipotence, and power
to help them? Are they not in the midst of that woe of them that say to the
wood, Arise; and to the dumb stone, Come and help us? And so long as they
imitate the heathen in erecting temples, altars, statues; in appointing them
religious days, feasts, fasts, several worships, etc. can they by an idle
word put out all men's eyes, so as we can see nothing beyond civil worship in
all this, because they call it douleia? What is there now in all Gods worship,
which they cannot do to them? They say, we may not sacrifice to them, that is
due to God only, but invoke them we may. Answ. 1. A silly shift, as though
all Gods proper worship were in sacrifices. 2. What are prayers but sacrifices
of the new Testament? 3. What is it but to offer sacrifice to them, to offer
them candles, incense, and the like?

2. The newfound distinction argues their gross ignorance, both in the
Scriptures, and in other secular learning, 2
if not wilful blindness; the words both of them in both being used for the
same, and promiscuously ascribed both to God and men. I. For the Scriptures.
They may (they say) give douleia to men and Angels: but then may we give all
the service due to the Lord Jesus to them, for under this word is it all
comprehended: Romans 16.18. they serve not the Lord Jesus, (...). And the Apostle
condemns the giving of douleia to things which by nature are no gods, Gal.
4.8. (...). Act. 20.18. serving the Lord with all modesty and many tears,
(...): here is douleia proper to God, which their distinction makes peculiar to
man. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. having turned from idols, (...), to serve the living and
true God. Coloss. 3.24. (...), for ye serve the Lord Christ. And might they
not in the Scripture observe how the Angel refused douleia, Revel. 22.7.
because he was (...), a fellow-seruant? Yet they say it is due to Angels and
Saints. And that latreia is not only taken in Scripture for worship due to
God, but for works belonging to men, is plain by Leuit. 23.7. (...), Thou
shall do no servile work. II. For secular learning: Ludouicus Vines a learned
man of their religion, in his commentaries upon Augustine de ciuitat. Dei, has
proved out of Suida^, Xenophon, and Valla, that these two words are usually
taken one for another. And yet upon this confused distinction, stands all the
frame of their confused idolatry at this day.

3
3. This distinction fights not only against antiquity, but against
themselves. Jerome against Vigilantius says, Nos non Angelos, non Archangelos,
non Cherubim, non Seraphim colimus and adoramus. And Augustine epist. 44. Scias
a Christianis Catholicis nullum coli mortuorum, No Christian Catholic
worshippeth any of the dead. And some of themselves, as Holcot and Durand,
write that no worship at all is to be given to an image, neither is it lawful
to worship it. And yet Aquinas and others say plainly, that the Crucifix and
image of Christ must be adored with the same honor as himself is; yea that
honor, stays in the very image: which I hope is more then douleia that is
given to the image of Christ.

But enough of this idle distinction. They must, as the Midianites, fight
against themselves and one another, that fight against God and his glory. And
we must fight against them, and take part with our God for his right, and
as soon join our selves with Pagans and Infidells as with Papists, one of
their worshippes being every way as idolatrous, as the other. I know there is
difference in the persons whom they represent in the image, between Peter and
Paul, and between Jupiter and Mercury: But in the thing there is no
difference, divine worship given to an image of the one being as hateful to
God as that which is given to the other.

We worship not the image, but God in the image, nor the Saints themselves,
Object. 2.
but God in the Saints; honor done to Gods friends is done to God himself. So
the Rhemists say: As the worship of the image of Antichrist is the worship of
Antichrist himself, so the worship of the image of Christ is the worship
of Christ himself. In Apoc. 12.. ^.

I answer: 1. After the same manner the Gentiles maintained their idolatry, who
instituted idols, vt admoneamur diuinae naturae, Answ. 1.
to put them in mind of God. 2. It is false which they say: for they worship
the images and Saints themselves, 2
as appears evidently in their forenamed services. 3. God will be honored in
such signs and means as himself has appointed, 3
and not condemned; neither has he more condemned image worship, then his
worship in an image. Besides, whatsoever the Rhemists say, God has appointed
what honor to give to his friends, and has denied to give this honor to any
of the^, Isa. 42.8. All will worship is condemned, Col. 2.23. No worship
pleases him that is not commanded in his word, Matthew. 15.9. 4. Thus might
they defend the most gross idolatry as ever was: as for example: 4
Iehu worshipped God, and was zealous for the Lord of hosts, 2. Kin. 10.16. but
he worshipped God in the two calves at Dan and Bethel; for it is said, verse.
31. he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam. He might with Papists have
said, Why, I worship no calves, but God in the calves. Yet he was an
idolater.

The Samaritans and Assyrians in Samaria feared God, and served their images,
2. King. 17.28.33.41. that is, served God in images: But they were not thereby
freed from horrible idolatry, for which God cast them out. Judge. 17. Micha
worshipped the true God in an idol, and could say as much as the Papists, I
worship not the image, but God in the image: for v. 3. the silver was dedicated
to the Lord to make an image: and v. 13. now the Lord will be merciful unto
me, seeing I have got a Leuite in my house. And yet he was a gross idolater*
Exodus 32. the Israelites worshipped not the calfe, but God in the calfe: for 1.
they proclaimed holy day to Iehoua, not to the calfe, v. 5. 2. the thing they
desired was only some visible presence of God to go before them now in the
absence of Moses, v. 1 3. they could not be so senseless as to think that an
idol, which had eyes and did not see, and feet but could not walk, could go
before them, but that God represented thereby and reconciled unto them should
go before them. 4. when they said, These be thy Gods Oh Israel, which brought
thee out of Egypt, could they be so blockish as to think a dead idol, made
but the day before, could be that God which brought them many weeks before out
of Egypt, when it had no being? Therefore by a figure of the sign put for the
thing signified it is thus meant, This is in honor of the God that brought
thee out of Egypt.

Object. They forgate God, Psalm. 106.20. Answ. It cannot be meant of all memory
of God; but, that they forgate their duty and obedience to God, together with
Gods express commandment to the contrary. Yet was this condemned by God, and
revenged by Moses as an high idolatry.

5
5. It is false which the Papists say, that they worship not the image, but God
in the image; their common practice is to invoke images, to trust for good
from them, to vow, offer, and go in pilgrimage to them, and make sure of
protection from them. This is the honor of images to the great and high
dishonor of God. 6
6. The Papists themselves after all their flourishes, are glad to leave this
practice, as which they had rather hold by way of dispute to toil the
Protestants, then in sound judgment to help themselves. Exam Council. Trid.
part. 3.
Chemnitius writes of George Cassander, that after long dispute and strife to
varnish over invocation of Saints, he concluded thus, Ego in meis precibus non
soleo Sanctos inuocare, sed inuocationem dirigo ad Deum ipsum, idque in nomine
Christi: hoc enim tutius esse existimo: I for my part use not to call upon the
Saints, but direct my prayers to God himself, and that in the name of Christ:
for I take this to be the safer course. And Hofmeister a great Papist, after he
had heaped up many opinions about invocation of Saints, concludes in the words
of Augustine, (if that book De visitatione infirmorum was his) Tutius and
iucundius loquor ad meum Iesum, quam ad aliquem sanctorum spirituum Dei, I
speak more safely and with more comfort to my Jesus, then to any of those
blessed spirits that are with God. And to those that do not thus, may be
applied that in Ier. 2.13. This people has committed two great evils, they
have left the fountain of living waters, and dug to themselves wells that
will hold no water.

I will conclude with the concession of Eccius in his Enchiridion, wherein he
shows that invocation of Saints was not delivered by the Spirit of God in the
old Testament, neither in doctrine, nor commandment, nor promise, nor
example, for two reasons: 1. Because that people was so prone to idolatry. 2.
Because the Fathers were in limbo before Christ's passion, neither had the
blessed vision of God. Neither was it delivered in the new Testament for two
reasons more: 1. Because the Gentiles were very prone to return to their old
idolatry. 2. Least the Apostles should seem to teach their own honor after
their death.

Let us take this Doctor at his word, and his reasons as they are (though
better might be given:) and only hence infer thus much; If the doctrine of
invocation of Saints, be found neither in the old nor new Testament, with what
conscience do they urge it on the simple, under pretense of Scripture? If it
be said, This perhaps is but one Doctors opinion, to him consents Asotus a
great and learned Jesuit, who tells us plainly, Non doceri in scripturis, sed
insinuari Sanctorum inuocationem, that the invocation of Saints is only
insinuated in the Scripture.

Mark the force of truth in these two great points, of justification granted
by Bellarmine, and of invocation of Saints granted by all these great Papists.

Our doctrine condemns the presenting of ones body at the external divine
worship of any thing which is not God: Use. 2.
and consequently, a man may not be present at false worship to give it the
least allowance, no not in gesture. Whence they are convicted of dealing false
with God, who present their body at the Mass, with a conceit that they can
keep their hearts to God well enough. For, 1. Might not our Lord for a whole
world have found by all his wisdom such a present help for him, and by such a
policy have ouerreached the devil himself, who required only external
bowing, keeping his heart still unto God? No: our Lord knew well, 1. that body
and soul make but one man, who must have but one God, one Lord, one faith, one
worship. 2. that our bodies are the Lords as well as our souls, 1. Cor. 6.20.
created for his service as well as they, redeemed by Christ's blood as well as
they. 3. that he that requires the whole heart, requires also the whole
strength which is of the body. 4. that the soul cannot be in heaven, if the
body be in hell; neither can he bow the knee of his heart to God, that bows
the knee of his body to Satan. 5. that there can be no agreement between light
and darkness, God and Belial: the Arc and Dagon cannot stand in the same
Temple, and the heart cannot at the same time be the Temple of God and of
idols.

2. This is the difference between the Church of God, and the Synagogue of
Satan, that the one is a chaste wife and spouse of Christ, and keeps her to her
husband alone, and does not admit others to the use of her faith: the other
plays the harlot with many lovers, and keeps not her faith and confidence to
God alone, but permits others to be fellows with him at the same time. Now no
man can take her for a chaste and undefiled spouse, that will give the use of
her body to a stranger, though she plead never so confidently that she keeps
her heart to her husband. The case here is the very same.

3. Here is a number of sins infolded in this one action: 1. here is a
manifest appearance of evil, which we should fly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. 2. an
occasion of offense to others, to draw them in by our example, and, so far as
we may, a destroying of him for whom Christ has died, Romans 14.15. 3. a fight
against faith* and an allowance of that which a man condemns. Romans 14.22.
Blessed is he that condemns not himself in that he allows. His body
allows that which his heart condemns. 4. here is a denial of Christ, whose
faith he ought to confess and profess with his mouth; which he would do, if
it were in soundnes hid in the heart. 5. here is a dastardly joining with his
Lords enemy: for he that is not with him is against him. 6. here is not only
an approbation, but a communication in idolatry; a touching of pitch, and a
defiling of a man's self; a most present danger of infection, and defection
from God. 7. here is an hypocritical show of that which the heart abhorres; a
divided man, and divided manner of worship, which God hates who requires the
whole man. 8. experience shows, that such as give up their bodies to idols.
God in justice for the most part gives up the heart to horrible delusions.

4. If we must avoid an heretic, then much more an idolater. We must not only
hate the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, but avoid it. Many say they hate the
Mass; but I say, then they would avoid it: for we separate our bodies, not
only our hearts from the things we hate. And the commandment is, to get out
of Babylon. We read in the Ecclesiastical history, how S. John fled from
Corinthus the heretic, and Polycarpe from Marcion: And, those whom we may not
bid God-speed, or whom we may not inuit to our own tables, may we join with
them in polluting the Lords table?

5. Such persons keep not their hearts to God, that present their bodies at
idolatry, neither present they their bodies only: for the soul gouernes the
body, the will leads the action, the understanding the will, and the
affections attend the understanding. Now where there is understanding,
judgment, will, and affections, given to the idoll-worship, is not more then
the body given, even the chief and highest faculties of the soul? Of which
we can reckon no better then plowing with an ox and an ass, or sowing the
same field with diverse seeds, which the Lord in the law forbids, and
therein refuses the mixture of warrantable and unwarrantable rites in his
worship. God is a spirit and truth, and will not be worshipped in spirit and
falsehood. A dissembled worship is a mark of a true neutrall, of a plain
Laodicean, neither hot nor cold, a cake half baked on the hearth.

Quest. But is it not lawful on some occasion to be present at Mass.

Answ. In some cases a man may be present, and not sin: as, 1. When he is
there by violent compulsion, being bound and cast in as into a prison, so as
he cannot resist: this is not his sin, but theirs; and it may be said as of
Lucretia, Two in the sin, but one adulterer; she resisted and was forced, so
was he. 2. If in travel a man be in a fit place to see and observe their
folly, so as he show no reverence at all, or approbation by bending his knee,
uncovering his head, or otherwise. Thus the Apostle Paul went into the
idol-temple at Athens, as he passed by, not to approve, but to take occasion
to confute their idolatry, Act. 17.23. 3. A man may be amongst idolaters to
reprove and reprehend them, as 1* King. 13.1. a Prophet came to the altar
where Jeroboam was, to cry out against it. And Elias stood by Baals Priests
mocking them, while they daunced and launced themselves, 1. King. 18. And the
three fellows of Daniel stood by Nebuchadnezzars image, Aderant, sed non
adorarunt. Pet. Martyr.
to protest that they would never worship it, Dan. 3.1. 4. Some hold that in
politic employment, a man's calling necessarily requiring it, he may present
his body at idoll-worship: as a Protestant may carry a sword before a Prince
into the temple of an idol, with two caueats; 1. that neither by word nor
gesture he give any approbation of the idolatry: 2. that public protestation
be made by word, or writing, that he presents not himself for religions sake,
but civil obedience. I will say nothing against this last case: for my part, I
like a great deal better that practice of the Protestant Princes at Augusta,
who brought Charles the fifth their Emperor along as he was going to the
Mass, but left him at the Church-doore, and every man by his departure showed
what he thought of that service. Also when Valentinian brought Julian to the
temple of his idols, he that kept the door, sprinkled his gown with the
idols water, as the heathens used: whereat Valentinian gave him a box on the
ear. If we should thus present our selves, what tumults and stratagems should
we make? Object. That was heathenish service; but the Mass is more Christian,
and has good things in it. Answ. 1. That was the Mass from which the
Protestant Princes departed. 2. The Mass is as gross idolatry as ever any was
among the Gentiles, being made up of Iudaisme, Gentilisme, and shreds of
Christianity, 3. Let them tell us a difference between the bodily adultery of
heathens and Christians, and we will observe the same in the spiritual
whoredom which is idolatry.

Object. 1. But what say you of Namaan the Syrian, who requested leave to go
into the house of Rimmon with the King his Master, and the Prophet bade him go
in peace? 2. King. 5.18. Answ. 1. Some think he spoke only of civil and
politic presence, that his Master the King might lean upon him before his
idol; he in the mean time protesting that he would never worship other god
but the true God: to which the Prophet condescendeth. Which is the answer of M.
Perkins upon the second commandment; and M. Zanchius on Ephesians. 5. But,
howsoever the gesture it self is indifferent, to stand when the King stands,
and bow when the King boweth, etc. yet this gesture being clothed with such
circumstances, seems to me not approved by the Prophet, to do this, 1. in
the Church: 2. before an idol: 3. in the time of public service: 4. by one
professing the true God: this seems not so warrantable. And indeed both those
famous Divines departed from this answer, and gave a sounder in their latter
works, as appears both in M. Perkins his Cases of Conscience, and M. Zanchius
his book De redemptione.

2. Some think he speaks in the time past; as if he should say, Herein that I
have bowed, etc. the Lord be merciful to me: to which the Prophet said, Go in
peace. But there is no need thus to wrest either the tongue or the text.

3. The best answer is, that Namaan professes it a sin to go in to bow with
his Master in the house of Rimmon, and therefore prays twice for mercy for
it, professing he will never now worship any but the true God: neither does he
only pray against sin past, nor for leave for sin to come; but in sense of
his own weakness and infirmity desires mercy, that he may not be drawn from
his purpose, and withal stirs up the Prophet to pray for him for grace and
strength, and for pardon if at any time he should against his purpose be drawn
into his former sin: and in this sense the Prophet bids him go in peace: as
if he should say, I will pray that God would keep thee in thy godly resolution,
and for strength and mercy if thou should be drawn aside, and so farewell.

Now out of this example, how can they defend that not to be a sin, which
himself confesses a sin, and desires grace and mercy for, and strength
against? Besides, Naaman might seem to plead his calling for his warrantize,
if it were not: but what calling can they plead, but only newfanglednes, and
rash running out of their way and calling?

Object. 2. But Daniel worshipped the image which Nebuchadnezzar set up: else
he should have been punished as his three fellows were. Ans. A silly argument
of desperate men, blaspheming the holy Prophet who before had been cast into
the den of lions, for sticking unto God. But if they fall to conjectures, we
may easily refell them in their own kind, thus: 1. Perhaps the image was not
near Daniel. 2. If it were, he might not be observed. 3. If he were, it may be
the Chaldes durst not accuse him for his great grace and place with the King.
4. Or if they did, it may be the King would not hear them, nor draw him to
death for the great love he bare him, or the great service he did in his
kingdom.

Oh therefore let not us that are Jews, that is, the Israel of God, Ioh 4.9.
meddle with these Romish Samaritans; let us not enter into their cities, nor
turn into the way of the Gentiles: let them be unto us as Publicans and
heathens. Oh that our young Gentlemen would not go into this way, to perform
even the basest services of the Mass, but hear the voice of Christ, Matthew.
10.5.

In all our service of God this precept requires that we give him religious
reverence, Use. 3.
and express it in reverent and seemly gestures, especially in prayer and
praise to bow our bodies, and compose the parts thereof to seemly behauiours.
True it is, that religion stands not in gestures, neither does the Scripture
expressly tie us to this or that in particular, but only in general to such as
beseem holiness and humility.

See it in the example of the Saints. 1. King. 8.54. when Solomon had made an
end of all his prayer, be arose from kneeling on his knees, and stretching his
hands toward heaven. Good Iaacob being not able to bend and turn his body
for age, yet in worshipping God, he would lean on the end of his staff,
being in his bed, and bow as well as he could, Heb. 11.21. He might have
thought the age of his body and weakness, might exempt him from outward
adoration, yet he makes a supply of his weakness by the help of a staff. 1.
Chron. 29.20. the whole Congregation of Israel, in blessing the Lord, bowed
down their heads, and worshipped the Lord. And our Lord Jesus himself before
his passion, fell on his face, and prayed, Matthew. 26.39. All to teach us, how
reverently to demean our selves in our Lords service; yea if we can
conveniently, with Ezra, (chap. 9. v. 5.) to fall on our knees, and spread our
hands to the Lord. 1. To testify our humility, and that our souls are cast
down with our bodies. 2. This is a profession of the high Majesty of God
before whom we are: the greater the person is among men, the more reverence is
to be used in speaking to him, or in being spoken unto by him: but God is the
greatest of all, the Lord our maker, therefore let us kneel before him, Psalm.
95.6, 7. 3. Our reverent and humble gestures greatly help us against our own
weaknesses: the lifting up of our eyes and hands, help us to get our hearts
lifted up to God. 4. It manifests our care, to glorify God in our souls and
bodies, as we are commanded, 1. Cor. 6.20. and that we acknowledge them both to
be his, and both to depend upon him. 5. That we set not light by his
ordinances, in which he gives us leave to approach unto his throne of grace;
before whom the very Angels are said to cover their faces. 6. Hereby we give
good example to others, and provoke them also to reverence.

All which much condemns the profaneness of many, whom when Satan cannot
hinder from Church, he preuailes against them there; and in hearing the word,
receiving the Sacraments, and prayer, they manifest their contempt of those
holy ordinances, casting and rolling their eyes here and there, gazing idly,
or laying themselves to sleep and take a nappe some part of the Sermon, or
sitting unmannerly in prayer-time without all reverence, that should they come
so and behave themselves toward their Prince, they should be taught a lesson
for their rudeness. Is this to confess a man's own baseness, and the humble
conceit he has of himself? Is this the fruit of acknowledging Gods infinite
majesty? Surely that soul which feelingly sees it self to deal with God,
will make the body either kneel as a petitioner, or stand as a servant ready
to hear, and know, and do the will of his Lord.

And him only shall thou serve.] Doctr.
God must not only be worshipped, but also served. The distinction is easily
observed. For a man may in heart and gesture honor another, to whom he owes
but little service. And this word in the Hebrew, is taken from servants, who
besides inward reverence, and outward worship, owe to their Masters their
strength, labor, and service, yea frank and cheerful obedience. And suppose
any man have a servant, who will be very complemental, and give his master
cappe and knee, and very good words, yet when his Master commands him any
thing, he will not do it, here is honor, but no service; and denying service,
he plainly shows that his honor is but dissembled and hypocritical. So as
this service to God (as to earthly Masters) stands, 1. in fear, and reverent
inward affection: 2. in dutiful and ready obedience, in all holy and civil
actions. For,

1. These two God in the Scriptures has every where joined together, and
therefore no man may separate them. Deuteronomy. 5.29. Reasons. 1.
Oh that there were in them such an heart to fear me, and to keep my
commandments. Josh. 24.14, 15. Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in
uprightness; else choose you: for I and my house will serve the Lord. Eccles.
12. vlt. Let us hear the end of all, Fear God, and keep his commandments:
which is all one with Fear God, and serve him.

2. This service is a fruit of fear, and a true testimony of it: 2
for fear of God is expressed in service: and if a man would make true trial
of his fear, he may do it by his service. It is a note and branch also of our
love unto God: all which the holy Prophet Moses declares, Deuteronomy. 10.12. when he
expresses, that walking in all Gods ways, is a consequent of fear, and the
service of the Lord a fruit of love: And now Israel, what does the Lord thy
God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to walk in his ways,
and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God.

3. He justly calls for our service, in regard of the relation that is
between him and us, 3
as he is the Lord our God and Master, and has authority over us, to whom we
owe simple obedience, and we are his servants, to whom we owe of right our
whole strength and service. Now he becomes our Lord, and we his servants, not
only by right of creation and preservation, but by express covenant, that as
the Jews servants were said to be their masters money, so we are not our own,
but bought with a price, 1. Cor. 6.20. Our wages are set, and our promise
passed, our earnest-penny received, and no other Lord can lay claim unto us.

4
4. There is no creature exempted from the service of God: all creatures in
their kind serve him, and much more ought man, to whom he has appointed all
creatures to serve him, and has exempted him from the service of them all to
serve himself alone. All the Saints ever gloried that they were the servants
of God. The honorable mention of Moses is, that he was faithful in all the
house of God as a servant. And David says often, Lord, I am thy servant, keep
thy servant, etc. Paul, Peter, Jude, the servants of God. The Angels profess
themselves our fellow-seruants, and are called ministering spirits sent forth
for the heirs of salvation. Adam in innocence was not exempted from this
service, but must serve God in dressing the garden, as a servant his Lord and
Master. Nay, Christ himself the second Adam, was not only styled the beloved
Son, but the righteous servant of God, Isa. 53.11.

5
5. Our talents, our gifts, our strength, our work, our wages, all are his,
received from him, and for him, and therefore must be returned again unto him
in his service.

Quest. What is this service, which God requires at our hands?

Answ. The service of God is either Legal, or Evangelical. The former stands
in a perfect conformity with the whole law of God, when the creature can
present unto God a personal and total righteousness. Of this kind is the
service of the blessed Angels. Of the same kind was Adams in innocence. Of
the same was Christ's service, when he was made obedient to the death, that by
the obedience of one, many might be made righteous. This is that by which we
shall serve God in heaven, when we shall once again recover perfect
sanctification, and the whole image of God, which we have now lost. This now we
cannot attain unto; yet we must ever carry it in our eye as our scope and
aim.

Evangelical service is, when the heart being regenerate by Gods Spirit, and
purified by faith, has Christ's obedience imputed unto it, which is accepted as
it own perfect obedience, and now endeauours to obey God sincerly in all
things. In a word, that is evangelical service, which is perfect in Christ,
begun and inchoate in us; in him complete, in us sincere, and upright, which is
Christian perfection.

And to know this service the better, we will set down the conditions of it.

I. It must be willing and free, a free will offering: for hereby it is
distinguished from the service of devils, and wicked men, who are all subject
unto the power of God, and do him service in executing his will whether they
will or no: but one thing it is to be subjected, another to subject one self:
the one is from an inward principle, even the Spirit of God, which renews the
will, and makes it of unwilling willing and pliable: the other is only by some
outward force. The service of the godly resembles the Angels in heaven, who
are said to have wings, by which their will and readiness is figured in doing
the heasts of God. David had not such wings to fly swiftly, yet he would run
in the way of Gods commandments so fast as the burden of flesh would suffer
him. This condition our Lord and Savior commends unto us in his own example,
when he professes it is his m^ate and drink to do the will of his Father.

2. It must be hearty and sincere. Romans 1.9. whom I serve in my spirit: not in
body and ostentation, but in soul and sincerity; not in hypocrisy and
coldness, but in soundnes and feruencie; not coacted or compelled, but
chearefully and without dispute. The Apostle requires love out of a pure heart,
and a good conscience, 1. Tim. 1.5.
and faith unfeigned. And when the Lord bids David seek his face, David's heart
answers, I will seek thy face, Psalm. 27.8. Those that serve bodily Masters,
must not serve with eye-seruice, but as the servants of Christ, Ephesians. 5.6. how?
doing the will of God from the heart: and v. 5. (...), in simplicity of heart.
What man can abide a servant that deals deceitfully with him, if he know that
he outwardly pretends service, but his heart is not with him, but he dissembles
love, truth, faith, and reverence? No more can God. Men cannot see into the
hearts of their servants, but the Lord does, and cannot be deceived. The
fountain of all our obedience must be a pure and sincere heart, or else, if
the wellhead be corrupt, so are all the waters that issue thence.

3. It must be ruled and squared by God himself: for God must be served as he
will be served, and not as we think good: for God knows what is best, and
what pleases him best. Hin^ obe^^re ab audir^.
All obedience is to go by rule, not our own, or others, but Gods. As the
eyes of the handmaid is upon the hand of her Mistress, so in our service must
our eyes be upon Gods direction, Psalm. 123.2. which is implied in that phrase
Luke 1.75. that we should serve him in righteousness and holiness before him
all the days of our life. An earthly servant must not take up his own work,
nor do other men's business, but depend upon his own Masters mouth and
direction.

Now God rules his whole service in respect of the 1. matter: 2. manner: 3.
end.

I. For the matter. Whatsoever I command, that do only, says the Lord. Thou
shall not do that which is good in thine own eyes, but what I command thee.
And so we are taught to pray, Thy will be done.

II. For the manner. It must be 1. Absolute: 2. Total.

I. Absolute, without all condition on our part; whereas all service to men
must be conditional. The reason hereof is, because God being holiness it
self, can command nothing but what is most just and holy, but men may.

II. Total, both obiectiue and subiectiue. 1. It must be total in respect of
the object; all Gods commandments, all which call for our obedience. Partial
and delicate service, when we list, or at leisure, as the retainers of great
men on feasts days, is not that which likes him, but a constant diligence in
all his commandments, and a conscionable endeavor in all. General service
was holy David's aim, Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be confounded, when I have
respect to all thy commandments. Not that we can perfectly serve him, unless
we were perfectly sanctified, but, that we must make conscience of all Gods
commandments, even the least. 2. It must be total in respect of our selves:
we must be wholly employed in his service, in all our parts and powers, the
whole heart and all the strength is here challenged. Wherein there is a notable
difference between the service we owe to God, and that to men: We are to be
serviceable to men only in part, not wholly; for the soul and conscience are
not subject to men, which God especially takes up and looks for: Gods
privilege it is, to be the father of spirits: for although we take our bodies
from our parents, yet our souls are immediately from God: Men therefore have
no power and authority over our souls, but God has power both over soul and
body, and is the Lord of our conscience and spirit: and therefore of due must
we subject our selves wholly in his service.

III. God rules his service in respect of the end, which is twofold,
intentionis and termini. 1. The proper aim and end of our service must be, 1.
Gods glory directly. If all our service of men must be for God (as we saw it
must) much more must Gods immediate service. 2. The good of our brethren and of
Gods Church, which we must not scandalize, but build up: for God will be served
in our service of men. 2. We must serve our God without end: he requires such
an heart in his people, as to fear him always, Deuteronomy. 5.29. and 6.13. Thou
shall serve the Lord, and cleave unto him. We allow not our servants to cast up
our work, and make holyday at their pleasure: much less must Gods servants
think it lawful at any time to give any service to Satan, sin, lusts, the
world, or any creature against the will of the Lord.

This should provoke us to tender unto God this service with heart and good
will, thus squared by God for the matter, manner, Use.
and ends of it. The Apostle (Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7, 8.) persuades servants to obey
their Masters according to the flesh, by three arguments, all which are much
more strong to persuade our service to our Master in heaven: First (says he)
it is the will of God; Gods institution, and the ordinance of Christ. It is
enough for a servant to know that such a thing is the ordinate will of his own
Master. The second reason of the Apostle, is taken from the honor of their
service, that in serving men they served the Lord Christ, which was an
honorable thing. Now we serve a great Lord, and as good as great. If a servant
were bound to a wicked and froward Master, he must obey him in all lawful
things: How much more are we to yield service to so good a Lord, who can
command nothing but that which is most just, holy, and honorable? He sets us
not about any base or ignoble service, to work in brick or clay, as Pharaoh
commanded the Israelites, but our work is the practice of piety and
righteousness, of prayer and praise. And besides, it is most beneficial to
our selves: for, what gains he by our service? our goodness reaches not to
him, to add a grain to his perfection. Psalm. 50.9.10. I will take no bullock
out of thy house: for all the beasts of the forest are mine, and the sheep on
a thousand mountains: If I were hungry, I would not tell thee. But it is our
honor and profit; as when a noble man takes a poor snake near him to serve
him, such a mean man is more honored and pleasured, then the noble man to
whom he retains. The third reason of the Apostle, is drawn from the
expectation of reward or wages, which, if their Masters should fail, God would
not fail to repend unto the^: knowing, that whatsoever good thing any man
does, that same he shall receive of the Lord. Now if the Lord so liberally
reward faithful service done to mean, and even wicked men, how rich and
royal a reward gives he to the faithful service of himself? If gifts then
may move us to serve God, the Lord truly says, All these do I give thee, and
more also, my Christ, my Spirit, my self, and life eternal. No man gives such
wages, no servant ever had such a play master.

To these might be added sundry other motives: as, 1. To serve God, is to
reign, and to be a king over the world, fleshly lusts, etc. and to suite with
Saints and Angels. 2. God hereby becomes our protector, maintainer, and
revenger, as David often prays, Lord, save thy servant, teach thy servant,
revenge the cause of thy servant, etc. 3. Servants of unrighteousness meet
with the wages of unrighteousness. 4. All our comfort in crosses and
afflictions stands in our service of God, and a good conscience, or else we
have none. 5. To fear and keep his commandments, is the whole duty of a
man, and that which makes him fully happy.

Notes of a good servant of God.

1. Labor to know the will of the Lord, which he has revealed in his word, as
David prayed, Psalm. 119.125. For in the Scripture he has laid out our work
for us: and let us expect our calling to every business there: let us be ready
to hear, not lightly absent, nor present for custom, but conscience. 2. Let
us serve him in affection, and be glad to do any thing to please him, and
grieve when we fail either in doing that we should not, or in not doing that
we ought, or not in that manner that may please the Lord. 3. Be ever employed
in his work: How know I a man's servant, but by his laboring in his masters
business? Ye are his servants, to whom ye obey, Romans 6.16. and Ioh. 15. Ye
are my disciples, if ye do whatsoever I command you. If I see a man spend his
time in the service of sin, of lusts, of games, pleasure, the world, etc. I
know whose servant he is; certainly he is not in the service of God, he is not
in Gods work. 4. Intend thy Lords profit and glory. A good servant knows his
time and strength is his Masters, and he must be profitable to him, and seek
his credit. It will be with every servant of Christ as with Onesimus, Philem.
11. being converted: howsoever before grace he were so unprofitable and
pilfering, as he was unfit for any honest man's house, and much more the house
of God, yet now he profits the Lord, and credites him, and takes not his meat,
and drink, and wages for nothing. 5. A good servant sets forward his masters
work in others, he will provoke his fellow-seruants, and not smite and hinder
them as the evil servant did; he will defend his Lord, he will venture his
life for him, he will stand also for his fellow-seruants while they are in
their Masters business; he will be a law to himself, if there were no law, no
discipline; he will not idle out his time; his eye is upon the eye of his
Master, his mind upon his account, his endeavor to please him in all things.

VERSE. 11. Then the devil left him, and behold, the Angels came and ministered
unto him.

Having by the assistance of God now finished the two former general parts of
this whole history, which stood in the 1. preparation, and 2. the combat it
self: we proceed to the third and last, which is the issue and event of all,
which affords us the sweet fruit and comfort of all our Saviors former
sufferings from Satan, and of our labors and endeauours in opening the same.

In this issue two parts are to be considered: 1. Christ's victory: 2. His
triumph.

His victory and conquest, in that the devil left him.

His triumph, in that the Angels came and ministered unto him.

In both which shine out notably the marks of his divine power, which even in
all his lowest abasements did discover it self to such eyes as could see it,
and gave show of a person far above all that his outward presence seemed to
promise: as for example: His conception was by the holy Ghost: His birth as
mean and base as might be, but graced with a star, and the testimony of
Angels: and his circumcision with Simeons. His baptism performed by John in
Jordan, but graced by his Fathers testimony, and the Spirits descent in a
visible shape of a dove. H^s civil obedience causes him to pay tribute, but
he sends for it to a fish. His person was called Beelzebub, but Beelzebub
confesses him to be the Son of God. At his passion, what greater infamy then
to be hanged between two thieves? what greater glory then to convert and save
one of them? At his apprehension, they that took him fell backward to the
ground, Ioh. 18.6. In death he trod upon deaths neck: and being shut up in
the grave, he opened it. So here he is carried and recarried in the hands of
the devil, but as one weary of his burden, he is forced to leave him on the
plain field, and to give up the bucklers, because a stronger then he is come.
This is the great mystery of God manifest in the flesh, 1. Tim. 3.16.

In the victory of Christ, consider three things. 1. The time when the devil
left him, then. 2. The manner, he departed from him. 3. How long he left him,
and that is in Luke, for a season.

Then] this particle may have reference to three things: 1. When the
temptations were ended, says Luke, namely all those which his Father had
appointed him to endure at this time in the wilderness. For as the Son of God
knew how much to suffer, so Satan would not give over till he had spent all his
powder, and had exercised all his malice in these most hellish temptations,
wherein he used all his skill, strength, and malice, if he might possibly in
this seed of the woman overthrow all the sons of men, and in the head kill
all the members. Whence we may

Doctr.
Observe the obedience of the Son of God, who stood out resolutely, and
departed not the field at all, nor expected any rest, till all the temptations
for this time were ended. Christ could have confounded Satan in the beginning
of the temptations, and so have freed himself from further molestation: but he
continues, and abides all the trial to the end. And why?

Reasons. 1.
1. His love to his Father made him submit himself to the lowest abasement,
even to the death of the cross, and refuse no difficult service for which his
Father sent him into the world, of which this was a principal. The speech of
David was most proper to this son of David, Behold, here am I, let the Lord
do with me even as he will. In his greatest agony he said, Not my will, but
thy will be done. For, he that loves God, his commandments are not grievous
to him. 2
2. His love to his Church made him stand out the uttermost peril in this
dangerous combat. Ephesians. 5.25. Christ loved his Church, (...), and exposed
himself for it, and made himself liable to all wrongs and dangers for it, as
a loving husband steps between his wife and danger. 3
3. He persisted in the combat to teach us to hold out after his example in
temptation, and to expect freedom from temptation when we have endured all,
but not before. It is absurd to expect the victory before the field be won. 4
4. To comfort us his members, in that he has broken asunder all Satan's
forces, and blunted for us the edge and points of his most fierce temptations:
For if this serpent had had more poison and venom in him, if he had had a
sharper and more deadly sting, no doubt our Lord should have been assailed
therewith, and out of doubt he set all his seven heads on work how to cast him
down: But Christ out-stands all, and the Prince of the world found nothing in
him.

Learn from Christ's example willingly and chearefully to obey God in the
greatest temptations and trialls, Use. 1.
even to the end of them. For, 1. We profess we are followers of Christ, and
herein he has gone before us in example, which is of more force then many
precepts. 2. We pray that there may be but one will between God and us, Thy
will be done. These trials shall not be always: yet a little while, and he
that shall come will come: they be not so long as the devil will, but as God
has appointed. 4. The temptations of the godly are best at the end: We have
heard of the patience of Job (says the Apostle) and what end God gave him.
Blessed is the man that endures temptation, Iam. 1.12.

This also reprooues such as make more have for their peace then good speed.
Use. 2.
They would have Canaan before the Canaanites be subdued, nay before they step
into the wilderness: whereas the crown is not given before the strife, but to
those that strive lawfully. Who be they to whom Christ promises a Kingdom, to
eat and drink at his table, and sit on seats with him, but to those that
continue with him in temptation? Luke 22.28. and, Reu. 2. all is promised to
him that overcomes: and, Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a
crown of life.

We are in the Church militant, beset with our enemie^ so long as we live, and
can we expect victory without blows? or think we our selves safe and free,
when we have stood out one skirmish, or two, seeing our enemies are alive, and
ever renewing the assault? No: let us resolve to the contrary with the Apostle,
and say, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, from henceforth is laid up for me a crown of glory, which the
righteous judge shall give me at that day. Wages are given at the end of a
work, and an earnest only in the beginning.

Let us hence comfort our selves: Use. 3.
for so soon as the temptation is ended, we shall be delivered. When Abraham
had a bloody knife in his hand, and was stretching it out to kill his son,
Genesis 22.10. God bids him stay, he had been tempted enough, now his comfort
returns, his Isaac, his joy is preserved. There is but an hour for the power
of darkness, and after that comes light. Be content when God ecclipseth thy
light, and thou see thy self beset with darkness, wait a while, make not
haste, though the Lord tarry, he has not forgotten thee, nor his promise: the
patient abiding of the just, shall not always be forgotten. Matthew. 8.26. when
the disciples had been long tossed with waves, and the ship was full of
water, and they expected present death, then Christ awakes, and rebukes the
storm, and there was a great calm: but he had no sooner rebuked the winds,
but he rebuked their diffidence.

Use. 4.
Lastly, as Christ's temptation shows what condition we are subject to, so his
victory assures us of ours, and shows what shall be the end of our
temptations. In men's battles the victory is doubtful, here it is certain; in
them the stronger for the most part ouercomes, here the weaker, because they
are armed with the same power as Christ was. Here is a difference between the
godly and the wickeds temptations: God leads the wicked into temptations, and
then leaves them; he leads the godly in, but he leads them out also.

II. Then the devil left him,] namely, when he had been every way resisted,
when he could fasten nothing upon the Son of God, when neither penury and
want, nor temptation to vainglory, nor to covetousness could move him, then
he gives over. Whence observe, that

Doctr.
The way to make Satan fly, is strongly and stoutly to resist him. Iam. 4.7.
Resist the devil, and he will fly from you: 1. Pet. 5.8.9. Your adversary
the devil goes about as a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour, whom
resist steadfast in the faith: Ephesians. 4.27. Give no place to the devil.

Reasons. 1.
1. That which has been in the head perfectly fulfilled, shall be also
fulfilled in the members, seeing the resistance of Christ was not only for
himself, but for his members. Let no man say, It is true, the devil is that
strong man, but Christ is stronger then he, that binds him and makes him
fly; but alas! what is that to me a weakling, who dare not look my enemy in
the face? For as our Savior comforted his disciples against the malice of the
world, so also may we be comforted against the malice of the devil: Ioh. 16.
vlt. Be of good comfort, I have overcome the world; which had been but a cold
comfort to them, had not they shared with him in his own victory. Which is
also infinite in power, and in time.

2. The promise of God is, that if we resist Satan, he shall fly: 2
by virtue of which promise the devil is overcome and put to flight, by the
weakest member of Christ, manfully resisting him: for it is not the strength or
worthiness of our resistance that can daunt the devil, but because God has
promised to tread down Satan under our feet, Romans 16.19. therefore by
resisting we must tread upon him, not that our resistance is a cause, but only
a means, in which God gives victory. God promised Israel the land of Canaan,
and power to subdue all those nations then possessors of it; by virtue of which
promise, if five Kings at once rise up against Joshua, he must tread upon all
their necks: it was not their power that did this, though they must use means,
and raise all their power against them, but Gods promise: Say not in thine
heart, By my own hand, or strength, or wisdom, have I taken this good land:
no, it was because God loved thee: It was the land of promise. So here.

3. Satan cannot but fly if he be resisted, 3
because he is a conquered enemy, spoiled of his weapons which were most
mortal: and not only conquered in Christ our head, but in us his members: for
to whom was that promise made, but to the Church, that the seed of the woman
should bruise the serpents head? so as his head is broken to mystical Christ,
whole Christ both the head and the members; let him now nibble at the heel,
and hiffe, and gape, and fly upon them, he cannot hurt them, because his sting
is taken away. Now what can conquered enemies do if they be still resisted,
but fly.

4. The battle which we fight is the Lords, 4
wherein he will not be overcome: the strength is the Lords, who is mighty in
battle. What was the strength of David to Goliath? but when he comes against
him in the Name of the Lord, a small and weak resistance overthrows him. Our
armor is the Lords: Put on the armor of God. And it is armor of proof: It
were a disgrace to his workmanship if it should ever be found slight or
insufficient. Our cause is the Lords, a contention for the faith: Fight the
good fight of faith, which shall prevail against all the gates of hell. Our
captain was never overcome, nor can be, nor any one of his fellows: for they
are all members of that body, whereof he is the head; and can a head able to
save the body, suffer it self to be dismembered of any one member? Our aidars
and assistants that come in to help us while we resist, are the Angels who
have a charge to keep us in our ways, and give us strength and victory: they
be too strong for Satan and all his powers, and they be more that be with us
then they against us.

Obeict. But are not many of Gods children not only sore thrust at, but even
overcome in temptation? Nay, and does not experience show, that the more the
child of God resists, the more Satan assaulteth him? And does not another
experience teach us, that the less he is resisted, the sooner he flies, and is
less troublesome?

Answ. God in great wisdom suffers Satan to molest his dear children, and
infest them with long and strong temptations, and many times to foil them, and
to renew his temptations, and the battle day by day: 1. For their humbling and
exercise; the Lord destroyed not all the Canaanites before Israel, but left
some people to hold them battle, least they should grow secure, Judge. 3.1. and
to teach them battle: And Paul must be buffeted by Satan, least he should be
exalted by the multitude of revelations. 2. To make them more watchful of
their graces, and keep close their faith, hope, love, patience, etc. as when
robbers and pilferers are abroad, men shut up and lock their goods within; so
here. 3. To magnify his own glory, who manifests such power in such
weakness, and seasonably sets in for their safety and victory, when in their
sense they are utterly lost.

Nemo hic non vinc^t, nisi qui vincere noluit. Erasmus.
But, 1. Satan never ouercomes him that resists; he may foil him and beat
his weapon to his head, yea he may send him halting away with Iaacob so long as
he lives; yet at length he shall overcome, if he hold on his resistance.

2. Satan indeed often assaulteth where he is much resisted: for he will still
renew the battle: Sometimes in strong Christians, whom the Lord presses forth
as the leaders in his battle, for, strength is for the war. Job resisted,
but was still assaulted, because his measure of strength was such as was to be
a pattern to all ordinary men. Our Lord had resisted Satan once and again,
but till now he flies not, because he was to be the General of the field, on
whom all must look as an example, and for direction. But the issue is, that
Satan shall fly at length, and the longer and stronger his temptations are,
the more God glorifieth himself both in the victory of his servants, and
confusion of the devil, as we see in both the former examples.

Sometimes he fiercely assayleth weaker Christians, who are easilier pulled
from their holds for want of knowledge, judgment, or resolution: these he
thinks will be tired out with importunity, and he hopes to force them to yield
at length. And surely many weaker ones inuit Satan's temptations unawares,
which toil them worse then death, because they are so flexible; Satan
sometimes hears them speak in his own language, Thou art an hypocrite, a
great sinner above all men; sometimes he sees them use his weapons against
themselves, and so give way to the adversary in stead of resisting, whereas
stout and manfull resistance would speedily procure their peace: sometimes for
want of judgment they are not able to distinguish of Satan's sins from their
own, but carry themselves as they would take upon themselves the devils
reckoning. Alas! all this inuites him, and makes him welcome. But here let
the weakest believer know, that if he resist lawfully, he shall carry away the
victory, let his resistance be never so weak, and this shall make for Gods
greater glory, and Satan's greater confusion, that he is not able to stand out
the field against the weakest of them, whom he may seem to scorn. It was a
great confusion, that Satan was not able to stand against Christ himself: but
that he shall not be able to stand against a sinner, a worm, which turns
again in the name of Christ, is greater confusion then the former.

3. Whereas Satan seems quiet where he is least resisted, it is no marvel,
his kingdom is not divided against himself. What need a captain bend his
forces against a town, which has delivered up it self into his hand: What
need he set bulwarks and cannon-shot against those walls and gates which are
willingly set open? When the strong man keeps the hold, all things are at
peace. But a miserable peace it is, to run from under the color of the
Prince of peace, to go so peaceably and gently to the dungeon of eternal
darkness.

This may comfort the child of God, Use. 1.
that he shall outstand all his temptations: it is not only possible for him
to overcome the devil, and put him to flight, but also certain. For, the just
man falls seven times a day, but rises again, Prou. 24.16. And why? 1.
Because Gods election is eternal, and unchangeable, and his foundation sure.
2. Because of Christ's prayer, that our faith might not fail. 3. Because the
godly man has built his house on a rock, against which the winds may blow,
and the floods beat, but it shall stand: and he is set into that head, who
overcame the tempter that he might overcome him also. 4. Because of the
promise, that God will not forsake his child ouerlong, but supply strength for
the combat, and give a gracious issue. And temptation preuailes only when God
adds not a second grace, but stands a far off.

Object. But was not David overcome with temptation?

Answ. Yes justly when he remitted of his watch and resistance; but this was
neither totally nor finally. The reason is, because God puts a man into the
hands of the devil two ways: 1. absolutely: 2. with limitation. Absolutely,
as when his justice gives up a wicked man to be wholly ruled at his will, 1.
Tim. 2.16.
and carried headlong to destruction. With limitation, when a man is put into
his hand to prevail over him to a certain measure, as Job, and our Savior to
be in these temptations carried and molested, to a certain measure of time and
vexation. Thus the Lord sometimes for a time leaves his own children into the
hand of Satan, so as he may tempt them, and prevail over them to the
committing of fearful sins, as we see in David and Peter, which sins
often blind and harden them, and damp their conscience, that for a time they
see no displeasure of God, but lie secure and impenitent, as David well nigh a
year.

But all this desertion of God was to a certain measure: at length the cloud
was gone, the mist dispersed, the light returned, Satan resisted, and forced to
fly away. And this is the ground of that prayer of David, and the Saints,
Lord, forsake me not ouerlong: not fearing that the Lord would quite take away
his grace from him (as the violent Lutherans teach) but that he should not
withdraw his second grace over far, or overmuch: Which prayer is grounded on
a promise of God, by virtue whereof we may conclude, that the battle of
believers is not for the overthrow, but the exercise of their faith.

Use. 2.
This should stir up the Christian to cheerful resistance, which is the
condition of Satan's flight. Object. Alas, he is a spirit, I am flesh: which
is great advantage. He is a legion, I am but one man, he can oppress me with
number. He is a principallity, as strong as a roaring lion, I am a weak worm.
He is subtle as a serpent, I am foolish and unwise. He is cruel and fierce,
how can I have any heart to resist him?

Answ. 1. There is in every Christian a Spirit stronger then he, Ioh. 4.4.

2. There be more with us then with him, 2. Chron. 32.7. fear him not.

3. He is mighty, Satan potens, omnipotens Christus.

Callidia serpens and sapiens, Christus sapientia.


but what can a strong man being disarmed do?

4. He is subtle, but in our Lord are treasures of wisdom, and he is made
wisdom to us of God, 1. Cor. 1.30.

5. He is cruel, but what hurt can a lion do being in chains, or a grate?

Secondly, in thy resistance strive lawfully: How? Two ways, 1. By good
means. 2. In a good manner.

First, the means of resisting the devil must not be such as are of the
devils own devising, as crosses, relics, holy water, exorcismes, nor
seeking to witches and sorcerers, which is to cast out the devil by
Beel-zebub: but by means appointed by our captain who was best acquainted
with this war; as,

1. The word of God, the holy Scriptures, by which Christ made the devil fly,
and so must we: 1. Ioh. 2.14. I write unto you young men, because ye are
strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the devil:
which plainly shows, that not by spells and charms of Scriptures, but by
the abiding of it in the heart, to rule and order the life, Satan is overcome.
Satan is subtle, but the word gives wisdom to the simple, which ouercomes
his subtilty.

2. Faith in Gods promises, 1. Pet. 5.9. -- whom resist steadfast in the faith;
Christ here sets himself steadfastly in the word of his Father, and so conquers
the devil. The victory that ouercomes the world, is by faith to lean on the
promises of God. Faith keeps in sight Christ our victorious captain, and sets
the crown of life in our eye, which is laid up for them that are faithful to
the death.

3. Prayer joined with fasting and watching. Christ entering this combat armed
himself with fasting, watching, and prayer, for many days together. David
when Goliath drew near, took a stone out of his scrip, and smote him in the
forehead that he fell down: This stone that overthrows the hellish Goliath, is
prayer. While Moses hands are lifted up, all the armies of the Amalekites fly
before Israel. And S. James in his Epistle tells us, that if we would resist
the devil, we must draw near God, c. 4. v. 8. and never do we draw nearer
God, then in effectual and fervent prayer. Let the disciples use any means
without this, the devil will not fly; whereof if they ask the reason, Christ
tells them, the devil is not cast out but by fasting and prayer.

4. The practice of true godliness, and resolution against all unrighteousness.
Righteousness is called a brestplate, Ephesians. 6.14. which is not only that
imputed righteousness of Christ, but that inherent righteousness of our
selves, which is the study and endeavor in a godly life: and the Apostle
James among other directions in resisting the devil, c. 4. v. 8. gives this
for one, Cleanse your hearts ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye wavering
minded: and the reason is good, seeing by every sin and lust being nourished
Satan is let in, and the yielding to any corruption is to give him so much
ground, in stead of beating him out of our borders. He that is in a fight,
abstaineth from whatsoever would hinder him, 1. Cor. 9. and therefore from
sin, which presses down, and hangs fast on. Let us meditate on that law,
Deuteronomy. 23.9. When thou go out against thine enemies to fight, abstain from
every evil thing. For this weakens us, and turns God against us, and drives
his good Angels from us.

5. Gods Spirit: Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: our
own strength will easily be turned against us, our own counsels cannot but
cast us down. God resists the proud, and assisteth the humble. As therefore
Moses said to Israel at the red sea, being naked and weak, not knowing what
to do, so may we in this case, Stand still, fear not, behold the salvation of
the Lord: Greiue not the Spirit, nor quench his motions, who is the spirit of
power, of wisdom, of fortitude and counsel, of strength and direction: and
go forth in the boldness of that Spirit, as Ier. 20.11. The Lord is with me
like a mighty giant, therefore mine enemies shall be overthrown, and shall not
prevail, but shall be mightily confounded.

Secondly, the good manner of resisting the devil that he may fly, is this:

1. Resist the first temptation, and break the serpents head, dash the heads
of Babylons brood against the stones. Wise men will not let the enemy come
near the walls, or the gates, much less into the market place. It is a great
advantage to give the foil at the first onset. Give no place to the devil,
give sin no room in thy heart, or if Satan inwardly suggest any, there close
it up, let it die and never come out, as a man that has a serpent in a
vessel, stops it up and there it dies.

2. Resist the least evil motion, contemn not the least temptation, for
Satan can tell how by one grain of poison to kill the soul, and by one dead
fly to corrupt a whole box of ointment. The weakest man, yea or woman is
strong enough to kill a sleepy Sisera. The weakest temptation is too strong for
a careless and secure adversary. Eve should have resisted Satan in an apple,
and Lots wife in a look. No sin is so light and venial, that is not worth
resistance. For Satan can use small sins as the fisher uses small hairs to
hold the fish as fast, or faster then greater tackling, and secret sins to
do more harm in the soul then open.

3. Resist stoutly and manfully: if he pull one way, pull thou the other, for
so does he that resists. If he tempt thee to pride, incline thou so much the
more to humility. If he move thee to revenge, provoke thy self to meekness
and patience. If he tempt thee to earthlinesse, bend thou thy self so much the
more to heauenly-mindednesse: and thus thou shall beat him with his own
weapons, and take off Goliahs head with his own sword, and all his gain in
tempting thee, shall be to set thee faster and nearer unto God.

4. Resist constantly to the last: though thou be sore assailed, and ready to
forsake the field, yet resist still though never so weakly. Consider that Christ
promises a place on his throne only to him that overcomes, Reu. 3.21. and
that there is no safety in flying, no piece of armor appointed for the back.
If thou be greatly straightned, send Satan to the cross of Christ, there he
shall receive an answer: but rather die manfully then fly cowardly. By flying
thou loosest the victory, by dying thou can not.

5. Resist after victory, when Satan seeemes not to resist; hold on thy
harness, and expect the enemy when he seems absent; perhaps he faines
himself foiled, when he is but renewing his assalt, or as a pyrate hangs out a
flag of truce to board us, or dissembles a flight to draw us out of our holds,
and then has an ambushment against us; and this is his sorest fight: or he
will seem to yield the victory to them, whom he knows cannot tell how to use
it, but either they will grow proud of it, or secure and lay off their watch,
and then, whom he could not in war overcome while he was resisted, in their
peace he spoils them, when they think he needs no resistance.

This reprooues the idle conceit of men, Use. 3.
who think to be safe from the devil without resistance; as, 1. Many ignorant
men, who will spit at the mention of the devil, and bless themselves from the
foul fiend, and yet are sure enough in his power: these never knew what it
meant to resist the devil; they want knowledge in the word, and are willingly
and wilfully ignorant; they want faith, and never inquire after it; they live
according to nature, and the fashion and custom of the times, are ordinary
swearers, and Sabbath Breakers, and worldlings, and they think it was never
well since there was so much preaching. And for the Spirit of God, if he were
not present to restrain them with common grace, it were no living near them;
but for the renewing of the Spirit, to set them out of Satan's power, and the
corruption of their own sins, he is so far from them, as they may say
truly with John's disciples, Act. 19.2. We know not whether there be an holy
Ghost or no. Alas, how pitiful is the state of these men, who think Satan is
fled from them, when he is their only counselor and familiar, ruling them at
his pleasure?

2. Many that think to resist the devil, but they are loath yet to disease
either him or themselves: yet a little while they will hold their sins, they
would feign provide for their wives and children, and rise to such an estate,
before they give up their covetousness, usury, deceitful and injurious
courses: they will leave their voluptuous and adulterous courses, when they are
old, that is, when these sins must needs leave them; they will repent of
their sins when they die, they would be loath to carry them to Gods judgment
with them; but so long as they live, their sin shall live with them. Fie upon
such madness: Are old decrepit men fit for the field? Is a man upon his
deathbed a fit man to master a giant? Shall a man so be-foole himself, as to
think that then he can easiest resist the devil, when his power is least? No,
no: Satan will now triumph and trample upon his spoil; he knows well, that
not one of ten thousand lets his sin live so long with him, but his
repentance dies with him also.

3. Others dream of a victory over the devil, and they are safe, but they are
not so strict as not to yield some equal conditions to their adversary, they
care not to give a little place unto him. They are no great swearers by great
oaths, but now and then they may forget themselves, and say by God, or faith,
or ^oth, etc. Nor great gamesters that live by gaming, but now and then sit out
a number of hours together, to spend and pass away their times. Nor great
drinkers, but only give Satan advantages by running into such company and
houses as they be provoked to drink a little more then they need. Nor open
contemners of the word and prayer, to speak against it, and make their minds
known; but they cannot abide this strictness at home. Is not the Church the
house of prayer? Nor known adulterers, they are honest of their bodies, but
their eyes are full of adultery, and their mouths full of obscene filthy
speeches, yet they say they think no hurt. This is to dally with the devil,
as friends at foyles, that have capps on the points of their rapiers, for fear
of hurting one another. Here is no spirit ruling, but he that rules in the
world. The devil flies not for such a resistance.

III. Then the devil left him,] Namely, when Christ bade him be gone. Whence
we may note; Doctr.
that,

The power of Christ is such, as all the devils in hell are not able to
resist. If Christ bid the devil avoid, even then at his word he must be
packing. Mark. 9.25. he charged the unclean spirit to come out, and enter no
more into the man, so as the devils cried for grief and anger: Mark. 1.34. a
whole legion of devils submissiuely entreat him not to torment them. And this
was not only so in it self, but in the knowledge of all the Jews, who
brought all that were possessed with devils, and he healed them: Matthew. 15.28.
the Canaanitish woman seeking to Christ for her daughter that was possessed,
acknowledged thereby that his power was above all the devils: and our Lord
most notably in that story manifests his power over them, who being absent
from the maid, and did not so much as speak to the devils, yet they obeyed
his will, and could as little withstand his power being absent as present.

Now more distinctly to know this power of Christ, we must understand that it
is either twofold, 1. of his essence, called (...): or 2. of his office, called
(...). The former, is the omnipotency of Christ, as he is God equal with the
Father, and the holy Ghost: for as his essence (as the Son) is the same, so
is his power, an absolute, creating, sustaining, and commanding power, ruling
all creatures, and ouerruling in all things. The latter, is the power of his
office, as he is Mediator and King of his Church: and this power differs
from the former: 1. In that it is a power received, Matthew. 28.18. All power is
given me in heaven and in earth: Phil. 2.9. God has given him a Name above all
Names: whereas Christ's power, as God, is not received, but his own proper
power being God.

2. That power is essential, infinite, and incommunicable to any creature:
this is personal, communicated by dispensation of grace, after a singular
manner unto Christ, as God-Man, and our Mediator.

3. That power is immutable, unchangeable, everlasting; this power shall after
a sort be determined: for he must give up his kingdom to his Father, 1. Cor.
15.24. not that Christ shall ever cease to be a powerful head of his Church,
nor that he shall cease to reign with his Father for all eternity: but look
as the Father now does not rule the Church, namely as Mediator, but the Son;
so the Son shall not then rule his Church in the manner, as he now does, as
Mediator, but in the same manner as his Father shall. Now he rules and puts
forth his power in fighting against his enemies, but then all his enemies shall
be ^roden under his feet, and made his footstool. Now he manifests his
power in gathering a Church by the word and Sacraments, but then all the elect
shall be gathered. Now at his Fathers right hand he puts forth his power in
making intercession for us, but then he shall intercede no more for us. At the
end of the world, he shall declare his mighty power, in raising all the dead,
and sitting on judgment on them; but then there shall be no more need of this
power, when death shall be swallowed up into victory, and a final sentence is
given on all flesh. So as Christ shall not reign as now he does, but as his
Father.

Whence it follows, that the power by which Christ subdueth the devils, is
not only that essential power of his divine nature, but the power of his
office, whereby even in our nature and flesh, he subdueth them. And this power
may be distinguished according to the subjects into two kinds: first, that
power by which he sweetly rules the Church as the head the member^, or a King
his subjects: and this is either directive or coerciue. Secondly, that
coercitiue and iudiciarie power which he exercises against his enemies, wicked
and ungodly men, as a king against rebels and foes to his state and person.
And this power is properly raised against the devils and his instruments,
against which they cannot stand.

Reasons. 1.
1. Christ was prophesied to be the seed of the woman that must bruise the
serpents head: which prophecy plainly shows, that Christ as Mediator in our
flesh, must disperse all Satan's forces planted against us; and for this end the
Son of God appeared, to destroy the works of the devil: and the work does
properly and singularly belong unto Christ, although the fruit and benefit of
it by communication of grace flow unto the Church, as the body of Christ.
Object. But did not others beside Christ command the devils? Act. 8.7. when
Philip preached in Samaria, unclean spirits crying came out of many: and Act.
16.18. Paul turned about, and commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the
maid. Answ. 1. Christ did it by his own power, they by his. 2. The power of
Christ is one thing, faith in his power is another; they did it not so much by
power, as by faith in this power: whence S. Paul charge the foul spirit, In
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to come out. 3. Common men were able to
discern a difference between Christ's power and others in casting out devils:
Mark. 1. and Luke 4.36. fear came on them, and they said among themselves,
With authority he commands foul spirits, and they come out; that is, by his
power and divine authority, and not as other Exorcists did. 4. He did work
his as a person that was God, other his disciples as persons with whom God was,
working and confirming the doctrine with signs and wonders that followed, Mar.
16. vlt.

2. All things are given him, and put under his feet. Ioh. 3.35. 2
The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand. Hebr.
2.8. Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet. And as if that
were not plain enough, he sets in the next words a large comment upon it.
And in that he has put all things in subjection under him, he left nothing
that should not be subject, only except him which did put all things under
him, as it is, 1. Cor. 15.27. So as it is plain, that excepting God himself,
nothing is not subject to Christ as Mediator.

Now this may be enlarged by a special induction of all things. Angels are
subjected to his word: 1. Pet. 3.22. -- to whom Angels, and powers, and might,
are subject: with a reason, For he is the Lord of the holy Angels, and set
far above all principalities and powers, Ephesians. 1.21. Unreasonable creatures
hear his word, and obey him: Luke 8.25. Who is this that commands the winds
and the seas, and they obey him? Diseases obey him: to the leper he says, I
will, be thou clean: and he is clean immediately, Matthew. 8. to the lame man
he says, Take up thy bed, and walk, and he does so, Matthew. 9.6. He meets a
blind man, Ioh. 9.7. and bids him go wash in Siloam, and he comes again
seeing. Yea, death it self hears, and departs at his word, Ioh. 11.44. At
that word Lazarus came forth, bound hand and foot: and the time comes, when
they that are in the graves, shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
come forth. In one word, the Apostle ascribes to Christ, that he is able to
subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3.21. all creatures, all enemies, sin,
Satan, the grave, hell, death, damnation, and whatsoever resists his glory
in himself or any of his members.

3
3. Christ's kingdom must be set up against, and above all the kingdoms of the
world. Dan. 2.45. the little stone cut out of the mountain without hands,
breaks in pieces the clay, the iron, brass, silver, and gold: that is, the
kingdom of Christ shall break all those great kingdoms; and the God of
heaven raises a kingdom to his Son, which shall never be destroyed: And
therefore for the upholding of this kingdom, he must be invested with power,
which neither the tyrants of the world, nor the god of the world can ever
prevail against. For never were all the kingdoms of the world so opposed by
the world and the devil, as the poor kingdom of Jesus Christ: but this power
of Christ is as an hook in Nebuchadnezzars iaws, and a chain in which he
holds Leuiathan, limiting him how far he shall exercise malice against the
Church, and no further.

4
4. Christ as Mediator was to perform those works, which no other creature
could ever do, and therefore was to be endued with such power as no other
creature could be capable of. Hence he proves himself to be from God, Ioh.
15.24. If I do not such works as no other man ever did, believe me not.
Where he speaks of his miracles, which, in respect of the manner and multitude
never man did the like in his own name, nor so many. To which add those great
works, of raising himself by his own power from the dead, Romans 1.4. Of
satisfying Gods justice for man's sin, a work above the reach of men and
Angels. Of meriting eternal life for all the elect, which must be an action
of him that is more then a creature. Of applying his merit, to which end he
must rise from death, ascend and make intercession. Of sending his Spirit. Of
begetting faith, and preserving his people in grace received. Of leading them
through death and the dust into his own glory. These are such things as all
power of mere creatures is too weak for. All the Angels in heaven cannot do
the least of them. All the devils in hell cannot hinder them. And hence Christ
is styled the lion of the tribe of Judah, Michael, the mighty God King of
glory* etc.

This may be a terror to Christ's enemies: Use. 1.
for such is his power as shall make them all his footstool. Do we provoke
him? are we stronger then he? 1. Cor. 10.21. Psalm. 2.9. those that will not be
subject to the rod of his mouth, shall be crushed with a rod of iron. Therefore
take heed of being an enemy to Christ, or his word, or servants: else thou
shall be revenged even in that wherein thou sinnest; with the breath of his
lips he shall slay the wicked; one word of Christ, one ite shall turn them
all into hell. Is the power of Jesus Christ such in his base and low estate, as
all the devils in hell are not able to resist it, but if he speak the word
they give place? how desperately do wicked men go on in sin as if they were
able to make their part good against him? Ioh. 18.6. when Christ but said I am
he, presently his apprehenders fell to the ground. Reu. 17.14. they shall fight
against the lamb, but the lamb shall overcome.

This is comfort also to the godly, Use. 2.
in that Christ as Mediator in our flesh is armed with power above all our
enemies, so as nothing shall hinder our salvation: Not Satan; for the prince of
this world is cast out; he may have us in the mountain, or on the pinnacle, but
he cannot cast us down. Not sin: Christ has powerfully triumphed against it
on the cross, has fully satisfied for it, and perfectly applied that
satisfaction to the forgiveness of sins. Not death: Christ has powerfully
foiled him in his own den, and trampled on him, saying, O death I will be
thy death. Not temptation: Christ sits in heaven as a merciful high Priest,
tempted once as we are, that he might be able to succor them that are tempted.
Not corporal enemies: He by his power rules in the midst of his enemies.
Laban shall not speak a rough word, nor Esau hurt Iaacob, nor Saul hit David;
for he orders the thing otherwise. Not the grave: for we have the assurance of
a glorious resurrection by the working of his mighty power, whereby he is able
to subdue all things, Phil. 3.21. Not hell it self: Reu. 1.18. I have the
keys of hell and of death. In one word, not any thing present nor to come,
nothing shall separate between Christ and us: none shall pluck us out of his
hands: for he has purchased for us, and maintains a mighty salvation, 1.
Pet. 1.5.

This teaches us to submit our selves to this power of Christ, Use. 3.
or else we are worse then senseless creatures who all obey him, yea then the
devils themselves who did obey him. And then is a man submitted to it, when
his eyes are opened to see what is the exceeding greatness of his power in
himself, believing as the Apostle prays, Ephesians. 1.19. Therefore labor to
find Christ's saving power in thy soul. Quest. How may I find it in my self?
Answ. 1. If thou can find the work of faith in thee, a work of great
power, a supernatural work, beyond, yea against the strength of nature. What
a work of omnipotence is it to raise the dead? yet a greater power is here, to
bring in this life of God into him that is dead in trespasses and sins,
resisting his own raising: for so the Apostle implies in that place, Col.
2.12. 2. If thou can find in thee the work of sanctification, which is a
work of great power: 2. Pet. 1.3. according to his divine power he works
grace and glory. This second creation of a man goes far beyond his first in
power: there was nothing to begin with, no more is here; no life of God till
God call the things that are not, as though they were: but there was a bare
privation, here is a resistance and rebellion, stiff necks, and hearts of
adamant. Hence regeneration is called a creation, and the regenerate new
creatures: But a difficult work, which God works not alone, but God and man
made one person, and not of nothing for nothing, as the former, but of worse
then nothing, and for a price, even the precious blood of the Son of God.
Labor to find this change in thy self by faith and holiness. Christ did never
more manifest his power, then by raising himself from the dead: and thou can
not have a surer argument of Christ's power prevailing in thy soul, then by
getting daily out of the grave of sin, and moving according to the life of
God. So soon as Christ had called Lazarus out of his grave, he bade loose him
and let him go; and if thou find the bands of death, thine own sins
loosed, forsaking thy own evil ways, it is a sign that Christ by a
powerful word has quickened thee. Therefore put on S. Paul's mind, Phil. 3.10.
who counted all things dung to know the virtue of Christ his death.

3. A mighty work of power in Christ is, to gather his Church out of all
peoples and nations, and to bring them within one roof, though they were never
so dispersed and alienated one from another, and to knit them by faith to
himself the head, by love one to another, and by his own discipline to
conform them to his own government. It never cost all the Monarchs in the
world so much strength and power to settle their kingdoms and people in peace
under them. Do thou then find thy self brought into the number of Gods
people? Do thou love them entirely for Gods image and goodness? Art thou
serviceable to every member, and that in the head? Here is a power put forth
that has reconciled the woolfe and the lamb, Isa. 1^.6* 7.
the child and the cockatrice. But if thou carest not for Christ's ordinances
and discipline, his laws are too strict, thou must have more liberty then he
affoards, if thy affections be rough and stirring against Gods children, thou
have not yet subjected thy self to Christ.

4. A mighty work of power in Christ was, that he was able to foil
temptations, and stand out against all hellish powers, so that the devil found
nothing in him: Now find thou the power and strength of Christ in the
spiritual combat? Do thou chase Satan before thee, and the whole band of
his temptations? Would thou refuse a whole world rather then sin against
God, or gratify Satan and thy self with the least displeasure of him? All the
power of Christ was set against sin, and Satan's kingdom: And if thou have
part in this power of Christ, it abolisheth sin in thee, and strengthens
thee with full resolution against all sin.

5. A mighty work of Christ's power is, to enrich his children with all
necessary graces tending to salvation, and to lead them into the fruition of
their eternal inheritance. It cost Joshua some labor before he could bring
Israel into the good land that abounded with good things: it cost our IOSHVA
more. Find thou this fruit of Christ's power, that thy face is set toward
heaven? and is it with thee as with those that entered into that good land, who
tasted of the fruits aforehand? have thou received the first fruits of the
Spirit? do thou grow in grace? do thou with patience expect the promises,
and begin the heavenly life already? have thou hope, joy, love of God, zeal
for God, constancy in the truth? for these are purchased by this power of
Christ. Then here is a creating virtue put forth, a fruit of Christ's mighty
power, magnify this grace of God, and hope for the accomplishment and
finishing of the same work by the same power, the which shall preserve thee to
salvation.

6. A mighty work of Christ's power was, the perfect fulfilling of the law.
Whether do thou partake in this power? art thou perfect in the way,
sincerely obeying God in all his commandments? do thou subject thy self
to the law as the rule of thy law? do thou aim at the perfection thereof?
Christ loved his Father with all his heart, and his neighbor as himself, yea
above himself: and if this power of Christ prevail with thee, this will be
the scope and aim of all thy actions. For though the obedience of the law be
not necessary to justification, yet it is requisite to sanctification.

7. Another work of Christ's power was, that it set him free from all
corruption and infirmities, which he undertook for us without sin. Labor to
find this power of Christ in thy soul, daily freeing thee from the corruption
of thy sin, and daily infirmities. If the Son set you free, ye are free
indeed: not only the reign of sin is thrust down, but the corruption of
sin is lessned. David desired the Lord to give him again his free Spirit,
Psalm. 51.10, 11. he well knew, that where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty, that is, not only a redemption from damnation by our justification,
but from corruption and vain conversation by our sanctification.

8. Christ's power was mighty in ruling and ordering his own powers and
faculties; his understanding was able to see God perfectly, his will only
just, right, and wise, never bowing from the will of his Father, Not my will,
but thy will be done. His memory could never forget any good thing, but he
retained his whole duty ever before him. His affections were ordered according
to right judgment. His appetite never exceeded the bounds of sobriety and
moderation. His speech was gracious, his actions all exemplary, no spot in him
from top to toe. And this same power of Christ is in some measure manifest in
all his members: this power enlightneth the minds of believers, formerly
blind, to see God in part, and persuades the will, and boweth it to obey Gods
will, which before was captiuated to the will of the devil: it inspireth godly
desires and gracious resolutions, and strengthens the memory to retain good
things, being before as rimy as a sieve: it guides and altreth the affections,
making the believer to love good things, and good men, and whatsoever sets
forward Gods glory, and to hate zealously the contrary. Christ's power in the
soul, orders the appetite to sobriety in the seasonable and thankful use of
outward mercies, makes a man speak the language of Canaan, and his whole
course savor of Christ.

Whence it is plainly concluded, that ignorant persons, malicious persons,
libertines, intemperate drunkards, gluttons, filthy talkers, swearers, loose in
their behavior, open enemies to this power of Jesus Christ, not submitting
themselves to the rod of his mouth, shall be laid under his rod of iron.

This teaches us to go on fearelesly in good duties, Use. 4.
seeing this power of Christ is with us, and for us. He is of power to protect
us against enemies and dangers. Of power to strengthen, us in our duties; when
we are weak and feeble he will perfect his power in our weakness, 2. Cor.
12.8. Of power to make us invincible in our sufferings, Phil. 4.13. I can do
all things through him that inableth me. Of power to reward our least labor
of love undertaken for him. Of power to answer our prayers, and to do
abundantly above all we ask or think. Of power to perform all his gracious
promises, which shall be made good to us in due time. Of power to supply us with
all good means in his service; he can give wealth, and make the latter end
better, as he did to Job: the divine power gives all things pertaining to life
and godliness, 2. Pet. 1.3. Of power in death it self to keep that which we
commit unto him till the last day. Of power to rebuke diseases, and command
death, and after death to raise our bodies to eternal life, being clothed
with corruption, and wrapped with deaths garments: 1. Cor. 6.14. God has
raised up the Lord Jesus, and shall raise us also by his power.

Lastly, Use. 7.
this doctrine assures us of our perseverance in grace begun, Christ by his
power lays such fast hold on us: no seducer is able to deceive the elect, nor
pluck them out of his hands: for the weakness of God is stronger then men, 1.
Cor. 1.25. and when we cannot comprehend him so fast as we would, he
comprehends us, and preserues us by his power to salvation, 1. Pet. 1.5.
Neither does this doctrine maintain any security but the security of faith,
which is ever attended with the fear of God, and fear to sin.

The SECOND thing in the victory of our Savior is the Matthew; Saint Luke more
plainly, (...), which implies a bodily departure and sensible, as we have
formerly showed his presence to be.

Quest. What kind of departure was this? it seems to be a willing and
voluntary subjection to Christ: he bids him depart, and he is gone. Answ.
Indeed it seems obedience, but it is nothing less then true obedience: for,
1. He came of his own motion, but went away by Christ's, who spoke a powerful
word, which he could not, nor durst resist. 2. He goes when he can stay no
longer, his commission for this time was now expired, his liberty was
restrained, the temptations were ended, God permits him now no further, and now
he leaves the Son of God: and so lest he Job in the same reason, when he had
vexed him as much as he could obtain leave to do. 3. Satan could not change
his wicked nature, in leaving Christ he leaves not his malice against him, only
he leaves the exercise of it for the present. 4. He returns again afterward,
and sets upon our Savior with new assaults, which is a plain argument he went
now against his will.

Doctr.
To do that which God commands, and to leave undone that which he
forbids, is not always a sign of true grace. The devil is commanded to
give over tempting of Christ, and he gives over; is commanded to be gone, and
he goes; yet this is no argument of true grace; and that which is incident
unto the devil, cannot be a sign of grace in any man, but as there is a forced
and fained obedience in Satan himself, so in all his instruments, which
proceeds not from any true grace, let them flatter themselves in it never so
much. Cain offers sacrifice as well as Abell, and brings a show of obedience,
but his heart being filled with murderous thoughts, was void of all grace.
Balaam was commanded not to curse the people of God, and he professed, that if
Balaac would give his house full of silver he would not do it; as if he had
made great conscience of Gods commandment, but it was much against his will:
for having received an answer from God, not to curse them, he would not be
answered, but went again and again to know the mind of God, not content to
rest in that answer, with which he was not pleased. And after that, he gives
Balaac wicked counsel, to send his people to Sittim to offer to their idols,
where Israel was likely to fall in love with women, and so commit fornication
with them; by which he brought the curse of God amongst them, whereby numbers
of them were destroyed. Here was a seeming obedience, without any grace in the
heart.

Exodus 8.19. Iannes and Iambres and the rest of the enchanters of Egypt, stood
out in resisting Moses and Aaron so long as they could, and then gave over; but
not of any conscience, but because in the plague of the lice they saw the
finger of God, against which they could not prevail. The like was the
obedience of the Jews, when they desisted from persecuting the Apostles, Act.
5.35. because Gamaliel a doctor of the Law perceived, that they did fight
against God. Add hereunto the example of Judas, who after his sin of
betraying his Lord, made a fair show of repentance, confessed his sin,
restored the money, bewailed and justified his Master; but all this without all
grace in his heart; for he went away and hanged himself.

1. A man only by repressing and restraining grace, Reasons. 1.
may both do many things which God has commanded, and leave undone what God
has forbidden; as Haman refrained himself from Mordecai, Est. 5.10. though
his heart was full of wrath, chap. 3.5. Many other things might hinder him from
the present execution of his rage against Mordecai, as that Mordecai was as in
a Sanctuary, the Kings gate, that he was the Kings servant, that it was better
to reserve him to a shameful death, and effect it by a kind of form of law,
then to embrue his own hands in the blood of the Kings servant, and so
endanger himself. But the chief cause is Gods restraint of wicked men's fury,
that they cannot execute what they can determine against his Church, though he
use sundry means to restrain them. Nay further, a wicked man may be
restrained from some evils, which the child of God may fall into: he affects
an outward form and credit, and glory of an outward profession sometimes, and
to attain this end in which he notably deceiues himself, he cannot enjoy the
pleasures of sin with greediness; not because he conscionably hates these
sins, but he is bridled with the credit of his profession.

2. Obedience proceeding from true grace is so qualified, Reason. 2.
as neither Satan nor any wicked man is capable of it: For, Conditions of sound
obedience, ^.
1. It is an effect of the love of God, and of goodness. Deuteronomy. 30.20. Choose
life by loving the Lord, and obeying his voice, and cleaving unto him: Ios.
Take heed to the commandment and law, which Moses the servant of the Lord
commanded you, that is, that ye love the Lord your God, and walk in all his
ways, and keep his commandments, and cleave unto him. Love excludes all
coaction and constraint. Now wicked men resembling their father the devil,
cannot love God nor goodness, but notwithstanding all their pretenses, are
haters of God, and enemies of righteousness; they care not for his favor above
life, they love not his presence, nor to be with him, nor his image in his
child, nor his will in his word, nor his house, nor his holiness to resemble
him, nor his glory, but are more troubled at the loss of a grain of their
honor, then all his.

2. This obedience is a daughter of faith: for without faith it is impossible
to please God: whereas wicked men have nothing above corrupt nature, much less
such a supernatural endowment as faith is, which so unites unto Christ, as it
makes him more precious then all the world.

even their minds and consciences, and out of the abundance of the heart the
tongue speaks, the hand works, neither can a bitter fountain send out
sweet waters.

do many things, as Herod, but he cannot yield to all. 4. in continuance and
conclusion of that he does, it holds on in doing things purely for a good
end, for Gods glory, and not by fits and starts, but perseueres to the end,
and the crown of the work. In all which a wicked man comes short, for
whatsoever is forced or fained must be heavily entered on, and more heavily
ended: besides, whatsoever is from such an one, is joined with reigning sin,
which hales and tugges him backward, and toils him out before he be half way
in any good work.

Reason. 3.
How often does the Lord reject the sacrifices of the wicked, their oblations,
their fasts, their prayers, their temporary, yea miraculous faith, their alms
and charity, yea their confessing and preaching of Christ, as in the last
judgment? all which had they bin fruits of sound grace, they had been
acceptable. But God looks not so much to the matter of the work as the person
working, the manner of working, and the end of the action.

Well, as Satan goes away when he can stay no longer, and so his obedience is
forced, Use. 1.
so does sin from most men when they can keep it no longer; and so that
which seems obedience in them, is no better then the devils obedience in
this place. 1. Many refrain many sins for fear of hell, and the curse of
God, they dare not hold their sin any longer, whereas they are as much in
love with it as before: as Moses his parents kept him so long as they durst,
before they exposed him to the waters: so dearly love men the children of
their own corruption. What thank is it for a robber or fellon, to leave
robbing and stealing for fear of hanging? if there were no law, nor
Magistrate, he would to his own calling again, because he is no changeling.
So what thank is it for a man to avoid sin, because of damnation? here is no
fear of God, but fear of evil; no love of God, but self-love. And yet this
is the restraint of most men, whom conscience no whit bridleth. Why do men
abstain from open wronging of men, by robbing, stealing, murdering? they will
say, for conscience. But then the same conscience would keep them from all
secret deceit, lying, and cousenage: and then the same conscience would keep
them from all other sins also, as swearing, drinking, dicing, carding,
gaming, pride, wantonness, and the rest. A good conscience in one thing, is a
good conscience in all. 2. The like is the obedience of many sinners, that are
still in league with their sins. Many filthy unclean whoremungers and harlots
have left their sin, but it is because it has left them, they have broken
their strength, and either age or diseases in their bodies hinder them; oh now
they will pretend conscience. But they can as filthily speak, and as merrily
remember their mad prankes, as ever they acted them; they want only a body,
no mind, will, or affection, to commit over the same things again. Many
prodigals have left their sin, because their wealth has left them, and
poverty feeds upon them. Many quarrellers and swaggerers have left off such
furious courses: why? perhaps they have got some maime, or mischeife, or
perhaps they fear whether they do so again safely or no: and this is all the
conscience that has calmed and quieted them: but what obedience is this? Is
that an obedience to God, for a dicer or gamester to forbear play (or rather,
as it is, his theeuing) when he wants money to stake?

3. In Gods service, what makes men come to Church, to hear, and pray? Every
man says, Conscience. Yea, but good conscience works powerfully upon the
will: what then means the unwillingness of men, and heaviness, who are so
far from apprehending their weeke-occasions, as if they ask their own
hearts, they must tell them, that on the Sabbaths of God, were it not for fear
of law and shame of men, (both which are often forgotten) they would not come
at all. Here is obedience much like the devils, because they are of the
devils teaching. The like of many servants and childrens obedience, whose
coming to Church to hear their duty, is merely forced by the compulsion of
Masters and Parents, and has as little comfort in it as the devils obedience.

4. The like is to be said of late repentance at the time of death: when the
sinner has held his sin so long as he can, then he would be rid of it.
Indeed his sin leaves him, but not the curse of it: but he is so far from
leaving it, as were he to live over his days again, he would put as much life
into his sin as ever before. Late repentance is sieldome true, ever
suspicious. Why do many rich men never do good while they live, but live as
unprofitable and hurtful, as swine till they come to the knife; but then when
death is binding them, they will give somewhat to good uses, to the poor, for
a sermon, etc. Why, what mooues them? Conscience, they say. But it is an
accusing conscience, crying out against their oppression, usury, wrong,
cruelty, and deceit; and now this wicked conscience would stop it own mouth,
by offering to God some trifle of that he has robbed. For were it a good
conscience, why does he not leave some part of his wealth for God, before it
wholly leave him? Were it a free-will-offering, why comes it so late? why does
he not good, while he has time, Galat. 6.10? Surely God likes a living
Christian: for any man will be a Christian dying. Neither is it thanke-worthy
to give that which a man cannot keep. And commonly such gifts do more good to
others then the giver himself. Which is not spoken to hinder men from doing
good at their deaths, but to provoke them to do good before that time. And yet
better late, then never.

Let us examine all our obedience by this ground, and be sure that it differ
from the obedience of devils and wicked men. And that by these rules: 1. God
loves truth in the inward parts, and refuses all that obedience which follows
not sanctification of the Spirit: duties without must flow from graces within.
Examine now thy inward change: we are his new creatures, created to good
works: join that in thy actions which the devil divorced, the inner man with
the outward, the subjection of the soul with the obedience of the body. 2.
Examine thy love in thy obedience, that because the love of God constraines
thee, thou do what he commands, and whether thou preferrest the commandment
of God, which is ever joined with his glory, above all the world, and thy
obedience above thy profit, credit, ease, pleasure, men's favor or disfavor,
whether thou can obey God against all these. This was Abraham's love to God in
so difficult a commandment, as the killing of his son. But Satan here went
away, not for love of God, but for fear, and being forced. 3. Examine thy
manner of obeying, whether it be a willing and ready obedience. If I do it
willingly, (says the Apostle) I have a reward: and, Romans 6.17. Ye have obeyed
from the heart, or heartily. And such obedience, 1. repineth not as giving God
any thing too much, though the dearest things of all. 2. deuiseth no excuses,
as Saul when he did but half the commandment, pretended sacrifice, and the
peoples instance. 3. seeks no delays: I made haste, and delayed not to keep
thy righteous judgments, Psalm. 119.

4. Do thou obey in all thy commandments? 1. the commandment of faith in
the Gospel, as well as the actual obedience of the Law? for one is as
acceptable as the other. 2. obeyest thou the commandment as well of doing
good, as of abstaining from evil? for, the devil here abstaines from this
evil of tempting Christ, but can never do any good: he ioynes not these
commandments in his practice, as Gods spirit does in his precept, Isa.
1.16.17. 3. make thou conscience of the least commandment as well as of the
greatest? for, all of them have a stamp of God upon them: make thou
conscience of small oaths, vain words, rouing thoughts? 4. do thou obey
constantly? for, love is strong as death, and much water cannot quench it. But
alas! much obedience is like that of David's false friends, Psalm. 18.44.45.
strangers shall be in subjection to me, but they shall shrink away.

For a season.]

Luke 4.13.

1. In his ministry, he was tempted both in his doctrine and miracles. For his
doctrine: the Scribes and Pharisees often sought to catch advantages against
him, as in the case of the bill of divorce, Mat. 19.1. and of the woman taken
in adultery, Ioh. 8. which by Moses his law should be stoned; but Master what
say thou? The Sadduces also tempted him in the case of the woman that had
seven husbands, whose she should be in the resurrection, Mat. 22.23. And the
Lawyer concerning the great commandment of the law, verse. 35. As for his
miracles the seal of that doctrine, they tell him to his face that he cast out
devils by Beelzebub, Mat. 9.34. and 12.24.

2. In his life and civil obedience. The Pharisees take counsel together how
they might entangle him in his talk about paying tribute to Caesar, Matthew.
22.15. And when he ate meat in Matthews house, Man. 9.11. they asked why he
did eat meat with Publicans and sinners, and therefore he was one of them.
Simon the Pharise seeing Mary Magdalen annoynting Jesus his feet with precious
ointment, and wash^ng them with tears, and wiping them with her hairs, said,
Surely if this man were a Prophet, he would know that this woman is a sinner,
and not let her meddle with him. How often did they murmr at him, and lie in
wait for him, and take up stones to stone him, and rail upon him, with most
despightfull words, calling him Beelzebub, a Samaritan, a glutton, a loose
companion, running up and down with noted sinners: In all which Satan was the
chief agent.

3. But above all other temptations those were most fierce and furious, with
which he was afflicted, torn, and tormented about the time of his passion, and
on the cross. For then, as himself witnesses, the prince of the world came
upon him with all his train, Ioh. 14.30. he came in himself, and whole
legions of wicked Angels with him, as the Apostle plainly implies, Coloss.
2.15. he spoiled principalities, and powers, and triumphed over them in the
cross. Now or never Satan must win the field, this is the last act, Christ was
never so beset with misery, Satan never had him at such an advantage before;
now Gods whole wrath is upon him, and now the devil and his Angels set upon
him so sore, that in his agony in the garden he sweates drops of water and
blood, and on the cross he cries out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me?

Those were more secret temptations of Satan and his instruments: but let us
see with what hellish darts they pierced him openly upon the cross, not to
speak of those which he endured all the time he was in examination,
condemnation, and leading to execution. For,

1. They hang him between two thieves as an arch-rebell, and of all sinners the
greatest, and dart against him the same temptation with that in all this
history, that he was not the Son of God, If thou be the Son of God, come
down from the cross, certainly God would not let his Son hang there, but
thou art a deluder, and arch-seducer of the people.

2. They tempted him with fear of death, Matthew. 27.42. he saved others,
himself he cannot save; this is a wise Savior indeed, he cannot escape
death in whose hands he is sure enough, and even overcome already of death,
and yet he will be a Savior.

3. They tempted him with utter reiection from God, as the most damned
reprobate that ever was, He trusted in God, now let him deliver him if he will
have him: but he can neither deliver himself, nor God will have none of him,
he abhorres him, and will cast him presently to hell. These and a number of the
like was our Savior molested and tempted withal, secretly and openly, even
then when the wrath of his Father seized upon him. So as truly the Evangelist
might say, that Satan left him but for a season.

Christian life is but an intercourse of quiet and trouble: sometime Satan
leaves Christ, Doctr.
but he comes again and renewes his temptation: so it is with the members, who
have much war, but some peace, many troubles, but some breathing time. This
truth we will a while discover both in the state of the whole church of God
from time to time, as also in some particular members thereof.

What a night seemed to oppress the Church in the cradle, when wicked Cain
slew righteous Abel, so as all religion and true worship seemed to be destroyed
in all Adams posterity, having only Cain left? But shortly after God gave Adam
a Seth, in whom the Church was restored and preserved, and pure religion
propagated. In Henochs time how was the worship of God profaned, when the
sons of God married the daughters of men, which was the cause of the flood?
but afterward it was restored by Noah and Sam, and by him continued to Abraham.
Now the Church, as it was in the Arc, so was it like the Arc of Noah, against
which the waters had a time to increase, and a time also of decreasing. What a
night of trouble was the Church in, all the while it was in Egypt a stranger
for 400. years, especially when they were oppressed with burdens, and had
their infants drowned in the river? but a change came, God sent and saved a
Moses, by whom he will deliver his people, but so as they must be acquainted
with this continual enterchange in their estate: they must be no sooner
delivered out of Egypt, but be chased into the bottom of the sea; but there
God makes them a way: and no sooner out of the sea, but into the wilderness,
and from thence the good land takes them: and in that good land they never
rested in one estate, but sometimes had the better of their enemies, and
sometime for sin their enemies had the better of them, as all the history of
the Judges witnesses. In the time of the Kings, how was the Church troubled
and wasted in the time of Ahab and Iezabel, when all Gods Prophets were slain,
and true religion was quite trodden down? But what a sudden change was there?
even when things were at the worst, did the Lord bring a strange alteration by
Elijah, who slew all the Prophets of Baal, and restored true religion. How
great misery suffered the Church in the time of Manassah and Ammon? but how
happily was it changed by the piety of good Josiah, in whom God made his people
more happy then formerly miserable? But who would have thought but that the
Church had been utterly wasted in the seventy years captivity, wherein it
sat in the shadow of death? Yet it was happily restored by Cyrus. But when his
godly decrees concerning the building of the Temple were hindered by Cambyses
his son, God stirred up Darius who favored the Church, and commanded the
continuance and perfection of the work; but not without many vicissitudes of
storms and calmes, even after their return, as appears in the books of
Ezra and Nehemiah.

What a raging storm was that, wherein our Lord and Head of the Church was put
to death? now the whole Church lay bleeding and dead with him. But what a
change was there the third day by his glorious resurrection? In the Apostles
days, how was the Church wasted when Saul had letters from the high Priests to
carry bound to Jerusalem whosoever called on the Lord? but when he that
breathed out nothing but slaughter and threatening, was once converted, then the
Church had for a while rest and peace, Act. 9.31. After the Apostles, what a
continual storm arose against Christians, which lasted 300. years under the
ten monsters of men, those bloody men, Nero, Domitian, Traian, Antoninus,
Seuerus, Maximinus, Decius, Valerianus, Aurelianus, Dioclesianus, whose rage
was such as a man could not set his foot in Rome, but tread upon the graves of
Martyrs? But after this night a fair sun rose up in the East, Constantine
the Great, who chased before him that horrible darkness, and brought a blessed
calm. But this lasted not long, but his second son Constantius (far short
of his Fathers piety) with all his strength set up and maintained that
Arrian-heresie, which his good father had condemned in the Nicen Council: by
which as bloody persecution sprung up in the Church as ever was before, which
lasted almost 80. years, until Constance the youngest son of Constantine set
up again the Nicen faith in the Western part of the world, as Italy, Greece,
Afric, Illiricum, and banished the former poison. After this, what a black
darkness of Mahometisme possessed the Eastern part of the world, under which
it lies sunck at this day? And as pitchy and palpable darkness of Antichrist
and Popery occupies the Western part of the world. But what a light did the
Lord raise up in the midst of Popery, his zealous servant Luther, since whom
the light has mightily prevailed to the blasting of Antichrist, and the
consuming of him upon his nest? Yet not this without a cloud^ for,

To speak of our own Church: After the long darkness, like that of Egypt,
had prevailed and covered for many hundred years the face of our country, it
pleased God that the light of the Gospel should peep into our land in the
days of King Henry the eight, but yet much clouded, and opposed almost all
his days. In his son Edward the sixth, Englands Josiah, it began to shine
more brightly, and a more thorough reformation was undertaken. But this
sunshine lasted not long, but in Queen Mary's days the truth was again
cast into the fire, and the bodies of Gods Saints pitilesly destroyed. God in
mercy for his elects sake shortened those days, and raised up our late Queen
Elizabeth, of blessed memory in all posterities* who was semper eadem in the
maintenance of the faith, and left Christ sitting in his kingdom, and the
truth triumphing over Popery and Antichristian falsehood, which by Gods mercy
we enjoy under our gracious King. This has been the changeable estate of the
Church from the beginning, and, eadem est ratio totius ac partium, the same
truth discouers it self in the particular members.

As for example. Abraham now a poor man in Egypt, presently enriched and made
heir of the land of promise; now rejoicing in his Isaac, and a while after
stretching out his hand to kill his only son; who also herein was a notable
type of the Church, now bound, and presently loosed, and raised up after a sort
from the dead. Jacob was now afraid of Esau, when he came in warlike manner to
meet him, with 400. men at his heels; but in a little season God lets him see
a sudden change, who had inclined his brothers heart to do him no harm,
against his often former purposes to slay him. Joseph is now hated of his
brethren, after a season honored of them: now sold as a slave to the
Ismaelites, afterward made a governor of Potiphar a Princes house: now accused
by his Mistress, and cast into prison, but after fetched out by Pharaoh, and
made ruler of all his Princes, and the whole land of Egypt. David sometimes
cast down, and, God has forgotten him, a while after so confident in God,
that he will not fear to walk in the vale of the shadow of death: sometimes
pursued by Saul as a traitor and rebel, sometimes by Saul acknowledged his
good son, and more righteous then himself: and when Saul is dead and cease
his persecution, his own son Absalom shall rise against him, to depose him
from his Kingdom. And Jobs messengers of evil tidings still ouertooke one
another. And to spare further examples, our own experience can teach us, that
for the most part, we have not rid our selves out of one temptation, but
another ensues; such are our changes in this present estate. And why?

Reasons. 1.
1. Satan goes for a while from Christ himself, his holy flesh in the time of
his infirmity needing a breathing time, and a refreshing; by which he knows
what we weaklings have need of, and is become a merciful high Priest, to give
us some rest in the midst of our conflicts, which else would bruise and break
us.

2. He goes but for a season, because of his invincible malice, 2
who cannot affoard us a good hours rest, if he may have leave to disturb us,
because he maliceth our Lord and Savior with an inueterate and deadly malice;
so that although he be in himself out of his reach, yet he still continues to
tempt him (being in heaven) in his members upon earth. This deadly malice in
his nature our Savior notes, in Matthew. 12.44. The unclean spirit when he is
cast out, seeks to re-enter, and returns again, and where he finds a fit
house, he brings in seven devils worse then himself. He is diligent to watch
our mischeife, and if he cannot prevail at one time, he will assay another.

3. God sees it good to stir us out of our security, who are ready to expose
our selves to temptation, 3
especially after we have out-stood a temptation, and never are we easier made
a prey for Satan, then when the pride of heart tickles us, and so we grow
secure, because we have out-growne some temptation. If our estate of corruption
did not necessarily require changes and armies of sorrows, we should find the
Lord not delighted in afflicting the sons of men: but he sees how prone we
are to surfeit of fullness; and as a field of corn, the rancker it is, the
easier it is laid down with every storm, and violent wind of temptation: and
therefore he changes hurtful prosperity with wholesome (though bitter) potions
of afflictions, and like a good Physician prescribes us a thin diet, and
abstinence after our surfeit and excess. 2. God sees these changes good for us,
to season and stir up our prayers: In affliction we can seek the Lord
diligently: Isa. 26.16. Oh Lord, in trouble they have visited thee, they powered
out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them. He knows his Church is never
so fitly disposed to feruencie and efficacy in prayer, as when the cross is
on her shoulders; whereas in her peace she is sleepie, cold, negligent, rouing
and remiss in her seeking after Christ, Psalm. 55.19. 3. God sees these changes
good for us, to lift us up from this evil world: for were our prosperity not
interrupted, we would doat too much upon the world, and would wish no other
heaven then this upon earth: for, if we be so hardly and heavily gotten out of
so miserable a world, as is full of sorrows and heart-griefes, how hardly or
rather impossibly should we get out of an unchangeable earthly happiness,
though to enjoy our heavenly inheritance? 4. God sees it good for us to bring
these changes into our estate, and to entermixe with afflictions, comforts and
breathings, to help our patience and perseverance; for else all our sorrows
would exceed our strength, if they were without intermission. The Lord will not
have us swallowed up of sorrow, and therefore does so temper and blend our
estate, as we be not quite tired out with the instance of our skirmishes and
conflicts, but after our skirmishes retyres us for a while, where we may breath
and refresh our selves, and recover our strength and fitnes for further
service, whenever our great commander shall employ us. 5. God sees these
changes good for us, that by them we might prize his mercies, to praise the
giver: does not the night make the day more delightful? would we so prize and
praise God for health, if it were not sweetened with sickness? Plenty is
endeared by want, and an honey comb has no sweetness to a full stomach;
whereas he that has been pinched with penury and need, knows what a benefit
abundance is.

4
4. God for his own great glory brings these changes into our estate, thereby
manifesting, 1. his wisdom in upholding his Church by contraries, which fight
one against another, as the frame of the world standing on four contrary
elements. 2. his power, that brings to the grave, and back again, 1. Sam.
2.6. that supporteth his children to stand under so great burdens without
fainting, thereby magnifying his omnipotent power in such weakness. 3. his
goodness, in suffering his children to be afflicted on every side, but not
drowned in the waves of them; to be persecuted, but not forsaken; to be cast
down, but not to perish; yea to be killed, but not overcome, 2. Cor. 12.9.
and, 4.7. Nay, his goodness is such as turns all these changes to good,
bringing good out of evil, sweet out of sour, life out of death, and his own
order out of earthly confusions. 4. his glory, in the strange and miraculous
deliverance of his Church in it most desperate estate, and in the powerful
overthrow of his enemies. And of all the persecutions of his Church it may be
said as of Lazarus his sickness, It is not to death, but that God may be
glorified.

Use. 1.
Then let us not dream of so stable a peace in our Church and land, as men's
security every where has seemed to lay hold of, looking at the peaceable
disposition of our gracious King, at his hopeful successor, at our union among
our selves, at our league with all other nations, at the continuance and
undisturbed estate and liberty of the Gospel for these 60. years. For, 1. God
sees not good to give any Church on earth an unchangeable estate: that is the
Churches expectation in heaven.

2. Our peace has brought in a general security, profanenes, intolerable
pride of all fashions and colors, beside modest and white, a deluge of
drunkenness daily drowning the brains and souls of thousands, a wearines of
this Mannah, a dangerous Apostasy from the first beginnings of the Gospel,
and a falling back of many great ones into the professed idolatry of
Antichrist, and in the most a contempt of religion, yea and of a formal
profession that denies the power and life of godliness. Add to these
execrable swearing unpunished, foul adulteries unrevenged, or slightly
punished, the Sabbaths of God horribly and generally violated and profaned, by
games and practices unlawful upon any day. And now will God continue a peace
to so unthankful a people, that do put it to no other use then to arm
themselves against God, and fight against his grace and glory?

3. Consider how God dealt with his own people: they had as long peace under
David and Solomon as we, as wise and excellent a King as ever was, being an
eminent type of Christ; yet we see what long ease and peace brought him to,
which was the overthrow of his kingdom, and the renting of ten parts of
twelve from him to his servant: he was a King of peace as his name imported,
had posterity, had made a league with all neighbour-nations; yet God being
provoked, brings a woeful change on him, and his land. So may it be to us.

4. Consider how God has threatntd us of late years to bring in woeful
changes, to remove the Gospel, and give away our kingdom, liberties,
free-holds, and lives to strangers. Remember that admirable year of 88. and
that no less admirable threatening and deliverance in 1605. Forget not the
raging and devouring plague, in which there was no peace or safety to him that
went in and out. Remember the furious fire in many great places of the land,
burning up whole towns and villages: the general diseases and distempers in
men's bodies, which have been as universal as our provocation has been: the
change of our seasons, the breaking out of waters drowning the earth, the
infection of the air, many barbarous conspiracies against the life of so
innocent and merciful a King, and the hot conte^tions of many brethren in our
own Church. All which are remarke^ble signs of Gods displeasure, if not
f^^eru^ners of a lamentable cha^^e. But he that considers how all these
things are forgo^^en and worn away unprofitably, without all wholesome use o^
reformation, cannon but think that the Lord (if timely repentance hinder not)
will take some other course, and so speak as he will be heard: for the truth
never fayles, which you have heard at large; One judgment is ever a forerunner
of another, unless repentance cuts them off. Oh that God would put it in the
hearts of high and low to seek the continuance of our happy peace, in our
seasonable seeking of God by repentance, and not seeking still to provoke him
by wilful impenitencie.

Use. 2.
Let us not expect an end of temptation and trial, while we are here below,
seeing Satan goes away (in respect of temptation and molestation) but for a
season. If Satan be gone, he will return: yea although he cannot prevail, he
will not cease to be an enemy: and the longer our peace has been, let us
think our change the nearer. None of Gods children, but the devil is
sometimes departed from them: but the experience of them all shows, that he
never stayed long away from any of them: and therefore let us be wise,
although Gods goodness have kept him a great while from us, not thereby to
grow secure, but as forecasting his coming again, arm our selves for him. 1.
Not mistaking our present estate, which is a pilgrimage, and not a paradise of
ease and pleasure. 2. Considering, that evils foreseen loose a great part of
their bitterness; and they are so much the weaker against us, as we are stronger
by our providence and foresight of them. 3. Neither may we think much, that
after one, or two, or three assaults, Satan has not done with us, but comes
again, as he did against our Lord: for we servants are not better then our
Master, nor better then our fellow-seruants, who have been often assaulted; as
David, first to adultery, and after that to murder, and after that to pride in
numbering the people, and after that Satan came again and again. And Paul was
often buffeted by Satan, yea after he ^ad prayed thrice, he got no release,
but a promise of sufficient grace. 4. Neither may we conceive it strange, that
after some sleighter temptations, we should be urged with fouler: for Satan
commonly keeps his strongest till the last, as he did to our Lord. Many say,
never were any so fowly tempted, nor so often as they: their flesh trembles,
and their hair stands an end, to think what foul temptations Satan
suggesteth with great instance: But, can there be a fowler temptation then to
worship the devil himself? yet the Son of God was tempted to it. Therefore
resist as he did, and the sin is not thine, but Satan's, who shall be damned,
but thou shall be saved in the day of the Lord. Satan still comes with more
malice, and worst at last, contrary unto God who is best at last.

In that Christian life is mixed with peace and trouble, Use. 3.
learn we not to fix both our eyes upon any present prosperity, nor use it
as a perpetuity, but hold it as a mooueable, which passes and moves from one
to another. We have now a sweet sense of God, but this may be ouercast, he may
hide himself and we be troubled: we may now have the joy of our faith, and
presently our souls be clouded with unbelief, distrust, and dregs of
infidelity. All Gods graces are still in fight, often foiled by their
contraries. And for temporal things, our health is conflicted with sickness,
our good name wounded with disgraces and defamations, our friends mortal, and
were they not so, yet mutable, often becoming our greatest enemies; our wealth
winged, and leaves us when we have most need of comfort, our life it self
commutable with death, which is the turning of us out of all that we loved
dearest, excepting God himself. Let us therefore fix our eyes upon those
eternal good things, and that eternal peace, and that kingdom which cannot
be shaken: For the things which are seen, are temporal, but the things not
seen are eternal. And then, whatsoever I loose, it is but a mooueable, my
inheritance is safe and sure.

Hence we may see how like wicked men are unto their father the devil in their
courses: Satan seems to go from them, Use. 4.
but it is but for a season, and so do their sins, but for a season, by a
counterfeit repentance: As we may see in two or three instances.

1. Some upon some good motions and exhortations by Gods word and Spirit, are
struck with some sense of their estate, their conscience is checked, and they
resolve to take a new course, and perhaps enter upon it, as the devil were
quite gone: But he comes again, he went but for a season, and sets them as
deep in their usury, deceit, gaming, and wicked fellowship as ever before: the
dog returns to his vomit, and the sow to her wallowing in the mire: the
evil spirit that seemed to be gone, is returned, and has brought with him 7.
worse devils, because he found his house fit for him.

2. Some about the time of receiving the communion are very devout, will make a
show of religion, of prayer, of repentance, of charity, and love; they will not
swear much that day, perhaps not play, but read, and (it may be) sing Psalms:
A man would think (for so do they) that the devil is quite gone. But is is
but for a season, their righteousness is but as a morning dew, their
unrighteousness returns, and they become as disordered in their courses, as
malicious in their lives, the next day, as ever they were before. A fearful
case, that with Judas they receive the sop and the devil withal.

3. Others in the time of sickness are very penitent, will confess all,
promise amendment, plead for pardon, crave good prayers, and vow to God, if he
restore them, to become new men and women; and now the devil (they hope) is
quite gone. But no sooner their sickness breaks, but the devil comes again,
and brings all their former sins back again, and they are well contented
against all their vows, promises, and resolutions, to admit them into firmer
favor and league then ever before; and, being of near kindred with Satan,
will then go away when they can stay no longer. The most hard-hearted Pharaoh
can do all this, to get out of Gods hands; but he must not so carry it at
length.

Use. 5.
Lastly, let us comfort our selves in our trouble: for this also is changeable:
our Lord knows we have need of a refreshing, and we shall be refreshed: The
rod of the wicked (yea of the wicked one) shall not always rest on the lot of
the righteous, least they put forth their hand to vanity. And although it may
seem hard, that Satan goes but for a season, yet is not this without much
comfort: For although it were a great mercy for Satan not to come unto us, yet
to come and go away foiled, is a far greater, as he does from all the
members of Christ, who in expectation of this joyful and seasonable event, may
encourage themselves to hold out with patience unto the end.

And behold, the Angels came, and ministered to him.] In these words is laid
the triumph of our Lord Jesus Christ after his victory, which is set down not
without a star or note of special observation, Behold, being held over this
point following for special purpose. For this particle notes, 1. sometimes a
strange thing, as, Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son. 2. a long
desired thing and much expected, as Behold oh Sion, thy King comes, etc. 3.
an excellent thing now set before the eye, and present, as Ioh. 1.29. Behold
the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world: and so it is a note
of admiration. 4. a true and certain thing: so it is set before many promises
and threats. 5. it is ever a note of attention, and argues intention and weight
in that matter where God^ spirit has prefixed it. It has all these uses in
this place, noting a strange triumph, such as never was met withal in all the
monuments in all the world besides. It was but shadowed in that strange triumph
sung to David, 1. Sam. 18.7. when David had returned from the slaughter of the
Philistim, the women came out and sang by course, Saul has slain his
thousand, but David his ten thousand: why? he slew but one man. True, but in
that one enemy he did as much as if he had slain ten thousand others. But
here in one enemy, this son of David, has slain his legions and millions,
not of men but of devils, not Philistims but hellish powers, which had defied
the host of Israel. This note also calls us to behold as expetible, certain
and excellent a triumph, as all the notes of attention, which are in the
Scripture, all the Selahs in the world are too little to gain sufficient
attention, or set out the greatness of this divine mystery. It calls us as
the parenthesis of our Savior, Matthew. 24.15. speaking of the certain strange
signs of Ierusalems overthrow, Let him that reads consider; so, Let him that
reads behold, that is, consider, meditate, remember, prize this great and most
glorious work of the Son of God. And it checketh and rebukes our heaviness,
dullness, and want of affection, in the beholding and due regard of so
material and comfortable a point of heavenly doctrine, so nearly concerning
our selves.

But what must we behold? Two things: 1. the coming of the Angels unto
Christ: 2. their ministering unto him.

In the coming of the Angels, note, 1. when they came, 2. to whom, 3. the
manner of their coming.

I. When, in the first word, namely, when the devil had left him, and not
before. For, 1. The good Angels have little joy to be where wicked Angels and
devils are, especially whiles their commission stands in force to molest the
children of God. 2. They were ready enough to attend upon their Lord, but
Christ permitted them not for the time of temptation: 1. least their presence
should have driven Satan away before the temptations had been ended: 2. he had
no assistance of man or Angel, but alone in the wilderness sustaines all the
brunt of the temptation: he must tread the wine press alone, as none must
share with him in his conquest and victory. 3. Satan's mouth must be stopped, who
would have said he had overcome by their aid, if they had been present. 4.
the text says not, the Angels came in to help him in the time of temptation;
but, when the devil had left him, they came to minister to him.

II. The person to whom they came, to him, now plainly manifest to be God and
man; man tempted by the devil like us in all things except sin: God who had
overcome the devil, and now riding in a chariot of glorious triumph: man in
the hands of Satan carried and recarried at hi^ pleasure; God to whom the
Angels as ministers and the squires of his holy body, do homage and attendance.

III. The manner of their coming, (...), they now came in unto him, standing
before a far off, as in war when the enemies are scattered, the friends
come in with joy: for so it was when David had foiled and slain Goliath, the
men of Israel and Judah arose, and shouted, and applauded that noble victory.
Quest. But how did they come in? Answ. 1. By moving themselves from the place
where they were, to that place where Christ was, and they were not before: for
the same Angel cannot be in two places at once, because 1. his essence is
finite, and therefore limited: 2. they are definitiuely in place, although not
repletiuely: for the Angel is in a place only by applying his virtue to the
place, by which virtue he rather contains the place, then the place him, as it
does bodies. But when a legion of wicked Angels are said to be in one man, it
is necessary that spirits defined to be in one place cannot at the same time be
without that place, till they be moved thence into another. Good Angels are
not in heaven and earth at once, much less every where.

Now whereas they are truly in place, and truly moved in place, both without
bodies, as also in assumed bodies, it would make much for the clearing of the
Angels manner of coming to Christ, to know whether they came in a bodily
shape, or without bodies at this time.

I answer: I doubt not (and yet I will not contend about it) but that they came
in bodily shapes. Quest. Have Angels bodily shapes to appear in? Answ. No, not
proper to their nature, being mere spiritual substances, without corporal
matter, or physical composition: But yet they have bodily shapes, 1. ascribed
to them by way of description, for our capacity: 2. assumed by way of
dispensation, for our consolation.

I. For our comprehension; the Angels with two wings cover their face and
feet: Isa. 6.2.
this signifies that their nature is hid and removed from the knowledge of
man. And with twain^ their bodies are covered, Ezekiel. 1.11. to signify the
same. And their hands are under their wings, by which is meant that their
powerful and secret operation also cannot be discerned with bodily eyes.
Therefore has the Scripture expressed their nature under diverse shapes, and
ascribed unto them many parts both of men and other creatures, in which we may
see and understand their work and office: as Ezekiel. 1. Angels are described by
four beasts; not because they are no more in number (for, thousand thousands
sit at his right hand) but because they do the commandments of God in all the
four quarters of the world. These beasts have four several faces: 1. the
face of a man, to note that all of them are reasonable and understanding
creatures, as man is. 2. The face of lion, to signify that every Angel is
strong, and powerful, and courageous, as the lion among the beasts. Psalm.
103.20. Praise the Lord ye Angels strong in power. One of them is stronger
then a number of men, yea then a number of devils. 3. The face of an ox, to
note their patience, assiduity, and vnweariablenesse in their service and
ministry, as the ox is a beast most patient, and constant, and profitable in
his pains. 4. The face of an Eagle, to note their swiftnes and alacrity,
seeing a far off many hidden things, as the eagle; flying strongly and
swiftly, that is, irresistably as the eagle; holding out, not fainting, but
renewing their strength as the Eagle.

By the same Prophet they are described, chap. 10.22. by the shape of Cherubs;
which were the faces of little fair boys with wings, noting unto us under
that resemblance their nature, to be void of deceit as a child, simple,
innocent, not proud, or arrogant, not envious or malicious. Having wings, to
note their readiness and expedition in their ministry: and these wings in their
four sides, to show that their ministry extended to all the four sides of
the world.

II. By way of dispensation they have often assumed bodies that were true,
immediately created of God, not imaginary or fantastical, as Marcion thought,
whom Tertullian refuted, neither generated nor borne as man's body is, nor
hypostatically united to the Angels as constitutiue parts, as our body is a
constituting part of us; but taken upon them for the time of some special
service, and laid down again, even as we do our apparel, to the end they
might familiarly confer and converse with men, till that special service
were performed.

Thus did they visibly appear unto Abraham, and Lot: thus was the Angel of
God seen like a fourth man in the furnace, which the three children were cast
into: and in this humane shape, I doubt not but they came and appeared to the
Son of God in this place. My reasons are these: 1. If the Angels came often
in bodily shape to the servants and adopted children of God, why should they
not much more to the natural son of God, being clothed with the same
flesh? 2. We have formerly proved, that the devil came in assumed bodily
shape, the more to molest and terrify the Son of God, and therefore the
Angels came to him also in bodily shape, the more to comfort him. 3. The
present estate of Christ required it, who was man, and subject to many
infirmities and therefore the Angels came corporally to comfort him. 4. The
phrase of the text implies a more sensible and peculiar manifestation of them
then before: as in his agony an Angel appeared to him, (...), Luke 22. verse.
43.

In this coming of the Angels, note an happy change in the estate of our
Lord and Savior: for in stead of the devil his deadly enemy, come the Angels
his friends and household servants: in stead of one devil many Angels; for all
are his to attend him: in stead of sharp hunger for forty days together, now
he has bodily food and comfort in a moment.

God may hide his comforts for a time, but at length they shall shine out upon
his servants, Doctr.
as the Sun from under a cloud. All the time of the temptation Christ was
without food, without angels, nay he endured sharpness of hunger in his
body, and of Satanicall vexation in his soul: now the Lord comforts him, not
only in remoouing evil from him, but restoring to him his whole former peace,
besides the glory of a most victorious conquest. And the fame is his dealing
with his servants: Psalm. 73.1. David being plunged exceedingly with a
greiuous temptation of Atheism; not whether there was a God or no, but whether
this God were just and merciful, seeing things fell out so cross to good men,
and so prosperously to the wicked; at last breaks out into a settled
resolution, Yet God is good to Israel. He was in the temptation as a man cast
into the sea, souzed in one billow after another, at length he descries a
shore, and with extreme toil and peril he gets thither, and crawles up, and
says, Yet I have escaped drowning. Or as a man in a pitched field, that in the
thick of his enemies had escaped many blows and deadly thrusts, being set
beyond the danger says, Yet I am alive. So the Lord, though in temptation he
seem to stand far off, yet at last appears with strength and comfort. The
same David being in great distress a long time, hunted as a partrich by Saul,
but strangely delivered from him and Achish, concludes, Psalm. 34.19. that how
great soever the troubles of the righteous be, yet the Lord will at length
deliver them out of all. To this purpose Solomon says, that though the just
man fall seven times a day, namely, into affliction, yet he rises again.

Abraham in his great trial saw nothing but sorrow and vexation for the loss
of his Isaac: yet in the third day, when the case seemed desperate, God was
seen in the mountain; as if he had not seen God till he came into the
mountain. Whence his posterity used it as a prouerbiall speech, In the mount
God will be seen: at the farthest he will be seen there, if not before. Job
assured himself, that after darkness he should see light; and according to
his faith, we see howsoever Satan set upon him, with all his might to blaspheme
God, and his friends would needs prove him an hypocrite; and which was worst
of all, God not only stood a far off from him, but came upon him and against
him, a^ one that strove against the Almighty, and one that reproved his
Maker, chap. 39. verse. 35. Yet at length he steps out for him, acquites him,
and rebukes his friends, and accepts his servant, and turns his captivity,
and gives him twice as much as before he had, chap. 42.

1. Herein the wisdom of God joined with his power shines forth: hereby the
Lord knows how to bring light into darkness* Reasons. ^
Psalm. 112.4. To the righteous arises light in darkness. No darkness or
misery can keep God and the comforts and strength of his spirir from his
children. Yea hereby the Lord knows how to bring light out of darkness, as
once he did in the creation. Romans 8.28. We know that all things are turned to
the best, to them that love God. His wisdom and power turns things, not
only good into good, nor only afflictions and trialls, but even their sins
and infirmities, like a good Physician that tempers poison to a remedy, and of
the vipers skin makes a remedy to heal the vipers sting.

2
2. This is the godly man's privilege above wicked ones, to find God sweet to
their souls, either in afflictions, or in the ending of them: 1. Because their
persons (whatsoever their estate is) are accepted with God, whereas the other
are rejected. 2. They are sealed with the earnest of Gods Spirit, and can go
unto God in fervent prayer, whereas the other want the Spirit, and cannot pray
to be heard, Psalm. 18.41. They cried, but there was none to save them, even to
the Lord, but he answered them not. 3. They have the grace of repentance, which
remooueth sin the cause of affliction, and are come out of Babylon though
they live in Babylon, being as so many Lots in Sodom. Whereas the other are
impenitent, and never remoouing the cause, the effect lies ever upon them, and
grows every day heavier then other. 4. They have peace of conscience, and can
sing the new song to God and the Lamb, having a set of sweet music in their
souls; and with peace they have patience, supporting them unto Gods seasonable
deliverance. Whereas the wicked are as the raging sea, and has no peace nor
patience, but a senseless vnfeelingnes of his estate; their hearts being
either ignorant, ascribing all their smart to fortune, or constellations, or
fatal necessity, or secundarie causes, being not able to ascend so high as
God the author, or descend so low as their own sins, the just meritorious
causes of their evils; or hardened and feared, or senseless, as Nabals, whose
heart was as a stone dead within him.

3. It is one end of Gods extreme humbling and afflicting his children, 3
not to sink or forsake them, but at the last the powerful work of God may
be showed on them, both for his glory, and for theirs. The poor blind man
(Ioh. 9.3.) carried his misery a great while, from his birth to his man's
estate, and yet our Savior witnesses, that it was neither for his sin, nor
his parents, but that the work of God might be showed upon him, in the
miraculous cure of him, when all the power of nature and art could do him no
good. Lazarus was extremely humbled, dead, buried, lying in the grave
stinking: who would have thought beyond Marie, that he should ever have been
raised till the last day? and yet our Savior says, that even that death of
his was not unto death, but for the glory of God. Yea, the Lord never brings
any evil upon his children, wherein he intends not in the end to show them
some great good: as, Deuteronomy. 8.16. The Lord tried, humbled, and proved his
people in the wilderness, that he might do them good at the latter end: Job.
23.10. He knows my way, and tries me: and what was the issue? I shall come
forth like the gold. And the Apostle affirms, that the trial of our faith,
which is much more precious then gold, shall be found to our praise, and
honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1.7.

4. God hereby manifests his care and faithfulness in his promises: for he
has promised, 4
how ever he suspend his comfort for a time, to return in due season: neither
can his mercies come to an end, nor himself leave his mansion finally.
Therefore it is that sometimes he foretells his children of evils to come,
that they should not come suddenly on them, neither distrust his care in them,
nor be ignorant of a good issue out of them. Sometimes he numbers them out, and
tells how many, and how long they shall be: Dan. 9.25. There shall be seven
weeks, that is, 39. years: and there shall be 62. weeks, that is, 434.
years, and then the Messiah shall come, etc. And always he that sets the
setting of the stars, and the bounds of the sea, sets much more the period
of our troubles, and the furthest limits of his childrens trialls: which
suppose they reach even to death it self, they can follow them no further, but
then is a rest from their labor, a reaping of the fruits of their sufferings, a
joyful harvest of a sorrowful seed-time, wherein the Lord meets them with a
full and final deliverance, and puts them in full possession of all his
most glorious promises.

Let the godly consider of their privilege, to provoke their patience and
constancy in their greatest trialls, Use. 1.
which cannot make them unhappy. For, 1. the godly man's present estate is the
best for him, be it what it can be: the furnace is the fittest place for gold.
2. His trial shall be turned to good, because God has the disposing,
tempering, and moderating of it. 3. His trial shall be but light and
momentanie, not in respect of the present sense, but because the time of
temptation shall be swallowed up by the time of victory. 4. The end of it
shall be happy: and all is well that ends well: here shall be a most blessed
issue. And therefore let drossie Christians fear the fire, who are sure to be
wasted in it, whilst the godly rejoice in tribulation, and with David walk
fearelesly in the valley of the shadow of death, because God who lead him in,
was with him to lead him out.

Use. 2.
Let the godly judge of themselves, not always according to their present
estate or feeling, which may occasion their feet almost to slip, but look to
the happy end of their trialls. And though the smart continue long, yet let
them be assured that the Lord keeps all their bones, so that not one of them
shall be broken. Neither let us be weary and faint in our minds: for although
God seems not to hear us, yet he hears us well enough. And though he seem
to stand a far off us, it is but a delay, no denial of our request. And
though he seem to neglect us, let us not neglect him, but hold on in the
prayer of faith.

Let this serve as a ground of comfort and encouragement to us, that when with
Israel we stand as it were on the sea-brinke, Use. 3.
beset with dangers, then we may be still, and expect the salvation of the
Lord. For as the Prophet speaks, (Hab. 2.3.) The vision is yet for an
appointed time, but at the last it shall speak, and not lie: if it tarry,
wait; for it shall surely come, and shall not stay. Let us not make have, nor
limit the Lord in prescribing him a time and means, but leave all that to his
wisdom, lean upon his arm, rely upon his word, he has a mind to do us
good, and that when it shall be most for his glory and our salvation. We are
not yet perhaps in the deep, nor at the mountain, nor so destitute but we
find some supports. But were the case with us as it was here with our Lord, if
we were in the world, as in a wilderness, our food nothing but stones, our
company wild beasts ready to devour us, no friend near us, but the devil
tossing and tumbling us with his temptatitions, we should assuredly see the
Lord extraordinarily providing for us, and working out for us unexpected
comfort: our extremity would be Gods opportunity. God sent not Moses to deliver
Israel from under Pharaoh, till their burdens were at the heauiest, and their
oppressions intolerable. God might have sent his Angel to preserve the three
children from being cast into the fire, but he did not till they were in the
flames; this was Gods time, wherein he was more glorified, his children more
gloriously delivered, and his enemies more mightily confounded, then if the
Angel had come before. Even so, when this land was like that fiery furnace,
made seven times hotter then ever before, to consume the bodies of Gods Saints
in Queen Mary's days, in the midst of those flames God sent that happy Queen
(now a blessed Saint) to quench those fires, and deliver our whole Church from
that tyrannical and Papal oppression. Thus the Lord himself waits, and
stays for the fittest time of our deliverance; and so must we. Never shall the
faithful soul fail of a day of refreshing.

And ministered unto him.] We have spoken of the Angels coming: Now the last
thing considerable in this history, is their ministry unto Christ; wherein are
two things: 1. How they minister to him: 2. Why they minister.

I. 1. They ministered in adoring the Son of God, the only conqueror of the
devil, and honoring him as the victorious destroyer of the Prince, and
commander of all hellish powers: For the Angels rejoiced in Christ's victory,
in the devils overthrow, and the salvation of the Church of God. The goodness
of their nature carries them wholly to the glory of God, in all their actions
and motions, and the good of the Church; as at the birth of Christ they sung,
Glory to God on high, on earth peace, and good will to men. And there is no
doubt but now upon this victory, they did much more honor him, and
congratulate his glorious triumph.

2. They ministered to him in comforting him, being in his soul extremely
afflicted and molested with Satan's temptations: for how could the Son of God
but utterly abhor, and with fiery zeal detest such blasphemous temptations,
as that he should not only distrust his Fathers providence, but even fall
down and worship the devil himself, with which temptations a sinful man
yet in his corrupt nature, would be exceedingly distracted and disturbed? It is
no doubt therefore, but as in his agony before his passion, the Angels came
to comfort him, so likewise in this conflict and perturbation so soon as they
might, they came in to the same purpose.

3. They ministered to him in releeuing his body, which was now broken with
hunger, and watchings, having already fasted 40. days and 40. nights; and
brought him food to allay his hunger, spreading as it were a table for him in
the wilderness. For, if they neglected not the servant of God Elias in the
wilderness, being ready to starve for food, but provided him a meal, in
strength whereof he went 40. days and 40. nights, 1. King. 19.5. much less
would they neglect the Son of God, who was now in the same necessity.

4. They ministered to him standing about him, and giving attendance, waiting as
it were at his table, and ready to be employed in any further service he had to
command them: Psalm. 103.20. Ye Angels ready to execute his will. Whence in
Ezeck. 1.11. the Angels are described with wings stretched upward, noting
their propensity and readiness to the commandments of Christ.

II. Why the Angels do thus minister to Christ. Answ. Not for any necessity
of his (for 1. he was able to have sustained himself, and held out for ever
against the devil: 2. he was able to have confounded the devil: 3. he was
able to have created food in the wilderness without them, which they could not
do: for, although they could fetch food elsewhere provided, yet could they not
create any,) but, 1. It was their duty to attend him as their Lord, called the
Lord of the holy Angels. 2. Christ would now use their ministry, and did not
help himself by miracle, as he might if he had pleased. But we read not that
he used his power for himself or his Disciples: Himself being hungry and
weary at Iaacobs well, he created not food, but sent his Disciples into the
city to buy bread: And when his Disciples were faint and hungry, they were
feign to pluck ears of corn, and eat it: But yet he used not his miraculous
power. For miracles were wrought for the edification of others, and commonly
done in the presence of many, whose faith was to be strengthened, as the
Disciples was in part already. 3. This was so for our instruction and
consolation, that we also in our wants, standing in the Lords battles, may
expect the presence and comfort of the Angels.

Doctr.
The privilege of Christ, whereby he is exalted above all creatures, hence
appears, in that the Angels minister unto him. Heb. 1.6. the Apostle proves
Christ's divinity, and eminency above all things, out of that testimony of the
Psalm, And let all the Angels of God worship him. For, he must needs be
greater then all, who must be honored of all. Ioh. 1.51. Christ himself
proves himself the Son of God, because, notwithstanding he is the son of
man: which plainly notes him to be, 1. a true man, and 2. a weak man: yet
they should see the heavens opened, and the Angels ascending and descending
upon him, as was figured in Jacobs ladder, Genesis 28.12. For Christ is the ladder
and only way by which we ascend into heaven. It reached from earth to heaven,
signifying his two natures, God of his Father in heaven, man of Jacobs loins
in earth. Angels ascending and descending, are the ministering spirits
attending him: for in that phrase is meant their sending out, their emission,
and commission to their office, descending to their work, and ascending to
give account of it. Now according to this Prophecy of Christ, two of his
Disciples saw the heavens open upon him in his transfiguration, Matthew. 17.1.
2. In his resurrection, those keepers of the sepulcher saw the Angel of the
Lord that descended from heaven, and had roled away the stone from the door,
and sat upon it, so as they were afraid, and as dead men, Mat. 28.4. The women
also saw the Angel and talked with him, that had attended him in his
resurrection, ver. 5. And in his ascension all his Disciples saw the heavens
opened unto him, and two Angels standing by them, who attended him, Act. 1.

1. The more honorable the attendants and ministers, Reasons. 1.
the greater is the personage so attended. But our Lord has not a guard of men
about him, as the great Princes of the earth; but a guard of Princes, and not
of Princes only, but of principalities and powers, rules, thrones, and
dominations; and therefore he must needs be a mighty God, advanced above all
creatures. 2. The Angels are in Scripture every where spoken of, 2
as the excellency of the creatures; so as when the highest praise of any
thing is to be given, it is taken from the excellency of Angels. Manna is
called Angels food, Psalm. 78.25. that is, if Angels should need food, they
could not wish more excellent. 1. Cor. 13.1. If I should speak with the
tongues of Angels, etc. that is, excellently. Yea, the most happy and glorious
estate that our selves look for after the resurrection, is hence extolled,
that we shall be (...), like Angels. Now all this advancement of them, is not
so much in respect of themselves, with whom we have no commerce, but for the
advancement of Christ, the Lord of the holy Angels; and that in their glory we
may behold the glory of Christ, to whom they are servants. 3. The truth hereof
was shadowed in the ceremonial law, Exodus 25.20. 3
The Cherubims (signifying the Angels) must lift their wings on high, as
attending upon God, and their faces must be to the mercie-seate, which lively
resembled Christ, on whom their eyes must be still cast, as the eye of the
handmaid to the hand of her Mistress. And, chap. 26.31. the veil of the
Tabernacle which covered the most holy, (expressly signifying the flesh of
Christ, which hiding his divinity made way for us to heaven) must be made of
broydered work with Cherubims, not without Cherubims: for these noted the
multitude of Angels serving Christ, even as man: for being in his lowest
estate, and apprehended to the death, he gives this as a reason to Peter to put
up his sword, because, if he would, he might pray to his Father, and have
twelve legions of Angels to rescue him.

Object. But this seems not Christ's privilege to have the Angels his
ministers, seeing all the godly have them ministering spirits for their good,
Heb. 1.14. as Abraham, Lot, Elias, Daniel. Ans. True, they had, but this
impeacheth not Christ's honor, because they serve not us after the same manner
they serve him: for 1. Their service is due to Christ as their creator and
Lord; of duty: to us, as creatures, of charge. 2. Their service to him is
immediate as the Head of the Church, to us mediate only as members of the
Head. 3. Their service is proper to him, and invested in him, as his own
right: to us given by virtue of our communion with him. 4. To him as the author
and preserver of all the gifts and graces they have; and equal it is, that
whatsoever is excellent in any kind, be wholly ascribed, to the author and
giver of it: to us only so far as the owner has put them in trust to employ
those gifts for our good. Faith in Christ interests us in this ministry of the
Angels, who love the members because of the head. They are his Angels, and so
called by special propriety: Matthew. 16.27. when the Son of man shall come in
the clouds, and all his holy Angels with him, because by special prerogative
they do him homage and service: And our Angels by special commission and
direction from him. 5. They never ministered to man, but for the honor of
Christ. Reu. 22.9. Worship God.

Let us imitate the Angels. Do they honor Christ by their ministry, Use. 1.
and shall we refuse his service? especially seeing ^ee took our nature, and
bound us straiter to him then the Angell^. They are most expedite and ready,
having wings to fly withal: Let their wings speed us in his service. They are
unweariable in performing obedience, and shall we be so heavy and shrinking,
as to account every thing too much that we do for him? They are in all things
ruled and moved by his Spirit: Ezekiel. 1.20. whither the Spirit led them they
went: Let us also give up our selves to the leading of his Spirit, not running
of our own heads in any business, unsent, without our warrant. They rejoice in
all good things, and in Christ's victory, the benefit of which redounds to us
more then to them, and that men by the same are set out of the devils power:
And why do no^ we more rejoice in this victory of Christ? why do we rejoice in
evil, which is the devils sin, in sinful courses and company? why do we hate
and scorn those, who most partake in this victory? How unlike is this to the
Angels?

If the Angels be servants unto Christ, Use. 2.
then we see herein both his love to us, and our own honor, who has
vouchsafed us his own special servants to attend us: For he has not only
charged them with the safety of Abraham, Iaacob, Lot, Elias, Daniel, and other
extraordinary holy men, but their commission is general: Psalm. 91.11. they
shall keep thee in all thy ways, that is, not only Christ himself, but
every member of Christ: for this honor have all the Saints. And what a comfort
is it, that we so weak creatures, and so beset with spiritual and invisible
enemies, have appointed to us by the Lord so many spiritual, invisible, and
more powerful aiders, and assisters? What a comfort is it, that no temporal
enemy can so soon wrong us in our persons, estates, or names, but the Angels
of God are ready to turn it off, and keep off the peril, and then return to
God to complain of the wrongdoers? What a care should we have not to forfeit
our privilege, to keep us in our ways, and walk warily because of the
Angels, not greeuing them by sin, nor driving them from about us, whose
protection under Gods is more safe then if we lay under shield and spear,
Psalm. 91.4. with 11. And if our Lord himself received comfort from them, how
great may be our comfort from them?

Hence we are to ascribe the glory of power, Majesty, Use. 3.
and kingdom unto our Lord Jesus, who if he be able to command all the Angels
in heaven, much more all the devils in hell, who are far weaker then they:
All power is his in heaven and earth. And now we are no longer to esteem of
him according to his base estate, in the wilderness, in the world, but according
to his surpassing power manifested through all this history in vanquishing the
devil, and in receiving the divine honor from the most grorious Angels. To
this great Michael, who even without his Angels has in pitched battle
overcome the great red dragon and all his Angels, be ascribed all power,
might, victory, and triumph, of all men, Saints, and Angels, in earth, and in
the highest heavens, for all eternity. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
(...).
THE ALPHABETICALL Index or Table, pointing to the principal points in this
Exposition.
A
IN Christ's lowest Abasement sparkles of Divinity fly out: sundry instances.
page 363 Actions brought forward by bad means to be supected: sundry
instances. 312 Accusers mouths how to be stopped: four rules. 30 Against
false accusation, 7. rules. 26 Adversaries must be overcome rather with
patience then power. 112 Adoption called into question by Satan for present
adversity, 5. reasons. 89 Allegories must not be stuck too fast unto. 264
Christ's Allegation of Scripture with some addition and change of words, 5.
reasons. 338 Angels called Gods Angels, 3. reas. 235 Angels tender keepers of
the godly, three reasons. 237 Concerning Angels 3. observations. 239 Angels
come not in unto Christ, before the devil is gone from him, 4. reas. 401
Angels cannot be in two places at once, why. 402 Angels have bodily shapes by
way of 1. description: 2. dispensation. 403 Angels minister unto Christ, and
how. 409 Christ was more Angry in the last temptation, then in the two former,
4. reasons. 333 Apochryphall books not authentical, 4. reasons. 133 In the
Arc were three things kept. 162 Assemblies in the Church of England holy
meetings, 4. reas. 166 Avoid, signifies three things. 332
B
BAd causes are thrust on by bad means 4. reas. 311 Behold, signifies 5.
things in Scripture. 4^0 Blame thy self sinning more then the devil. 216
Blessing more desirable then means. 138 Blind and bloody battles for the holy
land, more for the Popes profit then Gods glory. 177 Boasters resemble the
devil. 315 To get Bread out of stones, 3. ways. 10^ Gods way to get Bread,
contrary to the devils in three things. 109
C
TO live out of a lawful calling wicke^ 3. reasons. 14^ Calling to be well
carried, two rules. 150 Special Calling, requires the practice of 4. virtues.
151 Christ was locally carried to the pinnacle, 4. reasons. 190 In Christ,
Satan would have cast down all mankind. 206 Satan would have us cast down our
selves, why. 215 Causes of God must affect us above our own, 5. reasons. 333
Changes here good for us, 5. reasons. 395 To be cheerful in trialls, 4
motives. 15 Chair of Rome a frivolous pretense. 177 Christ subject to
temptations, notwithstanding his perfection of 1. nature, 2. grace, 3. power. 7
Christ chose to be tempted in the wilderness, 4. reasons. 19 Christ's going into
the wilderness, no ground for Popish Eremites, 4. reas. 22 Christ would be
tempted, 4. reas. 35 Christ by being tempted succoureth us 4. ways. 36 Christ
safer among wild beasts then wicked men. 44 Christ not so rough with Satan,
as with some wicked men, no or with his own disciples, 4. reas. 113 Christ
reuealeth himself only to such as will make right use of his knowledge, 4.
reas. 116 Christ as able to defend us as himself, from wild beasts and
devils. 45 Christ's privilege above all creatures in the ministry of Angels,
3. reas. 410 Christ's combat exemplary as victorious. 243 Christians must be
reasonable even to most unreasonable adversaries, 3. reas. 110 Church no
competent Judge of controversies. 246 Church has no authority over Scripture,
4. reas. 247 Church of England not to be separated from for some corruptions,
4. conclusions. 166 Comforts for weak Christians in temptation, 4. grounds. 7
Circuit of Satan is the compass of the earth. 20 Comforts from Christ's being
tempted, 4. grounds. 37 Comfort of the creatures a greater blessing then the
creatures themselves. 139 Comfort in that Satan cannot overcome him, who is
not willing to be overcome. 216 Comforts from the custody of Angels. 238
Comforts of God hid for a time, but a^ length shine out upon his children, 4.
reasons. 404 Bad company worse then solitariness. 23 Comforts when
temptations come thick on us, three. 280 Compacts with Satan, 1. open, 2.
s^cret. 317. etc. Means to avoid Satan's compacts, 5. 320 Conference of
Scriptures beats out the true sense of them: see instances as large. 256
Counsels no competent judges of controversies, 4. reas. 249 In the inner court
of the Temple were 4. things of note. 161
D
DAy of sickness and death most (...) to resist Satan's temptations, three
reas. 66 Death enters the soul by the windows of the senses, 4. reas 291
Devil is not driven away by holy water, relics, nor the naming of Jesus. 10
11 Difference between the love of God as God, and of God as a Father 92
Directions for the fortifying of faith, three. 86 Distinction of (...) and
(...): 1 silly: 2* ignorant: 3. novel. 347 Doctors and Fathers no competent
Judges of Scripture, 5. reas. 248 Doing of what God commands, not always a
sign of true grace, 3. reas. 385 God draws near his Saints in trouble. 3.
ways. 94
E
EFfects of the spirits assured governance in troubles, three. 17 Eminent
persons must be so much the more watchful. 288 Ends and means must be tied
together. 277 Equivocation a Jesuitical trick discovered. 233 Three estates
Satan especially would cast men from: 1. of innocence: 2. regeneration: 3.
office in Church or commonwealth. 206 Evil men clean one to another, because
all of them hate Christ. 160 Excellency cannot exempt a man from Satan's
temptations, 3. reas. 8 How to avoid Satan's extremities, three rules. 200
F
FAmily-worshippe of God stands in five things. 172 Fasting, the kinds, 1.
civil: 2. religious: 3. miraculous. 47 Fasting of Christ differs from Popish
in 8. things. 49 Christ fasted his fast for 4. causes. 50 Fast of Christ no
longer or shorter then forty days, 5 reasons. 51 Forty nights of Christ's fast
expressed, two reasons. 51 Fasting a necessary Christian duty, 3. reasons. 52
Motives to fasting, 11. 53 Faith his actions about the means of safety: if
present, 3.46. if absent, 3. ibid. Overthrow of faith the aim of all Satan's
temptations, 5. reas. 83 Faith must be so much the stronglyer fortified, as
Satan more furiously assayleth it. 86. Faith his excellency in 4. things. 86
The least faith can pray for more. 88 Properties of faith in want of means* 3.
98 Faith how it demeaneth it self toward the word of Gods providence, 3.
rules. 145 Faithfulness in promises, enforced by five reasons. 309
G
COmmon Gamesters live by no word of God. 150 Generallitie of obedience in 4.
things. 389 Gifts of G^^ differ from the devil in four things. 319 Glory of
God must be preferred above all the world, 6. reas. 327 Motives to promote the
glory of God, 5. 350. To glorify God in good measure, means 4. 331 God
glorifieth himself in our trialls four ways. 396 Glory of the world falsely
claimed by Satan, for 1. possession: 2. disposition: 4. reas. 310 God some
ways an actor in evil, no ways an author. 14 God tempts man two ways. 30
Godly men shall want no accusation in the world, why. 29 The more God graceth a
man, the more Satan seeks to disgrace him, 3. reas. 3. and 9. Six graces
Satan would feign rob us of. 283
H
POpish hallowing of water wicked, six reasons. 11 Headship of the Pope falsely
grounded. 231 Little or no help in injustice, 3. reas. 147 Christ full of the
holy Ghost, how. 39 Holiness sweetneth our callings three ways. 151 To hold out
in trialls without hast-making, 4. reas. 365 No sign of Gods hatred to be
vexed with the devil, but of the devils: 4. reas. 193 Christ, able to feed
others miraculously, was hungry himself. 59
I
SAtan can make gross Idolatry seem a small moate. 316 Jerusalem called holy
City, 5. reas. 160 Jerusalem full of corruptions, yet called holy: why. 165
Importunity of Satan against Christ and his members to draw them to sin, 4.
reas. 279 Infirmities which Christ took upon him: which in three propositions.
59 Why Christ took our infirmities, 5. reas. 60 Infirmities of Christ differ
from ours in 6. things. 61 Induction to prove all things subjected to Christ's
word. 377 Infallible Judge of controversies the holy Scriptures, 4 reas. 244
Incompetent judges of controversies obtruded by the Church of Rome, 4. 246
Instance of Satan to draw us to evil, must make us more instant in good. 283
Instances of Satan's false conclusions in matter of faith, 3. of practice, 9.
102. Instances in 4. kinds of temptations how to use the word against Satan.
126 Instances of many men, whose obedience is no better then that of devils.
387
L
TO know a man lead by the spirit, three rules. 18 Christ comes lead of the
spirit, Satan comes of himself. 75 Liberties of religion are better prized
in their absence then in their presence. 181 The more light of grace the Lord
bestows on his children, the more does the darkness of the world fight
against it. 157 Life of a Christian a continual intercourse of peace and
trouble, 4. reas. 391 Love of the world easily makes a man a prey and spoil
of Satan, 5. reas. 299 To pull our hearts from the love of the world five
means. 303 Four other considerations to the same purpose. 301 Lying is the
devils mother tongue. 100 A looking glass for liars. 314 Lying a hateful
sin, for three reasons. ibid.
M
MAgistrates, governors not of men only, but of Christians. 335 Man tempts
God 2. ways, 31. Man tempts man 3. ways, ibid. Man tempts himself 2.
ways. ibid. Manner of Christ's temptation external, 4. reas. 74 Not to be
present at Mass, with pretense of keeping the heart to God, 5. reas. 351 Mean
estate best, 3. reasons. 7 Means of f^rtifying faith, 4. 87 Means to confirm
to a man's self his own adoption, 3. 93 To use unlawful means to help our
selves diabolical, 3. reas. 95 Means to fence us against Satan's wicked
inferences, 3. 104 Means not sufficient to sustain the life of man, in six
instances, and 5. reas. 135 Means not to be set above their place. 137 Means
not to be neglected where they are, 3. reas. 138 Better to want means then to
enjoy such as proceed not out of the mouth of God. 153 Means to raise our
selves being cast down, four. 212 To sin against means fearful in things
1. spiritual: 2. temporal. 222 Means to partake of the Angels ministry,
three. 241 Means of nourishing confidence in God, four. 277 Meekness of
Christ to Satan himself, 5. reas. 111 Ministers must be very watchful over
their people, because of the tempter. 71 Wicked Ministers hinder some comfort,
but not all efficacy from the Sacrament. 167 To conceive of dumb Ministers,
five grounds. 168 Modesty in speaking of our selves commended in Christ's
example. 115 Motives to avoid slaundering, 5. 27 Motives to out-stand
temptations, 3. 42 Motives to stir up one another to good, four. 72
Mountains about Jerusalem, 7. 289 Mountain chosen for the third temptation,
3. reas. 285 No mountains to be wished but Gods holy mountain. 289
N
DIfference of names or numbers, must not make us suspect error in the
Scripture, but our own ignorance. 265
O
Objections for Usury answered, 148 Objections for Sabath breaking. 149 Chief
Objections of the separation answered. 167 Objections to prove Christ on the
pinnacle only in vision, answered. 189 Objects of senses, 5. warrantable. 294
In opposition of good men and good things, consider 5. things. 158 Ordinances
of God not to be meddled with without due respect and reverence: as 1. word: 2.
oath: 3. lots. 175 Conditions of sound Obedience, 4. 385 Cheerful Obedience,
4. things. 386 Outward things make neither happy nor unhappy, 4. reasons. 91
P
Pinnacle of the Temple chosen for the second temptation by satan, 4. reasons.
182 No place in the world free from temptation. 20 Places of Gods worship to be
reverently esteemed and used. 174 No place longer holy then God and his worship
are present. 176 Satan usually fitteth his temptation to the place, or the
place to his temptation, 3. reasons. 182 Places of probable perrill and danger
to be avoided especially, of 4. sorts. 184 Men in highest places are in
greatest danger of falling, 3. reasons. 286 The higher the Pinnacle a man stands
on, the more busy satan is to cast him down. 207 Satan helps men up to the
Pinnacle only to cast them down again. 210 The Pope puts down the devil in
boasting. 315* Power of Christ irresistable by all the devils in hell, 4.
reasons. 375 Power of Christ is of his Office and Essence. 375 They differ in
3. things. ibid. Popes have erred in matters of faith. 25^ 8. Marks of the
mighty power of Christ in us. 380 Power of Christ frustrateth satan's greatest
advantages. 193 Power of satan over the bodies of men great, God permitting
him. 193 Prayers to be made for governors especially, why. 288 Presence of God
in his word and worship makes places holy, 3. reasons. 164 Satan ordinarily
tempts to presumption, 4. reasons. 200 Most dangerous presumption is in
spiritual things, as in 6* instances. 203 Presumption in things temporal to
be avoided, in 4. instances. 205 Privilege of Gods children because of the
Angels. 240 A singular privilege of the Church to have so perfect a direction
as the Scripture. 134 Privilege of the godly to find God sweet to your souls
in trialls, or after them, 4. reasons. 406 Properties of such as to whom Christ
will reveal himself, 3. 119 All promises and threats in Scripture
conditional, although the condition be not ever expressed. 263 All promises
of satan are miserable, foul, and deceitful, 5. reasons. 304 Promises of God
differ from the devil how. 305 Proffers of Satan all upon some wicked
condition or other. 316 Miserable men that accept of satan's profers, 4.
instances. 320 Public persons must especially watch against 2. things. 6
Public persons must be above other careful of Gods glory. 335
Q
QVestion, how could Christ be safe among wild beasts. 44 How Christ could be
hungry being able to feed so many miraculously. 59 Why Christ took not all
infirmities of every particular man, 3. reasons. 59 Why satan is so restles in
tempting, 3. reasons. 70 Whether Christ's temptations were in inward motion or
external. 74 Why Christ seeing he could would not turn stones into bread, 5.
reasons. 115 How to conceive the word of God by which he governs and
preserues the creatures. 142 Whether S. Matthew or S. Luke, observe the right
order of the temptations seeing they differ. 155 Whether a man may pray or
communicate with an evil man, or with a wicked or dumb minister. 167 Whether
a man may hear the word with profit and blessing from a wicked man. 170
Whether Christ was indeed on the pinnacle or in vision. 188 How Satan a spirit
could carry Christ his body, 5. considerations. 190 Whether Ionathans action,
who with his armor-bearer only set on a whole army of enemies was
presumption. 202 Why did not Satan cast down Christ, but says, cast thy self
down, 3. reas. 212 How satan is said to fill Ananias his heart Act. 5.3. 219
Whether it be not lawful to ask a sign. 270 How satan can prevail to bring
men to worship himself in stead of God, ways, and means. 322, etc. Whether
we may present our selves at mass thinking to keep our hearts to God. 351
Whether on no occasion we may be present at mass. 353 Whether the Prophet gave
Naaman leave to be present at Idolatry. 354
R
REasons why our Savior would not yield to the last temptation, 5. 326 Receive
nothing from the devils hand, 3. reasons. 319 Redemption free to us cost
Christ dear. 192 Religion set up, or held up by bad means is wicked as the
Romish. 313 Representations of Satan quick and short, 3. reasons. 291
Restlesnesse in evil an express image of the devil. 280 Strong Resistance of
Satan makes him fly, 4. reasons. 366 Means of Resisting Satan, 5. 371 Manner
of Resistance in 5. things. 373 Reverence in Gods worship urged, 6. reasons.
356 Riches must not have our hearts, 4. reas. 152 Romish teachers disarming men
of the Scriptures, confuted by 5. reasons. 122. Romish doctrine Idolatrous
proved at large. 345 Rules of resisting Satan's temptations, 3. 57 Rules to
know when the tempter commeh, 2 77. Rules to confirm the heart in the love of
God notwithstanding outward crosses, 3. 92 Rules to fence us from using
unwarrantable means of our good, 4. 97 Rules to avoid seduction by
separatists, 4. 171 Rules to uphold our selves when Satan would cast us down,
3. 110 Rules to try whether a Scripture be wrested, 7. 256 Rules of trial
whether our obedience be beyond that of the devils, 4. 389 Rules to carry our
selves free from infection of sin in all places where we come, 3. 187
S
Sabbath Breakers cast by Gods word notwithstanding all their pleas. 149
Sacrament may be received where open offenders are tolerated. 159 To Sanctify
a man's person, he must set up Gods worship in his heart. 172 The word Satan
used by Christ in the last temptation, 4 reason. 332 Satan cannot hinder Gods
children of salvation, he may of comfort. 4 Satan's mouth may be stopped, but
not his malice. 5 Satan an accuser, 3. reasons. 25 Satan tempts, 2. ways. 32
May allure us, cannot force us. 34 Ever takes us at the weakest, 3. reas. 64
Comes to a man, 2. ways. 73 Assayleth the Son of God knowing him so to be,
4. reason. 76 Aims at 4. things in his 1. temptation. 79 In tempting directly
opposes the word of God, 5. reas. 80 Satan the most eminent and dangerous
tempter, 4. reasons. 69 Seeks ever to blemish the good he cannot hinder. 98
Infers mischeiuous conclusions upon true premises, 4. reasons. 99 Never
comes without some stone or other. 108 Allows his servants stones for
bread. 109 Seeks cheifely to draw them to sin who have most means against
it, 4. reasons. 218 Can tempt, but not force us to sin, 5. reason. 213 His
subtilties to be watched, 6. instances. 198 Can allege Scripture to thrust
forward his wicked purposes, 5. reason. 224 Alleges Scripture 3. ways. 225
Is not content that men sin, unless they do it most sinnefully. 219 In one
allegation of Scripture out of Psalm 91.11. he hides 8. faults. 228 Never
overcome without resista^ce. 374
Scriptures being our weapon, we must always have them in readiness. 124
Scriptures the hammer of heresies, as in 6. instances. 131 Scriptures how
abused to establish errors in doctrine, 5. instances. 231. in practice in
many. 234 Scriptures no dumb, but a speaking Judge. 245 Scriptures conferred
in parallel places. 258 Scriptures collated in unlike places, and reconciled, in
25. instances. 259 Scripture most aptly alleged by Christ. 268 Some Scripturs
fitter for some to meditate on, then others. 268 Security must be watched
against, after temptation foiled, 5. reas. 279 Senses must be diligently kept,
and 4. rules for the right ordering of them. 293 Service of God must be ruled
wholly by God, for 1. matter, 2. manner, 3. end. 360 Service of God twofold,
1. Legal, 2. Evangelical. 358 Of Service Evangelical, 3. conditions. 359.
Service of God must be cheerful, 3. reasons. 361 Marks of a good Servant of
God, 5. 362 Means to be preserved from the service of Satan, 5. 325 A sign
may be asked in 4. cases. 270 Five vain ends of asking a sign. 271 Three
sins above other, make men most like the deuiil. 281 Sins of Jerusalem, the
sins of England, 5. instances. 178 Sins of this age fearfully aggrauated
by our means of grace. 221 Soul lives by Gods word, 4. ways. 139. Solitary
places fittest for temptation, 2. reason. 21 Direction for solitariness, 4. 24
Spirit of God led Christ into the wilderness, 3. reason. 12 Spirits created of
three sorts. 12 Sundry sorts of men snared by Satan, in seeking unlawful
courses to help themselves. 96 To turn Stones into bread an ordinary
temptation. How and wherein. 105 Sundry sorts of men to whom Christ never
reuealeth himself. 118
T
TEmple of Jerusalem described, with the several Courts, and their contents.
161 Temptation not a sign of Gods hatred, but of the devils. 9 Temptations
all of them appointed and lilimited by God, 2. reas. 13 It was not against the
holiness or power of Christ to be tempted. 32 Christ being tempted was without
sin, how in 3. grounds. 32 Of Temptions, 3. degrees. 33 Greatest temptation
not to be tempted. 34 Temptations manfully to be resisted, 3. motives. 37
Being tempted look up to Christ tempted, for 1. salvation, 2. imitation. 38
By lesser Temptations Satan makes away to greater, 4. reasons. 59 Where satan
begins Temptation, we must begin resistance. 57 To Tempt any to evil a
fearful sin. 72 The first Temptation of Christ, was not to gluttony, as
Papists, 2. reas. 79 No Temptation, no faith. 86 8. Things slily couched in the
1. Temptation. 105 In the second temptation Satan aims at 5. things. 195
Satan tempting seeks to bring men to extremes, 5. reas. 197 Satan can tempt
and persuade, but not force us to sin, 5. reas 213 Temptations armed with
Scripture most dangerous. 231 Men tempt God, in 1. judgment: 2. affection: 3.
actions. 269 God actually tempted, 4. ways. 272 To tempt God dangerous, 4.
reas. 273 Five sorts of tempters of God. 274 How men tempt God in matters, 1.
of soul, 275. 2. of body: three ways. 276 Tempters of themselves, as if there
were no Tempter. 70 Christ abides the whole temptation to the end, 4. reas.
364 God suffers his children to be vexed with long and strong temptations. 3.
reas. 368 Gods children shall out stand all temptations. 4. reas. 366 A sober
use of humane testimonies in Sermons not unlawful. 252 Men thrust from God by
Satan. 325 God has sundry ways threatened this land of late years. 397
Greatest trialls of the godly cannot make them unhappy, 4. reas. 407 To try
spirits alleging Scripture 4. rules. 225 Holy times, as the Sabbath not to be
profaned. 176
V
Unjust getting of earthly things accursed 3. ways. 145 All the voice of Satan
is, Cast thy self down. 217 Usurers live not by Gods word, but against it.
147
W
TO watch over our weakness, five notable rules. 66 Five sorts of persons
fail in the watch over their senses. 238 Many warnings of God to Jerusalem and
England. 180, etc. Wild beasts why Christ was with them, 4. reas. 43 Wealth
becomes ours and rightly used 4. ways. 152 God never brings his children into
the wilderness of temptation but first fits them with sufficient grace, 4. reas.
39 Will of man moved two ways. 214 A principal wile of Satan to overthrow
men by Scripture, 4. reas. 250 Witches and seekers to them condemned, 3. reas.
97 Wicked men by no means lay aside their malice to Gods children, 4. reas.
156 Wicked men are loath to be compared to the devil, but are sometimes worse.
159 Word written a principal weapon of the Christian soldier, 5. reas. 120
Word is then used aright, when temptations are cut off by it, 3. reasons. 126
The Word cutteth off temptations to despair in 6. instances. 127. to
presumption, in 8. instances. 128. to pride in 5. instances. 129. to injustice,
6. instances. 130 Only Gods word, but every word of God preserves the life of
man, 4. reas. 139 Word of God sustaineth us, 1. above all means, 3. ways.
140. 2. without all means. 141. 3. against all means. 141 Word of God made the
air light without the Sun, and the earth fruitful without rain. 143 Word
of God from an evil man, may be heard with blessing to a good man, four
reas. 170 To hear or read the word religiously, four rules. 227 Satan
sieldome so good as his word, 3. reas. 306 Worship is twofold, 1. Civil: 2.
Divine: both of them twofold. 340 Worship civil, and religious differ in five
things. 342 Worship Civil, is grounded in Divine. 343 Worship religious due to
God only, 5. reas. 344 Six means by which Satan prevails to set up the
worship of himself. 324
FINIS.

