THE STRANGEST ADVENTVRE THAT EVER HAPPENED: EITHER in the ages passed or
present. Containing a discourse concerning the success of the King of
Portugal Dom Sebastian, from the time of his voyage into (...) battle against
the (...). unto the sixth of (...) 1601. In which Discourse, is diverse curious
histories, some ancient Prophesies, and other matters, whereby most evidently
appears: that he whom the Seigneurie of Venice has held as prisoner for the
space of two years and twenty two days, is the right and true king of
Portugal Dom Sebastian. More, a Letter that declares, in what manner he was
set at liberty the IV. of December last. And beside, how he parted from Venice
and came to Florence. All first done in Spanish, then in French, and now
lastly translated into English.

PSALM. CXVII. By the Lord is this thing done: and it is miraculous in our eyes.

LONDON, Printed for Frances Henson dwelling in the Blackfriars. 1601.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM RIder, Lord Mayor of this famous City of
London, and to all the rest of the worshipful Senators and Aldermen his
brethren: particularly by name, as bound by some favors, Sir Stephen Soame
knight, M. John Garrard Alderman, with the two worshipful Sheriffs, M.
Cambell and M. Crauen.
THe translation of this strange and admirable discourse (right Honorable and
right Worshipful) being committed to my trust, and I finding it in the French
to be commended from Venice, to the most Christian King of France, as a matter
of truth and absolute assurance: lest in his English attire he should wander
unregarded through the wor^ I was the bolder (in love and humble duty to ^o^
(...) general) to make your names and titles the (...) ^nance to his free
passage, the same having bene^ (...) before, and sufficiently authorized: To
tell yo^ (...) poor opinion of it were needless, because the m^ sufficiently
commends it self, and in reading it (...) satisfy any curious questioner:
Only my humble (...) ^uest is, that my boldness to you may be held
blame^esse, and my poor goodwill accepted but in indiffe^t worth. So shall I
rest yours in any greater employment, and remain ready at all times with my
very uttermost service.

Your Honors and Worships in all duty, A. M.

To the Reader.
IN the end of the month of August last past (gentle Reader) I received a
packet of Letters ^n the Italian tongue, wherein one was written in fa^^^ of
the king of Portugal Dom Sebastian, who was as then said to be prisoner in
Venice. This letter was directed to the most Christian king, and I carried it
with all possible diligence I could use, and caused it to be delivered to his
Majesty. In the same packet there was also a further traduction of the same
letter; which having thus happened to my hands, I acquainted diverse of my
friends therewith, who made such reckening and esteem thereof, as it were a
matter beyond all other most rare and marvelous. This letter was of such
power, as it provoked and kindled in the hearts of my said friends, an extreme
love and affection toward the Prince, and begot in them likewise a vehement
desire, to see him in liberty and peaceable possession of his kingdom, as if
themselves had been subjects thereto belonging. So (referring that to such as
were more obliged by duty, and had more particular interest in such
business,) after the receipt of this leeter, I labored all I might to
understand some tidings of his estate and success. Having then learned, that a
Religious man, of the order of the preaching Friars (named brother Joseph
Texere a Portuguese, one known to the greatest and meanest in Europe, as also
here very well) had written to this City to a Bishop a friend of his, a
discourse of matters happening since the said king began to enterprise his
Affricke voyage: I so much importuned a nephew to the said Bishop, who kept
this discourse in his hands to send to his uncle, as no excuses might serve
from transferring it to mine. The reading thereof was to me so pleasing and
agreeable, as both it encouraged and cut off all supposition of labor, in the
speedy writing and copying it out. Having by this means this version in mine
own power, I thought I should commit an inexcusable fault, if I should reserve
to my proper use such a strange accident and worthy regard. Hereupon attending
could get convenient opportunity, to the end that every one might (...) the
excellent occasions contained in this discourse: I concluded ^mit it to the
press, accompanied with a letter of the said ^s, written by him since the
sending of the Discourse to the same (...), and wherewith it pleased his
Lordship to acquaint me. Thou (...) find (courteous Reader) at the beginning of
this discourse, a ^lation of the letter written to his most Christian Majesty,
(...) is annexed hereunto, because it contains some points that are (...)
subject of this work, and which deserve both to be seen and (...). And ere
thou enter into it, be not abashed at the title we have (...) it: for so soon
as thou have but stepped a little into it, thou will ^e it to be most apt and
conuenable. Now, because I would con^, I entreat thee not only gently to make
acceptance hereof: but ^end in all parts and places the right of a king, whom
God and ^e has endued with infinite graces, wise, valiant, good and just,
(...) though lost in a cause no less honorable then Christian.

Farewell. From Lions this 30. of January, 1601.
The copy of a Letter, written by a Venetian Gentleman to his most Christian
Majesty, translated out of Italian into French, and out of French into English.
To the most Christian King, Henry the fourth, King of France and Navarre.
THat great God, whose judgments are always diverse and contrary to ours,
disposes and orders al things on earth by different means, not being
comprehensible to our capacities: and no body but himself, can attain to any
certain knowledge of their issues and effects. But as he is full of sovereign
goodness, of infinite wisdom, and admirable providence, he knows how to
draw good out of evil, exalting and raising up those things, which the
ignorant world taxes in his imaginations with titles base and abject. That this
is most infallible, none knows, or has better approved, then your most
Christian Majesty: whose enemies, bred and borne in your own proper kingdom,
being your liege people, vassals and subjects, accompanied with strange and
foreign adversaries, most unjustly traversing and persecuting you, till you
obtained that whereto God and nature had ordained you. Nevertheless, by the
assistance of the same God (albeit to further and effect the better their
damnable intentions, they took the couerture and pretext of Religion) your
Majesty did manage those affairs with such wisdom and speed, as entering
into the whole and lawful possession of the kingdom, their own eyes could
witness the vanity of their pretenses, and how ill shaped the cloak was that
^id their loose purposes. So that the same difficulty, which served them as
their principal object to abuse the world withal, being broken and
disappointed, stopped the mouth of their reasons alleged, and wasting their
forces and strength, held their noses to the ground, till they came to
knowledge of their own errors* although somewhat too late. And much more late
had they been in finding remedy, if your most Christian Majesty (moved by
your own ^ind nature and accustomed benignity) had not received them ^to
grace and favor. So that hence them selves may discern, ^oth what I have
before and now again say, that the judgments ^f God are diverse and
contrary to men's* who seldom attain to any perfect accomplishment of their
plots and imaginations. Nor ^ake I so long a preamble (most Christian king) to
any other and, but to serve my self with that which I find fit in my very
^ule, as standing some way bound to speak to your Majesty, in ^uour of the
poor and unfortunate (nevertheless most happy ^ne day, when God shall so
please) Dom Sebastian, the true and ^wfull king of Portugal. And to this
attempt I bind my self the ^ther, through the malice of some, who for the
interest of their e^ate only, give it out in the world (and it may be likewise
before ^our Majesty) that he is but a silly foolish Calabrois. Wherefore
^ntend by this my letter to make known to your Highness the ^uth of the
matter, that when he shall come to the acquaintance (...) a king, a king so
Christian and magnanimous as your Majesty (...) one not to learn what it is
to suffer outrageous persecutions, ^osses and iniustices: it may be a means to
urge assistaunce to a ^ore prisoned king, who desiring this illustrious
Seigneurie, to ^t him but be seen to such Portegueses as were in this City,
for ^knowledgement of some secret marks, which he had naturally ^aractered on
his body, it might by no means be so permitted, ^ither he showed to the world
in any sort. At length there came ^her a Gentleman of quality, a Portugueze,
that brought the ^me marks proved as authentical, under the hands of the
pub^e Notaries and Peers of Portugal: but the honorable Lords of ^s Estate
were resolute not to let him see him, albeit the prisoner ^de this protestation
ensuing to them: You say, my Lords, that ^m not Sebastian king of Portugal, let
me be seen to my Portu^eses, yea to all the world: and if you find that I am
not such as I ^intaine my self to be, let my head be smitten of.

Upon which words, I thought good to signify to your most ^ristian Majesty,
some particularities touching the prisoner. He ^h the same shape, the same
hands and feet (to wit, the right ^re long then the left) he bears the same
age, the same marks ^d gate, with the knees bowing inward, as Dom Sebastians
king (...) Portugal did. Whereby of diverse in this city and other places he
has been known: for they accompanied in his voyage to Affricke, and had seen
him in his kingdom: with whom discoursing, he put them in mind of sundry
particulars which they had had as then together, and were impossible that any
other but the King himself should know. Of all which particular notes, I most
humbly entreat your Majesty to hear only but two. There is a merchant here,
who some five and twenty years since was wont to trade into Portugal: this
man being at Lisbon before king Sebastian passed into Afric: mark what befell
him. As he was upon the sea shore, stopping his ship that had received a
leake, he saw a far off the King coming, making a goodly horse whereon he
rid, to mount and coruet very sprightly under him: and he not knowing him to be
the King: this beast (quoth he) what will he break his own neck? The King
and others of the train hearing these words, gallopped the horse so mainely
toward the merchant, and made him in such a fearful taking, as the poor man
verily thought he should loose his life. But when he knew him to be the King,
he fell to the ground, and weeping (on his knees) desired pardon, for he feared
lest his lavish tongue might have made him to be trussed up. The King as he was
ever full of clemency, commanded him to stand up, entreating him very
honorably, and bestowing sundry favors upon him.

Sebastian seeing the same merchant here in our city, before he was arrested
as a prisoner, demanded of him (unasked) if he remembered such a matter, and so
acknowledging the one the other, diverse things passed between them which
happened at that present occasion.

Moreover, this King (I would say this prisoner) when he was at Messina,
knowing that there dwelt a gentleman of a very famous family, who had
accompanied him in his voyage to Affricke: he went and found out his house, and
upon some private passages between them, they kindly renewed their former
acquaintance. Besides, since his arrival here in our city, and before his
imprisonment, he writ diverse letters to the said gentleman, and received
likewise letters back again from him. And by his express means, was a man
and letters sent into Portugal, to sundry faithful Lords of that kingdom:
but we hear that this man so sent to Portugal, died in those parts, but
unknown how, ^^ter he had delivered all or the most part of his letters.
Notwith^anding, as afflictions and miseries alters men's minds, making ^em
forget or lay aside all kindness and friendship: even so this ^entleman
(touched in this case, and to become a subject to the ^ng of Castile) hearing
Sebastian was held as a prisoner, gave over and left off all former
acquaintance. But I most humbly in^eat your Majesty, that in this case you
would not stand aloof, ^t beholding the occurrences of this unhappy King, and
(though prisoner) yet passing in such sound form of truth, that you ^ould
interpose your authority, and manage this weighty cause ^ith such diligence
and dexterity, as your Highness has here^fore given accomplishment to
affairs much more hot and ^fficult, wherein you shall do a work worthy the
name of a ^odly and most Christian King, and for which, I pray the omni^otent
Creator, to crown your Majesty with perpetual glory ^d felicity. From
Venice, this 28. of July. M.D.C.

The most humble and affectionate servant in duty to your Majesty most
Christian. GIOVANNE CAPVGNANO.

The Copy of a Discourse concerning the success of Dom Sebastian King of
Portugal, since he began his enterprised voyage into Affricke, until the sixth
of January this present year, 1601.
Sent by the reverend Father, brother Joseph Texere Portugueze, to a Bishop his
friend.
More, a letter of the said Fathers to the same Bishop, wherein he declares,
how the Venetians delivered out of prison the said King of Portugal, Dom
Sebastian.
MOST worthy Lord, (post habitam benedictionem) I received four letters from
your most worthy Lordship, since the end of September hitherto, with this last
which was delivered me the two and twentieth of the passed month, dated the
fourth, and came by the way of Paris. For which, and for all the honors and
graces you have done me in them, I often kiss the hands of your sacred self.
They will me that I should answer (as one accused) to certain demands set
down therein: which, in obedience to your worthy commandment, I purpose to
do, and for my better understanding, as also all others whatsoever, the
demands shall be set down in order following.

The first demand.
For what cause the King of Portugal Dom Sebastian, without leaving any heir
unto his kingdom, would put his life in hazard of losing, passing at the age
of 24. years and a half into Afric, a country of Infidels, and a land
extremely hot and unfaithful?

The second demand.
What judgment I make of his life, whether he died in the battle, or saved
himself? And what I think of the body that was buried (as his) in the church
of Bethlehem, a covent of Monks of the order of Saint Jerome, a league from
Lisbon, in the beginning of the year, 1583.

The third demand.
Wherefore (being alive) he would not discover himself? that he might be used
like a King, and freed from so great misery, as is well known the slaves in
Barbary do endure?

The fourth demand.
Where he has been all this long continuance of time? and how chance he came
to Venice, and not to France or some other place: where (without doubt) he
might have received better entertainment, according as appertained to his
condition? And whether, by my sight of him, I know him assuredly?

The fifth demand.
What they were that procured his liberty? What further tidings I have of him,
and whether he determine to pass any further then this city?

The sixth demand.
Admit that this prisoner be the same king of Portugal Dom Sebastian, and that
by the help of God, favor of his most christian Majesty, as also other
Princes and estates of Christendom, the Seigneurie of Venice do so acknowledge
him: what means and remedies has he to recover his kingdoms, and to
reestablish himself in the possession of them?

An answer to the first demand.
For answer to the first demand, I say, that the principal cause which
provoked king Sebastian to pass into Affricke, was (as being a very christian
Prince, honorable and just) his enflamed desire to increase christianity, and
to make the name of God known through the wide universe. And (as after he came
to the years of discretion) he always maintained and chearished this ^ope: so
such an apt occasion instantly offering it self, he did ^mbrace it with all
affection. But worthy Lord, the better to give notice of what I intend, I must
derive my course from higher ^nstances, discoursing of the race and success of
the later Barba^ian kings: to wit, Muley Mahamet Xarifa, and Muley Ma^uco
surnamed Abdelmelech (who would term himself the ser^ant of the most high)
this the uncle, the other the nephew, yet both royal pretenders. Muley Mahamet
(father to Muley Hamet the bastard, now reigning in Barbary) had three
legitimate sons, Muley Abdela Xarifa, Muley Abdelmumen, and Muley
Abdelmelech, otherwise called Maluco, of whom we now are come to make mention.
This was a very wise Prince, and of mighty valor, he joined to his own
inheritance all the kingdoms of Barbary, and them he discretly governed while
he lived. At point of death, he named for principal heir his eldest son
Muley Abdela Xarifa: conditionally, that he should give to his two brothers
part of his kingdoms. Muley Abdela succeeding thus his father, not only
denied to fulfill his commandment, but concluded upon the death of his
brethren. Who hearing thereof in the city of Miquines, where as then they kept,
took counsel to withdraw themselves into Turkey: and so traveling thence,
after they had dispatched some hindering difficulties, within a few days they
arrived with their mother and sister at Tremessen, a city of the Turks. At the
same time reigned in the kingdom of Fez, the only son to Muley Abdela
Xarifa, named Muley Mahamet Xarifa, who by express charge sent a man to
Tremessen, and there he murdered Muley Abdelmumen, as he was at his prayers in
the Temple: Muley Maluco then being at Constantinople, where then bare sway the
Sultan Selim. Muley Abdela advertised of this murder (although himself had
before procured it) made show as if it displeased him greatly, and (with
chiding his son) caused justice afterward to be done on the murderer. After
some few years his hour of death approaching, he left as his only heir the
said Muley Mahamet his son, without making any mention of his brother Muley
Maluco: who still kept himself at Constantinople, intending to request succor
of the great Emperor.

Muley Maluco being certified of his brothers death, made such means unto the
Sultan Amurath, who reigned then after the death of his father Sultan Selim,
that he gave him ten galleys for his passage to the realm of Argell or
Argiere, and commandment to the king of that country, to levy so many men as
he could, and then to accompany him in his own person, till he had seated him
in the kingdoms and lands of Barbary. Muley Maluco having been at Argiere,
departed thence in company of the said king, and with him three thousand
Turkish harquebuziers, all arriving together at Tremessen, where with ten
pieces of artillery and other munition, the inhabitants united their forces
with them. From thence he iourneyed with his power into Barbary, and there
after diverse fightes with the king his nephew, he took possession of Teza,
which was yielded to him without any resistance. And proceeding onward, he came
to Fez, where then was Muley Mahamet with thirty thousand horse, and ten
thousand harquebuziers: there was likewise an Andalusian Colonnell, that came
and joined eighteen hundredth Andalusians with him. The ordinance on either
side played very roughly, Muley Mahamets part did small damage, but Muley
Malucos very much, discomfiting almost all his nephews horsemen, and forcing
them to a speedy flight. On the other side, the foot (after diverse hot
skirmishes) came to handy blows, continuing the fight so long, and with such
fury, as dark night was feign to terminate the battle. Muley Mahamet
beholding his troops thus vanquished, and considering it was beyond his
strength to make any further counter-quarrie against his uncles forces,
withdrew himself into Morocco, and such in his company as bare him best
affection. His uncle took the way to Fez, where he was honorably received,
and few days after gave free liberty to Bacha king of Argiere, to depart home
again with his men, whereof seven hundredth remained there still with him. Muley
Maluco understanding that his nephew prepared to charge him with a fresh
encounter, went thence to Miquines, where continuing his resolution, within a
while after the two armies began to show themselves near to the town of Hale,
where the uncle overthrew again his nephew and his forces, which amounted to
forty thousand horse, and ten thousand harquebuziers Muley Mahamet seeing
himself flatly foiled in the field, and out of all hope of making head any
more, fled to Morocco, whence he passed to the mountains (called Montes
Claros) and by this retraite, Muley Maluco made himself sole Lord of Barbary.

By this history is apparently to be seen, with what small help a man may
game those kingdoms whereto he has any right. In like manner, and with much
more ease, may king Sebastian recover his: because it appertains to no other
but him, for he is true Lord and King thereof.

From the mountains Muley Mahamet sent his Ambassadors to the king Dom
Sebastian, and desired succor at his hands: making him such large offers, as
were very profitable, and greatly for the advantage of Christendom. He gave
him (as I have learned from diverse credible persons) all the shoares which he
held on the Ocean sea, and six leagues into firm land, with the towns and
cities thereto belonging: among which were the cities of Arzile, Saphin, and
Larache, all very strong places and of great importance. Some say that he gave
him the abounding Alcacarquibir, Tituan, and other places: more, he caused in
the field a plain delivery of Arzile to be made, by Cid Albequerin brother to
his wife, who was the governor of the said city. And granted him moreover,
that the faith of Jesus Christ should be preached in Barbary, and full power
to crown himself Emperor of Morocco.

This was the reason that made the King Dom Sebastian lo^ke up his crown,
which the Kings his predecessors, and himself even until that time, had
openly worn. I saw that Crown locked up into pieces of Artillery, which were
newly and purposely made for that voyage: in like manner I saw the Banners,
Standards, and the ships under sail for that army. And I know that the king
Dom Sebastian took with him an uncle of mine, my mothers brother, who was
judge of the Armories in the kingdoms of Portugal, to serve him as master of
those ceremonies, which were to be used in the act of his coronation as
Emperor.

The king Dom Sebastian seeing so great offers (and being a Prince of the
loftiest enterprises, desirous to win honor, and such reputation as should
wait on due merit) knowing what virtues consisted in himself, accompanied with
such forces, courageous, fearelesse, hardy, active, and presuming in himself
that he only was borne to break down and squander the infidelles impieties:
accepted the conditions that were made unto him. And thus justly deserved the
sins of Portugal, that he should put his person in danger of loss, his
kingdoms and Monarchy in the balance as a pray to strange nations. Hence may
your worthiness gather, what you desire to know out of the first demand.

An answer to the second demand.
I answer to the second demand negatiuely: that king Sebastian did not die in
the battle, and that the body which was buried in Bethlehem was none of his.
But before by manifest reasons I approve my sayings, let me entreat your
sacred fatherhood to understand, that when he began to make his preparation for
this voyage, I was then a man of years, and in some authority (which admit as
spoken between our selves, because that which oftentimes contenteth friends,
displeases and raises a repining nature in such as are not so.) When he
parted from Lisbone to pass into affricke, being the year 1578. and in the
month of June, I was in the 35. year of mine age, and had the use of very
honorable charges, governing some couents of mine order, and had preached in
diverse places of Portugal, with applause and satisfaction of mine auditors.
The same year I was in Lent called from my covent at Santeren, where I then
aboade, to Lisbone, by Dom Alphonso de Chasteaublan^ chief Almoner to the
king, and Commissary general of the Bull for the Croisade, to preach in the
towns of Esbernos, Borba, Villaricosa, Landroal, Terena, Moncaras, Moran, Mora
and Portel: and I was enrolled in the register of them, who were appointed to
accompany the king in his present voyage, which could not by my self be
performed, because my Prelates that had command over me, had consigned me to
the government of the Covent of Santeren, which is the fourth of our order,
and the chiefest in Portugal: because the Priour there ruling, began to find
himself not well, and had accomplished his three years jurisdiction, in which
respect my Prelates prayed the king to pardon me, from bearing him company in
his purposed voyage, and at their requests it was obtained. Thus I stayed at
home (although against my will) in Portugal, without passing into Affricke. I
hold the rather this kind of discoursing with your Lordship, because you may
the better perceive, that I had years and authority (as before I declared)
sufficient to know great men, and what belonged to state affairs. The king
parted from Lisbone, taking with him about thirty religious persons of my order
(to whom he bare very kind affection, and reposed trust enough in them, for he
used to call them his brethren.) One of their number was our Provincial of
Portugal, who commanded the orders through all the government of the kingdom,
and as well in Europe as in Affricke, Asia, and America, named brother John de
Silue, graund-child or son to the Governor of Portugal, brother to the
Bishop of the city called the Port of Portugal, and to Fernand de Silue, who
at that very time was Ambassador into Castile: brother Manuell de Bosa, brother
Vincent Afonseca, and other religious men of very good descent. There was also
mine uncle Manuell Texere, of whom I made mention in my first answer, a
brother of mine likewise, called brother Diego Cardose de Mirande, that married
with a sister of mine, and diverse others of my kindred. King Sebastian having
joined with his army in Affricke, at the city of Arzile, and leaving Larache,
was gone toward the city of Alcacarquibir: there in the field thereto
belonging, he put his men in order the fourth of the month of August.

When the heavy news was brought to Portugal, and that I had intelligence
thereof: because of the intrest I had in the journey, I was constrained to go to
Lisbone, being fourteen leagues distant from Santeren, to understand whether
they were true or no. Where arriving the 25. of the said month, I met with
mine uncle, who was the self same day returned from Affricke. He by
commandment of the General of the army, that remained behind as Lieutenant
general for the king, had brought thither with him unto Lisbone Cid
Albequerin, and his nephew the young Xarifa, son to his sister and Muley
Mahamet Xarifa, which young Xarifa is now a Christian, and lives in Spain,
bearing the title of the Prince of Morocco, and is commander of the order of
Saint James, a Prince of many excellent parts and singular hope. Being thus
with mine uncle, he told me that king Sebastian withdrew himself from the
battle, embarked in his Galliot, but for certainty that he was alive. If I
would know any other news, I should go visit Cid Albequerin: and he earnestly
entreated me that I would do him so much pleasure, because the said Cid
Albequerin would receive great contentment by my sight and knowledge, for on
the way he had much talk with him of me. So I went to see Cid Albequerin, and
after I had long conferred with him, I desired him to do me so much kindness,
as to tell me what was become of Dom Sebastian. The first word that he gave me,
was delivered with vehement expression of grief, being thus: He is not dead,
and if he be, the God of the Christians is unjust. This he spoke to me very
sprightly, and in perfect good Spanish, which he had the use of better then my
self. Hereupon I entreated his Excellency to favor me in such sort, as to
tell me what he understood of the whole affairese, and prayed to be resolved
the rin from his own mouth. He lifting his eyes up to heaven, having the
tears ready to drop down his cheeks: O Ala (quoth he) which is as much as
when we say, o Lord: then having been silent an indifferent while, he used
these speeches to me: Reverend father, your fatherhood shall know, that
although I am none of the oldest in the world, yet I have been seen in some
battles, where I have noted men of singular valor, and incomparable power: but
I never saw so brave and generous a knight (whereat he fetched a great sigh) as
the king Dom Sebastian. For he exce^^ed all the rest, fighting in this sad and
disastrous battle, and ever I was by his side: all the world would have made
him way, and by the behavior of his sword, he left the earth covered with his
enemies bodies. God having then given (dear father) to the Christians, a
Prince so valiant, hardy, coragious, wise, good and just, and to take him from
them again in so short a time (for he was aged but 24. years, 7. months,
and 15. days) he should show himself cruel and very unjust to them; and as
for my self, I should so hold and esteem him. (A discrete answer out of an
infidels mouth, considering he was better grounded in good speech, then
governed by the rule of truth: because among the attributes which we give to
God, one of the most proper is, that he is an upright Judge, and the judgments
of all truth are justified by himself, as the kingly Prophet David evidently
shows us in the 18. Psalm and 10. verse.) And because (quoth he, proceeding)
that I hold it for most certain, that he is alive, know that I came from the
battle with him, and with the king Muley Mahamet my dear brother, and riding
along the river of Larache, to pass on the other side, certain Moors gave us
the chase some six leagues from the field of battle. So that we were forced
to separate our selves one from another, I passed the river, leaving the king
and my brother on the other side. He was very sore hurt upon one arm, and the
blood ran forth thereat abundantly: so that if he be dead, it was upon that
wound, otherwise without all doubt he is living. I swear to your fatherhood,
that my words are of truth.

My self having discoursed this story to diverse persons, as well in Portugal
as some other parts of Spain, whence I departed in the year 1581. constrained
to leave my country, as well for further freedom, as to save my self from
the menaced danger of mine enemy, to pass into France, so to England,
Holland, Zeland, and other quarters of Germany and Europe. Most worthy Lord,
this may serve as a true testimony for me before me^, to stop the mouths of
some adversaries, who according to their deprauing custom, say that I have not
spoken this upon mine oath, but only invented it. He further named many to me
that were forced to flight, whose names I do not now very well remember. I
think I have remembrance of them at Paris among my papers written by the hand
of a Gentleman, a Portugueze, who was named Sebastian Figuera, which he gave me
three years after, as I demanded diverse questions of him concerning that day,
to insert them in a book which I was then making. The same Gentleman parted
with the king, who about four leagues from the field of battle, commanded him
to turn back again, to understand whether the enemy pursued still o^ no:
which he did, but coming back the same way to seek the king, he could not
see any of them that he had parted withal. And he had not gone far, but being
grievously wounded, he was taken by the Moors: who questioning with him about
king Sebastian, to the end they should desist from his further pursuit, he
told them that he saw his body lying among the dead. Many years since I heard
the same story, out of the same Gentleman's mouth.

In all the speech I had with Cid Albequerin about king Sebastian, and in all
my conference with mine uncle, and this last mentioned gentleman with diverse
others, I never heard any report of his garments, nor of his arms, which were
much differing from those of other Princes and gentlemen; which made me
evermore hold it for most certain that he was still alive, because he could
not be found dead in the battle. And this belief was secretly kept among the
Portugals, although publicly they agreed with others and spoke the contrary:
therefore let no body blame us in firmly maintaining, that this should
appear to be the true king D^ Sebastian I know well that your worthiness may
reply unto me, a^ I was not above three months since answered by my Lo^ ^he
P^nce, (which Prince is Henry of Bourbon Prince of Conde, c^efe Prince of the
blood, and chief Peete of France) at S. (...) des Fossez, according to his
quick and iugenuous spirit, (^s one of the most rare and apprehensiue spirits
in the world) who said: If you hold this opinion, how chance you have written
in your book, De ortu Portugalliae and regni initijs, etc. which was printed
at Paris in the year 1582. that the king Dom Sebastian was dead? I say now to
your reverend Lordship, as then I answered the self same Prince: My Lord, your
argument is very forcible, nevertheless you must know, that when I made that
book which was in the year 1581. it was no long while after king Sebastian had
thus lost himself, and as then it was a matter extremely perilous to
manifest this truth: because that as Latin books might pass into Barbary,
the king of that country gathering knowledge thereby, that the king Dom
Sebastian was in those parts, and causing him by search to be found out, I
might be justly taxed with the cause of his loss, which had been very great to
all Christendom. But would you vouchsafe to see the book I made, De iure quod
competie viris Portugallensibus in augurandis suis Regibus a^ Principibus,
which I writ in the year 1588. you shall there find, that when I speak of the
king Dom Sebastian, I justify him not to be dead: and that the body which was
buried in Bethlehem as his, was the body of a Swizzer. In the said year*
because it was so long since the matter had past, I held it as no inconvenience
to speak the contrary to what I had said before: wherefore I entreat, that
this may serve as an answer and satisfaction to the alleged argument. As for
the body (worthy sir) whether it were his or no; I say once again that it was
not, and that the body buried in Bethlehem, in the month of January 1583. I
then being prisoner in Lisbon, with 40. pound weight of iron on my feet, by
the commandment of D. Philip II. king of Castile, was the body of a Swizzer,
for so the Portuguezes commonly called him. They that visited me in prison (the
number was but small, but they were people of great authority) mocked such as
said it was the body of Dom Sebastian, and often spoke thus to me: Oh happy
Swizzer, to have thy body buried with so much honor fa^g, and solemn pomp!

King Philip dealt herein very industriously, as well by thrusting a dead man
into the mouths of the Portuguezes* who ^ustified their king to be living: as
also thereby to deceive others, who knowing little or nothing herein, might the
better be em^oldened in following his course. Our king (worthy Lord) is
living, according to the news that we have of him, which are correspondent to
sundry prophecies, whereto in times past (albeit that I hold it as most
assured, that my Lord and King could not be dead, and that the body which king
Philip caused to be brought from Affricke, and enterred at Bethlehem, was the
body of a Swizzer) though they came neither from a David* nor an Esaias, nor a
Daniell, or any like Prophet, yet no man at all but would give both faith and
credit to them. If herein I deceive my self, I desire that my infirmity may
be pardoned, confessing that much more great is the desire I have to see so
strange a marvel in my time, then any hope I have at all of accomplishme^t of
those Prophecies, which your holy fatherhood may behold in the discourse
annexed to the end of this answer, and that discourse, the reverend Father
Doctor Sampayo, entitled Diuinum Oraculum, etc.

To prove that that body was not the body of our king Dom Sebastian, (...)
suffices to know, that many saw him living, who at this very day are dwelling,
four, five and six leagues distant from the field of battle. Moreover I
remember, that being by Gods grace escaped from the rigorous imprisonment
wherein I was conferring of this matter with some religious persons of my
Order, who had endured bondage and slavery: they all told me, that the king
Dom Sebastian was in Barbary with the Arabes, and lived in the mountains. And
I call to mind, that as the reverend Father brother Thomas Sequera, Superior
of Ebora and my ancient friend came to visit me, I saying to him, that I was
much bound to Father Vincent of Aphonseca (who was then Archbishop of Goa) for
the kind favors he had done me during my captivity: he answered me; If
brother Vincent showed himself courteous to your fatherhoode, I believe he did
it because he was your kinsman (as indeed he was, but very far off) not in
respect he was any good Portugueze. Understand (my worthy Lord) that this man
was a very cunning crafty Spaniard, and was one of them we sent for Barbary.
He was so bad a man, and of so vile a conscience, that he durst maintain for
certainty, that the body of a Swizzer was the very true body of our king Dom
Sebastian, when all other else affirmed the contrary. He lies buried in
Bethlehem, by commandment of the King of Castile: but I trust in God, that
one day a king shall come into Portugal, who shall disinterre him out of
Bethlehem, and send him to be buried in the Escuriall.

This brother Vincent of Afonseca, when the king of Castile began to recompense
the services of some of his partakers, but scarce faithful friends to their
own country, was made Archbishop of Goa, which is Primate of all the East
Indies, and D. Edward de Meneses Viceroy of the said Indies. Moreover, the
Portuguezes did so certainly assure themselves of their king Dom Sebastians
life, that a Portugal Mason was so bold, as to publish himself to be the said
king Dom Sebastian, and found in the action very many followers: who went with
him straight to Lisbon, and if he had entered the even of S. John Baptist, he
had been received in seat of the same king Dom Sebastian. But being badly
councelled, he lodged that night a league off the city, whither sallied forth
diverse Castilian souldies and good store of Portuguezes, that knew him to be a
mere seducer. Whereupon, being forsaken of his associates that followed him
like unarmed fools, he was taken and hanged, and caused diverse others to be
hanged likewise, of royal authority; among whom (to his own great ill hap)
was a President hanged.

Likewise in a certain Province of Portugal, called Beyra a poor Portugueze
of mean condition, gave out himself to be the King Dom Sebastian, and this
was delivered for a matter so true and confident, as the Cardinal of Austria,
who at this day is Archduke, and earl of Flaunders, being Viceroy in
Portugal, determined to withdraw himself thence into Castile. Nevertheless,
following the counsel of the five Governors of Portugal, who governed the
kingdom conioyntly with him, he sent to Captain Gil de Mesa, who now is one
of the gentlemen of the chamber to the most christian King, that he should go
with his company of two hundred men, and to take the man there, and bring him
thither with all honor and reverence: because if he chanced to be that man he
named himself to be, he would redeliuer into his hands the scepter, and the
Crown belonging to the Portugal Kings and their kingdoms. Gil de Mesa went
on his journey, and arriving in the Province of Beyra, came to the town of
Penamacor, and finding the man, took him very easily, and brought him along
with him to Lisbon: where being known for an impostor, he was publickely
whipped with rods, and after sent to the galleys: he was living still not many
years since, and every one called him sober Sebastian. He was not hanged,
because in his trial he could not be charged with any other crime, then this
which was but of his own invention. Lastly, we know that in Spain, a Cook or
Pye-baker of Madrigall, made himself to be held for the king Sebastian, and in
secret caused it so to be given forth: but afterward, as each of this false
opinion had found before, he was known to be an abuser, and for he had
committed other very heinous offenses, was executed according to justice.

These examples do witness perfectly to our eyes, that since the loss of
their king Sebastian in Aff^icke, all the Portuguezes have evermore taken him
to be living: and hereby appears sufficiently that he is not dead, neither
was that his body which was buried in Bethlehem. Moreover, by the same examples
your worthy Lordship may easily judge, that this man held as a prisoner at
Venice, is the King Dom Sebastian himself, considering that in two years and
five months already passed, since he first began to manifest himself, the
Seigneurie continually found from day to day, more evident appearance still of
truth, without encountering any thing whatsoever to the contrary, or could be
believed for certain, in all the allegations of the Ambassador from Castile
against the prisoner. The Lords of this honorabble estate, warned by the
success of such false impostors, may the better excuse themselves, that they
have with such extremity and long delay, proceeded against the very person of
king Dom Sebastian. Which being so, and the divine Oracle ensuing added hereto:
I hope I have answered (reverend Lord) your second demand.

A divine Oracle, worthy to be published and known through all the world:
imprinted at Lisbone in Latin, with permission of the holy office, in the
year MDC.
Brother Stephen de Sampayo Portugueze, of the order of the Friars Preachers,
reader of divinity in the University of Tolossa, To the Reader.
AS the al-good and most mighty God, disposes things with no less opportunity
then clemency, it is come to pass that since the time of some four years
past, there has been found in Portugal two memories or monuments, of most
venerable antiquity, in a very celebrate Monastery of the order of the
Cisteaux, which we commonly call the Abbay of Alcobaca, as the fathers of that
covent searched among their papers and registers, for certain priueledges for
their warrant for a kind of vexation, whereof it shall be needless to speak
at this time. And in short while after they were presented to Philip II. king
of Castile, by the Priour Provincial of the said order, and read apart each
from other before his Catholic Majesty, and then again redeliuered back to
the Monastery: both which (for certain causes) have been brought to light, and
the translation of them conferred with the original.

The oath of Dom Alphonso first king of Portugal, for approbation and
assurance of the vision, which he saw the year MCXL. in the Province of Campo
d'Ourique.
I Alphonso first King of Portugal, son to the famous Earl Henry, graund
child or son to the great King Alphonso, before you worthy personages, the
Archbishop of Braga; and the Bishop of Coimbre, and Theotonio, and you other
Lords, officers, and subjects of my kingdom: do swear upon this Cross, and
on this book of the most holy Evangelists, which I touch with my hands; that I
a miserall sinner, have seen with mine unworthy eyes, my Lord Jesus Christ
spread abroad upon the cross, in manner following.

I being with mine army in the land which is near to the river Tagus, in the
Province of Campo d'Ourique, to give battle to Ismael, and to four other
kings of the Moors, who had with them infinite thousands of men at arms: and
my people being somewhat sad and fearful, to behold such a numberless
multitude of warriors, came unto me and said, that it would be overmuch
boldness in us to bid them battle. Whereupon, being very much afflicted with
what I heard and saw, I began to ponder apart by my self what I were best to
do. In my pauillion I had a book, containing both the old Testament and the
new of Jesus Christ; I opened it, and happening to read the victory of Gedeon,
I began thus to say to my self: Thou know o Lord Jesus Christ, that for the
love of thee, I have undertaken this war against thine enemies: Lord, it is
in thy hand to give me and mine strength to vanquish these blasphemers of thy
name. And speaking so I fell asleep upon the said book, and sleeping, I saw
an old man come to me, saying: Alphonse, take good courage, for thou shall
vanquish and put to repulse all these Kings here, and shall break their
forces, and God shall show himself to thee. As I was in this vision, suddenly
came to me Ferdinand de Sousa gentleman of my chamber, who awaking me, said:
Sir, raise your self, for here is an old man come to speak with you. Let him
enter, said I: if he be any of our friends. When the man was come in, I knew
him to be the same good old man which I had seen in my vision; he said unto
me: Sir, be of good cheer, you shall vanquish, you shall vanquish, and you
shall not be vanquished. God loves you, for he has cast the eyes of his mercy
upon you, and on your race, even to the sixteenth generation, wherein your
ligne shall be weakened and diminished. Nevertheless, in this diminution and
feebling, there shall be no want of his divine favor and succor. He has
commanded me to tell you, that when you do hear in the night ensuing, the
bell of mine hermitage, wherein I have lived sixty six years among the
infidels, and in the protection of the most high: you shall come forth of your
camp, all alone without company and he will make his great mercy appear unto
you. I obeyed, and prostrating my self in reverence to the ground, worshipped
the messenger, and him that sent him.

And as I attended in prayer the second watch of the night, I heard the bell,
then (armed with my sword and shield) I went forth of the camp. Then I saw on
my right hand toward the East, a bright beam in the element, the splendor
whereof increased more and more. And as I held mine eyes respectively fixed on
that quarter, I saw in that beam (shining brighter then the Sun) the blessed
Cross, and Jesus Christ crucified thereupon: likewise both on the one side and
other, a multitude of young men seeming very white, whom I accounted to be
holy Angels. When I had beheld this vision, I laid by my sword, shield and
garment, put off my shoes, and being prostrated along upon the earth, I wept
abundantly: then going to entreat strength and preservation for my subjects,
without any trouble I spoke in this manner: Lord, to what end do thou show
thy self to me? would thou increase the faith of him that only believes in
thee? It were better (Lord) that these infidels should see thee, to the end
that they might believe: as for my self, from the day of my baptism, I have
known and acknowledged thee the true God, Son of the Virgin, and the Father
eternal.

This cross was of admirable greatness, and elevated from the earth about ten
Cubits: and the Lord with a sweet sound of his voice (which I heard with mine
unworthy ears) said to me: I do not appear unto thee in this sort, for
increase of thy faith, but to comfort thy heart against this battle, and to
fix the chiefest Princes of this kingdom upon a firm rock. Courage
Alphonso, for thou shall not only vanquish and be conqueror in this battle,
but likewise in all other which thou shall fight against the enemies of the
cross. Thou shall find thy men cheerfully disposed to the battle, and in the
name of a king they will require thee to enter the fight; make thou no doubt at
all, but liberally grant whatsoever they demand. For I build and destroy both
Empires and Kingdoms, and I will establish an Empire in thee and thy
posterity: to the end that my name may be spread and augmented, even unto the
very uttermost nations. And that thy successors may know that I have given
thee thy kingdom, the Scutchion of your armies shall be fully beautified with
the price whereby I bought mankind, and of those wherewith the Jews bought and
sold me: this shall be to me a sanctified kingdom, for pres^auation of the
faith, and loving of piety.

Having heard these words, I worshipped and said: For what merits (O Lord)
does it please thee to show me so great grace? I will do whatsoever thou have
commanded me: and Lord, look favorably on my posterity as thou have promised
me, and keep my people of Portugal safe and sound. But if any misaduenture be
to be endured, convert it (Lord) rather against me and my successors, and
pardon my people whom I love as my only son. Which the Lord showing me he
would consent unto: Never (quoth he) shall my mercy part from thee nor thine,
for by them I am to prepare a great harvest, and them have I chosen for my
harvest laborers in lands far remote. This said, he vanished, and I (full of
confidence and contentment) returned to my camp. And that these matters happened
thus, I king Alphonso swear by the holy Gospels of Christ Jesus, which I touch
with these my hands. Wherefore I command my successors that shall come for
ever, that they bear in their arms five Scutchions parted in form of a
cross, because of the cross and the five wounds of Jesus Christ: and in each
of them thirty pence, and on the top or Crest the Serpent of Moses, being the
figure of Jesus Christ. And that this may be a memorial to our generation;
whosoever shall go against it, let him be cursed of God, and with the traitor
Judas eternally tormented in hell.

Given at Coimbre the 29. of October. MCXL. S. Archbishop of Braga. P. Bishop
of Coimbre. T. Pr^our. Gonsalo de Sousa, Attorney of Guimaranyes. Pelayo
Mendes, Attorney of Braga. So^^o Martius, Attorney of Coimbre. Fernand Pires,
cup bearer to the King. Pero Pays, ensigne-bearer to the King. Vasco San^hes.
Alphonso Mendes, geuernour of Lisbone. Mendo Pirez, for Albert, great
Chauncellor to the King. I Alphonso king of Portugal.

I Thomas de la Croix, notary public Apostolic, and Secretary to the Legate
in these realms of Portugal, have corrected this copy of the oath of D.
Alphonso of glorious memory, according to the perfect original, which is
sealed with five seals at labels hanging, the two for most whereof seem to be
those of the Archbishop of Braga, and the Bishop of Coimbre, and the other two
lowest, to wit, the fourth and fifth, belong to two of those Lords that are
named in the role. Lastly, that in the midst is the seal of the king, having
five Scutchions arraunged in the form of a cross, an^ in each of them thirty
pence: according a^ aunciently the said king and his successors were
accustomed to bear in their arms. All the rest of the seals are in red wax,
except the kings seal which is of natural virgin wax, or rather as it is
commonly called, white wax. The rest are hanged at labels of the same color
red, but that of the kings is fastened to a label cut out of the same
parchment, being altogether whole and sound without harm. Thus do I certify
and maintain all this to be true, as I am a Notarie, and according to the oath
whereto I stand obliged by reason of mind office. In affirmatio^ whereof I have
subscribed to this writing, and sealed it with my seal public and
accustomed, at L^bo^e the 4. of Noue^ber 1599. being thereunto prayed and
requested.

Thomas de la Croix.



A testimonial of Alphonso the first king of Portugal, for a vassellage or
free money by him granted.
IN the name of God, because it is necessary, that every faithful man should
do his part to the Ministers of God* of those goods which he has received from
the Sovereign giver of all things, to the end that by their means he may be
made partaker of the heavenly treasures: I Alphonso, not long since created by
the grace of God King of Portugal, and for that cause feeling my self to
stand more obliged then any other, desirous to offer unto the most High my
body and all my best means, that both I and any successors might reign for
ever: acknowledge first to hold our kingdom at the hand of God, who made a
gifter thereof to me, to the end that with firm heart and perfect charity, I
should defend the Christian faith against the outrageous Infidels, and that I
should enrich the holy Church with the revenues of my Realm* for performance
whereof, it should be a holy kingdom, loved of God, and established for ever.
And because I have already rendered my self tributarie, and all such as shall
appertain to me, to the blessed S. Peter and his successors, desiring
likewise to have him my advocate to God and his blessed mother: by the consent
of my subjects (who by their virtue, without any strange help, have
established me on this my royal throne,) I appoint and constitute, as well for
me as for my successors, that my self, my kingdom, my race and them that
shall come after me, shall be in the safeguard, protection, defense, and
patronage of the most glorious virgin Marie de Clairuaux. Ordaining and
commanding to every one of my successors that shall come lawfully to the
inheritance of this kingdom, every year to pay and give in manner of a
fee-monie or tribute, and of vassellage to the said church of our Lady of
Clairuaux, (which is of the Order of the Cisteaux situate in the Realm of
France (...) the diocese of Langres,) fifty Marauedis of gold, pure, fine*
(...) ^ll and good. But if it happen, that any one of the said Mo^rie, enter or
pass by our demean, where there is builded any Monastery, the persons and
goods of such a one, shall be under the rule and patronage of the King, so that
he shall not be molested, disquieted, troubled, nor deceived of his goods by
any one. And if it happen, that they be restored to their former liberty, in
what hour, time or moment it shall so come to pass, at their best advantage,
let them do as they see cause. And because the goods of such Monasteries and
persons may be as goods royal: the King shall have so much care of them as he
ought to have if they were properly his own* And if any King, or Tyrant (which
we hope that none such shall be borne of our race) come to molest the said
persons, or make rape of their goods, and then countenance it, that he vsurps
on none of our heritage, nor of theirs, but those belonging to the virgin
Marie: he shall be held as disloyal to his Lord, be exempted from the defense
and custody which we appointed for my kingdom, and his seed shall not be
seen upon the earth. As for the religious persons, which are to serve the Lord
in this Monastery of Clairuaux, and the rest of their Order, they shall have
care to recommend devoutly to God, the estate of our kingdom, and my soul,
and theirs likewise of my kindred. And the Abbot Dom Bernard, and his
successors perpetually shall celebrate the feast of the dedication of their
church every year, on the day of the Annunciation of the blessed virgin Marie.

For which, oh Virgin mother of my Lord Jesus Christ, in honor and praise of
whom this Order is established to shine upon the earth: I Alphonso king of
Portugal thy humble servant do entreat, that thou would defend my kingdom
against the Moors, enemies to the cross of thy Son: and keep this crown
free from all strange domination, and permit no one to pay this fee money and
homage, but thy loyal servants, and those descended from my self. That if any
one attempt any matter whatsoever, contrary to this vassellage and
testimonial of this tribute: if he be a subject, let him be expelled out of
our kingdom. If he be a King (which God forefend) let him be held as accursed
by us, and never to be mentioned in our lignage* but that God (who gave us this
kingdom) despoile him of all dignity, I suffer his enemies to vanquish him,
and himself be buried in hell with that traitor Judas.

Made in the Church of Lamego, the 8. of Apr. MCXLII. I Alphonso the King. Ega^
Munis, Grandmaister of the household. Pero Pays, Ensigne-bearer to the King.
Fuas Raupi^o, Governor of Coimbre. Polayo de Sousa. Certifiers. Gonsalo de
Sousa. Vascho Sanches. Mendo Pirez. Rodrigo Aluares, witnesses. Alphonso Egas.

I Thomas de la Croix, Notarie public Apostolic approved, and Secretary to
the Legate in these kingdoms of Portugal, have collationed and corrected this
present copy upon his proper original, which is enabled with the seal
Royal: and so I certify by the oath that is enjoined me in regard of mine
office. In sign whereof, I have underwritten and signed this with my seal
public and usual.

At Lisbon the 4. of November, MDXCIX.


THE SVCCESSION AND number of the Kings of Portugal.
The first generation. Alphonso Henriques. 1. II. Sanche. 1. III. Alphonso. 2.
IIII. Sanche. 2. V. Alphonso. 3. VI. Denis. 1. VII. Alphonso. 4. VIII. Peter.
1. IX. Fernand. 1. X. John. 1. XI. Edward. 1. XII. Alphonso. 5. XIII. John. 2.
XIIII. Emmanuel. 1. XV. John. 3. XVI. Sebastian. 1.

Hereby is understood, that Sebastian is the sixteenth in generation, whereof
king Alphonso Henriques spoke in the oath of his revelation. This Sebastian was
borne after his fathers decease, when were very instant and frequent prayers,
processions and fastings among the people of Portugal, in the year, 1554. the
day of the two holy Martyrs, Fabian and Sebastian, a matter almost beyond all
hope: for his father died in nonnage or very young, and his mother was but
sixteen years old. This Prince was of an exceeding good nature, high in
courage, accompanied with great bodily strength, godly and religious, and that
in such sort, as even from the cradle his subjects had him in much admiration,
and they accounted him as another Caesar Augustus, according as caries the
signification of the name of Sebastian.

Ancient Prophecies which we cannot more conuenably appropriate to any other,
then to this self same Sebastian.
S. Cyrille the Hermit, in the treatise of the revelation which was made to
him, whereof the Abbot Ioachim glozed.

TEmpore annorum 54. orietur Sol, etc. Et erit Sol delitescens. Pungetur aculeo
despectissimo; in specu paruo tricamerato, and vectibus pergrandibus communito
ab Scorpionitis mancipabitur. Postea ad brauium orbis pertinget, etc. Read all
this Chapter.

In English thus:

In the time of 54. years, a Sun shall arise, etc. And this Sun shall be
hidden. He shall be pricked with a most despitefull sting; he shall be in a
little cave of three vaults, made strong with very great bars, he shall be
thra^led by Scorpionites: afterward he shall come to triumph over the world,
etc. Saint Isidore. Occultus Rex bis pie datus, in Hispaniam veniet in equo
ligneo: quem multi videntes, illum esse non credent. Domabit superbos:
spurcitias Hispaniarum purgabit. In Syriam transfretabit: super Sanctum
sepulchrum signum Crucifixi ponet: and erit Monarcha.

In English thus:

A hidden King shall twice be holily given, he shall come into Spain upon a
horse of wood (that is a ship) whom many beholding, they will not believe
that it is he. He shall subdue the proud: he shall purge the Spaniards of their
filthinesses. He shall pass into Syria: he shall place the Ensign of the
Crucifixe upon the holy Sepulcher: and shall be a Monarch. Theophilus the
Bishop. Dum secundum imperium occupabitur, Ciprusque a Christi hostibus fuerit
aggressa, Pastor ouium, coronis Graecorum nudus erit. Rhodia tunc Magistro
carebit. Hispania potentia virtu^eque munita illi tradet Magistrum: Romae autem
pastor glorio sui, ignotus apud homines, apud Deum probus and iustus erit: qui
cum vno Rege dictae Prouinciae, qui oblitus, mortuus, and non regnaturus
putabatur, regna deperdita recuperabit: Soldanum suae ditioni subiugabit, and
in Christianis domum Dei restituet.

In English thus.

While the second Empire shall be troubled, and Cyprus invaded by the enemies
of Christ: the Pastor of the sheep of the Grecian troops shall be left naked.
Rhodes shall then want a Master. Spain stored with virtue and power, shall
give it a Master. And there shall be at Rome a glorious shepherd, unknown to
men, good and just toward God: And this man, with a king of the same province,
that shall be forgotten, dead, and thought never more to reign, shall recover
again his lost kingdoms: shall subiugate the Souldan under his dominion, and
shall restore the house of God into Christendom. S. Methodus Bishop and
Martyr. lib. 6. cap. 28. Expergiscetur Rex in furore tanquam homo a somno vini,
quem existimabant homines tanquam mortuum esse. Hic exiet super filios Ismael a
mari Aethiopum, etc. Vide Biblioth. Patrum, fol. 526. primae Lutet. Paris.
editionis.

In English thus.

There shall a king awake in great fury, like a man out of a slumber of wine,
whom men shall repute to have been dead. He shall go out against the sons of
Ismael toward the Ethiopian sea, etc. Sybilla Erithraea. Compressa aquila,
cuius nomen quinque apicibus inaestimabiliter scriptum, ministrum iniquitatis
destruet, vrsum conteret, sceptru^ e^us possidebit, etc. In tractatu qui
incipit Requiritis a me, o ill^strissima turba Danaum. lib. 2.

In English thus.

The compressing Eagle, the name whereof is inestimably written in five marks,
shall destroy the minister of iniquity, bruise the Bear, and shall possess
his scepter, etc. In the Treatise that begins: You require of me, O
illustrious company of Grecians. The second book. An explication of some
points contained in this Discourse.
In the Epistle to the Reader.
THe cause why the religious persons of Alcobaca sought among their papers some
privileges and Donations of the Kings of Portugal, was because his Majesty
Catholic Dom Philip II. King of Castille, pretended to sell the jurisdiction
of seven towns, whereof the said Monastery is Lord. And because this divine
Oracle was imprinted at Lisbone, it was made dangerous to declare the said
cause. Wherefore the father Doctor Sampayo said, by way of parenthesis, that it
was not good to speak of it at that time.

In the Oath of the King Dom Alphonso.
The said King commanded to his successors, to come to the field with their
shield of arms, containing five scutchions fashioned like a cross, in each of
which should be figured the thirty pence, for which our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ was sold, etc. as more plainly is declared by the Notarie Apostolic
Thomas de la Croix in his certificate, assuring that they were so figured on
the seals. It may be that this commandment was observed at the first
beginning of the Realms of Portugal: but whether since then to this present,
we do not find that it has bin kept, chiefly since the reign of Alphonso
third of that name, and fifth king of Portugal, who was Earl of Bullen in
France. He adjoined to the crown of Portugal the Realms of Algarbes, which
were given him by Dom Alphonso le sage, King of Castille, and Emperor of the
East, in dower of marriage with Domne Beatrix his daughter, not to meddle at al
with the cross the first arms of Portugal (for first of all Portugal bare
for arms a shield argent, without any other thing) he placed round about the
shield which contained the five that fashioned the said Cross, seven
scutchions of gold, in a field Geules, which are the arms of the realms of
Algarbes, and since then to this present, the kings of Portugal have evermore
held the same arms, as they do at this day.

Stephen Garibay, in his abridgement of the history of Spain, speaking of the
Arms and Colors, calls those Castelles of the Realms of the Algarbes, which
engirt the Scutchion of the arms of Portugal, Orla, in French Geule or a
border, affirming that no other kingdom of Europe bears them but Portugal.
By which reason we may say, that the Geule or border which we see about the
arms of France, to wit, that of the order of S. Michael, and that of the holy
Ghost, of the Golden Fleece in Burgundy, and that of the Garter in England
etc. are but borrowed thence.

Now to return to our arms: the King Dom Emanuel seeing himself in Europe,
Lord of the kingdom of Portugal, and of the Realm of the Algarbe, which is
in the province of Spain; in Affricke of the other Realm of Algarbe, which is
in the province of Barbary; of all the coast of Guinee, even to the Cape de
bonne Esperance, and from thence unto the red sea: and of a great number of the
Isles situate in the sea of the said Africa; in Asia of the Realm of Goa, and
of a very spacious Monarchy, considering he held nine Kings his subjects and
tributaries, and four Queens: in America, of Bresil, a province of very large
extension: he bare a Sphere for his device, which signified the rule that
Portugal had in the four quarters of the world. Adioying likewise, the Cross
of the Order of the warfare of Jesus Christ, because the King of Portugal,
being graund master of the said Order, is Lord of diverse lands and towns in
Portugal, and of all the authority which the Portugueses possess abroad from
thence. And because sundry persons have demanded of me how they should
understand these Scutchions and pence: I here tell them, that the five
Scutchions in the Azure field set in one shield, the field whereof is Argent,
each of them figured with five white pence, do signify five kings Moors,
vanquished by one Christian king. The kings of the Moors subdued, are Ismael
and his four confederates: the vanquisher is the king Dom Alphonso the first,
king of Portugal, from whom grew this commandment. As for the pence, because
many have alleged to me, that in the five Scutchions, there are but xxv. pence
and not thirty, as other Authors and my self have written: I should be
infinitely eased, if in removing their doubt they would but hear me. Would you
find thirty pence? Count first of all the three Scutchions above and below,
which contain fifteen pence, next, them that are trauersed on the right side,
so that that in the midst be counted twice, considering it spreads unto either
hand: and there you shall find other fifteen pence, which joined to the first,
complete the number of thirty, and thus they may rest satisfied in their
demand.

To the Testimonial of vassellage and feoffement. And because I have already
rendered my self tributary, and all such as shall appertain to me, to the
blessed S. Peter and his successors, etc.
WE find in the histories of Portugal, that in the year 1169. when Pope
Alexander the sixth approved the election of the King D. Alphonso, and confirmed
his kingdom to him: the king, by the consent of his Portugueses, made the said
kingdom feudatarie to the holy Church of Rome, promising to pay as in tribute
every year two pounds of gold. In the time since, there is no memorial found
at all, that this tribute has been paid: as likewise none of our Historians do
show unto us, that these fifty Maruedies of gold have been paid to the
Monastery of our Lady of Clairueaux. And me thinks (worthy Lord) that it were
not much from the purpose, to make here a digression, thereby to acquaint your
reverend worthiness, upon what reason the king Dom Alphonso had such devotion
to this Monastery of Nostre dame de Clairuaux.

The king Dom Alphonso and S. Bernard did both live at that time, and the king
being informed of the wisdom, learning, and reformed life of this holy man,
and what miracles God wrought by his means, in favor and for the benefit of
the faithful: he began very quickly to receive him into good grace and
opinion. At this very time, the king had sent his son Sanche to besiege the
City of Santeren, called by the ancient Tordules S^alabis of Scabelisque the
first founder; and by the Romans, Presidium Iulium; by the Christians,
Santirenae, by reason of the holy Irena, a virgin and a Martyr, who suffered
death there for the Christian faith, in the year of our Lord 696. Then
afterward by the Moors Capelicastrum. This was a Parliament and colonie of the
Empire, and one of the greatest and most important towns of Lusitania, whereof
the Moors were Lords. The King thinking one while in this siege, and of the
Fortress of this city, because it was built on a high mountain, that it was
a matter very doubtful and difficult to take and subdue: to purchase aid and
help of God by the intercession of our blessed Lady the virgin, concluded in
his soul, if he might happen to win the said city, to make her great offers,
and to erect in his kingdom a great and notable monastery of Monks of the
order of the Cisteaux (whereof ensued the said monastery of Clairuaux) which
should and did flourish greatly through the world, and so does to this day. The
King Dom Alphonso soiourned then in the town of Coimbre, which then was the
capital place of all the kingdom: within some few days after, the King
departed from the said town, to be present at the siege with his son and
train; and as he was upon the way, there came before him two or three
religious men of the said order, who demanded of him (on the behalf of Friar
Bernard) place for beginning the building of the monastery which he had
promised. The King considering apart by himself, and remembering that he had
made this promise is his heart, and yet had not imparted it to any person
whatsoever, and seeing that Friar Bernard, who was distant off from him more
then three hundred miles, knew thereof, he took it as a good augurie or presage,
and began to hold it for certainty, that the heavenly Architect would not
slack his grace toward him, but that without all doubt he should conquer the
said city. Having then given good and charitable welcome to the religious men,
he said: My brethren, you come in a very apt season, let us journey on
together, and I will recount it unto you, as also make accomplishment of my
promise, so soon as I have recovered the city of Santaren from the Moors,
which I have besieged by my son and soldiers.

Three days after the arrival of the King there, the citiie was won and
taken, more by the help of heaven, then by the valor and strength of the
Christians: albeit no way to disparage their deserving, they fought like hardy
and very valiant men. The King doing the duty of a most brave Prince and
Captain, seeing him self in extreme great danger at the entrance of a gate
which he had won, whereon is an imag of our Lady, and is called the gate of
our Lady Alamarma, which is as much to say as, fasten o^ mine Arms, the very
portugal words which the King used then to his Squire, because one had untied
the buckles of his armor. The King being made Lord of a place of such weighty
importance, marked out forthwith to the said religious men a great quantity
of ground, whereon they should begin to build their monastery; which afterward
increased in such sort, as in short time the number amounted to 999. They lived
in particular little celles, dispersed among the valleys and mountains: and on
feast days they would meet together to praise the Lord. The religious men of
this monastery do hold by tradition, that their number shall never amount to
a thousand, because if they give the habit to one within the church, they
shall find another to be dead without. This has been assured to me by persons
of good years, religious men of the said monastery, who call themselves d'
Alcobaca, among whom are diverse of my kindred.

A thing which (right worthy Lord) may very well be so For if if we shall give
credit to Camden an English historian, who yet lives at this day, and is an
author worthy of belief: he certifies to to us in his Brittania, that in the
land which at this day is called England (which such as are seen in
Cosmography, know to be no greater the^ the kingdom of Portugal, with that of
Algarbe in Lusitania) a tyrant King put to death twelve thousand religious
persons, because they followed the part of another, who was the true and
rightful King. The same Camden does tell us, that these religious people were
of a monastery, which was divided into three several bands, and that the
least company of them contained seven hundred complete. But to come to our
purpose, these religious folk of Alcobaca, builded by succession of time, in
the great breadth of ground granted them by the King Dom Alphonso, seven
cities, so do the Spaniards call them, and the Latins, oppida sieve vrbes,
because that almost all of them are engirt with walls, and have castles, as in
France, Poissy, Meulan, Mante, Vernon, etc.

Philip II. King of Castille, would have sold the jurisdiction of them, as he
has sold others in Spain belonging to the Church. This moved the fathers of
the said monastery, to turn over their papers, and was the cause, that we saw
with our eyes a donation so devout and holy, made to the blessed mother of God
our Lady of Clairuaux, whereof Saint Bernard has bin Abbot. Now reverend
Lord, may it please you license me, to come to the declaration of some words in
the prophesies which perhaps may seem difficult to some wheresoever.

Concerning that of S. Cyril the Hermit. Tempore annorum. 54. etc.
This proposition has lately been declared elsewhere, speaking of the King
Dom Sebastian, who was borne in the year 1554. the 20. of January, between
eleven and twelve of the clock at night, as I well remember. I lacking books
here, and have not my memory so good (worthy Lord) now, as in times past, my
trauails, banishments, sicknesses (especially the last) has deprived me of the
better part, so that I cannot now cite some common known Psalms without
book, which I had in my younger years by heart, and could say readily.

Concerning that of S. Isidore. Occultus Rex bis pie datus. etc.
This may be very well applied to Dom Sebastian my Lord and king: because that
after the twelfth of January, the day whereon his father died, aged but
sixteen years and seven months, till the twenty of the said month, An.
1554. when he was borne: at Lisbone throughout all Portugal, day and night
they made continual processions, fastings and prayers, with very much devotion
and great store of tears, as the reverend father doctor Sampaye makes known in
his Epistle to the reader. The reason was, because the Portuguezes feared, that
the kingdom should fall into the Spaniards hands. For that when the King D. John
3. grandfather to to King D. Sebastian, gave his daughter Mary as wife to
Philip then prince of Castille, it was said by the contract of this marriage,
that if it happened that the King D. John should deceasse without children, he
that should be borne of Philip and Mary should be heir to the kingdom of
Portugal, whereto the people then consented (say some) but repented afterward,
that they labored not to contend rather by law or war, which questionless
had not wanted, because the Lord Dom Edward son to the infant Dom Edward
brother to the said King. D. John. 3. then lived, who was a Lord endued with
many singular virtues, and as a legitimate Prince borne of Kings by the ligue
masculine, did evermore claim the succession of his ancestors in the said
kingdom, which never yet fell unto the distaffe. Hereupon the Portuguezes
prayed to God so instantly, with so many processions, fasts, prayers and
tears, that it might please him to give them a Lord and Prince. Thus by divine
grace was Dom Sebastian given to the Portuguezes the first time, and thus now
again he gives him the second time.

An answer to the third demand.
For many causes (right reverend Lord) it was not necessary for the King Dom
Sebastian to discover himself in Barbary: of al which we will allege but two.
The first, if he had manifested himself, he had run into great danger of his
life's loss, for his enemy could not more easily have put him to death, then
in Barbary. There are a great number of officers kept in pay, who give them
such morsels, which is called the Boccon, or poisoned bit, as the poor patient
cannot by any means escape: they limit them to the year, month, days: what
shall I say? to very hours and moments. The second, if Muley Hamet had got
him into his power, the least that he would have demanded for his ransom, had
been the cities and towns which the Portuguezes possess in Barbary. This had
been a small gift for him, Tanger, Arzile, Mazagan, and the other places which
the Kings of Portugal do hold in Barbary. Nevertheless, Septa had bin great
loss to Christendom, for it is the key of Affricke and Europe. And the Moors
having that in their own power, at all times, and whenever they were thereto
disposed, they might pass into Spain an hundred thousand horse and more, and
from Spain post to other parts of Europe, as sometimes they did, when they were
not so well inured to war, nor expert in Arms. Our histories of Portugal
do tell us, that the infant Dom Fernand being taken by the Moors in the field
of the city of Tanger, as he there held his siege: some few days after, they
came to demand for his ransom only the city of Septa, which his father the
King Dom John of worthy memory, the Bastard, had won from the Mores. The king
(that then was) Dom Edward, for the singular love he bare to his brother,
resolved with his people (who loved the Prince entirely) to give what they had
demanded. The infant Dom Fernand being advertised of his brothers kind
respect, and the peoples goodwill to him likewise, found the means to write
secretly unto them, that they should be very careful what they did, saying:
God forbid, that by my occasion Christendom should endure such a damage: I had
rather be partaker among an hundred thousand martyrs, or die in captivity in
the Infidels custody, then cause such a manifest danger to all Christendom.

The Mores following still their motion (yet using the infant and his company
with extreme cruelty) came to the knowledge, that it was hindered much more by
the said infant, then the king his brother: whereupon they began to entreat
him in far better manner, that he might the gladlier consent to his own
redemption. But they could no way work him, to prefer his own particular
benefit, before the weal public of Christendom. So that the Moors growing
much displeased hereat, put him into an iron prison, without any bed or seat,
and so placed him before the gates of the city of Marocco, giving him daily to
eat certain ounces of bread, and a little water to drink. After some few
months, this holy Lord rendered his spirit to his Creator, in that rigorous
prison, suffering a glorious martyrdom, for the common good of all Christians,
after the example of his Lord Jesus Christ, redeemer of the whole world. His
body is buried in the Covent of our Lady of victory, which is of mine Order,
commonly called de la Battaille, in the Chapel of king D. John his father,
where God (in regard of him) did continually many miracles, for advancement of
the Christian faith.

The religious Fathers of the said Covent, on the day of his death do not use
to sing any Mass of Requiem, but that of all Saints, (because he was not
canonized, nor yet beatified) wherein he is contained amongst them. Friar Jerome
de Ramos, a religious man of mine Order, writ a book concerning the life of
this glorious Saint, in the Portugal language. Which book I believe that the
king Dom Sebastian has both seen and read, and that in imitation of the said
Saint, who was brother to his fourth grandfather, I am certainly persuaded,
that he having so apt means to conceal himself, would not be discovered: for
should he have there been revealed to the Mores, they might have come and
demanded for his ransom, the towns and cities elsewhere set down, nay the
city of Septa it self. And doubtless, the Portuguezes would have given them
all, nay rather much more, for the liberty of a King so good, so virtuous, and
so holy, whom they loved with such and so great affection, as if he had been a
God and their redeemer.

The king Dom Sebastian (most worthy Lord) was naturally so Catholic and
christianly addicted, that for the adding but of a very pulse breadth of ground
to Christendom, he would most gladly have yielded himself captive. And
therefore we may well conjecture and credit his good nature, that when he could
not get away without danger of his life, and likewise in respect of
Christendomes general benefit, he held it much more glorious for him to die
in prison and slavery in Barbary, then to live at liberty being Lord and
Monarch of the world. Thus, right reverend Lord, give we end to the answer of
your third demand.

An answer to the fourth demand.
Some do conjecture, that he has been amongst the Moors in Barbary many
years. Which very well be so (although such as have not been accustomed to
frequent that country, do imagine it impossible) and oftentimes it has so
happened to the Portuguezes, that they have lived captives in Barbary for the
space of 10.12.15.20.25. and 30. years, without any tidings heard of them all.
The reason is, that al slaves Noble do appertain to the King, and such as hold
them in their custody, are bound to make like delivery to him of them.
Whereby very often the Lords of the Moors, knowing their slaves to be of noble
race, dissemble with them, that they may not lose them: and that they may find
means to be rid of them, granting them for their liberty some reasonable
ransom.

So got out of captivity the Prince my Lord Dom Antonio, who died at Paris
with the title of King of Portugal, because he had been elected, received,
sworn and confirmed by the people, King of the said Realm: who being slave to
a particular man, his good fortune favored him so much as not to be known:
and he met with another slave of his company, an Affricane Gentleman, who
spoke very well the language of the Coimbre, and called himself Gaspar de
Gran. This man made his master believe, that this slave Dom Antonio, was a
Priest which would never be redeemed thence, because his kindred were very glad
of his life in imprisonment, for thereby they had in mean while the benefit
of his goods and rents: wherefore he gave him counsel, that it were much
better for him to make some reasonable composition, then to be a looser
altogether. In the end, the matter was so concluded, that for the ransom of
the Prince and the said Gentleman, the sum of six hundred Cruzadoes must be
paid him, which are Crowns valuing fifty solz or souse Tournois. And the Mores
parted thence with them, never traveling but by night, but hiding them selves
all the day time: and on the fifth or sixth day after they arrived in the night
at the gates of Arzile, where entering masqued, they left their slaves, received
their money, and then returned back to their houses. If the Lord Dom Antonio
had been known for such as he was, and had fallen into the power of the king
of Barbary, his matter had sorted a quite contrary way: for the slaves to the
king are kept in very strong guard, and if they hold ten thousand crowns
rent, there will be demanded fifty thousand for their ransom, which if they
will not make promise of, they must endure the sharp bastonnadoes. The slaves
that are to other particular men, are much more nearer their liberty: either
by getting such a sum of money, saving themselves otherwise, or enlarged at
length by the means of their Mistresses. It is a thing very ordinary in
Barbary, worthy Lord, for the women Moors do extremely love Christians: and
many times they receive liberty by the means of them, and likewise get very
good gifts from them.

In like sort diverse are freed and escape unknown, by means of the religious
Fathers of the most holy Trinity, which are called the Order De Redemptione
captiuorum, in France we call them Mathurines. There is commonly Monks of
this Order in Barbary, who deal with the Moors for the ransom of
Christians: which Monks do pass through all the Realms of Barbary, clothed
in their habits, with very much liberty, and have great credit with the
Moors. Among whom, if they find some man of quality, that is not known at
all, they compound immediately for his ransom, and counting down the money,
or promising to pay it in a limited time, they set him at liberty.

I think reverend Sir (because I can yet understand no further of matters
passed) that my Lord the king Dom Sebastian, has never been held as prisoner:
or if he have, it was his good hap to meet with an honest master, with
whom he lived so long, as till he could obtain his liberty, or compass the
means to make an escape. And as we do imagine, he has been wandering among the
Aethiopians, as your worthy self may gather by the translation of two letters
written unto me, the one from the Father doctor Sampayo, the other from Dom
John de Castro: the originals whereof remain in my custody, with seven or
eight other letters of theirs, which they did send to me from Venice.

In this demand likewise, your reverend Lordship prays me to tell you* for
what reason my Lord the king Dom Sebastian, did not come into France, or to
any place else, where doubtless he might have been received according to his
quality: namely, with better entertainment then he had at Venice? I answer,
that being by Gods grace restored to liberty, himself will deliver the causes
that moved him, to go and present himself before the Lords there, and those
likewise which withheld him from coming into France or elsewhere, according
as your self have alleged. As for my knowledge of him, it suffices me to
hear the speech of him, I being in one place, and he in another. But coming
to the sight of him, I can demand and know diverse notable things of him,
which is impossible for him to have altogether forgotten: for assuredly he can
and will resolve me in one or other. For since the time I became religious
(which was at two and twenty years, and 26. days of mine age) he being then
aged 12. years, one month, and 28. days, I have seen him in diverse
quarters of Portugal, and conferred with him of very important affairs.
Before I was religious, he being aged seven or eight years, I served as a Page
to his Grandmother, his fathers mother, who was sister to the Emperors Charles
the fifth, and Ferdinand, and graund-mother to the most Christian Queen Maria
de Medicis: and for this reason he is very near kinsman to the said Majesty,
cousin german removed by the fathers side, John the son of Catherine, and
likewise cousin german removed by his mothers side, Jane, who was eldest
daughter to the said Charles the fifth brother to Catherine. This which has
been said (joined with the translation of the two missiues ensuing,) may serve
as answer to your fourth demand.

The translation of a letter from the father Doctor Sampayo.
To the Rright reverend father and Doctor, the father Friar Joseph Texere
Portugueze, Counceller and Almoner to the most Christian King, in our covent of
the friars preachers at Paris.
Most reverend father and master:
I Have heretofore written to your fatherhood concerning this present matter,
and because I know not whether my letters have been delivered you or no, I
determined to send one more after the rest. Persuade your self (holy father)
and even as God shall deal with my soul in the article of death: that no
other motive stirs me hereunto, but only brotherly affection, truth and
zealous love to the liberty of my country.

The King Dom Sebastian our Lord, is prisoner here in this city, and so has
been for two and twenty months: whom God (in his judgments concealed to
himself) has permitted to come hither, transported to this place very
poorly, and robbed by five of his own servants which he entertained in
Cicilie. But so soon as he arrived here in this city (where he hoped to find
good favor and support) immediately the Ambassador of Castile persecuted him
most cruelly: persuading the Seigneurie, that he was a Calabrois, a thief,
etc. For this cause the Lords imprisoned him, and rigorously proceeded against
him: here they keep him close shut up, not suffering him to be seen, nor
enlarged, nor execute any act of justice upon him: Quia nullam inuenient in eo
causam. Because they can find no just cause against him.

Our sins are great, great is the strength of Spain, and the malice of the
Jewish Portuguezes in this country, whereof some wear red bonnets, and others
black: but the last are most dangerous. They think that they can impeach what
God has ordained ab aeterno, as the devil would have done the death of Jesus
Christ, by the means of the wife of Pilate. That this is very true, I swear
to your fatherhood, by the passion of Jesus Christ: that this man is as truly
the King Dom Sebastian, as I am known to be Friar Stephen de Sampayo. And if
it be not found to prove accordingly, let me not only (be condemned as a liar,
but for a renegate, a blasphemer and an heretic. For this, have I endeavored
my very uttermost diligence in my Portugal voyage. I have been on one side and
another, and understand secretly, that he has all the marks on his body,
without failing in any one of them, as he had in his infancy, only the wounds
excepted which he received in the bloody day at Affricke. He gives the reason
of his life, and yields account of all his passages in such sort, as there is
no understanding so obstinate and blind, but must thereby be utterly
vanquished; and God be my helper, as this is the truth.

These Lords do expect, that Kings and Princes should undertake this business,
at whose instance they would admit us to have sight and knowledge of him:
because they would not be faulty toward the Spaniard: for they say, they would
not incur the ill will of any one. This is an occasion whereby your reverend
fatherhood may purchase more honor, and perform far greater service to God,
the^ ever any Portugueze did: in coming hither, and bringing such letters of
favor with you, as may obtain for us the sight of him, and by examination to
apprehend the very certainty, for here you shall find with us more the^ twelve
persons, of all the estates of his time to know him by. He has been so
unfortunate, that leaving all his companions scattered through the world, he is
here arrived without any one of them. Dom George de Lancastre, Duke of A^eyro,
whom he left in Aethiopia, were sufficicient for his deliverance, if he were
here present.

I humbly pray your fatherhood, that upon sight of this present letter, you
would speedily journey hither, for your personal being here is very necessary:
considering withal, that a religious man your brother, of the order of S.
Dominicke, uses these persuasions to you, one that desires your good, honor and
quiet, with as earnest affection as his own.

It is seventeen months since I put hand to this service, I have been in
Portugal, and returned thence as I have told you, and it is impossible for me
to be abused as some are: who think this man not to be the King Dom Sebastian,
but that the Seigneurie detaines another hidden in stead of him. This man here,
known and reknowne for such, by the Concierges, by the Judges, by the greater
part of the Senate, and by his own Confessor, yet such is the invention of
this worlds children, as they imagine themselves more powerful then God, and
would presume to abolish so marvelous a work of the Lord.

I have written to the Governor, and to many other; I know not what the sins
are of our Portugezes in France, who were wont to oppose their lives to
extreme dangers, and hazard loss of their goods (with very good zeal) for a
figure: and will they not now with so much honor, in an action of truth and
glory, make their own advantage and benefit, not for a shadow, but for a
rightful King, whose life (both in the prison and abroad) rauisheth all the
country with admiration, by the means of his fastings, prayers, and
disciplines? notwithstanding all which, his strength is not a jot impaired, for
he is of very marvelous fortitude.

Whosoever will say, that this man is a Calabrois, and that he speaks not a
word of Portugal: he lies, he is the true King of Portugal Dom Sebastian, and
speaks Portugal (though somewhat corrupted, because it is 22. years since
he spoke the language usually. Whosoever says that they have shown him to us,
he lies: for to delay and win time withal, these Lords sent me to Portugal,
to be informed of the marks of his body, telling me, that otherwise they would
not let me see him, and that the Portugals had such forward desire to be free
from the Spaniards, as they would maintain (if need were) that their king Dom
Sebastian was but a Negro. Now albeit that I have brought so many authentical
marks, approved by public instruments from a Notary Apostolic, I have
entreated that we may have sight of him, to examine him, and make known the
truth or falsehood of the case, by the certifications which I brought hither
with me, as also a Chanon of Lisbone that came along with me. It was answered
us from the Senate, after diverse and sundry contestations; that it was not a
matter belonging to them, to know whether he were a king or no, without some
Kings and Princes moved the same to them on his behalf.

I speak so amply to your fatherhood, because you may perceive with what zeal
I write at this instant. I justify again unto you, and swear by the eternal
God, by his only begotten son, and by all our faith: that this prisoner is
our true Lord the King Dom Sebastian. If your reverend self would come with
letters from his most Christian Majesty, I believe that without any
hinderance, they would show him to us, and upon acknowledging, let us have him
enlarged. We are now going to move our request to his Holiness, that it might
please him to set a helping hand to this business, considering it is a case so
just and meritable of pity, wherein we doubt not but to have his furtherance.

With this present I have sent you the oath of the holy King, to the end that
you may make it public by impression: and by the first convenient means, I
will send you a letter which his Majesty wrote to his holiness, with an Elegy
wherein he makes the discourse of his life. Once more I earnestly entreat your
fatherhood, as much as possibly remains in me, that by no means you will let
slip so notable an occasion, well worthy to carry his deserving talent, and
that in person you would manage a matter of such importance: which, beside
imploring the strong arm of the King, and the favor of all Princes, has
necessarily need of the assistance of all loyal Portuguezes. For what account
of himself, can the reverend father Friar Joseph Texere render to the world,
so firm and constant a lover of his country? What excuse can he allege,
though there may be many, for not giving furtherance to this affair? Will he
incur the infamy of N. who for his offenses should be seen that this king
does live? What has your fatherhood done against the kingdom, that you should
not present your self before all the world with plain and open looks? Oh,
for the love of God, I beseech you consider in your soul, with what sincere
affection I use this language to you: I trust God him self will illuminate
your reverend understanding, to behold how dear an interest you have in this
cause. From Venice the xii. of October 1600.

The servant and brother to your fatherhood Friar Stephen de Sampayo.

Another Letter from Dom John de Castro.
To the worthy Sir, Docto^ Texere, Counselor and Almoner to the most
Christ^n King: chief Almoner to my Lord the Prince, and Confessor to Madame
the Princess his mother.
At Paris, in the covent of the Iacobius.
SIR,
I am extremely astonished, being the man that you are, and so well known for
a Portuguese, that you should at any time covet any thing more, then the
freedom of Portugal; that you make so small account of this incredible
marvel, concerning the king Dom Sebastian, the only prize of all that
kingdoms best adventures, considering it is now so many years since, that
you employed yourselfe in this business, with no small service unto the said
Lord. You have seen the whole discourse along of this matter, by letters as
well from my self as others, and because the former which I writ unto you,
were but briefly handled, as committing what remained overplus to better
leisure, I am now determined (for diverse good respects) to touch more
largely, yet as briefly as I can, the very foundation and ground of the whole
work.

The King Dom Sebastian, who in the year 1578. lost himself in the battle of
Affricke (he whom the enemy calls a Ca^a^o^s) is the very same prisoner which
is now detained here: even as certainly as you are Friar Joseph, and my self
Dom John. He departed safe and alive from the battle, but very sore wounded;
God having so delivered him, with some other of his company, among whom was
the Duke of Aueyro. And having gone the better part of the world, about the end
of his peregrination, he resolved to live private in an Hermitage; where after
some time passed, he was inspired by God, that he should return again^ to
Portugal to govern his kingdom. The self same inspiration was likewise
given to an Hermit, in the company of whom he ^ad lived: which Hermit
revealed many things very secret to him touching this matter: for which cause
he departed from the place where he abode, to accomplish what the Spirit of God
had inspired and enjoined him to.

So he arrived in Sicilie, in the year 1598. where he entertained four or
five servants (for he went before without company) with whom he embarked
himself at Messina, in a Galley belonging to his Holiness, to (...) for Rome,
purposing to discover himself to his said Holi^ When he was come near Rome,
those fellows (...) entertained for his servants, robbed and despoiled him of
(...) had, leaving him both poor and naked, so that he was (...) to seek to
needy and very wretched people, who besto^ (...) ^omewhat on him for the
honor of God. This mishap made him alter his former purpose; and the poor
miserable man was glad to trace all Italy, in hope to find the thieves that
had thus despoiled him. In the end, hearing no tidings at all of them, he
retired to this City, the above named year, in the month of June, having
about him but one poor Gazete, a piece of money valuing three Liards of France.
In this manner he lodged at a needy wretched house, where he remained some
days not being known. Afterward, diverse particularly began to listen after
him: for they heard that he called himself first a Knight of the Cross, and
then afterward, the King Dom Sebastian. As this brute ran abroad, Antonio de
Brito Pimentel, Pantaleon Pessoa, and many others came oftentimes to see him at
his lodging: and by occasion of this rumor, which spread it self more and
more through the City, changing his lodging, he fell by misfortune into the
hands of vile men, which being but very bare themselves, yet gave him clothes
and food at their charges. He got very evil reputation by the company of
such people, which was the principal cause or his strange misaduenture. He was
with those companions at Padoa, whereof this Seigneurie being advertised by the
Ambassador of Castille, and of some tumults made among them: to forestall such
inconveniences as might ensue, they sent to the Podestat of Padoa, that he
should by commandment cause him to avoid the Town within certain hours, and
by like certain days to depart the places belonging to their Estate.

Hereupon for some special reasons best known to himself, he returned again
unto this City, where the Seigneurs thereof at the instance of the said
Ambassador (who assured them that he was but a thief and a seductour, proving
it by the testimony of Jewish merchants Portugueses, and other persons of
selfsame honest quality, who took their oaths he was not the King Sebastian,
because the true King died in the battle of Affricke, neither did he resemble
him in any degree, imputing to him many and very enormous crimes) they sent to
apprehend him, and as a malefactor committed him to very close imprisonment:
notwithstanding, there were many persons both before and since his commitment,
that had known him very well in Portugal, and affirmed him to be the true
king Dom Sebastian.

At his first questioning withal, he declared to the Lords his mishap in
Africa, and in what manner God had delivered him. After, to diverse others he
did the like, and perceiving they would search into all his secrets, yet using
him very hardly, being a King, and one that had no way prejudiced their
estate: upon his natural and wonted inclination to choler, moved in a subject
of such justice and equity, he refused to make them any more direct answers,
but one while said one thing, then again another; nevertheless, he evermore
maintained him self to be the true king Dom Sebastian, desiring the Lords
therein to believe him, and if they approved him not to be the same* then to
chastise him justly as a false deceiuer, which as yet to this instant they
would never do, nor yet permit him to be seen by any.

He is in a certain prison, where no man may enter or speak to the prisoners:
neither may one write unto him, on peril of the saylours life, if he should
but consent thereto. He has endured very great pouerties, and passed through
many hard trauerses: being no less reproched and misprised, then the basest
prisoners with him. His life is very religious, addicted altogether to prayer
and fasting, feeding but on bread and water most days in the week. And yet
notwithstanding this austere abstinence, he is very strong, as I have heard by
one of the prisoners released out of that prison: who departed thence greatly
affectionate to him, seeming to love him highly, and reported matters
marvelous of his strength and other good parts.

As for the exterior marks of his body, he wants not one of them which he
had when as he reigned: the self same lip, look, head, body, arms, thighs,
legs and feet, not failing of any one mark which he had naturally
(imprinted as it were) on his person. He is wounded on the brow of the right
eye, and on the head, as many witnessed, when they saw him in the Affricke
battle: he has abundance of great wounds on his arms and legs: he speaks
Portugal as mingled or corrupted, wherein he is not much to be blamed,
considering he has not spoken it in the space of two and twenty years,
according to the resolution he took with his friends and companions, because
they might pass the better unknown. His hand writing is the self same,
observing still the same manner and method; all which are very well remembered
by diverse, that have both scene and known them in times past. In the secret
notes of his body, there is none likewise wanting, albeit he have many and
very notable, as is justified by good testimony, approved by the public
Notaries of Portugal. It is impossible to find another man in the world, that
should have all the self same marks, and it seems that God had thus signed
him from the womb of his mother, with so many rare and signal marks, to
make him known (by means of them) in so unhappy and miserable a time, even
as he has likewise preserved him for the fulfilling of so great and ancient
Prophesies, which have so copiously spoken of him. May it please God but to
permit, that the prosperities in the accomplishment yet remaining to him, may
answer in like certainty to the foretold adversities, which he has passed
already.

Things standing in this estate, we have demanded audience of the Seigneurie,
which twice has been granted us by the Senate with very good will. And there
we delivering the rumor that ran abroad, of the imprisonment of our King Dom
Sebastian, by means wherereof all Portugal was moved, and all Christendom
held it for meruellous and strange: we requested that he might be seen and
known, and if he were found to be the true King Dom Sebastian, that he might
be so held and esteemed of every one. If upon their suffering him, to be thus
questioned and seen by us, we returned and avouched him to be the same, we
would submit our selves to such imprisonment as they thought meet, and suffer
what punishment they would please to appoint, if herein we dissembled or dealt
false with them. Before these audiences could be obtained, we offered them a
Charter in parchment, whereby we gave them to understand, that we desired no
other grace or favor, but what has been granted in the like case by Philip.
2. King of Castille (he having more interest in this matter then they) about
two Portuguezes, who in Portugal did feign themselves severally to be the
true King D. Sebastian, he caused them to be kept in a public prison, where
all the world might have seen and spoken with them, to the end that they might
not be abused by them, and they were soon found to be villains and deceivers,
whereby the Portuguezes were quickly resolved.

We required moreover, that good order might be taken for his diet, and that
his person should be safely regarded, while this affair were further proceeded
in, least his enemies might compass his death by poison: for if any such
thing should so come to pass, the Portuguezes would report continually, that
the Seigneurie of Venice had murdered their proper, natural, lawful and true
King, when it should plainly appear that he was no Calabrois, -whence would
arise such ill will between the Portuguezes and the Venetians, as the
Seigneuries name should for ever be scandalized through the world. See here the
substance of all that we could do, yet we continued still in our right, with
all the diligence we could possibly use, calling never for any other thing
then justice. And as we grew great in the poor opinion of our hopes, Diego
Manuel chanced to arrive there, by whose coming we were somewhat more
comforted, persuading our selves now to obtain thoroughly what we desired:
because he had brought letters of great importance, which mainly might set
forward our earnest suit. And to strengthen us yet more, Sebastian Figuera came
hither likewise the 4. of this month, with letters from the States in general
of Holland, and from the Prince Maurice unto the Seigneurie, in favor of the
King Dom Sebastian, which were delivered on the morrow, for the Lords had
appointed us to be heard again as that day.

Now advise your self very well, whether I have reason or no to think
strangely of you, and to expect your presence here for obtaining of this
glory, wherein you have so seriously travailed until this day. If you have any
remembrance of heaven, or any high and generous spirit, here have you a
subject meet to employ it in. I believe you reserve to your self the sur-name
of a Portugueze, for nothing but to join it only with that of Texere. This
should be the hidden treasure, whereof in the end of the year 1598. you called
to the finding your good friend the knight Buodo, when you made your passage
into Holland. If you be desirous of glory and happiness, we shall soon have
you here: divide your self in pieces for the Prince, and you shall find the
effects thereof in the mercies of God. In sooth I know not how you have
abstained from coming barefoote hither, considering how zealous you have been
for the good and profit of our country; and such a professed enemy beside to
the Spaniard; and (in times past) of high courage for undertaking of any
worthy attempt; seeing (under heaven) is not the like case as here offers unto
you; besides, being free for whosoever to embrace. Awake your spirits either
now or never, and seeing you have so much credit in those parts, pray,
importune your friends in any place wheresoever, and if you may, obtain
letters from his most Christian Majesty, the famous Queen of England, the
general States of Holland, and from all the Princes and Lords of France: that
this Seigneurie may suffer the prisoner to be known what he is, true or false,
or at least to enlarge him, because to this hour they will neither let him be
known nor seen: but fail not to come, with what favors you can compass.
And say that denial herein maybe made unto you, yet you must not slack your
coming in a business so expedient: for you shall do no mean service to your
Prince, as you have done heretofore and that very notably, and had we but your
presence here, we should hold it sufficient.

Do not let fall to ground so great an adventure, seeing you have done so much
already for a shadow, and give the like counsel unto your friends; for never
can hap like occasion to this. On one side the enterprise is put into your
hand, on the other the recompense: do like a defender of your country, and
your merit shall be more then following times can acknowledge.
Notwithstanding, let me thus condition with you, that you shall not be so
covetous a lover of your self, as to make a sole benefit of the honor in
this action, but to divide some participation thereof to your friends.

I had forgot to tell you that the prisoner has had of the Siegneurie, five
crowns of this money monthly to dispend, which is a little more then four
crowns of the Sun; of which he gives away the most part to the poor for the
honor of God. I once more entreat you to haste your affairs with what
brevity you may, and as you come, give copies of this letter to so many as
shall require it, for I will send the same to as many others as I write unto.
You shall do me a singular pleasure, in making my commendations to M. de
Tiron, and tell him, that this is the marvel whereof I had talk with him so
many years since, and let him make account to be as certain of my service, as
his merits do justly challenge. And to Monsieur le Commaundeur de Chastes, say
that the time is now come wherein I shall make known to him how much I rest
engaged and am ready at his service. And so please him to credit me: if he
desire to purchase supreme glory and great estate, let his employment be
entire on this Princes behalf, for thereby he shall gain more honor and
repute, then his highest thoughts is able to imagine I kiss the hands of al our
friends according to my duty, and let each one receive me as effectually his.
Our Lord give you understanding of all I have writ unto you, with happy and
prosperous sucesse in your travail. From Venice the 6. of November 1600.
humbly kissing your hands.

The most affectionate to your service, Dom John de Castro.


This Dom John de Castro, whom I think your reverend Lordship knows very
well, has ever held this opinion; that the king Dom Sebastian was still alive,
and that Portugal should one day be restored by him. He took it for a matter
so firm and certain, that in the year 1596. when I was at Folambray, about
some affairs belonging to mine order and my self, the King besieging la Fere,
he justified it in the Chapter house of our covent of Iacobines at Paris, to
diverse Portuguezes (persuading them never to accord with D. Philip. 2. King of
Castille, neither ever to go together) for he knew assuredly that the King Dom
Sebastian lived, and that Portugal would be restored within few years; saying
moreover, that he esteemed it for a matter so certain, as he durst maintain
it upon his oath. Hereupon, so soon as he heard that the King Dom Sebastian
was kept prisoner at Venice, he could not any way remain in quiet.
Immediately he made his voyage for England, to entreat the royal Queen to
favor and further this case: from England he went to Holland, for the self
same purpose, and being returned to Faris, he never ceased till he came to
Venice, where he arrived the 28. of June last past, and his voyage was of such
importance, as we hope it will serve sufficiciently to get his King at liberty.

An answer to the fifth demand.
The persons that procured the liberty of my Lord Dom Sebastian king of
Portugal, are these following. The father doctor de Sampayo, regent in the
faculty of Theology at Tolossa, whom your worthy Lordship does know very
well. He in the service of the said King, adventured his life in very great
hazard, passing secretly into Portugal, and managed the matter wish such
dexterity, as it was possible for any man whatsoever to do. A doctor of the
order of Saint Bernard, named Friar Chrysostom, a very religious man, and (as
I have heard) of good credit and authority. Dom John de Castro before named,
the son to Dom Aluaro de Castro, who was one of the 4. governors that ruled
the kingdom, coniointly with the King Dom Sebastian, those whom we call in
Portugal, Veadores de la hazienda, and grand child to Dom John de Castro,
hertofore viceroy in the East Indies: of whose high prowesses, worthy deeds of
arms and victories, our histories give no mean commendation. A Chanon of
Lisbon, a man of noble lignage and rich, who abandonning his country, and
forsaking his goods, departed expressly from Portugal on this respect: and
brought the marks which the said king has on his body, approved by
authentical instruments of a Notarie Apostolic. Rodrigo Marquis, Diego
Manoel, and Sebastian Figuera, which three were servants to the king Dom
Antonio, namely companions in the same fortune. The last is he of whom we have
made mention in the second answer, and the same whom Dom John de Castro says
in his letter, to arrive at Venice, with letters from the general States of
the united Provinces, and the Prince Maurice.

It has been told me, that they expect at Venice the Lord Dom Christophero,
youngest son to the king Dom Antonio, who is at Rome, and with him these
Lords Manuel de Brito Pimentel, Pantaleon Pessoa de Neyua, Frances Antoine, and
other Gentlemen of Portugal, of whom I can say nothing what they are, because
their names were not written to me. The news that I have at this present, are
no other then those contained in the said letters from the Doctor de Sampayo,
and from Dom John de Castro, from each of whom I have received diverse other,
which nevertheless sort all to one self same end. There be sundry other
letters here from other Portuguezes, that affirm this man to be the true king
of Portugal Dom Sebastian, and approve it for truth by many reasons, giving
such plain appearance of verity, that (according to humane judgment) cannot
be encountered or ratified on any other then himself. So that I see nothing
which may call me into doubt of his not being the same man, for otherwise he
must questionless be a spirit or devil: which cannot be, considering his life
is so holy and perfect, his proceeding most simple* and (to use the very same
words which one has written to me) it is all mere simplicity. If he were a
seductour, or an evil spirit, he would express store of artificial crafts
and frauds in his doings: beside, a wicked spirit would never endure so long
and rigorous an imprisonment. The aforenamed aduertisements, instances and
intreates from the specified persons, beside reason it self, bind me (most
worthy Sir) to part thus briefly, but I hope to visit you again to morrow
after breakefast: and so I close up mine answer to your fifth demand.

An answer to the sixth and last demand.
For answer to the sixth and last demand, I say (right reverend Lord) that it
is to me very much displeasing, to serve as a Confessor in this business, and
by that means stand bound to keep all under seal: for this reason I dare not
answer categorically, because I fear to offend my most inward wel-willers in
their trust. Notwithstanding, that I may induce the king of Portugal Dom
Sebastian my Lord into France, I promise to make the mighty truth so
apparent, that it shall violently break the very strongest bars opposed
against it, and ouerflow the whole earth, that with much glory and prosperity
it may floate through all the Septentrion, and grace him home into his own
kingdom.

When the Portugals shall have their best loved and desired king at liberty:
who shall offer resistance? If Sir, you reply to me, demanding how I dare
assume such confidence in this case of Sebastian, seeing (in late proof) we
could not do any act of great importance, when we had Dom Antonio present with
us: I answer, that to justify my words* I have a thousand reasons that make
for me. There was great difference between Sebastian and Antonio. Antonio came
to the Crown by a very great hazard and difficulty: Sebastian from the womb
of his mother was borne Prince and heir. Antonio employed his time to govern
and visit the churches of his Priour de Crato (he was grand Prior of Malta in
Portugal, and for this respect, Lord spiritual and temporal of thirteen
cities, and more then four hundred villages:) Sebastian used to manage his
horses, and follow the exercise of arms. Antonio, as a man Ecclesiastical and
regular, kept his sword rusting in the scabberd: Sebastian like one secular and
a King, carried his daily naked, shining brighter then crystal. To confirm
what I say, me seems (worthy Sir) that it is not necessary to allege all
the reasons which offer themselves: it suffices us to know for certain, that
the king Dom Sebastian has at this day, and evermore had the will and heart of
a Portugueze, which is as firm in seeking his subjects benefit and love, as
it was ever ready with his weapon to encounter his enemy.

The Portuguezes know very well, that they have already felt for the space of
21. years, one month, and 25. days, the honey and sweet relish of his
government, and that if they have in all the passed time, tasted any thing
unsavory in his actions (because he was a little stiff and sharp:) they have
since then been so ouer-glutted with gall, as they will find his very bitterest
behavior, more sugared and sweet then the others best taste. Moreover, if there
be great difference between man and man: even so on the other side is there
between time and time. The Portuguezes live at this day, with an unquenchable
thirst of their liberty, so that they would gladly cast themselves from the
tops of high mountains, to find a redress for their slavish bondage. In the
passed time, as they had never tasted but their own natural government, so
they knew not how to prove the bitter, nor how well to esteem the benefit of
the sweet. Hence grew so many parts taking, both before and after the election
of Dom Antonio. He had with him the people, the Lords of the family of
Vimieuse and others, with the most part of the ecclesiastical and regular
persons. The duke of Bragancia, he brought in his quarter many Lords of
Portugal (for they were almost all descended of his house) and their
followers, which made near the number of two hundred thousand in Portugal.
The Nobles of Portugal, which are there called Escuyers or Cheualliers d'vne
Lance, and are the principal strength and sinews of the Realm, they betook
themselves all to see the sport of this play. The fourth part, which held for
his Catholic Majesty D. Philip king of Castile, because of the discord and
division of the rest, was the strongest, and proceeded at more pleasure in
those affairs. There was but one sole part with the King Sebastian, and to him
they continued still united firm: for it is a thing very public, and known
through the world, that the Portuguezes not only loved Dom Sebastian as their
king, but honored him as if he had been a God. Wherefore (worthy Lord) I hold
it for most certain, that so soon as they should understand their King to be
in France, they would immediately shake off the yoke of Castile, they would
send him money to supply his necessities, and would leauy an army by sea, with
whom they would gladly come to seek him, and no body could tell which way to
hinder them, for they are in possession, and hold all Portugal and his
Monarchy properly in their hands.

His Majesty Catholic holds nothing in Portugal which he can warrant or
defend: for what can three or four hundred soldiers do within the castle of
Lisbon, when for defense of the same there shall need 10000. There is in this
Castle a Parish that holds more then 500. houses or make-fires, this castle was
the palace of our Kings, builded on a mountain all of earth, subject to
undermining and blowing up. His said Majesty keeps his Garrison therein to no
other end, but only for ostentation: I my self was prisoner in it 3. months
and a half, in the year 1582. after the death of the Lord of Strozzi, and I
have heard Captains say, that if 10. thousand soldiers were in it, they would
make them dance out thereof in a moment, and mocked such as esteemed it for a
safe security, if any rumor or tumult should be blown through the city. His
Catholic Majesty holds as impregnable the Tower of Bethlehem on the sea, for
guard of the port a league from Lisbon; at three leagues that of S. John; at 4.
that of S. Anthony; at 5. that of Cascayes. In the first, third, and fourth,
there is not above 100. men of war: in the second, of S. John, admit there were
more then 400. whosoever is or shall be Lord of the land, shall be so likewise
very easily of al those towers. But say that S. John's is mighty and strong: I
know for certainty, that the 16. part of Prince Maurice his A. B. C. were
enough to race and batter it in 4. hours. (This A. B. C. are 24. Canons, which
the Prince Maurice caused to be made for the battery of Stenwick, and took it
perforce in the year, 1592.)

Moreover, his Majesty Catholic has an other Tower, which his father caused
to be made in the midst of the sea on a rock, which is called Test seche:
this tower serves to no end, but that the other of S. John's does countenance
it. At Setuball six leagues from Lisbon, there is also at entrance of the port
a tower called S. Philip, of very slender importance, by being built at the
foot of a high mountain that commands it. I think besides these, at the port
of Viana, sixty leagues from Lisbon, he keeps a Garrison of Spaniards in
another tower: behold here the strength of his Majesty Catholic in Portugal.
But of what import will they prove, though he had much more advantage, if the
Portugals were counited and co^bined together? so much the sooner ensued his
loss.

Dom John king of Castile the first of that name, called himself king of
Portugal in the right of his wife, who was daughter to D. Fernand king of
Portugal; the Queen mother, her kindred and allies, did likewise take part
with the Castillians: but the Portuguezes knitting them selves in an unity
together, rent forth of his hands whatsoever he had insulted on, and chased him
out of the kingdom, after they had overthrown him in the battle of
Aljibarota: albeit he had in his army four and thirty thousand men, and they
were but 7. thousand only: afterward, they gave him defiance again at
Valverde, at Trancoso, and elsewhere, as is to be seen in our histories (if
your reverend self but please to read, you shall there find it agreeing with
my words) and in pursuit they gave him law at their own pleasure, as anon we
shall tell you more in this answer.

Thus we may easily perceive, that it consists not in the strengh of the king
Catholic Dom Philip, both to guard Portugal, and keep all the kingdom
thereof under bridle, though he assembled all Spain, and all his other
command. Wherefore I am of the mind (most worthy Lord) that so soon as his
Majesty Catholic is given to understand, how that the King Dom Sebastian is
come into France, he will immediately send his Ambassadors to him, and offer
him the reintegration of his realm in quiet (swept clean already of corn and
chafe) as much as to say, as without pretending any thing to him but love and
kindness. And I think his Council will thereto advise him, if they have any
fear of God, if they be wise, discreet, or friends to the service and welfare
of their king. For if king Sebastian come with strong hand to the restoration
of Portugal, no way can hinder him the entrance of Portugal, then into
Castile, and from thence through all Sapine, whereby he will bring Dom Philip
into such distress, as doubtless he will go near to make ruin of all. And
when he shall come to urge his agreement, Dom Sebastian not only will bind him
to pay all his dispense, domages and wrongs endured by occasion of the war:
but likewise to restore him those revenues and profits, which the king his
father and himself have hald out of Portugal, for the space of more then
twenty years, which will amount to more then forty millions. Nay, that which
is more, to destroy him, and be grateful to his friends, and them that aided
him in the recovery of his kingdom: he will constrain him to render the
realm of Navarre to the king most Christian: that of Aragon to the Duke of
Lorraine, those of Naples and Sicilie to his holiness, and likewise to the
other Princes of Europe, all that he has held from them perforce; for the
flower they are in coming to peace and concord, the swifter ensues the great
loss and mishap of Spain.

This which I say reverend Sir, is not in bare and simple words only, nor
shall this be the first time, that Portugal has taught law to Castile: such
as are pleased in reading histories, shall find this very true, and of many
that we might report and set down in account, we will allege but only one.
Dom Peter King of Castile, surnamed the cruel (who was slain by his bastard
brother, that came to reign afterward, and named himself Henry the II.) left
two daughters, the first called Constance, the second Isabel, wife to Edmond of
Langley brother to John of Gaunt, the husband to the elder daughter Constance,
of whom was borne a daughter named Catharine. The said John of Gaunt, in the
regard of his wife Constance, qualified the king of Castile and Leon, and made
his direct passage from Gascoigne (which then was in the rule of the English)
into Spain, with eighteen thousand foot, and two thousand horse, and took
the Groigne, with the aid of John the bastard, elected King of Portugal,
received, sworn, confirmed, and obeyed by the Portuguezes, who were to him
very good friends. Thence he went on to Portugal, whence he entered into
Castile, and so on to the City of Burgos, distant from the place where he
parted more then twenty six leagues: took it at his arrival, and made
himself master of all the cities, towns and castles he came to: moreover,
they that were further off, came and for fear submitted themselves. And easily
had he attained to a larger advantage, but that his men died, who through their
neglect in ordering themselves, and small providence in good husbandry, were
overtaken by famine, whereon a pestilence ensued among the^, and they were
brought to such scarsity of victuals, as they were forced to run to the enemies
camp, which was under the guide of Jews Duke of Bourbon, who in favor of king
John of Castile, came thither well accompanied with the French, to request
wherewithal to save their lives. Which the said John of Portugal beholding,
complained to the Duke, saying, that it was not good for his soldiers to
treat with the enemy, affirming that they would cause more prejudice then all
the other: therefore he should repeal them presently, and forbid all community
of speech with the contrary part. Otherwise when they should enter fight, all
would by the edge of the sword be destroyed, the one in regard of love to the
other. Thomas Walsingham an English historian, delivers it in the self same
terms, and says, that the king of Portugal had with him four thousand
Portuguezes, and all of them very well armed.

Within few days after, certain Ambassadors sent by the king of Castile, came
to the Duke, desiring peace of him in all humility, to whom the Duke would give
no audience, Notwithstanding, the hunger and pestilence did enforce him, to
withdraw thence into Portugal to the town of Trancoso, whither they came
again seeking to him, being sent the second time from the said John king of
Castile, and to urge once more the same request: showing the Duke by many
reasons, the great profit might be drawn out of a kind peace between them.
The Duke then gave them the hearing, and condiscended to their demand, although
it was greatly against his will; chiefly, because he heard that the king hf
Portugal was willing thereto, and then (being touched therein by a more
effectual cause) namely, the intelligence of the troubles beginning in France
among the French and English, and some seditions at home in England: all which
showed him, that he could draw no fresh supplies thence, because that there
seemed to be greater need, and the mortality in his army did most of all
require it.

The accord between the King and the Duke was made in this manner. That Henry
eldest son to King John, named Prince of Castile, should espouse Catherine
the only daughter of the said Duke John of Gaunt, and Constance his wife, and
should succeed in the kingdoms of Castile, Leon, and other Seigneuries: that
the king should endowe the mother and daughter, and so he did: giving to the
mother the city of Guadalajata, Medina del Campo and Olmiedo: afterward, being
with her in the said Medina, he gave her likewise Hueta. To the daughter he
gave the Esturies, creating and naming her Princess, and his son Prince
thereof. So from thence forward, the eldest son ever bare the surname of this
principality: as of Daulphinies in France, of Wales in England, of Girona in
Aragon, of Vienna in Navarre, etc. Moreover, he should give the Duke six
hundredth thousand Franckes of gold, for his return into England, and forty
thousand Franckes in name of rent, beside the said cities and towns during the
lives of him an her.

John of Castile accepted of all these conditions with right good will, yet he
had France and the French on his side, and the King of Aragon (with whose
sister he was married, of whom was borne the said Prince Dom Henry, and Fernand
that after was king of Aragon, against the right of the true heirs indeed) and
Charles the III. king of Navarre his brother: but he knew notwithstanding all
these, that having civil wars in Castile, and Portugal for an enemy, fortune
would forsake him in all his realms and Seigneuries. Thus could and can the
kingdom of Portugal bear head against the rest of Spain. It is most
certain, that at all times, and as often as Portugal has the favor of
France, of England, or some other strange Prince whosoever it be, it compels
the king of Castile (to whom that is a bridle) to make him yield to reason, and
come at command, nay, to accept of conditions very ignominious and
prejudicial. And those of the Duke might have been much more aduantageable to
this agreement, if the king of Portugal had been willing: because having the
sword in his hand, he might have cut out his partage at his own pleasure. He
was the Judge, and it was done with his will: Qui habet gladium, potest
diuidere campos. And hence it came, that the Duke departed not very well
contented with him: although he gave him in marriage his eldest daughter
Philippe.

By this already rehearsed (worthy Lord) may be understood, that they who have
not the pearls of spotted affection in their eyes, may discern, and others,
whose hearts are not fatted with hate to this good king, may know, that my
words are neither bourdings nor songs. For if this King Dom John the bastard,
having all Spain, all France, and some of Castile his allies banding against
him, for himself only four thousand Portuguezes, and some English in weak
estate, and yet then suspected to, being withdrawn from Castile into
Portugal, could make laws to his enemies: what shall Sebastian do,
accompanied with a great number of Princes of Europe, with his Portuguezes and
his own person, which degenerates not a jot from that of his graundfather Dom
John the bastard, who for his fair deeds was surnamed, Of worthy memory:
against a young king, slenderly experimented, and but badly armed? It is not to
be doubted but he shall restore Portugal, seeing God and the prophesies have
so made him promise; and that he shall cleanse and purge the Spaniards of their
vices and abuses, according as S. Isidore has prophesied, who since he
flourished, it is more then a thousand years. What contentment, what joy shall
the world receive by sight hereof, and namely they that are the children of
God? What felicity for the Roman Church? What good for the weal public of
Christendom? Let the enemy judge this cause, and (as one said in Portugal)
let them crack this nut, and know, that yet at this day Portugal is far
stronger then Spain, yea all Spain in the time of the said Bastard. Then all
that were soldiers, were skilful in handling the sword, the lance, the
halbard and the cross or long bow: now at this day they can not be drawn from
the harquebuse or musket; for this reason the Portugals have yet more soldiers
then Spain. Because the Castilians, yea or the Spaniards that come from the
garrisons of the king of Castile, do never part thence but lame and maimed,
except it be some of the principal Gentlemen. Of the Portugueses sent from
Portugal to the East Indies, there comes back commonly the third part of
them, and of them that are scattered in diverse places of Affricke the second
part. This is most certain, for in the beginning of the reign of our Lord D.
Antonio, I found a roll of the soldiers that were to be had in Portugal,
wherein it was assured me, that within the province d'Entre, Douro and Migno,
which is called in Latin Interamnis, which contains no more then eighteen
leagues in length, and twelve in breadth at the most, three thousand old
soldiers were to be found.

To this answer, it remains for me yet to satisfy another objection, which
your reuered sanctity may make unto me, to wit, Some that have a mighty
opinion of the King of Castilles strength, would make the world believe, that
he is infinitely powerful, and can invade Portugal with huge numbers of
soldiers. To the first point I answer briefly and succinctly: That the King
of Castille is in no place more weak then in Spain. To the second: Whence
shall he gather such supplies of soldiers? Shall he furnish him self out
of those garrisons and forces which he has from Spain? Not so. If in case he
will cull out of the said garrisons some soldiers to forage Portugal, he
must at the least have four months time to do it. In less then four days
may men pass from Brittanie to Lisbone. Could he bring fifty thousand men
into Portugal, wherewithal will he feed them? I would only twenty thousand.
Moreover, what would avail fifty thousand soldiers in Portugal? All those
being there, could not impeach the King Don Sebastian from landing: for
Portugal has an hundred and forty leagues on the coast, and throughout is
landing easily to be had. In some parts, they that are on land in one place
cannot in a day give succor to the other, albeit they are distant but two
leagues. If king Sebastian did but set foot on land, all Portugal would
presently run to him: by which reason, strange soldiers would be forced to
yield themselves, or throw themselves headlong into the sea, or die with
famine, or else by the hands of their enemies.

Now give I conclusion to this present discourse, humbly beseeching your
worthy Lordship, to hold excused such slips as are therein, because in the
writing thereof, I have been driven to some nightly hours (which could not be
very many since I received your last letter) for so long a certification by
pen, and but that I was enjoined thereto by your express command, I could
gladly have excused my self from so tedious a travel. But the honors and
graces received from so worthy a person, have been so great, and continued in
such sort, as they bound me to obey without all excuse. If my pen have erred in
any point (whereof I doubt not) this hope is left me, that one day I may give
your Lordship more ample, certain and assured satisfaction, in all whatsoever
shall please you to require. I write in the Castilian language, because your
worthy self did so command me, and in regard you take some delight therein,
as it has been often told me. But should I confess the truth, my love would
much more have forwarded me, and rather have had me to write in my native
Portuguese. Our Lord guard and give prosperity to a personage of such honor.
From Lions the 6. of January. 1601.

The most humble orator and servant to your worthy Lordship, Friar Joseph
Texere Portuguese.

The copy of another Letter from the said father Friar Joseph, to the same
Bishop.
MOst worthy Lord ( habita benedictione) being since the 23 of this instant
month, dispatched with pasport from his Majesty most Christian, and the
worthy Lega^e Aldobrandino for my passage into Italy about affairs of mine
Order, and some of mine own in particular, with sundry letters of favor for
Venice, for Rome and other places: furnished with all things needful for my
voyage, I departed not till the 24, because it was the even of Christmas, (I
had received the 22. your Lordships letter, whereto I made no answer till the
6. and then gave it to my Lord your nephew, who is not hence departed as yet.)
And as I thought to depart on the Sunday after the feasts, I could not do it,
by reason we had intelligence, that on the way of Lions were disbanded
soldiers of the Swizzers, who robbed and ill entreated all passengers.
Hereupon, I made account to depart in the company of my Lord Monsieur de
Sancy, who traveled to the Fort of S. Catherine. The said Lord being hindered
by his businesses, made me to attend from day to day, till the Sunday
following, the 7. of this instant: and yet our parting was put off from Sunday
to Monday. It seems that God had so appointed it, to the end I should not
throw my self into danger, nor the incommodities of the season, neither
undertake a journey to no end. For on the same Sunday, when we had resolved
without fail to depart thence, about the seventh hour of night, I received
letters from Venice, whereby I was advertised, that the king of Portugal Don
Sebastian my Lord, was set at liberty. And at the ninth hour of the same
night, came a Gentleman to my lodging, one of my friends and acquaintance, with
him a Page belonging to a Lord my friend likewise, carrying a lighted torch;
which Gentleman told me on the behalf of the said Lord, that he had also
received letters from Venice, wherein were some news that he desired to
acquaint me withal. I took my cloak, and went to see him in his lodging,
where he confirmed to me the same tidings. And parting thence after ten a
clock, I went to visit another Lord, who, at the first sight of me, said: I
very well know ^at you come to tell me. Suddenly he again ratified the for^
news, discoursing the^ to me by diverse particularities; that said king was so
parted thence; that he went to embarke him (...) at Liuorne for passage to
Marseilles, and from Marseilles to (...) Court: that there came in his company
the Lord Christo^o, youngest son to the deceassed King D. Antonio, and D. ^n
de Castro, of whom one had written to him, that at the sight ^e king D
Sebastian he stood much amazed: but coming to ^er consideration, threw
himself suddenly at his feet, and ^ed him his Lord and King.

On the next day, came in public very many letters, all groun^ upon this
subject only. The joy and gladness was so great ^ng the Princes, and every
where in the Court, with the Prin^es, Ladies and Gentlewomen, great and small,
noble and vn^le, Ecclesiastical and regulars, as I cannot express to your
^thinesse. My Lord, your nephew both heard and saw all, he (...) report it as
an eye witness, what ke thinks of the forward wills ^esires, which he beheld in
the Princes, Lords and Gentlemen. ^ coniointly offered their persons, their
means and abilities in the ^ice of this king, who^ the most part of such as had
written of (...) from Venice, Padoa, and other parts, gave the name of holy.

^urely I dare affirm thus much unto you, as a matter certain (...) not to be
doubted, that if this king my Lord come into this ^gdome, as we already are
advertised: his Majesty most Chri^, with all his power and authority, can
hardly hinder the ^ces, Lords, Gentlemen, Soldiers; what should I say? the
^sts, Monks, Merchants, Mecanicks; the Pilots and Mari^, from assisting with
their service this Prince.

My Lord, I have every day hardly passed to and fro from my ^ging, for in the
streets some call me, others meet me, and some ^y to tear the very cloak off
my back. Such as heretofore ^e incredulous, and made a mockery hereof, are
those that now their hands highest to heaven, and come to make the largest ^s:
Res miranda. Every day we have here nothing but false ^mes, for so soon as
some four or five men are seen to ^e on horseback, immediately it is the King
Sebastian, men, ^en and children run out of the City to meet him. In brief,
^oy, the contentment, and the desire of this Princes arrival is so great, yea,
in all persons without any difference, as if he were given as an only
remedy, to the travails and miseries of this present age. And that it may
prove so, if ancient prophesies deceive us not, all Christendom has reason
to hope much, of prosperity and welfare by the means of this holy King.

The news that I have, how he was set at liberty, are these. After that the
Portuguezes had obtained audience of the Senate, which the Lords granted them
with benign and ready will: Diego Manuell arrived there from France, and
Sebastian Figuera from the States of Holland, with letters in favor of this
affair, as elsewhere you have heard before, and from Rome the Lord Dom
Christophero, with Manuel de Brito Pimentel, Pantaleon Pessoa de Neyua, and
Frances Antoine, with whom there joined many Portugueses more, that came from
diverse parts. The eleventh of this month past, the Lords entered into Council
(which they there term Pregay) where commonly you shall have two hundred Lords
of the chiefest of that Seigneurie. The Pregay held for the space of four
days. On the last, which was the instant about ten of the clock in the night,
the Lords concluded on their last resolution in this case. They caused the
prisoner to be brought, and commanded a Secretary to set down this
determination following.

Because he names himself to be the King of Portugal Dom Sebastian, he is
commanded out of this City within one day, and from the parts belonging to
this Seigneurie within three days more; on pain of commitment to the galleys
for the space of ten years, with iron gyues at his feet. But if his
indisposition of body cannot suffer this pain: then he stands condemned to
perpetual imprisonment. Moreover, for punishment of his disobedience committed,
in not departing the lands belonging to the State at the time when by
commandment of the podestate of Padoa he was so enjoined, they had already
given him these two years and 22. days imprisonment, since the contempt.

The sentence pronounced, he was immediately set at liberty; between eleven
and twelve of the clock in the night. Some letters from certain of Italy,
speaking in this manner, say: This was but a box of coriander comfites, to
please the Spaniard withal, because he is their neigbour: the gazetes affirm
the same.

A French Archbishop resident in those quarters, a man of ^es, great authority
and virtue, writing in his own language, ^ne of his friends dwelling in this
city: The Portuguezes (says that were here to demand their King, in the end
had him, knew (...), saluted him, and carried him hence. The first sign of
acknow^ement given by them, was, that he had one hand longer then the ^r. The
Lords of this Seigneury think they dealt wisely, in wash^ their hands of him.

^he king went from the Senate (without any suffered to keep ^ company) and
came all alone to the house of one master ^unces his ancent host, a Greek by
birth, with whom he found ^ged two gentlemen Portuguezes, Rodrigo Marquis and
Se^an Figuera. These men having well beheld and noted him, ^t they found him
mightily changed, and differing from him ^m they saw in Afric on the battle
day; yet they knew him. ^ques ran speedily to the lodgings of the Lord Dom
Cristo^o, and of Dom John de Castro, to advertise them of what had ^ed: the
king remained in conference of Portugal affairs with ^era. It was thought good
to remove the king out of that house ^o lodge him where D. John lay, as being
more capable and (...) public. Then came the Lord Dom Christophero, and the
^e Portuguezes that came with him from Rome, to see him, all the three knew the
king: Manuel de Brito having seen him ^ortugall, Pantaleon Pessoa and Frances
Antoine, having like^ seen him in Portugal, and since then in the day of
Affricke. ^e Portugueses being thus come to the lodging of D. John, with ^m
Diego Manuel abode, the king in presence of some stran^ took occasion of
speech with them in this manner:

Portuguezes, you have done a very great good to your coun^ and a service
very signal to me that am your Lord and king: ^re my vastalles and subjects,
and seeing you have performed ^ you ought, both in your respect to God and your
own ob^ duty, you shall not find me ungrateful for it; I am your father, (...)
you shall be my children. Now that I am in your hands, I pray (...) order your
proceedings with discretion; because you stand ^d to satisfy such as shalll
question you, how you know me (...) our Lord and king. And if you find that I
am not he, but an ^er, chastise me accordingly, throw me into the sea, There
are some among you possessed with writings of the marks which I have on my
body, as well those secret, as the other apparent: them the father doctor de
Sampayo, and the Channon brought from Portugal proved authentical by public
instruments of credit from the Notaries Apostolic. I know those instruments
to be made iudicially, and witnessed by persons of quality that nursed me, and
many times saw me naked when I was a child. Behold I pray you for your own
satisfying, whether it be so, that I have al those marks or no.

And as he would have unclothed himself, to be more perfectly known to them,
the Portug^^zes would not suffer him, but desired that he would discourse to
them some matter of his adventures. Whereto he replied, that he would therein
resolve them an other time, in mean while, he requested them to pleasure him
so much, as to tell him some news of his friends and country. Hereupon he
began to enquire of Dom John de Castro, concerning his brethren, his uncles and
other kindred: of Dom Christophero, for his brother Dom Emanuel. And after he
had conferred a long while with him, well considering and noting his face and
countenance: You resemble very much Dom Antonio your father (quoth he to him)
but I pray God give you grace to resemble in deeds your Grandfather the infant
Dom Jews Duke of Beja.

Here we have many things (worthy Sir) to speak of, and let me tell you,
that this king never loved some actions of the Lord Dom Antonio (who was cousin
german to his father the Prince D. John) because he was a man addicted to
women, lofty, somewhat unquiet, and he had demanded of the Queen D.
Catharine, and of the Cardinal D. Henriques brother to his grandfather the king
D. John, and to the infant D. Jews, father to Antonio, somewhat that they
would not give him, as finding they were not so much beholding to him. Some few
days before he departed on his Afric voyage, in very much choler he had
some sharp and rough speech with Dom Antonio: and thereupon the said Lord was
not shipped in the same Gallion with the king, but in that of Dom Alphonso, de
Portugal, Earl of Vimieuse (father to D. Frances de Portugal, who came into
France with the title of Constable) to whom he was a very great friend. So
much for the Lord Dom Antonio: and so much likewise for the infant, whom D.
Sebastian never knew (for when he died in the end of the ^ 1555. Sebastian was
but two years old) he was a Prince great in virtue and wisdom, of whom
Duarte Nunes de ^, albeit in the book he writ against me, he speaks evil of
al: ^of him he says well enough. This infant was a Prince very ^tie, valiant,
practiced in the art military, addicted to arms, ^xcellent horseman, loved
hunting, and the Mathematiques; ^y, religious. And being endued with so many
rare and heroi^ ^ertues, the Princes and council of the Realm of England,
^ested and made choice of him to join in marriage with ^ry their Queen, to
reign with her over them. In sum, infant was so wise, discreet and
skillful, as any prince ^d not be accomplished with better parts. For this ^
Sebastian, although he knew him not, but by fame only: yet ^spected his name
greatly, loved and made reckening of his ^ns.

^ow your Lordship may consider how proper these words ^o the King Dom
Sebastian. After two and twenty years and ^e, he discovered in public, what
he had kept hidden in his ^e breast, and which could not be manifested by any
other, (...) by himself only, because God alone knows the inward ^ghts of
men. He has made known to diverse, the marks of ^nds received on his head in
the battle of Affricke, causing (...) to put their fingers therein, and to
them showed beside the (...) signs naturally caractered on his body. Thus
spent he about ^e hours space wirh the said Portuguezes, demanding diverse ^ers
of them, showing himself so familiar and friendly, as he ^cted each of them
very choicely and lovingly. But yet he ^ot off the carriage of royal majesty,
which seemed in him ^esse, then if he were sitting in his seat of justice with
the ^ne on his head, and scepter in his hand, in the city of Lis^* Afterward,
when every one was withdrawn to his rest, ^ent and fell on his knees before a
Crucifix, which he ware in ^osome, where he so continued, till one came to call
him on ^ourney.

^ome have written to me, that since he has been seen ^ng his Portuguezes,
he has made good appearance, that he is ^ctually of their nation, profferring
in all perfection the words he pronounced: and if any one of them that parleyed
with him, intermedled any French words among the rest (because the most part of
them had lived in France, and spoke the French language) he would tell them of
it: so that yet he seems better to understand that tongue, then speak it. One
writes likewise, that he says, the armor he ware is hid in a certain place.
That the duke de Aueyro, the Earls of Redondo, and of Sortella, D. Fernand de
Meneses, and D. John de Castro, cousin german to him whom we have so often
named, are all yet alive, that he very well knows where they are, and so soon
as he shall have commodious means, he will send to the^. Christophero de Tauora
was slain before his eyes by certain robbers, that set upon the^ as they
iourneyed.

Dom John de Castro writ in a letter to me, that his face is now much altered
from the form it had at his parting in Affricke. As for the small wrinkles in
his face, those he knew very perfectly, so likewise did Sebastian Figuera; the
Father de Sampayo, Pantaleon Pessoa, Frances Antoine and other Portuguezes,
beside sundry strangers, that had seen him and knew him when he was in
Portugal. And as for his gate or carriage of his body, it is the very same
without any altering. Moreover, that he departed from Venice in the time
assigned him, and is coming for France, himself with others being on the way
with him. He prays me to order my business in sort, that I would be present
in the Court of his most Christian Majesty, attending this adventure so
strange and marvelous: so far the letter.

For this cause (worthy Lord) and in respect, whether he come by sea or land,
or whether he will pass for Holland from hence: I am determined not to be
absent, till I have seen him here, or understand he has taken some other
course. If I should do otherwise, I think the world would repute me a bad
servant to my King, and an enemy to my true and sovereign Lord. But I find
there are some, moved (by what devils I know not) that labor still to persuade
me, and would perforce make me to believe, although these news are so true,
public and certain, yet that this King of Portugal Dom Sebastian, is no
other then a Calabrois. But as that language is engendered and borne from the
womb of a Castillian, so I answer such kind of men, that it is behoouefull
for them to know, I am more bound to credit ^e noble, and religious persons,
who by letters written and (...) by their own hands, as also by their oaths,
have assured that the prisoner set at liberty by the Lords of Venice, is our
^ng of Portugal Dom Sebastian; then to be led by any Ca^ opinions.

^s a terrible thing to see and hear the goodly reasons allea^y these wise
masters, to underprop their false and depraved ^ions. It contenteth us, that
he is swart, and that the King (...) Sebastian was fair; that he speaks not
Portugueze, etc. To ^s have no interest at all in this matter, but (with a
purposed ^e) yield themselves enemies to this truth: what imports it whether a
man black or white should be King of Portugal? ^hether he speaks Portugueze
or Italian? It suffices, that a (...) as white as snow, passes the
Equinoctial line on the (...) of Guinea; that he performs the voyage of Saint
Thomas, (...) any other part wheresoever he pleases of Aethiopia, or (...)
iournes sundry years in Barbary, may become as black ^h, for the more white
a man is, the sooner he becomes the ^er. We understand that the king Dom
Sebastian has been ^thiopia and in Persia: where if he have lost his
whiteness ^oper color, it is not a thing to be wondered at.

^osoeuer has known the Lord Dom Christophero (reue^ Lord) youngest son to
the deceased king Dom Antonio, (...) his infancy, till he came to the age of
18. years, for so old ^s when he undertook his voyage to Barbary, will
confess ^e that he was then as white as milk, fair and neately fa^d: but
little more then three years when he lived in Barba^ ^re sufficient to make
him become so black, swartie and de^d, that at his return to England whence he
had parted be^ ^uen those that had been most frequent with him, could not (...)
him. He arrived in Barbary in the beginning of the year, (...) and came
again into England in 1592. at which time I was ^nce. Then afterward he came
to Paris, in the end of the (...) 1594. on Christmas even after dinner, at what
time I was ^g at Chesse with the king his father, in the street of S. Hono^
^ere he lodged at the Swan. So soon as the news came to ^er, that he was
beneath in the court, I craved leave to go (...); and descending the stairs,
I passed by him not knowing him, and went to talk with Dom John de Castro, and
Scipio de Figueredo, who had come with him from England, demanding news of
them of the said Lord Dom Christophero; they told me that that was he whom I
had met and passed by. I swear to your Lordship, that hearing those words, I
stood as rapt out of my self, to see him so deformed and changed, and the
others by no means could persuade me that it was he. I swear^ again to your
worthiness, as a Christian, an honest man, and (...) ^ous as I am, that I was
so angry to behold him thus changed, having lost the goodly complexion he had
before, as I w^ (...) an hour in a room beneath by my self, and would
neither (...) nor speak with him: hereof I have store of good witnesses yet to
this day.

If little more then three years had so much power, so strangely to alter the
Lord Dom Christophero, how much more may above twenty years, change the king
Dom Sebastian? Let this suffice to answer the ignorant and malicious. As for
his speaking Portugueze: who has examined him? not I certainly, nor any other
Portugueze semblable to me. He speaks a mixed kind of Portugueze (my good
Lord) according as Dom John de Castro writes to me in his last letter. As for
his writing, it is the same, and the self same hand: I have seen many
memories and papers written by him, which being conferred with the other that
he writ before his passage to Affricke, the one and other do truly agree.
For the rest, when the King Dom Sebastian shall be in good estate, though he
speak not Portugueze, I will hold him excused; considering it is more then
twenty years that he has been forth of his country, and still traveled among
strangers.

In this city of Lions, among the Spanish Comedians, there is a Portugueze
aged about some thirty years, a man well born, learned, and speaks the Latin
tongue very well, the place of his birth not far from mine: from him I could
never get one Portugueze word, yet speaks he as perfect Castilian, as if he
had been borne and brought up in the Court of Madrill: and it is but five
years since he has been absent from his own country, where be forsook his
kindred, some of them being well known to me. We have an hundred thousand like
examples through all ^s, and it is a thing so common, as there can never want
due ^e thereof. But I will not spare to speak this as truth, if the Dom
Sebastian, or any other Portugueze whatsoever, ha^ ^ost the use of his
Portugal language: by being conversant ^g his countrymen, come not again to
the recovery there^ shall pardon me then to be suspicious of him. By means
^gh a man may easily grow into heat, (my Lord) reproving ^pinions, and
restrayning the audacious courses of people ^orted with passions: therefore
whosoever will speak truth, (...) say, that my Lord Dom Sebastian king of
Portugal, is no ^rois. But the very self same king, who in the year, 1578.
(...) his voyage into Afric, in favor of Muley Mahamet Xa^ moved by the
offers which were made unto him, for the ^tage and weal public of all
Christendom. This does ^re plain to the eye, by those things whereon he has
trea^th the Portuguezes and other strangers, before he was im^ed, in the
prison, and afterward abroad: and verifies it self ^l by the marks secret as
apparent, which he bears on his (...), and which I will translate to you at
the end of this let^*

(...) the rest, to close up this last answer, I cannot choose but (...) my
complaint to your reverend worthiness, of these med^ ^ssieurs, that term my
Lord and king to be a Calabrois. ^w two years and more since they have lived
in this error, ^e as strong headed in this opinion now, as they were the ^ay.
Turely Sir, when I but think hereon, I can hardly (...) my cool blood from
warming, for I never saw any one of (...) Gallants that would say to me: He is
of such a territory, such (...) son, or kin to such a one: he has lived
among such, etc. ^ering Calabria is in subjection to his Majesty Catho^ who
for this reason only might send through all that ^ey, and enquire of his
quality and original, as being his (...): that they will not do so much at
one time or other, this (...) afflicts me.

^w Sir remains an answer to an objection of the enemy, ^o slubber, baffull,
and annihilate a matter so certain, (...) of the true King Dom Sebastian, say,
that this fellow ^he first deceiuer; but in Flaunders there was a Baldwin, in
France a Martin Guerre, etc. I can very well (as one that has read some
histories) help such kind of people to prove their intentions, remembering them
of the names and deeds of some impostors: setting apart the Neroes and others,
as Smerdis the Mago king of the Persians, the false Alexander of Syria, son
to Protarcus a man of base condition: Lambert Symnell, who named himself
Edward the fifth king of England, and son to Edward the fourth, Peter
Warbecke, whom the English call Periquin, or Perkin, who needs would be Richard
younger brother to the said Edward, and others. But the fact and proceeding of
these, differed greatly from the examen and true square of King Dom Sebastian:
also the means and respects whereby they presumed for kings titles, carried
another habit then this of king Sebastians. Concerning Baldwin and Martin
Guerre, their iuglings were discovered in very few days: so fell it out with
Smerdis, for Phaedimia the daughter of Otanes, disproued him quickly by his
short ears: and so was he known to be Mago, brother to Cantizites, and not
for Smerdes the son of Cyrus. The false Alexander, an Egyptian by nation, was
brought in by Ptolomie Euergetes, against Demetrius the younger. Lambert
Symnell was provoked on by great men of England, to term himself a king,
against Henry the seventh, of whom they could not endure the government. Peter
Warbecke, a native of Tournay, by the means and favor of Margaret Duchess of
Burgundy, second wife to Charles the warrior: named himself Richard,
youngest son to King Edward the fourth, and by her bare himself against the
said king Henry.

But King Sebastian is risen in another kind of degree, without aid, without
favor, not assisted by any Prince, poor and miserable, armed only with his
truth, and the conduct of God: and yet we hope he shall not want help for the
recovery of his kingdom. This is then sufficient to answer those
questionarie contriuers. As for their demand to me, where he has had abiding
for so many years, and why he spared to make himself manifest: himself one
day (when it pleases God) will therein resolve us. It is no new thing to hear
of a man, that have not been heard of for many years. I think there is at
this day a dozen of men in France, that have come home again amongst (...)
ends, after their being abroad for the space of twenty (...) nay 30. years,
without any news once heard of them all their absence. If I would number them
(Sir) who have ^mpeld to verify themselves, for such as they maintained ^lues
to be, I should make a discourse more ample, then ^ich I gave to my Lord your
nephew.

^e the decrees of the Parliaments in France looked over, ^ would be found
therein, of whom I find it no way in^ient to nominate some. As the Lord of
Boisgarnier, a Gentleman of Maisse: and next him his son the Lord of ^erre
near ^o Gyan: the Lord of Morinuille, called Courte^ ^ed of the royal house
of Dreux, and other who have had and labor enough in making themselves to be
known.

^ng thus answered these objections, I will conclude, assu^ur worthiness, that
being obliged by so many testimonies ^rkes of truth, I think that not only my
self, but even a ^n, should commit a mighty trespass against the holy ^ in
not believing this for a verity. Our Lord give accom^ent to my desires, and so
soon as he shall be arrived, I will speedy imparting to your worthy self, of
all the pleasures ^ntentments I receive. This shall be the end of my trauerses
^serable fortunes: this shall be the beginning of my glory city, where our Lord
give you ample perfection in aeter^ ^om Lions the 12. of January MDCI.

Kissing the hands of your reverend Lordship: your devoted servant: Friar
Joseph Texere Portugueze.

(...) marks and signs which the King of ^ortugall Dom Sebastian bears
naturally on his body.
HE has the right hand greater then the left. The right arm longer then the
left. 3. The body from the shoulders to the girdle-sted is so short, as his
doublet can serve none other but himself only. 4. From the girdle-sted down
to the knees he is very long. 5. The right leg is longer then the left. 6.
The right foot greater then the other. 7. The toes almost equal. 8. On the
little toe of the right foot he has a wart so increasing, as it appears to
be like a sixth toe. 9. The instep or neck of the foot, very high raised up.
10. On the one shoulder is a seal or mark, of the greatness of a Vinten of
Portugal: such a piece of money as a French piece of three blankes, the very
least and auncientest. 11. On the right shoulder toward the chine of the neck,
he has a black scarre, of the largeness of ones little nail. 12. He has
little pimples on his face and hands, and very apparent: but such as knows it
not cannot discern them. 13. He has the left side of his body shorter then
the right, so that he halts a little without any perceiving. 14. He lackes one
tooth on the right side, in the nether ^aw. 15. He has the flux of seed, or
Gonorrhaea. 16. He does abound in a signal very secret, that is to be spoken
of when need shall require. 17. Besides these secrets and signs, he has many
other which my easily be seen: as the fingers of the hands long, and the
nails likewise. 18. The lip of Austriche, like his graundfather Charles the
fifth Emperor, father to his mother, and of his graundmother Catherine Queen
of Portugal, mother to his father, sister to the said Charles the fifth. 19.
His feet little, and his legs crooked, etc. All these marks were borne with
him. 20. He has many marks of the harquebuze on his left arm, which he
received in the battle of Affricke. 21. Another mark or wound upon the head.
22. Another upon the right eye-brow.
^e copy of a letter written by a Gentle^ a Portuguese, to the most excellent
Prince, ^he Lord Dom Emanuell, son to the Lord Dom Antonio, elect king of
Portugal, abiding at Dort in Holland.
^e out of Portuguese into Castillian, out of Castillian into French, and
lastly out of French into English.
^Ost excellent Lord, in the separation which was made at Florence of the
Portuguezes, who had at Venice procu^e deliverance and freedom of the King of
Portugal Dom ^ian our Lord: the choice for France was committed to my ^ Dom
Christophero your brother, Dom John de Castro, ^ Manuell and Frances Antoine,
they went by the way of ^ne, and from thence intended to go to Marseilles.
Manuell ^ito, and Sebastian Figuera, they went for Rome, friar Chry^e for
Parma, friar Stephen de Sampayo, and Rodrigo Mar^ ^ooke another course, as all
the others did. My direction was ^e States of Holland, whither it was not
possible for me to ^y Germany, in regard of the reasons you shall read in this
^urse. Sebastian Figuera told us, that he had written to you ^e the whole
passage, touching the King our Lord and us, and ^s letters by the ordinary way
of Lions. Now because it may ^ out, that those letters are not as yet arrived
at you, or might ^ps be lost by the way: I determined with my self, in regard
may be with you in fewer days, then I can come to see your ^lency, to give you
advertisement by these letters, of all the ^e passages since we arrived at
Venice.

^he Lord Dom Christophero being at Rome, had intelligence ^ters from Doctor
Sampayo and other Lords, how needful ^s for him to succor the affairs of our
Lord the king Dom Se^a^. For which cause he left Rome, bringing in his company
^uell de Brito and my self: Frances Antoine came unto us the 18. of Noue^ber,
the 28. we arrived at Venice, where being with other Portuguezes, we were
informed of the business, and what was expedient to be done for him. Certain
days after, the Lord Dom Christophero required audience, which was given him
on Monday the 11. of December. Before he entered to the Senate, he was caused to
sit down without, in a chamber richly hung with tapistrie, where he attended
till he should be called in. They gave him the seat on the right hand of the
Prince, and speaking to him, termed him Illustrissime: when these courtesies
had bin done him, he gave in writing what he desired.

The same day, the Prince, with above two hundred of the principal Seigneurs
of that State, entered to Council, touching the matter of the king D. Sebastian
our Lord: this assembly is called the Pregay, there they determine of matters
grave and important. The Tuesday following, the Pregay held again for the same
cause. The wednesday being S. Lucies day, the Pregay held not at all, because
they then made election of an Attorney. They sat again the Thurseday, and
the Friday following the case was concluded. At night after ten a clock, the
King our Lord was called to the Senate, where to him was intimated, the self
intimation which had been made to him by the Podestate of Padoa, the year
1598. It is said, that when the king entered the Senate, and while the decree of
his sentence was reading, all the Seigneurs were up on their feet, and noted
him with very much respect. The king being gone from the Senate, went
presently, without admitting the company of any one, (though many made offer
of themselves) to the lodging of his first host, master Frances, where I had
diverse times seen him before his imprisonment.

Thither came Rodrigo Marquis, and Sebastian Figuera, who at first sight of him
was much astonished, because he found him very different from him whom he had
seen in Portugal, and in Barbary the very same day of our overthrow,
flying four leagues distance from the field of battle. But when he had well
considered the form of his face, the dimples, the browe, the eyes, nose, and
Austrich lip, (which is not now so plumpe, as when he was in Portugal,
because then he was in good plight, and now very meagre) his speech, and the
other parts of his body: he suddenly sent ^o Marquis, to advertise the Lord
Dom Christophero ^f, and the other Portugueses. They thought it meet, that
^ing should be brought to the lodging of Don John de ^o and Diego Manuel, as
being a house more retired from ^oples haunt of the City, then that belonging
to Master ^es; and so it was done. Thither resorted all the Portugue^ ^ccept
the father Doctor Sampayo, and Friar Chrysostom, ^eing ouerlated, went to the
Monastery of S. Dominicke, ^ is of the aduocation (as I think) of S. John and
S. Paul ^rs, and brethren: neither was there the Chanon, nor the ^deacon, who
was gone to Rome.

(...) the King saw us all there together, he prayed us that we (...) examine
him, and know if he were the true king of Por^ Don Sebastian or no, and he
would have unclothed him^ to show us the secret marks of his body: which we
would ^ffer, because Dom John de Castro had already known him ^ently, and
principally by his speech (for as he began to ^e, his voice was somewhat low
yet very strong, and in con^g rose higher and higher, as it ever did in
Portugal) so did ^es Antoine likewise. He perceiving that we would not ^t
him to discover his nakedness, showed us the right hand ^r then the left: the
arm so to; afterward his shoulders to ^rdlested; and from his girdlested to
the knees, his legs and (...) And to make it more apparent, that he was shorter
of all ^rts left then on the right, he kneeled down, commaun^ ^s to mark him
very diligently; and we saw, that without ^ubting, the said left part of his
body was shorter more by ^ers breadth then the right. Then he prayed Diego Man
^o give him a book, or else a pantofle (which was nearest ^) and putting it
under his left knee, then it made his body ^ht. We saw the pimples in his face
and hands, the hurt that ^d on the right eye-brow, and let every one in the
compa^ ^uch the wound in his head with their fingers. Afterward ^ewed us the
place where he wanted the tooth in the right ^eneath, and we know very well,
that Sebastian Neto his ^r, had thence drawn it forth; of whom himself
enqui^ ^erie particularly.

After he had long time held discourse with us, in common and severally of
diverse matters, we entreated him to eat something: but he answered, that
because it was Friday, he would not so much as make a collation, but only
would fast with bread and water, and meant not to break that fast, for he was
thereto obliged by a vow. Hereupon we entreated him to take his rest, but we
could not obtain so much of him: all that he would then permit us to do about
him, was to pull off his shoes, to warm him. I pulled off the right, and
presently passed my hand along the toes, where I felt the wart on the little
toe, which is so great, as it makes a resemblance of a sixth toe. Furthermore we
desired him to do us so much grace, as to tell us somewhat of his fortunes,
whereto he answered; That he had lived evermore in travel, in misery and
poverty; but the talk thereof we should refer till another time, and tell
him some tidings of his friends, and of such things which as the^ might give
him pleasure to hear. Then he began to view us very earnestly one after
another, and seeing us habited of diverse fashions and colors, because some
were attired after the French, others like Hollanders, some Italian like, and
Frances Antoine as a Pilgrim, with his walking staff in his hand: he began to
say smiling, Tanto trage? So many sorts? which he spoke with such a grace, as
comforted and greatly gladded us to hear; and those of us that had perfectly
known him before, saw in this very act, that he was our true Lord and King
Dom Sebastian.

He then enquired of the Lord Dom Christophero, concerning your Excellency; of
D. John de Castro touching his brethren, and particularly of Friar Fernand, a
Religious of Saint Dominique, beside, concerning his uncles and kindred. Then
of all in general, for the Lady Domne Catherine his aunt Duchess of
Bragancia, and the Duke her son, telling us, that when he made the Afric
voyage with him, he was very little, but fair (the said duke having not then
accomplished ^ years.) Then he enquired likewise of his Palace de la Ribera;
of Euchobregas, of Castillo; and principally of those de Santos le vieil (which
I think did belong to the father of Dom John, or else to his grandfather Dom
John de Castro) whether they were sound, enlarged, or destroyed? He very much
loved the situation thereof, as being ^ll, on the sea, without and within the
town, and in a ^ire prospect. Moreover, he would be informed of the ^f S.
John, and whether the Castilians had built any Fort (...) Teste-seche or no.
He demanded of us if they kept still (...) one the general procession, on S.
Sebastians day, which ^eginning from the day of his birth. They come forth of
^sh of Saint John, and then go to the church of S. Vincent ^a, which church is
a parish, and likewise a Monastery ^nons regulars of Saint Augustine, and
therein is an arm ^t Sebastian.

^nquired also of D. Theotonio de Bragancia, who at this ^rchbishop of Euora,
brother to the grandfather of him (...) Duke now: of Dom Alphonso de
Castello-blanco his Al^ who now is Bishop of Coimbre: of Dom Fernand de ^s,
surnamed Bouche-ouuerte, otherwise Gobe-mouches, or ^ mouth: of Dom Jews
Perera de Euora, godfather to ^hn de Castro, and a cousin germane of ours: and
for ma^ers: naming their names, the places of their abiding, ^arges that they
had: giving such notable ensigns of and so extraordinarily, as it rapt us all
into exceeding ad^n.

(...) like he did of Ladies, among whom he named Domne ^ de Alcacona, daughter
to Peter d' Alcacona, Earl de las ^, and chief Secretary of Portugal: who
was wife to Aluaro de Mello, son to the eldest son of Dom Al^ Marquess of
Ferrara, which Dom Aluaro de Mello ^ed in the Affricke journey. This Lady his
wife Domne (...) (according as I have heard) was one of the fairest, gal^ best
disposed, honest and most virtuous Ladies of Por^ He asked much news of the
Sisters of Christophero de (...), and other Ladies, the names of whom I do not
re^r. For when I went in the Affricke voyage with the said (...) was but a
young ladde, no other then a Page, whereby I ^ot have the knowledge of many
persons. All which ^e demanded of us, with the grace of as royal authori^ it
had been in the year 1578. (when he set forward on ^age to Affricke) and in
his palace of Ribera at Lisbon; ^h as much simplicity did he proceed in all,
and through all, plainly, without fraud, cauillation or heat, as it had been
an infant of ten years old.

When he had awhile well noted the Lord Dom Christophero your brother, he said
unto him: You resemble very much Dom Antonio your father, but I pray God (in
deeds) you may resemble your grandfather the infant Dom Jews Duke of Bega; in
steed of saying Beja. He pronounces what he speaks in Portuguese, but makes a
mixture of other strange words there amongst, or by the breaking of diverse
sillables. As, when he spoke to us of France, he would usually say Franca. And
we would say: Sir, in Portuguese, we say Franca. How? quoth he, do not we say
in Portuguese, Villa-franca, Paramanca, etc? In like manner as when we
intermeddle some French word among our Portuguese, we shall and do relish it,
because we have been in France, and know how to speak French, and so by
custom fall into the same blame he does.

We spent three hours and more with his Majesty in these discoursings, after
which, the Lord Dom Christophero and others withdrew themselves, and he
remained with D. John and Diego Manuel: who likewise stepped aside into another
chamber, leaving him alone where he had been, to the end he might repose
himself, because he had not slept in all the night before; but in steed of
sleeping, he fell to prayer. Before we left him, he offered to pull on his
shoes; D. John made offer, but could not, albeit he took pains enough: nor
likewise Diego Manuel after D. John, because the insteppe of his foot was so
high, as it required much better strength to pull them on. He seeing that they
could not attain it, set his foot upon a stool, and plucked it on himself
very easily: a very certain testimony of his natural strength, and a
verifying of that which is said among the marks of his body.

The father de Sampayo and Friar Chrysostom staid not long before they came,
who with the King and D. John, thought good to have him out of that house
(because the people began now to make a murmuring and grumbling, every one
being very desirous to see him) and to convey him to the covent of S.
Dominick. So did himself likewise desire, not only to part thence, but quite
out of Venice: and that they would resolve themselves, which way were best to
take for avoiding the country. D. John and Dic^ ^anuell went on with him, the
said fathers hasting before to ^minickes, and leaving him there, all four went
to the lodg^ the Lord D. Christophero: where considering, that the passa^
either side, for the Grisons and Germany were stopped up, ^anes of the
Ambassadors of Castille and Sauoy, whereof ^ad good intelligence by Venetian
gentlemen, who went (...) quest thereof, and assisted them with their best
coun^ ^ey concluded, that they would depart the night following (...) the
city, in the habites of religious conuerts from S. Domi^, with an Italian
father of the said monastery, and embar^ ^hemselues in a Gundelot, pass
thence to Chioazza, and from ^azza straight to Ferrara: where they would stay
for more ^anie to go for Florence, and from thence to Liuorne, and so
^rseilles. As it was said, so it was done.

^e night being come, the King embarked himself in a gun^, with the said
Italian father: whose courage failed him, and ^uing the hardiness to venture
this journey, left his majesty (...) gundelot, and returned to his monastery.
The father de Sam^ and Friar Chrysostom seeing this, concluded that of them
(...) (because delay caused danger) the Friar Chrysostom ^d accompany him.
So passed they on, even until it was night ^e saturday, which was the 16. of
December, the King having ^larged the night before, being the 15. of the same
month* ^ay following being sunday, and the 17. the father doctor ^mpayo, came
to the lodging of the Lord Dom Christophero, ^er Dom John and the other
Portuguezes (being advertised ^of) came very soon after. They hearing by the
father do^, in what manner the King was departed, became extremely ^ed in mind
and very pensive, suspecting immediately some ^e to ensue: for Friar Chrysostom
was a very bad man, of evil ^t, and too well known in Italy, and every
where bruted, ^e was at Venice soliciting the Kings delivery. All agreed,
(...) should away the very same hour, to accompany his Man: so I embarked
my self forthwith, and on the monday fol^g, arrived at Chioazza, 25. miles
from Venice, where I ^d news, that the King took another way (because he had
^gence, being refreshing himself on land, that there was a of war arrived,
who made inquiry after two religious persons, and had soldiers abord sent
from the Ambassador of Castille) and so that they were gone by Padoa.

Hereupon I shipped my self again in hope to recover them, which was impssible
for me, by reason of the waters extremity, but was constrained to return to
Venice. Here let me tell your Excellency, that the night whereon the king was
enlarged, there arose in Venice a very great wind, which endured until
midnight after the next day: wherein ensued such a mighty ouerflow of the
waters in the city, as it drowned up great store of houses, and did harm to
the amounting of above three millions. For all the cesternes were lost, also
the wines, the spices, sugers and merchandises, that were in their lower
warehouses. This inundation began (as I said) on tuesday at night the 19. of
December, the day limited for the Kings departing from the confines of the
Siegneurie, as likewise notwithstanding he did. A thing which bred a very
strange amazement among the men in those parts, who held diverse opinions of
this accident, and almost all assured themselves, that the presence of this
holy King, was a wonderful preservation to the city.

All matters concerning this Prince, are accommpanied with extraordinary
signs from heaven. One told me on the way, that the 28. of the month past,
fell two such thunder claps at Florence, as have shiuerd la Copa of the great
Church, and almost an unrecoverable losle. For it is said, the work can never
be brought to the perfection wherein it was, in the judgment of the best, if
they would dispend thereon four hundred thousand crowns: the first amounted to
six hundred thousand; they that imagine the least, speak of two hundred
thousand.

So soon as I was at Venice, came the letters of Friar Chrysostom, written
from Padoa; wherein he signified, that the King would go thence by Ferrara, and
from Ferrara to Florence, whereon, they all put themselves in readiness to
follow. And because many report that the king traveled continually like a
Jacobine: I assure your Excellency they deceive themselves, for he left it off
at his parting from Padoa, betaking himself to his Cape and r^ier. Those
letters made me take sea the same day, and making to Ferrara with all speed I
could, at my arriual I heard the king was past. Thence I followed, and came to
Florence the ^^rst of January, and going to seek Friar Chrysostom at the
mo^asterie of the Cisteaux, he told me, that the great Duke had made ^ay of our
Lord the King, and as for himself, he had attended ^wo days about his
delivery. I gave notice hereof to the Lord Dom Christophero, and the other
Portuguezes, who were as yet ^n their way thither, and arrived there the 4. of
the said month; ^here having first done some diligent endeavors toward the
great Duke, they concluded upon our separation. So the quarter of Hol^nd being
committed to me, as I signified to your Excellency in ^e beginning hereof, I
returned to Venice, where I would not ^ew my self, but from Venice past to
Ausbourg, from Aus^ourg to Noremberg to gain Hamborough, which possibly I
^ould not do by reason of the snowes. The thieves upon the ways, and sundry
other discommodities much hindered me: which made ^e come to this city of
Heildelberg, where I have visited the ^ountie Palatine, and the Countess your
fair sister. From hence (...) will go into Lorraine, and thence pass into
France: praying God to guide me with safety to Paris, to the end I may
speedily ^ome to your Excellency; whom the Lord prosper and keep in ^s
protection. From Heidelberg this twelfth of February 1601. (...) leave many
things unwritten, which at large I will deliver to ^our Excellency, when I
shall be so happy as to see you.

The most humble and obedient servant to your Excellency. Pantaleon Pessoa de
Neyua.
^ Forgot to tell your Excellency, that the king, not only during his ^
imprisonment, was 27. times questioned by my Lords the Se^tors in common: but
likewise by the iaylour, and also by his con^ssour in particular: by the
warders and prisoners that were with ^m. To all whose interrogations, he
evermore maintained and pro^sted, that he was the true king of Portugal D.
Sebastia^: and insta^t^ requested, that he might be confronted, by the marks
and signs which were known he had naturally imprinted on his body. Iu^fying
withal, that he had a body of flesh and bones, and not of ^asse, to grave
any supposed marks upon it: praying he might be seen of the Portuguezes,
yea, and to strangers that had known him in Portugal or elsewhere, before he
lost himself in the battle of Aff^icke, all which they would not permit. At
the beginning, he answered them still to very good purpose, but in the end,
seeing they would do him no such favors as he desired, but only proceed with
him in nothing but demands: being somewhat by nature impatient and choleric,
he much disdained to answer their interrogatories. Notwithstanding, being
returned to the prison, and discoursing to the prisoners what demands they had
made to him, he said: I answered here and there to such a demand, but I must
answer such and such things. This is the report of such as have been delivered
out of the same prison wherein he was enclosed* and himself likewise told us
as much since then, from his own mouth.




An addition of some importance.
I Thought good to add to the end of this work, what has been delivered to
me by a personage of good credit, who heard it spoken by the mouth of the King
Dom Sebastian himself, among other questions that were made to him: he being
desired to reveal, whether he had been kept as a captive in Africa or no:
made answer, that he was not taken nor stayed as a captive or slave; but having
escaped from the battle by flight, though very sore wounded, and with him
those that are mentioned in the last letter of Friar Joseph Texere, to the
Bishop; to wit, the Duke d' A^ (...) of Redondo and de la Sortella, D. Fernand
de Meneses, and (...) John de Castro, etc. who by the Kings advice, did all
secretly and strangely disguise themselves, that they could not be known to
any one: which being done, the King and they in the confused return of the
army to Portugal, came back with them, where having bound the rest to him by a
dear engaged oath, would none of them be seen or known, but providing
themselves of such jewels and money as they could conveniently get, departed al
again from Portugal. Being urged to express his reason for so doing, the King
said: that his grief and shame was so great, that by his folly and rash- loss
to the hurt of all Christendom, (...) more be seen, but penitently wander
through the world, without any intent ever to reuisite his kingdom more, and
the very same mind he found likewise to be in his friends so sworn to him.
Being asked, by what means he now returned without them (whom he avouches to
be all living) and why no sooner he discovered himself: he answered, beside
some reason already expressed in the letter of Dom John de Castro of his
living in a hermitage, etc. that he will more at large satisfy this demand,
when he shall have his person secured in any country.

Likewise, by another of worth to be believed, it is said that the worthy
gentleman sir Anthony Sherley (for his great valor and services) in high
account with the Sophie of Persia, has written to an especial friend of his*
that a gallant gentleman, who named himself Le Cheualier de la Cro^x, The
Knight of the Cross, with other Gentlemen his companions, were in great
reputation with the said Sophie of Persia, by reason of diverse exceeding and
singular proofs made of their valor and knightly services, which they
performed against the Turk in the Sophies behalf. Agreeing with the report of
himself in Venice before his apprehension (in the letter of the said Dom (...)
de Castro) where he first named himself the Knight of the Cro^^: which falling
out ^ be so, there is no question to be made, but though he had himse^ there,
as in all other places, this Knight of the Cross will plainly approve himself*
as already it is for certainty received, (...) king of Portugal Dom
Sebastian, and the (...) ^uered, when he discou^ (...) that the (...)

FINIS

