PAVLS COMPLAINT AGAINST HIS NATVRALL CORRVPTION WITH THE MEANS HOW TO BE
DELIVERED FROM the power of the same.

Set forth in two Sermons upon the 24 verse of the 7. Chapter of his Epistle to
the Romans.

Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? By
me WILLIAM TEELINCK, Preacher of the Word of GOD at MIDDLEBVRGH.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson for John Bellamie. 1621.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL HIS VVORTHIE FRIEND, Mr THOMAS NICHOLAS Esquire; As also,
To the virtuous Gentlewoman, Mrs JANE NICHOLAS his wife; Grace, and peace in
this life, with perfection of glory, and happiness in that to come.
WORSHIPFVLL,
The consideration of the duty which every Christan is in Conscience bound to
perform, namely, To advance the glory of God by whom he was created, and upon
whom he wholly depends; and also to further the good of his Brother the Image
of God, and fellow member with him of the same mystical body of Christ,
compelled me to take in hand the Translation of these two Sermons following, as
being the good which I (having opportunity of time and place to accomplish)
might in no wise omit. They were first preached and published in the
Netherlandish Dutch, for the benefit of the people of God in those parts, which
being also my desire in this place, I according to my slender ability have
translated and published them here; and as a token of the respect I bear unto
your worth, and of the thanks I owe unto you for the many favorable fruits of
your love, am bold to tender them unto your acceptance, and commit them unto
your Patronage.

They may fitly be termed the Anatomizing of the body of sin, a touch stone
for a Christian, or, a Receipt for a sick soul, for they (jointly) contain
matter suting unto these three titles, and use full for all sorts of men, as
well those that have a name to be alive but are dead, having a show of
Religion, but want substance; as those that are Christians indeed, and in
truth, Whose praise is not of men but of God.

But being loath to be too troublesome unto you with abundance of words, I
refer you unto the book it self, which (being jealous of mine own errors
and insufficiency, I submit unto your judicious censure) ever consecrating my
self unto you for your service in all that I am or shall be able to perform,
and my prayers unto God for your safety and protection in body and soul: and
thus I humbly take my leave,

ever remaining your Worships to be commanded in whatsoever, C^: HARMAR.

The Author his Epistle to the Reader.
ALthough in all the holy Scripture (the word of truth) it be found to be most
true, that in the world there is nothing more hateful and fearful then
sin, yet daily experience teaches, that there are very few which are
grieved, and troubled therewith: there are to be found in this cursed world,
multitudes of them that mourn for their temporal losses, and crosses the
fruit of sin; one, complains pitifully of his poverty, of the loss, and
damage he has sustained; another of his sickness, of the grief, and pain
that he has suffered; a third of the shame, contempt, disgrace, or injury
which this, or that man has offered unto him; but few consider that sin is
the mother of all this mischief: yea, when they are free from the foresaid
inconveniences, though they lie plunged, and smoothered in sin, they are
never touched therewith, but pass away their time carelessly, and securely; Let
them care, that care will: only some few, whose eyes God has opened for to
see the mysteries of his kingdom, do make their sins their greatest
trouble, and grief; and not without good cause; for it is most certain, and
true that he shall never see God with joy, hereafter in heaven; which comes
not to see his sins with a holy, and godly sorrow here upon earth: In this
sense, those that mourn are called blessed of our Savior himself. Therefore
for to move men unto this godly sorrow for their sins, and to stir them up
unto an holy zeal against all sins, I have published these Sermons
following, wherein I have showed how we may be delivered both from the
condemning, and commanding power of sin unto our eternal comfort: whereby if
any man reap benefit, I shall highly rejoice in my labor herein bestowed.
Farewell in the Lord.

Middleburgh the 21. of July. 1620. Thine in the Lord, WILLIAM TEELINCK.

PAVL HIS COMPLAINT AGAINST HIS NATVRALL CORRVPTION, WITH THE MEANS HOW TO be
delivered from the power of the same.
Set forth in two Sermons upon the
24. verse of the 7. Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans; O miserable man
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
THE Apostle Paul having declared at large, in the foregoing verses, The
connection of the Text with the former verses.
the cumbersome contention he had with his flesh, and natural Corruption, the
which was always in his way, and exceedingly hindered him in the service of
his God; and now finding himself dangerously beset with this enemy, he cries
out for help, as it were, with a loud voice, saying, O miserable man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?

The sum of the Text.
The sum. A mournful Lamentation, or Complaint against that natural
corruption wherewith the Apostle found himself oppressed

The parts of the Text.
The parts are these, 1. Against what he complains; against the body of
death. 2. Who complains; The Apostle himself; I miserable man. 3. How he
complains; Two manner of ways, First he declares himself therefore to be
miserable, in that he has this body of death about him; secondly, he wishes
to be delivered from it.

1. Of what he Complains.

He complains of the body of death, by which we must understand, (as it
appears in the former Verses) our natural corruption, which makes us in our
selves unapt to any good, and prone, and ready to all evil; even that
original sin wherein we were conceived, and borne; concerning which the
Apostle formerly testifies, that it works death, Ver. 13. And in another
place is termed by him, the body of sin, Romans 6.6. in which respect also he
declares himself to be carnal, sold under sin. ver. 14. and witnesses,
that it is in him a Law in his members, whereby he is greatly hindered in the
performance of obedience unto the Law of God. ver. 22.23. But we shall better
judge of the meaning of this manner of speech, if so be we observe the reasons
why original sin, or natural corruption is called a body, yea, Why our
natural corruption is named a body.
a body of death.

Our natural corruption is named a body for these reasons following:

1. As a body has many members, 1 Reason.
so also has this natural corruption; it is a conjunction, or knitting
together of many evil members; or rather, Because it spreads it self
thorough all the powers and parts of the whole man.
it spreads it self through all the powers, and parts of the whole man:
therefore it is not only called a body, but also a Man, even the old Man.
Ephesians. 4.22. Implying, that there is nothing in man which is not defiled, and
polluted with this natural corruption: the understanding is hereby darkened:
the will, perverted: the affections disordered: the members of the body, fit,
and ready instruments, and weapons of unrighteousness, etc. yea, the
unregenerate man, which is nothing but flesh, having not the spirit, Iud. ver.
19. is in regard of this natural corruption, named darkness it self. Ephesians.
5.8. And in the regenerate man himself (which has now received the spirit 1.
Ioh. 3.24. and in that respect is called Light it self. Ephesians. 5.8.) yet this
corruption spreads it self in such sort, thorough all the parts, and powers
of his soul, and body, that it is as a Law in his members, Romans 7.23. there is
no more difference herein between the regenerate, and the unregenerate, then
between the dark night, wherein there is no light at all, and the break of
the day, wherein the light begins to appear, but is not wholly broken
forth, the light and darkness being mixed together, thorough the whole air.
For the unregenerate are totally possessed with this corruption in all the
parts, and powers of their soul and body, so that in them there is not any
spiritual light; and therefore they are called children of the Night, and of
Darkness. 1. These. 5.5. But on the contrary side, the regenerate are only so
overcome with this natural corruption, in all the parts and powers of their
soul, and body, as the air is with darkness when the day begins to
break; at which time the light, and darkness do, as it were, struggle
together thorough the whole air: in which regard the break of the day is
called light; and men are wont to say, behold, it is day, although that there
be much darkness in the air: and in this sense are the regenerate in the
Scripture named light. Ephesians. 5.8. And children of the light, and of the day. 1.
These. 5.5. although that there be much spiritual darkness in them, and that
they are not wholly free from the sinful flesh, but are in every part polluted
therewith: and for this cause in the regenerate themselves is this natural
corruption called a body of sin, Romans 6.6. For it is crept thorough every
part, and power of their soul and body.

So then this natural corruption is a body, but it is a body altogether ugly,
and monstrous, the parts whereof are wholly inuerted, or rather perverted, as
if the eyes stood in the place where the ears should; and the mouth were set
in the forehead; and all the rest of the members were most deformedly
mis-placed. To be short, it is a simple body of confusion, and darkness: it is
the image of the Devil; the draught, and proportion of Satan: it is in every
degree contrary to the image of God wherein at first he made Man.

It is therefore idle, and foolish that the Papists pretend, who say, that this
natural corruption, or concupisence which lusts against the spirit, is not
finne. For there is nothing more abominable in the eyes of God then this body:
for there is nothing in the world more dissonant, and contrary to the will of
God, and the image that he himself has made; he sees that the image of the
Devil is therein. It is truly a monster, misshapen in every member with sin:
yea, when it works not, but lies still without stirring, or moving, it is
altogether hateful before God, even as a wolf, or a Bear is to us when he
lies still, and sleeps; and as we know the Devil is abominable before God,
although he lies bound in chains of darkness, and sealed up in the
bottomless pit. Iud. 6. Reu. 20.

Reason 2. Because it hangs upon un as our own flesh.
Secondly, this natural corruption is called a body, and likewise the flesh,
Gal. 5.17. because it lies, and hangs upon us, even as our own body, or
flesh: therefore it is called the sin that hangs so fast on, Heb. 12.1. For
whither we go or stand, we carry it with us as we do our own body, and
flesh. Yea, when we were conceived, formed, and had our being in our mothers
womb, it received also form, and being with us, and in us, and sticks in us
as it were in our marrow, and bones; and hangs as fast upon us, as the black
skin upon the Moore, and the spotts upon the Leopard, which do spring of
their own nature. Ier. 13.23. Hence it is that the restraining, and bridling
of our sinful Concupiscence is termed in holy Scripture, Mat. 5.29.30.
hands cut off, and eyes put out; it being as grievous for us to do it, as to
dismember our selves: yea, we are as unable of our selves, to put away this
natural corruption, as the Leopard his spotts; and as we our selves are, to
pluck of our skin, and lay aside our flesh: nothing but the hand of God is
able to do it.

Why our natural corruption is named a body of death. Reason 1. Because it
works the death both of soul and body.
Now it follows, that we enquire why. It is named a body of death: and for
that there are these reasons.

First, it is so called, because ir works the death both of the soul, and
body of man.

This natural corruption no sooner enters upon the soul, but it kills it
spiritually, leaving it no more power to do the will of God, then a body
without a soul has, to perform the office of a man; yea, it makes it stink
like a dead karkase in the nostrills of God, Psalm. 53.2. There is no carrion
that has lieu long stinking in a corner, cralles so full of filthy Maggotts
and worms, as the soul of that man, in whom this corruption has had
undisturbed possession but a little while.

Hence it is that the Scripture says of unregenerate men, that their throat is
an open Sepulcher, Romans 3.23. Out of which corrupt, and rotten conversation
proceeds. Ephesians. 4.29. And from whence is it (think you) that this noisome
stench of sins, breaks forth thorough the whole world? but from the souls of
men, which lie dead, and stinking, by means of this natural corruption.

And look, what it has done no the foul, the like also has it done to the
body, it eats and consumes that as a moath does a Garment, Psalm. 39.12. It is
like a wolf, or a bear; which having taken a man by the throat, still suckes
his blood, and never leaves, till all be up. From whence comes it (think you)
that man being such an admirable piece of work, decays, consumes, and with
e^s away in such short space as we see? It arises originally, and principally
from this natural corruption, which is in our bodies, as a moth in a garment,
eating them, and consuming them by a little, and a little: whereby it plainly
appears, that this sin is the sting of death, both of soul, and body, 1.
Cor. 15.56.

The lamentable experience hereof, had our first Parents, Adam, and Eve, who,
as soon as by their disobedience they had plucked upon themselves this
corruption, (for it is the very same wherewith they were polluted, from whom it
is descended unto us) they felt in themselves the sting of death; Foreuen then
their souls utterly lost their spiritual life; and their bodies, as it were,
receiving their deaths wound, began presently to decay, being in the first
place deprived of that excellent beauty, and luster wherewith they were
clothed. For at first, they were more glorious and beautiful in their bodies,
then the Lillyes in Paradise; but when this filthy pollution had once
ouerrunne them; then began they to be ashamed of their own bodies, and to
cover them: yea, this sin so wrought upon them, that by reason thereof, they
could not remain in Paradise, but went and hid themselves amongst the trees of
the Garden. Genesis 3. Such deadly, and destroying poison both to soul and body
there is in this corruption.

Reason 2. Because it ingendreth and brings forth a brood of deadly sins.
This natural corruption, is also called a body of death, because it
engenders, and brings forth a brood of deadly sins, Iam. 1.14.15. Which
are nothing else but dead works. Heb. 6.1. David having committed those two
great, and heinous sins of Adultery, and Murder; and being greatly humbled,
and broken in heart for the same, went (as one would say) to seek out the
fountain by the stream, and to enquire, how it might come to pass that he
should so exceeding foolishly forget himself; and he finds his natural
corruption to be the original cause from whence those most hateful, and
deadly crimes did proceed, Psalm 51.5. Wherefore in this regard, with good
cause is it termed, a body of death.

Reason 3. Because it is destined to everlasting death.
It is likewise called a body of death, because it is destined to everlasting
death, as the man in whom it reigns, Romans 6.23. Even as David was called a
Child of death, not only, because he had killed another, but because he
himself had deserved to die: So, this corruption is likewise called a body of
death, because it is condemned to die, and to death it must go, Colos: 3.5.
Gal. 5.24. Yea, it is a matter of such consequence, that what man soever does
not in this life begin to kill, and crucify this monster, he himself shall
die eternally. As the Apostle says, Rom: 8.13. If you live after the flesh ye
shall die, (that is to say, eternally, for we must all die once, Heb: 9. ver:
27.) but if by the spirit ye mortify the deeds of the body, that is, of
this wicked body of sin, which is condemned to die, Rom: 6.6. ye shall live.
Thus then stands it with this natural corruption, this hateful ugly monster,
that unless we begin to kill it while we are here, it will not only bring
upon us the spiritual death of our souls, and the temporal death of our
bodies, but also the eternal death of both, whereby we shall perish for ever.
Yea, we have all of us already deserved, that we together with our natural
corruption, or sinful flesh, should be plucked out of the Land of the living,
and cast into everlasting darkness, where is weeping, wayling, and gnashing
of teeth. But here in appears the wonderful, and unspeakable loving
kindness, patience, and long suffering of God, inviting us to repentance, and
salvation, Romans 2.4.2 Pet. 3.9.
in that there is space given us here wherein to repent, and crucify this body
of death. Therefore it is the greatest madness that can be in the world, that
a poor, wretched condemned caytiffe, dares be so bold, as to put off from day
to day his Repentance, and the mortifying of the wicked body of his original
corruption, which he knows not in how short a time may bring him into
everlasting perdition.

Behold, these are the reasons for which the Apostle names our natural
corruption, Doctrine 1. That the original corruption wherein we were all
conceived and borne, is a most deformed and misshapen body of death.
a body of death, from whence arises this observation; that the original
corruption, wherein we were all conceived, and borne, is a most deformed,
misshapen body of death; a monster altogether ugly, and fearful. Which is
manifest, in that it not only corrupts, and destroys soul, and body; but
also brings them both into everlasting condemnation, unless a course be
taken in time, as it was plainly proved in the opening of the Text; and may
also further be gathered, out of this, that the Apostle himself cries out so
earnestly, and complains that he is a miserable man, because he was
troubled, and oppressed therewith.

For this cause is it, that natural, unregenerate men, in whom the corrupt
flesh has the vpperhand, are so commonly in the Scriptures compared to most
noisome, and hurtful Creatures, as Serpents, and Vipers, Mat: 23.33. Lions,
Psalm: 10.9. Bears, Pro: 28.15. Ravening Wolves, Mat: 7.15. Wild Swine, Psalm:
80.13. wild Asses, Job 1^.12. Foxes, and young Foxes which spoil, and bring
to naught every thing about which they come, Cant: 2.15. Yea, the natural man
is said to have the Devil to his Father, Ioh: 8.44. So that a child is not
more like to his Father, then an unregenerate man, spiritually, is to the
Devil; and judge you, what a monstrous thing this is, that man, which was
created after Gods own image, should now be likened unto those Creatures
aforesaid, not only in some respects (as God himself is, unto some of them)
but even in the most odious, and hateful things that are in them; and not
only so, but in sin and wickedness to resemble the Devil himself too;
therefore the Scripture says of carnal men, which have nothing in them but
nature, that their throat, Romans 3.13.14.15.16.
is an open Sepulcher: the poison of Aspes, is under their lips: their mouth is
sull of cursing, and bitterness: their feet are swift to shed blood:
destruction and calamity are in their ways, as in the way of some devouring
Monster, which destroys, and spoils all things where he passes, or comes.

For this cause is it, that the Saints of GOD, whose eyes he has opened for to
see the hatefulness of this Monster, our natural corruption, (which we all
brought with us into the world, from our Mothers womb) had rather die, then
fulfill the lusts thereof, which are always against God, and contrary to his
holy Commandments: Such is the nature of this body of death, that it will no
longer do any work of God, then it may with profit, or pleasure; and when
either of these is crossed, then farewell obedience.

If Nabuchadnezzar commands contrary to the Law of God, that all men must
worship the Golden Image, or else be cast into the fiery furnace; natural
corruption, flesh, and blood will straight way conclude, that it is best to
obey the King; but the Saints of God, which know the hatefulness of this
Monster, will rather undergo the punishment then give it his desire. If that
adulterous woman Potiphars wife, should go about to draw Joseph to commit
folly with her, this monster, our natural corruption would presently consent;
but Joseph the servant of God, rather then he will do so, will leave his
garment behind, and venture his life too, for he knows that this body of
death is a fearful, ugly monster, the lusts whereof are enmity to God.

Yea, the accursed, unregenerate wretches themselves, whose joy, delight, and
chiefest happiness is placed in pleasing their corrupt, and sinful flesh, and
whose only care, and study, is to satisfy the lusts of this vile, and
filthy monster, so that they cannot sleep, till such time as they have given
it its fill of disobedience and iniquity; when they once, thorough some
stirring of their conscience come to have their eyes opened, whereby they
begin to perceive the terriblenesse of this monster, they become hateful,
and fearful unto their own selves, and oftentimes murder themselves, hoping
thereby to get out of the sight, and presence of that grim, and hellish
monster, which now they begin to see in themselves, whereat they are
affrighted: as it came to pass with Judas, and many others.

Now, the reasons for which original sin, or natural corruption may truly
be held to be such an hateful, and deadly monster, may (besides that which
shall be hereafter spoken) be taken out of those reasons which we have already
given in the opening of the Text, wherein we showed wherefore this natural
corruption is termed a body of death. And if so be, that it be a monstrous
thing when in a body, the members are all misshapen, and misplaced, and
moreover, in themselves exceedingly depraved; so must this natural corruption
needs be held to be a monstrous thing, wherein the understanding, which should
be governor and leader of the will, and fleshly lusts, and affections, not
only lies subdued under them both, but also is in it self utterly obscured,
and darkened: and the will, and affections in themselves altogether perverted,
and disordered.

Furthermore, if the death, and pollution of body, and soul; if a deadly
brood of all manner of heinous, and deadly sins; nay, if eternal death and
damnation are most odious, and terrible things, then this natural corruption
must needs be judged to be a hateful, and fearful thing, which
occasioneth, and brings forth all these things, as was made manifest before
in the opening of the Text: Wherefore we conclude, as we began, that the
natural corruption wherein we were all conceived, and borne, and which we all
brought into the world with us from our mothers womb, is a most ugly, deformed
body of death, a fearful, and deadly monster.

Use 1. To teach us to mourn and lament in the consideration of it.
Now, let us see what Use we can make of that which has been spoken, and in
the first place here is great cause of mourning, and lamentation, even, because
that although this body of death our natural corruption, which in every place
is known by the name of brittle, weak, and corrupt flesh, be such an
abominable, and deadly monster, as that it deserves, and ought to be of every
one persecuted, and hunted, even to death; yet, is so generally served, and
obeyed in the lusts thereof as at this day it is. Behold, and mark the course
of the world, and consider well the actions of the most part of men, and you
shall find, that they tend chiefly to the fulfilling, and satisfying the
desires of this horrible monster, their corrupt flesh, to the susteyning and
supporting of it, and to the giving it the fill of whatsoever it requires: if
it will have men eat till they surfeit, and drink till they be drunk, you
shall find multitudes of them that will do it, although they should eat and
drink up goods, bodies, and soul, and all: if it lusts after wantonness,
you shall find those that fit, and address themselves for that also, by
lurking here and there in corners, gazing, and staring out at Windows, and
doors, and frequenting dishonest places; or by using idle, and immodest
exercises, as lascivious dancing, wanton sporting, amorous songs, corrupt and
rotten communication, stuffed with vain, and unfruitful iestes, and profane
passages, and that, upon the Sabbath day, the which although some seem to
observe and keep, by resting from the works of their calling, and serving the
world; yet you shall have the same men profane, and violate that blessed day,
which God has set apart for his own service, by doing the works of their
corrupt flesh, and toyling to serve it in the lusts thereof, as in taking
their carnal sports, and such pas times as their base and sensual affections
shall lead them unto, when they should be best employed in spiritual exercises.
Whereas, if they saw their spiritual estate, and were sensible of the wants
thereof, they would think one day too little for them to spend in bewayling
their sins and miseries, in prayer, meditation, reading, and hearing the word
of God: or if they did but know, and duly consider the wonderful
bountifulness, mercy, patience, and long-suffering of God, who has so safely
protected them, so carefully provided for them, and so mercifully spared them,
notwithstanding their sins and unworthiness; they would think that time
rather too short then too long for them to bless him, and praise him enough;
and to spend in godly and sanctified discourse, and conference upon those
things which appertain and tend to Gods glory, and their own mutual comfort,
and edification in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Furthermore, how many do we see, whose daily practice and trade of life is,
to fulfill, and satisfy the lusts and desires of this vile, and ugly monster,
their corrupt flesh, in lying, deceiving, usury, seeking unlawful and ungodly
gains, slandering, and backbiting their neighbors, undermining for offices,
and places of dignity, by a thousand ungodly, and sinister means, and
devises, and infinite ways else, which would be too long here to be repeated,
so that it is a thing most lamentable, and never enough to be bewailed, that
Man, that excellent creature, which at first was created, to serve the Lord his
God in holiness, and righteousness all the days of his life, to his
everlasting comfort, should be found to be so base, as to sell himself to be a
slave, and a drudge to his corrupt and sinful flesh, and to serve it in the
vile, and contemptible lusts and appetites thereof, to his everlasting woe and
destruction: yea, I say, that it is a thing altogether lamentable, that this
body of death, this pernicious, and deadly monster, our natural corruption
should be thus diligently obeyed, and served, notwithstanding the wages thereof
be death eternal both of soul, and body; when in the mean time, the service
of our good, and gracious God, is utterly neglected, and yet the reward which
he offers is everlasting joy, and happiness.

Use 2. To admonish us to take notice of this deadly monster.
In the second place, this serves to warn, and admonish all the children of
men that they take good notice of this cruel, and deadly monster which keeps
all this quarter in the world, and which they all have brought with themselves
into the world. When some noisome beast is discovered to be in a Country, the
people of the same are not a little moved therewith: how do they bestirre
themselves, consult, and lay their heads, and helps together, to chase it, or
ensnare it, that they might by some means bring it to death? how shall we then
behave our selves, which have received such credible, and certain information,
that such a pernicious, and deadly monster, as the corrupt flesh, is risen up
amongst men? shall we be idle, and secure? shall we not bestirre our selves,
and look about us, and join all our forces together to kill, and destroy this
fell, and cruel monster? Se^ing it has been so manifestly, and undeniably
made to appear unto us, that unless we kill it, it will kill and destroy us,
and that eternally, Romans 8.13. And to the end that the Apostle might the more
thoroughly make us to understand this, and consequently the better deter, and
affright us from the love and service of this our corrupt flesh, which we so
gladly and readily obey; he calls it in our Text, a body of death: now there
is nothing more terrible, and fearful to man then death; yet there is nothing
more pleasing unto him, then to obey his corruption in all its filthy lusts,
notwithstanding the Apostle declares it (how-soeuer it slatteringly laugheth,
and smileth upon a man) to be a deadly, and destroying monster, a body of
death, having in it self the sting both of temporal, I Cor. 15.16.
and eternal death, wherewith it gives the deaths-wound to every careless,
and improvident person which serves, and obeys it: even as Ioab did unto
Amasa when he embraced him, 2. Sam. 3.

Wherefore every one that loves his soul, must lay to heart the Apostles
admonition, Romans 13.14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no care for
the flesh, to obey it in the lusts thereof; yea, he must set himself against
his corrupt flesh, which is no other thing then a most dangerous monster, how
sweet, and lovely soever it seems to be: he must in nothing take care to
please, and obey it, for then it will grow more strong, and hurtful; but he
must weine it of its lust, and deny it of whatsoever it desires, and so
crucify it, and by little and little, as it were, hunger-sterue it, that he
himself may live. What we are to know and do further as touching this body of
death, shall be declared in the parts of the Text, which now follow to be
handled.

The opening of the second part of the Text.
2. Who it is which here complains against this body of death?

IT is the Apostle himself which complains against the body of death, which
was in him: for in the verse following, he speaks of himself, and says
(...), I my self, and thus speaks he every where, not as being unregenerate,
but as having an unfeigned, and sincere love and delight in the law of God,
which flesh and blood did never teach him, in which regard also, by the
testimony of the Psalmist, he may be known to be blessed, Psalm. 1.2. From
hence follows this observation. Doctrine 2. That the natural corruption
which makes man of himself unapt and unfit to any good, and prone to all
evil, is in the best, and most holiest of Gods children.
The body of sin, and of death is in the best, that is, the natural
corruption which makes man of himself unapt, and unfit to any good, and prone
and ready to all evil, is even in the best and most holy of all; This
appears out of that the Apostle himself here complains that it was in him,
who without doubt, was one of the best Christians in the world at that time:
and he further declares unto us that the faithful (among whom he shuts
himself also) while they are here upon earth (how far soever they are
proceeded in the new birth) do know but in part, 1. Cor. 9.10.11.12. And he
says of the Thessalonians, that there was something wanting in their faith, 1.
These. 3.10. When in another place, he witnesses of them, that unto other
Christians they were notable examples, and patterns of true faith. 1 These.
1.7.8. Yea, in this regard Elias himself, was subject unto the same passions
unto which other of Gods children are. Iam. 5.17. and all the children of God
are said to have in them fleshly concupiscences, which strive against their
soul. 1. Pet. 2.11. The best as long as they remain in this life have always
somewhat in them which they must crucify, Gal. 6.24. Col. 3.5. Romans 8.13.
which they must mortify thorough the spirit. Whereby it manifestly appears,
that there is in every one an evil eye, which must be plucked out; and a bad
hand, that must be cut off. Mar. 9.43. etc.

Here it may be asked, Quest.
why God does suffer his best Children thus to be oppressed, and cumbered with
this body of death, so long as they live here upon earth?

First, Answ.
God does it for the greater glory of himself, and of his children, and the
greater shame, and disgrace of the Devil: for truly, it tends greatly to
the praise and glory of God, and to the honor of his children, and to the
shaming of the Devil; that he knows how, and is able to keep, and preserve
such weak and feeble vessels against all the power of Hell, and to make them
conquerours over Satan, in that very flesh which is so polluted with sin,
and was once depraved by the Devil.

Secondly, the Lord does it because it is fit that there should be a
difference put between the cursed earth, and blessed heaven; to be without
finne, and free from combat with it, is a prerogative and privilege belonging
only to the seat royal, and court of heaven: it cannot be that we should
enjoy it here upon earth; no we must long after the fruition of it in heaven.

It may be demanded again, Quest.
that seeing the very best are polluted with this natural corruption, what
difference is there then between the children of God, and the children of the
world, between true believers, and carnal men?

There is as great difference between them as is between the darkness of
the darkest night, Answ.
and the light of the morning at the break of the day, as we heard before;
yea, the difference between the carnal, and spiritual man, in respect of
this inherent corruption, is great every manner of way: for in the unregenerate
man, this monster of sin, sits, as it were, upon a throne, ruling, and
having dominion in his heart, where it commands, and is obeyed in every
thing. For experience makes it plain, that there is nothing wherein worldly
men do take more delight and pleasure, then in serving their corrupt flesh in
all its lusts, whether it be in covetousness, voluptuousness, pride,
ambition, or in any thing else whereunto their appetites carry them. But on the
contrary side, in the children of God, (how s;oeuer it has place in them, yet)
it sits not as upon a throne, ruling, and commanding as a King, but lies,
as it were, stretched out upon a rack, where thorough the working of the
spirit it is every day more and more dis^joynted, weakened, and mortified.
Furthermore, the daily practice of the true Children of God is, not to take
care for the flesh, to obey it in the lusts thereof, as carnal men do, but
to beat it down, and bring it in bondage to the will of God, as the Apostle
did. 1. Cor. 9.27.

Here by the way we may consider the exceeding sottishness of many poor, and
wretched persons which serve the flesh, and live in sin, who when they once
hear, that all men, yea, the very best are sinful, and that the most holy and
sanctified have their wants and defects, and are clogged with the sinful
flesh; then begin they to justify themselves, and to say, we have all drunk
of one cup; he that is without sin let him cast the first stone at me; have I
my imperfections? Another has his; I am not alone, I hope I shall get into
heaven as well as another; and so they set themselves in equal degree with the
true Children of God; they themselves being no other then fleshly men, and
children of the world.

But thou miserable man which speak after this manner, understand thou
not? or will thou not understand, that there is a great difference between
having the sinful flesh in one, and fighting with it; and having it in one,
and loving and serving it in the lusts thereof? Is there no difference
between chaste Joseph, who being set upon by Potiphars wife, and tempted to
commit folly, ran away; and between the light, and wanton woman, who sought
to draw him unto it? Is there no difference between a modest, and chaste
Matron, who having a Ruffian in her house, resists him, strives against him,
seeks by all means to drive him out, and cries out earnestly, O wretched
woman that I am, who shall deliver me from this wicked villain? and between a
lascivious woman which rejoices, and is glad that the Ruffian is in her house;
which makes a bed for him, and solaceth her self with him: so is there great
difference between you, which let sin reign in your mortal bodies, that you
might obey it in the lusts thereof. Romans 6.12. and between the servants of God
which wrestle, and fight with it, and labor to beat it down, and bring it in
subjection. 1 Cor. 9 27. Yea, there is so great difference (mark it well) that
you with your sinful flesh shall be cast into Hell, where you shall eternally
be tormented, if in time you repent not; where on the contrary side, the
Children of God shall be freed, and delivered from their sinful flesh, and be
exalted into Heaven: yea, behold, there is so great difference between you
two, that the one shall be damned, and the other saved; the one go to heaven,
and the other to hell.

But although this natural corruption is not alike in all men, yet it is
truly in all men, and that in the very best, as daily experience teaches: for
who is there among the most holy and sanctified that live, which feels not in
himself the prick of the corrupt flesh? and finds not something to be in
him, which stands in his way, and keeps him from doing the good which he
would do, greatly hindering him in the service of the most high.

Use 1. To teach every one to walk warily and circumspectly, seeing we carry in
and about us such a body of sin and of death.
First, this serves to incite, and stir up every one to walk warily and
circumspectly, seeing that we carry about us, and in us such a body of sin,
and of death; such a deadly and deceitful monster as the flattering flesh,
which always lies in ambush to entrap the soul, and is conspired with the
Devil to bring it unto destruction. Shall we not then stand upon our guard?
Shall we not watch and pray, and put on all the Christian Armor of proof to
defend our selves withal? how can a poor man escape destruction, and
condemnation, if he looks not well to himself, seeing he is so beset on
every side, within and without with such dangerous, and cruel enemies. Admit
that a Frontier town be straightly besieged with a strong Army without; and
has within it mutinous soldiers, which always seek their opportunity to
betray, and deliver it over into the enemies hands; how can such a Town be
safe if good watch be not kept? Must it not of necessity be wasted, and
ransacked, unless the Citizens do take more then common care, and diligence
to secure themselves? We see it is bad enough with a City in such a case, let
it do the best it can: and even thus stands it with us; the Devil runs
round about us, seeking to devour our souls, the corrupt flesh is within us
ready to betray our souls into his hands; how then can we avoid destruction,
if we be secure, and negligent, For this cause says the Scripture, If the
righteous shall scarcely be saned, where shall the sinner, and ungodly man
appear. 1. Pet. 4.18. If that the Apostle Paul was thus troubled, and grieved
with the sin that cleaued so fast unto him, which was then upon his guard, and
strove manfully with it; which had then denied himself, and made it his
continual practice, and trade to beat down and kill this body of sin, 1.
Cor. 9.27. What will then become of secure and negligent men, that take no more
care for their noble and precious soul, then as though there were no
deceitful Satan always seeking his advantages to enter upon it, nor any
corrupt flesh, and body of death to kill and putrify it? It shall surely come
unto them as the Apostle says, when they shall say peace and safety, then
shall come upon them, sudden destruction, as the travail upon a woman with
child, and they shall not escape, 1. These. 5.3. unless in time they prevent
it.

And it is most certain, that all this security, which is in worldly and
carnal men, arises only from this, that they neither think, nor consider
that there is a whole kingdom of darkness, and all the power of hell up in
arms for to destroy their soul: and a whole body of death, and of sin
within them, which is evermore ready to betray them into the hands of the
destroyer: this ignorance is the cause, and ground of all their security; for
did they but see how mighty and cruel their enemies are; and what deadly, and
poisonous concupiscences they carry in their bosoms, they would surely be
affrighted, and tremble, and cry out with the Apostle, as if they were in some
great exigent, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body
of death?

Wherefore we must suffer our selves to be admonished, evermore to stand upon
our guard, to pray, to have God always before our eyes, and often to hear,
read, and meditate on his Word, and to follow his will revealed therein: those
that are subject to any disease in their body, as the stone, the gout, or the
like, when they begin to perceive any sign of their old grief, they
presently make their moan, and complain of it, and live more carefully, and
respectively, avoiding whatsoever may further and increase their disease, and
using all means to have it cured; so must we also do for our souls, unless
by giving over all care of them, we brand our selves with the mark of men
reprobated, and given up of God.

Use 2. A iustreproofe of all such as content themselves with a civil life.
In the second place, this serves for the just reproof of the exceeding great
blindness, and sottishness of many worldly, and carnal men, who because they
lead an outward civil life among their neighbors, paying every man his own,
and defrauding no man of a penny, as their manner of speech is, are therefore
accustomed to justify themselves before God, and bear themselves in hand,
that they have no need to fear hell, yea, heaven is their due;
notwithstanding, they are convinced in conscience, that they are sinful, yet
they know no other sins that they have, then some small sins, which they
hold to be venial, and those they think are so few in number, that they need
not to make any doubt of their salvation; and in the mean time they forget
that (howsoever they carry it outwardly) there is a whole body of death in
them, which makes them accursed before God, and liable unto eternal
condemnation: this they consider not, but say in their heart, I am no thief,
no murderer, no drunkard, no cheater, no whore-monger, I can go to Church with
my neighbors, I need not hide my head for any man; and why should they tell me
then that I shall not come to heaven as well as another? And in the mean while
(poor men) they think nor what God has to say unto them, and what he can
allege against them; they weigh and consider not that there is a body of death
in them, which makes them to be damnable and accursed before God, yea, though
while they live they should neither move, nor stir, and do neither good, nor
bad.

But O thou poor man that art thus minded, how lamentable is thy case? Thou
hasf a whole body of sin with in thee, and that as thou lie, and sleep:
there is a moustrous deformity in thee, which makes thoe most abominable
before God, and being not covered will certainly bring thee to hell: thy
natural corruption possesses thy soul, kills it, and makes it stink
before God, Psalm. 53.2. It destroys thy body also; for from whence (think
thou) does it come, that thy body is subject unto so many pains, and difeases;
that it so decays, and consumes away? comes it not from this inward body
of sin, which has in it self the sting of temporal and eternal death. 1
Cor. 15.56. So then ye need not be a thief, or a murderer, or an adulterer,
or a drunkard, or a deceiuer, or an usurer: thou may choose whether thou will
take so much pains for to go to hell: remain the same that thou art by
nature, and thou shall not escape it: continue still an old wife unto the old
Man, as by nature thou art, and thou can not be saved; thou must perish, Luc.
13.3.5. if so be thou art not renewed in the spirit of thy mind; if the hand
of God come not upon thee; if his spirit works not in thy heart, and create
in thee a new heart, and a new spirit; if he causes not the light of his
grace to arise in thy heart, that thou may no longer remain darkness, but
may be light as the day beginning to break: if this (I say) be not wrought
in thy heart, it is not possible that thou should ever enter into the
kingdom of heaven; or inherit eternal life; for thou have a body of death
in thee which will bring thee into everlasting death, except thou begin to kill
the works of this body, which thou can not do but thorough the spirit, which
by nature thou have not, neither can have, but from God alone.

O what a lamentable thing is it, that the natural man is so blockish, and
dull that he not so much as once thoroughly considers this; admonish, and
exhort these men to mark Gods word, diligently to repair to the Congregation
of the faith, to watch and pray, to redeem the time, and to work out their
salvation with fear and trembling; they cast it in the wind; they see no
reason why they should so trouble themselves: they suppose it stands well
enough with them, because they are not so openly scandalous and offensive in
their conversation as others, and peradventure somewhat better then some of
their neighbors, of whom they report that there is no goodness in them: when as
they themselves know not yet what it means to be renewed in the spirit of
their mind; and what it is to mortify the deeds of the body thorough the
spirit.

Use 3. To teach Gods people to put far from them that conceit of carnal men.
Thirdly, let this serve to exhort all the people of God to put far from them
this opinion, and conceit of worldly, and carnal men; let us give out selves
no rest, till we find that we are renewed in the spirit of our mind, and that
we have some power thorough the spirit to mortify the works of this body of
death: let us also take heed, that we be not so foolish, as to seek our
justification in our selves, or in our own works: nothing but that which is
perfect can stand before the judgment of God: but we have a body of sin in
us, which hinders us from perfection; therefore let us seek it only in Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Use 4. To work a sound humiliation in all mankind.
Fourthly, this may move us to humility; shall we be proud, and insolent,
which bear about us, and in us a body of death; which are condemned men, upon
whom by the law of God the sentence of death has already passed? Is it a
seemly thing that persons condemned, and ready to be executed, should be
proud and arrogant? shall we then be high minded, and grudging? shall we be
envious, and malicious? shall we be wanton, and careless, which have in us a
body of death, whereby we are liable unto eternal death? Shall we in the
pride of our hearts, make of our body of death, a body of insolency, and
murmuring; a body of voluptuousness, and mirth; a body of wantonness, and
jesting? let that be far from us: humility becomes condemned men. Abraham
was humbled, because he was but dust and ashes, Genesis 18 27. and shall not we be
so too, which are nothing else but an accursed lump? Job was humbled, because
the fores had overrun his body: but the natural corruption has run
thorough all the parts and powers of our soul, and body, and shall we not be
humbled? shall a man be cast down for a disease in the body? and shall we
that are so deadly sick in soul, not be cast down at all.

Use 5. To administer comfort to the Warriors against this corruption.
Fifthly, here is matter of comfort, and encouragement to all good hearts, who
knowing that there is a body of death in them, are therewith unfeignedly
grieved, and troubled, and earnestly busied, and exercised in mortifying, and
killing the same by the spirit, do notwithstanding feel in themselves the
pricks of the flesh, and the continual buffetts, and assaults of this body of
sin: Behold my beloved brothers, and sisters, be not dismayed, and think
not therefore that you are Bastards among the sons of God: No, as you have
before heard, it is the lot of all the Children of God: mark in all the
foregoing verses of the seventh chapter to the Romans, what the Apostle
himself had to do with his natural corruption; be not then discouraged, but
stand to it stoutly, and although the Devil goes about to persuade thee, that
thou art no child of God, because thou feel the prick of the flesh so
strong in thee; yet know for certain that in as much as thou striuest manfully
with thy corruptions, and do not study to obey, and please them, but
seek by the spirit to mortify, and kill them; know (I say) that thou art a
child of God: continue therefore in thy spiritual combat; fight valiantly;
and put on all the Christian armor of proof; and let this serve to make thee
long and desire to be delivered from this body of death, and to be with Christ;
and in the mean time be humbled in thy self, and patient toward thy brother,
out of the sense of thine own imperfections: and strive not only against
this, or that sin, according to the manner of worldly men, (whereby it
appears that their heart is not upright with God:) but with the Apostle,
fight against the whole body of sin, using the means that God has ordained
whereby thou may overcome, and avoiding all occasions that may make thee
fall: and so doing be assured in thy self, that thus to strive against thy
natural corruption, is an infallible mark, that thou art a Child of God, and
a sure ground of unspeakable comfort.

The second Sermon.
The opening of the third part of the Text.
Thirdly, How the Apostle lamenteth over the body of Death?

The Apostle his lamentation is twofold: first, he declares himself
therefore to be miserable: secondly, he wishes to be delivered. Of both which
we shall speak by Gods assistance: and first of this, that the Apostle
declares himself to beo miserable, because he had the body of death in him.
O miserable man (says the Apostle) who shall deliver me? It is very strange
the Apostle lamenteth here after this manner: in other places he affirms, and
that confidently, that he rejoiced even in the greatest tribulations, 2 Cor.
4.8. etc. 2 Cor. 6.4. etc. How does he here then so mournefully complain? Did
he speak from his heart, when he said, O miserable man? Was he not then a man
blessed of the Lord? Was he not then assured of his salvation? How comes it
then that he calls himself miserable?

Without doubt the Apostle speaks here in good earnest, Answ.
for he was then in a hot skirmish, and had little time, or cause to dally, or
lest: yea, he spoke not only in earnest, but also upon good grounds, for the
other afflictions wherein he says, he did glory, and rejoice, were outward
afflictions, wherein in truth he might well rejoice: but here he speaks (as
we have heard before) of his natural corruption; of the sin that hanged
fast upon him, and of the old man, which he began to behold in all the parts,
and members thereof. The which made him lament and complain in good earnest,
as being a thing out of which he could draw no comfort at all: in which regard
he might instly account himself to be miserable: For this body of death
considered in it self, makes a man truly wretched and miserable, the which
may sufficiently be gathered out of the first part of our Text, whereunto we
will briefly add, The body of death has these miserable effects which
follovv.
that the body of death, in respect of which the Apostle so earnestly
complains, has these miserable, and cursed effects which follow.

It defaceth the Image of God in us.
the which is a thing altogether lamentable, and miserable. If a man does
break a leg, or an arm, how does he cry out, and complain of his misery?
What cause then is there of mourning and complaint, when the soul of man is
broken to pieces, and made unfit for every good use? When the most noble and
eminent of man is ^^terly depraved, and corrupted? We see that in a man's body,
when any member is wounded, or afflicted with any grief, the more worthy and
excellent that member is, the greater is both the grief, and danger of the
sore: prick a man in the arm, or the leg with the point of a Needle, and he
will both feel it and complain of it; but prick him in the apple of his eye,
and that shall pierce him to the heart, and make him cry out. If it be so with
the eye of the body, how great is the pain and grief, when the eye of the
mind is not only pricked, but wholly put out? When the most noble, and
precious soul is wounded, and that to death? this is it that made the Apostle
cry out, O miserable man.

Secondly, Man thus depraved in soul by original Being thus defaced we
become the children of wrath and disobedience.
is by nature a child of disobedience, and a child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.2.2.
That is, unfit for the service of God, and liable to the curse of God; both
which are miseries beyond comparison.

First, he cannot do the works of God: for he is as a broken tooth, which
serves for no use at all; and as a broken arm wherewith a man cannot work.
As soon as a man begins to frame himself unto the service of God, he
finds his corruption ever to be in his way, so that the good that he
willingly would do, he cannot do as he would: With this are the children of
God greatly moved, howsoever the children of the world, which put not forth
their strength to the service of God, feel no inconvenience herein: even as
one that has a broken leg, and lies still, feels not the smart thereof so
much as he that is ever assaying to walk; and therefore they complain not;
nevertheless, this exceedingly grieueth the servants of God, and they account
it as a great misery, that they can no better perform their duty to God.

Secondly, the natural man is liable to the curse of God, Deuteronomy. 27.26. He that
destroys the image of God, him will God destroy: This is it that did cast
many of the Angels out of heaven into hell: this drove Adam out of Paradise,
and makes all the sons of men subject unto eternal death: and from hence
do arise all the plagues and punishments which are inflicted upon man: now, as
a man having committed murder, and being come to himself, accounts himself
to be miserable, in regard of the offense, which makes him worthy of death,
although he be neither apprehended, nor condemned to die: even so it is with
the children of God, who notwithstanding that they are delivered (as the
Apostle was) from the fear of death, thorough our Lord Jesus Christ, Heb.
2.15. yet because they know that their sinfulness causes God to hide his
cheareful countenance from them, Esaias 59.2. Which is unto them as bitter as
death it self, therefore they cry out unfeignedly because of this body of
death; O miserable man.

Now in that the Apostle himself which had already in a great measure
mortified, and subdued this body of death, 1 Cor. 9.27. yet nevertheless so
pitifully complains against it, whereas there are many thousands that go
frolikely along being never touched, much less troubled therewith, yet are as
it were wrapped, and plunged over head and cares, in sin and iniquity: from
thence follows this Doctrine; Doctrine 1. The more holy a man is, the more
sensible is he of his natural corruption.
The more sanctified, and holy that a man is, the more sensible is he of his
corruptions, and the more troublesome are they unto him. This is manifest, in
that the Apostle that was none of the greatest sinners, but one of the holiest
upon the earth, yet makes the greatest complain against his corruptions: he
reckons up 2 Cor. 11. many, and sundry bitter afflictions, and persecutions,
yet none of them makes him cry out, and complain so mournefully as he does
here, because of his natural corruption, which he saw to be the mother of all
misery.

Thus David, when through his folly he had wounded himself with sin, goes
weeping unto the bosom of his heavenly Father, and cries out with a loud
voice, Heal my soul O Lord, for against thee have I sinned: But the Children
of the world in the same case, wipe their mouth with the Harlot, and ask what
cuill they have done.

Now the reasons for which the regenerate, and true Children of God are so
grieved with sin, whereas the children of the world are never touched, much
less troubled therewith, are chiefly these.

First, Reasons. 1. Because they have a feeling conscience sensible of sin.
the regenerate and true Children of God have received spiritual life in them,
whereby they have a quick, and feeling conscience, which the Lord gives them
to keep them from sin; But on the contrary side, the natural man is dead in
sin, Ephesians. 2.1. and has a seared Conscience 1 Timothy 4. which is utterly past
feeling, as it is said, their heart is waxed fat, that they cannot understand
Mat. 13.15. Hence it is that the Children of the world, being dead in sin,
and dead in conscience, can so easily digest all manner of sins, and make so
light of them; being accustomed never to lament for the iniquity, and offense
of their sins, but for some outward inconvenience, which they have procured
unto themselves in the world by their sins, as loss, reproach, or the like:
but the regenerate, being living in soul, and quick in conscience, are
sensible of the least prick of sin, the smart whereof causes them to cry out,
O miserable, etc.

Secondly, 2. They have their eyes open to see the ugliness of sin.
the regenerate have their eyes open to see the ugliness of sin, and the
hateful deformity of this body of death: they see that it defaceth the image
of God in Man, makes him unfit for the service of God, and liable to the curse
of God: they see that it dishonors God, and provoke him to anger;
scandalizeth the Church, grieueth the godly, and rejoices the wicked, and
causes the name of God to be blasphemed, and his Gospel to be disgraced: they
see also, that hell, and eternal damnation do hang at the tail of sin, how
sweet, and pleasing soever it seems to be: all this do they see, as a
people that is near unto God, who gives great light unto all them that are
about him: they see also, that it shuts Heaven, and opens Hell: increases
the heat of Hellfire, for the ungodly, and hides the comfortable light of
Gods countenance many times from his own children: All this do the Saints of
God see, which makes them so lament, and complain of sin; but the children
of the world because they neither see, nor understand this, are nothing
troubled with sin, notwithstanding they are from top to toe polluted
therewith.

Thirdly, the regenerate and true Children of God, do hate sin with a
perfect hatred, Psalm 97.10. Where on the contrary side, the unregenerate do
love it as much: yea, they have their special beloved sins, Job 20.12. Now
we know it is a thing not a little grievous for a man to have one whom he
hates always to be present with him, in his house, at his table, at his fire,
in his bed, and every where else, under his nose; So it grieueth the children of
God not a little, that the body of sin, and of death is in them, which they
hate with all their hearts, and wish that it were drowned in the bottom of the
sea: but it is not so with the children of the world, for they loving sin, or
not hating it, are nothing troubled therewith, although they know it to be in
them.

Fourthly, The Saints of God have learned to judge of sin, according to the
word of God, which declares it to be the most odious, and abominable thing
that is, Deuteronomy. 25.16. and herein have they also learned to renounce their own
understanding: but natural men do judge of sin according to their own
carnal conceit, and good meaning; and being by nature lovers of sin, they
cannot, nor will not understand that it is so hateful as truly it is; and
therefore, where they should condemn themselves for sin, they condemn the
law as if it were too strickt, and judged too severely of sin.

Lastly, as no element in his proper place is heavy; So sin in the natural
man, being in its right place is not grievous: but it is otherwise with the
children of God.

Use 1. For examination, by this, whether we be Gods children yea, orno.
Now come we to the Uses that may be made of this that has been spoken; and
the first shall be for Examination, and trial: for, by this Doctrine may every
man prove, and try himself whether he be a child of God, or not; in which the
most part of men are wanting, suffering themselves to be deceived in the case
of assurance of salvation; but it must not be so; for, would a man be willing
without proof, and trial of himself to go along merrily, and laughing, with
a hope of inheriting eternal life, and at last thorough want of trial, and
examination, find himself deceived in his expectation, and be cast into
eternal damnation, without hope of ever being delivered? Verily, I think not:
therefore enery one must take the pains to prove and examine himself.

Now, here is an infallible Rule, for proof, and trial: See how thou art
minded concerning sin; is it so, that when thou have thoroughly considered thy
whole estate, and condition, and weighed in thy heart how every thing stands
with thee, thou find nothing that troubles, and grieueth thee so much as
sin: and can thou, having all things at will, sit down with the Apostle
and mourn because of thy finnes, and cry out unfeignedly, O miserable man, who
shall deliver me? Wishing above all things to be delivered from the body of
sin, and to be freed from the power thereof; oh that is a good sign that
there is spiritual life in thee; that thou have a spiritual eye open to see
the hatefulness of sin: that thou thy self hate sin, and iudgest
thereof according to the word of God, denying thine own carnal conceit
therein: and that sin being in thee, is not in its proper place.

But on the contrary side, if it be so with thee that thou can lament, and
bewail thy losses, and crosses in outward things, and art nothing troubled for
thy sins; it is a very evil sign: can thou mourn, and grieve when thou
have wounded thine arm; and do thou make nothing of it when sin has
wounded thy soul, even to death? can thou frown when others have displeased
thee; and art thou not moved at all, when thou thy self have displeased the
God of heaven and earth? can thou rage, and take on with thy servants for
breaking a glass, or a pot; and have thou no holy indignation with thy self,
when thou have broken the law of God? Behold, it is a sign thou art in a bad
case. Furthermore, can thou, being poor and needy, lament, and bewail thy
state, and cry out, O miserable man? and can thou not because thou art
sinful cry out unfeignedly, O miserable man? Then it is greatly to be feared,
that thou art not only poor in body, but also accursed in thy poverty, and
want, if so be thou remainest the same in soul as thou art, Again, if thou
having spoken a lie, been angry, or peradventure drunk the last night, can
easily digest it, and go on frolickly, without once being touched at heart
with any sorrow for it; behold, it is a lamentable sign, that thou art dead in
sin, and art blind, not having an eye to see the hatefulnes of sin; that thou
hate not sin as thou should, nor iudgest of it as God does: yea, that
thou art altogether in sin, and sin in thee, is in its own place: And to
be short, it is an infallible sign, that if thou cryest not out because of thy
sins, O miserable man, who shall deliver me? Thou thy self art one of the
most miserable men that lives upon the earth.

Use 2. To cause lamentation in regard of the commonnesse of correction, and
yet the great want of a sensible feeling of it.
Secondly, here is great cause of mourning, and lamentation: For is it not a
miserable thing, that sin, which is so common in the world among name-bearing
Christians, and has so many lamentable effects, is so little complained of by
men and yet the want of being troubled with it, is such an infallible sign of
a miserable soul. Has not sin, as a sea, ouer-flowne all places? go unto
the houses, shopps, markets, counsels, Courts, Consistories, Churches, or any
place else, and if it be full of men, you shall find it to be full of sin
also: but where shall you find the holy complaint and outcry of Paul against
sin? Where shall you find those that from their hearts hold themselves to be
miserable, because they be sinful? and make the sorrow for their sins, to
exceed all their other sorrows, as the Saints of God were wont to do? Nay,
are there not multitudes to be found which harden themselves in sin? and are
so far from any remorse of Conscience for sin, that they rejoice, and take
pleasure in it, and are at no time so much grieved, as when they cannot bring
their sinful intents to effect, not making a meal but it must be with sin,
to whom it is not enough that they eat, and drink, but they must eat, and
drink sinfully, or else they cannot be merry: there are also those that plough
iniquity, Hosea 10.13. that are inuenters of wicked things, Romans 1.30 Workers
of unrighteousness, practitioners in sin, whose will, and understanding are
only employed to plot, and devise iniquity, to cover, extenuate, and defend
it with subtle Arguments, or so cunningly, and cleanly to carry their sinful,
and ungodly proiects, that they may not be perceived. There are likewise those
that live only in sin, whose meat, and drink it is to work iniquity,
Pro. 4.16. There are also those that build their houses, and hold them open in
sin, as those wicked and filthy Alehouses, and worse; and yet all these will
give themselves out for true Christians, and appropriate unto themselves the
comforts and prerogatives of the Children of God, when, remaining as they are,
they have no part in them, which is a thing altogether lamentable, and
miserable.

Use 3. To terrify all hard-hearted people, which delight in sin, never
sorrowing for sin.
Thirdly, this serves to terrify, and affright all abstinate, and hard
hearted men, which drink in iniquity like water, and can without any sorrow,
or remorse of conscience, commit, and digest the most gross, and abominable
sins; which can lie, swear, deceive, drink drunk, profane the Sabbath, or
do any wicked thing else, and yet pass away their time in joy, and mirth; yea,
and boast of their strong faith; and that they are sure of the pardon of their
sins, and the salvation of their souls: But the faith of these men is mad,
and foolish: it is no Apostolical faith; it is not of the nature of the
Apostle Paul's faith, who being upon good grounds assured, that his sins were
forgiven, yet was troubled, and grieved with them; even as a maid who having
slipped into folly, and now lives chastely, mourns, and lamenteth all her life
long, because of the scandal and reproach where with she has steined her
self, although she be forgiven of her friends, and companions, and as well
respected and esteemed by them, as she was in times past: but the peace, and
security of those idle, and vain boasters, arises not from the strength of
their faith, but only from this, that they have a dead, and benumbed
Conscience, and are still in their natural state, where sin being, as in its
proper element, is not heavy, and grievous. But look before thee thou
wretched man, behold, there shall a judgment come, and then thou shall know,
that this thy idle joy, and mirth, is nothing else, but the seed of thine
eternal pain, and torment, unless thou do in time turn and repent: for
it is most certain, that thou must either temporally, here; or else eternally
hereafter, lament, and bewail thy sins.

Use 4: To reprove all those which wonder at the humility of Gods children.
Fourthly, this serves to reprove those large Consciences, which when they see
the Child of God humbled, and grieved for his sins, are wont to marvel, and
say, they know not wherefore one should be so troubled for sin, for God is
merciful, say they, Christ is dead, and all things are well: but did not the
Apostle know what he did when he cried out so earnestly because of his sins,
O miserable man, who shall deliver me? But these men do not know, that it is
the property of the child of God to mourn, and grieve because he has
displeased his good and gracious Father by his sins, although (with the
Apostle) he be confident, that they be remitted, even as a good natured child,
when he has committed a fault, will be sorry that he has offended his Father,
although he has forgiven him.

Lastly, here is matter of comfort, and encouragement, for all those which out
of the sense and feeling of their sins and corruptions, are unfeignedly
grieved, and troubled with them, complaining, and crying out from their hearts
with the Apostle, O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of death? Oh my beloved brethren, and sisters, be not dismayed because you
find sin to be so heavy a burden; behold, it must be so, if you will be
eased of it: the more light a man thinks it is, the more heavy, and grievous
it shall fall upon him: it is a sign that you are in a joyful estate, if your
greatest sorrow be for your sins: a wound being full of dead flesh smarteth
not; but then it is the more incurable: it is a living, and quick conscience
that feels the smart of sin: this corruption is not felt by corruption: it is
a sign that there is spiritual life in us, when we can mourn for the
transgression, and iniquity of our sins: I say, for the transgression, and
iniquity of our sins, because they are contrary to the will of God, and do
displease him: the children of the world which are dead in sin, can mourn,
and lament enough for the punishment which is, (or they fear will) come upon
them, by reason of their sins: but it is the property of the children of God
to sorrow, and grieve because by their sins they have offended, and displeased
their good, and gracious Father: so then, go forwards, thus must it be with
you, if you will have it be well with you: step one step further with the
Apostle, and as with him you mourn because of the wickedness of your sins, so
cease not, and give your selves no rest, till with him also you find your
selves to be delivered both from the guilt, and dominion of sin, thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord, whereof by his assistance we purpose to speak in this
part of the Text which now follows.

The last part of the Text.
HEre the Apostle wishes to be delivered from the bady of death: O miserable
man (says he) who shall deliver me from this body of death? Now, we are
delivered from the body of death in this life (for thereunto has the Apostle
respect, as it appears in the verse following) when in this life we are saved
from our sins, Mat. 1.21. namely, when we have not only obtained
forgiveness of our sins, but are also strengthened against the power of sin,
and more and more set free from the bondage thereof, Ioh. 8.32.36. thus the
Apostle wishes here that the power of his corruptions might more and more be
broken, and decayed.

Moreover, the Apostle here wishing, asks who shall deliver him? which we
must not understand as though he did not know thorough whom he should be
delivered; for he declares in the verse following, that he knew it well
enough; but here he asks the question, only, to let us understand, that in
himself he found no means whereby he might be delivered: Like Iosaphat being
environed with his enemies, and seeing no way to escape, cried unto God for
help, 2 Chronicles. 18.31. Or as the seafaring men, who in time of storm, and
tempest, when their own art, and industry cannot help them, do cry unto the
Lord, Psalm. 107.28.29. So the Apostle cries here, as out of great misery, and
affliction, unto God for help, knowing that it must come only from him; for
sin makes man so miserable, that nothing but the almighty power of God can
deliver him: for by sin we are cast under the feet of Satan; we lie
condemned unto eternal death; and the wrath of God is incensed, and kindled
against our souls, for which who knows in himself any remedy? Judas finding
none, ran unto the tree: but Paul runs unto Christ, verse: 25. For it is the
son of God alone, which can deliver the wretched sons of men from the misery
of their sins.

But some man may ask, how comes it to pass, that the Apostle Paul, which
was none of the greatest sinners, yea, which was already in a great measure
freed from the might of sin; yet wishes thus earnestly to be delivered more
and more from it; whereas the children of the world, which lie even drowned
therein, and are very slaves unto it, yet speak not once of this deliverance.

Beloved, it came from this, that the Apostle had a feeling, and experimental
knowledge of the misery that arises from sin, and therefore he wishes to
be delivered from it: this the children of the world do not feel, and
therefore they think not of deliverance: he that can feelingly, and unfeignedly
complain, that he is miserable, because he is sinful, he will also heartily
cry out, and wish to be delivered from sin; from hence follows this
observation; Doctrine 2. The true sense of our misery by sin causes us to
seek deliverance by Christ.
The true sense, and feeling of the misery which sin brings us into,
causes us unfeignedly to seek our deliverance out of sin by Jesus Christ:
This we see manifestly in the Apostle Paul: For this cause was it that our Lord
Jesus Christ according to his infinite wisdom, sent John the Baptist before
him, as a forerunner to prepare the way for him, by teaching men to know their
misery, whereinto they were brought thorough sin, to the end, that they might
seek their deliverance out of sin thorough Christ, Mat. 3. For this cause
also is the law preached, that me^ being thereby brought to the knowledge of
their misery through sin, Romans 7.7. might the better be driven to Christ: in
which respect, the Law is called our leader to Christ, Gal. 3.24. In this
regard also Christ says, that those that are whole have no need of the
Physician, but those that feel their maladies, they call, and cry for him.
Reason 1. It is natural for all Creatures in distress to seek deliverance.
And the reason is, because it is by nature ingrafted into all Creatures when
they are in distress, and misery, to seek ease, and deliverance: as the young
Ravens in the wood when they are hungry, do cry unto God, Psalm. 147.9. And the
greater the misery, and affliction is, the greater is the desire to be
delivered. Now there is no smart like unto the smart of sin, unto a feeling
conscience: and there is no affliction, like unto the affliction of the
conscience, for (as we said before) the more noble, and excellent that member
is which is affected with any sore, the greater is the grief, and pain
thereof; So, the soul being the most worthy, and eminent part of Man, and in
misery, and distress; the sorrow and grief must of necessity be great, and
the desire to be delivered from it equal thereunto.

Uses.
Use 1. To show from whence it comes that men are in miserable bondage under
sin, and yet never seek for deliverance
First, this serves for to discover unto us, from whence it comes, that
there are so many which notwithstanding they are miserably possessed with this
body of sin, and polluted with all manner of impious transgressio^s, the
damnable brood thereof; yet never seek for their deliverance, truly, it
comes only from this, that they know not the misery wherein they are by sin:
yea, from whence comes it that many a man goes under the curse of God
because of his sins, and never thinks of his deliverance, passing along, as
it were, with an easy gale in a smooth Sea, without any perturbation at all:
and many also who knowing that they are sinful, and being ignorant of the
means whereby they may be delivered, yet are not a whit troubled: ask them,
have you not sinned against God? they will answer, yes; then ask them,
whether they by their sins have not deserved eternal death, even as others?
they confess that also: ask them then, what means they know whereby to be
delivered from the body of death? they answer, that God is merciful, and they
trust that he will not cast them away, because of their sins, but will save
them for his mercies sake. Demand of them then whether God saves all, and
condemns none; they must needs acknowledge, that the way is broad that
leads into destruction, and many there be that enter into it; and that there
be goats, as well as sheep: then come nearer unto them, and demand of them
upon what ground they hope that God will be more merciful unto them, for to
save them from hell, and bring them to heaven, then he is to many other whom he
casts into destruction? then they are at a stand, not knowing what to say, or
do; or, it may be run unto their works, for to seek their salvation there:
or else answer you, that it is too high a question for them, and that they are
not so deeply learned: and albeit they are convinced, that they are ignorant
of the means whereby they may be delivered from eternal perdition, yet they
let it stick there, troubling themselves no further, but go on carelessly, and
securely, not so much as once asking, or inquiring of that man of God which
has so convinced them, how, and which way they may be delivered; but let it so
remain, being negligent of their eternal good: and this their fearful, and
miserable blockishnesse, and dotage arises only from this, that they have no
sense, nor feeling of the miserable estate wherein they are by sin, but only
prate, and discourse of it, because they hear others do so, thinking that men
must say so: and because for the present, they have their bodily health, and
the things of this world at will; and feel no smart in their consciences (for
they are dead in sins, and trespasses, and consequently without feeling)
therefore are they secure, and seek not to be delivered from their sins;
but live, taking their pleasure, and delight therein, for they have neither
true knowledge, nor feeling of the misery, and wretchedness whereinto their
sins have brought them: how their soul is depraved, and corrupted, and what
a curse hangs over them: but this security of theirs, is like unto that of a
condemned person, who sleeping before execution, is secure no longer then his
sleep dureth: for from this that worldly men are ignorant of the misery
wherein they are thorough their sins, arises it that they are so negligent,
and careless, not troubling not themselves with the Apostle about their
deliverance; nor yet once looking after Christ Jesus unfeignedly, and heartily:
whereas had they learned tightly to know, and understand the misery wherein
they are by reason of their sins, they would with all earnestness, and
vehemency have sought their deliverance from the body of death, as the Apostle
did.

Use 2. Shows the necessity of the sound preaching of the Law.
Secondly, this shows how necessary it is that the Law should be thoroughly
Preached, to the end, that men being made thereby to know the miserable, and
woeful estate whereinto their sins have brought them, might the better be
driven to seek their deliverance thorough Jesus Christ. For it is most
certain, that neither the deliverance is heartily sought after, nor Jesus
Christ the Physician worthily esteemed, there where the hate fullness of sin,
and the greatness of the misery by reason of sin is not thoroughly known.

Go tell a man, which feels no grief, and thinks himself to be well, and
in health, that he should seek for help, and go unto the Physician for to be
cured; and he will mock, and deride you: but one that finds his disease, and
feels the pain thereof will thank you for your counsel: so until such
time that men have learned thoroughly to know their misery; Jesus Christ the
Physician is not respected, nor accounted off according to his worth, and
desert: and although the Ministers of Christ come unto them praying, and
beseeching them in the name of Christ, and entreating them for the love of
Christ, to carry themselves so and so; yet these men which know not their
misery regard it not at all, but set light by all the requests, and entreaties
of Christ, and suffer his Ministers to pray, and entreat as much as they will,
passing away their time without any care, or thought at all: and no maruayle;
for they feel no want of Christ, neither find they any more sweetness in the
Lord Jesus, then in a dry Wort-stalke. But on the contrary side, those that
have learned truly to know their misery, and which give up their hearts, and
souls unto Christ, for to be delivered thorough him; those esteem and count
of all things as dung, and dross for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ: whatsoever is required of these in the name of Christ, as soon as they
truly know it to be his will, they fashion themselves according unto it, they
only being those that honor, and esteem of Christ, according unto his worth,
and excellency, as daily experience makes it undeniably manifest: for this
cause, we see it to be most necessary, that men should learn to know their
misery by the preaching of the law, to the end, that they may come unto the
Gospel for their deliverance, in, and thorough Jesus Christ.

Use 3. To admonish all which would be delivered from the misery of sin, that
they would suffer themselves to be reproved.
Thirdly, This serves to admonish all those which seek to be delivered from
the body of death, that they willingly, and gladly suffer the reproof and
reprehension of their sins, and the discovery of the filthiness, and
hatefulness of them: but men are impatient of this, avoiding, and shunning it
as the death, yet without this they cannot be delivered from the body of death:
some when they hear sin sharply reproved, cry out, that it is the way to
preach men to destruction; but truly they know not what they say: are they
those that think to be delivered by their own works, that they cannot
suffer to have it truly declared unto them, that the very best of them
according to the tenor, and strictness of the Law, has by their own actions
deserned no less then hell and damnation? But if they be wise, and right
minded Christians, let them be willing to hear their own insufficiency, and
unworthiness discovered, and laid open unto them, that they may the more
reverence, and esteem of Jesus Christ, and learn, not in their own works,
but in his worthiness, and merits to seek their deliverance, and salvation;
and to acknowledge, and follow him, not from the teeth outwardes, like
hypocrites, but unfeignedly, and from their hearts, as the only Physician, and
savior of their souls.

Therefore most commendable is the practice of those Ministers of God which are
careful, and earnest to lay open before men's eyes their insufficiency,
vileness, and cursed estate by nature, endeavoring by that means to bring men
highly to esteem of Christ (whom the end of all our preaching is to make
known unto them) for by experience we find, and the truth it self makes it
clear, that our Lord Jesus Christ is worthily esteemed, and honored of none,
but of such as by the feeling of their misery are brought into the estate of
the Apostle when he cried out, O miserable man, who shall deliver me from this
body of death?

Use 4. Toteach us when we feel the lack of our Jove to Christ, then duly to
weigh the hatefulness of our sins.
Fourthly, this serves to admonish us, whenever we find our selves wanting
in our love, and due estimation of Christ, and feel that we have not such a
hearty, and grounded affection unto him, and such a hungry desire, and longing
after our deliverance from the body of death, thorough this Prince of life as
we should; that then we betake our selves unto a serious, and due consideration
of the manifold, and wonderful hatefulness, and vileness of our sins; how
miserably the image of God is thereby depraved, and defaced in us: how unfit it
makes us for the service of God: how fearfully by it the wrath of God is
kindled against us: how thereby we have deserved eternal death, and
damnation: and consequently what great need we have of the mediation of Jesus
Christ: and this will make us above all things (unless we are dead in sin)
seek our deliverance from this body of death, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord,
as the Apostle did.

Now in that the Apostle thus earnestly, and above all things in the world (as
here it is manifest) wishes, desires, and longs more and more to be
delivered, and freed from the power of sin: and in as much as he elsewhere
requires us to be his followers: from hence arises this instruction, Doctrine
3. That it behooves us above all things in the world, to seek to be delivered
from the power of sin.
that it behooves us above all things in the world, with all dilig^nce to
endeavor more and more to be delivered from the power of sin: We see here in
our Text that it is the practice of the Apostle, and his example being good, we
ought to make it our rule. This has evermore been the opinion, and practice
of all the servants of God, as it is here the outcry of the Apostle, Who shall
deliver me from this body of death? Such is David's wish, Psalm. 119.5. O that my
way were directed to keep thy statutes: and it has not only been the
longing, and desire of the servants of God: but also their daily practice, and
endeavor to attain unto it, as the Apostle Paul witnesses of himself, that
he desired in all things to walk honestly, Heb. 13.18. Yea, that it was his
daily occupation, his greatest exercise, and endeavor, to have always a clear
conscience toward God, and toward men, Act. 24.16. And David also testifies
as much of himself, that he refrained his feet from every evil way, that he
might keep Gods word, Psalm: 119.101.

Reason 1. Because true Religion teaches us to keept our selves unspotted of
the world. I am. 1.27.
First, This must be the endeavor of every one that will serve God, because
true Religion, and undefiled before God, even the Father, is, to visit the
widow, and fatherless in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of
the world.

Secondly, If so be we were in slavery under the Turks, Reason 2. Because the
bondage of sin is the greatest bondage that a Christian can undergo.
should we not by all means labor for our liberty? If we were griped in the
claws of a Lion; should we not desire, and strive to come forth? If we were in
danger of some fearful fire, or ouer-flowing of water, should we not make the
best speed we could to escape? Now, the bondage, the tyranny, the brunt, the
flood of sin is worse then the bondage of the Turks, the cruelty of a Lion,
or the unmercifulness of fire, or water: for these fasten only on the body,
and but for a short space: but the other on the soul, and that for ever.
Therefore, unless we will make it appear, that we be unbelieving contemners,
and mockers of the Doctrine of heaven and hell, and whatsoever appertains
thereunto, accounting it as merely verbal, and vain babbling; Let us above
all things in the world, labor, and endeavor more and more to be delivered,
and freed from the bondage of sin.

Uses.
First, Here is matter of mourning, Use 1. To enforce us to mourn because men
lie in their sins without once seeking any deliverance.
and lamentation, even that there are so few that labor, and exercise
themselves in this, notwithstanding it be matter of such necessity, and
consequence. You shall find men that are plunged up to the ears in sin, yet
nevertheless take no pains at all to get out of it: yea, they are so far
from using any diligence of themselves, to work out their liberty, and
freedom from the bondage of sin, as that they cannot suffer any man to
admonish them of their sins, or to lend them a hand to pluck them out of
them, being in madness, and folly like unto him which being possessed with a
deep sleep, and having an Adder creeping upon him is angry and takes it in
ill part, when his friend awaketh him, to the end, that he might avoid the
present danger: so truly is it a miserable, and lamentable thing (and yet
common) that worldly men, which do lie in wickedness, 1 Ioh. 5.19. as a beast
lies in hay, (for so the word there signifies) (...), are so far from
stirring, and rousing up themselves to rise out of their sins, and to harken
unto the voice which cries, awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead,
and Christ shall give thee light, as that they had rather go seek some body
to set a cushin under their elbow, to the end that they might sleep the more
easily, and soundly in their sins: but it shall be with them as the Lord
protests, Ezech. 13.18.19.

Use 2. To teach us to labor to be delivered from the body of death.
Secondly, let this move us to stir up our selves above all things (according
to the manner of the Apostle) to labor, and endeavor to have our selves
delivered from the body of death, and set free from the power thereof; for, we
see that we are altogether, and wholly in the captivity, and bondage of sin,
therefore to endeavor to get our liberty, must we prefer before all our
works; and especially, seeing the glory of our good, and gracious God, and the
eternal welfare of our own souls, do stand upon it: yea, it is most
certain, that whosoever sets not himself against his sins, for to be
freed, and delivered from his sins, shall die in his sins, John 8.24. For
this body of sin shall pierce him with the venomous, and cursed sting
thereof, which shall bring him, not only to temporal, but also to eternal
death, 1 Cor. 15.56. For as those that die in the Lord, are blessed, and rest
from their labors, and enjoy eternal happiness, Revel: 14.13. So those that
die in their sins, are certainly accursed, and shall have their part in the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone: Revel: 21.8. Therefore must we make
it our chiefest work to get our selves delivered from the power of sin,
unless we be willing thereby to be brought into eternal condemnation.

But if we find our selves to be already truly delivered from the power of
sin, so that it has no dominion over us, howsoever it remains in us, Romans
6.12. yet we must with the Apostle Paul, earnestly labor, and endeavor more
and more to be freed from it, because the comfort of our souls, and the peace
of our consciences, do stand upon it: for it is most sure and certain, that
we can no further rejoice, and comfort our selves in our faith, and good
conscience, then we refrain our selves from sin, and endeavor in all things
to walk honestly, Psalm. 119.101. Heb. 13.18.

Quest. What must we do to be delivered from the power of sin.
Here may some man demand, What are we to do, to the end that we may be
delivered from the power of sin, and more and more set free from the bondage
thereof?

To the end, that we may be set free from the power, and servitude of sin, we
must be made partakers of Jesus Christ, for his death is the death of our
death, and by his wounds are we healed, his blood being the medicine of our
souls, Esaias 53. Heb. 9.14. Now that we may be made partakers of Christ, we
must believe in him, for it is faith in him that makes us free, Ioh:
8.31.32.36. Which the Apostle having in the verse following our text, he
thanketh God through our Lord Jesus Christ, namely, for this, that he, thorough
the Lord Jesus Christ was delivered from the body of death. Therefore thus
speaks Christ of himself, Ioh: 8.36. If the son make you free, you shall
be free indeed: thus does John also testify, even that we thorough faith in
Christ do overcome the world, John 15.5.

But we find by experience, that the faith of many men consists only in
words, being nothing else but an idle conceit swimming in their brains: for
there be many who when they understand that men by faith are made free from
their sins, and blessed, do presently persuade themselves, that they also
believe, whereas alas, they know not what it is truly to believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, nor yet what is the nature, and virtue of true faith. Wherefore
let every one in few words understand, that whosoever would be found truly to
believe in Christ, must make it appear, that he believes, and holds for
good all the words, and counsel of Christ, and consequently must practice the
same, Ioh: 3.36. Luc: 6.46. Or else let him know that his faith is nothing
worth; and that he shall not be saved, although he suffers himself a thousand
times to be persuaded, that he shall obtain salvation, and happiness thorough
Jesus Christ.

For as we know, it is not enough for one that would be cured of some perilous
disease, only to believe that such an expert Physician can, and will cure him;
but if he will be helped, he must follow the advice of the Physician, and use
the medicines which shall be prescribed unto him, or else he is like to be never
the better: So it is not enough, that a man, to the end that he might be cured
of the body of death, by the only Physician of the soul, Jesus Christ, Mat.
9.12. persuades himself that Christ can, and will help him; but he must also
follow the counsel of Christ, if he will be cured by him, according to that
which the holy Scripture so expressly declares, even that Christ is the
author of salvation unto all that obey, Heb. 5.9. In which sense also speaks
John the Baptist most plainly, He that believes in the son has eternal
life, but he that obeyth not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him, Ioh: 3.36. From whence it may fully be gathered, that that
faith which makes not us obedient to the son, is not that faith whereby we
can be healed; so James also confidently affirms, that that faith is dead,
and nothing worth, which makes not us as well followers, as believers of the
words, and will of Christ. For it is most certain, that wheresoever true faith
is, there is also the practice and endeavor of obedience unto the will of
Christ.

Now, what the will of God is in this, that men might thorough our Lord Jesus
Christ be delivered from the body of death, very much might be spoken thereof,
but my purpose is here briefly, and in a word, to touch the most necessary
things, and so to conclude, because I have largely handled it in another place;
and, that wretched, and sinful man might be delivered from the body of death,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, the Prince of life, and be more and more set
free from the power of sin, he must practice, and endeavor these three things
according to the will, and counsel of Christ.

First, he must forsake himself, He that will follow me (says Christ, namely,
that will be led and healed by me) let him for sake himself, Mat. 16.24. that
is, let him cast away, and renounce his own understanding, and judgment; let
him break himself of his own will and affections: let him in nothing yield
unto his sinful flesh, nor take any care to obey it in the lusts thereof, Romans
13.14. And let him not please, or uphold this body of sin, by giving it any of
those deadly, and pernicious things it lusts after: but let him herin
circumcise himself; let him deal harshly and roughly with this body of sin,
keeping from it, and denying it of every thing it would have, so shall the
strength thereof decay; for as it was the meat of Christ, to do his Fathers
will, Io: 4.4. So is it the nourishment, and strength of the corrupt flesh to
do against the will of God, by committing sin, from which we must bridle it,
if we will kill it. Behold, this is the counsel of Christ, speaking after the
manner of a Physician, who when he takes a man in hand to cure him, requires
of him, that by all means he would keep a good dyer, and refrain to eat
those things which nourish, and feed his disease, the which the Christian man
must do that willingly would be cured of the body of death; for we find it to
be a common, and familiar thing, that those which be sick in body, do most
desire those things that do them least good; So is it also with men that are
sick in soul: they evermore desire, and lust after sin, which is most
hurtful unto them: therefore those that would be cured in their souls, must
deny themselves, according to the prescript rule of Christ: yea, they must
renounce, and forsake the whole body of death (as the Apostle cries out
against the whole body of death) and not only this, or that part, or member
thereof, as some do, who, to be cured forsake, and strive against some sins
retaining still other some pleasing and beloved ones, whereby they become the
more incurable, and continue sick even unto the death, as the scripture
teaches us, Eze: 18.31.32. for although the very best, so long as they remain
here, are not free from all sins, yet, every one that would be cured, and
healed of his sins, must strive, and fight against all of them, Job 20.12.

But this is very grievous unto a natural, and corrupt man, to weane his
lusts of their desires, and to deprive himself of those things with which
his heart is most in love: Oh, it is as death unto sinful man: it is, as if he
should put out his eye, or cut off his hand, as Christ himself gives us to
understand, Mat: 5. Nevertheless, it must be done, as he that cannot lie
teaches us in the same place, verse: 29.30. And look, by how much the more
this body of death, that hateful monster, the corrupt flesh, does flatter, and
embrace us, for to entice us to serve it in the lusts thereof, by so much the
more, must we set our selves against it, and seek to subdue it, and bring it
under, 1 Cor. 9.27. For our sinful flesh is like unto a wicked Enchantresse,
which smileth upon us when she purposes to destroy us; the pleasing and
delightful concupiscences thereof, are like Ioabs kisses, who killed Amasa
when he seemed to kiss him, 2 Samuel: 20.9.10. Therefore we must not favor and
please this monster of sin: but we must in this thing, deny our selves, and
kill our earthly members, Col. 3.5. And crucify our old man, Gal. 5.24. If we
will live, and be delivered from the eternal cross, and the eternal death.
Neither must we shrink, or be afraid to do it; for, the lusts of our flesh,
which we are to cut off, are as rotten members; members of the body of death,
cankered, and putrified members, which if we cut them not off in time, will
corrupt, and destroy our whole man; yea, and bring us also into eternal death,
as the truth it self teaches us expressly, testifying, that if we favor and
make much of the members of this body of death, that is, our sinful lusts,
and cut them not off, we shall with them be cast into hell, where the Worm
never dies, and the fire never goes out, Mar. 9.44.

Secondly, the man that would willingly be more and more delivered from the
body of death, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord, must not only deny, and
forsake himself, but also, with all his affections, and the deepest desires of
his heart, make all possible speed to come unto Christ, that he may be cured
of him, as he himself teaches, namely, that all that are weary, and laden
must come unto him, and he will ease them, Mat. 11.28.29. and Mat. 13.15. He
then that would be healed by Christ, and delivered from the body of death,
must give up himself unto him, to be cured by him, even as a poor patient
which having long been possessed with a grievous disease, puts himself
into the hands of a skillful Physician (which by Gods help can cure him) to be
ruled and handled according unto his will, and prescription.

Now the diet, the physic, the receipts which Christ the only Physician of
the soul prescribes unto his patients (that I may so speak) for their
curing, are found only in the holy Scripture, Ioh: 5.39. which is the Physic
book wherein are plentifully contained the words, which are life to them that
find them; and health unto their flesh, Pro. 4.22. Therefore the poor sinful
man that would have help, must order, and govern himself according to the
rule, and true meaning of the holy Scripture, wherein is comprehended the great
wisdom of God, and all the mysteries of spiritual Physic, according to
which whosoever truly frames, and carries himself, shall certainly, and
undoubtedly be healed. Therefore it is the greatest folly, and madness in the
world, and a sin whereof very many stand guilty before God, that wretched
sinful men should be slack, and negligent to enquire, and search after the
wisdom, and counsel of God, and to frame, and fashion themselves according
unto it, notwithstanding, the great, wife, and merciful God has revealed unto
them in his word (which he has put into our hands,) how they should walk, to
the end, that they may be healed of the body of death; but run unadvisedly
after the blind conceit of their own head, without once rightly considering,
what the Lord Jesus Christ, the only Physician of the soul has prescribed,
and delivered in the holy Scripture, for poor soule-sicke man to practice, and
apply unto himself, to the end that he may be cured; yea, the great stayne of
this sin of the godless children of the world, shall never be purged from
them unless they amend, therefore those that would be delivered from the body
of death, thorough our Lord Jesus Christ, must so give themselves up unto him
to be cured of him, as that they diligently search, and learn out of his word
how they must order, and address themselves, to the end, that they may be
healed.

Thirdly, He that would be delivered from the body of death thorough our Lord
Jesus Christ; must by all means endeavor to believe, and hold as firm, and
certain, that he thus denying, and giving up himself unto Christ, shall
truly be delivered, and cured by him: this did Christ require in the curing
of bodily diseases, Marc. 9.23. and elsewhere; teaching us thereby that this
faith is above all things necessary, and requisite unto the curing of the
mortal disease of our souls, it being the Conduit which conueyeth unto us
virtue from Christ, whereby we are healed of our corruptions.

But the Devil which sets up himself as a God of the world, labors by
all his might, and policy, to hinder and stop this: for he will either
persuade a man that he shall live, and be saved by his faith, and belief in
Christ, when he lives in a course of perdition, serving the flesh, wherein if
he continues, it is not possible that he should be saved, Romans 8.13. or else
he will make him believe if he can, that his sins are so great, that he
shall not obtain pardon and remission of God, when he has denied himself,
forsaken his sins, labors to be conformed unto the will of God, and is
heartily grieved because he cannot perform such obedience unto him, as he
should, and as he would: but let us take heed of both these Rocks: let us
not presume of the mercy of God, when we are not fit Objects of mercy,
standing in open rebellion against God, being friends of sin: and let it
also be far from us to think, that God will not have mercy upon us, when
we come unto him for mercy, with true sorrow and grief because we have
offended him; for it is his glory to have mercy, and to have respect unto them
that humble themselves: but let us wrestle with our vnbeleiefe, and believe,
that thorough the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, Act.
15.11.

This faith, thus being founded, not upon an idle conceit of our own brains;
but upon the forenamed grounds, the word, and council of Christ, we
accordingly endeavoring truly to forsake our selves, and to put our selves
into his hands, to be ruled and governed by him: This faith (I say) is mighty,
and works wonders; and there is no disease of the soul so mortal, or
incurable, of which we shall not be cured, if so be we hold fast, and
continue in this our true, and holy faith, following the council of Christ:
for then may we expect, the blessing of Christ, more and more to be delivered
from the body of death: Then shall it be done unto us, according to the words
of Christ, Matthew the fifteenth Chapter, and the twenty eight verse, Be it
unto thee as thou will; Then shall we be more and more freed from the power of
sin, and assured of our Salvation, to our great, and never ending comfort.

Laus honor and gloria sole Deo.
FINIS.

