Superbiae Flagellum, OR, THE WHIP OF PRIDE.

By JOHN TAILOR.



LONDON, Printed by G. ELD: 1621.

To the Right Worshipful, Worthy, and Learned Gentleman, Sr. THOMAS RICHARDSON
Knight, Serjcant at Law, and Speaker in the High Court of Parliament, etc.
A double Anagramme.

THOMAS RICHARDESONN. AS MAN HONORDE CHRIST, SO CHRIST HONERD A MAN.

YOur name includes, that As man honorde Christ, So God again through Christ
honored a man: For if man truly honor the most Highest Then Christ to honor man
both will and can. Right worthy Sir, this in your name is true, You honor
Christ, and Christ has honored you.

RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,

But that I am assured that your Noble disposition, in all parts is suitable to
the inside of this Book, I should never have dared to Dedicate it to your
Patronage: for as it is a Divine Poem, so has your Worship a religious heart,
as it has an honest intention, so have you a breast ever full of such thoughts,
which bring forth worthy actions: as it a Whip or Scourge against all sorts of
Pride, so have you ever been an unfaigned lover of Courteous humanity and
humility, I humbly beseech your Worship, (although the method and style be
plain,) to be pleased to give it favorable entertainment, for the honesty
that is in it, and the dutiful affection of the Author,

Who is most obsequiously obliged to your Worship,

JOHN TAILOR.

To no matter who, no great matter where, yet to be read there is matter why,
although not much matter when.
IT is no matter into whose hands or censure this my Superbiae Flagellum, or
Whipping, or Stripping of Pride fall into, if it come into the view of true
Nobility or Gentry, I know it will be charitably accepted. If into the hands of
degenerate yongsters, that esteem Pride more then all the Liberal Sciences,
who account the four Cardinal virtues, inferior to their own Carnal vices,
such a one will put me off with a scornful tush, a pish, or a mew, and commit
my Book to the protection of Ajax. If a wiseman read it, I know it will be
discreetly censured; if a Fool, his Bolt is soon shot, and I am armed against
it; if a Learned man peruse it, he will bear with my bad Schollership; if an
unlearned, I care not for his opinion; if a man of knowledge view it, he will
pardon my ignorance; if an ignorant Ass see it, he will bray out his own; if
an honest Richman spy it, he will be the poorer in spirit though not in purse;
but if a proud Dives handle it, he will esteem it worse then his dogs; if a
proud Courtier read it, he will tear it to tatters; whilst a Generous Affable
Gentleman, will lovingly entertain it. If beauty chance to behold it, it will
bid it welcome, if Pride stand not in the way; if a strong man that is not
proud of it, grow aquainted with the contents of my meaning, I think it will
content him; if Parents, or children, or all, or any body, that are not
poisoned with pride, do but see or hear it distinctly read, and understand it
with judgment, I am persuaded it will pass and repasse, with friendly usage,
but if any of the contrary faction come within the Air of it, they will use it
in some sort, as bad as the hangman may use them. And so much for, To no matter
who.

It is no great matter where this be read, for as a good man (being banished)
is never out of his country, because all countries are his, so my Book in
Church, Court, City, Country, Castle or Cottage, is one and the same; it may
perhaps alter the place where it comes from worse to better, but the place can
never alter the honest entents of it from better to worse. Therefore no great
matter where.

To be read there is matter, why, because it strikes at the root of a most
deadly sin, which almost as bad as an universal deluge, has ouerflowed the
most part of the world; and though the Preachers on Earth, (Gods Trumpets, and
ambassadors from Heaven) do diligently and daily strike at this abhominatio^,
with the eternal sword of the everlasting Word, yet what they cut down in the
day, like Mushromes, it grows up again thick and threesold in the night, for
whilst the husbandman sleeps, the envious man sowes tares.

Wherefore, I having a talent of knowledge lent me, by which I know that I must
render an account one day, how I have employed it, and having Written near
forty several pamphlets in former times, I purpose henceforward (God willing)
to redeem the time I have so misspent, employing my Pen in such exercises
(which though they be no free from a relish of mirth, yet they shall be clear
from profanation, scurrility, or obsceannesse I do know Pride is at such a
height, that my Molehill Muse can never by mineing at her foot, shake her
head, for where Divinity preuailes not, Poetry in meddling does but show the
Suns brightness with a Candle. Yet forasmuch as I know that Pride cast Angels
out of Heaven, made devils in hell, threw man out of Paradise, was a maine
causer of the drowning of the first World, is a deuowrer of this world, and
shall ever be accursed in the world to come, by this knowledge, I have with a
mixed inuectiue mildness, showed in this Book the vanities of all sorts of
Pride, not that I hope for amendment, but to show my honest intendment.

I have seen six or seven fashion hunting Gallants together sit scorning, and
deriding a better man then any of themselves, only because either his Hat was
of the old Block, or that his Ruff was not so richly laced, his Cloak has
been too plain, his Beard of the old translation, his Boots and Spurs of
the precedent second edition, and for such slight occasions a man has been
slighted, ieerd and wonderd at, as if he had been but a Zany to the fashion,
or a man made for the purpose for them to whet their scorn upon, and therefore
to read this, there is a matter why.

It is not much matter when, for be it read on Friday the Turks Holyday, on
Saturday the Jews Sabbath, on Sunday the Lords day, or on any day or all
days, nights or hours, there is Divinity with Alacrity, Poetry with honest
mirth, and every thing so interwouen, one with another, that if it please not
the generality, yet I hope in particularity it will be tolerably censurd by all
that hate Pride, and love humility. And therefore, not much matter when.

JOHN TAILOR.

A FEW LINES, TO SMALL PVRPOSE, against the Scandalous Aspersions, that are
either maliciously, or ignorantly cast upon the Poets and Poems of these Times.
THere does a strange, and true opinion run,
That Poots write much worse then they have don:
And how so poor their daily writings are,
As though their best inventions were thread bare.
And how no new things from them now does spring,
But all has refrence from some other thing.
And that their daily doings do reveal,
How they from one another silch and steal,
As if amongst them't were a statute made,
That they may freely use the theeuing trade.
And some there are that will not stick to say,
That many Poets living at this day,
Who have the Hebrew, Latin, Greek, at will,
And in the Italian and the French have skill,
These are the greatest thieves they say, of all
That use the Trade (or Art) Poetical.
For ancient Bards, and Poets in strange toungs,
Compiled have their verses and their songs:
And those to whom those tongues are rightly known,
Translating them, make others verse their own,
As one that steals a Cloak, and presently
Makes it his own, by alt'ring of the dye.
So whole boookes, and whole sentences have bin
Stolen, and the stealers, great applause did win,
And by their filching thought great men of fame,
By those that knew not the right Authors name.
For mine own part, my Conscience witness is,
I never was guilty of such theft as this,
Unto such robbery I could never reach,
Because I understand no foreign speech.
To prove that I am from such filching free,
Latin and French are heathen-Greeke to me,
The Grecian, and the Hebrew Charactars,
I know as well, as I can reach the Stars.
The sweet Italian, and the Chip Chop Dutch,
I know the man in the Moon can speak as much.
Should I from English Authors, but purloyne,
It would be soon found counterfeited coin.
Then since I cannot steal, but some will spy,
I Will truly use mine own, let others lie.
Yet to excuse the writers, that now write,
Because they bring no better things to light:
It Is because bounty from the world is fled,
True liberality is almost dead.
Reward is lodged in dark oblivion deep,
Bewitch't (I think) into an endless sleep,
That though a man in study take great pains,
And empt his veins, and puluerize his brains,
To write a Poem well, which being writ
Wthall his Judgment, Reason, Art, and Wit,
And at his own charge, print and pay for all,
And give away most free, and liberal
Two, three, or four, or five hundred books.
For his reward he shall have nods and looks;
That all the profit a man's pains has gat,
Will not suffice one meal to feed a Cat.
Yet Noble Wcstminster, thou still art free,
And for thy bounty I am bound to thee:
For had not thou, and thy Inhabitants,
From Time to Time relieved and helpd my wants,
I had long since bid Poetry adieu
And therefore still my thanks shall be to you.
Next to the Court, in general I am bound
To you, for many friendships I have found.
There (when my purse has often wanted bait)
To fill or feed it, I baue had receite.
So much for that, I Will now no more rehearse,
They show their loves in prose, my thanks in verse,
When death, Mecaenas did of life deprive,
Few of his Noble Tribe were left alive,
This makes Invention to be mean and hard,
When Pride and Avarice does killreward.
And yet me thinks, it plainly does appear,
Men's writings are as good as e're they were.
Good lines are like a Banquet ill imployd,
Where too much feeding has the stomach cloyde.
Good verses fall sometimes (by course of fate)
Into their hands that are preiudicate.
And though, the Writer never so well has pend,
Yet they will find fault with what they cannot mend.
Thus many a learned well composed line,
Has bin as Pearl that is cast before a swine.
Or more familiarly to make compare,
Like Aquauitae given unto a Mare.
These fellows, (glutted with variety)
Hold Good lines in a loathed saciety,
Whiest paltry Riming, Libells, Iigges, and Jests,
Are to their appetites continual feafts.
With which their fancies they do feed and fill,
And take the Ill for good, the Good for ill.
Whilst like to Monkeyes, (scorning wholesome meat)
They grredily do poysnous spiders eat.
So let them feed until their humors burst,
And thus much bold to tell them here I durst.
That Poetry is now as good as ever,
If bounty, to relieve her would endeuer.
Men's minds are worse then they have bin of yore,
Inuention's good now, as it was before.
Let liberality awake, and then
Each Poet in his hand will take a pen,
And with rare lines enrich a world of paper,
Shall make Apollo, and the Muses caper.
FINIS.
Superbiae Flagellum, or the Whip of Pride.
WHen all things were as wrapped in sable night,
And Ebon darkness muffled up the light: If any man fetch his slory higher, let
him take my book for naught.

When neither Sun, or Moon, nor Stars had shinde,
And when no fire, no Water, Earth or Wind,
No harvest, Autumn, Winter, when no Spring,
No Bird, Beast, Fish, nor any creeping thing,
When there was neither Time nor place, nor space,
And silence did the Chaos round embrace:
Then did the Archworkmaster of this All,
Create this Massy Universal Ball.
And with his mighty word brought all to pass,
Saying but Let there Be, and done it was.
Let there be Day, Night, Water, Earth, Herbs, Trees
Let there be Sun, Moon, Stars, fish, foul that flees,
Beasts of the Field, he said but, Let there be,
And all things were created as we see.
Thus every sensible and senseless thing,
The High-Creators Word to pass did bring:
And as in viewing all his works he stood,
He saw that all things were exceeding good.
Thus having furnished Seas, and Earth, and Skies;
Abundantly with all varieties,
Like a Magnificent and sumptuous Fcast,
For the entertainment of some welcome Guest,
When Beasts and Birds, and every living Creature,
And the Earths fruits did multiply by Nature;
Then did The Eternal Trinity betake
It self to Council, and said, Let us make,
Not Let there be, as unto all things else,
But LET US MAKE MAN, that the rest excels;
According TO OVER IMAGE LET US MAKE In perfect Holiness and Righ^eousnesse.

MAN, and then did The Almighty Red Earth take,
With which he formed Adam, every limine,
And (having made him) breathed life in him.
Lo, thus the first Man never was a Child,
No way with sin original defiled:
But with high Supernat'rall Understanding,
He over all the World had sole commanding.
Yet though to him the Regency was given,
As Earths Lieutenant to the God of Heaven,
Though he commanded all Created things,
As Deputy under the King of Kings;
Though he so highly here was dignifide,
To humble him, not to be puffed with Pride,
He could not brag or boast of high borne birth,
For he was formed out of slime and earth:
No Beast, fish, worm, foul, herb, weed, stone, or tree,
But are of a more ancient house then he;
For they were made before him, which proves this
That their Antiquity is more then his.
Thus both himself, and his beloved Spouse,
Are by Creation of the younger house,
And whilst they lived in perfect Holiness,
Their richest Garments were bare Nakedness,
True Innocence were their chiefest weeds,
(For Righteousness no Masque or Visor needs.)
The royal'st robes that our first Parents had,
Was a free Conscience with Uprightness clad;
They needed never to shift; the clothes they wore
Was Nakedness, and they desired no more;
Until at last, that Hell-polluting sin,
With Disobedience soiled their Souls within,
And having lost their holiness Perfection,
They held their Nakedness an Imperfection.
Then (being both ashamed) they both did frame
Garments, as weeds of their deserved shame.
Thus, when as sin had brought Gods curse on man
Then shame to make Apparel first began,
E're man had sinned, most plain it does appear,
He neither did, or needed Garments wear,
For his Apparel did at first begin,
To be the Robes of penance for his sin.
Thus all the brood of Adam, and of Eve,
The true use of Apparel may perceive,
That they are Liueries, Badges, unto all
Of our sins, and our Parents woeful fall.
Then morethen mad, these mad-brain'd people be
(Or else they see, and will not seem to see)
That these same Robes (with Pride) that makes them swell
Are tokens that our best desert is hell.
Much like unto a Traitor to his King (...)

That would his Country to destruction bring,
Whose Treasons being proved apparently,
He by the Law is justly judged to dye,
And when he looks for his deserved death,
A Pardon comes and gives him longer breath,
I think this man most madly would appear
That would a halter in a glory wear,
Because he with a halter merited
Of life, to be quite disinherited
But if he should vaingloriously persist
To make a Rope of silk or golden twice,
And weare't as a more honorable show
Of his Rebellion, then course hemp or towe,
Might not men justly say he were an Ass,
Triumphing that he once a Villain was,
And that he wore a Halter for the nonce,
In pride that he deserved hanging once?
Such with our Heavenly father is the Case,
Of our first Parents and their sinful Race,
Apparel is the miserable sign,
That we are Traitors to our Lord divine,
And we (like Rebels) still most pride do take
In that which still most humble should us make,
Apparel is the prison for our sin
Which most should shame, yet most we Glory in;
Apparel is the sheet of shame as't were
Which (for our penance) on our backs we bear,
For man Apparel never did receive,
Till he eternal Death deferu'd to have.
And thus Apparel to our sense does tell
Our sinnes'gainst Heaven, and our desert of Hell.
How vain is it for man, a clod of Earth,
To boast of his high progeny, or Birth,
Because (perhaps) his Ancestors were good,
And sprung from Royal, or from Noble blood,
Where Virtuous worth did in their minds inherit,
Who gained their Honors by Desert and Merit;
Whose service for their Country never fai'ld,
Who (Justly) lived beloved, and did bewaild;
Whose Affability, and Charity,
Guided with pious true sincerity,
Who to their states loved all their lives to join
Love before Lands, Compassion before Coin?
Yet when they did, left wealth, place, state, and name
To Heirs, who bury all in Pride and shame,
But as the Sacred Truth most truly faith,
No man is saved by another Faith;
So though some honorable Rascals have
Turned their good Fathers to their timelesse grave,
And like Ignoble noble Reprobates,
Possess their names, possessions and estates,
Yet (for they want their Virtues and Deserts)
They are but Bastards to their better parts.
Manasse; was good Hezechiahs son,
And with his Crown into all Vice did run;
The Sire the title of good King did gain,
The Sonne's Abominations all did stain;
Honor is better well deserved then had,
To have it undeserved, that Honor's bad.
In Rome an ancient Law there sometimes was,
Men should through Virtue unto Honor pass:
And it is a Rule that evermore has bin,
That Honor's best which a man's self does win.
It Is no Inheritance, nor can it run
Successively from Father to the Son;
But if the Father nobly were inclined,
And that the Son retain his worthy mind,
If with his Fathers goods he does possess
His Goodness, all the world must then confess,
That that Sons Honor does it self display
To be the Fathers equal every way.
Thus good men's Honors can no Honor be
To their degenerate posterity,
But it is a man's own Virtue, or his Vice,
That makes his Honor high or low in price.
Of Birth, or Parents, no man can be proud,
Pride of Apparel here is disallowed,
Pride of our Riches is most Transitory,
Pride of our Beauty is a fading Glory:
Pride of our wisdom is most foolish folly;
Pride of our holiness is most unholy,
Pride of our strength is weakness in our thought,
And Pride in any thing will come to naught.
Pride has bin Author of the worst of Evils,
Transforming glorious Angels, into Devils, ^say 14. 4.

When Babels Tower began proudly to aspire,
With toungs confusion, they were paid their hire.
Through Pride the King of Babels glory ceast,
And for seau'n years it turned him to a beast:
And Baltazar that next him did succeed,
Lost life, and left his Empire to the Daniel 4. Daniel 5. The Medes and
Persians.
Mede,
For Pride, to Tire and Zidons wicked Kings
The Prophet a most just destruction brings. Acts 12. ^osephus ^^b. 19. ^^p. 7.
Acts 8.

Herod midst his ungodly glory vain,
Through Pride was eaten up with worms, and slain.
Great Alexander, King of Macedon
Disdaind to be his father Phillips son,
But he from Jupiter would be descended, Plutarch ^n the life ^f Alexander.

And as a god be honored and attended,
Yet Bain'de at Babylon he proved but man,
His godhead ended foolish as't began. ^e was ^pysned at Babylon.

There was in Sicilie a proud Physician,
Menecrates, and he through high ambition,
To be a god himself would needs prefer,
And would (forsooth) be named Jupiter,
King Dionysius making a great feast,
This foole-god daigned there to be a guest,
Who by himself was at a table placed,
(Because his godhead should the more be graced)
The other Guests themselves did feed and fill,
He at an empty table still, sat still.
At last with humble low Sir Reverence,
A fellow came with fire and frankinscence,
And offered to his godship, (saying then)
Perfumes were fit for gods, and meat for men:
The god in anger rose incontinent
Well laughed at, and an hunger'd, home he went.
The Roman Emperor Domitian
Would be a god, was murdered by a man.
Caligula would be a god of wonder,
And counterfeite the lightning, and the thunder;
Yet every Real heavenly Thundercracke,
This caitife in such fear and terror struck,
That he would quake, and shake, and hide his head
In any hole, or underneath his bed.
And when this godless god had many slain,
A Tribune dashed out his ungodly brain.
And thus the Almighty still' against Pride does frown
And casts Ambition headlong tumbling down
Great Pompey would be all the worlds superior,
And Caesar unto none would be inferior;
But as they both did live ambitiously,
So both of them untimely deaths did dye.
The one in Egypt had his final fall,
The other murdered in the Capital.
A number more Examples are beside,
Which shows the miserable fall of Pride:
And do men think to go to Heaven from henc^
By Pride, which cast the Angels headlong thrnce
Or do they through their Pride suppose to dwel^
With God, when Pride did make the Devils in he^^
It is a Vice which God abhors and hates,
And' against it does denounce most fearful threats
Oh, what a hellish vanity is it then,
That does bewitch vain women, and vile men,
That rather then their Pride and they will sever,
They will be seuer'd from their God for ever?
I will not say but Wisdom, Beauty, Health,
Strength, Courage, Magnanimity, and Wealth,
^mpires and Kingdoms, rule of Sea, and Land,
Are Blessings given by Gods all-giuing hand;
But not because on whom they are bestowed,
Should in the stead of Humbleness wax proud,
Or with vain glory have their hearts vpheau'd,
^or why? what ere they have they have received: 1. Cor. 4.

And therefore Christian Kings their styles do grace
King By the Grace of God, of such a place;
Because by his especial providence
They hold Maiesticall Pre-eminence.
And as there is distinction of Estates,
Some Emp'rours, Kings, and mighty potentates,
Superiors and Inferiors, each degree,
As Gods foreknowing Knowledge did foresee:
Yet he did not bestow his bounteous Grace,
To make the great men proud, or mean men base;
Abundant wealth he to the Rich does lend,
That they the poor should succor and defend.
He has given strength and vigor to the strong,
That they should guard the weak from taking wrong:
To some he knowledge does and wisdom grant
Because they should instruct the Ignorant,
But unto no man God his gifts does give,
To make him proud, or proudly here to live.
For Pride of state, birth, wisdom, beauty, streng^^
And Pride in any thing, will fall at length,
But to be proud of Garments that we wear,
Is the most foolish pride a heart can bear.
For as they are the Robes of sin and shame,
Yet more may be considered in the same:
Be they compact of silk, or cloth of Gold,
Or cloth, or stuffes (of which there is manifold
Let them be laced and faced, or cut, or plame,
Or any way to please the wearers brain,
And then let him or her that is so clad,
Consider but from whence these stuffes were h^^
How Mercers, Drapers, silkmen were the Iayle^^
And how the Executioners were Taylers,
That did both draw and quarter, slash and cut,
And into shape, misshapen Remnants put.
Consider this, and you will grant me than
That Garments are the workmanship of man.
Which being granted no man can deny,
But that it is most base Idolatry,
To Adore or worship a proud paltry knave,
Because the Mercers shop has made him brave
Or is it not a foolish vile mistaking,
To Honor things that are a A Tailor is but a man; therefore it is Idolatry to
worship his workmanship
Taylers making
^ake a vow, that never whilst I live
Reverence to Apparel will I give;
Some goodness in the wearer I Will expect,
Or else from me he shall have small Respect;
^in him virtue, and true worth I see
He shall have heart and hand, and cap and knee.
It Is laudable there should be diffrence made
Betwixt a Courtier, and a man of Trade:
For sense or Reason never would allow,
A Prince to wear a habit for the Plow.
Nor that a Carter vainly should aspire,
To thrust himself into the Court attire.
Distinctions of Office, and Estates
Should habit men according to their rates,
Thus I rich Garments no way do condemn,
But I say no man should be proud of them.
In Rome, a worthy Law there once was made
That every man, of each degree and Trade,
Some mark or Badge, about him still should bear
Whereby men knew what all men's callings were.
The Consuls bearing the Imperial sway,
(To whose command the rest did all obey)
In token they had power to save or spill,
Had Rods and Axes borne before them still.
The Censors, Tribunes, AEdiles, and the Praeto^^
The Prouosts, Questors, and the Conseruators
And as their offices were sundry varied,
So were they known by things before the^ carri^^
The Mercer in his hat did wear some tuffe,
Or shred of Silk, or Gold, his trading stuff;
Drapers a piece of List, Weauers a quill,
Or Shuttle, and the Millers wore a Mill.
And as men sundry callings did apply,
So they wore Emblemes to be known thereby
But if that Law were but enacted have,
How like a plucked crow, would Pride sppn appe^^
Some Tailors would be very mad no that,
To wear each one a Bodkin in his hat;
There Is many a wealthy Whoremaster would sk^^
And stamp, and start, if he should wear a whip
But yet if every thief of each degree,
Were bound to wear a halter, God bless me:
A Butcher still should wear a Calfe or Bull,
My self (a Waterman) an Oar or Skull.
And so of every trade both high and low,
Men (by their badgs) would their functions kno^^
And if this Law the State would but allow,
Some would wear calves skins, that wear velu^ no^^
Then Jack and Iill, and John a Drones his issue,
Would not be trapped thus in Gold and Tissue.
It Is strange a coxcomb should be crammed with pride
Because he has got on a Satin hide:
A Grogreine outside, or a silver Case,
Some fourercene groce of buttons, and Gold lace;
When as perhaps the corpse that carries all,
Has more diseases then an Hospital,
And (which is worst of all) his Soul within,
Stinks before God, polluted with all sin.
Romes great Arch-tyrant Nero, amongst all
The matchless vices he was taxed withal,
(The which in Histories are truly told,)
Was said to have shoe ties all wroght o'r with gold,
If in an Emperor (that did command
Almost the whole world, both by Sea and Land,
Who countermaunded Indian Mines and Iems,
Jewels, and almost all earths Diadems,)
To wear gold shoe-strings were a noted crime,
What may it then be called at this time,
When many, below Hostlers in degree,
Shall (in that point) be deck'r as brave as lie?
Thus Pride's an over weening self opinion,
A soul destroyer, come from Hels dominion;
Which makes vainglorious fools, and new found mad^^
Forget they are of Eues good brood and Adams.
But yet though Pride be a most deadly sin,
What numbers by it do their livings win?
A world of people daily live thereby;
Who (were it not for it) would starve and die,
Thus (by corruption of the time) this Devil
Is grown a good, bad, necessary evil.
She is the Mercers only fruitful crop,
She is the Silkman, and th'Embroderers prop;
She is the Haberdashers chiefest Stock,
She feeds the Hat-sellers with block on block;
She makes the Dyers daily live to dye,
And dye to live, and get great wealth thereby;
She (every Winter) does the Draper feed,
With food and fucll She supplies his need.
She is the Tailors goddess; and upon her
He daily does attend to do her honor;
All the inventions of his studious pate,
He at her shrine does ever consecrate,
He takes the world for fashions that excel,
From Germany, from France, from Spain, from hell
And would himself be out of fashion quite,
But that Pride in new fashions does delight,
Silkweauers (of the which abundance are)
Were not for Pride would live, and dye most bare:
Sempsters with ruffs and cuffs, and quoifes, and caules,
And falls, (were not for pride) would soon have falls.
The Shooemakers neat, spanish, or polony,
Would have but single-soal'd receipt of money.
The sweet Perfumers, would be out of favor,
And hardly could be sauers by their savor.
The glittring Ieweller, and lapidary,
(But for Prides help) were in a poor quandary,
The goldsmiths plate would stand upon his shelfe,
And's Rings and Chains he might wear out himself.
Thus Pride is grown to such a height, I say,
That were she banished, many would decay:
For many hundred thousands are you see,
Which from Pride only, have meat, clothes, and fee:
No marvel then she has so many friends,
When as such numbers on her still depends,
Pride is their Mistress, she maintains them still,
And they must serve her, or their case is ill.
But as so many numbers numberles,
Do live and flourish hcere by Prides excess:
So are there more upon the other side,
Toild and tormented still to maintain Pride.
The painful Plowmans pains do never cease,
For he must pay his Rent, or lose his lease,
And though his Father and himself before,
Have often releiu'd poor beggars at their door;
Yet now his Fine and Rent so high is reared,
That his own meat and clothes are scarcely cleared
Let him toil Night and Day, in light and dark,
Lie with the Lamb down, rise up with the Lark
Dig, delue, plow, sow, rake, harrow, mow, lop, fell
Plant, graft, hedge, ditch, thresh, winnow, buy and sell
Yet all the money that his pains can win,
His Landlord has a purse to put it in.
What though his Cattle with the Murraine dye,
Or that the Earth her fruitfulness deny?
Let him beg, steal, grieve, labor and lament,
The Quarter comes, and he must pay his Rent;
And though his Fine and Rent be high, yet higher
It shall be raised if once it does expire:
Let him and his be hunger-staru'd and pin'de,
His Landlord has decreed his bones to grind:
And all this carke and care, and toil of his,
Most chiefly for this only purpose is,
That his gay Landlord may wear silk and feather
whilst he poor drudg can scare get frize or lether
Because his Landlady may dog the fashion,
Hce's racked and tortured without all compassion;
Because his Landlords Heir may have renown
Of Gentle, though the Father be a Clown:
Because his landlords daughters (decked with pride)
With ill got portions may be Ladyfide.
In brief, poor tenants pinch for clothes and food
To dawb with pride their landlords and their brood.
The time has bin (and some alive knows when)
A Gentleman would keep some twenty men,
Some thirty, and some forty, less or more,
(As their Reuenews did supply their store.)
And with their Charities did freely feed
The Widow, Fatherless, and poor man's need,
But then did Pride keep residence in Hell,
And was not come upon the earth to dwell:
Then Love and Charity were at the best,
Expressed in Action, not in words professed.
Then conscience did keep men in much more aw,
Than the seuerest rigor of the Law,
And then did men fear God (with true intent,)
For's Goodness, not for fear of punishment.
But since the Leprosy of Pride has spread
The world all over, from the foot to head:
Good bounteous house keeping is quite destroyed,
And large revenues other ways imployd.
Means that would four men meat and means allow,
Are turned to garters, and to roses now,
That which kept twenty, in the days of old,
By Satan is turned satin, silk, and gold,
And one man now in garments he does wear,
A thousand akers, on his back does bear,
Whose ancestors in former times did give,
Means for a hundred people well to live.
Now all is shrunk, (in this vainglorious age)
T'atire a coach, a fooreman, and a page,
To dice, drink, drabs, tobaco, hawks and hounds,
These are the expense of many thousand pounds,
Whilst many thousands starve, and daily perish,
For want of that which these things used to cherrish.
There is another Pride, which some profess,
Who pinch their bellies, for their backs excess:
For though their guts through want of fodder clings,
That they will make sweet filthy fidle strings;
Yet they will suffer their mawes pine and lack,
To trap with rich caparisons the back.
These people, (for their Pride) do Justice still,
Upon themselves, although against their will.
They do in their own stomachs, try, examine,
And punish outward Pride, with inward famine.
But sure the people can be good for nothing.
Whose reputation only lies in clothing:
Because the hangman often may execute,
A theife or traitor in a Satin suit,
And that suit which did from the gallows drop,
May be again hanged in a Broakers shop,
And then again hanged, and bought, and worn,
And secondly (perhaps) to Tiburne borne:
And so at sundry times, for sundry crimes,
The Hangman may sell one suit sixteen times,
And every Rascal, that the same did fit,
To be exceeding pockie proud of it.
And all this while, (if I be not mistook)
It rests unpaid for, in the Mercers book.
Thus many simple honest people have,
Giun worship to a Broakers wardrobe slave,
Thus Tiburne ornaments may be the chief,
To grace a graceles arrant whore, or theife.
A Seruing-man, I incast clothes have seen,
That did himself so strangely ouerween,
That with himself he out of knowledge grew,
And therefore all his old friends he misknewe,
Until at last his Glory did decease,
His outside faced with tatters, rags and grease,
Then did the changing time, the youth transform
From Pride to be as lowly as a worm.
A many of these fellows may be had,
That Is meek or proud, as clothes are good or bad.
I leave true Noble Gentry all this while,
Out of the reach of my inuectiue style,
It Is fit that those of worthy race and place,
Should be distinguished from the Vulgar base.
Perticulars I Will not to question call,
My Satyr is against Pride in general.
Soft Raiment is in Princes Courts allowed,
Not that the wearers should thereof be proud;
For worth and wisdom knows most certainly,
That Hell gives Pride, and Heaven Humility,
And be their garments never so rare or rich,
They never can make Pride their hearts bewitch.
Then if all sorts of men considred this,
Most vain the pride of any raiment is,
For neither sea, land, fish, foul, worm, or beast,
But man's beholding to the most and least.
The silly Sheep puts off his coat each year,
And gives it to forgetful man to wear:
The Ox, Calfe, Goat, and Dear do not refuse
To yield their skins, to make him boots and shoes,
And the poor Silkworme labors night and day
T'adorne and garnish man with rich array:
Therefore if men of this did rightly think,
Humility would grow, and Pride would shrink.
Fowls of the Air do yield both fans and plumes
And a poor Ciuet Cat allows perfumes.
The Earth is ripped and bowel'd rent and torn,
For Gold and silver which by man is worn:
And sea and land are raked, and searched and sought,
For Jewels too far fetched, and too dear bought.
Thus man's beholding still (to make him trim)
Unto all creatures, and not they to him.
Nature (without man's help) does them supply,
And man without their help would straue and dic.
If men (I say) these things considered well,
Pride then would soon be tumbled down to hell.
Their golden suits that make the^ much renowned,
Is but the guts and garbage of the Ground:
Their Ciuet (that affords such dainty sents)
Is but a poor Cats sweating Excrements;
Their rarest Jewels (which most glister forth)
Are more for outward show then inward worth,
They are high valued at all times, and season,
But for what reason, none can give a reason,
The best of them, like whoores, have ever bin,
Most fair without, and full of bane within.
And let a great man wear a piece of glass,
It (for his sake) will for a Diamond pass;
But let a man that is of but mean degree,
Wear a fair Diamond, yet it glass must be.
This valuing of a Jewel is most fit,
It should not grace a man, man should grace it.
A good man to his suit is a repute,
A knaves repute lies only in his suit.
And for a stone, that but 3. drams has weighed,
Of precious poison, hundreds have bin paid.
And who can tell how many lives were lost,
In fetching home the Bables of such cost?
(For many of them are as dearly bought.
As if they from The ^old of blood that ^he Jews ^ought with the ^hirty pei^es
of sil^er, which ^udas ^rought ^acke a^aine after ^e betray^d Christ, Mat. 27.
7. Acts 1. 19.
Acheldama were brought.)
Yet some rush through (fantasique pates to please)
Rocks, sands, and change of air, rough winds and seas
Storms, te^pests, gusts, flawes, pirates, sword, and fire,
Death, or else slavery, (never to retire.)
And thus Prides various humors to suffice,
A number hazard these calamities.
When our own Country does afford us here,
Jewels more precious, nothing nigh so dear.
A whetstone is more necessary sure,
A grindstone much more profit does procure:
But for a A millstone is a poereles lewell.
millstone, that is a Jewel rare,
With which no other stone can make compare.
The loadstone is the means to find the rest,
But of all stones the millstone is the best.
Free stones and artificial bricks I grant,
Are stones, which men in building cannot want:
And the flintstone can yield us fire and heat,
But yet the millstone yields us bread to eat.
The tilestone keeps us dry, the roadstone bydes,
And holds fast Boats, in tempests, winds, and tides,
The chalkstone serves for lyme, or for account
To score, how reck'nings do abate or mount.
Pebles, and gravel, mend high ways I know,
And ballast ships, which else would overthrow.
And this much I Will maintain here with my pen,
These are the stones that most do profit men:
These, these are they, if we consider well,
That Saphirs, and the Diamonds do excel,
The Pearl, the Em'rauld, and the Turkesse blew,
The sanguine Corrall, Ambers golden hew,
The Crystal, Iacinth, Achate, Ruby red,
The Carbuncle, Squared, Cut, and Pollished,
The Onix, Topaz, Iaspar, Hematite,
The Sable Iet, the Tutch, and Chrysolite;
All these considred as they are indeed,
Are but vain toys that does man's fancy feed;
The stones I named before, do much more good
For building, sailing, lodging, firing, food.
Yet Jewels for their lawful use are sent,
To be a luster, and an ornament
For State, magnificence, and Princely port,
To show a Kingdoms glory, at the Court;
And God (I know) ordained them to be worn,
Superior States to honor and adorn,
And for the uses they were made are good,
If (as they should be) they are understood:
T'adorne our persons they are still allowed,
But not to buy too dear, or make us proud.
The Holy Ghost in Exodus recites,
How Aaron (High Priest of the Israelites)
Twelve several stones did on his Breast Plate bear,
Which of the twelve Tribes a remembrance were;
But they were mystical, prophetique tropes,
And figures of Saluations future hopes.
But God did never give or Gold or Iemme,
Or Jewel, that we should take pride in them.
The Deu'll laughed lately at the stinking stir,
We had about Two inuectiue pamphlets against the monstrous and shapelesse
disguises of men and women.
Hic Mulier, and Haec ^ir
The Masculine apparel'd Feminine,
And Feminine attired Masculine,
The Woman-man, Man-woman, choose you whether,
The Female-male, Male-female both, yet neither;
Hels Pantomimicks that themselves bedights,
L^ke shameless double sex'd Hermophradites,
Virago Roaring Girls, that to their middle,
To know what sex they were, was half a Riddle,
Brave trimmed and trussed, with daggers and with dags,
Stout Captain Maudlins feather bravely wags,
Lieutenant Female Soldiers.
Dol, and valiant Ensign Besse,
All armed with impudence and shamelessness;
Whose Calves eg starch may in some sort be taken
As if they had been hanged to smoke like Bacon,
Whose borrowed hair (perhaps) not long before
Dropped from the head of some diseased Whore,
Or one that at the Gallows made her Will,
Late choked with the Hangmans Pickadill.
In which respect, a Sow, a Cat, a Mare,
More modest then these foolish Females are.
For the bruit beasts (continual night and day)
Do wear their own still (and so do not they.)
But these things have so well bin banged and firk'd
And Epigram'd and Satyrd, whipped and Ierk'd,
Cudgeld and bastinadoed at the Court,
And Comically stag'de to make men sport,
lyg'd, and (with all reason) mocked in Rhyme,
And made the only scornful theme of Time,
And Balladmongers had so great a task,
(As if their muses all had got the laske.)
That no more time therein my pains I Will spend,
But freely leave them to amend, or end.
I saw a fellow take a white loaves pith,
And rub his masters white shoes clean therewith
And I did know that fellow, (for his pride)
To want both bread and meat before he died.
Some I have heard of, that have bin so fine,
To wash and bathe themselves in milk or wine,
Or else with whites of eggs, their faces garnish,
Which makes the^ look like visors, or new varnish
Good bread, and oatmeale has bin spilt like trash
My Lady polecats dainty hands to wash:
Such there has bin, but now if such there are,
I wish that want of food may be their share.
Some practice every day the Painters trade,
And strive to mend the work that God has made.
But these deceivers are deceived far,
With falsely striving to amend, they mar:
With deu'lish dawbing, plast'ring they do spread,
Deforming so themselves with white and red,
The end of all their cunning that is shown,
^s God will scarcely know them for his own.
^n a great frost, bare breasted, and vnlac't,
I have seen some as low as to their wast:
One half attyr'd, the other half stark bare,
Shows that they half ashamed, half shameless are,
Half, (or else all) from what they should be erring,
And neither fish or flesh, nor good red herring.
I blowed my nails when I did them behold,
And yet that naked Pride would feel no cold.
Some every day do powder so their hair,
That they like Ghosts, or Millers doc appear:
But let them powder all that er'e they can,
Their Pride will stink before both God and man.
There was a trades man's wife, which I could name
(But that I Will not divulge abroad her shame)
Which a strong legion of good garments wore,
As gowns and petticoates, and kirtles store.
Smocks, headtires, aprones, shadows, shaparoons
(Whimwhams, and whirligiggs to please Baboones
Jewels, rings, ooches, brooches, bracelets, chains
(More then too much to fit her idle brains)
(Besides, she paid (not counting muffes and ruffs)
Four pounds six shillings for two pair of cuffs
Twill make a man half mad, such worms as those
The general gifts of God should thus ingrosse.
And that such numbers want their needful use,
Whilst hellish Pride peruerts them to abuse.
Now a few lines to paper I will put,
Of men's Beards strange and variable cut:
In which there is some do take as vain a Pride,
As almost in all other things beside.
Some are reaped most substantial, like a brush,
Which makes a Natural wit known by the bush
(And in my time of some men I have heard,
Whose wisdom have bin only wealth and beard
Many of these the proverb well does fit,
Which says Bush natural, more hair then wit.
Some seem as they were starched stiff and fine
Like to the bristles of some angry swine:
And some (to set their loves desire on edge)
Are cut and prun'de like to a quickset hedge.
Some like a spade, some like a forke, some square,
Some round, some mowed like stuble, some stark bare,
Some sharp Steletto fashion, dagger like,
That may with whispering a man's eyes out pike;
Some with the hammer cut, or Roman T,
Their beards extrauagant reformed must be,
Some with the quadrate, some triangle fashion,
Some circular, some ouall in translation,
Some perpendicular in longitude,
Some like a thicket for their crassitude,
That heights, depths, bredths, triform, square, oual, round,
And rules Geo'metricall in beards are found,
Besides the upper lip's strange variation,
Corrected from mutation to mutation;
As't were from tithing unto tithing sent,
Pride gives to pride continual punishment.
So^e ( spite their teeth) like thatched eues downward grows
And some grows upwards in despite their nose.
Some their mustatioes of such length do keep,
That very well they may a maunger sweep:
Which in beer, ale or wine they drinking plunge,
And suck the liquor up, as't twere a Sponge;
But it is a Slouens beastly Pride, I think,
To wash his beard where other men must drink.
And some (because they will not rob the cup,
Their upper chaps like pot hooks are turned up,
The Barbers thus (like Taylers) still must be,
Acquainted with each cuts variety:
Yet though with beards thus merrily I play,
It Is only against Pride which I inueigh:
For let men wear their hair or their attire
According as their states or minds desire,
So as no puffed up Pride their hearts possess,
And they use Gods good gifts with thankfulness.
There Is many an idle shallow pated Gull,
Thinks his own wisdom to be wonderful: Against Pride of worldly wisdom.

And that the State themselves do much forget,
Because he in authoritie's not set:
And having scarely wit to rule a Cottage,
Thinks he could guide a kingdom with his dotage.
True wisdom is man's only guide and guard,
To live here, to live better afterward.
It is a rich man's chief pre-eminence,
And it is a poor man's stay, and best defense.
But worldly wisdom is the ground of all
The mischiefs that to man did ever fall.
Gods wisdom is within the Gospel hid,
Which we to* search, are by our Savior bid. 1. Cor. 2. 7.

Thus Pride of humane wisdom is all vain,
And foolish fancies of man's idle brain.
Pride of our knowledge, we away must throw Against Pride of humane knowledge

For he knows most, which least does seem to know
One Apple from the tree of life is more,
Then from the tree of knowledge half a score;
It Is good for us to know our Masters will,
But the not doing it, makes knowledge ill.
There Is many know, the Just in heaven shall dwell,
Yet they unjustly run the way to hell.
The life Eternal no way can be won,
But to know God, and Ioh. 17. 3:
Jesus Christ his Son.
Christ, (to his people) by his word and passion,
Taught men the joyful Luke 1. 73
knowledge of salvation.
I rather had by knowledge, raise my chance,
Then to be poor with barb rous ignorance;
Yet better it were I nothing understood,
Then to know goodness, and to do no good.
Thus knowledge, worthy is of dignity,
But not to make the knowers proud thereby.
For if men would, to know themselves endeuer,
Pride of their knowledge would infect the^ never.
Pride of our riches is a painful pleasure,
Like sumpter horses laden with rich treasure, Against Pride of riches.

So Misers bear their wealth as they are able,
Till Death the hostler makes the grave their stable.
There Is some take pride in treasure basely got,
Have it, yet want it, as they had it not;
And though to get it, no vile means they spare,
To spend it on themselves they seldom dare;
How can a base extortionizing Bore,
Get riches ill, and give God thanks therefore?
It Is all one, if a theife, a baude, a witch,
Or a Bribe taker should grow damned rich,
And for their trash, got with their hellish pranks,
The hypocriticke slaves will give God thanks.
No let the litter of such whelps,
Give thanks to th'Deuill (author of their helps)
To give God thanks, it is almost all one,
To make him partner in extortion.
Thus if men get their wealth by means that is evil,
Let them not give God thanks, but thank the devil.
Yet wealth the gift of God has ever bin,
But not such wealth that is only got by sin;
Nor any wealth if men take pride therein.
And those who put their foolish confidence
In Riches, trusting to their false defense;
Those that with Mammon are bewitched so,
Our Sauiour'gainst them threats a fearful Luke 2
Woe.
Humility with Riches may be blessed,
But Pride's a poison God does still detest.
Pride of our Learning's vain, it does appear, Against Pride of Learnin

For though men study many a weary year,
And learned as much, as possibly the brain,
Or scope of man's Inventions may attain,
Yet after all their studies, truth does show,
Much more is what they know not, then they know,
To learn by bad men's vices, vice to shun,
By good men's good, what should by us be done,
This is the learning we should practice most,
Not to be proud thereof, or vainly boast.
A Princes favor is a precious thing, Against bing proud of Princ favors.

Yet it does many unto ruin bring;
Because the hauers of it proudly use it,
And (to their own ambitious ends) abuse it.
If men that are so stately and so strange,
Would but remember how time often does change,
And note how some in former times did spread,
By their examples they would take some heed, Comparison.

For as a cart wheel in the way goes round,
The Spoak that is highest is quickly at the ground,
So Envy, or just cause, or misconceit,
In Princes Courts, continually do wait,
That he that is this day Magnifico
To morrow may go by ^^eronimo
The spoakes that now are highest in the wheels,
Are in a moment lowest by the heels.
Haman was proud, past reasons bounds or scope,
And his vainglory ended in a rope,
And his ten sounes, in duty to obey
Their father, followed him the self same way.
Those men that harbor Pride within their breast,
Do seldom end their days in peace and rest.
But if they do, disgrace and shame withal,
Are the chief waiters on their funeral.
Where honor is with noble virtue mixed,
It like a Rock stands permanent and fixed,
The snares of envy, or the traps of hate
Could never, nor shall ever hurt that state:
Like Adamant it does beat back the battry,
Of spiteful malice, and deceiving flattry,
For it with Pride can never be infected,
But humbly is supernally protected,
Such with their Kings shall ever be beloved,
And like to fixed stars, stand fast, unmoved. (...) (...) of (...)

Those that are proud of beauty, let them know,
Their Pride is but a fickle, fading show.
A smoke, a bubble, a time-tosted toy,
A Luna like, sraile, ever changing joy.
For as a tide of flood, slow'd to the height,
Does (in a moment) fall to ebbing straight:
So beauty, when it is most fair and fine,
(Like new plucked flowers) does presently decline.
That man or woman's virtue does excel,
If with their beauty chastity does dwell:
But Pride of beauty is a mark most sure,
That th'owners of it, use it to procure
The Paphian pastime, and the Cyprian game,
The sports of Venus, and the acts of shame,
To breed the heat of Cupids lustful flame.
Often beauty has fair chastity displaced,
But chastity, has beauty ever graced.
For it is a Maxim, those have ever bin,
That are most fair without, most foul within.
Too often has beauty, by disloyalty,
Branded it self with lasting infamy,
That one frail creature, (nobly will descended)
(Proud of her fairenes) fowly has offended,
And on her honse and kindred, laid a blot,
That the dishonor never will be forgot.
But a fair feature virtuously: nclin'd,
A beauteous outside, and a pious mind,
Such are Gods Images Epitomies,
And Cabinets of heanens blessed treasuries:
And therefore be thy feature, fair or foul,
Let inward virtues beautify the soul.
Pride of our strength, shows weakness in our wit, (...) (...) of (...)

Because the Chollicke, or an Ague fit,
The toothache, or the pricking of a pin,
Often lets the strength out, and the weakness in.
The Tribe of Dans great glory,* Sampsons strength ^udges ^19.

By a weak woman was orethrowne at length.
And sure there is many do themselves much wrong
In being proud because they are made strong,
For a great number living now there are,
Can wrestle, throw the sledge, or pitch the bar,
That on their backs four hundred weight can bear
And horse shoes (with their fifts) in sunder tear,
Yet never use their strength in any thing,
To serve their God, their country, or their King.
But with outrageous acts their lives pursue,
As if God gave them strength but as their due,
As though they like the Giants could remove,
And hurl great mountains at the head of Jove,
Or like Gargantua, or Polipheme,
Or Gogmagog, their boystrous fancies dream,
That they more wonders by their strength can do,
Then Hercules could e're attain unto.
Let those Goliahs, that in strength take pride,
Know that the Lord of Hosts does them deride,
And what they are (that proudly brag and swell
Of strength) let any man but note them well,
If hurt or sickness make their strength decay,
A man shall never see such Cowes as they.
Being strong, their minds on God they never set;
In weakness, instly he does them forget:
Strength, thus like headstrong lades they do abuse it,
For want of Reasons bridle how to use it.
Pride of our children's vain; our proper stem Against Pride of our hauir
children.

Must either dye from us, or we from them.
If our examples of the life we live
Enrich them not more then the gifts we give,
If (disobedient) they despise mstruction,
And will peruersly run into destruction;
Much better had it bin, we had not bin
Begetters of such Imps of shame and sin.
Children no duty to such Parents owe,
Who suffer vice their youth to ouergrow,
Neglect to teach thy son in younger years,
He shall reject thee in thy hoary hairs,
The way to make our children us obey,
Is that our selves from God run not astray,
Such measure to our maker as we mete,
It Is just, that such, we from our children get.
The Apostle Paul exhorts more and less,
To be all children in^ maliciousnes:
That is to say, as children harmeles be,
So we should from maliciousnes be free.
Thus Pride of birth, apparel, wealth, strength, state,
And Pride of humane wisdom God does hate:
Of knowledge, learning, beauty, children and
The Pride of Princes favor cannot stand.
And Pride in any thing shall evermore,
Be barred and shut from heavens Eternal door,
For whosoever will believe and look,
Shall find examples in the sacred book:
That God has euer'gainst the proud withstood,
And that a proud heart never came to good.
He says Pride is* destruction, and again Toby 4.

That Pride is* hateful before God and men:
How Prides beginning is from God to fall, Eccle. 10.

And of all sin is the* original.
Who takes hold on Pride, in great affliction
Shall be o'rethrowne, filled with Gods malediction.
Pride was not made for man, man has no part
In Pride, for God Proverbs 16. Pro. 29. Eccle. 29. Matt. 23. Luke 14. 18 Luke
1. ludeth 9.
abhors a proud heart,
And' it is decreed by the Almighties doom,
That Pride unto a fearful fall shall come.
A person that is proud, never pleased God yet:
For how can they please him whom they forget?
Yet as before I said, again I Will say,
That Pride to such a height is grown this day:
That many a thousand thousand family,
Were not for Pride would beg, or starve and die.
And the most part of them are men of might,
Who in Prides quarrel will both speak and fight:
I therefore have no hope to put her down,
But Satyre-like, to tell her of her own.
There is another Pride which I must touch,
It is so bad, so base, so too too much:
Against libellers. Most of these libellers have an Itching vein of Riming,
which with much scratching maks scuruy lines and so from itch to seratch, sro^
scratch to scuruy, and from scuruy to seabbed they proceed in time, with their
botching, to be termed (by knaves and fools) scald Poets.
Which is, if any man's good fortune be,
To rise to Honorable dignity,
Or through infirmity, or wilfulnes,
Men fall unhappily into distress.
That Libellers do spirt their wits like froth,
To rail at Honor, and dishonor both.
These Mungrell whelps are ever snarling still,
Hating men's goodness, glorying in their ill,
Like bloud-hound Curs they daily hunt and sent,
And rhyme and Iigge on others detriment:
Supposing it a very virtuous thing,
To be an arrant Knave in libelling.
Forsooth these Screech-owles would be called the wits,
Whose flashes fly abroad by girds and fits:
Who do their mangy Muses magnify:
Making their sport of men's calamity,
But yet for all their hateful hellish mirth,
They are the vilest cowards on the earth:
For there is not one that does a libell frame,
Dares for his ears subscribe to it his name.
It Is a base brutish pride to take a pen,
And libell on the miseries of men;
For why all men are mortal, weak and frail,
And all, from what they should be fall and fail.
And therefore men should in these slip'ry times
Bewail men's miseries, and hate their crimes:
Let him that stands take heed he does not fall,
And not rejoice in men's mishaps at all.
It is too much for Libellers to meddle,
To make their Muse a Hangman or a Beadle:
At men's misfortunes to deride and jest,
To add distress to those that are distressed.
As I do hold men's vices to be vile,
So at their miseries I Will never smile,
And in a word (lest tediousness offend)
Alibeller's a Knave, and there is an end.
Thus having of Prides various forms related
And how of God, and good men it is hated:
I think it fit some Lines in praise to write,
Of Virtues which to Pride are opposite.
For vice with show of Virtue blindes the eye,
And Virtue makes vice known apparently.
When falsehood is examined and compared
With Truth, it makes truth have the more regard.
The Crow seems blackest when the Swan stands near
And goodness makes the ill most bad appear:
So virtues that are contrary to vices,
Make them contemptible, and base in prices:
Humility, if it be well embraced, The praise of Humility

It makes disdainful Pride, disdained, disgraced:
Humility is a most heavenly gift,
The Stayre that does (to Glory) men up lift.
None but the meek and lowly humbled spirit
Shall true eternal happiness inherit:
Those that are humble honor Eccle. 19.
God always,
And only those will he to honor raise.
If thou be great in state, give thanks therefore
And humble still thy self, so much the more.
He that is humble, loves his Christian brother,
And thinks himself Phil. 2. 3.
inferior to all other;
Those that are meek the Lord shall ever guide,
And Psalm; 25. 9
teach them in his ways still to abide.
For though the Lord be high, he has respect
Unto the Ps. 138. 6.
lowly, whom he will protect.
Humility, and lowliness goes on,
Still before honor, (as says Solomon)
He that is humble here and free from strife,
Shall for Prou. 22. 4.
reward have glory, wealth, and life.
He that himself does humble, certainly,
Our Savior says shall be Mat. 23. 12.
exalted high.
He that with Christ will wear a glorious Crown
Must cast himself, (as Christ did) humbly down
And like to the rebounding of a ball,
The way to rise, must first be, low to fall.
For God the Father will accept of none,
That put not on the meeknes of his Son:
If Proudly thou do lift thy self on high,
God and his blessings, from thee, still will fly:
But if thou humble, meek, and lowly be,
God and his blessings will come down to thee.
^f thou would travel unto heaven, then know,
^umility's the way that thou must go.
^f in presumptuous paths of Pride, thou tread,
It Is the right wrong way that to hell does lead.
^now that thy birth, attire, strength, beauty, place,
^re given unto thee by Gods special grace:
^now that thy wisdom, learning, and thy wealth,
Thy life, thy Princes favor, beauty, health,
and whatsoever thou can goodness call,
^as by Gods bounty given unto thee all.
and know that of thine own thou do possess,
nothing but sin, and woeful wretchedness,
Christians Pride should only be in this, A Pride which is fit for all estates.

When he can say that God his Father is.
When grace and mercy, (well applide) afford,
^o make him brother unto Christ his Lord.
When he unto the holy Ghost can say,
^hou art my Schoolmaster, whom I Will obey;
When he can call the Saints his fellows, and
^^y to the Angels, for my guard you stand,
This is a lawdable, and Christian Pride,
(...) know Christ, and to know him crucified.
This is that meek ambition, low aspiring,
Which all men should be earnest in desiring:
Thus to be proudly humble, is the thing,
Which will us to the state of glory bring.
But yet beware; Pride hypocritical,
Puts not humilities cloak on at all:
A lofty mind, with lowly cap and knee,
Is humble Pride, and meek hypocrisy.
Ambitious minds, with adulating looks,
Like courteous Crowne-aspiring* Bullinbrookes; King Henry the 4.

As a great ship ill suited with small sail,
As Judas meant all mischeife, cride All haibe,
Like the humility of Absolon:
This shadowed Pride, much danger waits upon
These are the counterfeite (God faue ye Sirs)
That have their flattries in particulars,
That courteously can hide their proud intents,
Under varieties of complements.
These vipers bend the knee, and kiss the hand,
And swear, (sweet Sir) I am at your command.
And proudly make humility a screw,
To wring themselves into opinions view.
This Pride is hateful, dangerous, and vile,
And shall it self (at last) it self beguile.
Thus Pride is deadly sin, and sin brings shame,
Which here I leave to hell, from whence it came
FINIS.

